Appletons' Cyclopaedia of American Biography, Vol. 1 (James Grant Wilson and John Fiske, 1887)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/appletonscyclop01wilsuoft): the 1887 New York (D. Appleton) first edition, vol. 1 of 6 (Aaron–Crandall), ed. Wilson & Fiske — complete through END OF VOLUME I.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APPLETONS'


CYCLOPEDIA  OF  AMEKICAN


BIOaEAPHY


EDITED BY


JAMES GRANT WILSON

AND

JOHN FISKE


As  it  is  the  commendation of a  good  huntsman  to  find  game  in a  wide  wood,
so  it  is  no  imputation  if  he  hath  not  caught  all.  Plato.


VOLUME I.
AARON-CRANDALL


NEW YORK
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

],  3  AND  5  BOND STEEET
1891


COPYBIGHT. 1886.

By  D.  APPLETON AND  COMPANY.


PEE  FAO  E


Appletons'  Cyclopedia  of  American  Biogeaphy  is  intended  to  supply  a
want  that  has  long  been  felt  by  the  nations  of  the  New  World,  and  more  par-
ticularly by  the  people  of  the  United  States.  Every  scholar  and  every  reader  has
recognized  the  benefit  of  the  great  French  Dictionaries  of  Universal  Biography,
and  the  utility  of  the  more  recent  National  Biography  of  Great  Britain,  now  in
course  of  publication.  Each  nation  should,  if  possible,  have  its  own  cyclopaedia
of  biography.  The  Belgian,  British,  and  German  Dictionaries  at  present  in
progress  are  instances  of  such  work  in  the  Old  World.  It  is  proposed  to  provide
a  Cyclopaedia  of  Biography  for  the  New  World  worthy  to  rank  with  them.

The  Cyclopaedia  will  include  the  names  of  above  fifteen  thousand  prominent
native  and  adopted  citizens  of  the  United  States,  including  living  persons,  from
the  earliest  settlement  of  the  country;  also  the  names  of  several  thousand  emi-
nent citizens  of  Canada,  Mexico,  Brazil,  Chili,  Peru,  and  all  the  other  countries
of  North  and  South  America.  The  great  aim  has  been  to  embrace  all  note-
worthy persons  of  the  New  World,  and  to  give  biographies  that  shall  embody
with  sufficient  fulness  the  latest  result  of  historical  research,  rendering  it  a  refer-
ence-book of  the  highest  order.  The  work  will  also  contain  the  names  of  nearly
one  thousand  men  of  foreign  birth  who,  like  Bishop  Berkeley,  Braddock,  Bur-
goyne,  Cabot,  Columbus,  Comwallis,  Lafayette,  Montcalm,  and  Whitefield,  are
closely  identified  with  American  history.

The  editors  have  endeavored,  in  all  instances,  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  the
most  competent  students  of  special  periods  or  departments  of  history,  and  they  have
had  the  assistance  of  scholarly  and  experienced  associates,  together  with  a  well-
equipped  staff  of  writers.  Many  articles  of  importance  have  been  contributed
by  some  of  the  most  brilliant  names  in  American  literature  as  well  as  by  many
of  our  most  illustrious  statesmen,  soldiers,  and  jurists.  Much  valuable  material
has  been  obtained  from  original  sources;  and  in  the  case  of  recent  lives  and
those  "men  of  light  and  leading"  who  are  still  with  us,  important  aid  has  been
afforded  by  the  friends  and  relatives  of  the  subjects.

It  has  been  the  aim  of  the  editors  to  render  the  Cyclopaedia  educational  as
well  as  entertaining  and  instructive,  by  making  those  articles  referring  to  impor-
tant men  and  measures  full  and exhaustive ; thus,  in  the  articles on the  Presi-


y{  PREFACE.

dents,  some  two  hundred  pages  will  be  devoted  to  a  complete  and  authentic
account  of  all  their  public  acts,  placing  the  reader  in  possession  of  an  accurate
history  of  their  administrations,  covering  a  century  of  our  national  annals.  The
same  statement  may  be  made  in  respect  to  the  chief  cohmial  and  state  gov-
ernors ;  our  celebrated  judges  and  statesmen ;  members  of  the  Cabinets,  of  the
Senate,  and  House ;  men  distinguished  in  art,  commerce,  and  literature ;  leaders
in  the  Church ;  and  those  "  great  heirs  of  fame  "  who  won  renown  in  the  late  and
previous  wars — thus  forming  a  very  full  and  comprehensive  history  of  the  United
States  and  those  other  countries  of  the  New  World  with  which  we  are  bound
by  so  many  ties,  since  its  first  discovery  by  "  the  world-seeking  Genoese."  To
the  above  are  added  numerous  notices  of  persons  of  the  pre-Columbian  period,
now  appearing  for  the  first  time  in  the  English  language.

Although  it  is  manifestly  impossible,  within  the  limits  of  six  octavo  vol-
umes, to  supply  all  the  information  that  might  be  desired  by  students  of  gene-
^^^^Ji  yet  it  is  confidently  believed  that  the  data  given  will  be  found  sufficient
and  satisfactory.  Especial  attention  is  called  to  the  information  concerning  the
publications  of  the  New  World,  which  is  brought  down  to  the  date  of  publica-
tion. In  the  case  of  the  more  important  notices  of  men  and  women,

"  On  Fame's  eternall  bede-roll  worthy  to  be  fyled,"
the  principal  authorities  used  are  mentioned  with  a  view  to  indicating  the
sources  from  which  additional  information  may  be  obtained  by  those  who  are
seeking  for  it.  The  projectors  of  the  Cyclopaedia  have  made  use  of  every
available  source  of  information,  including  a  special  library  of  several  thousand
volumes,  and  have  utilized  the  most  valuable  portion  of  Drake's  "Dictionary  of
American  Biography,"  together  with  the  author's  manuscript  corrections  and
additions,  purchased  for  that  purpose,  as  well  as  the  unpublished  manuscripts  of
the  compiler  of  "Initials  and  Pseudonyms,"  who  was  preparing  a  cyclopaedia
of  American  and  other  authors.

The  work  will  be  completed  in  six  volumes,  appearing  at  intervals  of  from
four  to  six  months— possibly  more  rapidly,  if  found  consistent  with  editorial  and
mechanical  accuracy.  Each  volume  will  be  illustrated  with  at  least  ten  fine
steel  portraits  of  eminent  men  of  the  New  World,  including  the  Presidents  of
the  United  States,  forming  altogether  a  most  valuable  and  attractive  national
portrait-gallery  of  illustrious  Americans.  These  will  be  supplemented  by  between
one  and  two  thousand  smaller  vignette  portraits  from  original  dra^vings  by
Jacques  Eeich,  accompanied  by  facsimile  autographs,  and  also  several  hundred
views  of  birthplaces,  residences,  monuments,  and  tombs  famous  in  history.  The
signatures  are  for  the  most  part  from  the  collection  of  some  six  thousand
American  autographs  in  the  possession  of  the  senior  editor.


LIST OF PORTEAITS OJST STEEL.


ARTIST

ENGRAVER

pAaa

Adams,  John

Stuart

Hall

Frontispiece

Adams,  John  Quincy

Marchant

Parker

Face  24

Arthur,  Chester  Alan

Bell

Hall

99

Bancroft,  George

Richter

Hall

154

Benton,  Thomas  Hart

Freidericha

Rogers

241

Bryant,  William  Cullen

Sarony

Hollyer

422

Buchanan,  James

Smith

Hall

428

Calhoun,  John  Caldwell

Brady

Jackman

498

Clay,  Henry

Brady

Jackman

640

Cleveland,  Grover

Photograph

Hall

651

Cooper,  James  Fenimore

Elliott

Marshall

725

SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  OONTEIBUTOES
TO APPLETONS' CYCLOPEDIA OF AMERICAN BIOGRAPHY.


Adams,  Charles  Kendall,

President  Cornell  University,

Agassiz,  Alexander,

Author  and  Professor.

AUibone,  S.  Austin,

Author  "  Dictionary  of  Authors."

Amory,  Thomas  C,

Author  "  Life  of  General  Sullivan,"  etc.

Bancroft,  George,

Author  "History  of  the  United  States."

Barrett,  Lawrence,

Author  "Life  of  Edwin  Forrest."

Bayard,  Thomas  F.,

Secretary  of  State.

Bigelow,  John,

Author  "  Life  of  Franklin,"  etc.

Boker,  George  H.,

Poet,  late  Minister  to  Kussia.

Botta,  Mrs.  Vincenzo,

Author  and  Poet.

Bradley,  Joseph  P.,

Judge  United  States  Supreme  Court.

Brooks,  Phillips,

Author  "  Sermons  in  English  Churches,"'
Carter,  Franklin,

President  Williams  College.

Chandler,  "William  E.,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.

Clarke,  James  Freeman,

Author  "Ten  Great  Religions,"  etc.

Cooper,  Miss  Susan  Fenimore,

Author  "Rural  Hours,"  etc.

Conway,  Moncure  D.,

Miscellaneous  Writer.
Coppee,  Henry,

Professor  Lehigh  University,  Pa.

Coxe,  Arthur  Cleveland,

Bishop  Western  New  York.

CuUum,  Gen.  George  W.,

Author  "  Register  of  West  Point  Graduates,"  etc.

Curry,  Daniel,  D.  D.,

Author  and  Editor.

Curtis,  George  Ticknor,

Author  "  Life  of  James  Buchanan,"  etc.

Curtis,  George  William,

Author  and  Editor.


De  Costa,  Rev.  B.  F.,

Historical  Writer.

De  Lancey,  Edward  F.,

Ex-President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Didier,  Eugene  L.,

Author  '  Life  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe."

Dix,  Morgan,

Rector  Trinity  Church,  New  York.

Doane,  William  C,

Bishop  of  Albany.

Drake,  Samuel  Adams,

Author  "  Historic  Personages  of  Boston,"  etc.

Draper,  Lyman  C,

Secretary  Wisconsin  Historical  Society.

Fiske,  John,

Author  and  Professor.

Frothingham,  Octavius  B.,

Author  "  Life  of  George  Ripley."

Gayarr6,  C.  E.  A.,

Author  "  History  of  Louisiana."

Gerry,  Elbridge  T.,

Member  of  New  York  Bar.

Gilman,  Daniel  C,

President  Johns  Hopkins  University.
Goodwin,  Daniel,  Jr.,

Member  of  Illinois  Bar.

Greely,  Capt.  A.  W.,  XT.  S.  A.,

Author  "Three  Years  of  Arctic  Service."
Hale,  Edward  Everett,

Author  "Franklin  in  France,"  etc.

Haydon,  Rev.  Horace  E.,

Author  "  Pollock  Genealogy,"  etc.

Henry,  William  Wirt,

Of  the  Virginia  Historical  Society,

Higginson,  Col.  T.  W.,

Author  "  History  of  the  United  States,"  etc.

Hilliard,  Henry  W.,

Ex-United  States  Senator  from  Georgia.

Howe,  Mrs.  Julia  Ward,

Author  "  Later  Lyrics,"  etc.

Jay,  John,

Late  Minister  to  Austria.

Johnson,  Gen.  Bradley  T.,

Member  Maryland  Bar.

Johnson,  Rossiter,

Author  "  History  of  the  War  of  1812,"  etc.


SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  CONTRIBUTORS.


Johnston,  William  Preston,

President  Tulane  University.

Jones,  Rev.  J.  William,

SeereUiry  Southern  Historical  Society.

Jones,  William  Alfred,

Author  "  Character  and  Criticism,"  etc.

Kobb6,  Gustav,

Musical  Editor  of  New  York  "Mail  and  Express."

Lathrop,  George  Parsons,

Author  "  A  Study  of  Hawthorne/'  etc.

Lincoln,  Robert  T.,

Ex-Secretary  of  War.

Lodge,  Henry  Cabot,

Author  "Life  of  Hamilton."

MacVeagh,  Wayne,

Ex-Attoniey-Cieneral,  U.  S.
Marble,  Manton,

Late  Editor  •'  The  World."

Mathews,  William,

Author  "  Orators  and  Oratory,"  etc.

McMaster,  John  Bache,

Author  "  History  of  the  People  of  the  United  States."

Mitchell,  Donald  G.,

Author  "  Reveries  of  a  Bachelor,"  etc.

Mombert,  Dr.  J.  L,

Miscellaneous  Writer.

O'Neal,  Edward  A.,

CJovernor  of  Alabama.

Parker,  Cortlandt,

Member  of  the  New  Jersey  Bar.

Parkman,  Francis,

Author  "  Frontenac."  "  French  in  Canada,"  etc.

Phelps,  William  Walter,

Member  of  Congress  from  New  Jersey.

Porter,  David  D.,

Admiral  United  States  Navy.

Preston,  Mrs.  Margaret  J.,

Author  and  Poet.

Puron,  Dr.  Juan  G.,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.

Read,  Gen.  J.  Meredith,

Late  Minister  to  Greece.

Reid,  Whitelaw,

Editor  of  New  York  "  Tribune."

Robinson,  E.  G.,

President  Brown  University.


Romero,  Mattias,

Mexican  Minister  to  United  States.

Royce,  Josiah,

Professor  in  Harvard  University.

Sanborn,  Miss  Kate,

Miscellaneous  W'riter.

Schurz,  Carl,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Shea,  John  Gilmary,

Author  and  Editor.

Sherman,  William  T.,

Late  General  of  the  Army.

Smith,  Charles  Emory,

Editor  Philadelphia  "  Press.'

Spencer,  Jesse  Ames,

Author  and  Professor.

Stedman,  Edmund  C,

Author  "  Poets  of  America,"  etc.

Stiles,  Henry  R.,  M.  D.,

Author  "History  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y."

Stoddard,  Richard  Henry,

Author  "Songs  of  Summer,"  etc.

Stone,  William  L.,

Author  "  Life  of  Red  Jacket,"  etc.

Strong,  William,

Ex-Judge  U.  S.  Supreme  Court.

Tucker,  J.  Randolph,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.

Waite,  Morrison  R.,

Chief  Justice  of  the  Supreme  Court.

Washbume,  E.  B.,

Late  Minister  to  France.

Welling,  James  C,

President  Columbian  University,

Whitman,  Walter,

Author  "  Leaves  of  Grass,"  etc.

Wilson,  Gen.  Jas.  Grant,

President  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Society.

Winter,  William,

Poet  and  Theatrical  Critic,

Winthrop,  Robert  C,

Ex-United  States  Senator.

Young,  Alexander,

Miscellaneous  Writer.


To  the  above  list  other  names  will  he  added  as  the  work  progresses.


Among  the  Contributors  to  the  first  volume  of  "  Appletons^  CyclopcBdia  of  American  Biography  "

are  the  following  :


Bev.  Joseph  H.  Allen,

Author  "Hebrew  Men  and  Times."
Channing,  William  Ellery,
Channing,  William  Henry.

S.  Austin  AUibone,  LL.  D.,

Author  of  "Dictionary  of  Authors."
Bancroft,  George.

Thomas  C.  Amory,

Author  of  "  Life  of  Gen.  Sullivan."
Coffin,  Admiral  Sir  Isaac,
Coffin,  Gen.  John,
and  other  articles.

Marcus  Benjamin,

Fellow  of  the  Chemical  Society.
Agassiz,  Louis,
Bache,  Alexander  Dallas,
and  other  articles.

Arthur  E.  Bostwick,  Ph.  D.

Audubon,  John  James,
Colfax,  Schuyler,
and  other  articles.

Mrs.  Vincenzo  Botta,

Author  and  Poet.
Carnegie,  Andrew.

Charles  RoUin  Brainard,  A.  M.

Beecher,  Lyman,  and  his  sons,
Benton,  Thomas  Hart,
and  other  articles.

James  C.  Brogan.

Articles  on  Catholic  Clergymen.

Franklin  Carter,  LL.  D.,

President  of  Williams  College.
Chadbourne,  Paul  Ansel.

John  D.  Champlin,  Jr.,

Editor  of  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Painters  and  Paintings.
Articles  on  American  Painters.

William  E.  Chandler,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Navy.
Arthur,  Chester  Alan,
Berry,  Nathaniel  S.

John  Esten  Cooke,

Late  Historian  and  Novelist.
Crawford,  William  Harris.

Arthur  Cleveland  Coxe,

p.  E.  Bishop  of  Western  New  York.
Cleveland,  Aaron,
Cox,  Samuel  Hanson.


Rev.  Daniel  Curry,  D.  D.,

Author  and  Editor.

Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal Church,

George  Ticknor  Curtis,  LL.  D.,

Author  of  "  Life  of  James  Buchanan."
Buchanan,  James,

Henry  Dalby,

of  the  Montreal  "Star."
Articles  on  Canadian  Statesmen,

Lyman  C.  Draper,  LL.  D.

Campbell,  Arthur,
Clark,  George  Rogers.

Maurice  F.  Egan,

of  the  "Freeman's  Journal."
CoRRiGAN,  Michael  Augustus,
and  other  articles.

John  Fiske,

Professor  and  Author.

Adams,  John,
Adams,  John  Quincy,
Arnold,  Benedict,
Clinton,  Sir  Henry,
Cornwallis,  Lord,
and  other  articles.

Daniel  C.  Oilman,  LL.  D.,

President  of  Johns  Hopkins  University.
Berkeley,  George,
Buckingham,  William  A.,
and  other  articles.

Samuel  Hart,

Professor  at  Trinity  College.
Brownell,  Thomas  Church.

Thomas  Wentworth  Higginson,

Author  of  "History  of  the  United  States."

Brown,  John,  of  Osawatomie,
Henry  W.  Hilliard,

Late  Minister  to  Brazil.

Butler,  Pierce  M.,
and  other  articles.

Mrs.  Julia  Ward  Howe,

Author  and  Poet.
Crawford,  Thomas.

Frank  Hunting^ton.

Bolivar,  Simon,
Bradford,  William,
and  other  articles.


xu


CONTRIBUTORS  TO  THE  FIRST  VOLUME.


Bev.  Abram  S.  Isaacs,  Ph.  D.,

Editor  of  the  ''Jewish  Messenger."
BoNDi,  Jonas,
and  other  articles.

Oen.  Bradley  T.  Johnson,

Member  Baltimore  Bar.
Carroll,  Charles,  of  Carrollton,
Claiborne,  William.

Bossiter  Johnson,

Author  and  Editor.
Carter,  Robert,
Chase,  Salmon  Portland,
and  other  articles.

Bev.  J.  Byland  Kendrick,  D.  D.,

Ex-President  of  Vassar  College.
Burr,  Aaron,
and  articles  on  Baptist  clergymen.

Gustav  Kobb6,

Musical  Editor.

Catenhausen,  Ernst,

Chadwk'k,  George  W.,

and  other  articles.

Neil  Macdonald.
Brown,  Peter,  and  his  sons,
Blake,  William  Hume,
and  other  articles.

Frederic  G.  Mather,

Journalist.
Church,  Sanford  Elias,
Cornell,  Ezra,  and  Alonzo  B.

William  Mathews,  LL.  D.,

Author  of  "  Orators  and  Oratory."
Ames,  Fisher.

John  Bach  McMaster,

Professor  and  Author  of  "  History  of  the  People  of
the  United  States."

Coxe,  Tench,
and  other  articles.

J.  I.  Mombert,  D.  D.
Allen,  Ethan,
Braddock,  Edward,
Boone,  Daniel,
Cartier,  Jacques.

Charles  Ledyard  Norton.

BuRNsiDE,  Ambrose  Everett,
('ooper,  James  Fenimore,
and  other  articles.

Edward  A.  O'Neal,

Governor  of  Alabama.
Chapman,  Reuben.

David  D.  Porter,

Admiral  of  U.  8.  Navy.

Bainbridge,  William.

William  Purcell,

Editor  of  the  Rochester,  N.  Y..  "  Union.*'
Butts,  Isaac,
Cassidy,  William.


Dr.  Juan  G.  Puron,

Spanish  Author  and  Editor.

Articles  on  South  and Central American
Characters.

Prof.  Josiah  Boyce,

Author  of  "California,"  in  Commonwealth  Series.
Articles  on  California  Pioneers.

Miss  Kate  Sanborn,

Author  and  Editor.
Botta,  Anne  C.  Lynch.

Carl  Schiirz,

Ex-Secretary  of  the  Interior.

Clay,  Henry.
Bev.  E.  de  Schweinitz,  D.  D.,

Moravian  Bishop.

Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Moravian  Church.

Charles  Emory  Smith,

Editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Press."
Blaine,  James  Cillespie.

Bev.  J.  A.  Spencer,  D.  D.

Articles  on  Bishops  of  the  Protestant  Epis*
copal  Church.

Bichard  Henry  Stoddard,

Author  and  Editor.

Bryant,  William  Cullen.
Frederick  D.  Stone,

Pennsylvania  Historical  Society
Coombe,  Thomas,
and  other  articles.

William  L.  Stone,

Author  of  "  Life  of  Brant."

Acland,  Lady  Harriet,
Brant,  Joseph,
Burgoyne,  John,
and  other  articles.

William  Strong,

Ex-Justice  U.  S.  Supreme  Court.

Binney,  Horace,
Bradley,  Joseph  P.

Charles  Burr  Todd,

Author  of  "  Life  of  Joel  Barlow."
Barlow,  Joel.

J.  Bandolph  Tucker,

Member  of  Congress  from  Virginia.
Calhoun,  John  Caldwell.

James  C.  Welling,  LL.  D.,

President  of  Columbian  University

Corcoran.  William  Wilson.
Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson,

Author  and  Editor.
Bayard,  James  Asheton,
Clarke,  McDonald,
Cogswell,  Dr.  Jonathan,
Columbus,  Christopher,
and  other  articles.

William  Winter,

Author  and  Critic.
Booth,  Edwin,
Brougham,  John,
Burton,  William  Evans.


APPLETONS'

CYCLOMDIA  OF  AMERICAN  BIOGRAPHY.


AARON,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  New  Britain,
Bucks  CO.,  Pa.,  in  1800 ;  d.  in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,
11  April,  1865.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at  six  years
of  age,  and  became  the  ward  of  an  uncle,  upon
whose  farm  he  worked  for  several  years,  attending
school  only  in  winter.  A  small  legacy  inherited
from  his  father  enabled  him  at  the  age  of  sixteen
to  enter  the  Doylestown,  Pa.,  academy,  where  he
fitted  himself  to  become  a  teacher,  and  at  the  age  |
of  twenty  was  engaged  as  an  assistant  instructor  in
the  classical  and  mathematical  school  in  Burling-
ton, N.  J.  Here  he  studied  and  taught,  and  soon
opened  an  independent  day  school  at  Bridge  Point,
but  was  presently  invited  to  become  principal  of
Doylestown  academy.  In  1829  he  was  ordained,
and  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in  New
Britain.  In  1833  he  took  charge  of  the  Burling-
ton high  school,  serving  at  the  same  time  as  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  that  city.  Accepting  in
1841  an  invitation  from  a  church  in  Norristown,
Pa.,  he  remained  there  three  years,  when  he  opened
the  Treemount  seminary  near  Norristown,  which
under  his  management  soon  became  prosperous,
and  won  a  high  reputation  for  the  thoroughness  of
its  training  and  discipline.  The  financial  disasters
of  1857  found  Mr.  Aaron  with  his  name  pledged  as
security  for  a  friend,  and  he  was  obliged  to  sacrifice
all  his  property  to  the  creditors.  Pie  was  soon
offered  the  head-mastership  of  Mt.  Holly,  N.  J.,
institute,  a  large,  well-establi>hed  school  for  boys,
where,  in  company  with  his  son  as  joint  principal,
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life.  During  these
years  he  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Mt.  Holly.  He
prepared  a  valuable  series  of  text-books  introducing
certain  improvements  in  methods  of  instruction,
which  added  greatly  to  his  reputation  as  an  educa-
tor. His  only  publication  in  book  form,  aside  from
his  text-books,  was  entitled  "  Faithful  Translation  "
(Philadelphia,  1842).  He  was  among  the  early  ad-
vocates of  temperance,  and  was  an  earnest  support-
er of  the  anti-slavery  cause  from  its  beginning.

ABAD,  or  ABADIANO,  Die^o  Jos6,  Mexican
poet,  b.  near  Jiquilpan,  between  Michoacan  and
Guadalajara,  1  July,  1727 ;  d.  in  Italy,  30  Sept.,
1779.  He  became  a  Jesuit  in  early  youth,  and
afterward  taught  philosophy  and  civil  and  canon
law  in  Zacatecas  and  the  city  of  Mexico.  When
forty  years  old,  and  while  rector  of  the  college  of
Queretaro,  he  began  the  study  of  medicine,  in  the
practice  of  which  he  was  successful.  Then  he  went
to  Italy  and  published  a  volume  of  Latin  poetry,
under  the  title  of  "  Heroica  Deo  carmina,"  to  which

VOL. I. — I


he  owes  his  greatest  fame.  Among  other  works  he
wrote  descriptions  of  the  principal  rivers  of  the
world  in  a  book  called  "  Geografia  hidraulica."
Several  editions  of  the  "  Heroica  Deo  carmina "
were  published,  in  Madrid  (1769),  Venice  (1774),
Ferrara  (1776),  and  Cecina  (1780).

ABADIE,  Eugene  H.,  surgeon,  b.  in  France,
about  1814 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  12  Dec,  1874.  He  en-
tered the  medical  corps  of  the  U.  S.  army  in  1836,
with  the  rank  of  assistant  surgeon.  In  1853  he  was
promoted  surgeon,  and  as  such  served  through  the
civil  war,  receiving  the  brevet  rank  of  colonel  in
March,  1865.  His  first  service  was  with  the  Creek
nation,  then  recently  removed  from  their  hereditary
lands  in  Georgia,  and  until  the  Seminole  war  he  was
engaged  with  the  migrating  tribes.  After  this  ser-
vice he  was  stationed  at  the  forts  in  New  York
harbor,  and  at  various  regular  posts  in  the  interior
until  tlie  war  with  Mexico,  where  he  was  on  duty
in  1848,  but  was  ordered  to  Point  Isabel,  Texas,  in
1849.  Changing  from  station  to  station  as  the  exi-
gencies of  the  service  demanded,  he  was  in  Texas
when  the  U.  S.  forces  in  that  state  were  surrendered
by  Gen.  Twiggs,  and  before  the  close  of  1861  he  was
paroled  as  a  prisoner  of  war  and  permitted  to  go
north.  He  was  stationed  at  West  Point  in  1862-64,
during  which  period  he  was  detailed  to  serve  on
medical  boards  in  Philadelphia  and  New  York.  In
1865  he  became  chief  medical  officer  of  the  military
division  of  west  Mississippi,  in  1866  medical  direc-
tor of  the  department  of  Missouri,  and  lastly  acting
assistant  medical  purveyor  at  St.  Louis.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  had  seen  more  years  of  actual
service  than  anv,  save  two,  of  the  army  surgeons.

ABAD  Y  QUEIPO,  Manuel,  Spanish  bishop,
b.  in  Asturias  about  1775;  d.  about  1824.  He
studied  theology  in  Spain,  and  went  to  Mexico.
Prom  Michoacan  he  was  sent  to  Spain  to  plead
against  a  royal  decree  affecting  the  interests  of  the
priesthood,  and  was  successful  in  his  mission.  In
1809  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of  Michoacan.  Dur-
ing the  first  period  of  the  revolutionary  war  he
adhered  to  the  royal  party,  and  went  to  the  city  of
Mexico.  After  his  return  to  Michoacan,  through
intrigues  of  his  opponents,  he  was  sent  to  Spain
and  imprisoned.  But  he  obtained  an  interview
with  King  Ferdinand  VII.,  who  not  only  pardoned
him,  but  appointed  him  his  minister  of  justice.
Yet  the  Inquisitors  imprisoned  him  again  for  his
opposition  to  the  Inquisition.  Afterward  he  was
bishop  of  Fortora.  but  was  again  in  prison  in  1823,
where  he  died,  it  is  believed,  in  the  following  year.


ABASCAL


ABBEY


ABASCAL  (ab-as-cal'),  Jose  Fernando,  Span-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Oviedo,  Asturias,  in  1743;  d.  in
Madrid  in  1821.  He  entered  the  army  in  1762,  and
after  serving  for  twenty  years  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  colonel,  and  during  the  war  against  the
French  to  that  of  brigadier-general.  In  1796  he
went  to  Ciiba,  assumed  the  command  as  viceroy,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  defence  of  Havana
when  that  city  was  attacked  by  an  English  fleet;
Afterward  he  was  commander  in  New  Galicia,  and
still  later  viceroy  of  Peru,  his  great  ability  and  tact
being  especially  beneficial  to  those  countries.  He
also  defended  Buenos  Ayres  from  the  English,  and
at  the  same  time  repressed  revolts  in  Lima  and  in
Cuzco ;  but  being  unsuccessful  in  some  operations,
he  was  recalled  in  1816.  Four  years  before  he  had
been  created  Marques  de  la  Concordia,  in  allusion
to  his  conciliatory  policy  in  Peru,  which  prevented
trouble  between  the  natives  and  the  Spanish  resi-
dents. See  Stevenson's  "  Twenty  Years'  Residence
in  South  America  "  (London,  1825).

ABASOLO,  Mariano,  Mexican  patriot,  b.  near
Dolores,  Guanajuato,  about  1780;  executed  at  Chi-
huahua, 1  Aug.,  181 1.  He  became  conspicuous  dur-
ing the  Mexican  war  for  independence,  and  was  a
colonel  in  the  patriot  army  of  Hidalgo,  distinguish-
ing himself  during  the  campaigns  that  opened  the
war,  and  was  exceptionally  humane  in  his  treat-
ment of  prisoners.  He  took  part  in  the  engagement
at  Las  Cruees,  and  fled  with  Hidalgo  after  the  dis-
astrous fight  at  Arce  de  Calderon  ;  was  captured  by
the  government  troops,  and  shot  in  company  with
his  chief.  Their  bodies  were  exposed  on  poles  and
left  unburied  until  1822.

ABBADIE,  D'  (dab-bah-dee'),  governor  of  Louis-
iana, b.  about  1710 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  4  Feb.,  1765.
He  was  sent  to  America  by  Louis  XV.  of  France,  to
take  charge  of  certain  royal  business  interests  in
New  Orleans,  and  was  granted  military  authority
over  the  affairs  of  the  province.  His  administration
was  marked  by  great  wisdom.  Restraining  the  ten-
dency to  brutality  on  the  part  of  masters  toward
their  slaves,  he  secured  the  good  will  of  the  best
people  in  the  community.  In  his  dealings  with  the
Indians  he  was  equally  successful,  and  his  memory
is  piously  cherished  in  the  French  parishes.  As  the
result  of  the  sale  of  Louisiana  to  Spain  in  1762,  Gov.
Abbadie  was  ordered  in  1764  to  resign  his  com-
mand to  a  Spanish  representative,  and  he  died  of
grief,  caused  by  the  necessity  of  surrendering  his
charge  to  those  whom  he  regarded  as  enemies.  There
appears  to  be  no  record  of  his  Christian  name.

ABBADIE,  Antoine  Thomson  d',  explorer,
b.  ni  Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1810.  With  his  younger
brother,  Arnaud  Michel,  he  was  early  taken  to
France  by  his  father,  a  Frenchman.  In  1835  he
was  sent  by  the  academy  of  sciences  on  an  explor-
ing expedition  to  Brazil,  where  he  remained  nearly
two  years.  In  1873  he  published  "Observations
relatives  k  la  physique  du  globe,  faites  au  Bresil  et
en  Ethiopie."  His  other  works  do  not  relate  to
America.

ABBE,  Cleveland,  meteorologist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  Dec,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  the
New  York  free  academy  in  1857,  taught  mat  he-,
matics  in  Triuity  Latin  school  for  a  year,  and  then
went  to  MichigMU  university,  where 'he  studied  as-
tronomy under  Prof.  Brunnow.  and  taught  the
higher  mathematics  in  the  scientific  school.  From
1860  to  1864  he  lived  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where
Dr.  B.  A.  Gould,  the  astronomer,  assigned  him  the
telegraphic  longitude  work  of  the  U.  S.  coast  sur-
vey. The  years  1865-'66  he  spent  raainlv  at  the
Imperial  observatory  at  Pulkova,  near  St.'  Peters-
burg, Russia,  as  the  guest  of  the  resident  staff  of


observers.  After  a  short  sojourn  at  Washington
he  was  chosen  director  of  the  Cincinnati  observa-
tory. This  was  in  1868,  and  he  soon  proposed  an
enlargement  of  the  scope  of  the  institution  to  in-
clude terrestrial  phj'sics  so  far  as  they  relate  to
astronomy.  Investigation  of  the  subject  led  him
to  suggest  that  Cincinnati  should  be  made  the  head-
quarters of  meteorological  observation  for  the  United
States,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  and  comparing
telegraphic  weather-reports  from  all  parts  of  the
land,  and  making  deductions  therefrom.  The  Cin-
cinnati chamber  of  commerce  saw  the  value  of  the
suggestion,  and  accepted  his  proposition.  Sept.  1,
1869,  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "Weather
Bulletin  of  the  Cincinnati  Observatory."  Prior  to
this  time  (1856)  the  Smithsonian  Institution  had
used  the  telegraph  for  weather-forecasts,  but  these
were  not  sent  out  for  the  benefit  of  the  public  at
large.  The  favor  with  which  the  Cincinnati  project
was  received  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  con-
gress through  the  efforts  of  H.  E.  Paine,  M.  C.  (Wis.),
and  H.  L.  Dawes  (Mass.)  [see  House  Bill  602,  Dec.
19,  1869],  and,  by  a  joint  resolution  of  9  Feb.,  1870,
the  secretary  of  war  was  directed  to  provide  for
taking  meteorological  observations  at  military  posts
in  the  interior  of  the  continent,  and  on  the  lakes  and
sea-coasts,  with  the  design  of  giving  warning  of  the
approach  and  probable  force  of  storms.  In  Janu-
ary, 1871,  Gen.  Albert  J.  Myer,  chief  of  the  army
signal  service,  was  directed  to  take  charge  of  the
new  weather  bureau,  and  he  appointed  Prof.  Abbe
his  meteorologist,  whose  duty  it  was  to  prepare
"probabilities"  or  storm  warnings.  Prof.  Abbe
became  popularly  known  as  "Old  Probabilities,"
and  under  his  direction  the  service  soon  reached
the  high  degree  of  efficiency  that  it  has  since  main-
tained. For  about  one  year,  or  until  competent
assistants  could  be  trained,  Prof.  Abbe  in  person
did  the  work  of  collating  and  tabulating,  which
had  to  be  done  three  times  a  day.  The  publica-
tion of  the  "  Monthly  Weather  Review "  and  the
"Bulletin  of  International  Simultaneous  Observa-
tions "  was  begun  under  his  supervision.  His  pub-
lications, astronomical  and  meteorological,  are  very
numerous,  and  his  contributions  to  current  peri-
odicals, cyclopedias,  and  books  of  reference  are
well  known  to  astronomers.

ABBEVILLE,  Claude  d'
missionary,  d.  in  Paris  in  1632.
with  the  mission  of
the  Capucin  Fathers
on  the  island  of
Maragnan,  near  the
coastof  Brazil,which
was  established  in
1612.  In  his  "  His-
tory "  of  the  mission
he  describes  the  cus-
toms of  the  natives
of  the  island  and
of  the  neighboring
parts  of  the  conti-
nent.

ABBEY,  Edwin
Austin,  artist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  1852.  He  was  a
pupil  of  the  Penn-
sylvania academy,
Philadelphia,  and
has  devoted  himself
chiefly  to  drawing
illustrations  for  books  and  magazines,  but  since  1875
has  done  excellent  work  in  water-colors.  He  re-
moved in  1883  from  New  York  to  London,  where


(dab'-veel),  French
He  was  connected


W

'.£^9^.


ABBEy


ABBOT


8


his  studio  now  is.  He  is  a  member  of  the  New
York  water-color  society,  and  of  the  London  insti-
tute of  water-colors.  Among  his  best  pictures  are
"  The  Stage  Office  "  (187G) ;  "  The  Evil  Eye  "  (1877) ;
"Lady  in  a  Garden"  (1878):  "Rose  in  October"
(1879);  "The  Widower"  (1883);  and  "  Reading  the
Bible  "  (1884).  Notable  among  his  illustrations  are
those  to  Robert  Herrick's  poems  and  "She  Stoops
to  Conquer."  He  visited  the  United  States  in
1886.

ABBEY,  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Rondout,  N.  Y.,
11  July,  1843.  He  was  educated  at  Kingston  acad-
emy and  the  Hudson  river  institute.  His  first
book,  "  May  Dreams,"  was  published  in  New  York
in  1802.  About  this  time  he  became  assistant  edi-
tor of  the  Rondout  "  Courier,"  and  subsequently  of
the  Orange  "  Spectator  "  (N.  J.).  "  Ralph  and  other
Poems  "  appeared  in  1860,  "  Stories  in  Verse  "  in
1809,  and  "  Ballads  of  Good  Deeds "  in  1872.  A
new  edition  of  the  last  named  appeared  in  England
in  1876.  "  Poems  by  Henry  Abbey  "  was  published
in  1879,  embracing  the  greater  part  of  the  old  selec-
tions and  several  new  pieces.  "  The  City  of  Success
and  other  Poems"  appeared  in  1888,  and  a  new
and  comprehensive  edition  of  his  more  important
poems  was  published  in  Kingston  in  1886.

ABBEY^  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  Genesee
CO.,  N.  Y.,  16  Nov.,  1805.  In  1816  he  removed  to
Illinois,  and  thence,  in  182o,  to  Natchez,  Miss.  He
became  a  minister  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  in  1844,  and  was  identified  with  the  move-
ment separating  that  denomination  into  its  north-
ern and  southern  branches.  He  has  published
"  Letters  to  Bishop  Green  on  Apostolic  Succession  "
and  "  End  of  the  Apostolic  Succession "  (1853) ;
"Creed  of  All  Men"  (1855);  "Ecclesiastical  Con-
stitution "  (1856) ;  "  Church  and  Ministry  "  (1859) ;
"  Diuturnity  "  (1866) ;  "  Ecce  Ecclesia,"  an  answer
to  "  Ecce  Homo  "  (1868) ;  "  The  City  of  God  and
the  Church-Makers  "  (1872).  In  1858  he  was  elected
financial  secretary  of  the  Southern  Methodist  pub-
lishing house.  His  other  works  include  "  Bap-
tismal Demonstrations,"  "  Divine  Assessment,"
"  Strictures  on  Chiirch  Government,"  and  "  The
Divine  Call  to  the  Ministry."

ABBOT,  Abiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Wilton,  N.  H.,
14  Dec,  1705  ;  d.  in  West  Cambridge,  Mass.,  31
Jan.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1787,
taught  in  Phillips  Andover  academy  until  1789,
studied  theology,  and  labored  as  a  missionary  in
Maine.  In  1794  he  was  tutor  of  Greek  in  Harvard.
He  was  ordained  minister  of  the  church  in  Coven-
try, Conn.,  in  1795,  from  which  he  was  dismissed
in  1811,  on  account  of  his  theological  opinions.  He
taught  the  Dummer  academy  until  1819,  and  then
cultivated  a  farm  in  North  Andover  until  1827,
when  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  church  at
Peterborough,  N.  H.,  where  he  remained  until  his
retirement  from  the  ministry  in  1848.  He  pub-
lished in  1811  an  account  of  his  difficulty  with  the
Coventry  congregation,  in  1829  a  "  History  of  An-
dover," and  in  1847  the  "  Genealogy  of  the  Abbot
Family."

ABBOT,  Abiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,
17  Aug.,  1770 ;  d.  on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  7  June,
1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1792,  be-
came the  Congregational  minister  at  Haverhill,
Mass.,  in  1794,  and  in  1802  took  charge  of  the
church  at  Beverly.  He  wrote  a  volume  of  descrip-
tive "Letters  from  Cuba"  (Boston,  1829)  while  visit-
ing that  island  for  his  health  in  1827,  and  died  of
yellow  fever  on  his  return  voyage.  Dr.  Abbot  was
an  eloquent  preacher.  His  sermons,  accompanied
by  a  memoir  by  S.  Everett,  were  published  in  Bos-
ton in  1831.


ABBOT,  Benjamin,  educator,  b.  about  1762 ;  d.
in  Exeter,  N.  II.,  25  Oct.,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1788,  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Dartmouth  in  1811,  and  took  charge  of  Phillips
academy,  Exeter,  N.  II.,  which  he  conducted  until
1838.  Among  the  pupils  under  his  training  were
Daniel  Webster,  Edward  Everett,  Lewis  Cass,  Jared
Sparks,  George  Bancroft,  and  John  G.  Palfrey.

ABBOT,  Ezra,  biblical  critic,  b.  in  Jackson,
Maine,  28  April,  1819;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
21  March,  1884.  It  is  said  that  he  knew  his  letters
at  the  age  of  nineteen  months.  When  five  years
old  he  was  promoted  to  the  first  class  in  reading,
and  at  seven  he  expressed  the  great  interest  he
felt  in  Rollin's  "  Ancient  History."  In  the  sports
of  childhood  he  manifested  the' keenest  zest,  was
an  expert  at  catching  trout,  and  was  an  excel-
lent story-teller.  He  studied  at  Phillips  Exeter
academy,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  college  in
1840,  and  soon  afterward  made  his  home  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.  In  1856  he  became  assistant  librari-
an at  Harvard.  He  made  a  careful  revision,  and
collation  with  the  originals,  of  the  numerous
learned  quotations  in  Jeremy  Taylor's  "  Holy  Liv-
ing and  Dying,"  and  published  a  new  edition  (Bos-
ton, 1864).  In  1869  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Yale  college,  and  in  1872  Harvard
conferred  on  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.,  al-
though he  was  a  lay-
man. From  1872  till
his  death  he  was  pro-
fessor of  New  Testa-
ment criticism  and
interpretation  in  the
Divinity  school  at
Cambridge.  He  made
important  contribu-
tions, mostly  in  the
department  of  bibli-
cal criticism,  to  peri-
odicals. As  a  bibliog-
rapher his  labors  were
very  valuable,  and  he
furnished  a  curious
and  extensive  cata-
logue of  books  on  the
subject,  which  he  pre-
pared as  an  appendix  to  Alger's  "  Critical  History
of  a  Future  Life,"  and  an  invaluable  addition  to
the  Prolegomena  to  the  8th  edition  of  Tischendorf 's
Greek  Testament.  His  most  important  work,  as
well  as  his  latest,  was  a  small  volume  on  "  The  Au-
thorship of  the  Fourth  Gospel "  (1880).  Mr.  Abbot
was  a  Unitarian,  and  contributed  largely  to  the  peri-
odicals of  that  denomination.  He  also  furnished
occasional  papers  for  the  "  North  American  Re-
view "  and  the  "  Jouriuil  of  the  American  Oriental
Society,"  and  was  a  member  of  the  American  com-
mittee to  revise  the  New  Testament.  Pie  left  a
library  of  5,000  volumes,  containing  many  rare
books,  including  a  rich  collection  of  Greek  New
Testaments  of  various  editions.  In  accordance
with  his  desire,  this  collection  was  added  to  the
library  of  Harvard  university.  The  remainder  of
his  books  was  given  to  the  library  of  the  Divinity
school  connected  with  the  university,  on  condition
that  "  there  shall  be  secured  as  soon  as  possible  a
more  adequate  and  safe  place  of  keeping."  Amon^
his  works  are  "New  Discussions  of  the  Trinity'"
and  "  Literature  of  the  Doctrine  of  a  Future  Life."
He  also  edited  Norton's  "  Statement  of  the  Reasons
for  not  Believing  the  Doctrines  of  the  Trinitarians,"
Lamson's  "  Church  of  the  First  Three  Centuries,"
and  other  controversial  works,  and  contributed  to


ABBOT


ABBOT


the  pronunciation  of  names  in  "  Worcester's  Dic-
tionary." A  memorial  of  Dr.  Ahb(jt  was  published
by  the  alumni  of  Harvard  divinity  school  in  1884.

ABBOT,  Francis  Elliiigwood,  author,  b,  in
Boston,  0  Nov.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1859,  and  from  1870  to  1880  was  editor  of
'*  The  Index,"  a  Boston  journal  of  free  thought.
He  has  written  much  on  metaphysical  subjects,
and  has  published  in  book  form  "Scientific  The-
ism "(Boston,  1880).

ABBOT,  Henry  Larcom,  soldier,  b.  in  Bev-
erly, Mass.,  13  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at
West  Point  in  1854,  and  made  brevet  second  lieu-
tenant of  topographical  engineers.  His  first  ser-
vice was  in  the  office  of  the  Pacific  railroad  surveys
in  Washington,  whence  in  1855  he  was  transferred
to  the  Pacific  railroad  survey  of  the  route  between
California  and  Oregon,  and  afterward  served  on
the  hydrographic  survey  of  the  delta  of  the  Missis-
sippi river.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  princi-
pally engaged  as  a  military  engineer,  and  rose  by
successive  steps  until  brevetted  brigadier-general,
U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  and  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  engineers,  31  March,  1880.  He  served
in  various  actions,  and  was  wounded  at  Bull  Run
in  18(51.  Since  the  close  of  the  war  he  has  been  en-
gaged in  superintending  the  defences  of  the  East
river ;  in  command  of  the  engineer  post  and  depot
at  Willet's  Point,  N.  Y.,  and  of  the  engineer  bat-
talion and  the  engineer  school  of  application,  the
latter  of  which  he  has  created.  He  was  a  member
of  the  expedition  to  Sicily  to  observe  the  solar
eclipse  in  1870,  member  of  the  engineer  board  on
the  U.  S.  military  bridge  equipage  and  drill,  of  one
on  a  plan  for  the  protection  of  the  alluvial  region
of  the  Mississippi  against  overflows,  and  of  various
other  boards  connected  with  fortifications  and
river  and  harbor  improvements.  He  invented
and  developed  the  U.  S.  system  of  submarine
mines  for  coast  and  river  defence,  1869  to  1886.
He  has  published  "  Vol.  VI.,  Pacific  Railroad  Re-
ports "  (Washington,  1857) ;  "  Physics  and  Hydrau-
lics of  the  Mississippi,"  jointly 'with  Capt.  A.  A.
Humphreys  (Philadelphia,  1861) ;  "  Siege  Artillery
in  tlie  Catnpaign  against  Richmond  "  (Washington,
1867) :  "  Experiments  and  Investigations  to  develop
a  System  of  Submarine  Mines  for  defending  Har-
bors of  the  United  States"  (1881);  jointly  with
boards  and  commissioners,  "  United  States  Bridge
Equipage  and  Drill  "  (1870);  "  Reclamation  of  the
Alluvial  Basin  of  the  Mississippi  River"  (1875);
"Report  of  Gun-Foundry  Board"  (1884);  and
"  Report  of  the  Board  on  Fortifications  or  other
Defences  "  (1886).

ABBOT,  Joel,  physician,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,
17  March,  1766;  d.  in  Washington,  Ga.,  19  Nov.,
1826.  He  received  an  academic  education,  and
then  studied  medicine,  his  father's  profession.  In
1794  he  removed  to  Washington.  Ga.,  and  began
practice.  In  1809  he  was  elected  to  the  legislature,
and,  after  holding  various  local  offices,  was  elected
to  the  fifteenth  congress  (1816),  and  successively
re-elected  until  1825.  In  1820  he  was  appointed
by  the  Georgia  medical  society  a^s  its  representative
in  preparing  the  "  National  Pharmacopoeia."

ABBOT,  Joel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Westford,
Mass.,  18  Jan..  1793;  d.  in  Hong  Kong,  China,  14
Dec,  1855.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  at  the
outbreak  of  the  second  war  with  England,  and
was  ordered  to  the  frigate  "  President "  as  aid  and
signal  officer  to  Com.  Rodgers,  who,  impressed  by
his  zeal  and  efficiency,  recommended  him  to  Com.
Macdonough,  then  in  command  of  the  naval  forces
on  Lake  Champlain.  Learning  that  the  British
had  acciinudated  a  large  supply  of  spars  at  Sorel,


Macdonough  sent  for  Midshipman  Abbot  and  asked
him  if  he  was  willing  to  die  for  his  country.  "  Cer-
tainly, sir ;  that  is  what  I  came  into  the  service  for,"
was  the  answer.  Macdonough  then  told  him  what
he  wished  done,  and  young  Abbot,  disguised  as  a
British  officer,  entered  the  enemy's  lines,  taking
the  risk  of  being  hanged  as  a  spy  in  case  of  cap-
ture, discovered  where  the  spars  were  stored,  and
destroyed  them.  Such  were  the  hardships  and
dangers  encountered  during  this  expedition  that
when  he  reported  to  his  commanding  officer  he
was  in  a  state  of  prostration,  from  the  effects  of
which  he  was  long  in  recovering. For  this ex-

eloit  and  for  gallantry  in  action  off  Cumberland
[ead,  11  Septem-
ber, 1814,  he  was
promoted  lieuten-
ant, and  congress
Voted  him  a  hand-
some sword.  Dur-
ing the  remain-
der of  the  war  he
had  no  further  op-
portunity for  dis-
tinction, though
at  one  time  he
quelled  a  formid-
able mutiny.  In
December,  1818,
he  was  placed  in
charge  of  a  30-
gun  pirate  craft,
the  "  Mariana,"
captured  by  Com.
Stockton  off  the
African  coast.  On  the  voyage  to  Boston  part  of  his
crew  mutinied,  and  the  piratical  prisoners  succeeded
in  wrenching  off  their  irons,  during  a  terrible  gale.
Notwithstanding  this  seemingly  hopeless  state  of
affairs,  Lieut.  Abbot  regained  command  of  his
crew,  kept  the  mutineers  at  bay,  and  brought  his
ship  safely  into  port.  In  1838  he  was  promoted
commander,  serving  on  the  various  foreign  squad-
rons, and  from  1839  to  1842  was  in  command  at
the  Boston  navy-yard.  In  1852  he  commanded
the  "  Macedonian "  in  the  Japan  expedition,  suc-
ceeding Com.  Perry  as  flag-officer  of  the  squad-
ron. During  this  critical  period  of  our  rela-
tions with  China  he  was  often  called  upon  to  per-
form delicate  diplomatic  duties,  discharging  them
to  the  complete  satisfaction  of  the  government.
He  probably  shortened  his  life  by  devotion  to  the
interests  of  commerce  in  personally  superintend-
ing the  placing  of  buoys  and  a  light-ship  in  the  har-
bor of  Shanghai,  which  for  the  first  time  then  had
its  channels  and  sailing-courses  properly  defined.

ABBOT,  Joseph  Hale,  educator,  b.  in  Wilton,
N.  H.,  26  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  7
April,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  col-
lege in  1822,  was  tutor  there  in  1825-'27,  and
from  1827  to  1833  professor  of  mathematics  and
teachei  of  modern  languages  in  Phillips  Exeter
academy.  He  then  taught  a  school  for  young
ladies  in  Boston,  and  subsequently  became  princi-
pal of  the  high  school  in  Beverly,  Mass.  He  was  a
member,  and  for  several  years  recording  secretary,
of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  to
whose  "Transactions"  he  contributed  numerous
scientific  j^apers.  He  paid  much  attention  to  the
solving  of  pneumatic  and  hydraulic  problems,  and
published  ingenious  and  original  speculations  on
these  subjects.  In  the  "Ether  Controversy"  he
was  an  advocate  of  the  claims  of  Dr.  Charles  T.
Jackson,  and  wrote  warmly  in  his  behalf.  He  was
associated  with  Dr.  Worcester  in  the  preparation  of


ABBOT


ABBOTT


6


his  English  Dictionary,  and  furnished  many  of  the
scientiiie  definitions.

ABBOT,  Samuel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Andover,
Mass.,  25  Feb.,  1732 ;  d.  12  April,  1812.  He  was
a  merchant  in  Boston,  and  by  his  perseverance,  hon-
esty, and  methodical  habits  acquired  great  wealth,
which  he  devoted  to  various  religious  and  charita-
ble purposes.  He  interested  himself  in  the  estab-
lishment of  Andover  theological  seminary,  and  con-
tributed $20,000  for  that  purpose,  which  amount
he  increased  by  $100,000  on  his  decease.

ABBOT,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Wilton,  N.  H.,
30  March,  178G ;  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1839.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1808,  studied  law,  and
practised  his  profession,  first  at  Dunstable  and
then  at  Ipswich,  Mass.  He  was  the  inventor  of  a
process  by  which  starch  is  made  from  the  potato,
and  was  burned  to  death  in  his  factory.

ABBOTT,  Austin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Boston,  18  Dec,
1831,  is  the  second  son  of  Jacob  Abbott,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  the  City  of  New  York
in  1851,  and  was  admitted  to  the  New  York  bar  in
1852.  He  entered  into  partnership  with  his  elder
brother,  Benjamin,  and  cooperated  with  him  in
preparing  legal  compilations  of  great  value  to  the
profession.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
the  University  of  the  City  of  New  York  in  1886.
As  joint  author  with  his  brothers  Benjamin  and
Lyman,  he  wrote  two  novels,  "  Cone-Cut  Corners  "
(1*855)  and  "  Matthew  Caraby  "  (1858).  Individually
he  has  contributed  to  current  publications.  The
titles  of  his  most  important  law  books  are  "  New
Cases,  Mainly  New  York  Decisions"  (17  vols..  New
York,  1877-'86) ;  "  Official  Report  of  the  Trial  of
Henry  Ward  Beecher"  (1875,  2  vols,  only  pub-
lished, owing  to  failure  of  publisher) ;  '•  Reports
and  Decisions  of  the  New  York  Court  of  Appeals  "
(4  vols.,  1873-'78) ;  "  Digests  of  New  York  Statutes,
and  Reports  of  United  States  Courts,  and  of  the
Laws  of  Corporations ;  Reports  of  Practice  Cases  "
(33  vols.,  1873),  continued  in  supplementary  and
annual  volumes,  and  in  connection  with  his  brother
Benjamin's  "Digest";  "Trial  Evidence"  (1880);
"  Trial  Brief  for  Civil  Jury  Cases  "  (1885).

ABBOTT,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  on  Long
Island,  N.  Y.,  in  1732 ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  J.,  14  Aug.,
1796.  The  story  of  Mr.  Abbott's  life  has  for  a  hun-
dred years  been  a  typical  one  for  the  great  denomi-
nation of  which  he  was  an  early  apostle.  His  father
died  while  he  was  a  lad,  providing  by  will  that  his
sons  should  learn  trades.  Benjamin  was  appren-
ticed to  a  hatter  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  fell  into
evil  ways  and  for  a  time  led  a  wild  life.  Cutting
short  his  apprenticeship,  he  went  to  New  Jersey
and  joined  one  of  his  brothers  on  a  farm,  but  con-
tinued his  profligate  career  in  spite  of  his  marriage
with  a  worthy  member  of  the  Presbyterian  church.
During  all  this  time  he  was  kind  to  his  family,  and  a
frequent  if  not  regular  attendant  upon  religious  ser-
vices. When  he  was  thirty-three  years  old  he  had
a  frightful  dream  of  future  punishment,  which,
though  it  did  not  lead  him  at  the  time  to  mend  his
ways,  came  back  to  him  several  years  afterward  un-
der the  influence  of  an  itinerant  Methodist  preacher,
and,  overwhelmed  with  terror,  he  suffered  agonies
of  remorse  until  the  preacher  returned  on  his  cir-
cuit, when  he  was  converted  and  could  not  rest  till
he  himself  became  a  preacher.  So  earnest  was  he
that  his  wife,  long  a  chui'ch  member,  experienced
renewed  conviction  of  sin  under  her  husband's
powerful  representations,  and  his  influence  over
her  was  repeated  in  thousands  of  other  cases  wher-
ever he  went.  With  his  wife  and  children  he
soon  united  with  the  Methodists,  and  became  the
most  popular  and  successful  preacher  in  the  vicin-


ity. Wonderful  conversions  of  the  most  hardened
characters  took  place  wherever  he  preached,  and  in
consequence  of  his  chance  appeals  to  individuals.
The  war  for  independence  interfered  with  his
work,  as  the  Methodists  were  popularly  suspected
of  disloyalty,  and  on  several  occasions  he  was
threatened  by  excited  soldiery.  His  personal  force
was  such  that  he  always  preached  down  his  assail-
ants, and  he  once  reduced  to  the  attitude  of  peace-
ful auditors  a  hundred  soldiers  who  had  assembled
to  do  him  violence.  For  sixteen  years  he  served
as  a  local  preacher,  and  in  1789  he  became  an  itin-
erant, joining  the  Dutchess  County  (N.  Y.)  circuit.
In  1791  he  was  on  the  Long  Island  circuit,  in  1792
in  Salem,  N.  J.,  and  in  1793  was  made  an  elder  and
sent  to  the  Cecil  circuit,  Maryland.  After  this
time  his  usefulness  was  impaired  by  ill  health,  but
in  the  intervals  of  fever  he  went  about  as  usual
and  performed  his  pastoral  duties  whenever  his
strength  permitted.  His  life  has  ever  been  a  stir-
ring theme  for  the  exhorters  who  have  succeeded
him,  and  in  the  minutes  of  conference  for  1796  he
is  referred  to  as  "  one  of  the  wonders  of  America,
no  man's  copy,  an  uncommon  zealot  for  the  blessed
work  of  sanctification,  who  preached  it  on  all  occa-
sions and  in  all  congregations."

ABBOTT,  Benjamin  Vau^lian,  lawyer,  b.  m
Boston,  4  June,  1830 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  17  Feb.,
1890.  He  was  graduated  at  New  York  university
in  1850,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,  and,  after  some
years  of  practice,  devoted  himself  mainly  to  compi-
lations and  digests  of  law.  Some  of  the  more  im-
portant of  these  are  enumerated  in  the  article  on
Austin  Abbott,  his  brother,  who  was  associated
with  him.  His  earliest  independent  publication
was  "  Reports  of  Decisions  of  Circuit  and  District
Courts  of  the  U.  S."  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1870-'71).
In  June,  1870,  he  was  appointed  to  revise  the  stat-
utes of  the  United  States,  a  work  that  occupied
three  years,  and  resulted  in  the  consolidation  of
sixteen  volumes  of  U.  S.  laws  into  one  large  octavo.
Charles  P.  James  and  Victor  C.  Barringer  were
associated  with  Mr.  Abbott  in  this  work.  On  its
completion  he  undertook  a  new  edition  of  the  "  U
S.  Digest,"  a  work  that  occupied  him  imtil  1879.
The  original  digest  was  compressed  into  thirteen
volumes,  followed  by  nine  volumes  of  annual  sup-
plements. In  the  meantime  he  had  prepared  "  A
Digest  of  Decisions  on  Corporations  from  1860  to
1870  "  (New  York,  1872),  and  "  A  Treatise  on  the
Courts  of  the  United  States  and  their  Practice  "  (2
vols.,  New  York,  1877).  He  next  compiled  a  "  Dic-
tionary of  Terms  in  American  and  English  Juris-
prudence "  (2  vols.,  1879) ;  a  "  National  Digest "
(4  vols.,  1884-'85),  which  comprised  all  important
acts  of  congress,  and  decisions  of  the  U.  S.  supreme
court,  circuit  and  district  courts,  court  of  claims,
etc.,  and  the  fourth  American  edition  of  "  Addison
on  Contracts"  (1883).  "Judge  and  Jury"  (New
York,  1880)  is  a  collection  of  articles  contributed
anonymously  to  periodicals ;  "  Travelling  Law
School  and  Famous  Trials"  (1880)  is  a  juvenile
publication  in  the  Chautauqua  reading-circle  series.
He  supplied  many  articles  for  the  "  Medical  Refer-
ence Handbook,"  and  acted  as  editor  for  the  law-
yers' cooperative  publishing  company  of  Rochester,
N.  Y.  His  latest  work,  entitled  "  The  Patent  Laws
of  all  Nations,"  was  still  in  preparation.

ABBOTT,  Charles  Conrad,  naturalist,  b.  in
Trenton,  N.  J.,  4  June,  1843.  He  was  educated  at
Trenton  academy,  and  studied  medicine  at  the
university  of  Pennsylvania,  graduating  in  1865,
Dr.  Abbott  has  very  carefully  investigated  the  first
appearance  of  pre-historic  man  in  this  country,  and
has  accumulated  a  valuable  archaeological  coUec-


6


ABBOTT


ABBOTT


tion  containing  20,000  specimens,  mainly  stone  im-
plements, which  is  now  in  the  Peabody  museum,
Cambridge,  Mass.  He  is  a  frequent  contributor  to
the  scientific  journals,  and  has  also  written  reports
for  the  government  surveys.  He  is  also  the  author
of  "  Primitive  Industry :  or.  Illustrations  of  the
Hand-work  in  Stone,  Bone,  and  Clay  of  the  Native
Races  of  the  Northern  Atlantic  Seaboard  of  Ameri-
ca" (Salem,  1&81).  His  "Rambles  of  a  Natural-
ist "  (New  York,  1884)  and  "  Upland  and  Meadow  "
(1886)  are  interesting  descriptions  of  his  personal
experiences  in  New  Jersey.

ABBOTT,  Edward,  journalist,  b.  in  Farming-
ton,  Me.,  15  July,  1841.  He  is  the  fourth  son  of
Jacob  Abbott,  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  the  City  of  New  York  in  1860,  and  afterward
studied  at  Andover  theological  seminary.  In  1863
and  1863  he  was  with  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commis-
sion of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  On  28  July,
1863,  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  of  the  Con-
gregational church,  and  until  1865  he  was  chaplain
of  the  city  institutions,  Boston.  He  became  pas-
tor of  Steam's  chapel  (now  Pilgrim  church)  in
1865,  and  remained  there  until  1869,  when  he  be-
came associate  editor  of  the  "  Congregationalist,"
retaining  the  place  until  1878.  He  then  trans-
ferred his  ecclesiastical  relation  to  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  took  charge  of  St.  James
parish,  Cambridge.  In  the  same  year  he  under-
took the  editorship  of  the  "  Literary  World."  He
has  published  "  The  Baby's  Things "  (New  York,
1871);  "The  Conversations  of  Jesus"  (Boston,
1875);  "A  Paragraph  History  of  the  United
States"  (1875);  "A  Paragraph  History  of  the
Revolution  "  and  "  Revolutionary  Times  "  (1876) ;
"The  Long-Look  Books"  (3  vols.,  1877-'80);  "Pil-
grim Lesson  Papers "  (1872-'74) ;  and  "  Abbott's
Young  Christian,"  edited  with  a  life  of  the  author
(New  York,  1882),  and  contributed  largely  to  peri-
odical literature.

ABBOTT,  Gorliam  Bummer,  educator,  b.  in
Hallowell,  Me.,  3  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.  in  South  Natick,
Mass.,  31  July,  1874.  He  was  a  son  of  Rev.  Jacob
Abbott,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  College  in  1826,
and  studied  theology  at  Andover  with  the  class  of
1831.  After  receiving  ordination  as  a  Congrega-
tional minister  in  1831,  he  became  a  teacher  in
New  York  city,  and  shortly  afterward  was  settled
at  New  Rochelle,  N.  Y..  where  he  remained  till
1845,  doing  at  the  same  time  literary  work  for  the
American  Tract  Society.  On  leaving  New  Ro-
chelle he  assisted  his  brothers  in  establishing  a
female  seminary,  the  Abbott  institute,  in  New
York  city.  He'  founded  in  1847  a  young  ladies'
seminary,  known  as  the  Spingler  institute,  where
he  remained  for  thirteen  years.  The  high  reputa-
tion of  this  school  necessitated  an  enlargement,
and  the  Townsend  mansion  on  Fifth  avenue  was
procured,  remodelled,  and  converted  into  an  annex,
llis  seminary  held  a  high  rank,  not  only  in  New
York  but  throughout  the  country,  for  more  than
thirty  years.  He  was  a  successful  teacher,  and
possessed  of  great  executive  ability.  The  title  of
LL.  I),  was  conferred  on  him  by  Ingham  University
in  1860.  He  retired  from  the  seminary  in  1869
with  a  competence,  but  subsequent  unfortunate  in-
vestments caused  a  material  diminution  of  his
proi)erty.  His  researches  as  a  biblical  student  dis-
I)layed  extreme  thoroughness.  He  imported  at  his
own  expense  a  set  of  plates  of  the  "Annotated
Paragraph  Bible"  of  the  London  Tract  Society,
and  also  published  several  editions  of  the  work,
Avhich  was  issued  at  an  extremely  low  price  in
order  to  facilitate  biblical  instruction.  He  was  the
author  of  several  religious  and  didactic  works,  prin-


cipal among  which  were  the  "  Family  at  Home,"
"  Nathan  W.  Dickerman,"  "  Mexico  and  the  United
States."  and  "  Pleasure  and  Profit."

ABBOTT,  Horace,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Sud-
bury, Mass.,  29  July,  1806 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
8  Aug.,  1887.  He  was  early  engaged  in  the  man-
ufacture of  shafts,  cranks,  axles,  etc.,  in  Balti-
more, and  is  said  to  have  made  the  first  large
steamboat-shaft  ever  forged  in  this  country.  In
1850  he  built  his  first  rolling-mill,  which  was  larger
than  any  before  attempted  in  the  United  States.
A  second  mill,  built  in  1857,  contained  a  pair  of
ten-foot  rolls,  which  were  described  as  being  the
longest  plate-rolls  ever  made  in  America.  In  1858
a  third  mill  was  erected,  and  in  1861  a  fourth.
In  these  mills  the  armor-plates  for  the  "  Monitor  "
were  made,  and  subsequently  those  for  nearly  all
the  vessels  of  the  monitor  class  built  on  the  Atlan-
tic coast,  as  well  as  for  the  "  Roanoke,"  "  Agamen-
ticus,"  "Monadnock,"  and  other  government  ves-
sels. In  1865  an  association  of  capitalists  purchased
the  entire  works  and  organized  a  stock  company
known  as  the  Abbott  Iron  Company  of  Baltimore,
and  elected  Mr.  Abbott  president.

ABBOTT,  Jacob,  author,  b.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,
14  Nov.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Farmington,  Me.,  31  Oct.,  1879.
He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  College,  Brunswick,
Me.,  in  1820,  and  studied  divinity  at  Andover
Mass.,  receiving  ordination  as  a  Congregational
minister.  From  1825  to  1829  he  was  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Amherst
college,  and  afterward  he  established  the  Mount
Vernon  school  for  girls  in  Boston.  In  1834  he  or-
ganized a  new  Congregational  church  in  Roxbury
(the  Eliot  church)  and  became  its  pastor.  He  re-
moved to  Farmington,  Me.,  in  1839,  and  subse-
quently devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  lit-
erary labor,  dividing  his  time  between  Farmington
and  New  York,  and  travelling  extensively  abroad.
A  complete  catalogue  of  his  works  (which  are
chiefly  for  the  young)  would  considerably  exceed
200  titles.  Many  of  them  are  serial,  each  series
comprising  from  3  to  36  volumes.  Among  them
are  the  "  Young  Christian "  series  (4  vols. ;  new
ed.,  with  life  of  the  author.  1882),  the  "Rollo
Books "  (28  vols.),  the  "  Lucy  Books "  (6  vols.),
the  "  Jonas  Books "  (6  vols.),  the  "  Franconia
Stories  "  (10  vols.),  the  "  Marco  Paul  Series  "  (6  vols.),
the  "Gay  Family"  series  (12  a^oIs.),  the  "Juno
Books"  (6  vols.),  the  "Rainbow"  series  (5  vols.),
and  four  or  five  other  series ;  "  Science  for  the
Young  "  (4  vols.,  "  Heat,"  "  Light,"  "  Water  and
Land,"  and  "  Force  ") ;  "  A  Summer  in  Scotland  " ;
"  The  Teacher  " ;  more  than  20  of  the  series  of  illus-
trated histories  to  which  his  brother  John  S.  C.
contributed,  and  a  separate  series  of  histories  of
America  in  8  volumes.  He  also  editedi,  with  addi-
tions, several  historical  text-books,  and  compiled  a
series  of  school  readers.

ABBOTT,  John,  entomologist.  He  Was  for
many  years  a  resident  of  Georgia,  and  wrote  "  The
Natural  History  of  the  Rarer  Lepidopterous  In-
sects of  Georgia,"  which  was  edited  by  Sir  J.  E.
Smith,  and  published  in  London,  with  104  colored
.plates,  in  1797.

ABBOTT,  John  Joseph  Caldwell,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  St.  Andrews,  Argenteuil  co.,  Can-
ada East,  12  March,  1811.  He  is  a  son  of  the  Rev.
Joseph  Abbott,  M.  A.,  first  Anglican  incumbent  of
St.  Andrews;  was  educated  at  St.  Andrews,  and
subsequently  at  McGill  College,  Montreal,  where
he  was  graduated  as  B.  C.  L.,  studied  law,  and  in
1847  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada.  In
1859  he  was  elected  a  representative  from  Argen-
1  teuil  in  the  Canadian  assembly,  and  he  represented


ABBOTT


ABBOTT


this  constituency  until  the  union  of  the  provinces,
when  he  was  returned  for  the  house  of  commons.
For  a  brief  period  in  1862  Mr.  Abbott  was  solici-
tor-general in  the  Sandfield  Macdonald-Sicotte
administration.  In  1879  he  went  to  England  with
the  Hon.  H.  L.  Langevin  on  the  mission  that  re-
sulted in  the  dismissal  of  Lieut.-Gov.  Lue  Letel-
lier  de  St.  Just.  Mr.  Abbott  is  regarded  as  one  of
the  best  authorities  in  Canada  on  commercial  law,
and  he  added  largely  to  his  reputation  by  his
"  Jurv  Law  Consolidation  Act "  for  Lower  Canada.
ABBOTT,  John  Stephens  Cabot,  author,  b.  in
Brunswick,  Me.,  18  Sept.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Fair  Haven,
Conn.,  17  June,  1877.  He  was  a  brother  of  Jacob
Abbott,  and  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  College  in
1825,  and  at  Andover  Theological  Seminary.  He
was  ordained  as  a  Congregational  minister  in  1880,
and  successively  held  pastorates  at  Worcester,  Rox-
bury,  and  Nantucket,  Mass.  Like  his  elder  broth-
er, he  had  the  narrative  faculty  in  a  remarkable
degree,  and,  like  him,  he  was  a  prolific  writer.  His
first  published  work,  "  The  Mother  at  Home "
(1833),  commanded  a  large  sale,  and  was  followed
by  "  The  Child  at  Home,"  and  at  short  intervals  by
other  books  of  a  semi-religious  character.  In  1844
he  resigned  his  pastorate  and  devoted  himself  to
literature,  his  favorite  field  of  work  being  profes-
sedly historical.  His  principal  books  are  "  Prac-
tical Christianity  "  ; "  Kings  and  Queens,  or  Life

in  the  Palace  "  ;
"The  French  Rev-
olution of  1789  " ;
"The  History  of
Napoleon  Bona-
parte "  (2  vols.);
"  Napoleon  at  St.
Helena  "  ;  "  The
History  of  Napo-
leon III."  (18G8);
10  volumes  of  il-
lustrated histo-
ries; "A  History
of  the  Civil  War  in
America  "  (2  vols.,
1863-1866);  "Ro-
mance of  Spanish
History" (1870);

c^W  c^-^.  c^^^'^^ tory  of  Frederick

the  Second,  called
Frederick  the  Great "  (1871).  Several  of  these  have
been  translated  into  foreign  languages.

ABBOTT,  Joseph  Carter,  journalist,  b.  in
Concord,  N.  IL,  15  July,  1825 ;  d.  in  Wilmington,
N.  C,  8  Oct.,  1882.  He  studied  at  Phillips  An-
dover academy,  and  subsequently  under  private  in-
struction, covering  the  usual  college  course.  He
then  read  law  in  Concord,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1852,  at  which  time  he  had  already  edited
the  "  Daily  American  "  for  six  months.  He  contin-
ued to  edit  this  journal  until  1857,  and  in  the  mean-
time (1855)  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of
New  Hampshire,  and  in  that  capacity  effectively
reorganized  the  State  militia.  In  1859-'61  he  as-
sumed the  editorship  of  the  Boston  "Atlas  and
Bee,"  but  continued  to  discharge  his  duties  as  ad-
jutant-general. He  early  joined  the  "  Know  Noth-
ing "  party,  and  during  all  these  years  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  magazines,  being  particularly
interested  in  historical  matters.  He  was  a  member
of  the  commission  for  adjusting  the  boundary  be-
tween New  Hampshire  and  Canada.  When  the  civil
war  broke  out  he  showed  great  energy  and  efficiency
in  raising  and  organizing  troops  until,  yielding  to
the  desire  for  active  service,  he  obtained  a  commis-


sion as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  7th  regiment.  New
Hampshire  volunteers.  On  various  occasions  he  dis-
tinguished himself,  but  especially  at  the  attack  on
Fort  Fisher,  N.  C,  where  his  brigade  stormed  suc-
cessively several  positions  where  the  Confederates
made  a  stand.  He  was  promoted  colonel  22  July,
1863,  and  commanded  his  regiment  in  active  service
until  the  summer  of  1864,  when  he  was  placed  in
charge  of  a  brigade  and  brevetted  brigadier-general.
After  the  war  he  removed  to  Wilmington,  N.  C,
where  he  was  a  member  of  the  constitutional  con-
vention, was  elected  U.  S.  senator  by  the  Republi-
cans for  a  partial  term  ending  in  1871,  served  as
collector  of  the  port  under  President  Grant,  and
was  inspector  of  ports  under  President  Hayes.

ABBOTT,  Lyman,  clergyman,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  18  Dec,  1835.  He  is  the  third  son  of  Jacob
Abbott,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  the  City
of  New  York  in  1853,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  went  into  partnership  with  his
brothers,  Benjamin  V.  and  Austin,  in  1856,  Be-
coming convinced  that  he  was  better  qualified  for
the  pulpit  than  for  the  bar,  he  studied  theology
with  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  John  S.  C,  Abbott,  and  en-
tered the  ministry  in  1860.  His  first  pastoral
charge  was  the  Congregational  church  in  Terre
Haute,  Ind,,  where  he  remained  until,  in  1865,  he
was  chosen  secretary  of  the  American  Union  (Freed-
men's)  Commission,  This  office  called  him  to  New
York  city,  and  occupied  him  until  1868,  During  a
part  of  this  period  he  was  also  pastor  of  the  New
England  church  in  New  York  city,  but  he  resigned
in  1869  to  devote  himself  to  literature  and  journal-
ism. He  was  joint  author  with  his  brothers  of  two
novels  (see  Austin  Abbott),  and  for  several  years
he  edited  the  "  Literary  Record "  of  "  Harper's
Magazine,"  at  the  same  time  conducting  the  "  Il-
lustrated Christian  Weekly."  This  last-named  duty
he  resigned  to  take  charge  of  the  "  Christian  Union,"
an  independent  weekly  journal,  in  the  editorship  of
which  he  was  for  a  time  associated  with  Henry
Ward  Beecher,  and  of  which,  since  Mr.  Beecher's
retirement,  he  has  been  editor-in-chief.  His  works
include  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth :  His  Life  and  Teach-
ings "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  Old  Testament  Shadows
of  New  Testament  Truths  "  (1870) ;  "  A  Dictionary
of  Bible  Knowledge  "  (1872) ;  "  A  Layman's  Story  "
(1872);  an  "Illustrated  Commentary  on  the  New
Testament,"  in  four  volumes  (1875  et  seg.) ;  a  Life
of  Henry  Ward  Beecher  (1883) ;  "  For  Family  Wor-
ship," a  book  of  devotions  (1883) ;  and  "  In  Aid  of
Faith"  (1886).  He  is  also  the  author  of  several
pamphlets,  the  most  important  being  one  on  "  The
Results  of  Emancipation  in  the  United  States"
(1867).  He  has  edited  two  volumes  of  "  Sermons
by  Rev.  Henry  Ward  Beecher,"  and  "  Morning  and
Evening  Exercises,"  selected  from  the  writings  of
the  same  author,

ABBOTT,  Robert  Osborne,  surgeon,  b,  in
Pennsylvania  in  1824;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16
June,  1867.  He  entered  the  army  in  1849  as  as-
sistant surgeon,  and  in  that  capacity  accompanied
Magruder's  battery  to  California.  He  subsequently
served  in  the  East,  and  also  in  Florida  and  Texas.
During  1861  he  was  assistant  to  the  chief  medical
purveyor  in  New  York.  In  1862  he  was  made  medi-
cal director  of  the  fifth  army  corps,  and  later  in  the
same  year  was  appointed  medical  director  of  the
department  of  Washington,  having  charge  of  all
the  hospitals  in  and  about  the  capital,  together
with  all  the  hospital  transports.  The  incessant  and
arduous  duties  of  this  office,  which  he  held  until
November,  1866,  seriously  impaired  his  health.  A
six  months'  sick-leave  failed  to  restore  it,  and  he
died  a  victim  of  over-work.


8


ABEEL


ABERT


ABEEL,  David,  missionary,  b.  in  New  Bruns-
wiclv,  X.  J.,  12  June,  1804;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  4
Sept.,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  Rutgers  College,
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  and  studied  at  the  Theo-
logical Seminary  of  the  Reformed  church  in  that
Slace.  J  lis  first  pastoral  charge  was  at  Athens,
■.  Y.,  where  he  remained  for  two  years,  and  then
sailed  for  Canton,  China,  in  October,  1829,  under
the  auspices  of  the  Seaman's  Friend  society,  but
after  a  year's  service  placed  himself  under  the  di-
rection of  the  American  board  of  commissioners
for  foreign  missions.  He  visited  Java,  Singapore,
and  Siam,  studying  the  Chinese  language ;  but  his
health  failed  Jind  he  returned  home  by  way  of
Eui-ope  in  1838,  visiting  Holland,  France,  and
Switzerland,  and  everywhere  urging  the  claims  of
the  heathen  upon  Christian  nations.  In  England
he  aided  in  forming  a  society  for  promoting  the
education  of  women  in  the  East.  On  returning  to
America  he  published  "  The  Claims  of  the  World  to
the  Gospel,  "  Residence  in  China,"  and  "  The
Missionary  Convention  at  Jerusalem."  In  1839  he
revisited  ^lalacca,  Borneo,  and  parts  of  Asia,  and
in  1842  established  a  mission  at  Amoy.  In  1845
his  health  gave  way  altogether,  and  he  returned
home  to  die.  He  was  one  of  the  most  successful  of
the  early  American  missionaries,  being  gifted  with
sound  practical  sense  and  energy.  See  "  Memoirs,"
by  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Williamson  (1849).

ABERCROMBIE,  James,  British  soldier,  b.
in  Scotland  in  1700 ;  d.  28  April,  1781.  He  was  de-
scended from  a  wealthy  family,  entered  the  army,
and  reached  the  grade  of  colonel  in  1740,  of  major-
general  in  1750,  of  lieutenant-general  in  1759,
and  of  general  in  1772.  He  commanded  the
British  forces  in  America  after  the  departure  of
Loudoun  in  1758,  ordered  the  disastrous  attack
on  Fort  Ticonderoga,  8  July,  1758,  and  then  re-
treated to  his  intrenched  camp  south  of  Lake
George.  Superseded  in  1759  by  Amherst,  he  re-
turned to  England  and,  as  a  member  of  parliament,
supported  the  coercive  policy  toward  the  American
colonies.  His  son  James  died  in  Boston,  24  June,
1775,  of  a  wound  received  at  Bunker  Hill.  He  had
served  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Amherst  in  1759,
and  was  promoted  to  the  grade  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  1770.  In  the  charge  on  Buijker  Hill  he  led
the  grenadiers.

ABERCROMBIE,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1758;  d.  in  that  city  26  June,  1841.
He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia in  1770,  and  studied  divinity,  but,  owing  to  a
disease  of  the  eyes,  followed  mercantile  pursuits
from  1783  until  1793,  when  he  was  ordained  and
became  associate  pastor  of  Christ  church.  He  was
principal  of  the  Philadelphia  acadeiny  from  1810
to  1819,  and  retired  from  the  ministry  in  1833.  He
published  "  Lectures  on  the  Catechism  "  (1807)  and
several  sermons.  See  Sprague's  "Annals  of  the
American  Pulpit."

ABERCROMBIE,  John  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in
Tennessee  in  1802;  d.  in  Roslvn,  N.  Y.,  3  Jan.,
1877.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1822,
served  as  adjutant  in  the  1st  Infantry  from  1825  to
1833,  and  was  made  captain  in  1830. '  He  served  in
the  Florida  war,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gal-
lant conduct  at  the  battle  of  Okeechobee.  He  was
engaged  in  frontier  duty  in  the  west  until  the
Mexican  war.  For  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Mon-
terey, where  he  was  wounded,  he  received  the  bre-
vet rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was  at  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz  and  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  served  in
1847  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Patterson.  When
the  civil  war  broke  out  he  was  stationed  in  Minne-
sota. He  took  part  in  the  Shenandoah  campaign


and  was  in  command  at  the  action  of  Falling  Wa-
ters. He  served  through  the  Peninsular. campaign
as  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  was  wounded  at
Fair  Oaks,  and  was  present  at  Malvern  Hill  and  in
several  skirmishes  on  the  retreat  to  Harrison's
Landing.  He  was  engaged  in  the  defence  of  Wash-
ington in  1802  and  1803,  had  charge  of  depots  at
Fredericksburg  in  May,  1864,  and  took  part  in
the  defence  against  Hampton's  Legion  in  June,
1804.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  at  the
close  of  the  war,  and  retired  12  June,  1865.

ABERCROMBY,  Sir  Robert,  British  soldier,
b.  in  October,  1740;  d.  near  Stirling,  Scotland,  8
Nov.,  1827.  He  served  in  Canada  throughout  the
French  war,  and  as  colonel  of  a  regiment  during
the  war  of  the  revolution.  He  led  the  expedition
that  destroyed  American  shipping  in  the  Delaware
in  May,  1778,  surprised  Gen.  Lacey  at  Crooked  Bil-
let, Pa.,  was  wounded  at  Monmouth,  and  led  a  sor-
tie from  Yorktown,  capturing  two  batteries.  He
was  promoted  major-general  in  1790,  served  in
India,  succeeding  Cornwallis  as  commander-in-
chief  in  1793,  and  was  made  a  general  in  1802.

ABERT,  John  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Shep-
herdstown,  Va.,  17  Sept.,  1788;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  27  Sept.,  1803.  He  was  the  son  of  John
xVbert,  who  came  to  this  country  with  Rochambeau
in  1780.  Young  Abert  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1811,
but  at  once  re-
signed, and  was
then  employed
in  the  war  office.
Meanwhile  he
studied  law,
and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar
in  the  District
of  Columbia  in
1813.  In  the
war  of  1812  he
volunteered  as
a  private  soldier
for  the  defence
of  the  capital.
He  was  reap-
pointed to  the
array  in  1814
as  topographi-
cal engineer,  with  the  rank  of  major.  In  1829  he
succeeded  to  the  charge  of  the  topographical  bu-
reau at  Washington,  and  in  1838  became  colonel  in
command  of  that  branch  of  the  engineers.  He
was  retired  in  1801  after  "  long  and  faithful  ser-
vice." Col.  Abert  was  associated  in  the  supervi-
sion of  many  of  the  earlier  national  works  of  en-
gineering, and  his  reports  prepared  for  the  gov-
ernment are  standards  of  authority.  He  was  a
member  of  several  scientific  societies,  and  was  one  of
the  organizers  of  the  national  institute  of  science,
which  was  subsequently  merged  into  the  Smithso-
nian institute.  His  sons  served  with  distinction  in
the  U.  S.  army  during  the  civil  war. — James
William,  soldier,  b.  in  Mount  Holly,  N.  J.,  18
Nov.,  1820,  was  graduated  at  West  Po'int  in  1842.
After  service  in  the  infantry  he  was  transferred  to
the  topographical  engineers,  and  was  engaged  on
the  survey  of  the  northern  lakes  in  1843-44.
He  then  served  on  the  expedition  to  New  Mexico,
and  published  a  report  (Senate  doc,  1848).  From
1848  to  1850  he  was  assistant  in  drawing  at  West
Point,  and  from  1851  to  1800  he  was  engaged  in
the  improvement  of  western  rivers,  except  dur-
ing the  Seminole  war  in  1856-58,  when  he  was  in
Florida. During  the  civil  war  he  served  on  the


/  /  c^fi^^


ABOVILLE


ACOSTA


9


staffs  of  Gen.  Patterson  and  Gen,  Banks  in  the
Virginia  campaign  of  1801-'62,  He  was  severely
injured  at  Fredericli,  Md.,  in  18G2,  and  subse-
quently served  on  Gen.  Gillmore's  staff,  having  at-
tained the  rank  of  major  in  1863.  He  resigned  on
25  June,  1864.  For  a  short  time  he  was  an  ex-
aminer of  patents  in  Washington,  and  later  he  be-
came professor  of  mathematics  and  drawing  in  the
University  of  Missouri,  at  Koila.  He  is  a  contribu-
tor to  current  literature  in  science,  art,  and  history.
— Silvaiius  Thayer,  civil  engineer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa,,  22  July,  1828.  He  was  educated  at
Princeton,  and  in  1848  began  his  engineering  ca-
reer in  the  government  service  on  the  construction
of  the  James  river  and  Kanawha  canal.  For  eleven
years  he  was  actively  engaged  on  government  work
at  various  localities.  In  1859  he  was  appointed
engineer  in  charge  of  all  the  works  of  construction
at  the  Pensacola  navy-yard.  During  the  civil  war
he  served  at  first  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Banks  in  his
Virginia  campaign,  and  later  under  Gen.  Meade
with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  From  1865  to
1866  he  was  engaged  on  the  surveys  of  the  Magda-
lena  river  for  the  Colombian  government.  On  his
return  he  again  joined  the  engineering  corps,  and
has  been  occupied  on  numerous  government  sur-
veys. Since  1873  he  has  been  in  charge  of  the
geographical  division  extending  from  Washington,
D.  C,  to  Wilmington,  N.  C.  Col.  Abert  is  the  au-
thor of  numerous  valuable  reports  on  his  work,  and
has  also  published  "  Notes,  Historical  and  Statisti-
cal, upon  the  Projected  Route  for  an  Interoceanic
Ship  Canal  between  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific
Oceans"  (Cincinnati,  1872).— William  Stretch,
soldier,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  1  Feb.,  1836;  d.  in
Galveston,  Tex,,  25  Aug.,  1867.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant  in  the  artillery  in  1855,  and  at  the  out-
break of  the  civil  war  in  1861  was  stationed  at  Fort
Monroe,  Va.  He  was  appointed  captain  in  the
cavalry  in  1861,  and  fought  in  the  battles  of  Wil-
liamsburg and  Hanover  Court  House.  Later  he
joined  Gen.  McClellan's  staff,  and  was  at  Antie-
tam.  From  November,  1862,  to  October,  1864,  he
was  assistant  inspector-general  at  New  Orleans
under  Gen.  Banks,  after  which  he  served  in  the
defences  of  Washington  as  colonel  of  the  3d  Mas-
sachusetts artillery.  Subsequent  to  the  war  he
was  with  his  regiment  in  Texas,  and  became  as-
sistant inspector-general  of  the  district  of  Texas,
In  June,  1867,  he  was  advanced  to  the  rank  of
major  in  the  7th  U.  S.  cavalry.  He  received  sev-
eral brevets,  the  highest  of  which  was  that  of  lieii-
tenant-colonel.

ABOVILLE,  Francois  Marie,  Comte  d',
French  soldier,  b.  in  Brest,  in  January,  1730;  d.  1
Nov.,  1817.  Pie  distinguished  himself  as  a  young
officer  of  artillery  at  the  siege  of  Miinster,  came  to
America  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  commanded  the
artillery  of  Rochambeau's  army  at  the  siege  of
Yorktown,  and  was  made  a  brigadier  in  1788.  He
commanded  the  French  army  of  the  north  in  1792,
and  was  governor  of  Brest  in  1807,  with  the  rank
of  lieutenant-general.  Embracing  the  cause  of
the  Bourbons,  he  was  made  a  peer  of  E'rance  after
the  restoration.

ABRAHAMS,  Simeon,  physician  and  philan-
thropist, b.  in  1809 ;  d.  in  New  York,  14  April,  1867.
He  practised  medicine  in  New  York  with  success,
and  bequeathed  large  sums  to  Jewish  and  other
charities  in  that  city.

ACAMAPICTLI  (ah-kah-mah-petch'-tli).  I.  An
Aztec  king,  d.  in  1389.  He  succeeded  to  the  throne
in  1352,  and  consolidated  the  kingdom,  collecting
the  tribes  and  making  new  laws.  He  constructed
roads  and  aqueducts,  and  was  the  founder  of  the


city  of  Tenochtitlan.  II.  The  third  Aztec  king,
second  grandson  of  the  preceding.  He  assisted
King  Quiiuitzin,  of  Texeoco,  against  his  two  rebel-
lious sons,  and  finally  routed  them.  He  ruled
his  own  country  in  peace  for  fortv-one  years,  and
died  in  1402.

ACCAULT,  Michael  (ak-ko'),  explorer.  He  was
one  of  the  trusted  lieutenants  of  La  Salle,  discov-
erer of  the  Mississippi,  and  was  sent  by  him  with
Louis  Hennepin  during  the  summer  of  1679  to  ex-
plore the  upper  part  of  that  river.  This  expedition
has  been  fully  chronicled  by  Father  Hennepin,  who
represented  the  church,  while  Accault  and  Du  Gay
were  the  military  aids.  They  ascended  ihe  river  to
the  falls  of  St.  Anthony,  were  captured  by  the  Sioux
Indians,  rescued  by  the  gallant  French  officer  Dan-
iel Duluth,  and  reached  the  trading-station  at  Green
bay  in  the  autumn. See  Hennepin.

ACLAND,  Christina  Harriet  Caroline  Fox,
daughter  of  Stephen,  first  eaii  of  Ilchester,  b.  3
Jan.,  1750 ;  d.  at  Tetton,  England,  21  July,  1815.
She  married,  in  September,  1770,  Maj.  John  Dyke
Acland.  accompanied  him  to  America,  and  shared
in  all  the  vicissitudes  of  Burgoyne's  campaign,
which  culminated  in  the  surrender  of  the  British
army,  17  Oct.,  1777.  In  the  second  battle  of  Sara-
toga, 7  Oct.,  Maj,  Acland  was  severely  wounded
and  carried  a  prisoner  within  the  American  lines.
On  the  night  of  the  9th,  accompanied  by  the  chap-
lain and  her  maid,  she  set  out  from  the  British
camp  in  a  frail  boat  and  in  the  midst  of  a  driving
storm  to  rejoin  her  husband.  She  was  received
with  the  utmost  cordiality  by  Gates,  shared  her
husband's  captivity,  and  carefully  nursed  him  until
restored  to  health.  The  kindness  that  had  been
shown  to  his  wife  Maj.  Acland  recii)rocated,  while
on  parole  in  New  York,  by  doing  all  in  his  power
to  mitigate  the  sufferings  of  the  American  prison-
ers. The  oft-repeated  story  that  after  her  hus-
band's death  she  became  insane  for  a  time,  and
finally  married  Chaplain  Brudenell,  is  totally  un-
true. She  died  the  widow  of  Maj.  Acland,  as  is
attested  by  the  burial  register.  The  story  that  her
husband  was  killed  in  a  duel  is  equally  unfounded.
He  received  a  paralytic  stroke  on  29  Nov.,  1778,
while  directing  some  improvements  about  his  place,
and  died  on  2  Dec.  In  person  Lady  Harriet  was
highly  graceful  and  delicate,  and  her  manners  were
elegantly  feminine.  Mrs.  Perez  Norton  commem-
orated her  sufferings  in  a  touching  poem,  and
before  she  left  New  York  a  painting  representing
her  standing  in  a  boat,  with  a  white  handkerchief
in  her  hand  as  a  flag  of  truce,  was  exhibited  at  the
royal  academy,  London.  There  is  a  striking  por-
trait of  her  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  at  Killerton,
Exeter,  the  seat  of  Sir  Thomas  Dyke  Acland.  She
suffered  for  years  from  cancer,  but  bore  it  with
great  fortitude.  She  is  still  remembered  for  her
numer-ous  charities.

ACOLHUA  I.  (ah-kol-hoo'-ah),  a  king  of  Azca-
potzalco.  He  ascended  the  throne  in  1168.  II.
(also  called  by  some  historians  Tetzotzomoc)  a
king  of  Azcapotzalco. He  began  to  rule  in  1239.

ACOSTA,  Cecilio,  Venezuelan  jurist  and  writer,
b.  in  Caracas  m  1831 ;  d.  there  in  1880.  He  was
the  editor  of  the  penal  code  now  in  force  in  his
country,  Venezuela.  He  was  a  great  Spanish  and
Latin  scholar,  and  had  a  thorough  knowledge  of
the  French,  English,  and  Italian  literatures,  Acos-
ta  was  among  the  first  South  Americans  honored
with  the  appointment  of  corresponding  member  of
the  Spanish  academy.

ACOSTA,  Joaquin,  Colombian  general  and  au-
thor, b.  in  Guaduas,  Colombia,  29  Dec,  1799;  d.
there  in  1852. He  entered  the  Colombian  army  at


10


ACOSTA


ADAIR


the  age  of  twenty,  and  rendered  distinguished  ser-
■•nces  as  an  officer  of  engineers.  He  was  a  member
of  the  convention  of  New  Grenada  in  1831,  and
was  afterward  a  representative  in  congress.  In
1834  he  exi)lored  the  valleys  of  the  Socorro  and
Magdalena  rivers,  and  in  1841  made  researches
relative  to  the  Ghibocas  and  other  Indian  tribes.
He  was  for  a  time  New  Grenadan  minister  to  Ecua-
dor, and  from  20  July  to  8  Nov.,  1842,  was  charge
d'affaires  at  Washington.  Subsequently  he  held
the  office  of  secretary  of  state  in  the  New' Grenadan
government.  He  published  in  Paris,  in  1848,  a
history  of  the  discovery  and  settlement  of  New
Grenada,  accompanied  by  a  valuable  map  made  by
himself,  the  first  one  published  since  Colombian  in-
dependence. He  also  contributed  to  the  publica-
tions of  the  French  geographical  society.

ACOSTA,  Jose  de,  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in
Medina  del  Campo  in  1539;  d.  in  Salamanca,  15
Feb.,  1000.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  became  a
member  of  the  Society  of  Jesus.  He  was  a  mis-
sionary in  South  America  from  1571  until  1570,
then  visited  Mexico,  where  he  remained  two  years.
After  his  return  to  Spain  he  published  "De  na-
tura  Novi  Orbis  et  de  promulgatione  evangelii
apud  Barbaros "  (Salamanca,  1588-'!)),  which  he
translated  into  Spanish  and  extended.  It  wfis  is-
sued under  the  title  "  Ilistoria  natural  y  moral  de
las  Indias  "  (1590),  attained  great  popularity,  and
was  translated  into  various  languages.  He  was
rector  of  the  university  of  Salamanca  at  the  time
of  his  death.

ACOSTA,  Santos,  Colombian  statesman,  b.  in
Miraflores,  Colombia,  in  1830.  He  became  con-
sj)icuous  in  politics  when  quite  young.  He  has
been  general-in-chief  of  the  Colombian  army,  repre-
sentative and  senator  in  several  legislatures,  secre-
tary of  state,  a  foreign  minister,  and  president  of
the  republic.

ACRELIUS,  Israel  (akra'-le-oos),  Swedish  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Osteraker,  Sweden,  25  Dec,  1714 ;  d.  in
Fellingsbro,  25  April,  1800.  He  was  educated  in
Upsala,  ordained  in  1743,  and  sent  out  as  provost
of  the  Swedish  congregations  in  New  Sweden
(afterward  Delaware),  in  1749.  He  reached  Phila-
delphia in  November,  and  began  his  work  with  zeal
and  prudence,  successfully  superintending  the  ec-
clesiastical affairs  of  the  Swedish  colonies,  which  he
found  in  great  disorder.  But  ill  health  obliged
him  to  resign  in  1750,  after  a  sojourn  of  seven
years  in  America,  and  on  his  retui-ri  to  Sweden  the
king  gave  him  a  pension  and  the  living  of  Fell-
ingsbro. He  wrote  various  articles  on  America,
for  Swedish  journals  and  for  religious  papers,  and
published  "The  Swedish  Colonies  in  America"
(Sto(;khoIm,  1759),  which  was  translated  into  Eng-
lish in  1874,  and  is  a  work  of  value  and  interest.

ACUALMETZLI,  the  Indian  name  of  a  Mexi-
can warrior,  b.  in  Coyacan  in  1520 ;  d.  in  1542.
His  chi-istian  name  was  Ignacio  Alarcon  de  Roque-
tilla.  When  he  was  a  year  old  his  father  and
jnother  died,  the  former  in  battle  against  the
Spaniards,  and  the  latter  from  the  effects  of  pun-
ishment received  because  she  insulted  one  of  the
captains  of  Cortes.  A  Spaniard  took  care  of  the
orphan,  had  him  christened,  and  gave  him  an  edu-
cation. P)ut  Acualmetzli,  when  about  twenty  years
of  age,  learned  the  cause  of  his  parents'  death  and
joined  the  Chichimecas,  then  in  revolt,  in  order  to
seek  revenge.  He  fought  bi-avely,  and  instructed
the  Indians  in  civilized  warfare,'  until  he  fell  in
battle  with  the  troops  sent  against  them  by  the
viceroy  Antonio  de  Mendoza.

ACtJ^A,  Cristobal  de  (ah-koon'-va),  Spanish
Jesuit  missionary,  b.  in  Burgos,  Spain,  in 1597;


d.  about  1070.  He  was  attached  to  Texeira's
Amazon  expedition  in  1039-41,  with  the  special
object  of  reporting  the  incidents  of  the  explora-
tion. On  his  return  to  Spain  he  published  his
"  Nuevo  Descubrimiento  del  Gran  Rio  de  las  Ama-
zons." All  the  copies  of  this  work,  except  two,
were  unfortunately  destroyed,  but  from  these  a
translation  was  made  by  Gomberville  into  French
in  1084.  Although  great  interest  was  excited  by
the  expedition,  the  distractions  in  the  mother  coun-
try prevented  the  government  from  taking  any
marked  interest  in  the  colonization  of  the  region
to  which  so  much  energy  and  talent  had  been  de-
voted. Acuiia  afterward  went  to  the  West  Indies,
thence  returned  to  South  America,  and  died  while
on  his  \v{iy  from  Panama  to  Lima.

ACUNA,  Jiiaii,  marquis  of  Casaferte,  37th
viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,  late  in  the
17th  century;  d.  in  Mexico,  17  March,  1774.  He
was  an  officer  of  artillery  in  the  Spanish  army.
For  twelve  years,  from  15  Oct.,  1722.  he  governed
New  Spain  with  great  success  in  all  the  depart-
ments of  the  administration.  During  that  period
many  public  buildings  were  erected,  among  them
the  custom  house,  the  mint,  and  the  "Newgate"
of  Vera  Cruz,  erected  1727,  which  for  many  years
was  called  "  Puerta  de  Acuna."  IMining  received  a
great  impulse,  while  commerce  with  Spain  and  the
Philippine  islands  was  increased.  Acuna  sent  to
Texfis  a  colony  from  the  Canary  islands,  who  found-
ed the  town  of  San  Fernando.

ACUNA,  Manuel,  Mexican  poet,  b.  in  the  state
of  Coahuila,  27  Aug.,  1849;  d.  by  his  own  hand
0  Dec,  1873.  He  founded  the  literary  society
"Netzahual  Coyotl,"  in  which  he  first  showed  his
poetical  talent.  He  was  the  author  of  a  play  en-
titled "  El  Pasado."  His  best  poems  are  "  Gloria "
and  "  A  Rosario."  Disappointment  in  love  is  said
to  have  been  the  cause  of  his  suicide.

ADAIR,  James,  Indian  trader  and  author,  lived
in  the  18th  century.  He  resided  among  the  In-
dians (principally  the  Chickasaws  and  Cherokees)
from  1735  to  1775,  and  in  the  latter  year  pub-
lished his  "  History  of  the  American  Indians."  In
this  he  attempted  to  trace  the  descent  of  the  In-
dians from  the  Jews,  basing  his  assumption  upon
supposed  resemblances  between  the  customs  of  the
two  races.  At  that  time  such  an  hypothesis  was
regarded  as  visionary,  but  the  idea  has  since  found
many  supporters,  among  them  being  Boudinot  in
his  "  Star  of  the  West."  Unsatisfactory  as  are  his
vocabularies  of  Indian  dialects,  they  are  the  most
valuable  part  of  his  writings.

ADAIR,  John,  general,  b.  in  Chester  co.,  S.  C,
in  1759;  d.  in  Harrisburg,  Ky.,  19  May,  1840.  He
served  in  the  revolutionary  army,  and  in  1787  re-
moved to  Kentucky,  where  he  was  appointed  major
under  St.  Clair  and  Wilkinson  in  their  expeditions
against  the  Indians  of  the  northwest  in  1791.  In
an  attack  by  "  Little  Turtle,"  the  Miami  chief,  6
Nov.,  1792,  while  in  camp  near  Fort  St.  Clair,  his
command  was  defeated  and  forced  to  retreat.  He
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  framed  the
constitution  under  which  Kentucky  was  admitted
into  the  union,  1  June,  1792.  Adair  was  appointed
lieutenant-colonel  under  Gen.  Charles  Scott  in
1793,  was  for  several  years  a  representative  from
Mercer  co.  in  the  Kentucky  legislature,  of  which
body  he  was  elected  speaker,  and  was  also  regis-
ter of  the  U.  S.  land  office.  In  1805-'0  he  was  U.  S.
senator.  Returning  to  militarv  life,  he  became
volunteer  aid  to  Gen.  Shelby  at  the  battle  of  the
Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813,  was  made  brigadier-general
of  the  state  militia  in  November,  1814,  and  com-
manded the  Kentucky  troops  with  distinction  at


ADAIR


ADAMS


11


New  Orleans  under  Gen.  Jackson.  From  1820  to
1824  he  was  governor  of  Kentucky,  and  in  1831-'33
a  member  of  congress,  serving  on  the  committee
on  military  affairs.

ADAIR,  William  P.,  assistant  chief  of  the
Cherokee  nation,  b.  about  1828 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  23  Oct.,  1880.  During  tlie  civil  war  he  com-
manded a  brigade  of  Indians,  which  was  organized
by  Gen.  Albert  Pike,  in  the  service  of  the  confed-
eracy, and  fought  at  the  battle  of  Pea  Kidge.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  at  the  capital  repre-
senting the  interests  of  his  tribe.

ADAM,  Graeme  Mercer,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Loanhead,  Midlothian,  Scotland,  in  1839.  He  was
educated  at  Portobello  and  at  Edinburgh,  and  when
quite  young  entered  a  publishing  house  in  that  city,
and  in  1858  was  given  charge  of  one  of  its  depart-
ments. A  few  months  later  he  accepted  a  proposal
by  the  Blackwoods  to  take  charge  of  a  book  store
in  Toronto,  Canada.  In  I860  he  succeeded  to  this
business  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of  RoUo  &
Adam,  who  were  the  publishers  of  the  first  of  the
more  important  Canadian  periodicals,  the  "  British
American  Magazine."  Mr.  Rollo  retired  in  18(56,
and  it  then  became  the  firm  of  Adam,  Stevenson,
&  Co.  The  business  not  proving  successful,  in  1876
it  was  discontinued,  and  Mr.  Adam  went  to  New
York,  where  he  helped  to  found  the  publishing
house  that  has  since  been  developed  into  the
John  W.  Lovell  Publishing  Company.  He  re-
turned to  Toronto  in  1878 ;  in  1879  he  established
the  "  Canada  Educational  .  Monthly,"  which  he
edited  for  five  years,  and  in  1880  assumed  the
editorship  of  the  "Canada  Monthly,"  which  he
and  Prof.  Goldwin  Smith  were  instrumental  in
founding  in  1872.  He  also  published  '"The  North-
west, its  History  and  its  Troubles  "  (1885) ;  "  Out-
line History  of  Canadian  Literature  " ;  and,  with
Ethelwvn  Wetherald,  "An  Algonquin  Maiden"
(Toronto,  1887).

ADAMS,  Abigail  (Smith),  wife  of  John  Ad-
ams, second  president  of  the  United  States,  b.  in
Weymouth,  Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1744 ;  d.  in  Quincy,
Mass.,  28  Oct.,  1818.  Her  father,  the  Rev.  Will-
iam Smith,  was  for  more  than  forty  years  minister
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Weymouth.  Her
mother,  Elizabeth  Quincy,  was  great-great-grand-
daughter of  the  em-
inent Puritan  divine.
Thomas  Shepard.  of
Cambridge,  and  great-
grandniece  of  the  Rev.
John  Norton,  of  Bos-
ton. She  was  among
the  most  remarkable
women  of  the  revolu-
tionary period.  Her
educatioTi,  so  far  as
books  were  concerned,
was  but  scanty.  Of
delicate  and  nervous
organization,  she  was
so  frequently  ill  dur-
ing childhood  and
youth  that  she  was
never  sent  to  any
school ;  but  her  loss
in  this  respect  was
not  so  great  as  might  appear ;  for,  while  the  New
England  clergymen  at  that  time  were  usually
men  of  great  learning,  the  education  of  their
daughters  seldom  went  further  than  writing  or
arithmetic,  with  now  and  then  a  smattering  of
what  passed  current  as  music.  In  the  course  of
her  long  life she  became extensively  acquainted


J  Af.


ao^\j


with  the  best  English  literature,  and  she  wrote  in  a
terse,  vigorous,  and  often  elegant  style.  Her  case
may  well  be  cited  by  those  who  protest  against  the
exaggerated  value  commonly  ascribed  to  the  rou-
tine of  a  school  education.  Her  early  years  were
spent  in  seclusion,  but  among  people  of  learn-
ing and  political  sagacity.  On  25  Oct.,  1764,  she
was  married  to  John  Adams,  then  a  young  lawyer
practising  in  Boston,  and  for  the  next  ten  years
her  life  was  quiet  and  happy,  though  she  shared
the  intense  interest  of  her  husband  in  the  fierce
disputes  that  were  so  soon  to  culminate  in  war.
During  this  period  she  became  the  mother  of  a
daughter  and  three  sons.  Ten  years  of  doubt  and
anxiety  followed  during  which  Mrs.  Adams  was  left
at  home  in  Braintree,  while  her  husband  was  ab-
sent, first  as  a  delegate  to  the  continental  congress,
afterward  on  diplomatic  business  in  Europe.  In
the  zeal  and  determination  with  which  John
Adams  urged  on  the  declaration  of  independence
he  was  staunchly  supported  by  his  brave  wife,  a
circumstance  that  used  sometimes  to  be  jocosely
alleged  in  explanation  of  his  superiority  in  bold-
ness to  John  Dickinson,  the  women  of  whose  house-
hold were  perpetually  conjuring  up  visions  of  the
headsman's  block.  In  1784  Mrs.  Adams  joined
her  husband  in  France,  and  early  in  the  following
year  she  accompanied  him  to  London.  With  the
recent  loss  of  the  American  colonies  rankling  in
the  minds  of  George  III.  and  his  queen,  it  was
hardly  to  be  expected  that  much  courtesy  would  be
shown  to  the  first  minister  from  the  United  States
or  to  his  wife.  Mrs.  Adams  was  treated  with  rude-
ness, which  she  seems  to  have  remembered  vindic-
tively. "Humiliation  for  Charlotte,"  she  wrote
some  years  later,  "  is  no  sorrow  for  me."  From
1789  to  1801  her  residence  was  at  the  seat  of  our
federal  government.  The  remainder  of  her  life
was  passed  in  Braintree  (in  the  part  called  Quincy),
and  her  lively  interest  in  public  affairs  was  kept  up
till  the  day  of  her  death.  Mrs.  Adams  was  a  wo-
man of  sunny  disposition,  and  great  keenness  and
sagacity.  Her  letters  are  extremely  valuable  for
the  light  they  throw  upon  the  life  of  the  times.
See  "  Familiar  Letters  of  John  Adams  and  his  Wife,
Abigail  Adams,  diu'ing  the  Revolution,"  with  a
memoir  by  C.  F.  Adams  (New  York,  1876).

ADAMS,  Alviii,  expressman,  b.  in  Andover,
Vt,  16  June,  1804;  d.  in  Watertown,  Mass.,  2
Sept.,  1877.  In  1840  he  established  an  express
route  between  New  York  and  Boston,  making  his
first  trip  on  4  May.  A  few  months  later,  under
the  firm-name  of  Adams  &  Co.,  he  associated  with
himself  Ephraim  Farnsworth,  who  took  charge  of
the  New  York  office.  On  the  death  of  the  latter,
soon  afterward,  William  B.  Dinsmore  suerseeded
to  his  place,  and  for  several  years  subsequently  the
business  was  limited  to  New  York,  New  London,
Norwich,  Worcester,  and  Boston.  In  1854  the
corporation  of  Adams  Express  Co.  was  formed  by
the  union  of  Adams  &  Co.,  Harnden  &  Co.,  Thomp-
son &  Co.,  and  Kinsley  &  Co.,  with  IVIr.  Adams  as
president.  Its  business  then  rapidly  extended
throughout  the  south  and  west,  and  m  1870  to
the  far  west.  Mr.  Adams  was  associated  with  the
organization  of  the  pioneer  express  throughout  the
mining  camps  of  California  in  1850;  but  on  the
consolidation  of  the  companies  in  1854,  Adams  &
Co.  disposed  of  their  interest  to  the  California  Ex-
press Co.  During  the  civil  war  the  facilities  that
were  afforded  by"  Adams  Express  Co.  were  of  the
greatest  value  to  the  national  governineiit,  Mr.
Adams  accumulated  a  large  fortune.  See  "  His-
tory of  the  Express  Business,"  by  A.  L.  Stimson
(New  York,  1881).


12


ADAMS


ADAMS


ADAMS,  Amos,  clergyman,  b.  in  Medfield,
Mass.,  1  Sept.,  1728 ;  d.  in  Dorchester,  5  Oct.,  1775.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1752,  and  in  Sep-
tember of  the  following  year  became  pastor  of  a
church  in  Koxbury,  which  he  served  until  his
death.  He  was  secretary  of  the  convention  of  min-
isters at  Watertown,  which  in  May,  1775,  reconi-
mended  the  people  to  take  up  arms.  Many  of  his
sermons  were  published  from  175G  to  1769,  as  well
as  two  discourses  on  "  Religious  Liberty  "  (1767).
The  most  notable  of  his  writings  were  two  dis-
courses on  the  general  fast,  G  April,  1769,  in  which
he  gave  "A  Concise  Historical  View  of  the  DifR-
culties,  Hardships,  and  Perils  which  Attended  the
Planting  and  Progressive  Improvement  in  New
p]ngland,  with  a  Particular  Account  of  its  Long
and  Destructive  Wars,  Expensive  Expeditions,"
etc.  (republished  in  London,  1770).

ADAMS,  Andrew, jurist,!),  in  Stratford,  Conn.,
in  January,  1736;  d.  in  Litchfield,  26  Nov.,  1797.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  college  in  1760,  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Fairfield  co.,  and  practised  law  for  a
time  in  Stamford,  but  in  1764  removed  to  Litch-
field. He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in
1776-81,  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1777-'80,  and
again  in  1781-'82,  as  well  as  a  member  of  the  coun-
cil in  1771.  In  1789  he  received  the  appointment
of  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  of  which  he  was
made  chief  justice  in  1793.  He  was  an  adroit  and
able  lawyer  and  a  learned  judge.

ADAMS,  Benjamin,  lawyer,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  in  1765;  d.  in  Uxbridge,  28  March,  1837.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  university  in  1788,  and
became  a  lawyer ;  was  member  of  the  legislature
from  1809  to  1814,  state  senator  in  1814-'15,  and
again  in  1822-'25,  and  went  to  congress  in  1816,
where  he  remained  until  1821.

ADAMS,  Charles,  lawyer,  b.  in  Arlington,  Vt.,
12  March,  1785;  d.  in  Burlington,  13  Feb.,  1861.
Ho  prepared  himself  for  college  by  the  light  of  his
lather's  forge,  and  was  a  member  of  the  first  class
that  was  graduated  from  the  university  of  Ver-
mont in  1804.  He  became  a  prominent  lawyer,
and  was  a  constant  contributor  to  newspapers  on
political  questions.  He  was  the  friend  and  adviser
of  Gen.  Wool  during  the  Canadian  difficulties  of
1838,  and  wrote  a  history  of  the  events  connected
with  that  rebellion  under  the  title  of  "  The  Patriot
War."  The  work  appeared  in  parts  in  the  local
press,  but  was  never  issued  in  book  form.

ADAMS,  Charles  Baker,  geologist,  b.  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1814;  d.  in  St.  Thomas,  W.
I.,  19  Jan.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
college  in  1834,  and  studied  for  two  years  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary.  Later  he  was  associ-
ated with  Prof.  Edward  Hitchcock  in  a  geologi-
cal survey  of  New  York.  In  1837  he  became
tutor  in  Amherst  college,  and  in  1838  was  made
professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  history  in  Mid-
dlebury  college,  Vt.  From  1845  to  1848  he  was
state  geologist  of  Vermont,  and  published  annual
reports  of  his  work.  In  1847  he  was  chosen  pro-
fessor of  {istronomy  and  zoology  in  Amherst  col


lege.  Between  1844  and  1851  he  made  journeys
to  Panama  and  the  West  Indies  for  scientific  pur-
poses. He  was  the  author  of  eleven  numbers  of
"Contributions  to  Conchology,"  monographs  of
"Stoastoma"  and  "  Vitrinelfa,"  "Catalogue  of
Shells  Collected  in  Panama"  (New  York,  1852),  and,
with  Alonzo  Gray,  "  Elements  of  Geology  "  (1852).
ADAMS,  Charles  Follen,  author,  b.  in  Dor-
chester, Mass.,  21  April,  1842.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen
entered  into  mercantile  pursuits.  At  the  age  of
twenty-two  he  enlisted  in  the  13th  Massachusetts


infantry ;  was  in  all  the  battles  in  which  his  regi-
ment participated,  was  wounded  at  Gettysburg,
taken  prisoner ;  released,  and  detailed  for  hospital
duty.  Since  1872  he  has  been  known  as  a  writer
of  German  dialect  poems,  chiefly  humorous.  The
first  that  appeared  was  "  The  Puzzled  Dutchman  "
in  "Gur  Young  Folks"  in  1872.  This  was  fol-
lowed by  various  others  of  which  "  Leedle  Yaw-
cob  Strauss"  (1876)  became  immediately  a  favorite.
Mr.  Adams  is  a  frequent  contributor  to  periodical
literature,  and  has  published  in  a  volume  "  Leedle
Yawcob  Strauss  and  other  Poems"  (Boston,  1877).
ADAMS,  Charles  Francis,  diplomatist,  son  of
John  Quincy  Adams,  b.  in  Boston,  18  Aug.,  1807 ;
d.  there,  21  Nov.,  1886.  When  two  years  old  he
was  taken  by  his  father  to  St.  Petersburg,  where  he
learned  German,  French,  and  Russian.  Early  in
1815  he  travelled  all  the  way  from  St.  Petersburg  to
Paris  with  his  mother  in  a  private  carriage,  a  diffi-
cult journey  at  that  time,  and  not  unattended  with
danger.  His  father  was  soon  afterward  appointed
minister  to  England,  and  the  little  boy  was  placed
at  an  English  boarding-school.  The  feelings  be-
tween British  and  Americans  was  then  more  hostile
than  ever  before  or  since,  and  young  Adams  was
frequently  called  upon  to  defend  with  his  fists  the
good  name  of  his  coinitry.  When  he  returned  after
two  years  to  America,  his  father  placed  him  in  the
Boston  Latin  school,  and  he  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard college  in  1825,  shortly  after  iiis  father's  in'
augu  ration  as
president  of  the
United  States.
He  spent  two
years  in  Wash-
ington, and
then  returned  to
Boston,  where
he  studied  law
in  the  office  of
Daniel  Webster,
and  was  admit-
ted to  the  Suf-
folk bar  in
1828.  The  next
year  he  married
the  youngest
daughter  of  Pe-
ter Chardon
Brooks,  whose
elder  daughters

were  married  to  Edward  Everett  and  Rev.  Na-
thaniel Frothingham.  From  1831  to  1836  Mr.
Adams  served  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature.
He  was  a  member  of  the  whig  party,  but,  like  all
the  rest  of  his  vigorous  and  free-thinking  family,
he  was  extremely  independent  in  politics  and  in-
clined to  strike  out  into  new  paths  in  advance  of
the  public  sentiment.  After  1836  he  came  to  dif-
fer more  and  more  widely  with  the  leaders  of  the
whig  party  with  whom  he  had  hitherto  acted.  In
1848  the  newly  organized  free-soil  party,  consisting
largely  of  democrats,  held  its  convention  at  Buf-
falo and  nominated  Martin  Van  Buren  for  presi-
dent and  Charles  Francis  Adams  for  vice-president.
There  was  no  hope  of  electing  these  candidates,
but  this  little  party  grew,  six  years  later,  into  the
great  republican  party.  In  1858  he  was  elected  to
congress  by  the  republicans  of  the  3d  district  of
Massachusetts,  and  in  1860  he  was  reelected.  In
the  spring  of  1861  President  Lincoln  appointed  him
minister  to  England,  a  place  which  both  his  father
and  his  grandfather  had  filled  before  him.  Mr.
Adams  had  now  to  fight  with  tongue  and  pen  for
his  country  as  in  school-boy  days  he  had  fought


^^


"C^re^^cuf  .y^a^ryu^


ADAMS


ADAMS


13


with  fists.  It  was  an  exceedingly  difficult  time  for
an  American  minister  in  England.  Though  there
was  much  sympathy  for  the  U.  S.  government
on  the  part  of  the  workmen  in  the  manufact-
uring districts  and  of  many  of  the  liberal  con-
stituencies, especially  in  Scotland,  on  the  other
hand  the  feeling  of  the  governing  classes  and  of
polite  society  in  London  was  either  actively  hostile
to  us  or  coldly  indifferent.  Even  those  students
of  history  and  politics  who  were  most  friendly  to  us
failed  utterly  to  comprehend  the  true  character  of
the  sublime  struggle  in  which  we  were  engaged —
as  may  be  seen  in  reading  the  introduction  to  Mr.
E.  A.  Freeman's  elaborate  "  History  of  Federal
Government,  from  the  Formation  of  the  Acha?an
League  to  the  Disruption  of  the  United  States"
(London,  18G2).  Difficult  and  embarrassing  ques-
tions arose  in  connection  with  the  capture  of  the
confederate  commissioners  Mason  and  Slidell,  the
negligence  of  Lord  Paimerston's  government  in
allowing  the  "Alabama"  and  other  confederate
cruisers  to  sail  from  British  ports  to  prey  upon
American  commerce,  and  the  ever  manifest  desire
of  Napoleon  III.  to  persuade  Great  Britain  to  join
him  in  an  acknowledgment  of  the  independence  of
the  confederacy.  The  duties  of  this  difficult  diplo-
matic mission  were  discharged  by  Mr.  Adams  with
such  consummate  ability  as  to  win  universal  admira-
tion. No  more  than  his  father  or  grandfather  did
he  belong  to  the  school  of  suave  and  crafty,  in-
triguing diplomats.  He  pursued  his  ends  with
dogged  determination  and  little  or  no  attempt  at
concealment,  while  his  demeanor  was  haughty  and
often  defiant.  His  unflinching  firmness  bore  down
all  opposition,  and  his  perfect  self-control  made  it
difficult  for  an  antagonist  to  gain  any  advantage
over  him.  His  career  in  England  from  1861  to
18G8  must  be  cited  among  the  foremost  triumphs
of  American  diplomacy.  In  1872  it  was  attempted
to  nominate  him  for  the  presidency  of  the  United
States,  as  the  candidate  of  the  libei'al  republicans,
but  Horace  Greeley  secured  the  nomination.  He
was  elected  in  1869  a  member  of  the  board  of
overseers  of  Harvard  college,  and  was  for  several
years  president  of  the  board.  He  has  edited  the
works  and  memoirs  of  his  father  and  grandfa-
ther, in  23  octavo  volumes,  and  published  many
of  his  own  addresses  and  orations. — John  Quincy,
lawyer,  eldest  son  of  Charles  Francis  Adams,  b.
in  Boston,  22  Sept.,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  college  in  1853,  and  admitted  to  the
Suffolk  bar  in  1855.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  on  Gov.  Andrew's  staff.  He  was  elected  to
the  legislature  by  the  town  of  Quincy  in  1866,
but  failed  to  secure  a  reelection  the  following
year  because  he  had  declared  his  approval  of  An-
drew Johnson's  policy.  In  1869  and  1870  he  was
again  a  member  of  the  legislature.  In  1867  and
1871  he  was  democratic  candidate  for  governor
of  Massachusetts,  and  was  defeated.  In  1877  he
was  chosen  a  member  of  the  corporation  of  Har-
vard.—Charles  Francis,  Jr.,  lawyer,  second  son
of  Charles  Francis  Adams,  b.  in  Boston,  27  May,
1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1856,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858.  He  served  in
the  army  throughout  the  whole  of  the  civil  war,
and  was  mustered  out  in  July,  1865,  with  the
brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general  "of  volunteers.  He
has  since  devoted  his  attention  chiefly  to  railroad
matters,  and  in  1869  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  board  of  railroad  commissioners  of  Massachu-
setts. In  1871,  in  connection  with  his  brother,
Henry  Adams,  he  published  "  Chapters  of  Erie  and
other  Essays."  He  has  since  published  an  instruc-
tive book  on  railway  accidents. He  was  elected


in  1882  a  member  of  the  board  of  overseers  of
Harvard  college,  and  in  1884  president  of  the
Union  Pacific  railway. — Henry,  author,  third  son
of  Charles  Francis  Adams,  b.  in  Boston,  16  Feb.,
1838.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1858,  and
was  his  father's  private  secretary  in  London  from
1861  to  1868.  From  1870  till  1877  he  was  assistant
professor  of  history  in  Harvard  college,  and  was
one  of  the  ablest  instructors  the  university  has
known  during  the  present  generation,  possessing
to  an  extraordinary  degree  the  power  of  inciting
his  pupils  to  original  work.  He  again  resided  in
London  for  a  few  years,  and  is  now  living  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  where  he  is  writing  a  history  of  Jef-
ferson's administration.  He  has  published  "  Essays
in  Anglo-Saxon  Law  "  (Boston,  1876) ;  "  Documents
relating  to  New  England  Federalism,  1800-1815  "
(1877);  "Life  of  Albert  Gallatin"  (Philadelphia,
1879);  "Writings  of  Albert  Gallatin,"  edited  (3
vols.,  1879) ;  and  "  John  Randolph  "  (Boston,  1882).
— Brooks,  lawyer,  fourth  son  of  Charles  Francis
Adams,  b.  in  Quincy,  Mass.,  24  June,  1848,  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  college  in  1870,  admitted  to  the
Suffolk  bar  in  1873.  He  has  published  articles  in
the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "  and  other  periodicals,  and
is  the  author  of  "  The  Emancipation  of  Massachu-
setts "  (Boston,  1886).

ADAMS,  Charles  Kendall,  educator,  b.  in
Derby,  Vt.,  24  Jan.,  1835.  When  twenty  years  of
age  he  moved  to  Iowa,  and  subsequently  entered
the  university  of  Michigan,  graduating  in  1861.
He  became  assistant  professor  there  in  1863,  and
five  years  later  was  elected  to  the  full  professorship
of  history.  In  1869  he  founded  the  history  semi-
nary at  Ann  Arbor.  In  1881  he  became  a  non-
resident professor  of  history  at  Cornell  university,
and  in  1885  succeeded  Andrew  D.  White  as  its
pi'esident.  He  has  published  papers  and  pamphlets
on  historical  and  educational  subjects,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Democracy  and  Monarchy  in  France  "
(New  York,  1874)  and  a  "  Manual  of  Historical  Lit-
erature" (New  York,  1882).  He  has  also  edited
"  Representative  British  Orations "  (3  vols.,  New
Y^ork,  1884).

ADAMS,  Daniel,  author,  b.  in  Townsend,  Mass.,
29  Sept.,  1773 ;  d.  in  Keene,  N.  H.,  8  June,  1864.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  college  in  1797,
studied  medicine,  and  settled  in  Leominster  to
practise  his  profession.  Here  he  published  an  ora-
tion on  the  death  of  Washington,  and  began  the
preparation  of  his  school-books,  including  the
"  Scholar's  Arithmetic,"  "  Grammar,"  and  "  Under-
standing Reading,"  which  were  issued  from  his
own  press.  In  1806  he  removed  to  Boston  and
opened  a  select  school,  and  also  edited  the  "  Medi-
cal and  Agricultural  Register."  He  settled  in
Mount  Vernon  in  1813,  resumed  his  practice,  and
revised  his  arithmetic,  which  was  then  published
as  "Adams's  New  Arithmetic."  He  also  edited  a
newspaper  called  "The  Telescope."  In  1846  he
settled  in  Keene,  N.  H.,  where  he  spent  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  He  was  the  author  of  many
school-books,  principally  on  mathematics.  From
1838  till  1840  he  served  as  a  state  senator,  and  he
was  for  some  time  president  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire Bible  Society  and  also  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire Medical  Society.

ADAMS,  Edwin,  actor,  b.  ui  Medford,  Mass.,
3  Feb.,  1834;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  25  Oct.,  1877.  He
made  his  debut  29  Aug ,  1853,  at  the  National  thea-
tre in  Boston,  acting  Stephen  in  '  The  Hunchback."
In  November  he  appeared  at  the  Howard  athenaeum
as  Bernardo  in  "  Hamlet,"  and  thence  he  went  to
Philadelphia,  where  he  appeared,  20  Sept.,  1854,  as
Charles Woodley  in "The  Soldier's Daughter."


14


ADAMS


ADAMS


He  played  also  at  the  St.  Charles  theatre,  Balti-
more, where  he  achieved  his  first  great  success.
About  1800  he  appeared  in  Buffalo  as  Hamlet,  and
subsequently  with  Miss  Kate  Bateman  and  Mr.  J.
W.  WalUick  at  the  Winter  Garden  in  New  York;
and  afterward  in  all  the  principal  cities  in  the
United  States  as  a  star.  In  1866  he  returned  to
New  York,  and  in  Wallack's  old  theatre,  the  Broad-
way, played  Robert  Landry  in  the  "  Dead  Heart,"
and  Adrian  de  Teligny  in  the  "  Heretic."  At  the
opening  of  Booth's  theatre,  8  Feb.,  1867,  he  ap-
peared as  Mercutio,  and  shortly  afterward  enacted
Narcisse,  lago,  Raphael,  Rover,  Claude  Melnotte,
and  Enoch  Arden,  this  last  character  becoming  a
great  favorite.  He  appeared  with  Edwin  Booth
during  the  season  of  1869-'70  in  several  of  Shake-
speare's plays,  then  visited  Australia,  where  his
health  failed,  and,  returning  to  San  Francisco,  re-
ceived a  generous  benefit,  37  May,  1876,  followed
by  others  in  New  York,  Philadelphia,  Boston,  and
elsewhere.  He  possessed  a  voice  of  wonderful  rich-
ness, strength,  and  melody,  and  was  regarded  as
one  of  the  best  light  comedians  on  the  stage.  His
wife,  a  clever  actress  and  graceful  danseuse,  retired
from  the  stage  several  years  ago.

ADAMS,  Eliphalet,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  26  March,  1677 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  4
Oct.,  1753.  He  was  the  son  of  Rev.  William  Adams,
the  second  minister  of  Dedham,  Mass.,  was  graduat-
ed at  Harvard  college  in  1694,  preached  in  various
places  witiiout  settlement  for  ten  years,  and  in  1709
was  ordained  a  Congregational  minister  in  New  Lon-
don, Conn.  He  was  a  man  of  learning,  and  was  an
eminent  Hebraist.  A  diary  kept  by  him  for  sev-
eral years  is  preserved  in  the  "  Massachusetts  liis-
torical  Collection,"  iv,  1.  Plaving  become  inter-
ested in  the  welfare  of  the  Indians  in  the  region,
he  acquired  their  language.  As  a  preacher  he  was
popular,  and  various  of  his  sermons  were  deliv-
ered before  bodies  educational  and  political.  Many
of  them  were  published,  the  principal  ones  being,
one  on  the  death  of  Rev.  James  Noyes,  of  Stoning-
ton,  1706;  election  sermons,  1710  and  1713;  a  dis-
course occasioned  by  a  storm,  1717;  Thanksgiving
sermon,  1721 ;  on  the  death  of  Gov.  Saltonstall,
1724;  on  the  ordination  of  Rev.  William  Gager,
1725;  on  the  ordination  of  Thos.  Clap,  1726,  and  a
discourse  before  young  men.  1727.

ADAMS,  Ezra  Eastman,  author,  b.  in  Concord,
N.  H.,  29  Aug.,  1813;  d.  in  Oxford,  Pa.,  3  Nov.,
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  college  in
1836,  and  in  1840  became  chaplain  to  the  seamen  at
Havre,  France.  After  ten  years  of  assiduous  labor,
he  made  an  extensive  tour  in  Europe,  and  then  re-
turned to  America.  In  1854  he  became  pastor  of
the  Pearl  st.  Congregational  church  in  Nashua,  N.
II.,  whence  in  1860  he  went  to  Philadelphia  and
entered  the  service  of  the  foreign  evangelical  so-
ciety. Soon  afterward  he  took  charge  of  an  enter-
prise that  developed  into  the  Broad  st.  church  of
that  city.  From  1867  till  his  death  he  was  pro-
fessor of  theology  in  Lincoln  university,  near  Ox-
ford, Pa.,  and  in  1870  he  began  editorial  work  on
the  ''  Presbyterian."  He  was  the  author  of  several
poems  of  merit.

ADAMS,  F.  W.,  physician  and  musician,  b.  in
1787;  d.  in  :\Iontpelier,  Vt,  in  1859.  He  was  a
good  performer  on  the  violin,  and  early  turned
his  attention  to  violin-making.  He  conceived  the
opinion  that  the  superior  tones  of  the  Amati  and
Stradivarius  instruments  were  due  to  their  having
been  made  of  old  and  seasoned  wood,  and  accord-
ingly he  searched  the  forests  of  northern  Vermont
and  Canada  for  maple  and  pine,  taking  his  wood
from  partially  decayed  trees,  and  constructed  140


violins,  some  of  which  were  remarkable  for  their
powerful  and  sweet  tones,  especially  those  made
from  the  oldest  woods.

ADAMS,  Hannah,  author,  b.  in  Medfield,  Mass.,
in  1755 ;  d.  in  Brookline,  15  Nov.,  1832,  She  was
the  first  woman  in  America  who  made  literature  a
profession.  Showing  at  an  early  age  a  fondness
for  study,  she  acquired  a  fair  knowledge  of  Greek
and  Latin  from  divinity  students  boarding  with
her  father,  who  was  himself  a  man  of  literary  tastes.
He  became  bankrupt  when  she  was  in  her  seven-
teenth year,  and  she  and  her  brothers  and  sisters
were  obliged  to  provide  for  themselves.  During
the  war  of  the  revolution  she  supported  herself  by
making  lace,  and  afterward  by  teaching.  She  was
a  woman  of  varied  learning  and  indomitable  perse-
verance. Her  principal  work  was  a  "  View  of  Re-
ligious Opinions  "  (1784),  in  which  she  gave  a  com-
prehensive survey  of  the  various  religions  of  the
world.  It  was  divided  into :  1.  An  Alphabetical
Compendium  of  the  Denominations  among  Chris-
tians; 2.  A  Brief  Account  of  Paganism,  Moham-
medanism, Judaism,  and  Deism ;  3.  An  Account
of  the  Different  Religions  of  the  World.  The  work
passed  through  several  editions,  and  was  reprinted
in  England.  In  the  fourth  edition  she  changed
the  title  to  "  Dictionary  of  Religions."  She  wrote
also  a  "  History  of  New  England  "  (1799)  and  "  Evi-
dences of  Christianity"  (1801).  Her  writings
brought  her  little  pecuniary  profit,  yet  they  secured
her  many  friends,  among  them  the  Abbe  Gregoire,
with  whom  she  carried  on  an  extensive  corre-
spondence, and  also  received  his  aid  in  preparing
her  "History  of  the  Jews"  (1812).  In  1814  she
published  a  "  Controversy  with  Dr.  Morse,"  and  in
1826  "  Letters  on  the  Gospels."  She  was  simple  in
her  manners  and  of  rare  modesty.  A  voyage  from
Boston  to  Nahant,  about  ten  miles,  was  her  only
journey  by  water,  and  a  trip  to  Chelmsford  her
farthest  by  land.  During  the  closing  years  of  her
life  she  enjoyed  an  annuity  provided  by  friends  in
Boston,  and  at  her  death  was  buried  in  Mount  Au-
burn, the  first  person  whose  body  was  placed  in
that  cemetery.  Her  autobiography,  edited  with
additions  by  Mrs.  Hannah  F.  Lee,  was  published
in  Boston  in  1832.

ADAMS,  Henry  A.,  Jr.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1833.  He  entered  the  naval  school
at  Annapolis  in  1849,  and  was  graduated  in  1851 ;
became  a  passed  midshipman  in  1854,  and  a  master
the  following  year,  when,  while  attached  to  the
sloop  of  W9,r  "  Levant,"  he  took  part  in  the  engage-
ment with  the  forts  at  the  mouth  of  Canton  river,
China.  He  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant  in
1856,  and  was  on  the  '•  Brooklyn  "  at  the  passage
of  forts  St.  Philip  and  Jackson,  and  the  capture  of
New  Orleans  in  April,  1862.  Commissioned  as
lieutenant-commander  and  transferred  to  the  North
Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  he  participated  in
both  the  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  received  the
encomium  from  Admiral  Porter  in  his  official  de-
spatch of  28  Jan.,  1865,  "■  I  recommend  the  promo-
tion of  Lieut.-Com.  II.  A.  Adams,  without  whose
aid  we  should  have  been  brought  to  a  standstill
more  than  once.  He  volunteered  for  anything  and
.everything."  After  the  taking  of  Richmond  he
was  one  of  the  party  that  accompanied  President
Lincoln  on  his  entry  into  the  city.  He  was  com-
missioned as  commander  in  July,  1866,  and  was
ordered  to  the  store-ship  "  Guard,'''  of  the  European
squadron,  where  he  remained  during  1868-'9,  and
was  afterward  assigned  to  duty  in  1870  in  the
navy-yard  at  Philadelphia.

ADAMS,  Herbert  Baxter,  educator,  b.  in  Am-
herst, Mass.,  16  April,  1850. His  early  training


ADAMS


ADAMS


15


was  in  the  Amherst  schools  and  in  Phillips  Exeter
academy.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1872,
and  received  the  degree  ot  Ph.  D,  at  Heidelberg,
Germany,  in  187C.  lie  was  fellow  in  history  in
Johns  Hopkins  university  from  1876  to  1878,  asso-
ciate from  1878  to  1888,  and  was  appointed  asso-
ciate professor  in  1888,  He  has  been  secretary  of
the  American  historical  association  since  its  founda-
tion in  1884.  In  1873  he  went  to  Europe  and  de-
voted three  years  to  travel  and  study.  His  princi-
pal writings  are  "  The  Germanic  Origin  of  the  New
England  Towns  " ;  "  Saxon  Tithing-Men  in  Ameri-
ca"; "Norman  Constables  in  America";  "Village
Communities";  "Methods  of  Historical  Study,"
and  "  Maryland's  Influence  upon  Land  Cessions  to
the  United  States."  All  these  papers  are  published
in  the  "  Johns  Hopkins  University  Studies  in  His-
torical and  Political  Science,"  edited  by  Prof.
Adams,  4  vols.  (Baltimore,  1888-'80).

ADAMS,  Isaac,  inventor,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.
H.,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Sandwich,  N.  H.,  19  July,  1883.
His  education  was  limited.  At  an  early  age  he
was  a  factory  operative,  and  afterward  learned  the
trade  of  cabinet  maker,  but  in  1824  went  to  Boston
and  sought  work  in  a  machine  shop.  In  1828  he
invented  the  printing-press  that  bears  his  name.
It  was  introduced  in  1830,  and  came  into  almost
universal  use,  being  still  so  popular  as  to  warnii
its  manufacture  in  more  than  thirty  different  siz*  -.
He  improved  it  in  1834,  making  it  substantially
what  it  now  is.  The  distinctive  feature  of  his
presses  is  that  the  impression  is  given  by  lifting  a
flat  bed  with  its  form  against  a  stationary  platen.
The  sheets  are  fed  by  hand.  He  engaged  with  his
brother  Seth  in  the  manufacture  of  these  and  other
machines,  and  acquired  a  competency.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate  in  1840.  His
last  years  were  spent  in  retirement.

Ai)AMS,  James  Hopkins,  statesman,  b.  in
South  Carolina  about  1811 ;  d.  near  Columbia,  S.
C,  27  July,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1831.  In  1832,  during  the  "  nullification  "  excite-
ment, he  strongly  opposed  the  nullifiersin  the  leg-
islature. After  serving  in  the  state  senate  for  sev-
eral sessions,  he  was  elected  governor  for  the  term
of  1855-'57.  He  was  one  of  the  state  commission-
ers that  were  chosen,  after  the  ordinance  of  seces-
sion was  passed,  to  treat  with  the  i)resident  con-
cerning the  disposition  of  United  States  property
in  South  Carolina.

ADAMS,  Jasper,  educator,  b.  in  Medway,  Mass.,
27  Aug.,  1793;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  25  Oct.,
1841.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  university  in
1815,  and  studied  theology  at  Andover.  In  1819
he  was  chosen  {)rofessor  of  mathematics  at  Brown
university,  and  during  the  same  year  was  ordained
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  He  became
president  of  the  college  of  Charleston  in  1824,  and
of  Geneva,  N.  Y.  (now  Hobart)  college  in  1826.
Again,  from  1828  to  1836,  he  was  in  charge  of  the
college  of  Charleston.  He  was  chaplain  and  pro-
fessor of  geography,  history,  and  ethics  at  West
Point  from  1888  to  1840,  and  subsequently  was  in
charge  of  a  seminary  at  Pendleton,  S.  C.  He  pub-
lished sermons  and  addresses,  and  a  "  Moral  Phi-
losophy "  (New  York,  1888).

ADAMS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  1704;  d,  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  23  Jan..  1740.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1721,  became  pastor  of  a  church  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  April  11,  1828,  and  afterward  set-
tled in  Philadelphia.  He  was  well  known  as  an
author  and  linguist,  and  is  described  as  "  master
of  nine  languages,  and  conversant  with  Greek,
Latin,  French,  and  Spanish  authors."  Plis  poems
(Boston,  1745)  include  a  metrical  version  of  the


Book  of  Revelation. A  satirical  poem  on  the  love
of  money  was  published  separately.

ADAMS,  John,  second  president  of  the  United
States,  b.  in  that  part  of  the  town  of  Braintree,
Mass.,  which  has  since  been  set  off  as  the  town  of
Quincy,  31  Oct.,  1785  ;  d.  there,  4  Jidy,  1826.  His
great-grandfather,  Henry  Adams,  received  a  grant
of  about  40  acres  of  land  in  Braintree  hi  1636,  and
soon  afterward  emigrated  from  Devonshire,  Eng-
land, with  his  eight  sons.  John  Adams,  the  subject
of  this  sketch,  was  the  eldest  son  of  John  Adams
and  Susanna  Boylston,  daughter  of  Peter  Boylston,
of  Brookline.  His  father,  one  of  the  selectmen  of
Braintree  and  a  deacon  of  the  church,  was  a  thrif-
ty farmer,  and  at  his  death  in  1760  his  estate  was
appraised  at  £1,880  9s.  6d.,  which  in  those  days
might  ha\e  been  regarded  as  a  moderate  competence.
It  was  the  custom  of  the  family  to  send  the  eldest


son  to  college,  and  accordingly  John  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1755.  Previous  to  1773  the  gradu-
ates of  Harvard  were  arranged  in  lists,  not  alpha-
betically or  in  order  of  merit,  but  according  to  the
social  standing  of  their  parents.  In  a  class  of
twenty-four  members  John  thus  stood  fourteenth.
One  of  his  classmates  was  John  Wentworth,  after-
Avard  royal  governor  of  New  Hampshire,  and  then
of  Nova  Scotia.  After  taking  his  degree  and  while
waiting  to  make  his  choice  of  a  profession,  Adams
took  charge  of  the  grammar  school  at  Worcester.
It  was  the  year  of  Braddock's  defeat,  when  the
smouldering  fires  of  a  century  of  rivalry  between
France  and  England  broke  out  in  a  blaze  of  war
which  was  forever  to  settle  the  question  of  the  pri-
macy of  the  English  race  in  the  modern  world.
Adams  took  an  intense  interest  in  the  struggle,  and
predicted  that  if  we  could  only  drive  out  "  these
turbulent  Gallics,"  our  numbers  would  in  another
century  exceed  those  of  the  British,  and  all  Eu-
rope would  be  unable  to  subdue  us.  In  sending
him  to  college  his  family  seem  to  have  hoped  that
he  would  become  a  clergyman  ;  but  he  soon  found
himself  too  much  of  a  free  thinker  to  feel  at  home
in  the  pulpit  of  that  day.  When  accused  of  Ar-
minianism,  he  cheerfully  admitted  the  charge.
Later  in  life  he  was  sometimes  called  a  Unitarian,
but  of  dogmatic  Christianity  he  seems  to  have  had
as  little  as  Franklin  or  Jefferson.  "  Where  do  we
find,"  he  asks,  "  a  precept  in  the  gospel  requiring
ecclesiastical  synods,  convocations,  councils,  de-
crees, creeds,  confessions,  oaths,  subscriptions,  and
whole  cart-loads  of  other  trumpery  that  we  find  re-
ligion encumbered  with  in  these  days?"  In  this
mood  he  turned  from  the  ministry  and  began  the
study  of  law  at  Worcester.  There  was  then  a
strong. prejudice  against  lawyers  in  New  England,
but  thie  profession  throve  lustily  nevertheless,  so
litigious  were  the  people.  In  1758  Adams  began
the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Suffolk  co.,  having


16


ADAMS


.fc:j:lC'^i^-1; -i-,%


his  residence  in  Braintr^e.  In  1764  he  was  married
to  Abigail  Smith,  of  Weymouth,  a  lady  of  social
position  higher  than  his  own  and  endowed  with
most  rare  and  admirable  qualities  of  head  and
heart.  In  this  same  year  the  agitation  over  the
proposed  stamp  act  was  begun,  and  on  the  burn-
ing questions  raised  bv  this  ill-considered  measure
Adams  had  already  taken  sides.  When  James
Otis  in  1761  delivered  his  memorable  argument
against  writs  of  assistance,  John  Adams  was  pres-
ent in  the  court-room,  and  the  fiery  eloquence  of
Otis  wrought  a  wonderful  effect  upon  him.  As
his  son  afterward  said,  "  it  was  like  the  oath  of
Hamilcar  administered  to  Hannibal."  In  his  old
age  John  Adams  wrote,  with  reference  to  this  scene,
"Every  man  of  an  immense  crowded  audience  ap-
peared to  me  to  go  away,  as  I  did,  ready  to  take
arms  against  writs  of  assistance. Then  and  there

was  the  first  scene
of  the  first  act  of
opposition  to  the
arbitrary  claims
of  Great  Britain.
f/-^  ^r-v  - .^^^-v„«  Then and there

[i^jp«5^  thg child Inde-

pendence was
born."  When  the
stamp  act  was
passed,  in  1765,
Adams  took  a
prominent  part  in
a  town-meeting  at
Braintree,  where
he  presented  reso-
lutions which  were
adopted  word  for
word  by  more
than  forty  towns
in  Massachusetts.
The  people  re-
fused to  make  use
of  stamps,  and
the  business  of  the  inferior  courts  was  carried
on  without  them,  judges  and  lawyers  agreeing  to
connive  at  the  absence  of  the  stamps.  In  the
supreme  court,  however,  where  Thomas  Hutchin-
son was  chief  justice,  the  judges  refused  to  trans-
act any  business  without  stamps.  This  threatened
serious  interruption  to  business,  and  the  town  of
Boston  addressed  a  memorial  to  the  governor  and
council,  praying  that  the  supreme  court  might
overlook  the  absence  of  stamps.  John  Adams  was
unexpectedly  chosen,  along  with  Jeremiah  Gridley
and  James  Otis,  as  counsel  for  the  town,  to  argue
the  case  in  favor  of  the  memorial.  Adams  deliv-
ered the  opening  argument,  and  took  the  decisive
ground  that  the  stamp  act  was  ipso  facto  null  and
void,  since  it  was  a  measure  of  taxation  which  the
people  of  the  colony  had  taken  no  share  in  passing.
No  such  measure,'  he  declared,  could  be  held  as
binding  in  America,  and  parliament  had  no  right
to  tax  the  colonies.  The  governor  and  council  re-
fused to  act  in  the  matter,  but  presently  the  repeal
of  the  stamp  act  put  an  end  to  the  disturbance  for
a  while".  About  this  time  Mr.  Adams  began  writ-
ing articles  for  the  Boston  "Gazette."  Four  of
these  articles,  dealing  with  the  constitutional  rights
of  the  people  of  New  England,  wore  afterward  re-
published under  the  somewhat  curious  title  of  "  An
Essay  on  the  Canon  and  Feudal  Law."  After  ten
years  of  practice,  Mr.  Adams's  business  had  be-
come quite  extensive,  and  in  1768  he  moved  into
Boston.  The  attorney  -  general  of  Massachusetts,
Jonathan  Sewall,  now  offered  him  the  lucrative
oflace  of  advocate-general  in  the  court  of  admiralty.


a^am^


ADAMS


This  was  intended  to  operate  as  an  indirect  bribe
by  putting  Mr.  Adams  into  a  position  in  which  he
could  not  feel  free  to  oppose  the  policy  of  the
crown ;  such  insidious  methods  were  systematically
pursued  by  Gov.  Bernard,  and  after  him  by  Hutch-
inson. But  Mr.  Adams  was  too  wary  to  swallow  the
bait,  and  he  stubbornly  refused  the  pressing  offer.
In  1770  came  the  first  in  the  series  of  great  acts
that  made  Mr.  Adams's  career  illustrious.  In  the
midst  of  the  terrible  excitement  aroused  by  the
"  Boston  Massacre  "  he  served  as  counsel  for  Capt.
Preston  and  his  seven  soldiers  when  they  were
tried  for  murder.  His  friend  and  kinsman,  Josiah
Quincy,  assisted  him  in  this  invidious  task.  The
trial  was  judiciously  postponed  for  seven  months
until  the  popular  fury  had  abated.  Preston  and
five  soldiers  were  acquitted  ;  the  other  two  soldiers
were  found  guilty  of  manslaughter,  and  were  bar-
barously branded  on  the  hand  with  a  hot  iron.
The  verdict  seems  to  have  been  strictly  just  accord-
ing to  the  evidence  presented.  For  his  services  to
his  eight  clients  Mr.  Adams  received  a  fee  of  nine-
teen guineas,  but  never  got  so  much  as  a  word  of
thanks  from  the  churlish  Preston.  An  ordinary
American  politician  would  have  shrunk  from  the
task  of  defending  these  men,  for  fear  of  losing  fa-
vor with  the  people.  The  course  pursued  by  Mr.
Adams  showed  great  moral  courage ;  and  the  peo-
ple of  Boston  i)roved  themselves  able  to  appreciate
true  manliness  by  electing  him  as  representative  to
the  legislature.  This  was  in  June,  1770,  after  he
had  undertaken  the  case  of  the  soldiers,  but  before
the  trial.  Mr.  Adams  now  speedily  became  the
principal  legal  adviser  of  the  patriot  party,  and
among  its  foremost  leaders  was  only  less  conspicu-
ous than  Samuel  Adams,  Hancock,  and  Warren.
In  all  matters  of  legal  controversy  between  these
leaders  and  Gov.  Hutchinson  his  advice  proved  in-
valuable. During  the  next  two  years  there  was
something  of  a  lull  in  the  political  excitement ;  Mr.
Adams  resigned  his  place  in  the  legislature  and
moved  his  residence  to  Braintree,  still  keeping  his
office  in  Boston.  In  the  summer  of  1772  the  Brit-
ish government  ventured  upon  an  act  that  went
further  than  anything  which  had  yet  occurred
toward  driving  the  colonies  into  rebellion.  It  was
ordered  that  all  the  Massachusetts  judges  holding
their  places  during  the  king's  pleasure  should
henceforth  have  their  salaries  paid  by  the  crown
and  not  by  the  colony.  This  act,  which  aimed  di-
rectly at  the  independence  of  the  judiciary,  aroused
intense  indignation,  not  only  in  Massachusetts,  but
in  the  other  colonies,  which  felt  their  liberties
threatened  by  such  a  measure.  It  called  forth  from
Mr.  Adams  a  series  of  powerful  articles,  which
have  been  republished  in  the  3d  volume  of  his
collected  works.  About  this  time  he  was  chosen  a
member  of  the  council,  but  the  choice  was  nega-
tived by  Gov.  Hutchinson.  The  five  acts  of  par-
liament in  April,  1774,  including  the  regulating
act  and  the  Boston  port  bill,  led  to  the  calling  of
the  first  continental  congress,  to  which  Mr.  Adams
was  chosen  as  one  of  the  five  delegates  from  Massa-
chusetts. The  resolutions  passed  by  this  congress
on  the  subject  of  colonial  rights  were  drafted  by
him,  and  his  diary  and  letters  contain  a  vivid  ac-
count of  some  of  the  proceedings.  On  his  return
to  Braintree  he  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  revo-
lutionary provincial  congress  of  Massachusetts,
then  assembled  at  Concord.  This  revolutionary
body  had  already  seized  the  revenues  of  the  colony,
appointed  a  committee  of  safety,  and  begun  to  or-
ganize an  army  and  collect  arms  and  ammunition.
During  the  following  winter  the  views  of  the  loyal-
ist party  were  set  forth  with  great  ability  and  elo-


ADAMS


ADAMS


17


^uenee  in  a  series  of  newspaper  articles  by  Daniel
leonard,  under  the  signature  of  "Massachusetten-
sis."  He  was  answered  most  effectively  by  Mr.  Ad-
ams, whose  articles,  signed  "  Novanglus,"  appeared
weekly  in  the  Boston  "  Gazette  "  until  the  battle  of
Lexington.  The  last  of  these  articles,  which  was
actually  in  type  in  that  wild  week,  was  not  pub-
lished.' The  series,  which  has  been  reprinted  in
the  4th  volume  of  Mr.  Adams's  works,  contains  a
valuable  review  of  the  policy  of  Bernard  and
Hutchinson,  and  a  powerful  statement  of  the  rights
of  the  colonies.

In  the  second  continental  congress,  which  assem-
bled on  May  10,  Mr.  Adams  played  a  very  im-
portant part.  Of  all  the  delegates  present  he  was
probably  the  only  one,  except  his  cousin,  Samuel
Adams,  who  was  convinced  that  matters  had  gone
too  far  for  any  reconciliation  with  the  mother
country,  and  that  there  was  no  use  in  sending  any
more  petitions  to  the  king.  As  there  was  a  strong
])rejudice  against  Massachusetts  on  the  part  of  the
middle  and  southern  colonies,  it  was  desirable  that
her  delegates  should  avoid  all  appearance  of  undue
haste  in  precipitating  an  armed  conflict.  Never-
theless, the  circumstances  under  which  an  army  of
16,000  New  England  men  had  been  gathered  to  be-
siege the  British  in  Boston  were  such  as  to  make  it
seem  advisable  for  the  congress  to  adopt  it  as  a
continental  army ;  and  here  John  Adams  did  the
second  notable  deed  of  his  career.  He  proposed
Washington  for  the  chief  command  of  this  army,
and  thus,  by  putting  Virginia  in  the  foreground,
succeeded  in  committing  that  great  colony  to  a
course  of  action  calculated  to  end  in  independence.
This  move  not  only  put  the  army  in  charge  of  the
only  commander  capable  of  winning  independence
for  the  American  people  in  the  field,  but  its  politi-
cal importance  was  great  and  obvious.  Afterward
in  some  dark  moments  of  the  revolutionary  war,
Mr,  Adams  seems  almost  to  have  regretted  his
part  in  this  selection  of  a  commander.  He  under-
stood little  or  nothing  of  military  affairs,  and  v^^as
incapable  of  appreciating  Washington's  transcend-
ent ability.  The  results  of  the  war,  however,  justi-
fied in  every  respect  his  action  in  the  second  conti-
nental congress.

During  the  summer  recess  taken  by  congress
Mr.  Adams  sat  as  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
council,  which  declared  the  offlce  of  governor  va-
cant and  assumed  executive  authority.  Uiuler  the
new  provisional  government  of  Massachusetts,  Mr.
Adams  was  made  chief  justice,  but  never  took  his
seat,  as  continental  affairs  more  pressingly  de-
manded his  attention.  He  was  always  loquacious,
often  too  ready  to  express  his  opinions,  whether
with  tongue  or  pen,  and  this  trait  got  him  more
than  once  into  trouble,  especially  as  he  was  inclined
to  be  sharp  and  censorious.  For  John  Dickinson,
the  leader  of  the  moderate  and  temporizing  party
in  congress,  who  had  just  prevailed  upon  that  body
to  send  another  petition  to  the  king,  he  seems  to
have  entertained  at  this  time  no  very  high  regard,
and  he  gave  vent  to  some  contemptuous  expressions
in  a  confidential  letter,  which  was  captured  by  the
British  and  published.  This  led  to  a  quarrel'with
Dickinson,  and  made  Mr.  Adams  very  unpopular
in  Philadelphia.  When  congress  reassembled  in
the  autumn,  Mr.  Adams,  as  member  of  a  commit-
tee for  fitting  out  cruisers,  drew  up  a  body  of  regu-
lations, which  came  to  form  the  basis  of  the  Ameri-
can naval  code.  The  royal  governor.  Sir  John
Wentworth.  fled  fi'om  New  Hampshire  about  this
time,  and  the  people  sought  the  advice  of  congress
as  to  the  form  of  government  which  it  should  seem
most  advisable to adopt. Similar applications

VOL. I. — 2


presently  came  from  South  Carolina  and  Virginia.
Mr.  Adams  prevailed  upon  congress  to  recommend
to  these  colonies  to  form  for  themselves  new  gov-
ernments based  entirely  upon  popular  suffrage;
and  about  the  same  time  he  published  a  pamphlet
entitled  "  Thoughts  on  Government,  Applicable  to
the  Present  State  of  the  American  Colonies."  By
the  spring  of  1776  the  popular  feeling  had  become
so  strongly  inclined  toward  independence  that,  on
the  15th  of  May,  Mr.  Adams  was  able  to  carry
through  congress  a  resolution  that  all  the  colonies
should  be  invited  to  form  independent  govern-
ments. In  the  preamble  to  this  resolution  it  was
declared  that  the  American  people  could  no  longer
conscientiously  take  oath  to  support  any  govern-
ment deriving  its  authority  from  the  crown :  all
such  governments  must  now  be  suppressed,  since
the  king  had  withdrawn  his  protection  from  the
inhabitants  of  the  tniited  colonies.  Like  the  fa-
mous preamble  to  Townshend's  act  of  1767,  this
Adams  preamble  contained  within  itself  the  gist  of
the  whole  matter.  To  adopt  it  was  to  cross  the
Rubicon,  and  it  gave  rise  to  a  hot  debate  in  con-
gress. Against  the  opposition  of  most  of  the  dele-
gates from  the  middle  states  the  resolution  was
finally  carried;  "and  now,"  exclaimed  Mr.  Adams,
"  the  Gordian  knot  is  cut."  Events  came  quickly
to  maturity.  On  the  7th  of  June  the  declaration
of  independence  was  moved  by  Richard  Henry
Lee,  of  Virginia,  and  seconded  by  John  Adams.
The  motion  was  allowed  to  lie  on  the  tal)le  for
three  weeks,  in  order  to  hear  from  the  colonies  of
Connecticut,  New  Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  Penn-
sylvania, Delaware,  Maryland,  and  New  York,
which  had  not  yet  declared  their  position  with  re-
gard to  independence.  Meanwhile  three  commit-
tees were  appointed,  one  on  a  declaration  of  inde-
pendence, a  second  on  confederation,  and  a  third
on  foreign  relations  ;  and  Mr.  Adams  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  first  and  third  of  these  committees.  On
the  1st  of  July  Mr.  Lee's  motion  was  taken  up  by
congress  sitting  as  a  committee  of  the  whole;  and
as  Mr.  Lee  was  absent,  the  task  of  defending  it  de-
volved upon  Mr.  Adams,  who,  as  usual,  was  op-
posed by  Dickinson.  Adams's  speech  on  that  occa-
sion was  probably  the  finest  he  ever  delivered.
Jefferson  called  him  "the  colossus  of  that  debate";
and  indeed  his  labors  in  bringing  about  the  decla-
ration of  independence  must  be  considered  as  the
third  signal  event  of  his  career.

On  the  12th  of  June  congress  established  a
board  of  war  and  ordnance,  with  Mr.  Adams  for  its
chairman,  and  he  discharged  the  arduous  duties  of
this  office  until  after  the  surrender  of  Burgoyne,
After  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  Lord  Howe  sent
the  captured  Gen.  Sullivan  to  Philadelphia,  solicit-
ing a  conference  with  some  of  the  members  of  the
congress.  Adams  opposed  the  conference,  and
with  characteristic  petulance  alluded  to  the  unfor-
tunate Sullivan  as  a  decoy  duck  who  had  much
better  have  been  shot  in  the  battle  than  sent  on
such  a  business.  Congress,  however,  consented  to
the  conference,  and  Adams  was  chosen  as  a  com-
missioner, along  with  Franklin  and  Rutledge.
Toward  the  end  of  the  year  1777  Mr.  Adams  was
appointed  to  supersede  Silas  Deane  as  commissioner
to  France.  He  sailed  12  Feb.,  1778,  in  the  frigate
"  Boston,"  and  after  a  stormy  passage,  in  which  he
ran  no  little  risk  of  capture  by  British  cruisers,  he
landed  at  Bordeaux,  and  reached  Paris  on  the  8th
of  April,  Long  before  his  arrival  the  alliance  with
France  had  been  consummated.  He  found  a
wretched  state  of  things  in  Paris,  our  three  com-
missioners there  at  loggerheads,  one  of  them  dab-
bling in  the  British  funds  and  making  a  fortune


18


ADAMS


ADAMS


by  privateering,  while  the  public  accounts  were
kept  in  the  laxest  manner.  All  sorts  of  agents
were  drawing  bills  upon  the  United  States,  and
commanders  of  war  vessels  were  setting  up  their
claims  for  expenses  and  supplies  that  had  never
been  ordered.  Mr.  Adams,  whose  habits  of  busi-
ness were  extremely  strict  and  methodical,  was
shocked  at  this  confusion,  and  he  took  hold  of  the
matter  with  such  vigor  as  to  put  an  end  to  it.  He
also  recommended  that  the  representation  of  the
United  States  at  the  French  court  should  be  in-
trusted to  a  single  minister  instead  of  three  com-
missioners. As  a  result  of  this  advice,  Franklin
was  retained  at  Paris,  Arthur  Lee  was  sent  to  Mad-
rid, and  Adams,  being  left  without  any  instruc-
tions, returned  to  America,  reaching  Boston  2
Aug.,  1779.  He  came  home  with  a  curious
theory  of  the  decadence  of  Great  Britain,  which
he  had  learned  in  France,  and  which  serves  well
to  illustrate  the  mood  in  which  France  had  under-
taken to  assist  the  United  States.  England,  he
said,  "  loses  every  day  her  consideration,  and  runs
toward  her  ruin.  Her  riches,  in  which  her  power
consisted,  she  has  lost  with  us  and  never  can  re-
gain. She  resembles  the  melancholy  spectacle  of
a  great,  wide-spreading  tree  that  lias  been  girdled
at  the  root."  Such  absurd  notions  were  quite
commonly  entertained  at  that  time  on  the  conti-
nent of  Europe,  and  such  calamities  were  seriously
dreaded  by  many  Englishman  in  the  event  of  the
success  of  the  Americans.

Immediately  on  reaching  home  Mr.  Adams  was
chosen  delegate  from  Braintree  to  the  convention
for  framing  a  new  constitution  for  Massachusetts ;
but  before  the  work  of  the  convention  was  finished
he  was  appointed  commissioner  to  treat  for  peace
with  Great  Britain,  and  sidled  for  France  in  the
same  French  frigate  in  which  he  had  come  home.
But  Lord  North's  government  was  not  ready  to
make  peace,  and,  moreover,  Count  Vergcnnes  con-
trived to  prevent  Adams  from  making  any  official
communication  to  Great  Britain  of  the  extent  of
his  powers.  During  Adams's  stay  in  Paris  a  mu-
tual dislike  and  distrust  grew  up  between  himself
and  Vergennes.  The  latter  feared  that  if  negotia-
tions were  to  begin  between  the  British  govern-
ment and  the  United  States,  they  might  lead  to  a
reconciliation  and  reunion  of  the  two  branches
of  the  English  race,  and  thus  ward  off  that  decad-
ence of  England  for  wliich  France  was  so  eagerly
hoping.  On  the  other  hand,  Adams  quite  correctly
believed  that  it  was  the  intention  of  Vergennes  to
sactrifice  the  interests  of  the  Americans,  especiallv
as  concerned  with  the  Newfoundland  fisheries  and
the  territory  between  the  Alleghanies  and  the  Mis-
sissippi, in  favor  of  Spain,  with  which  country
France  was  then  in  close  alliance.  Americans  must
always  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Mr.  Adams  tor
the  clear-sightedness  with  which  he  thus  read  the
designs  of  Vergennes  and  estimated  at  its  true
value  the  purely  selfish  intervention  of  France  in
belialf  of  the  United  States.  This  clearness  of  in-
sight was  soon  to  bear  good  fruit  in  the  manage-
ment of  the  treaty  of  1783.  For  the  present,
Adams  found  himself  uncomfortable  in  Paris,  as
his  too  ready  tongue  wrought  unpleasantness  both
with  Vergennes  and  with  Franklin,  who  was  too
much  under  the  French  minister's  infl\ience.  On
his  first  arrival  in  Paris,  society  there  had  been
greatly  excited  about  him,  as  it  was  supposed  that
he  was  "the  famous  Mr.  Adams"  who  had  ordered
the  British  troops  out  of  Boston  in  March,  1770,
and  had  thrown  down  the  glove  of  defiance  to
George  HI.  on  the  great  day  of  the  Boston  tea-
party. When  he  explained  that  he  was  only  a


cousin  of  that  grand  and  picturesque  personage,
he  found  that  fashionable  society  thenceforth  took
less  interest  in  him.

In  the  summer  of  1780  Mr.  Adams  was  charged
by  congress  with  the  business  of  negotiating  a
Dutch  loan.  In  order  to  give  the  good  peo])l('  of
Holland  some  correct  ideas  as  to  American  affairs,
he  published  a  number  of  articles  in  the  Leyden
"Gazette  "and  in  a  magazine  entitled  "La  poli-
tique hollandaise  " ;  also  "  Twenty-six  Letters  upon
Interesting  Subjects  respecting  the  Revolution  in
America,"  now  reprinted  in  the  7th  volume  of  his-
works.  Soon  after  Adams's  arrival  in  Holland,
England  declared  war  against  the  Dutch,  ostensi-
bly because  of  a  proposed  treaty  of  commerce  with
the  United  States  in  which  the  burgomaster  of
Amsterdam  was  implicated  with  Henry  Ijaurens,.
but  really  because  Holland  had  joined  the  league
headed  by  the  empress  Catharine  of  Russia,  de-
signed to' protect  the  commerce  of  neutral  nations
and  known  as  the  armed  neutrality.  Laurens  had
been  sent  out  by  congress  as  minister  to  Holland  ;•
but,  as  he  had  been  captured  by  a  British  cruiser
and  taken  to  the  tower  of  London,  Mr.  Adams  was-
appointed  minister  in  his  place.  His  first  duty
was  to  sign,  as  representing  the  United  States,  the
articles  of  the  armed  neutrality.  Before  he  had
got  any  further,  indeed  before  he  had  been  recog-
nized as  minister  by  the  Dutch  government,  he  was-
called  back  to  Paris,  in  July,  1781,  in  order  to  be
ready  to  enter  upon  negotiations  for  peace  with
the  British  government.  Russia  and  Austria  had
volunteered  their  services  as  mediators  between
George  III.  and  the  Americans;  but  Lord  North's^
government  rejected  the  offer,  so  that  Mr.  Adam&
had  his  journey  for  nothing,  and  presently  went
back  to  Holland.  His  first  and  most  arduous  task
was  to  persuade  the  Dutch  government  to  recog-
nize him  as  minister  from  the  independent  United
States.  In  this  he  was  covertly  opposed  by  Ver-
gennes, who  wished  the  Americans  to  feel  exclu-
sively dependent  upon  France,  and  to  have  no-
other  friendships  or  alliances.  From  first  to  last
the  aid  extended  by  France  to  the  Americans  in
the  revolutionary  war  was  purely  selfish.  That
despotic  government  wished  no  good  to  a  people
struggling  to  preserve  the  immemorial  principles
of  English  liberty,  and  the  policy  of  Vergennes-
was  to  extend  just  enough  aid  to  us  to  enable  us  to
prolong  the  war,  so  that  colonies  and  mother  coim-
try  might  alike  be  weakened.  When  he  pretended
to  be  the  disinterested  friend  of  the  Americans,  he
professed  to  be  under  the  influence  of  sentiments-
that  he  did  not  really  feel ;  and  he  thus  succeeded
in  winning  from  congress  a  confidence  to  which  he
was  in  no  wise  entitled.  But  he  could  not  hood-
wink John  Adams,  who  wrote  home  that  the  duke
de  la  Vauguyon,  the  French  ambassador  at  the
Hague,  was  doing  everything  in  his  power  to  ob-
struct the  progress  of '  the  negotiations ;  and  in
this,  Adams  correctly  inferred,  he  was  acting  un-
der secret  instructions  from  Vergennes.  As  a  di-
plomatist Adams  was  in  a  certain  sense  Napole-
onic ;  he  introduced  new  and  strange  methods  of
warfare,  which  disconcerted  the  perfidious  in-
triguers of  the  old  school,  of  which  Vergennes  and
•  Talleyrand  were  typical  examples.  Instead  of
beating  about  the  bush  and  seeking  to  foil  trickery
by  trickery  (a  business  in  which  the  wily  French-
man would  doubtless  have  proved  more  than  his-
match),  he  went  straight  to  the  duke  de  la  Vau-
guyon and  bluntly  told  him  that  he  saw  plainly
what  he  was  up  to,  and  that  it  was  of  no  use,  since
"  no  advice  of  his  or  of  the  count  de  Vergennes,.
nor  even  a  requisition  from  the  king,  should  re-


ADAMS


ADAMS


19


strain  me."  The  duke  saw  that  Adams  meant  ex-
actly what  he  said,  and,  finding  that  it  was  useless
to  oppose  the  negotiations,  "  fell  in  with  me,  in
order  to  give  the  air  of  French  influence  "  to  them.
Events  worked  steadily  and  rapidly  in  Adams's
favor.  The  plunder  of  St.  Eustatius  early  in  1781
had  raised  the  wrath  of  the  Dutch  against  Great
Britain  to  fever  heat.  In  November  came  tidings
of  the  surrender  of  Lord  Cornwallis.  By  this  time
Adams  had  published  so  many  articles  as  to  have
given  the  Dutch  some  idea  as  to  what  sort  of  peo-
ple the  Amei-icans  were.  He  had  some  months
before  presented  a  petition  to  the  states  general,
asking  them  to  recognize  him  as  minister  from  an
independent  nation.  With  his  wonted  boldness  he
now  demanded  a  plain  and  unambiguous  answer
to  this  petition,  and  followed  up  the  demand  by
visiting  the  representatives  of  the  several  cities  in
person  and  arguing  his  case.  As  the  reward  of
this  persistent  energy,  Mr.  Adams  had  the  pleasure
of  seeing  the  independence  of  the  United  States
formally  recognized  by  Holland  on  the  19th  of
April,  1782.  This  success  was  vigorously  followed
up.  A  Dutch  loan  of  $2,000,000  was  soon  negoti-
ated, and  on  the  7th  of  October  a  treaty  of  amity
and  commerce,  the  second  which  was  ratified  with
the  United  States  as  an  independent  nation,  was
signed  at  the  Hague.  This  work  in  Holland  was
the  fourth  signal  event  in  John  Adams's  career,
and,  in  view  of  the  many  obstacles  overcome,  he
was  himself  in  the  habit  of  referring  to  it  as  the
greatest  triumph  of  his  life.  "  One  thing,  thank
God !  is  certain,"  he  wrote ;  "  I  have  planted  the
American  standard  at  the  Hague.  There  let  it  wave
and  fly  in  triumph  over  Sir  Joseph  Yorke  and
British  pride.  I  shall  look  down  upon  the  flag-
staff with  pleasure  from  the  other  world."

Mr.  Adams  had  hardly  time  to  finish  this  work
when  his  presence  was  recjuired  in  Paris,  Negoti-
ations for  peace  with  Great  Britain  had  begun
some  time  before  in  conversations  between  Frank-
lin and  Richard  Oswald,  a  gentleman  whom  Lord
Shelburne  had  sent  to  Paris  for  the  purpose.  One
British  ministry  had  already  been  wrecked  through
these  negotiations,  and  affairs  had  dragged  along
slowly  amid  endless  difficulties.  The  situation  was
one  of  the  most  complicated  in  the  history  of  di-
plomacy, France  was  in  alliance  at  once  with
Spain  and  with  the  United  States,  and  her  treaty
obligations  to  the  one  were  in  some  respects  incon-
sistent with  her  treaty  obligations  to  the  other.
The  feeling  of  Spain  toward  the  United  States  was
intensely  hostile,  and  the  French  government  was
much  more  in  sympathy  with  the  former  than  with
the  latter.  On  the  other  hand,  the  new  British  gov-
ernment was  not  ill-disposed  toward  the  Americans,
and  was  extremely  ready  to  make  liberal  conces-
sions to  them  for  the  sake  of  thwarting  the  schemes
of  France.  In  the  background  stood  George  III.,
surly  and  irreconcilable,  hoping  that  the  negoti-
ations would  fail ;  and  amid  these  difficulties  they
doubtless  would  have  failed  had  not  all  the  parties
by  this  time  had  a  surfeit  of  bloodshed.  The  de-
signs of  the  French  government  were  first  sus-
pected by  John  Jay,  soon  after  his  arrival  in  Paris.
He  found  that  Vergennes  was  sending  a  secret
emissary  to  Lord  Shelburne  under  an  assumed
name ;  "he  ascertained  that  the  right  of  the  United
States  to  the  Mississippi  valley  was  to  be  denied  ;
and  he  got  hold  of  a  despatch  frojn  Marbois,  the
French  secretary  of  legation  at  Philadelphia,  to
Vergennes,  opposing  the  American  claim  to  the
Newfoundland  fisheries.  As  soon  as  Jay  learned
these  facts  he  proceeded,  without  the  knowledge
of  Franklin,  to  take  steps  toward  a  separate  nego-


tiation between  Great  Britain  and  the  United
States.  When  Adams  arrived  in  Paris,  Oct.  26,  he
coincided  with  Jay's  views,  and  the  two  together
overruled  Franklin.  Mr.  Adams's  behavior  at  this
time  was  quite  characteristic.  It  is  said  that  he
left  Vergennes  to  learn  of  his  arrival  through  the
newspapers.  It  was  certainly  some  time  before  he
called  upon  him,  and  he  took  occasion,  besides,  to
express  his  opinions  about  republics  and  monar-
chies in  terms  that  courtly  Frenchman  thought  very
rude.  Adams  agreed  with  Jay  that  Vergennes
should  be  kept  as  far  as  possible  in  the  dark  un-
til everything  was  completed,  and  so  the  negoti-
ation with  Great  Britain  went  on  separately.  The
annals  of  modern  diplomacy  have  afforded  few
stranger  spectacles.  With  the  indispensable  aid
of  France  we  had  just  got  the  better  of  England
in  fight,  and  now  we  proceeded  amicably  to  divide
territory  and  commercial  privileges  with  the  ene-
my, and  to  make  arrangements  in  which  our  not
too  friendly  ally  was  virtually  ignored.  In  this
way  the  United  States  secured  the  Mississippi  val-
ley, and  a  share  in  the  Newfoundland  fisheries,  not
as  a  privilege  but  as  a  right,  the  latter  result  be-
ing mainly  due  to  the  persistence  of  Mr,  Adams.
The  point  upon  which  the  British  commissioners
most  strongly  insisted  was  the  compensation  of
the  American  loyalists  for  the  hardships  they  had
suffered  during  the  war ;  but  this  the  American
commissioners  resolutely  refused.  The  most  they
could  be  prevailed  upon  to  allow  was  the  insertion
in  the  treaty  of  a  clause  to  the  effect  that  congress
should  recommend  to  the  several  state  governments
to  reconsider  their  laws  against  the  tories  and  to
give  these  unfortunate  persons  a  chance  to  recover
their  property.  In  the  treaty,  as  finally  arranged,
all  the  disputed  points  were  settled  in  favor  of  the
Americans ;  and,  the  United  States  being  thus  vir-
tually detached  from  the  alliance,  the  British  gov-
ernment was  enabled  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  de-
mands of  France  and  Spain  for  the  surrender  of
Gibraltar.  Vergennes  was  outgeneralled  at  every
turn.  On  the  part  of  the  Americans  the  treaty  of
1788  deserves  to  be  ranked  as  one  of  the  most  brill-
iant triumphs  of  modern  diplomacy.  Its  success
was  about  equally  due  to  Adams  and  to  Jay,  whose
courage  in  the  affair  was  equal  to  their  skill,  for
they  took  it  upon  themselves  to  disregard  the  ex-
plicit instructions  of  congress.  Ever  since  March,
1781,  Vergennes  had  been  intriguing  with  congress
through  his  minister  at  Philadelphia,  the  chevalier
de  la  Luzerne.  First  he  had  tried  to  get  Mr.  Ad-
ams recalled  to  America.  Failing  in  this,  he  had
played  his  part  with  such  dexterous  persistence  as
to  prevail  upon  congress  to  send  most  pusillani-
mous instructions  to  its  peace  commissioners.
They  were  instructed  to  undertake  nothmg  what-
ever in  the  negotiations  without  the  knowledge  and
concurrence  of  "  the  ministers  of  our  generous  ally,
the  king  of  France,"  that  is  to  say,  of  the  count  de
Vergennes;  and  they  were  to  govern  themselves
entirely  by  his  advice  and  opinion,  Franklin
would  have  followed  these  instructions;  Adams
and  Jay  deliberately  disobeyed  them,  and  earned
the  gratitude  of  their  countrymen  for  all  coming
time.  For  Adams's  share  in  this  grand  achieve-
ment it  must  certainly  be  cited  as  the  fifth  signal
event  in  his  career.

By  this  time  he  had  become  excessively  home-
sick, and  as  soon  as  the  treaty  was  arranged  he
asked  leave  to  resign  his  commissions  and  return
to  America,  He  declared  he  would  rather  be
"  carting  street-dust  and  marsh-mud  "  than  wait-
ing where  he  was.  But  business  would  not  let  him
go. In  September,  1783, he  was  commissioned,


20


ADAMS


ADAMS


along  with  Franklin  and  Jay,  to  negotiate  a  com-
mercial treaty  with  Great  Britain.  A  sudden  and
violent  fever  prostrated  him  for  several  weeks,
after  which  he  visited  London  and  Bath.  Before
he  had  fully  recovered  his  health  he  learned  that
his  presence  was  required  in  Holland.  In  those
days,  when  we  lived  under  the  articles  of  confedera-
tion, and  congress  found  it  impossible  to  raise
money  enough  to  meet  its  current  expenses,  it  was
by  no  means  unusual  for  the  superintendent  of
finance  to  draw  upon  our  foreign  ministers  and
then  sell  the  drafts  for  cash.  This  was  done  again
and  again,  when  there  was  not  the  smallest  ground
for  supposing  that  the  minister  upon  whom  the
draft  was  made  would  have  any  funds  wherewith
to  meet  it.  It  was  part  of  his  duty  as  envoy  to  go
and  beg  the  money.  Early  in  the  winter  Mr.
Adams  learned  that  drafts  upon  him  had  been
presented  to  his  bankers  in  Amsterdam  to  the
amount  of  more  than  a  million  florins.  Less  than
half  a  million  florins  were  on  hand  to  meet  these
demands,  and,  unless  something  were  done  at  once,
the  greater  part  of  this  paper  would  go  back  to
America  protested.  Mr.  Adams  lost  not  a  moment
in  starting  for  Holland,  but  he  was  delayed  by  a
succession  of  terrible  storms  on  the  German  ocean,
and  it  was  only  after  fifty-four  days  of  difficulty
and  danger  that  he  reached  Amsterdam.  The
bankers  had  contrived  to  keep  thj3  drafts  from  go-
ing to  protest,  but  news  of  the  bickei'ings  between
the  thirteen  states  had  reached  Holland.  It  was
believed  that  the  new  nation  was  going  to  pieces,
and  the  regency  of  Amsterdam  had  no  money  to
lend  it.  The  promise  of  the  American  govern-
ment was  not  regarded  as  valid  security  for  a  sum
equivalent  to  about  |800,000.  Adams 'was  obliged
to  apj)ly  to  professional  usurers,  from  whom,  after
more  humiliating  perplexity,  he  succeeded  in  ob-
taining a  loan  at  exorbitant  interest.  In  the  mean-
time he  had  been  appointed  commissioner,  along
with  Franklin  and  Jefferson,  for  the  general  pur-
pose of  negotiating  commercial  treaties  with  for-
eign powers.  As  his  return  to  America  was  thus
indefinitely  postponed,  he  sent  for  his  wife,  with
their  only  daughter  and  youngest  son,  to  come  and
join  him  in  France,  where  the  two  elder  soris  were
already  with  him.  In  the  summer  of  1784  the
family  was  thus  re-united,  and  began  house-keep-
ing at  Auteuil,  near  Paris.  A  treaty  was  success-
fuUv  negotiated  with  Prussia,  but,  before  it  was
i-eafly  to  be  signed,  Mr.  Adams  was  appointed
minister  to  the  court  of  St.  James,  and  arrived  in
London  in  May,  1785.  He  was  at  first  politely  re-
ceived by  George  III.,  upon  whom  his  bluff  and
fearless  (lignity  of  manner  made  a  considerable
impression.  His  stay  in  England  was,  however,
far  from  pleasant.  The  king  came  to  treat  him
with  coldness,  sometimes  with  rudeness,  and  the
royal  example  was  followed  by  fashionable  soci-
ety. The  American  govenmient  was  losing  credit
at  home  and  abroad.  It  was  unable  to  fulfil  its
treaty  engagements  as  to  the  payment  of  private
debts  due  to  British  creditors,  and  as  to  the  pro-
tection of  the  loyalists.  The  British  government,
in  retaliation,  refused  to  surrender  the  western
posts  of  Ogdensburg,  Oswego,  Niagara,  Erie,
Sandusky,  Detroit,  and  Mackinaw,  which  by  the
treaty  were  to  be  pronijitly  given  up  to  the  United
States.  Still  more,  it  refused  to  make  any  treaty  of
commerce  with  the  United  States,  and  neglected  to
send  any  minister  to  represent  Great  Britain  in
this  country.  It  was  generally  supposed  in  Europe
that  the  American  government  would  presently
come  to  an  end  in  general  anarchy  and  bloodshed':
and  it  was  believed  by  George  111.  and  the  nar-


row -  minded  politicians,  such  as  Lord  Sheffield,
upon  whose  cooperation  he  relied,  that,  if  sufficient
obstacles  could  be  thrown  in  the  way  of  American
commerce  to  cause  serious  distress  in  this  country,
the  United  States  would  repent  of  their  indepen-
dence and  come  straggling  back,  one  after  another,
to  their  old  allegiance.  Under  such  circumstances-
it  was  impossible  for  Mr.  Adams  to  accomplish
much  as  minister  in  England.  During  his  stay
there  he  wrote  his  "  Defence  of  the  American  Con-
stitutions," a  work  which  afterward  subjected  him
at  home  to  ridiculous  charges  of  monarchical  and
anti-republican  sympathies.  The  object  of  the
book  was  to  set  forth  the  advantages  of  a  division
of  the  powers  of  government,  and  especially  of
the  legislative  body,  as  opposed  to  the  scheme  of
a  single  legislative  chamber,  which  was  advocated
by  many  writers  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  The
argument  is  encumbered  by  needlessly  long  and
sometimes  hardly  relevant  discussions  on  the  his-
tory of  the  Italian  republics.

Finding  the  British  government  utterly  stub-
born and  impracticable,  Mr.  Adams  asked  to  be  re-
called, and  his  request  was  granted  in  February,
1788.  For  the  "  patriotism,  perseverance,  integrity,
and  diligence  "  displayed  in  his  ten  years  of  service
abroad  he  received  the  public  thanks  of  congress.
He  had  no  sooner  reached  home  than  he  was
elected  a  delegate  from  Massachusetts  to  the  mori-
bund continental  congress,  but  that  body  expired
before  he  had  taken  his  seat  in  it.  During  the
summer  the  ratification  of  the  new  constitution
was  so  far  completed  that  it  could  be  put  into
operation,  and  public  attention  was  absorbed  in
the  work  of  organizing  the  new  government.  As
Washington  was  imanimously  selected  for  the
office  of  president,  it  was  natural  that  the  vice-
president  should  be  taken  from  Massachusetts.
The  candidates  for  the  presidency  and  vice-presi-
dency were  voted  for  without  any  separate  specifi-
cation, the  second  office  falling  to  the  candidate
who  obtained  the  second  highest  number  of  votes
in  the  electoral  college.  Of  the  69  electoral  votes,
all  were  registered  for  Washington,  34  for  John
Adams,  who  stood  second  on  the  list ;  the  other  35
votes  were  scattered  among  a  number  of  candi-
dates. Adams  was  somewhat  chagrined  at  this
marked  preference  shown  for  Washington.  His
chief  foible  was  enormous  personal  vanity,  be-
sides which  he  was  much  better  fitted  by  tempera-
ment and  training  to  appreciate  the  kind  of  work
that  he  had  himself  done  than  the  military  work
by  which  Washington  had  won  independence  for
the  United  States.  He  never  could  quite  under-
stand how  or  why  the  services  rendered  by  Wash-
ington were  so  much  more  important  than  his
own.  The  office  of  vice-president  was  then  more
highly  esteemed  than  it  afterward  came  to  be,  but
it  was  hardly  suited  to  a  man  of  Mr.  Adams's  vig-
orous and  aggressive  temper.  In  one  respect,
however,  he  performed  a  more  important  part
while  holding  that  office  than  any  of  his  successors.
In  the  earlier  sessions  of  the  senate  there  was  hot
debate  over  the  vigorous  measures  by  which  Wash-
ington's administration  was  seeking  to  reestablish
American  credit  and  enlist  the  conservative  inter-
ests of  the  wealthier  citizens  in  behalf  of  the  sta-
bility of  the  government.  These  measures  were
for  the  most  part  opposed  by  the  persons  who
were  rapidly  becoming  organized  under  Jeffer-
son's leadership  into  the  republican  party,  the
opposition  being  mainly  due  to  dread  of  the  pos-
sible evil  consequences  that  might  flow  from  too
great  an  increase  of  power  in  the  federal  gov-
ernment. In  these  debates the  senate  was  very


ADAMS


ADAMS


21


evenly  divMed,  and  Mr.  Adams,  as  presidinja:  offi-
cer of  that  body,  was  often  enabled  to  decide  the
question  by  his  casting  vote.  In  the  first  con-
gress he  gave  as  many  as  twenty  casting  votes
upon  questions  of  most  vital  importance  to  the
whole  subsequent  history  of  the  American  people,
and  on  all  these  occasions  he  supported  Washing-
ton's policy.  During  Washington's  administra-
tion grew  up  the  division  into  the  two  great  parties
which  have  remained  to  this  day  in  American  poli-
tics— the  one  known  as  federalist,  afterward  as
whig,  then  as  republican ;  the  other  known  at  first
as  republican  and  afterward  as  democratic.  John
Adams  was  by  his  mental  and  moral  constitution
a  federalist.  He  believed  in  strong  government.
To  the  opposite  party  he  seemed  much  less  a  demo-
crat than  an  aristocrat.  In  one  of  his  essays  he
provoked  great  popular  wrath  by  using  the  phrase
"  the  well-born."  He  knew  very  well  that  in  point  of
hereditary  capacity  and  advantages  men  are  not
equal  and  never  will  be.  His  notion  of  democratic
equality  meant  that  all  men  should  have  equal
rights  in  the  eye  of  the  law.  There  was  nothing
of  the  communist  or  leveller  about  him.  He  be-
lieved in  the  rightful  existence  of  a  governing
class,  which  ought  to  be  kept  at  the  head  of  affairs  ;
and  he  was  supposed,  probably  with  some  truth,  to
have  a  predilection  for  etiquette,  titles,  gentlemen-
in-waiting,  and  such  things.  Such  views  did  not
make  him  an  aristocrat  in  the  true  sense  of  tiie
word,  for  in  nowise  did  he  believe  that  the  right
to  a  place  in  the  governing  class  should  be  herit-
able ;  it  was  something  to  be  won  by  personal
merit,  and  should  not  be  withheld  by  any  artificial
enactments  from  the  lowliest  of  men,  to  whom  the
chance  of  an  illustrious  career  ouglit  to  be  just  as
much  open  as  to  "  the  well-born."  At  the  same
time  John  Adams  differed  from  Jefferson  and
from  his  cousin,  Samuel  Adams,  in  distrusting  the
masses.  All  the  federalist  leaders  shared  this  feel-
ing more  or  less,  and  it  presently  became  the  chief
source  of  weakness  to  the  party.  The  disagree-
ment between  John  Adams  and  Jefferson  was
first  brought  into  prominence  by  the  breaking  out
of  the  French  revolution.  Mr.  Adams  expected
little  or  no  good  from  this  movement,  which  was
like  the  American  movement  in  no  respect  what-
ever except  in  being  called  a  revolution.  He  set
forth  his  views  on  this  subject  in  his  "  Discourses
on  Davila,"  which  were  published  in  a  Philadelphia
newspaper.  Taking  as  his  text  Davila's  history  of
the  civil  wars  in  France  in  the  IGth  century,  he
argued  powerfully  that  a  pure  democracy  was  not
the  best  form  of  government,  but  that  a  certain
mixture  of  the  aristocratic  and  monarchical  ele-
ments was  necessary  to  the  permanent  mainten-
ance of  free  government.  Such  a  mixture  really
exists  in  the  constitution  of  the  United  States,  and,
in  the  opinion  of  many  able  thinkers,  constitutes
its  peculiar  excellence  and  the  best  guarantee  of
its  stability.  These  views  gave  great  umbrage  to
the  extreme  democrats,  and  in  the  election  of  1792
they  set  up  George  Clinton,  of  New  York,  as  a
rival  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency ;  but  when
the  votes  were  counted  Adams  had  77,  Clinton
50,  Jefferson  4,  and  Aaron  Burr  1.  During  this
administration  Adams,  by  his  casting  vote,  de-
feated the  attempt  of  the  republicans  to  balk
Jay's  mission  to  England  in  advance  by  a  resolu-
tion entirely  prohibiting  trade  with  that  country.
For  a  time  Adams  quite  forgot  his  jealousy  of
Washington  in  admiration  for  the  heroic  strength
of  purpose  with  which  he  pursued  his  policy  of
neutrality  amid  the  furious  efforts  of  political  par-
tisans to  drag  the  United  States  into  a  rash  and


desperate armed struggle in support either  of
B>ance  or  of  England.

In  179G,  as  Washington  refused  to  serve  for  a
third  term,  John  Adams  seemed  clearly  marked
out  as  federalist  candidate  for  the  succession.
Hamilton  and  Jay  were  in  a  certain  sense  his  ri-
vals ;  but  Jay  was  for  the  moment  unpopular  be-
cause of  the  famous  treaty  that  he  had  lately  nego-
tiated with  England,  and  Hamilton,  although  the
ablest  man  in  the  federalist  party,  was  still  not  so
conspicuous  in  the  eyes  of  the  masses  of  voters  as
Adams,  who  besides  was  surer  than  any  one  else
of  the  indispensable  New  England  vote.  Having
decided  upon  Adams  as  first  candidate,  it  seemed
desirable  to  take  the  other  from  a  southern  state,
and  the  choice  fell  upon  Thomas  Pinckney,  of
South  Carolina,  a  younger  brother  of  Charles
Cotesworth  Pinckney.  Hamilton  now  began  to
scheme  against  Mr.  Adams  in  a  manner  not  at  all
to  his  credit.  Pie  had  always  been  jealous  of  Ad-
ams because  of  his  stubborn  and  independent
character,  which  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  be
subservient  to  a  leader.  There  was  not  room
enough  in  one  political  party  for  two  such  positive
and  aggressive  characters.  Already  in  the  election
of  1788  Hamilton  had  contrived  to  diminish
Adams's  vote  by  persuading  some  electors  of  the
possible  danger  of  a  unanimous  and  therefore
equal  vote  for  him  and  Washington.  Such  advice
could  not  have  been  candid,  for  there  was  never
the  smallest  possibility  of  a  unanimous  vote  for
Mr.  Adams.  Now  in  1796  he  resorted  to  a  similar
stratagem.  The  federalists  were  likely  to  win  the
election,  but  had  not  many  votes  to  spare ;  the
contest  was  evidently  going  to  be  close.  Hamil-
ton accordingly  urged  the  federalist  electors,  espe-
cially in  New  England,  to  cast  all  their  votes  alike
for  Adams  and  Pinckney,  lest  the  loss  of  a  single
vote  by  either  one  should  give  the  victory  to  Jef-
ferson, upon  whom  the  opposite  party  was  clearly
united.  Should  Adams  and  Pinckney  receive  an
exactly  equal  number  of  votes,  it  would  remain  for
a  federalist  congress  to  decide  which  should  be
president.  The  result  of  the  election  showed  71
votes  for  John  Adams,  68  for  Jefferson,  59  for
Pinckney,  30  for  Burr,  15  for  Samuel  Adams,  and
the  rest  scattering.  Two  electors  obstinately  per-
sisted in  voting  for  Washmgton.  When  it  ap-
peared that  Adams  had  only  three  more  votes  than
Jefferson,  who  secured  the  second  place  instead  of
Pinckney,  it  seemed  on  the  surface  as  if  Hamilton's
advice  had  been  sound.  But  from  the  outset  it
had  been  clear  (and  no  one  knew  it  better  than
Hamilton)  that  several  southern  federalists  would
withhold  their  votes  from  Adams  in  order  to  give
the  presidency  to  Pinckney,  always  supposing  that
the  New  England  electors  could  be  depended  upon
to  vote  equally  for  both.  The  purpose  of  Hamil-
ton's advice  was  to  make  Pinckney  president  and
Adams  vice-president,  in  opposition  to  the  wishes
of  their  party.  This  purpose  was  suspected  in
New  England,  and  while  some  of  the  southern
federalists  voted  for  Pinckney  and  Jefferson,  eight-
een New  Englanders,  in  voting  for  Adams,  with-
held their  votes  from  Pinckney.  The  result  was
the  election  of  a  federalist  president  w^th  a  republi-
can vice-president.  In  case  of  the  death,  disability,
or  removal  of  the  president,  the  administration
would  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  opposite  party.
Clearly  a  mode  of  election  that  presented  such
temptations  to  intrigue,  and  left  so  much  to  acci-
dent, was  vicious  and  could  not  last  long.  These
proceedings  gave  rise  to  a  violent  feud  between
John  Adams  and  Alexander  Hamilton,  which  end-
ed in  breaking  up  the  federalist  party,  and  has  left


22


ADAMS


ADAMS


a  legacy  of  bitter  feelings  to  the  descendants  of
those  illustrious  men.

The  presidency  of  John  Adams  was  stormy.
We  were  entering  upon  that  period  when  our
party  strife  was  determined  rather  by  foreign  than
by  American  political  issues,  when  England  and
France,  engaged  in  a  warfare  of  Titans,  took  every
occasion  to  browbeat  and  insult  us  because  we
were  supposed  to  be  too  feeble  to  resent  such  treat-
ment. The  revolutionary  government  of  France
had  claimed  that,  in  accordance  with  our  treaty
with  that  country,  we  were  bound  to  support  her
against  Great  Britain,  at  least  so  far  as  concerned
the  defence  of  the  French  West  Indies.  The  re-
publican party  went  almost  far  enough  in  their
sympathy  with  the  French  to  concede  these  claims,
which,  if  admitted  by  our  government,  would  im-
mediately have  got  us  into  war  with  England.  On
the  other  hand,  the  hatred  felt  toward  France  by
the  extreme  federalists  was  so  bitter  that  any  in-
sult from  that  power  was  enough  to  incline  them
to  advocate  war  against  her  and  in  behalf  of  Eng-
land. Washington,  in  defiance  of  all  popular
clamor,  adhered  to  a  policy  of  strict  neutrality,  and
in  this  he  was  resolutely  followed  by  Adams.  The
American  government  was  thus  obliged  carefully
and  with  infinite  difficulty  to  steer  between  Scylla
and  Charybdis  until  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon
and  our  naval  victories  over  England  in  1812-'14
put  an  end  to  this  humiliating  state  of  things.
Under  Washington's  administration  Gouverneur
Morris  liad  been  for  some  time  minister  to  France,
but  he  was  greatly  disliked  by  the  anarchical  group
that  then  misruled  that  country.  To  avoid  giving
offence  to  the  French  republic,  Washington  had
recalled  Morris  and  sent  James  Monroe  in  his
place,  with  instructions  to  try  to  reconcile  the
French  to  Jay's  mission  to  England.  Instead  of
doing  this,  Monroe  encouraged  the  French  to  hope
that  Jay's  treaty  would  not  be  ratified,  and  Wash-
ington accordingly  recalled  him  and  sent  Cotes-
worth  Pinckney  in  his  place.  Enraged  at  the
ratification  of  Jay's  treaty,  the  French  government
not  only  gave  a  brilliant  ovation  to  Monroe,  but
refused  to  receive  Pinckney,  and  would  not  even
allow  him  to  stay  in  Paris.  At  the  same  time,
decrees  were  passed  discriminating  against  Ameri-
can commerce.  Mr.  Adams  was  no  sooner  inaugu-
rated as  president  than  he  called  an  extra  session
of  congress,  to  consider  how  war  with  France
should  be  avoided.  It  was  decided  to  send  a  spe-
cial commission  to  France,  consisting  of  Cotes-
worth  Pinckney,  John  Marshall,  and  Elbridge
Gerry.  The  directory  would  not  acknowledge  these
commissioners  and  treat  with  them  openly;  but
Talleyrand,  who  was  then  secretary  for  foreign
aftairs,  sent  some  of  his  creatures  to  intrigue  with
them  behind  the  scenes.  It  was  proposed  that  the
envoys  should  pay  large  sums  of  money  to  Tallev-
rand  and  two  or  three  of  the  directors,  as  bribes,
for  dealing  politely  with  the  United  States  and
refraining  from  locking  up  American  ships  and
stealing  American  goods.  When  the  envoys  scorn-
fully rejected  this  proposal,  a  new  decree  was  forth-
with issued  against  American  commerce.  The  en-
voys drew  up  an  indignant  remonstrance,  which
Gerry  iiesitated  to  sign.  Wearied  with  their  fruit-
less efforts,  Marshall  and  Pinckney  left  Paris.  But,
as  Gerry  was  a  republican,  Talleyrand  thought  it
worth  while  to  persuade  him  to  stay,  hoping  that
he  might  prove  more  compliant  than'his  colleagues.
In  March,  1798,  Mr.  Adams  announced  to  congress
the  failure  of  the  mission,  and  advised  that  the
preparations  already  begun  should  be  kept  up  in
view  of  the  war  that  now  seemed  almost  inevitable.


A  furious  debate  ensued,  which  was  interrupted  by
a  motion  from  the  federalist  side,  calling  on  the
president  for  full  copies  of  the  despatches.  Noth-
ing could  have  suited  Mr.  Adams  better.  He  im-
mediately sent  in  copies  complete  in  everything
except  that  the  letters  X.,  Y.,  and  Z.  were  substi-
tuted for  the  names  of  Talleyrand's  emissaries.
Hence  these  papers  have  ever  since  been  known  as
the  "  X.  Y.  Z.  despatches."  On  the  8th  of  April
the  senate  voted  to  publish  these  despatches,  and
they  aroused  great  excitement  both  in  Europe  and
in  America.  The  British  government  scattered
them  broadcast  over  Europe,  to  stir  up  indignation
against  France.  In  America  a  great  storm  of
wrath  seemed  for  the  moment  to  have  wrecked  the
republican  party.  Those  who  were  not  converted
to  federalism  were  for  the  moment  silenced.  From
all  quarters  came  up  the  war-cry,  "Millions  for
defence  ;  not  one  cent  for  tribute."  A  few  excel-
lent frigates  were  built,  the  nucleus  of  the  gallant
little  navy  that  was  by  and  by  to  win  such  tri-
umphs over  England.  An  army  was  raised,  and
Washington  was  placed  in  command,  with  the
rank  of  lieutenant-general.  Gerry  was  recalled
from  France,  and  the  press  roundly  berated  him
for  showing  less  firmness  than  his  colleagues,
though  indeed  he  had  not  done  anything  dishonor-
able. During  this  excitement  the  song  of  "  Hail,
Columbia"  was  published  and  became  popular.
On  the  4th  of  July  the  effigy  of  Talleyrand,  who
had  once  been  bishop  of  Autun,  was  arrayed  in  a
surplice  and  burned  at  the  stake.  The  president
was  authorized  to  issue  letters  of  marque  and  re-
prisal, and  for  a  time  war  with  France  actually
existed,  though  it  was  never  declared.  In  Febru-
ary, 1799,  Capt.  Truxtun,  in  the  frigate  "  Constel-
lation," defeated  and  captured  the  French  frigate
"  L'Insurgente  "  near  the  island  of  St.  Christopher.
In  February,  1800,  the  same  gallant  officer  in  a
desperate  battle  destroyed  the  frigate  "  La  Ven-
geance," which  was  much  his  superior  in  strength
of  armament.  When  the  directory  found  that  their
silly  and  infamous  policy  was  likely  to  drive  the
United  States  into  alliance  with  Great  Britain,
they  began  to  change  their  tactics.  Talleyrand
tried  to  crawl  out  by  disavowing  his  emissaries  X.
Y.  Z.,  and  pretending  that  the  American  envoys
had  been  imposed  upon  by  irresponsible  adventu-
rers. He  made  overtures  to  Vans  Murray,  the
American  minister  at  the  Hague,  tending  toward
reconciliation.  Mr.  Adams,  wliile  sharing  the
federalist  indignation  at  the  behavior  of  France,
was  too  clear-headed  not  to  see  that  the  only  safe
policy  for  the  United  States  was  one  of  strict  neu-
trality. He  was  resolutely  determined  to  avoid
war  if  possible,  and  to  meet  France  half-way  the
moment  she  should  show  symptoms  of  a  return  to
reason.  His  cabinet  were  so  far  under  Hamil-
ton's influence  that  he  could  not  rely  upon  them  ;
indeed,  he  had  good  reason  to  suspect  them  of
working  against  him.  Accordingly,  without  con-
sulting his  cabinet,  on  18  Feb.,  1799,  he  sent  to  the
senate  the  nomination  of  Vans  Murray  as  minister
to  France.  This  bold  step  precipitated  the  quar-
rel between  Mr.  Adams  and  his  party,  and  during
the  year  it  grew  fiercer  and  fiercer.  He  joined
Ellsworth,  of  Connecticut,  and  Davie,  of  North
Carolina,  to  Vans  Murray  as  commissioners,  and
awaited  the  assurance  of  Talleyrand  that  they
would  be  properly  received  at  Paris.  On  receiving
this  assurance,  though  it  was  couched  in  rather
insolent  language  by  the  baffled  Frenchman,  the
commissioners  sailed  Nov.  5.  On  reaching  Paris,
they  found  the  directory  ovei-turned  by  Napoleon,
with  whom  as  first  consul  they  succeeded  in  ad-


ADAMS


ADAMS


23


justing  the  difficulties. This  French  mission  com-

K"  leted  tlie  split  in  the  federalist  party,  and  made
Ir.  Adams's  reelection  impossible.  The  quarrel
with  the  Hamilton ians  had  been  further  embittered
■by  Adams's  foolish  attempt  to  prevent  Hamilton's
obtaining  the  rank  of  senior  major-general,  for
which  Washington  had  designated  him,  and  it
rose  to  fever-heat  in  the  spring  of  1800,  when  Mr.
Adams  dismissed  his  cabinet  and  selected  a  new
one.  Another  affair  contributed  largely  to  the
downfall  of  the  federalist  party.  In  1798,  during
the  height  of  the  popular  fury  against  France,  the
federalists  in  congress  presumed  too  much  upon
their  strength,  and  passed  the  famous  alien  and
sedition  acts.  By  the  first  of  these  acts,  aliens
were  rendered  liable  to  summary  banishment  from
the  United  States  at  the  sole  discretion  of  the
president ;  and  any  alien  who  should  venture  to
return  from  such  banishment  was  liable  to  im-
prisonment at  hard  labor  for  life.  By  the  sedition
.act  any  scandalous  or  malicious  writing  against
the  president  or  either  house  of  congress  was  liable
to  be  dealt  with  in  the  United  States  courts  and
punished  by  fine  and  imprisonment.  This  act  con-
travened the  constitutional  amendment  that  for-
bids all  infringement  of  freedom  of  speech  and  of
the  press,  and  both  acts  aroused  more  widespread
indignation  than  any  others  that  have  ever  passed
in  congress.  They  called  forth  from  the  southern
republicans  the  famous  Kentucky  and  Virginia
resolutions  of  1798-99,  which  assert,  though  in
language  open  to  some  latitude  of  interpretation,
the  right  of  a  state  to  "  nullify  "  or  impede  the
execution  of  a  law  deemed  unconstitutional.

In  the  election  of  1800  the  federalist  votes  were
given  to  John  Adams  and  Cotesworth  Pinckney,
and  the  republican  votes  to  Jefferson  and  Burr.
The  count  showed  65  votes  for  Adams,  64  for
Pinckney,  and  1  for  Jay,  while  Jefferson  and  Burr
had  each  73,  and  the  election  was  thus  thrown  into
the  house  of  representatives.  Mr.  Adams  took  no
part  in  the  intrigues  that  followed.  His  last  con-
siderable public  act,  in  appointing  John  Marshall
to  the  chief  justiceship  of  the  Unitfed  States,  turned
out  to  be  of  inestimable  value  to  the  country,  and
was  a  worthy  end  to  a  great  public  career.  Very
different,  and  quite  unworthy  of  such  a  man  as
John  Adams,  was  the  silly  and  puerile  fit  of  rage
in  which  he  got  up  before  daybreak  of  the  4th  of
March  and  started  in  his  coach  for  Massachusetts,
instead  of  waiting  to  see  the  inauguration  of  his  suc-
cessful rival.  On  several  occasions  John  Adams's
career  shows  us  striking  examples  of  the  demoraliz-
ing effects  of  stupendous  personal  vanity,  but  on
no  occasion  more  strikingly  than  this.  He  went
home  with  a  feeling  that  he  had  been  disgraced  by
his  failure  to  secure  a  reelection.  Yet  in  estimat-
ing his  character  we  must  not  forget  that  in  his
resolute  insistence  upon  the  French  mission  of
1799  he  did  not  stop  for  a  moment  to  weigh  the
probable  effect  of  his  action  upon  his  chances  for
reelection.  He  acted  as  a  true  patriot,  ready  to
sacrifice  himself  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,
never  regretted  the  act,  and  always  maintained  that
it  was  the  most  meritorious  of  his  life.  "  I  desire,"
he  said,  "  no  other  inscription  ov^er  my  grave-stone
than  this:  Here  lies  John  Adams,  who  took  upon
himself  the  responsibility  of  the  peace  with  France
in  the  year  1800."  He  was  entirely  right,  as  all
disinterested  writers  now  agree.

After  so  long  and  brilliant  a  career,  he  now
passed  a  quarter  of  a  century  in  his  home  at  Quincy
{as  that  part  of  Braintree  was  now  called)  in  peace-
ful and  happy  seclusion,  devoting  himself  to  liter-
ary work  relating  to  thie  history  of  his  times. In


1820  the  aged  statesman  was  chosen  delegate  to  the
convention  for  revising  the  constitution  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  labored  unsuccessfully  to  obtain  an
acknowledgment  of  the  equal  rights,  political  and
religious,  of  others  tlian  so-called  Christians.  His
friendship  with  Jefferson,  which  had  been  broken
off  by  their  political  differences,  was  resumed  in  his
old  age,  and  an  interesting  correspondence  was  kept
up  between  the  two.  As  a  writer  of  English,  Jolui
Adams  in  many  respects  surpassed  all  his  Ameri-
can contemporaries ;  his  style  was  crisp,  pungent,
and  vivacious.  In  person  lie  was  of  middle  height,
vigorous,  florid,  and  somewhat  corpulent,  quite
like  the  typical  John  Bull.  He  was  always  truth-
ful and  outspoken,  often  vehement  and  brusque.
Vanity  and  loquacity,  as  he  freely  admitted,  were
his  chief  foibles.  Without  being  quarrelsome,  he
had  little  or  none  of  the  tact  that  avoids  quarrels ;
but  he  harbored  no  malice,  and  his  anger,  though
violent,  was  short-lived.  Among  American  public
men  there  has  been  none  more  upright  and  honora-
ble. He  lived  to  see  his  son  president  of  the  United
States,  and  died  on  the  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the
declaration  of  independence  and  in  the  ninety-first
year  of  his  age.  His  last  words  were,  "  Thomas
Jefferson  still  survives."  But  by  a  remarkable  co-
incidence, Jefferson  had  died  a  few  hours  earlier
the  same  day.  See  "  Life  and  Works  of  John  Ad-
ams," by  C.  F.  Adams  (10  vols.,  Boston,  18o0-'o6);
"  Life  of  John  Adams,"  by  J.  Q.  and  C.  F.  Adams
(2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1871);  and  "John  Adams,"
by  J.  T.  Morse,  Jr.  (Boston,  1885).

The  portrait  that  forms  the  frontispiece  of  this
volume  is  from  a  painting  by  Gilbert  Stuart,  which
was  executed  while  Mr.  Adams  was  president  and
is  now  in  the  possession  of  his  grandson.  The  one
on  page  16  was  taken  when  he  was  a  youth.  The
houses  represented  on  page  15  are  those  in  which
President  John  Adams  and  his  son  John  Quincy
Adams  were  born.

ADAMS,  John,  educator,  son  of  a  revolutionary
officer  of  the  same  name,  b.  in  Canterbury,  Conn.,
18  Sept.,  1772 ;  d.  24  April,  1863.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1795,  and  taught  for  three  years  at
the  academy  in  his  native  town.  In  1800  he  be-
came rector  of  Plainfield,  N.  J.,  academy,  and  in
1803  principal  of  Bacon  academy,  Colchester,  Conn.
In  June,  1810,  he  was  chosen  principal  of  Phillips
Andover  academy,  where  he  remained  for  twenty-
three  years,  and,  in  addition  to  his  regular  duties,
took  part  in  the  organization  of  several  of  the  great
charitable  associations  that  have  attained  national
importance.  He  resigned  his  office  in  1833,  and
went  to  Illinois,  where  he  established  several  hun-
dred Sunday-schools.  He  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  Yale  in  1854.

ADAMS,  John,  sailor,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  29
Nov.,  1796 ;  d.  in  Allston,  Mass.,  17  March,  1886.
He  was  the  last  survivor  of  all  who  witnessed  the
victory  gained  by  Hull  in  the  "  Constitution  "  over
Dacres  in  the  "Guerriere,"  19  Aug.,  1812.  He
was  subsequently  captured  and  confined  in  Dart-
moor prison  till  the  end  of  the  war.  For  nearly
half  a  century  afterward  he  followed  the  sea,  com-
manding soiiie  of  the  finest  merchantmen  that
sailed  from  Boston.

ADAMS,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Tennessee  in
1825;  killed  in  the  battle  of  Franklin,  Tenn.,  30
Nov.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in
1846,  and  joined  the  1st  dragoons.  He  was  bre-
vetted  1st  lieutenant  for  gallantry  at  Santa  Cruz
de  Resales,  Mexico,  16  March,  1848,  after  several
years  of  frontier  duty  was  promoted  to  1st  lieu-
tenant, 9  Oct.,  1851,  and  in  1853  served  as  aide  to
the  governor  of  Minnesota  with  the  rank  of  lieu-


24


ADAxMS


ADAMS


tenant-colonel.  He  was  promoted  captain  of  1st
dragoons,  80  Nov.,  185(5,  but  resigned  31  May,  1861,
and  became  a  confederate  major-general.

ADAMS,  John  F.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stratham,  N.
H.,  23  May,  1790;  d.  in  Greenland,  X.  II.,  11  June,
1881.  He"  began  to  preach  in  1812,  and  joined  the
New  England  Methodist  conference.  He  served  as
a  circuit  rider  in  the  backwoods  of  Maine,  and  so
distinguished  himself  by  zeal  and  ability  that  he
was  repeatedly  assigned  as  presiding  elder  to  im-
portant stations  at  Boston  and  Lynn,  and  the
larger  towns  of  eastern  New  England.  In  the
anti-slavery  agitation  he  took  a  prominent  part  in
favor  of  emancipation,  and  he  was  four  times  chosen
as  a  delegate  to  the  general  conference.

ADAMS,  John  (Juincy,  sixth  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Braintree,  Mass.,  11  July,
1767 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  23  Feb.,  1848.  He
was  named  for  his  mother's  grandfather,  John
Quiney.  In  his  eleventh  year  he  accompanied  his
father  to  France,  and  was  sent  to  school  near  Paris,
where  his  proficiency  in  the  French  language  and
other  studies  soon  became  conspicuous.  In  the
following  year  he  returned  to  America,  and  back
again  to  France  with  his  father,  whom,  in  August,
1780,  he  accompanied  to  Holland.  After  a  few
months  at  school  in  Amsterdam,  he  entered  the
university  of  Leyden.  Two  years  afterward  John
Adams's  secretary  of  legation,  Francis  Dana,  was
appointed  minister  to  Russia,  and  the  boy  accom-
panied him  as  private  secretary.  After  a  stay  of  four-
teen months,  as  Catharine's  government  refused  to
recognize  Mr.  Dana  as  minister,  young  Adams  left
St.  Petersburg  and  travelled  alone  through  Swe-
den, Denmark,  and  northern  Germany  to  France,
spending  six  months  in  the  journey.  Arriving  in
Paris,  he  found  his  father  busy  with  the  negotia-
tion of  the  treaty  of  peace  between  Great  Britain
and  the  United  States,  and  was  immediately  set  to
work  as  secretary,  and  aided  in  drafting  the  papers
that  "  dispersed  all  possible  doubt  of  the  indepen-
dence of  his  country."  In  1785,  when  his  father
was  appointed  minister  to  England,  he  decided  not
to  stay  with  him  in  London,  but  to  return  at  once
to  Massachusetts  in  order  to  complete  his  educa-
tion at  Harvard  college.  For  an  American  career
he  believed  an  American  education  to  be  best  fitted.
Considering  the  immediate  sacrifice  of  pleasure  in-
volved, it  was  a  remarkably  wise  decision  in  a  lad
of  eighteen.  But  Adams's  character  was  already
fully  formed  ;  he  was  what  he  remained  through-
out his  life,  a  Puritan  of  the  sternest  and  most  un-
compromising sort,  who  seemed  to  take  a  grim  en-
joyment in  the  performance  of  duty,  especially
when  disagreeable.  Returning  home,  lie  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  college  in  1788,  and  then  studied
law  in  the  office  of  Theophilus  Parsons,  afterward
chief  justice  of  Massachusetts.  In  1791  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  Suffolk  bar,  and  began  the  practice
of  law,  the  tedium  of  which  he  relieved  by  writing
occasional  articles  for  the  papers.  Under  the  sig-
nature of  "Publicola"  he  criticised  some  positions
taken  by  Thomas  Paine  in  his  "  Rights  of  Man  "  ;
and  these  articles,  when  republished  in  England,
were  generally  attributed  to  his  father.  In  a  fur-
ther series  of  papers,  signed  "  Marcellus,"  he  de-
fended Washington's  policy  of  neutrality;  and  in
a  thn-d  series,  signed  "  Columbus,"  he  discussed  the
extraordinary  behavior  of  Citizen  Genet,  whom  the
Jacobins  had  sent  over  to  browbeat  the  Americans
mto  joining  France  in  hurling  defiance  at  the
world.  These  writings  made  him  so  conspicuous
tha^t^in  1794  Washington  appointed  him  minister
to  Holland,  and  two  years  later  made  an  appoint-
ment transferring  him  to  Portugal. Before  he  had


started  for  the  latter  country  his  father  became
president  of  the  United  States  and  asked  Washing-
ton's advice  as  to  the  propriety  of  promoting  his
own  son  by  sending  him  to  Berlin.  Washington
in  strong  terms  recommended  the  promotion,  de-
claring that  in  his  opinion  the  young  man  would
prove  to  be  the  ablest  diplomat  in  the  American
service.  In  the  fall  of  1797  Mr.  Adams  according-
ly took  up  his  residence  at  the  capital  of  Prussia.
Shortly  before  this  he  had  married  Miss  Louisa
Johnson,  a  niece  of  Thomas  Johnson,  of  Maryland.
During  his  residence  at  Berlin  Mr.  Adams  "trans-
lated Wieland's  "  Oberon  "  into  English.  In  1798
he  was  commissioned  to  make  a  commercial  treaty
with  Sweden.  In  1800  he  made  a  journey  through
Silesia,  and  wrote  an  account  of  it,  which  was  pub-
lished in  London  and  afterward  translated  into
German  and  French.  When  Jefferson  became  presi-
dent, Mr.  Adams's  mission  terminated.  He  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law  in  Boston,  but  in  1802
was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  senate,  and  next
year  was  chosen  to  the  senate  of  the  United  States
instead  of  Timothy  Pickering.  The  federalist  party
was  then  rent  in  twain  by  the  feud  between  the
partisans  of  John  Adams  and  those  of  Hamilton,
and  the  reception  of  the  younger  Adams  in  the
senate  was  far  from  flattering.  Affairs  grew  worse
when,  at  the  next  vacancy,  Pickering  was  chosen  to
be  his  uncongenial  colleague.  Mr.  Adams  was
grossly  and  repeatedly  insulted.  Any  motion  he
might  make  was  sure  to  be  rejected  by  the  com-
bined votes  of  republicans  and  Hamiltonians,
though  frequently  the  same  motion,  made  soon  af-
terward by  somebody  else,  would  be  carried  by  a
large  majority.  A  committee  of  which  he  was  a
member  would  make  and  send  in  its  report  with-
out even  notifying  him  of  its  time  and  place  of
meeting.  At  first  Mr.  Adams  was  subjected  to
such  treatment  merely  because  he  was  the  son  of
his  father ;  but  presently  he  rendered  himself  more
and  more  amenable  to  it  by  manifesting  the  same
independence  of  party  ties  that  had  made  his
father  so  unpopular,  independence  in  politics  has
always  been  characteristic  of  the  Adams  family,
and  in  none  has  this  been  more  strongly  marked
than  in  John  Quiney  Adams.  His  first  serious  dif-
ference with  the  federalist  party  was  occasioned  by
his  qualified  approval  of  Jefferson's  purchase  of
Louisiana,  a  measure  that  was  bitterly  opposed  and
fiercely  censured  by  nearly  all  the  federalists,  be-
cause it  was  feared  "it  would  add  too  much  strength
to  the  south.  A  much  more  serious  difference  arose
somewhat  later,  on  the  question  of  the  embargo.
Questions  of  foreign  rather  than  of  domestic  policy
then  furnished  the  burning  subjects  of  contention
in  the  United  States.  Our  neutral  commerce  on
the  high  seas,  which  had  risen  to  very  considerable
proportions,  was  plundered  in  turn  by  England  and
by  France,  until  its  very  existence  was  threatened.
In  May,  1806,  the  British  government  declared  the
northern  coast  of  Europe,  from  Brest  to  the  mouth
of  the  Elbe,  to  be  blockaded.  By  the  Russian  proc-
lamation of  1780,  which  was  then  accepted  by  all
civilized  nations  except  Great  Britain,  such  paper
blockades  were  illegal ;  but  British  ships  none  the
less  seized  and  confiscated  American  vessels  bound
to  any  port  on  that  coast.  In  November  Napoleon
issued  his  Berlin  decree  making  a  paper  blockade
of  the  whole  British  coast,  whereupon  French  cruis-
ers began  seizing  and  confiscating  American  vessels
on  their  way  from  British  to  French  ports.  Two
months  later  England  issued  an  order  in  council,
forbidding  neutrals  to  trade  between  any  of  her
enemy's  ports  ;  and  this  was  followed  by  orders  de-
creeing fines  or  confiscation  to  all  neutral  ships


\


'X.,


■s^


3, ^.  Jlcu^-rxj,


D.AppleiOTi  6c  Go.


ADAMS


ADAMS


25


daring  to  violate  the  edict.  In  December,  1807.
Napoleon  replied  with  the  Milan  decree,  threaten-
ing to  confiscate  all  ships  bound  to  England,  or
which  should  have  paid  a  fine  to  the  British  gov-
ernment or  submitted  to  search  at  the  hands  of  a
British  commander.  All  these  decrees  and  orders
were  in  flagrant  violation  of  international  law,  and
for  a  time  they  made  the  ocean  a  paiademonium  of
robbery  and  murder.  Their  effect  upon  American
commerce  was  about  the  same  as  if  both  England
and  France  had  declared  war  against  the  United
States.  Their  natural  and  proper  effect  upon  the
American  people  would  have  been  seen  in  an  im-
mediate declaration  of  war  against  both  England
and  France,  save  that  our  military  weakness  was
then  too  manifest  to  make  such  a  course  anything
but  ridiculous.  Between  the  animus  of  the  two
bullies  by  whom  we  were  thus  tormented  there  was
little  to  choose  ;  but  in  two  respects  England's  ca-
pacity for  injuring  us  was  the  greater.  In  the  first
place,  she  had  more  ships  engaged  in  this  highway
robbery  than  France,  and  stronger  ones ;  in  the
second  place,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  distinguish-
ing between  Americans  and  Englishmen,  she  was
able  to  add  the  crowning  wickedness  of  kidnapping
American  seamen.  The  wrath  of  the  Americans
was  thus  turned  more  against  England  than  against
France ;  and  never  perhaps  in  the  revolutionary
war  had  it  waxed  stronger  than  in  the  summer  of
1807,  when,  in  full  sight  of  the  American  coast,
the  "  Leopard  "  fired  upon  the  "  Chesapeake,"  killed
and  wounded  several  of  her  crew,  and  violently
carried  away  four  of  them.  For  this  outrage  the
commander  of  the  "  Leopard  "  was  promoted  in
the  British  service.  In  spite  of  all  these  things,
the  hatred  of  the  federalists  for  France  was  so
great  that  they  were  ready  to  put  up  with  insult
added  to  injury  rather  than  attack  the  power  that
was  warring  against  Napoleon.  So  far  did  these
feelings  carry  them  that  Mr.  John  Lowell,  a  promi-
nent federalist  of  Boston,  was  actually  heard  to  de-
fend the  action  of  the  "  Leopard."  Such  pusilla-
nimity incensed  Mr.  Adams.  "  This  was  the  cause,"
he  afterward  said,  "  which  alienated  me  from  that
day  and  forever  from  the  councils  of  the  federal
party."  He  tried  to  persuade  the  federalists  of  Bos-
ton to  hold  a  meeting  and  pledge  their  support  to
the  government  in  any  measures,  however  serious,
that  it  might  see  fit  to  adopt  in  order  to  curb  the
insolence  of  Great  Britain.  But  these  gentlemen
were  too  far  blinded  by  party  feeling  to  respond  to
the  call ;  whereupon  Mr.  Adams  attended  a  repub-
lican meeting,  at  which  he  was  put  upon  a  com-
mittee to  draft  and  report  such  resolutions.  Pres-
ently the  federalists  bowed  to  the  storm  of  popular
feeling  and  held  their  meeting,  at  which  Mr.  Adams
was  also  present  and  drafted  resolutions.  For  his
share  in  the  proceedings  of  the  republicans  it  was
threatened  that  he  should  "  have  his  head  taken  off
for  apostasy."  It  was  never  of  much  use  to  threaten
Mr.  Adams.  An  extra  session  of  congress  was
called  in  October  to  consider  what  was  to  be  done.
Mr.  Jefferson's  government  was  averse  to  war,  for
which  the  country  was  ill  prepared,  and  it  was
thought  that  somewhat  milder  measures  might
harass  England  until  she  would  submit  to  reason.
For  a  year  and  a  half  a  non-importation  act  had
been  in  force ;  but  it  had  proved  no  more  effective
than  the  non-importation  agreements  of  1768  and
1774.  Now  an  embargo  was  laid  upon  all  the  ship-
ping in  American  ports.  The  advantage  of  such  a
measure  was  very  doubtful ;  it  was  damaging  our-
selves in  the  hope  of  damaging  the  enemy.  The
greatest  damage  fell  upon  the  maritime  states  of
New  England,  and  there  the  vials  of  federalist


wrath  were  poured  forth  with  terrible  fury  upon
Mr.  Jefferson  and  the  embargo.  But  the  full
measure  of  their  ferocity  was  reserved  for  Mr.
Adams,  who  had  actually  been  a  member  of  the
committee  that  reported  the  bill,  and  had  given  it
his  most  earnest  support.  All  the  choicest  epithets
of  abuse  were  showered  upon  him ;  few  men  in  our
history  have  been  more  fiercely  berated  and  re-
viled. His  term  of  service  in  the  senate  was  to  ex-
pire on  3  March,  1809.  In  the  preceding  June  the
Massachusetts  legislature  chose  Mr.  Lloyd  to  suc-
ceed him,  a  proceeding  that  was  intended  and  ac-
cepted as  an  insult.  Mr.  Adams  instantly  resigned,
atui  Mr.  Lloyd  was  chosen  to  fill  the  remainder  of
his  term.  In  the  course  of  the  next  month  the  re-
publicans of  his  congressional  district  wished  to
elect  him  to  the  house  of  representatives,  but  he  re-
fused. ■  In  1806  Mr.  Adams  had  been  appointed  •
professor  of  rhetoric  and  belles-lettres  at  Harvard
college,  and  in  the  intervals  of  his  public  duties
had  delivered  lectures  there,  which  were  published
in  1810,  and  for  a  time  were  held  in  esteem.

One  of  Mr.  Madison's  first  acts  on  succeeding  to
the  presidency  in  1809  was  to  nominate  Mr.  Adams
minister  to  Russia.  Since  Mr.  Dana's  failure  to
secure  recognition  in  1782,  the  United  States  had
had  no  minister  in  that  country,  and  the  new  mis-
sion was  now  to  be  created.  The  senate  at  first
declined  to  concur  in  creating  the  mission,  but  a
few  months  later  the  objectors  yielded,  and  Mr.
Adams's  nomination  was  confirmed.  He  was  very
courteously  received  by  Alexander  I.,  and  his  four
years  and  a  half  in  Russia  passed  very  pleasantly.
His  diary  gives  us  a  vivid  account  of  the  Napole-
onic invasion  and  its  disastrous  ending.  In  the
autumn  of  1812  the  czar  offered  his  services  as  me-
diator between  the  United  States  and  Great  Brit-
ain. War  had  only  been  declared  between  these
powers  three  months  before,  but  the  American  gov-
ernment promptly  accepted  the  proposal,  and,  in  the
height  of  the  popular  enthusiasm  over  the  naval
victories  of  Hull  and  Decatur,  sent  Messrs.  Gallatin
and  Bayard  to  St.  Petersburg  to  act  as  commission-
ers with  Mr.  Adams.  The  British  government  re-
fused to  accept  the  mediation  of  Russia,  but  pro-
posed instead  an  independent  negotiation,  to  which
the  United  States  agreed,  and  the  commissioners
were  directed  to  meet  at  Ghent.  Much  time  was
consumed  in  these  arrangements,  while  we  were
defeating  England  again  and  again  on  the  sea,  and
suffering  in  return  some  humiliating  reverses  on
land,  until  at  last  the  commissioners  met  at  Ghent,
in  August,  1814.  Henry  Clay  and  Jonathan  Rus-
sell were  added  to  the  American  commission,  while
England  was  represented  by  Lord  Gambler,  Dr.
Adams,  and  Mr.  Goulburn.  After  four  months  of
bitter  wrangling,  from  which  no  good  result  could
have  been  expected,  terms  of  peace  were  suddenly
agreed  upon  in  December.  In  warding  off  the
British  attempts  to  limit  our  rights  in  the  fisheries
Mr.  Adams  played  an  important  part,  as  his  father
had  done  in  1782.  The  war  had  been  a  drawn
game,  neither  side  was  decisively  victorious,  and
the  treaty  apparently  left  things  much  as  before.
Nothing  was  explicitly  done  to  end  the  pretensions
of  England  to  the  right  of  search  and  the  impress-
ment of  seamen,  yet  the  naval  victories  of  the
United  States  had  taught  the  British  a  lesson,  and
these  pretensions  were  never  renewed.  The  treaty
was  a  great  disappointment  to  the  British  people,
who  had  hoped  to  obtain  some  advantages,  and
Mr.  Adams,  for  his  share  in  it,  was  reviled  by  the
London  press  in  a  tone  which  could  not  but  be  re-
garded as  a  compliment  to  his  powers.  After  the
conclusion  of  the  treaty  he  visited  Paris  and  wit-


26


ADAMS


ADAMS


nessed  the  return  of  Napoleon  from  Elba  and  the
exciting  events  that  followed  up  to  the  eve  of
Waterloo.  Here  his  wife  and  children  Joined  him,
after  a  tedious  journey  from  St.  Petersburg,  not
without  distress  and  peril  by  the  way.  By  this
time  Mr.  Adams  had  been  appointed  commissioner,
with  Clay  and  Gallatin,  to  negotiate  a  new  com-
mercial treaty  with  England.  This  treaty  was
completed  on  13  July,  1815;  but  already,  on  26
May,  when  ]Mr.  Adams  arrived  in  London,  he  had
received  tlie  news  of  his  appointment  as  minister
to  England.  The  series  of  double  coincidences  in
tiie  Adams  family  between  missions  to  England
and  treaties  with  that  power  is  curious.  First
John  Adams  is  minister,  just  after  his  share  in  the
treaty  that  concluded  the  revolutionary  war,  then


his  son,  just  after  the  treaty  that  concluded  the
war  of  i812-'15,  and  then  the  grandson  is  minister
during  the  civil  war  and  afterward  takes  part  in
the  treaty  that  disposed  of  the  Alabama  question.
After  an  absence  of  eight  years,  John  Quincy
Adams  was  called  back  to  his  native  land  to  serve
as  secretary  of  state  under  President  Monroe.  A
new  era  in  American  politics  was  dawning.  The
war  which  had  just  been  concluded  has  sometimes
been  called  our  second  war  of  independence ;  cer-
tainly the  year  1815,  which  saw  the  end  of  the  long
strife  between  France  and  England,  marks  an  im-
portant era  in  American  history.  Our  politics
ceased  to  be  concerned  mainly  with  foreign  affairs.
So  suddenly  were  men's  bones  of  political  conten-
tion taken  away  from  them  that  Monroe's  presi-
dency is  traditionally  remembered  as  the  "  era  of
good  feeling."  So  far  as  political  parties  were  con-
cerned, such  an  epithet  is  well  applied ;  but  as  be-
tween prominent  individuals  struggling  covertly  to
supplant  one  another,  it  was  anything  rather  than
an  era  of  good  feeling.  Mr.  Adams's  principal
achievement  as  secretary  of  state  was  the  treaty
with  Spain,  wiiereby  Florida  was  ceded  to  the
United  States  in  consideration  of  |5,0()0,000,  to  be
applitul  to  the  liquidation  of  outstanding  claims  of
American  merchants  against  Spain.  By  the  same
treaty  the  boundary  between  Louisiana  and  Mexi-
co was  established  as  running  along  the  Sabine  and
Red  rivers,  the  upper  Arkansas,  the  crest  of  the
Rocky  mountains,  and  the  42d  parallel.  jNIr.  Ad-
ams defended  the  conduct  of  Gen.  Jackson  in  in-
vading Spanish  Florida  and  hanging  Arbuthnot
and  Ambrister.  He  supported  the  policy  of  recog-
nizing the  independence  of  the  revolted  colonies  of
Spanish  America,  and  he  was  the  principal  author
of  what  is  known  as  the  "  Monroe  Doctrine,"  that
the  American  continent  is  no  longer  open  to  colo-
nization by  European  powers.  His  official  report
on  weights  and  measures  showed  remarkable  scien-
tific knowledge.  Toward  the  close  of  Monroe's
first  term  came  up  the  first  great  political  question
growmg  out  of  the  purchase  of  Louisiana :  Should


Missouri  be  admitted  to  the  union  as  a  slave-state,
and  should  slavery  be  allowed  or  prohibited  in  the
vast  territory  beyond?  After  the  Missouri  com-
promise had  passed  through  congress,  and  been
submitted  to  President  Monroe  for  his  signature,
two  questions  were  laid  before  the  cabinet.  First,
had  congress  the  constitutional  right  to  prohibit
slavery  in  a  temtory  ?  and,  secondly,  in  prohibiting
slavery  "  forever  "  in  the  territory'north  of  Mason
and  Dixon's  line,  as  prolonged  beyond  the  Missis-
sippi river,  did  the  Missouri  bill  refer  to  this  dis-
trict only  so  long  as  it  should  remain  under  terri-
torial government,  or  did  it  apply  to  such  states  as
might  in  future  be  formed  from  it?  To  the  first
question  the  cabinet  replied  unanimously  in  the
affirmative.  To  the  second  question  Mr.  Adams
replied  that  the  term  "forever"  really  meant  for-
ever; but  all  his  colleagues  replied  that  it  only
meant  so  long  as  the  district  in  question  should
remain  under  territorial  government.  Here  for
the  first  time  we  see  Mr.  Adams  taking  that  firm
stand  in  opposition  to  slavery  which  hereafter  was
to  make  him  so  famous.

Mr.  Monroe's  second  term  of  office  had  scarcely
begun  when  the  question  of  the  succession  came
into  the  foreground.  The  candidates  were  John
Quincy  Adams,  secretary  of  state;  William  H.
Crawford,  secretary  of  the  treasury ;  John  C.  Cal-
houn, secretary  of  war ;  and  Henry  Clay,  speakej-
of  the  house  of  representatives.  Shortly  before  the
election  Gen.  Jackson's  strength  began  to  loom  up
as  more  formidable  than  the  other  competitors  had
supposed.  Jackson  was  then  at  the  height  of  his
popularity  as  a  military  hero,  Crawford  was  the
most  dexterous  political  manager  in  the  country.
Clay  was  perhaps  the  most  persuasive  orator.  Far
superior  to  these  three  in  intelligence  and  charac-
ter, Mr.  Adams  was  in  no  sense  a  popular  favorite.
His  manners  were  stitf  and  disagreeable ;  he  told
the  truth  bluntly,  whether  it  hurt  or  not ;  and  he
never  took  pains  to  conciliate  any  one.  The  best
of  men  in  his  domestic  circle,  outside  of  it  he  had
few  warm  friends,  but  he  seemed  to  have  a  talent
for  making  enemies.  When  Edward  Everett  asked
him  if  he  was  "  determined  to  do  nothing  with  a
view  to  promote  his  future  election  to  the  presi-
dency as  the  successor  of  Mr.  Monroe,"  he  replied
that  he  "  should  do  absolutely  nothing,"  and  from
this  resolution  he  never  swerved.  He  desired  the
presidency  as  much  as  any  one  who  was  ever  chosen
to  that  high  office ;  but  his  nature  was  such  that
unless  it  should  come  to  him  without  scheming  of
his  own,  and  as  the  unsolicited  expression  of  popu-
lar trust  in  him,  all  its  value  would  be  lost.  Under
the  circumstances,  it  was  a  remarkable  evidence  of
the  respect  felt  for  his  lofty  character  and  distin-
guished services  that  he  should  have  obtained  the
presidency  at  all.  The  result  of  the  election  showed
99  votes  for  Jackson.  84  for  Adams.  41  for  Craw-
ford, 37  for  Clay.  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  had  with-
drawn from  the  contest  for  the  presidency,  received
182  votes  for  the  vice-presidency,  and  was  elected.
The  choice  of  the  president  was  thrown  into  the
house  of  representatives,  and* Mr.  Clay  now  used
his  great  influence  in  favor  of  Mr.  Adams,  who
was  forthwith  elected.  When  Adams  afterward
made  Clay  his  secretary  of  state,  the  disappointed
partisans  of  Jackson  pretended  that  there  had  been
a  bargain  between  the  two,  that  Adams  had  secured
Clay's  assistance  by  promising  him  the  first  place
in  the  cabinet,  and  thus,  according  to  a  usage  that
seemed  to  be  establishing  itself,  placing  him  in  the
line  of  succession  for  the  next  presidency;  The  pep-
pery John  Randolph  characterized  this  supposed
bargain  as  "  a  coalition  between  Blifil  and  Black


ADAMS


ADAMS


27


George,  the  Puritan  ancj  the  blackleg."  There
never  was  a  particle  of  foundation  for  this  reck-
less charge,  and  it  has  long  since  been  disproved.

During  Monroe's  administration  the  Federalist
party  had  become  extinct.  In  the  course  of  John
Quincy  Adams's  administration  the  new  division
of  parties  into  Whigs  and  Democrats  began  to  grow
up,  the  Whigs  favoring  internal  iinprov^ements,  the
national  bank,  and  a  high  tariff  on  importations,
while  the  Democrats  opposed  all  such  measures
on  the  ground  that  they  were  incompatible  with  a
strict  construction  of  the  constitution.  In  its  rela-
tion to  such  questions  Mr.  Adams's  administration
was  Whig,  and  thus  arrayed  against  itself  not  only
all  the  southern  planters,  but  also  the  ship-owners
of  New  England  and  the  importers  of  New  York,
But  a  new  and  powerful  tendency  now  came  in  to
overwhelm  such  an  administration  as  that  of
Adams.  The  so-called  "  spoils  system "  was  al-
ready germinating,  and  the  time  had  come  when  it

could  be  put  into
operation. Mr.
Adams would
have  nothing  to
say  to  such  a  sys-
tem. He  would
not  reward the
men  who  worked
for  him,  and  he
would not^  re-
move from'  of-
fice the men
who most vig-
orously opposed
him. He stood
on his merits,
asked  no  favors
and granted
none ;  and  was,
on the whole,
the most inde-
pendent presi-
dent we have
had  since  Washington. Jackson  and  his  friends
promised  their  supporters  a  share  in  the  govern-
ment ofltices,  in  which  a  "  clean  sweep  "  was  to  be
made  by  turning  out  the  present  incumbents. The
result  of  the  election  of  1828  showed  that  for  the
time  Jackson's  method  was  altogether  the  more
potent; since he obtained 178  electoral  votes,
against  83  for  Adams.

The  close  of  his  career  as  president  was  marked
by  an  incident  that  increased  the  odium  in  which
Mr.  Adams  was  held  by  so  many  of  the  old  feder-
alist families  of  Boston.  In  the  excitement  of  the
election  the  newspapers  devoted  to  Jackson  swarmed
with  mischievous  paragraphs  designed  to  injure
Adams's  reputation.  Among  other  things  it  was
said  that,  in  1808,  he  had  suspected  some  of  the
federalist  leaders  of  entertaining  a  scheme  for  car-
rying New  England  out  of  the  union,  and,  fearing
that  such  a  scheme  would  be  promoted  by  hatred
of  the  embargo,  and  that  in  case  of  its  success  the
seceded  states  would  almost  inevitably  be  driven
into  alliance  with  Great  Britain,  he  communicated
his  suspicions  to  President  Jefferson  and  other
leading  republicans.  These  tales,  published  by  un-
scrupulous newspapers  twenty  years  after  the  event,
grossly  distorted  what  Mr.  Adams  had  actually  said
and  done ;  and  thirteen  eminent  Massachusetts
federalists  addressed  to  him  an  open  letter,  de-
manding that  he  should  bring  in  a  bill  of  particu-
lars supported  by  evidence.  Adams  replied  by  stat-
ing the  substance  of  what  he  had  really  said,  but
declining  to  mention  names  or  to  point  out  the


^Ja-c


(j)  aylhjuxj</y\SL yC<La/v\/i^


circumstances  upon  which  his  suspicion  had  been
based.  In  preserving  this  reticence  he  was  actu-
ated mainly  by  unwillingness  to  stir  up  a  furious
controversy  under  circumstances  in  which  it  could
do  no  good.  But  his  adversaries  made  the  mistake
of  attributing  his  forbearance  to  dread  of  ill  con-
sequences to  himself,  a  motive  by  which,  it  is  safe
to  say,  Mr.  Adams  was  never  influenced  on  any
occasion  whatever.  So  the  thirteen  gentlemen  re-
turned to  the  attack.  Mr.  Adams  then  wrote  out  a
full  statement  of  the  ease,  completely  vindicating
himself,  and  bringing  forward  more  than  enough
evidence  to  justify  any  such  suspicions  as  he  had
entertained  and  guardedly  stated.  After  finishing
this  pamphlet  he  concluded  not  to  publish  it,  but
left  it  among  his  papers.  It  has  lately  been  pub-
lished by  Prof.  Henry  Adams,  in  his  "  Documents
relating  to  New  England  Federalism,"  and  is  not
only  of  great  historical  importance,  but  is  one  of
the  finest  specimens  of  political  writing  to  be  found
in  the  English  language.

Although  now  an  ex-president,  Mr.  Adams  did
not  long  remain  in  private  life.  The  greatest  part  of
his  career  still  lay  before  him.  Owing  to  the  myste-
rious disappearance  of  William  Morgan,  who  had
betrayed  some  of  the  secrets  of  the  Masonic  order,
there  was  in  some  of  the  northern  states  a  sudden
and  violent  prejudice  against  the  Freemasons  and
secret  societies  in  general.  An  "  anti-mason  par-
ty" was  formed,  and  by  its  votes  Mr.  Adams  was,
in  1831,  elected  to  congress,  where  he  remained,
representing  the  same  district  of  Massachusetts,
until  his  death  in  1>^48.  He  was  shortly  afterward
nominated  by  the  anti-masons  for  the  governorship
of  Massachusetts,  but  was  defeated  in  the  legisla-
ture, there  being  no  choice  by  the  people.  In  con-
gress he  occupied  a  perfectly  independent  attitude.
He  was  one  of  those  who  opposed  President  Jack-
son's high-handed  treatment  of  the  bank,  but  he
supported  the  president  in  his  firm  attitude  toward
the  South  Carolina  nullifiers  and  toward  France.  In
1835,  as  the  French  government  delayed  in  paying
over  the  indemnity  of  |5,000,000  which  had  been
agreed  upon  by  the  treaty  of  1831  for  plunder  of
American  shipping  in  the  Napoleonic  wars,  Jack-
son threatened,  in  case  payment  should  be  any
longer  deferred,  to  issue  letters  of  marque  and  re-
prisal against  French  commerce.  This  bold  policy,
which  was  successful  in  obtaining  the  money,  en-
listed Mr.  Adams's  hearty  support.  He  defended
Jackson  as  he  had  defended  Jefferson  on  the  occa-
sion of  the  embargo ;  and  this  time,  as  before,  his
course  was  disapproved  in  Massachusetts,  and  he
lost  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  had  been  chosen
to  that  office  by  the  state  senate,  but  the  lower
house  did  not  concur,  and  before  the  question  was
decided  the  news  of  his  speech  in  favor  of  reprisals
turned  his  supporters  against  him.  He  was  thus
left  in  the  house  of  representatives  more  indepen-
dent of  party  ties  than  ever,  and  was  accordingly
enabled  to  devote  his  energies  to  the  aid  of  the
abolitionists,  who  were  now  beginning  to  appear
conspicuously  upon  the  scene.  At  that  time  it  was
impossible  for  the  opponents  of  slavery  to  effect
much.  The  only  way  in  which  they  could  get  their
case  before  congress  was  by  presenting  petitions  for
the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia. Unwilling  to  receive  such  petitions,  or  to
allow  any  discussion  on  the  dreaded  question,  con-
gress in  1836  enacted  the  cowardly  "gag-rule,"
that  "  all  petitions,  memorials,  resolutions,  or  pa-
pers relating  in  any  way  or  to  any  extent  whatso-
ever to  the  subject  of  slavery  or  the  abolition  of
slavery,  shall,  without  being  either  printed  or  re-
ferred, be  laid  upon  the  table  ;  and  that  no  further


28


ADAMS


ADAMS


action  whatever  shall  be  had  thereon."  After  the
yeas  and  nays  had  been  ordered  on  this,  when  Mr.
Adams's  name  was  called  he  rose  and  said :  "  1
hold  the  resolution  to  be  a  direct  violation  of  the
constitution  of  the  United  States,  the  rules  of  this
house,  and  the  rights  of  my  constituents."  The
house  sought  to  drown  his  words  with  loud  shrieks
and  yells  of  "  Order ! "  "  Order  ! "  but  he  raised  his
voice  to  a  shout  and  defiantly  finished  his  sentence.
The  rule  was  adopted  by  a  vote  of  117  to  68,  but  it
did  more  harm  than  good  to  the  pro-slavery  party.
They  had  put  themselves  in  an  untenable  position,
and  "furnished  Mr.  Adams  with  a  powerful  weapon
which  he  used  against  them  without  mercy.  As  a
parliamentary  debater  he  has  had  few  if  any  supe-
riors ;  in  knowledge  and  dexterity  there  was  no
one  in  the  house  who  could  be  compared  with  him  ;
he  was  always  master  of  himself,  even  at  the  white
heat  of  anger  to  which  he  often  rose ;  he  was  terri-
ble in  invective,  matchless  at  repartee,  and  insensi-
ble to  fear.  A  single-handed  fight  against  all  the
slave-holders  in  the  house  was  something  upon
which  he  was  always  ready  to  enter,  and  he  usually
came  off  with  the  last  word.  Though  the  vitupera-
tive vocabulary  of  the  English  language  seemed
inadequate  to  express  the  hatred  and  loathing  with
which  the  pro-slavery  party  regarded  him,  though
he  was  more  than  once  threatened  with  assassina-
tion, nevertheless  his  dauntless  bearing  and  bound-
less resources  compelled  the  respect  of  his  bitterest
opponents,  and  members  from  the  south,  with  true
chivalry,  sometimes  confessed  it.  Every  session  he
returned  to  the  assault  upon  the  gag-rule,  until
the  disgraceful  measure  was  rescinded  in  1845.
This  part  of  Mr.  Adams's  career  consisted  of  a  vast
number  of  small  incidents,  which  make  a  very  in-
teresting and  instructive  chapter  in  American  his-
tory, but  can  not  well  be  epitomized.  He  came  to
serve  as  the  rallying-point  in  congress  for  the  ever-
growing anti-slavery  sentiment,  and  may  be  re-
garded, in  a  certain  sense,  as  the  first  founder  of  the
new  republican  party.  He  seems  to  have  been  the
first  to  enunciate  the  doctrine  upon  which  Mr.  Lin-
coln afterward  rested  his  great  proclamation  of
emancipation.  In  a  speech  in  congress  in  1836  he
said :  "  From  the  instant  that  your  slave-holding
states  become  the  theatre  of  war — civil,  servile,  or
foreign — from  that  instant  the  war  powers  of  the
constitution  extend  to  interference  with  the  insti-
tution of  slavery  in  every  way  in  which  it  can  be
interfered  with."  As  this  principle  was  attacked
by  the  southern  members,  Mr.  Adams  from  time  to
time  reiterated  it,  especially  in  his  speech  of  14
April,  1842,  on  the  question  of  war  with  England
and  Mexico,  when  he  said :  "  Whether  the  war  be
civil,  servile,  or  foreign,  1  lay  this  down  as  the
law  of  nations:  I  say  that  the  military  authori-
ty takes  for  the  time  the  place  of  all  municipal  in-
stitutions, slavery  among  the  rest.  Under  that
state  of  things,  so  far  from  its  being  true  that  the
states  where  slavery  exists  have  the  exclusive  man-
agement of  the  subject,  not  only  the  president  of
the  United  States,  but  the  commander  of  the  army
has  nower  to  order  the  universal  emancipation  of
the  slaves."

After  the  rescinding  of  the  gag-rule  Mr.  Adams
spoke  less  frequently.  In  November,  1846,  he  had
a  shock  of  paralysis,  which  kept  him  at  home  four
months.  On  21  Feb.,  1848,  while  he  was  sitting  in
the  house  of  representatives,  came  the  second  shock.
He  was  carried  into  the  speaker's  room,  where  he
lay  two  days,  and  died  on  the  28d.  His  last  words
were:  "This  is  the  last  of  earth;  I  am  content."
See  "Life  and  Public  Services  of  John  Quincy
Adams,"  by  William  H.  Seward  (Auburn,  1849);


"  Life  of  John  Quincy  Adams,"  by  Josiah  Quincy
(Boston,  1858) ;  "  Diary  of  John  Quincy  Adams,"
edited  by  Charles  F,  Adams,  12  vols.,  8vo  (Phila-
delphia, 'l874-'7) ;  and  "  John  Quincy  Adams,"  by
John  T.  Morse,  Jr.  (Boston,  1882).

The  steel  portrait  of  Mr.  Adams,  facing  page  24,
is  from  a  picture  by  Marchant,  in  the  possession  of
the  New  York  Historical  Society.  The  mansion
represented  on  page  26  is  the  Adams  homestead  at
Quincy,  in  which  the  presidents  lived,  now  the
summer  residence  of  Charles  Francis  Adams.

ADAMS,  Julius  Walker,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1812.  He  entered  West
Point  academy  in  1830,  but  was  never  graduated.
After  acting  as  assistant  engineer  of  various  rail-
roads, from  1832  to  1844,  he  was  at  Cochituate
water-works,  Boston,  in  1846,  and  in  the  same  year
became  superintending  engineer  of  the  Erie  rail-
way. He  removed  to  Kentucky  in  1852,  was  chief
engineer  of  the  Central  railroad,  and  in  1855  of
the  Memphis  and  Ohio  railroad.  He  had  charge
of  the  establishment  of  a  system  of  sewers  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1856,  and  in  1860  was  engineer
of  the  water-works  at  New  Haven,  Conn.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of  the  67th  New  York
volunteers,  and  was  wounded  at  Fair  Oaks.  Since
then  he  has  been  chief  engineer  of  the  city  works
of  Brooklyn,  projector  of  the  East  River  suspen-
sion bridge,  and  for  six  years  consulting  engineer
to  the  department  of  public  works.  New  York.  He
has  been  president  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers,  and  has  published  "  Sewers  and  Drains,"
and  various  scientific  papers. — His  son,  Julius
W.,  b.  in  Westfield,  Mass.,  in  April,  1840,  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  15  Nov.,  1865,  was  graduated  at
West  Point  in  1861,  served  there  as  assistant  in-
structor of  infantry  tactics  till  June,  1862,  was
wounded  and  taken  prisoner  at  Gaines's  Mills,
promoted  captain  in  August.  1862,  and  served
at  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  Gettysburg,
where  he  commanded  a  regiment,  and  the  second
battle  of  Cold  Harbor,  where  he  received  wounds
that  caused  his  death.

ADAMS,  Nehemiali,  clergyman,  b.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  19  Feb.,  1806;  d.  6  Oct.,  1878.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1826,  and  at  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1829.  His  first  pastoral
charge,  beginning  immediately  after  his  gradua-
tion, was  the  first  church  of  Cambridge,  as  the  col-
league of  the  Rev.  Abiel  Holmes,  D.  D.  On  26
March,  1834,  he  became  pastor  of  the  Essex  st.
church,  Boston,  a  relation  which  lasted  until  his
death.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  theologi-
cal and  ecclesiastical  controversies  of  his  time,  and
for  many  years  was  an  officer  of  the  American
tract  society,  and  of  the  American  board  of  com-
missioners for  foreign  missions.  His  "  South  Side
View  of  Slavery "  (Boston,  1854),  and  his  corre-
spondence with  Governor  Wise,  of  Virginia,  on
kindred  topics,  the  best-known  of  his  works,  called
out  many  unfavorable  comments  from  the  anti-
slavery  press.  His  "  Sable  Cloud  "  (Boston,  1863),
"  a  Southern  tale  with  Northern  Comments,"  pro-
voked similar  discussion.  He  also  wrote  "The
Cross  in  the  Cell,"  "  Scriptural  Argument  for  End-
less Punishment,"  "Broadcast,"  and  "At  Even-
tide." In  1869,  in  consequence  of  his  failing  health,
his  people  procured  an  associate  pastor  and  gave
Dr.  Adams  a  long  leave  of  absence.  He  made  a
voyage  round  the  world  and  described  it  in  "  Un-
der the  Mizzehmast "  (1871).

ADAMS,  Robert  H.,  senator,  b.  in  Rockbridge
CO.,  Va.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  2  July,  1830.
He  was  graduated  at  Washington  college,  Lexing-
ton, Ky.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in


ADAMS


ADAMS


29


Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  afterward  in  Natchez,  where
he  settled  in  1819.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1828,  and  was  elected  a  U.  S.  senator  from
Mississippi  to  fill  the  vacancy  that  had  been  caused
by  the  death  of  Thomas  B.  Reed,  serving  from  8
Feb.  to  31  May,  1830.

ADAMS,  Samuel,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  37  Sept.,
1723 ;  d.  there,  3  Oct.,  1803.  Among  the  grandsons  of
Henry  Adams,  the  emigrant  from  Devonshire,  were
Joseph  Adams,  of  Braintree,  and  John  Adams,  of
Boston,  a  sea-captain.  The  former  was  grand-
father of  President  John  Adams;  the  latter  was
grandfather  of  Samuel  Adams,  the  statesman.  The
second  son  of  Capt.  John  Adams,  b.  6  May,  1689,
was  named  Samuel,  and  in  1713  married  Mary  Fi-
field.  Of  their  twelve  children,  only  two,  besides
the  illustrious  Samuel,  survived  their  father.  The
elder  Samuel  Adams  was  a  man  of  wealth  and  in-
fluence. He  owned  a  large  estate  on  Purchase
street,  with  a  noble  mansion  fronting  on  the  har-
bor, and  here  the  younger  Samuel  Adams  was  born.
The  father  was  always  a  leader.  He  was  justice  of
the  peace,  deacon  of  the  old  Sonth  church,  select-
man, and  member  of  the  legislature,  where  he  made
himself  prominent  in  the  quarrels  with  Gov.  Shute.
About  1724,  in  company  with  some  friends,  mostly

sea-captains,  ship-
wrights, and  per-
sons otherwise
connected  with
the  shipping  in-
terest, which  was
then  very  power-
ful, he  founded  a
political  club  de-
signed "  to  lay
plans  for  introdu-
cing certain  per-
sons into  places  of
trust  and  power."
This  institution
was  known  as  the
"  caulkei's'  clnb,"
whence  the  term
"  caucus  "  is  sup-
posed to  have  been
derived.  It  was
evidently  from  his
father  that  the  younger  Samuel  inherited  the  politi-
cal tastes  and  aptitudes  which,  displayed  amid  the
grand  events  of  the  revolution,  were  to  make  him  on
the  whole  the  most  illustrious  citizen  that  Massachu-
setts has  ever  produced.  Young  Adams  was  edu-
cated first  at  the  Boston  Latin  school,  then  at  Har-
vard college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1740.  Very
little  is  known  of  his  college  life,  except  that  he  was
noted  as  a  diligent  student.  He  was  fond  of  quot-
ing Greek  and  Latin,  after  the  pedantic  fashion  of
the  time.  In  1743,  being  then  twenty-one  years  of
age  and  a  candidate  for  the  master's  degree,  he
■chose  as  the  subject  for  his  Latin  thesis  the  ques-
tion, "  Whether  it  be  lawful  to  resist  the  supreme
magistrate  if  the  commonwealth  cannot  otherwise
be  preserved  " ;  and  this  question  he  answered  in
the  affirmative.  History  has  not  told  us  how  this
bold  doctrine  affected  Gov.  Shirley  and  the  other
■officers  of  the  crown  who  sat  there  on  commence-
ment day  and  listened  to  it.  It  was  the  wish  of
the  elder  Samuel  that  his  son  should  become  a
clergyman ;  but  the  son  had  no  taste  for  theology
and  preferred  the  law.  In  those  days,  however,  the
law  was  hardly  considered  a  respectable  profession
by  old-fashioned  New  Englanders ;  and  after  a
snort  time  Samuel  yielded  to  his  mother's  objec-
tions and  entered  the  counting-house  of  Thomas


j/a  rrt^j^^cUx^^^f^i^i


Gushing,  a  prominent  merchant,  father  of  an  emi-
nent revolutionary  leader.  Shortly  afterward  his
father  gave  him  £1,000  with  which  to  set  up  in
business  for  himself.  He  lent  half  of  this  to  a
friend,  who  never  returned  it,  and  lost  the  other
half  in  bad  bargains.  Then  he  became  partner
with  his  father  in  a  brewery,  but  the  business  did
not  prosper.  About  this  time  the  father  lost  the
greater  part  of  his  fortune  in  a  wildcat  banking
enterprise.  In  1690,  at  the  time  of  the  disastrous
expedition  of  Sir  William  Phips  against  QueV)ec,
Massachusetts  had  issued  paper  money,  with  the
inevitable  results.  Coin  was  driven  from  circula-
tion, and  there  was  a  great  inflation  of  prices,  with
frequent  and  disastrous  fluctuations.  This  led  to
complaints  from  British  merchants  trading  to
Massachusetts,  and  the  governor  was  ordered  by
the  board  of  trade  to  veto  any  further  issue.  A
quarrel  ensued  between  the  governor  and  the  legis-
lature, and,  as  the  governor  proved  inexorable,  two
joint -stock  banking  companies  were  devised  to
meet  the  emergency.  The  one  known  as  "the  "  sil-
ver scheme,"  and  patronized  chiefly  by  merchants,
undertook  to  issue  £110,000  in  notes,  to  be  re-
deemed in  silver  at  the  end  of  ten  years;  the
other,  which  was  known  as  the  land-bank,  or  "  man-
ufactory scheme,"  undertook  to  issue  £150,000,  re-
deemable in  produce  after  twenty  years.  It  was
with  the  latter  scheme  that  Mr.  Adams's  father
was  connected.  There  were  800  stockholders,  and
they  not  only  controlled  the  Massachusetts  legisla-
ture, but  succeeded  in  compassing  Gov.  Belcher's
removal.  Their  plans  were  nipped  in  the  bud,
however,  by  an  act  of  parliament  extending  to  the
colonies  an  act  of  the  reign  of  George  I.  forbidding
the  incorporation  of  joint-stock  companies  with
more  than  six  partners.  The  two  Massachusetts
companies  were  thus  obliged  to  suspend  operations
and  redeem  their  scrip ;  and,  as  the  partners  were
held  individually  liable,  they  were  quickly  ruined.
Thus  the  wealth  of  the  elder  Adams  melted  away
in  a  moment.  The  friends  of  the  bank  denounced
this  act  of  parliament  as  a  violation  of  the  chartered
rights  of  the  colony;  and  the  question  as  to  the
extent  of  the  authority  of  parliament  in  America
began  to  be  agitated.  So  in  a  certain  sense  Samuel
Adams  may  be  said  to  have  inherited  his  quarrel
with  the  British  government.  After  the  death  of
his  father  in  1748  he  carried  on  the  brewery  by
himself,  and  obtained  from  his  political  enemies
the  nickname  of  "  Sammy  the  maltster."  Present-
ly, when  he  was  made  tax-collector  for  the  town
of  Boston,  these  wits  devised  for  him  the  epi-
thet of  "Sammy  the  publican."  His  office  made
him  personally  acquainted  with  everybody  in  Bos-
ton, and  his  qualities  soon  won  for  him  great  in-
fluence. He  had  all  the  courage  and  indomitable
perseverance  of  his  cousin,  John  Adams,  but  with-
out his  bhmtness  of  manner.  As  an  adroit  political
manager  he  was  not  surpassed  by  Jefferson,  whom
he  resembled  in  his  thorough-going  democracy.
He  had  a  genuine  sympathy  for  men  with  leather
aprons  and  hands  browned  by  toil ;  he  knew  how
to  win  their  confidence,  and  never  abused  it,  for  he
was  in  no  sense  a  demagogue.  In  the  town-meet-
ing he  soon  became  a  power,  yet  it  was  not  until
his  forty-second  year  that  his  great  public  career
began.  In  May,  1764,  he  drafted  the  instructions
given  by  the  town  of  Boston  to  its  newly-chosen
representatives  with  reference  to  Grenville's  pro-
posed stamp-act.  These  instructions  were  the  first
public  protest  in  America  against  the  right  of  par-
liament to  tax  the  colonies.  Next  year  he  was  him-
self elected  to  the  legislature,  where  he  remained
till  1774,  officiating  as  clerk  of  the  house,  and  draft-


30


ADAMS


ADAMS


ing  most  of  the  remarkable  stste-papers  of  that
period  of  fierce  agitation.  In  the  controversies
first  with  Gov.  Bernard,  then  with  his  successor,
Hutchinson,  Samuel  Adams  was  always  foremost.
On  the  passage  of  the  Townshend  acts  in  1767,
Adams  wrote  the  petition  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature  to  the  king,  the  letter  of  instructions  to
their  agent  in  England,  and  the  circular  letter  ad-
dressed to  the  other  colonies,  inviting  their  aid  in
the  defence  of  the  common  rights  of  Americans.
The  king  was  especially  enraged  by  this  circular
letter,  and  Gov.  Bernard  was  directed  to  order  the
legislature  to  rescind  it  under  penalty  of  instant
dissolution.  After  several  days'  discussion  the  legis-
lature, by  a  vote  of  92  to  17,  refused  to  rescind.
This  obstinacy  had  much  to  do  with  the  decision  of
the  British  government  to  send  troops  to  Boston
in  the  hope  of  overawing  the  people  of  that  town.
On  the  morning  after  the  famous  "  massacre  "  of  5
March,  1770,  ]\Ir.  Adams  was  appointed  chairman
of  a  committee  to  connnunicate  the  votes  of  the
town-meeting  to  the  governor  and  council.  More
than  5,000  persons  were  present  at  the  town-meet-
ing, which  was  held  in  the  old  South  meeting-
house, and  all  the  neighboring  streets  were  crowded.
Lieut.-Gov.  Hutchinson,  with  the  council,  and  Col.
Dalryi^ple,  commander  of  the  two  regiments,  sat
in  the  old  state-house  at  the  head  of  King  street.
When  Adams  presented  the  demand  of  the  town-
meeting  that  the  soldiers  should  be  removed  to  the
castle  in  the  harbor,  Hutchinson  at  first  disclaimed
any  authority  in  the  matter ;  but  Adams  reminded
hiin  that  as  acting  governor  of  Massachusetts  he  was
commander-in-chief  of  all  troops  within  the  prov-
ince. Hutchinson  consulted  a  while  with  Dalrymple,
and  at  length  replied  that  the  colonel  was  willing
to  remove  one  of  the  regiments  in  order  to  appease
the  indignation  of  the  people.  The  committee,  led
by  Adams,  returned  to  the  church  with  this  mes-
sage, and  as  they  proceeded  through  the  crowded
street,  Adams,  bowing  to  right  and  left,  passed
along  the  watchword,  "  Both  regiments  or  none ! "
When  the  question  was  put  to  vote  in  the  church,
5,000  voices  shouted,  "  Both  regiments  or  none  ! "
Armed  with  this  ultimatum,  Adams  returned  to
the  State-house  and  warned  Hutchinson  that  if  he
failed  to  remove  both  regiments  before  nightfall
he  did  so  at  his  peril.  Hutchinson  was  as  brave
and  SIS  obstinate  as  Adams,  but  two  regiments  were
nowerless  in  presence  of  the  angry  crowd  that  filled
IJoston,  and  before  sunset  they  were  removed  to
the  castle.  These  troops  were  ever  afterward  known
in  parliament  as  the  "Sam  Adams  regiments."

In  1772  the  government  ventured  upon  a  step
that  went  further  than  anything  that  had  yet  been
done  toward  driving  Massachusetts  into  rebellion.
It  was  ordered  that  the  judges,  holding  their  offices
at  the  king's  pleasure,  should  henceforth  be  paid
by  the  crown  and  not  by  the  colony.  This  act.
which  aimed  directly  at  the  independence  of  the
judiciary,  aroused  intense  indignation.  The  judges
were  threatened  with  impeachment  if  they  should
dare  to  accept  a  penny  from  the  crown.  Mr.  Ad-
ams now  had  recourse  to  a  measure  that  organized
the  American  revolution.  The  people  of  Boston,
in  town-meeting,  asked  Hutchinson  to  convene  the
legislature  to  decide  what  should  be  done  about  the
judges'  salaries.  On  his  refusal,  Adams  proposed
that  the  towns  of  Massachusetts  should  appoint
"committees  of  correspondence"  to  consult  with
each  other  about  the  connnon  welfare.  Such  a  step
was  strictly  legal,  but  it  virtually  created  a  revolu-
tionary legislative  body,  which  the  governor  could
neither  negative,  dissolve,  nor  prorogue.  Within
a  few  months  eighty  towns  had  chosen  their  com-


mittees of  correspondence,  and  the  system  was  in
full  operation.  Hutchinson  at  first  scoft'ed  at  it,
for  he  did  not  see  to  what  it  was  leading.  The
next  spring  Dabney  Carr,  of  Virginia,  moved  that
intercolonial  committees  of  correspondence  should
be  formed,  and  this  was  soon  done.  But  one  more
step  was  needed.  It  was  only  necessary  that  the
intercolonial  committees  should  assemble  in  one
place,  and  there  M^ould  be  a  continental  congress
speaking  in  the  name  of  the  united  colonies,  and,
if  need  be,  superseding  the  royal  governments.  By
such  stages  was  formed  the  revolutionary  govern-
ment that  declared  the  independence  of  the  United
States  and  administered  the  afl'airs  of  the  new  na-
tion until  1789.  It  was  Samuel  Adams  who  took
the  first  step  toward  its  construction,  though  the
idea  had  been  first  suggested  in  1705  by  the  great
preacher  Jonathan  Mayhew.  In  order  to  provoke
the  colonies  to  assemble  in  a  continental  congress,
it  was  only  necessary  that  the  British  government
should  take  the  aggressive  upon  some  issue  in
which  all  the  colonies  were  equally  interested.  The
sending  of  the  tea-ships  in  1773  was  such  an  act  of
aggression,  and  forced  the  issue  upon  the  colonists.
The  management  of  this  delicate  and  difficult
affair,  down  to  the  day  when  Massachusetts  virtu-
ally declared  war  by  throwing  the  tea  into  the  har-
bor, was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  committees  of
correspondence  of  Boston  and  five  neighboring
towns,  with  the  expressed  consent  of  the  other
Massachusetts  committees  and  the  general  approv-
al of  the  country.  In  this  bold  act  of  defiance
Samuel  Adams  was  from  first  to  last  the  leading
spirit.  He  had  been  the  first  of  American  states-
men to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  independence
was  the  only  remedy  for  the  troubles  of  the  time ;
and  since  1768  he  had  acted  upon  this  conviction
without  publicly  avowing  it.  The  "Boston  tea-
party  "  made  war  inevitable.  In  April,  1774,  par-
liament retorted  with  the  acts  for  closing  the  port
of  Boston  and  annulling  the  charter  of  Massachu-
setts. This  alarmed  all  the  colonies,  and  led  to
the  first  meeting  of  the  continental  congress.  In
this  matter  the  other  colonies  invited  Massachu-
setts to  take  the  lead,  and  the  work  was  managed
by  Mr.  Adams  with  his  accustomed  shrewdness
and  daring.  W^hen  the  legislature  met  at  Salem,
17  June,  1774,  in  conformity  to  the  new  acts  of
parliament,  he  locked  the  door,  put  the  key  into
his  pocket,  and  carried  through  the  measures  for
assembling  a  congress  at  Philadelphia  in  Septem-
ber. A  tory  member,  feigning  sudden  illness,  was
allowed  to  go  out,  and  ran  straight  to  the  governor
with  the  news.  The  governor  lost  no  time  in
drawing  up  the  writ  dissolving  the  legislature,  but
when  his  clerk  reached  the  hall  he  found  the  door
locked  and  could  not  serve  the  writ.  When  the
business  was  accomplished  the  legislature  adjourned
sine  die.  It  was  the  last  Massachusetts  legislature
assembled  in  obedience  to  the  sovereign  authority
of  Great  Britain.  The  acts  of  April  were  hence-
forth entirely  disregarded  in  Massachusetts.

Samuel  Adams  and  his  cousin  John  were  dele-
gates to  the  first  continental  congress.  They  knew
that  Massachusetts  was  somewhat  dreaded  and  dis-
trusted by  the  other  colonies,  especially  by  Penn-
sylvania and  New  York,  on  account  of  her  for-
wardness in  opposing  the  British  government.
While  there  was  genuine  sympathy  with  her  situa-
tion, there  was  at  the  same  time  great  reluctance
to  bringing  on  a  war.  The  rigid  puritanism  of
Massachusetts  was  also  held  in  disrepute.  Samuel
Adams  felt  it  necessary  to  be  conciliatory,  and  it
was  easy  for  him  to  be  so,  for  he  was  large-minded
and  full  of  tact. A  motion  to  open  the  proceedings


ADAMS


ADAMS


31


of  the  congress  with  prayer  was  opposed  by  John
Jay,  on  the  ground  that  Episcopalians,  Congrega-
tionalists,  Presbyterians,  Baptists,  and  Quakers
could  hardly  be  expected  to  unite  in  formal  wor-
ship. Then  Samuel  Adams  got  up  and  said,  with
Eerfect  sincerity,  that  "  he  was  no  bigot  and  could
ear  a  prayer  from  a  gentleman  of  piety  and  vir-
tue who  was  at  the  same  time  a  friend  to  his  coun-
try. He  was  a  stranger  in  Philadelphia,  but  he
had  heard  that  Mr.  Duche  deserved  that  character,
and  therefore  he  moved  that  Mr.  Duche,  an  Epis-
copal clergyman,  might  be  desired  to  read  prayers
to  the  congress."  This  was  a  politic  move,  for  it
pleased  the  Episcopalians,  who  were  the  dominant
sect  in  New  York,  Virginia,  and  South  Carolina ;
and  it  produced  an  excellent  impression  in  Phila-
delphia, where  Duche  was  the  most  popular  preacher
of  the  day.  It  was  thought  that  the  men  of  New
England  were  not  so  stiff-necked  as  had  been  gen-
erally supposed,  and  there  was  a  reaction  of  feel-
ing in  their  favor.

Toward  the  end  of  the  following  winter  Gen.
Gage  received  peremptory  orders  from  the  ministry
to  arrest  Samuel  Adams  and  ''  his  willing  and  ready
tool,"  John  Hancock,  and  send  them  over  to  Lon-
don to  be  tried  for  high  treason.  A  London  news-
paper predicted  that  their  heads  would  soon  be  ex-
posed on  Temple  Bar.  It  was  intended  to  seize
them  at  Lexington  on  the  morning  of  19  April,
but,  forewarned  by  Paul  Revere,  they  escaped  to
Woburn  and  made  their  way  to  Philadelphia  in
time  for  the  second  session  of  the  continental  con-
gress. For  the  next  eight  years  Mr.  Adams  took
an  active  and  important  part  in  the  work  of  the
congress.  Probably  no  other  man  did  so  much  as
he  to  bring  about  the  declaration  of  independence.
He  had  a  considerable  share  in  framing  the  state  con-
stitution of  Massachusetts  adopted  in  1780.  After
the  close  of  the  war  he  opposed  the  strengthening  of
the  federal  government,  through  fear  of  erecting  a
tyranny  that  might  swallow  up  the  local  govern-
ments. Like  Patrick  Henry,  R.  PI.  Lee,  and  others
who  had  been  foremost  in  urging  on  the  revolution,
he  was  ranked  among  the  anti-federalists.  Unlike
the  two  Virginians  just  mentioned,  however,  he  did
not  actively  oppose  the  new  constitution  of  1787.
In  the  Massachusetts  convention  of  1788,  for  con-
sidering the  federal  constitution,  he  was  by  far  the
most  influential  member.  For  two  weeks  he  sat  in
silence  listening  to  the  arguments  of  other  mem-
bers. Then  he  decided  to  support  the  constitution
and  urge  its  ratification  unconditionally,  but  with
a  general  understanding  that  Massachusetts  would
submit  to  the  new  congress  sundry  amendments
equivalent  in  effect  to  a  bill  of  rights.  His  decision
carried  the  convention  in  favor  of  ratification  by
the  narrow  majority  of  187  yeas  to  168  nays.  But
for  this  ratification  on  the  part  of  Massachusetts
the  constitution  would  not  have  been  adopted,  and
of  all  the  great  services  rendered  by  Samuel  Adams
to  his  country  none  was  greater  than  this.  The
example  of  Massachusetts  in  proposing  amend-
ments was  followed  by  other  states,  and  it  was  thus
that  the  first  ten  amendments,  declared  in  force  15
Dec,  1791,  originated.  In  1789  Mr.  Adams  was
chosen  lieutenant-governor  of  Massachusetts,  Han-
cock being  governor.  There  were  many  who  urged
his  claims  for  the  vice-presidency  under  Washing-
ton, but  the  preference  was  given  to  his  cousin  as
more  fully  in  sympathy  with  the  federalist  party.
He  was  chosen  governor  of  Massachusetts  in  1794.
and  served  in  that  capacity  till  1797.  His  political
opinions  resembled  those  of  Jefferson.  II  is  last  years
were  spent  in  his  house  on  Winter  street,  Boston,  as
he  had  been  obliged  to  part  with  his  paternal  man-


sion on  Purchase  street.  His  personal  appearance
IS  thus  described  by  Mr.  Wells:  "His  stature  was
a  little  above  the  medium  height.  He  wore  a  tie-
wig,  cocked  hat,  buckled  shoes,  knee-breeches,  and
a  red  cloak,  and  held  himself  very  erect,  with  the
ease  and  address  of  a  polite  gentleman.  On  stop-
ping to  speak  with  any  person  in  the  street  his
salutation  was  formal  yet  cordial.  His  gestures
were  animated,  and  in  conversation  there  was  a
slight  tremulous  motion  of  the  head.  His  com-
plexion was  florid,  and  his  eyes  dark  blue.  The
eyebrows  were  heavy,  almost  to  bushiness,  and  con-
trasted remarkably  with  the  clear  forehead,  which,
at  the  age  of  seventy,  had  but  few  wrinkles.  The
face  had  a  benignant  but  careworn  expression,
blended  with  a  native  dignity  (some  have  said  maj-
esty) of  countenance  which  never  failed  to  impress
strangers."  In  conversation  he  was  entertaining,
and  possessed  a  great  fund  of  anecdote.  He  was
frugal,  temperate,  and  incorruptible.  His  capacity
for  work,  as  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  all  of
his  illustrious  family,  was  prodigious.  In  religion,
unlike  his  cousin  John,  he  was  a  strict  Calvinist.
He  was  twice  married,  first  in  1749  to  Elizabeth
Checkley,  daughter  of  the  pastor  of  the  new  South
church.  She  died  m  1757,  and  in  1764  he  married
Elizabeth  Wells,  daughter  of  an  English  merchant
who  had  settled  in  Boston  in  1723.  His  only  son,
Samuel,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  college  in  1771,
studied  medicine  with  the  famous  Dr.  Joseph  War-
ren, served  as  surgeon  in  the  army  throughout  the
war,  and  thereby  ruined  his  health  and  died  in
1788.  Samuel  Adams  left  only  female  descendants.
An  excellent  statue  of  him  in  bronze,  by  Miss
Whitney,  stands  in  Dock  square,  and  his  portrait
by  Copley  hangs  in  Faneuil  hall.  His  life  has  been
written  by  W.  V.  Wells,  "  Life  and  Public  Services
of  Samuel  Adams  "  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1865),  and  by
J.  K.  Hosmer,  "  Samuel  Adams  "  (Boston,  1885).

ADAMS,  Samuel,  military  surgeon,  b.  in  Maine ;
d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  9  Sept.,  1867.  He  entered
the  national  army  16  April,  1862,  and,  after  a  year
spent  in  the  active  duties  of  the  permanent  hos-
pitals, joined  the  army  of  the  Potomac  and  served
constantly  with  it  until  it  was  disbanded.  During
his  field  service  he  rose  from  the  rank  of  regimen-
tal surgeon  to  that  of  medical  inspector  of  the
ninth  army  corps,  receiving  also  a  brevet  for  "  meri-
torious conduct  at  the  capture  of  Petersburg."
During  one  of  the  closing  battles  of  the  war,  at  a
time  when  the  brilliant  and  rapid  series  of  federal
successes  tended  to  obscure  acts  of  individual  gal-
lantry. Dr.  Adams  distinguished  himself  by  riding
along  the  advanced  line  of  combatants,  and,  under
the  fire  of  the  enemy,  dressing  the  wounds  of  Gen.
Potter,  who  could  not  be  removed  from  the  spot
where  he  fell,  and,  but  for  the  action  of  Surgeon
Adams,  would  have  lost  his  life.  At  the  close  of
the  war  Surgeon  Adams  received  an  invitation  from
a  wealthy  and  well-known  gentleman  to  accompany
his  family  on  a  European  tour  as  his  physician ;
but  an  application  for  leave  of  absence  was  refused
by  the  war  department,  on  the  ground  that  his
services  could  not  be  spared.  Soon  afterward  he
was  ordered  to  Texas,  where  yellow  fever  was  epi-
demic, and  his  last  days  were  spent  among  the  vic-
tims of  the  disease,  of  which  he  died.  He  was
highly  esteemed  for  his  Christian  character.

ADAMS,  Seth,  inventor,  b.  in  Rocjiester,  N.  H.,
13  April,  1807 ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  7  Dec,  1873.
He  was  apprenticed  to  a  cabinet  maker,  and  after
he  had  attamed  his  majority  he  removed  to  Boston,
where  he  worked  in  a  machine  shop.  In  1831  he
established  a  business  for  the  manufacture  of  ma-
chinery, and  two  years  later  he  became  interested


32


ADAMS


ADAMS


in  the  printing-press  invented  by  his  brother  Isaac,
and  subsequently  obtained  the  exclusive  right  of
making  it.  In  1836  he  enlarged  his  shops  in  order
to  produce  the  famous  power  presses  lately  in-
vented by  his  brother,  the  interests  of  the  two
brothers  were  united,  and  the  firm  of  I.  &  S.
Adams  was  established,  which  continued  until
1856.  In  1849  he  took  charge  of  the  Adams  sugar
refinerv,  which  for  many  years  was  the  largest  but
one  of 'its  kind  in  the  United  States.  He  accumu-
lated a  very  large  fortune,  a  portion  of  which  he
left  for  the"  establishment  of  the  Adams  nervine
asylum  in  West  Roxbury,  Mass.,  for  hypochon-
driacs. He  also  gave  a  considerable  sum  of  money
to  Bowdoin  college.  For  some  time  he  was  a
member  of  the  city  council  and  of  the  board  of
public  works.  A  massive  monument  has  been
erected  to  his  memory  in  his  native  town.

ADAMS,  Stephen,  senator,  b.  in  Franklin  co.,
Tenn. ;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  11  May,  1857.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  of  Tennessee,
afterward  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  Mis-
sissippi, where  he  took  a  prominent  part  in  politics.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  representatives,
was  a  member  of  congress  in  1845-'7,  and  became
a  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in  1848.  In  1852,  on
the  resignation  of  Jefferson  Davis,  who  gave  up  his
seat  to  become  candidate  for  governor,  he  was
chosen  as  a  state-rights  democrat  to  serve  out  the
term  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  which  expired  in  1857.

ADAMS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Colches-
ter, Conn.,  25  Jan.,  1807;  d.  at  Orange  Mountain,
N.  J.,  31  Aug.,  1880.  His  father  was  John  Adams,
LL.  D.,  principal  of  the  Bacon  academy  at  Colches-
ter, whence  he  removed  in  1810  to  assume  charge
of  the  Phillips  academy  at  Andover,  Mass.  His
mother  was  Elizabeth  Ripley,  a  lineal  descendant

of  Gov.  Brad-
ford. He  was
{)reparedforcol-
ege  at  Andover
and  was  grad-
uated at  Yale
in  1827,  count-
ing among  his
classmates  Hor-
ace Bushnell,
Henry  Durant,
Judges  Ed-
wards, Ilage-
boom,  Gould,
and  Welch,  and
N.  P.  Willis.
He  studied  for
the  ministry  at
Andover  theo-
logical semina-
ry, under  Prof.
Moses  Stuart,
on  whom  he  de-
livered a  memorial  discourse  in  New  York  25  Jan.,
1852.  He  was  graduated  in  1830,  and  in  February,
1831,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  evangelical  Con-
gregational church  in  Brighton,  Mass.,  where  he  re-
mained until  April.  1834.  In  August,  1834,  he  took
charge  of  the  Central  Presbyterian  church  in  Broome
street,  N.  Y.  He  was  moderator  of  the  new-school
general  assembly  at  Washington  in  1852.  The  uni-
versity of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1842,  and  Princeton  college  that  of  LL.  D.  in
1869.  In  1853  his  congregation  founded  the  Madi-
son square  Presbyterian  church,  wliose  pastorate
he  resigned  in  October,  1873,  after  nearly  forty
years  of  consecutive  service  m  one  church,  to'
accept  the  presidency  of  the Union  theological


/^^^ /^^a-i^<^^


seminary  in  the  city  of  New  York,  in  connection
with  the  professorship  of  sacred  rhetoric  and  pas-
toral theology.  He  was  instrumental  in  advanc-
ing the  prosperity  of  that  institution  and  giving  it
an  assured  independence.  In  1871  he  went  as  a
delegate  from  the  evangelical  alliance  to  the  em-
peror of  Russia  to  secure  liberty  of  worship  to  the
dissenters  from  the  Greek  church  in  the  Baltic
provinces,  and  succeeded  in  his  mission.  In  the
same  year  he  acted  as  delegate  from  the  general
assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  of  America  to
the  general  assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  of
Scotland,  and  to  the  Free  church  assembly.  In
1877  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  general  council  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Edinburgh,  responding  to
the  address  of  welcome  by  the  lord  provost  of  that
city.  Dr.  Adams's  chief  characteristic  was  a  broad
catholicity ;  he  abhorred  dogma  and  sectarianism.
It  was  natural,  therefore,  to  find  him,  from  1869  to
1871,  a  leader  of  the  new-school  branch  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  in  the  efforts  to  reunite  the
two  divisions  of  that  church  into  one  body,  and  he
was  chosen  to  address  the  old-school  assembly  that
met  in  New  York  in  June,  1869,  as  the  representa-
tive of  this  new-school  branch.  In  the  same  spirit
he  delivered  the  address  of  welcome  to  the  foreign
delegates  to  the  evangelical  alliance,  which  met  in
New  York,  3  Oct.,  1873,  and  the  following  passage
therefrom  shows  his  creed :  "  We  meet  to  express
and  manifest  our  Christian  unity.  Divers  are  the
names  we  bear  both  as  to  countries  and  churches —
German,  French,  Swiss,  Dutch,  English,  Scotch,
Irish,  Lutheran,  Reformed,  Anglican,  Presbyterian,
Episcopalian,  Methodist,  Baptist,  Independent —
but  we  desire  and  intend  to  show  that  amid  all
this  variety  of  form  and  circumstance  there  is  a
real  unity  of  faith  and  life ;  believing,  according  to
the  familiar  expression  of  our  common  Christian
creed,  '  in  the  Holy  Catholic  Church '  and  the  com-
munion of  saints."  On  5  Oct.,  1873,  was  held  in  his
church  at  Madison  square  a  communion  service  in
which  representatives  from  every  denomination
and  almost  every  nation  on  earth  took  part.  Criti-
cism having  been  made  on  the  dean  of  Canterbury
for  assisting  at  this  service,  Dr.  Adams  published
a  reply  that  silenced  all  animadversion.  As  he
opened  the  exercises  of  this  alliance,  he  was  chosen
to  close  them  at  its  final  meeting  in  the  Academy
of  Music.  His  last  sermon  was  delivered  6  June,
1880,  before  the  graduating  class  at  West  Point.
He  was  a  personal  friend  of  Daniel  Webster,  who
always  attended  his  church  when  passing  through
New  York.  From  a  conference  in  his  study,
brought  about  by  a  sermon  delivered  on  the  duty
of  employers  to  their  employees,  sprang  the  Young
Men's  Christian  Association  of  New  York,  and  the
many  kindred  associations.  He  was  prominent  in
the  council  of  the  American  Bible  society,  the
American  board  of  foreign  missions,  and  the  Ameri-
can tract  society.  He  was  president  of  the  Pres-
byterian board  of  foreign  missions,  and  for  fifteen
years  president  of  the  New  York  institution  for  the
instruction  of  the  deaf  and  dumb,  a  class  of  unfor-
tunates in  whom  he  took  great  interest.  He  edited
the  works  of  Robert  Hall  (4  vols..  New  York,  1830),
and  was  the  author  of  "  The  Three  Gardens :  Eden,
Gethsemane,  and  Paradise  "  (1859) ;  a  biographical
sketch  of  Isaac  Taylor,  prefacing  the  "Spirit  of
Hebrew  Poetry"  (1861);  "Thanksgiving,  Memo-
ries of  the  Day  and  Helps  to  the  Habit "  (1865) ;
"  Conversations  of  Jesus  Christ  with  Representa-
tive Men  "  (18(58).  and  other  works.

ADAMS,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Monaghan,
Ireland,  3  July,  1813.  He  entered  Trinity  college,
Dublin,  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  became  a  scholar


ADAMS


AGASSIZ


33


of  the  house  in  1833.  He  read  law  and  medicine
each  for  a  year,  and  was  for  a  time  with  liis  uncle  at
Ballyhaise  as  an  accountant.  In  1838  he  entered
the  General  theological  seminary  in  New  York,
graduating  in  1841.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  Nashotah  mission,  afterward  Nashotah  theologi-
cal seminary,  in  Wisconsin,  where  he  went  in  Sep-
tember, 1841.  During  the  following  winter  he  con-
tributed to  an  English  publication  an  article  on
the  church's  duties  to  her  emigrants,  which  at-
tracted much  attention.  Since  the  foundation  of
the  seminary  he  has  been  professor  of  systematic
divinity.  lie  has  published  "  Mercy  to  Babes "
(New  York,  1847) ;  "  Christian  Science  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1850) ;  and  "  A  New  Treatise  on  Baptismal
kegeneration "  (New  York,  1871),  and  has  con-
tributed largely  to  periodical  literature,  writing
princi{)ally  on  theological  topics.

ADAMS,  William  Forbes,  bishop,  of  the
American  Episcopal  church,  b.  in  Ireland,  2  Jan.,
1833.  He  came  to  the  United  States  at  the  age  of
eight,  and  was  ordained  deacon  15  Dec.  1859,  and
priest  in  July  of  the  following  year.  While  rector
of  a  parish  in  the  diocese  of  Louisiana  he  was
nominated  in  the  house  of  bishops,  2  Nov.,  1874,
and  elected  missionary  bishop  of  New  Mexico  and
Arizona.  He  was  consecrated  in  St.  Paul's  church.
New  Orleans,  17  Jan.,  1875,  and  entered  upon  his
work :  but,  in  consequence  of  physical  infirmity,  his
resignation  was  offered  and  accepted,  15  Oct.,  1877.
He  is  now  (1886)  rector  of  Holy  Trinity  parish,
Vicksburg,  Miss.

ADAMS,  William  Taylor  ("Oliver  Optic  "),
author,  b.  in  Medway,  Mass.,  30  July,  1822.  He
was  for  twenty  years  a  teacher  in  the  public  schools
of  Boston,  fourteen  years  a  member  of  the  school
committee  of  Dorchester,  and  one  year  a  member
of  the  legislature.  He  has  devoted  most  of  his  life
to  writing  for  the  young,  with  whom  he  has  a  warm
sympathy.  His  career  began  in  1850,  and  he  has
produced  a  thousand  stories  in  newspapers,  exclu-
sive of  his  books.  In  earlier  life  he  edited  the  "  Stu-
dent and  Schoolmate,"  and  in  1881  "Our  Little
Ones,"  but  he  is  best  known  as  an  editor  by  his
"  Oliver  Optic's  Magazine  for  Boys  and  Girls."  He
published  his  first  book  in  1853,  "  Hatchie,  the
Guardian  Slave,  or  the  Heir  of  Bellevue,"  which
had  a  large  sale,  and  was  followed  by  "  In-doors
and  Out,"  a  collection  of  stories.  The  "  Riverdale
Series "  (6  vols.)  for  boys  was  completed  in  1862.
His  other  works,  mainly  in  series,  include  "  The
Boat  Clvb,"  "  Woodville,""  Young  America  Abroad,"
"StaiTv  Flag,"  "Onward  and  Upward,"  "Yacht
Club,"  aad  "  Great  Western."  His  published  works
comprise  about  one  hundred  volumes.  He  has
written  two  novels  for  older  readers,  "  The  Way  of
the  World  "  and  "  Living  too  Fast,"

ADET,  Pierre  Auguste,  French  diplomatist,
b.  in  Nevers  in  1763;  d.  in  1832.  He  left  the
artillery  service  to  devote  himself  to  the  study  of
chemistry,  and  afterward  engaged  in  politics  and
became  minister  to  the  United  States  in  1795.  In
1797  he  broke  off  diplomatic  relations,  presenting
the  note  of  the  Directory  declaring  that  France
would  treat  neutrals  as  they  allowed  themselves  to
be  treated  by  the  English.  "Before  retiirning  to  his
own  country  he  issued  an  address  to  the  American
people,  intended  to  inflame  them  against  the  policy
of  their  government.

ADLER,  Felix,  author,  b.  in  Alzey,  Germany,
13  Aug.,  1851.  He  is  the  son  of  a  Hebrew  rabbi.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  college  in  1870,  and
subsequently  studied  at  Berlin  and  Heidelberg,  ob-
taining the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  After  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  was  professor  of  Hebrew  and

VOL. I. — 3


Oriental  literature  at  Cornell  university  from  1874
to  May,  1876,  when  he  established  a  new  religious
society  in  New  York,  called  the  Society  of  Ethical
Culture,  to  which  he  speaks  regularly  on  Sundays.
He  published  in  1877  a  series  of  discourses  expound-
ing his  views,  luider  the  name  of  "  Creed  and  Deed,"
and  he  has  contributed  many  papers  to  periodical
literature.

ADLER,  George  J.,  philologist,  b.  in  Germany
in  1821 :  d.  in  New  Yoi^,  24  Aug.,  1868.  He  waj5
brought  to  New  York  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and  was
graduated  at  the  university  of  New  York  in  1844,  in
which  institution  he  was  professor  of  German  from
1846  till  1854.  He  compiled  a  German-and-p]ng-
lisli  dictionary,  the  first  edition  of  which  appeared
in  New  York' in  1848,  and  also  a  German  grammar
and  other  text-books,  and  puljlished  a  lecture  en-
titled "  Poetry  of  the  Arabs  of  Spain  "  (New  York,
1868) ;  "  Wilhelm  von  Humboldt's  Linguistic  Stud-
ies" (1868):  and  a  translation,  with  notes,  of
Fauriel's  "  History  of  Provencal  Poetry."  He
was  insane,  with  occasional  lucid  intervals,  for  the
last  eight  years  of  his  life,  and  died  in  Blooming-
dale  asylum.

ADRAIN,  Robert,  mathematician,  b.  in  Car-
rickfergus,  Ireland,  30  Sept.,  1775;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  10  Aug.,  1843.  He  took  part  in
the  Irish  rebellion  of  1798,  received  a  severe  wound,
and  escaped  to  America.  He  taught  school  in  New
Jersey  and  Pennsylvania,  contributed  to  scientific
Journals,  and  from  1810  to  1813  was  professor  of
natural  philosophy  and  mathematics  in  Rutgers
college,  then  until  1825  in  Columbia  college,  and
from  1827  to  1834  was  professor  of  mathematics  in
the  university  of  Pennsylvania.  He  edited  Hut-
ton's  "  Mathematics,"  published  essays  on  the  figure
and  magnitude  of  the  earth  and  on  gravity,  and
was  editor  from  1825  to  1829  of  the  "  Mathematical
Diary." — His  son,  (Jarnett  B.,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  20  Dec,  1816;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,
N.  J.,  17  Aug.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Rutgers
college  in  1833,  and  in  1837  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  He  was  elected  to  congress  from  New  Jer-
sey in  1856,  and  reelected  in  1858,  serving  in  the
house  as  chairman  of  the  eonunittee  on  engraving.

AGASSIZ,  Alexander,  naturalist,  b.  in  Neu-
chatel,  Switzerland,  17  Dec,  1835.  He  is  the  only  son
of  Louis  Agassiz  by  his  first  wife,  and  he  followed
his  father  to  the

United  States  in  ^, — -

1849.  His  early
education  was
received  abroad,
and  after  his
arrival  in  this
country  he  pre-
pared for  Har-
vard, graduat-
ing in  1855.
Then  he  studied
engineering  at
the  Lawrence
scientific  school,
where  in  1857  he
received  the  de-
gree of  B.  S.,  af-
ter which  he
took  a  further
course  in  the
chemical  de-
partment, and  also  taught  in  his  father's  school
for  young  ladies.  In  1859  he  went  to  California  as
an  assistant  on  the  coast  survey,  and  was  engaged
on  the  northwest  boundary.  He  collected  specimens
for  the  museum  at  Cambridge,  and  visited  the  prin-


C^ ,  C^c'^^o^^Aj'


34


AGASSIZ


AOASSIZ


cipal  mines.  In  1800  he  returned  to  Cambridge  and
became  assistant  in  zoology  at  the  museum,  taking
charge  of  it  in  1865  during  his  father's  absence  in
Brazil.  In  1865  he  became  engaged  in  coal-mining
in  Pennsylvania,  and  during  the  following  year  in
the  copper  mines  of  Lake  Superior,  where  he  was
engaged  until  1869  as  superintendent  of  the  Calu-
met and  Hecla  mines.  He  developed  these  de-
posits until  they  became  the  most  successful  copper
mines  in  the  world,  and  from  the  wealth  they  have
brougiit  to  him  he  has  made  gifts  to  Harvard
amounting  to  over  $500,000.  During  1869-'70  he
visited  Europe  and  examined  the  museums  and
collections  of  England.  France,  Germany,  Italy,
and  Scandinavia.  On  his  return  in  1870  he  re-
sumed his  duties  at  the  museum  in  Cambridge,  of
which  he  was  made  curator,  on  the  death  of  his
father  in  1874,  and  remained  as  such  until  1885,
when  he  resigned,  owing  to  ill*  health.  During  the
summer  of  1878  he  acted  as  director  of  the  Ander-
son school  of  natural  history,  and  in  1875  he  visited
the  western  coast  of  South  America,  examining  the
copper  mines  of  Peru  and  Chili,  and  making  an
extended  survey  of  Lake  Titicaca  and  collecting
for  the  Peabody  museum  a  great  number  of  Peru-
vian antiquities.  He  afterward  went  to  Scotland
to  assist  Sir  Wyville  Thompson  in  arranging  the
collections  made  during  the  exploring  expedition
of  the  "  Challenger,"  part  of  which  he  brought  to
this  country.  He  wrote  one  of  the  final  reports  on
the  zoology  of  the  expedition,  that  on  Echini.
From  1876  to  1881  his  winters  were  spent  in  deep-
sea  dredging  expeditions  in  connection  with  the
coast  survey,  the  steamer  "Blake"  having  been
placed  at  his  disposal  for  this  purpose.  Mr.  Agas-
siz  was  a  fellow  of  Harvard  college  till  1885,  and
has  served  as  an  overseer.  He  is  a  member  of  the
national  academy  of  sciences,  of  the  American  as-
sociation for  the  advancement  of  science,  being  its
vice-president  during  the  Boston  meeting  of  1880,
of  the  American  academy  of  sciences,  and  of  nu-
merous other  scientific  societies  of  this  country  and
Europe.  His  publications,  in  the  form  of  pam-
phlets, reports,  and  contributions  to  scientific  peri-
odicals and  the  proceedings  of  societies,  are  very
numerous,  and  are  principally  on  subjects  connect-
ed with  marine  zoology.  Most  of  these  are  to  be
found  in  the  bulletins  and  memoirs  of  the  museum  .
at  Cambridge.  It  has  been  said  that  he  is  "the
best  authority  in  the  world  on  certain  forms  of
marine  life."  He  is  the  author,  with  Mrs.  Eliza-
beth C.  Agassiz,  of  "Seaside  Studies  in  Natural
History"  (Boston,  1865);  of  "Marine  Animals  of
Massachusetts  Bay  "  (1871),  and  of  the  fifth  volume
of  "Contributions  to  the  Natural  History  of  the
United  States,"  left  incomplete  by  his  father.

AOASSIZ,  Jean  Louis  Riidolphe,  naturalist,
b.  in  Motier,  canton  Fribourg,  Switzerland,  28
May,  1807;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  14  Dec,  1873.
His  father  was  pastor  of  the  Protestant  parish  of
Motier,  a  profession  which  his  forefathers  had  for
six  generations ;  his  mother.  Mile.  Rose  Mayor,  was
the  daughter  of  a  ohysician  residing  in  Cudrefin,
canton  de  Vaud.  His  first  studies  at  home  were
directed  by  his  mother,  who  was  a  woman  of  high
endowments  and  rare  culture.  At  the  age  of  ten
years  he  and  his  younger  brother  were  sent  to  the
gymnasium  at  Bi'el,  in  the  neighboring  canton  of
Bern;  here  he  acquired  the  ancient  and  modern
languages,  which  later  became  so  valuable  to  him
in  his  biological  investigations.  Very  early  in  life
Agassiz  showed  a  fondness  for  natural  science,  and
in  his  boyhood  days  he  began  collecting  specimens.
His  leisure  time  at  the  gymnasium  was  similarly  oc-
cupied, and  his  first  collection  of  fishes  dates  from


this  period.  During  the  vacations  spent  at  Orbe
(Fribourg),  whither  his  father  had  been  transferred,
he  became  intimate  with  a  young  clergyman  named
Fivaz,  who  en-
couraged his  in-
terest in  natural
history  and  led
him  to  the  ac-
tive study  of
botany.  He  con-
tinued his  edu-
cation in  the
college  at  Lau-
sanne in  1833,
and  in  1824  be-
gan the  study  of
medicine  in  Zu-
rich, in  accord-
ance with  the
earnest  wishes
of  his  parents.
Thence  he  went
to  Heidelberg,
where  he  de-
voted his  prin-
cipal attention  to  anatomy  under  the  famous  Tiede-
mann,  and  in  1827  to  Munich,  where  he  came  under
the  infiuence  of  Schelling,  Oken,  Martins,  Dollinger,
Wagler,  Zucearini,  Fuchs,  and  von  Kobell.  Dollin-
ger, especially,  at  whose  house  he  occupied  a  room,
recognized  the  high  talent  of  his  pupil,  and  fostered
his  long-cherished  plan  of  devoting  himself  exclu-
sively to  zoology.  While  at  Munich,  Agassiz  organ-
ized the  club  called  the  "  Little  Academy,"  and  be-
came its  presiding  officer.  It  was  before  this  society
that  Born,  Kudolphi,  Michaelis,  Schimper,  and
Braun  first  disclosed  their  latest  discoveries,  and
even  Dollinger  made  his  new  ideas  known  there  be-
fore they  were  published.  Martins,  then  lately  re-
turned from  Brazil,  where  he  had  been  sent  on  a
scientific  exploring  expedition,  intrusted  young
Agassiz,  on  the  death  of  Spix,  with  the  description
of  the  fishes  that  had  been  collected.  This  work,
completed  when  he  had  scarcely  reached  his  twenty-
first  year,  was  dedicated  to  Cuvier,  and  published
in  Latin  (Munich,  1829).  The  brilliant  accomplish-
ment of  so  arduous  an  undertaking  at  once  gained
him  a  reputation  as  one  of  the  first  ichthyologists.
His  attention  was  then  directed  to  fossil  fishes,
and  those  at  the  museum  in  Munich,  as  well  as  such
other  paleontological  collections  as  were  available
in  central  Germany,  were  carefully  studied.

Meanwhile  he  had  not  neglected  his  medical
studies,  and  in  1829  he  received  the  doctor's  degree
in  medicine  from  Munich,  and  in  philosophy  from
Erlangen  in  1830.  His  second  great  undertaking
was  the  "  Natural  History  of  the  Fresh-water  Fishes
of  Europe,"  in  the  preparation  of  which  he  was  as-
sisted pecuniarily  by  the  publisher,  Cotta,  of  Stutt-
gart. It  was  never  completed,  but  was  partially
published  in  1839-'40.  After  receiving  his  de-
grees, he  spent  some  time  in  Vienna,  attending
the  hospitals,  and  pursuing  his  studies  of  the  fos-
sil fishes  by  examining  the  collections  in  the  im-
perial museum.  By  the  liberality  of  his  uncle,
Frangois  Mayor,  and  of  Christinat,  a  friend  of  Agas-
siz's  father,  he  was  enabled  to  continue  his  studies,
and  spent  two  years  (1831-'2)  in  Paris.  This  city
was  then  the  great  scientific  centre  of  Europe,  and
its  collections  were  the  richest  and  most  celebrated
on  the  continent.  Men  who  were  eminent  as  spe-
cialists were  attracted  to  the  capital,  and  formed
part  of  the  brilliant  circle  under  the  leadership
of  the  distinguished  Humboldt.  Cuvier,  the  great
French  naturalist,  received  the  young  Agassiz  with


AGASSIZ


AGASSIZ


35


enthusiasm.  The  valuable  treasures  of  the  Paris
museum  were  at  his  service,  and  the  material  col-
lected for  years  by  Cuvier  for  his  work  on  fishes
was  freely  transferred  to  the  young  naturalist.
The  development  theoiy  of  Geoffroy,  then  recently
advanced,  was  opposed  by  Cuvier  with  all  the
power  of  his  science  and  detailed  knowledge.
Agassiz  accepted  the  ideas  of  his  master,  and  firmly
adhered  to  them  throughout  his  life,  and  in  later
years,  when  the  development  theory  advanced  by
"Darwin  came  into  prominence,  he  was  uncompro-
mising in  his  efforts  against  its  promulgation.
Humboldt  also  became  his  firm  friend  and  patron,
aiding  him  materially  in  the  publication  of  his
work.  Among  his  associates  were  Owen,  Milne-
Edwards,  Rud.  Wagner,  and  Johannes  Mliller.

In  1882,  shortly  after  the  death  of  Cuvier,  he
returned  to  Switzerland  and  became  professor  of
natural  history  in  the  college  at  Neuchatel.  His
labors  on  the  fossil  fishes  were  gradually  approach-
ing completion,  the  first  of  the  five  quarto  volumes,
"  Recherches  sur  les  poissons  fossiles,"  appearing
in  1833  and  the  last  in  1843.  This  was  undoubt-
edly Agassiz's  most  important  contribution  to
science,  and  forms,  with  Cuvier's,  Valenciennes',
and  Johannes  Mliller's  works,  the  foundation  of
our  present  knowledge  of  fishes.  In  this  book  one
thousand  species  were  completely,  and  seven  hun-
dred partially,  figured  and  described.  At  Neuf-
chatel  he  gathered  around  him  young  and  talented
pupils,  and  the  little  city  became  one  of  the  chief
seats  of  science  in  Switzerland.  He  created  the
natural  history  museum,  and  was  the  chief  founder
of  the  scientific  society,  which  issued  the  first  vol-
ume of  its  memoirs  in  1835.  During  the  summers
frequent  scientific  excursions  were  made  in  the
Jura  and  the  Alps.  These  expeditions  led  to  his
study  of  the  glaciers,  and  in  1840  he  published  his
first  "  Etudes  sur  les  glaciers,"  which  gave  the  re-
sults of  his  observations  during  the  eight  preced-
ing summers.  He  had  erected  a  station  on  the
middle  of  the  Aar  glacier  at  a  height  of  8,000  feet
above  the  sea  and  twelve  miles  from  any  human
habitation,  and  from  this  now  celebrated  Hotel  des
Neufchatelois  he  conducted  his  experiments.  In
1847  he  published  his  "  Systeme  glaciaire,"  in  which
he  thoroughly  discussed  the  chief  phenomena  of
glaciers  and  more  fully  developed  his  views  on
their  earlier  extension.  In  the  mean  while  he  had
also  devoted  considera))le  attention  to  the  echi-
noderms,  and  in  1836  and  1837  published  special
memoirs  on  them.  His  monograph  on  living  and
fossil  echinoderms,  published  in  parts,  was  first
issued  in  1839  ;  portions  of  this  work  were  prepared
by  Desor  and  by  Valentin.  In  1834,  in  1S35,  and
in  1840,  Agassiz  visited  England  to  obtain  materi-
al for  his  work  on  fossil  fislies,  and  as  a  result  he
published  monographs  on  the  '•  Fossil  Fishes  of  the
Devonian  System  "  (1844),  and  on  the  "  B^ishes  of
the  London  "Clay  "(1845).

In  1846  he  came  to  the  United  States,  partly  to
make  himself  familiar  with  the  geology  and  natural
history  of  this  country,  in  fulfilment  of  a  mission
suggested  to  the  king  of  Prussia  by  Humboldt,  and
partly  to  deliver  a  series  of  lectures  on  "  Compara-
tive Embryology,"  at  the  Lowell  institute,  Boston.
The  lectures  met  with  a  most  cordial  reception,
and  by  special  request  he  delivered  an  additional
course  on  glacial  phenomena.  He  then  visited
New  York,  Philadelphia,  Charleston,  and  other
cities,  in  search  of  material  for  his  report.  In  1847
Supt.  A.  D.  Bache  placed  at  his  disposal  the  use  of
the  steamer  "  Bibb,"  belonging  to  the  coast  survey.
This  led  to  a  scientific  cruise  along  the  coast  of
Massachusetts,  and  some  years  later  (1850-1)  to  a


more  extended  trip  to  the  coral  reefs  of  Florida.
In  this  manner  he  became  thoroughly  familiar  with
the  marine  life  along  our  shores.  The  liberality  of
this  offer  affording  him  such  valuable  facilities  for
the  continuation  of  his  studies,  and  the  enthusiasm
with  which  he  was  everywhere  greeted,  induced
him  to  make  the  United  States  his  home.  The
Prussian  government  released  him  from  his  scien-
tific mission,  and  he  accepted,  in  1848,  the  chair  of
zoology  and  geology  in  the  Lawrence  scientific
school  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  a  professorship  spe-
cially created  for  him  by  Mr.  Lawrence,  At  Cam-
bridge, as  abroad,  he  attracted  brilliant  young  men,
enthusiasts  in  science,  many  of  whom  to-day  are
among  the  leading  naturalists  in  this  country.  Of
these,  besides  his  son  Alexander,  may  be  mentioned
Bickmore,  Clark,  Hartt,  Hyatt,  Lyman,  Morse,
Niles,  Packard,  Putnam,  Scudder,  Shaler,  Stimp-
son,  Tenney,  Verrill,  Wilder,  and  Ward.  He  pre-
pared during  1848,  with  Dr.  A.  A.  Gould,  "  Prin-
ciples of  Zoology,"  a  text-book  for  the  use  of
schools  and  colleges.  In  the  summer  of  the  same
year,  with  twelve  of  his  pupils,  he  made  an  explor-
ing expedition  to  Lake  Superior,  and  the  results
were  published  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Lake  Supe-
rior ;  its  Physical  Characteristics,"  etc.  (1850).

In  succeeding  years  he  traversed  the  entire
country,  lecturing  in  all  the  larger  cities  and  accu-
mulating vast  collections  of  specimens,  which  con-
stituted the  foundation  of  the  natural  history  mu-
seum in  Cambridge.  From  1851  to  1854  he  was
professor  of  comparative  anatomy  and  zoology  in
the  medical  college  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  dur-
ing this  time  he  studied  the  marine  animals  of  the
southern  coast,  also  visiting  the  adjoining  states ;
but,  as  the  climate  did  not  agi-ee  with  him,  he  re-
turned to  Cambridge.  In  1854  he  brought  to  a
successful  termination,  by  the  publication  of  a
fourth  volume,  the  "  Bibliographia  Zoologize  et
Geologiae,"  which  he  had  begun  in  1848  with  H.  E,
Strickland.  This  work  contains  a  full  list  of  all
the  periodicals  devoted  to  zoology  and  geology,
and  an  alphabetical  list  of  authors  and  their  works
in  the  same  departments.  It  was  the  complement
of  his  "  Nomenclator  Zoologicus,"  which  appeared
in  1842-'46.  Agassiz  next  began  to  collect  mate-
rial for  the  publication  of  a  magnificent  work  to
be  called  "  Contributions  to  the  Natural  History
of  the  United  States."  In  1857  the  first  volume
appeared,  containing  as  an  introduction  his  well-
known  '•  Essay  on  Classification,"  in  which  the
question  of  development  was  considered  in  a  man-
ner directly  in  opposition  to  the  now  generally  ac-
cepted theory  of  descent.  Of  this  work,  projected
on  a  gigantic  scale,  only  four  volumes  ever  ap-
peared during  his  life ;  the  fifth,  left  incomplete,
was  issued  by  his  son.  His  attention  was  then
turned  to  his  collections,  which  had  accumulated
in  great  bulk,  and,  unclassified,  were  stored  wher-
ever available  accommodation  could  be  obtained.
In  June,  1859,  the  museum  of  comparative  zoology
was  founded,  with  Agassiz  as  its  curator,  and  until
his  death  much  of  his  time  was  devoted  to  the
classification  and  arrangement  of  the  specimens.

In  1865,  his  health  having  become  somewhat  im-
paired by  constant  work,  he  was  enabled,  by  the
liberality  of  Mr.  Nathaniel  Thayer,  a  Boston  mer-
chant, to  visit  Brazil.  Here  again  he  made  great
collections,  which  now  enrich  the  museum  at  Cam-
bridge, and  a  journal  of  his  trip  was  published  in
1867.  He  was  appointed  in  1868  a  non-resident
professor  of  natural  history  in  Cornell  university,
Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  and  thei'e  delivered  a  course  of  lec-
tures. In  1871,  the  coast  survey,  having  occasion
to  send  the  new  war  steamer  "  Hassler "  around


36


AGNEW


AGtTEYNABA


Cape  Horn  to  operate  on  the  Pacific  coast,  extend-
ed to  Agassiz  an  invitation  to  make  the  voyage  in
the  interest  of  science.  The  expedition,  with  a
competent  corps  of  assistants,  sailed  in  Deceinber
and  reached  San  Francisco  hite  in  August.  Much
vahiable  scientific  information  was  accumuhited,
new  facts  concerning  the  glacial  phenomena  of
South  America  were  obtained,  careful  observations
of  the  temperature  of  the  water  and  deep-sea
soundings  were  regularly  made,  and  great  collec-
tions of  fishes,  reptiles,  mollusks,  and  other  speci-
mens of  natural  history  were  gathered,  a  large
portion  of  which  were  added  to  his  museum  in
Cambridge.  The  gift  of  Penikese  island  and
money  for  its  endowment,  by  John  Anderson,  of
New  York,  in  1873,  made  possible  the  establish-
ment of  the  Penikese  island  school  of  natural
history.  This  summer  school,  affording  opportu-
nities for  the  study  of  specimens  direct  from  nature
without  the  intervention  of  text-books,  was  the
accomplishment  of  a  long-cherished  project  of
Agassiz's.  The  first  season  was  enthusiastically
passed,  and  at  its  end  the  pupils  bade  farewell  to
tlie  master,  who,  a  few  months  later,  after  a  short
illness,  died  in  Cambridge.  His  grave  in  Mt.
Auburn  is  marked  by  a  boulder  from  the  glacier
of  the  Aar,  and  shaded  by  pine-trees  brought  from
Switzerland.

Agassiz  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
universities  of  Edinburgh  and  Dublin  before  he
was  thirty  years  of  age.  In  1836  he  was  elected  to
the  French  academy  of  sciences,  and  in  the  same
year  he  was  made  a  fellow  of  the  royal  society  of
London.  He  was  also  a  member  of  nearly  all  the
learned  and  scientific  societies  in  Europe.  In  the
United  States,  he  was  a  member  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  of  the
Boston  natural  history  society,  and  of  many  other
scientific  organizations.  He  was  also  an  original
member  of  the  national  academy  of  sciences.

In  addition  to  the  works  already  enumerated,
there  appeared,  under  the  title  of  "  The  Structure
of  Animal  Life"  (Boston,  1852),  a  collection  of
newspaper  extracts  of  lectures  delivered  extempo-
raneously. This  book  was  never  revised  by  him,
and  contains  numerous  errors.  Agassiz  also  pub-
lished "Methods  of  Study  in  Natural  History"
(Boston,  1863);  "Geological  Studies"  (two  series,
Boston,  1866-76);  and  "Journal  in  Brazil"  (Bos-
ton, 1868),  in  conjunction  with  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Cary
Agassiz,  who  has  edited  "  Louis  Agassiz :  His  Life
and  Correspondence  "  (Boston,  1886).  His  contri-
butions of  scientific  memoirs  to  transactions  and
proceedings  of  various  societies  were  numerous.  A
complete  list  of  them  may  be  found  in  the  cata-
logue of  scientific  papers  published  by  the  royal
society  of  London.

AGNEW,  Cornelius  Ilea,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  Aug.,  1830 :  d.  there,  18  April,  1888.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  College  in  1849,
studied  medicine  at  the  college  of  physicians  and
surgeons,  and  received  his  degree  in  1852.  Dur-
ing the  following  year  he  was  house  surgeon,  and
subsequently  curator,  at  the  New  York  hospital.
After  studying  in  Europe,  he  was  surgeon  to  the
New  York  eye  and  ear  infirmary  until  1864.  In
1858  he  was  ap|)ointed  surgeon  -  general  of  the
state  of  New  York,  and  at  the  outbreak  of  the
civil  war  he  became  medical  director  of  the  New
York  state  volunteer  hospital,  in  which  capacity
he  performed  most  efficient  service.  He  was  a
prominent  member  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commis-
sion, and  much  of  its  success  must  be  attributed  to
his  labors. In  1868  he  established  an  ophthalmic


clinic  in  the  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,
and  during  the  following  year  he  was  elected  clini-
cal professor  of  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  in  the
same  institution.  He  founded  in  1868  the  Brook-
lyn eye  and  ear  hospital,  and  in  1869  the  Man-
hattan eye  and  ear  hospital.  For  several  years
he  was  one  of  the  managers  of  the  New  York  state
hospital  for  the  insane,  at  Poughkeepsie.  Dr.
Agnew  exhibited  considerable  interest  in  the  edu-
cational institutions  of  New  York  city.  In  1859
he  was  elected  a  trustee  of  the  public  schools,  and
subsequently  he  was  president  of  the  board.  In
1864  he  was  a'^sociated  in  the  establishment  of  the
Columbia  college  school  of  mines,  and  in  1874  be-
came one  of  the  trustees  of  the  college.  In  1872
he  was  elected  president  of  the  State  medical  so-
ciety. He  contributed  numerous  papers  to  the
current  medical  journals,  most  of  which  are  de-
voted to  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear,  and  he  also
published  brief  monographs  and  a  "  Series  of
American  Clinical  Lectures,"  edited  by  E.  C.  Se-
guin,  M.  D.  (New  York,  1875).

AGNEW,  James,  British  soldier,  killed  in  the
battle  of  Grermantown,  4  Oct.,  1777.  He  came  to
Boston  in  the  latter  part  of  1775,  holding  the  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  commanded  a  brigade
in  1776,  and  was  engaged  at  Brooklyn  heights,  in
the  Danbury  expedition,  and  at  Brandywine,  where
he  was  wounded.

AGRAMONTE,  I^nacio,  Cuban  revolutionist,
b.  in  Puerto  Principe,  Cuba,  in  1841 ;  d.  11  May,
1873.  He  studied  law  in  Havana,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1867.  When  the  insurrection
against  Spanish  rule  broke  out  in  the  eastern  part
of  the  island  in  1868,  Agramonte  took  a  promi-
nent part  in  the  uprising  of  the  Camagiiey  district
in  November,  and  in  February,  1869,  he  was  ap-
pointed secretary  to  the  provisional  government  of
the  insurrectionists.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the
Cuban  congress,  and  one  of  the  signers  of  the  act
freeing  the  slaves  in  the  island.  Finally  he  took
the  field,  and  held  a  commission  as  major-general
of  the  forces  operating  in  the  Camagiiey  district,
where  he  distinguished  himself  in  many  bloody
contests  with  the  Spanish  troops.  He  fell  in  the
battle  of  J  imaguay u.

AGUADO,  Pedro  (ah-goo-ah'-do),  Spanish  Fran-
ciscan monk,  b.  in  Valdemoro,  near  Madrid,  in
the  16th  century.  He  went  to  South  America,
where  he  wrote  an  interesting  book  that  was  pub-
lished under  the  title  of  "  Descubrimiento  pacifica-
cion  y  poblacion  de  la  provincia  de  Santa  Marta  y
Nuevq  reino  de  Granada."

AGUERO,  Joaquin  de,  Cuban  revolutionist,
b.  in  Puerto  Principe,  Cuba,  in  1816 ;  d.  there  12
Aug.,  1851.  In  1843  he  freed  all  his  slaves.  In
1851  he  headed  an  insurrection  against  the  Spanish
government,  in  the  central  part  of  the  island,  was
defeated  after  a  desperate  contest,  and  was  cap-
tured and  shot,  together  with  his  principal  followers.

AGUEYNABA  (ahg-way-nah'-ba).  I.  Sachem  of
the  island  of  Porto  Rico  when  the  Spaniards,  under
command  of  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  took  possession
of  that  part  of  the  West  Indies.  He  was  friendly
to  Ponce,  and  accompanied  him  in  an  expedition
to  Santo  Domingo.  Soon  after  returning  to  his
ntitive  land  he  died,  in  1510.  II.  Sachem,  brother
of  the  preceding,  whom  he  succeeded  early  in  1511.
He  promoted  rebellion  among  his  fellow-Indians,
who  attacked  the  Spaniards  and  killed  many  of
them.  At  first  the  Indians  refused  to  follow  him,
fearing  the  result  of  a  war,  as  they  believed  the
Europeans  to  be  immortal ;  but  he  convinced  them
of  the  contrary  by  having  a  young  Spaniard  kept
under  water  until  dead,  and  'then  preserved  until


AGUILAR


AINSLIE


37


marks  of  decomposition  became  visible.  Thus  en-
couraged, the  natives  rebelled,  but  they  were  de-
feated, and  the  sachem  fell  in  battle.

ACtUILAR,  Maria,  Mexican  author,  b.  in  At-
lixco,  near  Puebla,  3  March,  1095 ;  d.  2o  Feb.,  1756,
She  entered  the  nunnery  of  Santa  Rosa,  of  Puebla,
at  the  age  of  nineteen,  and  in  1740  was  elected
abbess  of  her  convent.  Her  conventional  name
was  Sor  Maria  Agueda  de  San  Ignacio,  and  she
was  highly  esteemed  for  her  scholarship  and  zeal.
She  wrote  several  religious  books,  which  were
printed  in  Puebla  and  in  the  city  of  Mexico.

AOUIRRE,  Jose  Maria  (ah-geer'-rhe),  Mexi-
can lawyer,  b.  in  the  city  Of  Mexico  in  1778 ;  d.  in
1852.  He  was  a  priest,  but  the  authorities  gave
him  permission  to  practise  law,  which  he  had  stud-
ied thoroughly.  His  extraordinary  ability  as  a
lawyer  was  such  that,  in  fifty-two  years  of  continu-
ous practice  at  the  bar,  he  only  lost  half  a  dozen
cases.  He  distinguished  himself  specially  in  de-
fending persons  accused  by  the  Inquisition.

AGfUIRRE,  Lope  de,  Spanish  adventurer,  lived
in  the  lOth  century.  He  accompanied  Orsua  in  the
search  for  Eldorado  on  the  American  continent,
instigated  him  to  seize  upon  the  supreme  com-
mand, and  then  murdered  him  and  succeeded  to  his
place.  He  committed  a  series  of  atrocious  crimes,
and  finallv  met  with  a  violent  death.

AHUIZOTL  (ah-we-sut'-l),  king  of  the  Aztecs,
reigned  toward  the  end  of  the  15th  century;  d.
in  1502.  He  is  reputed  to  have  enlarged  the  em-
pire, and  built  many  canals  and  important  build-
ings. He  was  constantly  at  war,  and  conquered
Guatemala.  According  to  tradition,  72,344  prison-
ers were  immolated  by  his  order  in  four  days  at  the
consecration  of  a  temple  in  1486.

AHUMADA  Y  VILLALON,  Agustin  de  (ah-
oo-mah'-dah),  marquis  of  Las  Amarillas,  42d  viceroy
of  Mexico,  d.  5  Feb.,  1760.  He  assumed  the  office
of  viceroy  10  Nov.,  1755,  and  distinguished  him-
self by  his  honesty  and  zeal  in  eradicating  abuses
and  introducing  reforms.  In  his  time  happened
the  sudden  eruption  of  a  new  volcano  at  Jorullo,
near  Patzcuaro,  when  its  ashes  spread  in  large
quantities  and  caused  a  great  panic  among  the
population  of  Queretaro.  Ahumada  died  very  poor
in  Cuernavaca,  where  he  had  gone  for  his  health.

AIKEN,  Charles  Aiig-ustiis,  educator,  b.  in
Manchester,  Vt.,  30  Oct.,  1827.  He  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  college  in  1846  and  at  Andover
theological  seminary  in  1853.  From  1859  to  1866
he  was  professor  of  Latin  at  Dartmouth,  and  from
1866  to  1869  at  Princeton  college.  From  1869  to
1871  he  was  president  of  Union  college.  Subse-
quently he  held  the  chair  of  Christian  ethics  and
apologetics  in  Princeton  theological  seminary.

AIKEN,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  Flat  Rock,  N.  C,  7  Sept.,  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  the  college  of  South  Carolinsl
in  1825,  and  became  an  extensive  rice-planter  on
Jehosse  island,  near  Charleston.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  from  1838  to  1840,  state
senator  in  1842,  governor  of  South  Carolina  in
1844,  and  representative  in  congress  from  1851  to
1857.  He  contributed  liberally  to  charitable  and
educational  institutions.  He  took  no  part  in  se-
cession, and  was  elected  again  to  congress  in  1866,
but  was  not  admitted  to  a  seat.

AIKINS,  James  Cox,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in
the  township  of  Toronto,  30  March,  1823.  He  was
educated  at  Victoria  college,  represented  the  coun-
ty of  Peel  in  the  Canadian  house  of  assembly  from
1854  until  1861,  was  a  member  of  the  legislative
council  of  Canada  from  1862  until  the  union ;  be-
came a  member  of  the  privy  council  9  Dec,  1869 ;


was  secretary  of  state  of  Canada  from  1869  until
the  resignation  of  the  Macdonald  government,  5
Nov.,  1873 ;  was  appointed  secretary  of  state  a  sec-
ond time  19  Oct.,  1878,  and  was  called  to  the  senate
in  May.  1867. Mr.  Aikins  is  a  liberal  conservative.

AIKMAN,  Alexander,  journalist,  b.  in  Scot-
land in  1755;  d.  at  Prospect  Pen,  St.  Andrews,
Jamaica,  in  July,  1838.  He  came  to  Charleston,
S.  C,  and  learned  the  trade  of  a  printer.  When
the  American  colonies  revolted  he  left  the  country
and  established  in  Jamaica  a  loyalist  newspaper,
the  "  Jamaica  Mercury,"  afterward  called  the
"  Royal  Gazette."  He  was  public  printer  in  that
colony,  and  sat  for  many  years  in  the  assembly.

AILLEBOUT,  Louis  d',  French  governor  of
Canada,  d.  in  Quebec  in  1660.  He  brought  a  com-
pany of  colonists  for  the  island  of  Montreal,  and,
after  administering  that  province  in  the  absence
of  Maisonneuve,  was  nominated  governor  of  Three
Rivers.  From  1647  to  1651  he  was  governor  of
Canada.  He  negotiated  unsuccessfully  with  the
governors  of  the  New  England  provinces  for  a
white  league  against  the  Iroquois  chiefs.

AINSLIE,  Hew,  Scottish-American  poet,  b.  in
Bargeny  Mains,  Ayrshire,  5  April,  1792;  d.  in
Louisville,  Ky.,  11  March,  1878.  He  was  sent  to
the  Ayr  academy  to  complete  his  education,  but
was  compelled  to  leave  that  institution  when  four-
teen years  of  age,  in  consequence  of  ill-health.
Three  years  afterward  he  went  to  Glasgow  and  en-
gaged in  the  study  of  law  with  a  relative,  but,  as  it
proved  uncongenial,  he  returned  to  Roslin,  where
his  parents  then  resided,  and  engaged  in  landscape
gardening.  Soon  afterward  he  was  appointed  a
clerk  in  the  register  house,  Edinburgh,  and  at  in-
tervals while  so  employed  acted  as  amanuensis  for
Prof.  Dugald  Stewart,  the  last  of  whose  works  he
copied  for  the  press.  He  married  in  1812,  and  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  in  July,  1822.  Three
years  after  his  arrival  he  was  attracted  by  Robert
Owen's  peculiar  social  system  as  exemplified  at  New
Harmony,  Ind.,  but  after  a  trial  of  it  for  a  year  he
gave  it  up.  He  subsequently  removed  to  Cincinnati
and  became  partner  in  a  brewery.  A  branch  that
he  established  in  1829  in  Louisville  was  destroyed
by  an  inundation  of  the  Ohio  in  1832,  and  a  similar
establishment  erected  by  him  the  same  year  at  New
Albany  was  burned  in  1834.  Subsequently,  till  his
retirement  from  business,  he  was  employed  in  super-
intending the  erection  of  mills,  factories,  and  brew-
eries in  the  western  states.  Ainslie's  best-known
book,  "  A  Pilgrimage  to  the  Land  of  Burns  "  (1820),
consists  of  a  narrative  embodying  a  number  of
sparkling  lyrics.  A  collection  of  his  Scottish  songs
and  ballads,  edited  by  his  friend  William  Wilson,
was  issued  in  New  York  in  1855.  Ainslie  is  one  of
the  minor  Scottish  poets  represented  in  "  Whistle
Binkie "  (Glasgow,  1853)  and  in  Wilson's  "  Poets
and  Poetry  of  Scotland"  (New  York,  1876).  In
1864  he  visited  his  native  land  and  received  grati-
fying evidences  of  esteem  and  friendship  from
literary  men.  His  best-known  poems  are  "The
Ingle  Side  "  and  "  On  wi'  the  Tartan,"  which  were
much  admired  by  Sir  Walter  Scott,  who  by  mis-
take handed  Ainslie,  at  the  register  house,  several
pages  of  the  MS.  of  one  of  his  early  novels  in  place
of  a  legal  document.  Sir  Walter's  confidence  was
never  betrayed.  Another  circumstance  that  Ainslie
recalled  with  pleasure  was  related  by  him  on  the
one  hundred  and  twelfth  anniversary  of  the  birth
of  Robert  Burns,  to  a  large  company  assembled  in
Louisville,  over  which  he  presided,  to  celebrate  the
day  so  dear  to  all  Scotchmen — the  circumstance  of
his  having  had  the  honor  of  kissing  "  Bonnie  Jean."
widow  of  the  great  poet.


AINSWORTH


alamAn


AINSWORTH,  Laban,  clercrvman,  b.  in  Wood-
stock, Conn.,  19  July,  1757;  d.  in'Jaffrey,  N.  H.,  17
March,  1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
college  in  1778,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
church  at  Jaffrey  in  1782,  where  he  remained  until
his  death,  seventy-six  years.  This  is  probably  the
longest  pastorate  on  record.

AITKEN,  Robert,  publisher,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1734 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  July,  1802.  He  settled
in  Philadelphia  in  17(39,  and  published  the  "  Penn-
sylvania Magazine,  or  American  Monthly  Museum,"
from  January,  1775,  till  June,  1776,  having  Hop-
kinson  and  Witherspoon  for  contributors,  and  was
imprisoned  in  1777  for  his  attachment  to  the  cause
of  independence.  He  printed  the  first  American
bible  in  1782,  losing  money  on  the  venture,  and  is
reputed  to  have  been  the  author  of  "  An  Inquiry
Concerning  the  Pi-inciples  of  a  Commercial  Sys-
tem for  the  United  States  "  (1787).

AKERLY,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  1785;  d.
on  Staten  Island,  6  July,  1845.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  college  in  1804.  He  contributed  to
medical  and  scientific  periodicals,  was  active  in  es-
tablishing institutions  for  deaf  mutes  and  the
blind,  and  published  an  "  Essay  on  the  Geology  of
the  Hudson  River"  (1820)  and  " Observations  on
Deafness  "(1821).

AKERMAN,  Amos  Tappan,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
Hampshire  in  1819.  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth college  in  1842,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1841,  and  settled  in  Elberton,  Ga.,  in  1850.  He
followed  his  state  in  secession  in  1861,  and  served
the  confederate  government  in  the  quartermaster's
department ;  but  after  the  war  he  was  a  republican
and  reconstructionist.  He  was  appointed  district
attorney  for  Georgia  in  1866  and  attorney-general
of  the  United  States  in  1870,  remaining  in  that
office  until  1872,  when  he  resigned.

AKERS,  Benjamin  Paul  (ii-kers),  sculptor,  b.
in  Saccarappa,  VVestbrook.  Me.,  10  July,  1825 ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21  May,  1861.  No  genius
was  ever  more  a  special  gift  than  his,  since  there
could  hardly  be  less  congenial  soil  for  the  growth
of  an  artist  than  a
small  Maine  village
sixty  years  ago.  He
had  never  seen  an  art-
ist, nor  even  a  statue  or
a  bust  when  he  began
modelling.  He  had
previously  attempted
painting,  which  did  not
satisfy  him,  and  the
first  plaster  cast  that
he  ever  saw  was,  he
said,  "  a  revelation "
to  him.  In  1849  he
went  to  Boston  and
took  lessons  in  plaster
easting  from  Carew,
and  returning  home  to
Hollis,  where  his  fami-
ly then  lived,  he  ob-
tained some  clay  from
a  pottery  and  '  began
modelling,  space  for  the  work  being  "given  him  in
the  office  of  the  village  physician,  who  believed  in
his_  genius.  His  first  work  was  a  head  of  Christ,
which  was  remarkably  original  and  impressive,  and
was  afterward  ordered  in  marble  bv  the  United
States  minister  to  the  Hague.  Akers  next  made
the  bust  of  a  respected  townsman,  of  which  in  after
years  he  said :  "  It  was  as  ugly  as  Fra  Angelico's
devil,  and  was  a  remarkablv  faithful  likeness."  The
next  summer  he  took  a  studio  in  Portland,  and  for


vJiAb.


over  two  years  labored  diligently  and  conscientiously
at  what  he  now  felt  to  be  his  real  life-work.  H  e  made
many  portrait  busts,  among  them  being  that  of  Gov.
Gilm'an,  of  New  Hampshire,  Rev.  Dr.  Nichols,  of
Portland,  Prof.  Sheppard,  John  Neal,  Prof.  Cleave-
land,  Samuel  Appleton,of  Boston,  Henry  W.  Long-
fellow, and  others  of  less  note.  He  also  produced
several  ideal  works,  among  them  a  head  of  "  Char-
lotte Corday  "  and  a  bas-relief  of  '•  Evening."  In  the
autumn  of  1852  he  sailed  for  Europe,  reaching  Italy
in  December.  He  remained  studying  a  year  in  Flor-
ence, making  several  busts,  and  a  "  Morning "  as
companion  to  his  "  Evening,"  and  putting  in  mar-
ble several  of  his  previous  works.  In  the  autumn
of  1853  he  returned  to  Portland,  and  that  winter
modelled  the  statue  of  "  Benjamin  in  Egypt,"  which
was  exhibited  at  the  World's  Fair  in  New  York,
and  was  destroyed  at  the  burning  of  the  Portland
custom-house  the  next  year.  Among  his  portrait
busts  at  this  time  was  a  head  of  Judge  Shepley.
In  October,  1854.  he  went  to  Washington,  where
he  modelled  busts  of  many  of  the  noted  men  of  the
time,  among  them  that  of  Hon.  Lynn  Boyd,  of
Kentucky,  speaker  of  the  house,  Judge  McLean,  of
Cincinnati,  Edward  Everett,  Sam  Houston,  and
Gerrit  Smith.  In  January,  1855,  he  again  visited
Europe,  residing  at  times  in  Rome,  Venice,  Na-
ples, Switzerland,  Paris,  and  England,  crossing  the
Alps  on  foot,  and  in  the  following  two  or  three
years  produced  his  best-known  works.  These  in-
clude "  Peace,"  "  Una  and  the  Lion,"  "  Girl  Press-
ing Grapes,"  *'  Isaiah,"  Schiller's  "  Diver,"  "  Rein-
deer," "Saint  Elizabeth  of  Hungary,"  "Diana  and
Endymion,"  "  Paul  and  Francesca,"  "  Milton,"  and
the  "  Dead  Pearl-Diver."  The  last  two  works  are
described  in  Hawthorne's  "Marble  Faun."  Dur-
ing this  time  he  also  mad,e  many  busts  of  Ameri-
cans visiting  Rome,  and  executed  very  many  cop-
ies of  antique  busts  and  statues  for  the  galleries  of
American  and  English  patrons  of  art.  The  amount
of  labor  which  he  crowded  into  a  little  more  than
two  years  was  amazing ;  in  fact,  his  constant  toil  on
wet  clay  in  a  damp,  sunless  Roman  studio,  under-
mined a  constitution  naturally  delicate,  and  he  re-
turned home  in  the  summer  of  1857  with  his  health
seriously  broken.  He  was  unable  to  accomplish
much  in  his  art  during  the  next  two  years,  and  in
1859  made  another  visit  to  Italy  to  recruit  his  failing
strength,'  but  returned  the  next  year,  without  im-
provement, to  Portland.  Medical  advice  sent  him
to  Philadelphia  for  the  winter,  but  the  change  was
not  beneficial,  and  he  died  at  thirty-six  years  of
age,  with  his  work,  as  he  said,  "  just  begun."  He
had  much  literary  ability,  and  contributed  papers
on  art  and  artists  to  the  "Atlantic  Monthly."

AKIN,  Thomas  Beamish,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Liverpool,  Nova  Scotia,  1  Feb.,  1809.  He  stud-
ied law  with  the  late  Beamish  Murdoch,  author  of
the  "History  of  Nova  Scotia,"  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1831,  and  practised  as  a  solicitor  at  Halifax.
He  was  appointed  a  commissioner  in  1857  for  ar-
ranging and  preserving  the  ancient  records  and
documents  illustrative  of  the  history  of  the  prov-
ince of  Nova  Scotia,  and  has  been  twice  elected  a
governor  of  King's  college,  Windsor,  N.  S.  He  is
the  author  of  several  pamphlets,  including  "  His-
tory of  Halifax,  N.  S."  (1847) ;  "  Rise  and  Progress
of  the  Church  of  England  in  the  British  North
American  Provinces  "  (1849) ;  and  "  Selections  from
the  Public  Documents  of  the  Province  of  Nova
Scotia"  (1869).

ALAMAN,  Lucas  (ah-la-man'),  Mexican  states-
man, b.  in  the  state  of  Guanajuato,  18  Oct.,  1792;
d.  in  Mexico,  2  June,  1853.  He  was  educated  at
the  college  of  La  Concepcion  and  at  the  school  of


ALAMINOS


ALCEDO


39


mines  of  Mexico,  and  afterward  travelled  all  over
Europe.  After  the  fall  of  Iturbide  he  became  min-
ister of  foreign  affairs,  retiring  when  Iturbide  re-
turned to  power  in  1825.  At  this  period  he  found-
ed the  museum  of  antiquities  and  natural  history.
Under  Bustamente,  Alaman  became  foreign  minis-
ter again  in  1830  and  in  1837.  He  introduced  Eu-
ropean machinery  and  established  a  bank  for  the
encouragement  of  industrial  undertakings.  He
allied  himself  with  Santa  Anna  when  the  latter  re-
turned to  power  in  1853,  and  became  minister  for
foreign  affairs  and  the  chief  instrument  in  the  re-
actionary policy  of  fettering  the  press,  restoring
the  property  of  the  Jesuits  and  imposing  insup-
portable burdens  on  the  people.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  the  famous  "  Historia  de  Mejico "  (1849-52).

ALAMINOS,  Antonio  (ah-lah-mee'-nos),  first
naval  officer  of  the  Spanish  fleet  that  discovered
the  peninsula  of  Yucatan  in  1517.  He  distin-
guished himself  by  his  services  under  the  com-
mands of  Grijalba  and  Hernan  Cortes,  and  was  the
first  to  ])ass^the  Bahama  channel.

ALARCON,  Hernando  d'  (ah-lar-kon'),  Spanish
navigator,  b.  early  in  the  10th  century.  He  sailed
from  New  Spain  in  May,  1540,  with  two  ships  and  a
tender  along  the  western  coast  of  America,  under  in-
structions from  Mendoza,  the  viceroy,  to  aid  the  land
expedition  of  Coronado,  which  set  out  at  the  same
time,  in  search  of  the  seven  cities  of  Cibola.  He
made  a  careful  survey  of  the  shore-line  of  the  Cali-
fornian  peninsula,  previously  supposed  to  be  an  isl-
and, and  returned  to  New  Spain  in  1541,  having
failed  to  meet  the  land  expedition  according  to  the
plan.  He  also  discovered  the  Colorado  river,  as-
cended that  difficult  stream  for  100  miles,  and  took
possession  of  the  country  in  the  name  of  Charles
v.,  distributing  crosses  among  the  natives  as  a  mis-
sionary of  the  church,  telling  them  that  he  was  the
"  messenger  of  the  sun."  His  charts  and  observa-
tions, supplementing  those  of  Ulloa,  accurately
represented  the  configuration  of  California.

ALARCON  Y  MENDOZA,  Juan  Ruiz  d',
Mexican  dramatist,  b.  in  Tasco,  Mexico,  about
1580:  d.  in  Spain,  4  Aug.,  1039.  He  was  educated
in  Spain,  and  in  1009  became  a  lawyer  in  his  native
country.  In  1010  he  was  appointed  teniente  corre-
gidor  of  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  later  president  of
the  royal  council  of  the  Indies.  In  1028  he  pub-
lished eight  dramas,  and  in  1034  twelve  more.
"  La  verdad  sospechosa,"  of  which  Corneille's
"  Menteur  "  was  an  adaptation,  and  "  Las  paredes
oyen,"  which  still  keeps  the  stage  in  Spain,  are  his
most  famous  plays.  A  new  edition  of  his  works
was  printed  in  Madrid  in  1848-'52.

ALBA,  Fernando  d'. See  Ixtlilxochitl.

ALBANI,  Marie  Emma  Lajeunesse,  singer,
b.  at  Chambly,  near  Montreal,  in  1851.  Her  par-
ents were  French  -  Canadians.  She  was  educated
with  her  sisters  in  the  convent  of  the  Sacred  Heart
in  Montreal,  and  was  left  motherless  at  an  early
age.  Her  first  musical  training  came  from  her
father,  a  skilful  musician.  In  1804  he  removed  to
Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  her  singing  in  the  cathedral
attracted  much  attention.  A  concert  was  given
for  her  benefit,  and  with  the  proceeds  she  was  sent
to  Europe  to  complete  her  nuisical  education
After  studying  two  years  in  Paris,  where  she  found
a  patroness  in  Baroness  Lafitte,  under  the  tuition
of  Duprez,  and  then  in  Milan  under  Lamperti,  she
made  her  debnt  as  an  opera-singer  in  Messina  in
1870.  The  name  Albani  was  adopted  out  of  com-
pliment to  the  city  where  her  musical  promise  was
recognized  and  generoiisly  encouraged.  She  sang
at  jNIalta,  and  then,  during  the  winter  of  1871-72,
in  the  theatre  of  La  Pergola  at  Florence. Am-


broise  Thomas's  "  Mignon,"  which  had  been  damned
in  four  Italian  theatres,  became  a  success  with  her,
as  were  all  the  parts  with  which  she  identified  her-
self. When  her  fame  was  established  in  Italy  she
appeared  in  the  royal  Italian  opera  in  London.
She  sang  in  St.  Petersburg  with  great  success,  and
became  a  favorite  in  Paris  and  in  the  United  States,
as  well  as  in  London.  She  married  Ernest  Gye,
the  manager,  in  1878.  In  1883  she  made  a  tour* of
the  United  States,  and  in  May,  1880,  sang  the  ode
written  by  Tennyson  for  the  opening  of  the  colo-
nial exhibition  in  London.

ALBEAR,  Francisco,  general,  b.  in  Havana,
Cuba,  in  1810.  He  distinguished  himself  as  an  en-
gineer by  the  construction  of  several  remarkable
public  works  in  Cuba,  specially  the  Vento  aque-
duct, which  supplies  the  city  of  Havana  with
water.  He  is  the  author  of  several  memoirs  on
scientific  subjects,  among  them  one  on  the  convey-
ance of  water  to  supply  large  cities,  which  was
awarded  a  first  prize  at  "the  centennial  exhibition
in  Philadelphia  in  1870,

ALBEMARLE,  Duke  of  (George  Monck),  sol-
dier, b.  in  1008;  d.  in  1070.  He  was  one  of  the
proprietaries  of  Carolina,  and  afterward  became
palatine  by  appointment  of  Charles  II.  He  was  a
successful  general  in  Great  Britain  and  on  the  con-
tinent. The  early  settlements  along  the  coast  of
South  Carolina  were  at  first  named  in  his  honor ;
but  Albemarle  sound  is  all  that  now  perpetuates
the  name  in  America.  The  family  became  extinct
with  the  death  of  his  son.  Several  histories  of  his
life  have  been  written,  by  Guizot,  T.  Skelton,  T.
Skinner,  Gumble,  and  others.

ALBERT,  John  S.,  engineer,  b.  in  1835  ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  3  July,  1880.  He  entered  the  navy
in  1855  from  New  York,  and  was  appointed  chief
engineer  in  1801,  in  which  capacity  he  served
during  the  war  with  credit.

ALBRIGHT,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  near  Potts-
town  Pa.,  1  May,  1759;  d.  in  1808.  He  was  of
German  parentage  (the  name  originally  being  Al-
brecht),  and  was  brought  up  as  a  tile-burner.  Be-
ginning a  religious  life  in  1790,  and  being  success-
ful as  an  exhorter,  he  soon  became  a  Methodist
minister.  He  made  many  converts,  almost  exclu-
sively Germans,  and  in  1800  a  separate  church  or-
ganization was  created  for  them,  Albright  being
their  first  presiding  elder.  He  was  appointed
bishop  in  1807.  His  denomination  is  now  known
as  the  "Evangelical  Association,"  but  in  many
places its  ^adherents  are  named  "  Albrights."

ALCALA,  (xaliano  Dionisio  (al-kah-lah'),  a
brigadier-general  of  the  Spanish  naval  troops,  b.
in  Cabra,  Spain,  in  1702 ;  d.  in  the  battle  of  Trafal-
gar, 21  Oct.,  1805.  He  made  several  exploring
expeditions  by  order  of  the  Spanish  government,
among  them  one  to  the  straits  of  Magellan  in
1785,  and  another  to  find  a  new  passage  from  the
Pacific  to  the  Atlantic  ocean.  Commanding  the
ship  "  Bahama,"  in  1805,  he  fought  bravely  against
the  Fnglish  in  Trafalgar  until  a  cannon-ball  killed
him.  His  professional  writings  were  many,  the
best  known  being  his  treatise  called  "  Metodo  de
hallar  la;,  latitud  en  el  mar  por  las  atturas  del  sol."

ALCANTARA,  Francisco  Linares  (al-can-
tah'-rah).  Venezuelan  statesman,  b.  in  Furmero  in
1830 ;  d.  30  Nov.,  1879.  After  attaining  the  high-
est rank  in  the  army,  he  was  appointed  governor
of.  the  state  of  Aragua,  and  a  few  years  later,  in  1877,
he  was  elected  president  of  Venezuela.  The  period
of  his  administration  is  generally  known  in  that
country  under  t  he  name  of  El  Bienio  (the  two  years).
.  ALCEDO,  Antonio  (ahl-thay'-do),  Spanish  ge-
ographer, b.  in  America. He  lived  in  the  18th


40


ALCIBAR


century.  Very  little  is  known  about  his  life,  but
he  wrote  a  valuable  book,  now  very  rare,  entitled
"  Diccionario  geografico  historico  de  las  Indias
Occidentales  6  America."

ALCIBAR,  Jos6,  the  last  of  the  painters  be-
longing to  the  old  Mexican  school.  Very  little  is
known'about  his  life,  but  he  executed  many  works
of  merit,  especially  two  large  paintings  in  the  cathe-
dral of  Mexico,  dated  1779.  He  must  have  lived
to  an  old  age,  as  he  was  already  an  artist  work-
ing with  Carrera  fifty  years  before  that  time.

ALCOCER,  Vidal,  Mexican  philanthropist,  b.
in  the  city  of  Mexico,  8  April,  1801 ;  d.  there  22
Nov.,  18()6.  When  very  young  he  worked  as  a
bookbinder,  and  then  as  a  gunsmith,  until  he  en-
tered the  army.  He  fought  in  the  war  of  inde-
pendence, at  the  end  of  which  he  retired,  but  after-
ward took  part  in  the  organization  of  troops  for
the  war  agamst  the  F'rench,  and  then  as  a  soldier
in  operations  to  defend  his  native  city  from  the
American  army.  His  chief  aim  in  life  was  to  pro-
mote education  among  destitute  children,  in  pur-
suit of  which  he  organized,  in  1846,  an  association
which,  in  August,  1852,  had  established  twenty
schools  for  poor  children  in  the  city  of  I\Iexico,  and
from  1854  to  1858  the  number  of  these  schools
was  increased  to  thirty-three,  with  7,000  boys  and
girls  receiving  a  good  elementary  education.

ALCORN,  James  Lusk,  statesman,  b.  near  Gol-
conda,  111.,  4  Nov.,  1816.  He  early  removed  to
Kentucky,  and  was  educated  at  Cumberland  col-
lege. For  five  years  he  was  deputy  sheriff  of  Liv-
ingston CO.,  Ky.,  and  in  1843  was  elected  to  the

legislature.  _  In
1844  he  removed
to  Mississippi  and
began  the  practice
of  law.  From  1846
to  1865  he  served
in  one  branch  or
the  other  of  the
legislature.  In
1852  he  was  cho-
sen elector  -  at  -
large  on  the  Scott
ticket,  and  in  1857
was  nominated  as
governor  by  the
whigs.  This  he
declined,  and  was
a  candidate  for
congress  in  that
year,  but  was  de-
feated by  L.  Q.  C.
Lamar.  He  was
the  founder  of
the  levee  system  in  his  state,  and  in  1858  he  be-
came president  of  the  levee  board  of  the  Missis-
sij)pi- Yazoo  Delta.  In  1861  he  was  elected  briga-
dier-general by  the  state  convention,  of  which  he
was  a  member,  but  his  commission  was  refused  by
Jefferson  Davis  on  account  of  old  political  differ-
ences. He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1865,
but  was  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat.  He  was
elected  govenior  in  1869  on  the  republican  ticket,
Irom  which  oflTice  he  resigned  on  being  elected  to
the  LT.  S,  senate,  where  he  served  for  six  years,
from  4  Dec,  1871.  In  1873  he  was  defeated  as  in-
dependent candidate  for  governor  of  his  state.

ALCOTT,  Amos  Bronson  educator,  b.  in  Wol-
cott,  Conn.,  29  Nov.,  1799.  His  father  was  a  farm-
er. While  yet  a  boy  he  was  provided  with  a  trunk
of  various  merchandise,  and  set  out  to  make  his
way  in  the  south.  He  landed  at  Norfolk,  Va.,  and
went  among  the  plantations,  talking  with  the  peo-


ALCOTT


pie  and  reading  their  books.  They  liked  him  as  a
companion,  and  were  glad  to  hold  discussions  with
him  on  intellectual  subjects.  They  would  keep
him  under  their  roofs  for  weeks,  reading  and  con-
versing, while  he  forgot  all  about  his  commercial
duties.  But  when  he  returned  to  the  north  his
employer  discovered  he  had  not  sold  five  dollars'
worth'of  his  stock.  He  relinquished  his  trade  in
1823,  and  established  an  infant  school,  which  im-
mediately attracted  attention.  His  method  of
teaching' was  by  conversation,  not  by  books.  In
1828  he  went  to  Boston  and  established  another
school,  showing  singular  skill  and  sympathy  in  his
methods  of  teaching  young  children.  His  success
caused  him  to  be  widely  known,  and  a  sketch  of
him  and  his  methods,  under  the  title  of  "  A  Record


of  Mr.  Alcott's  School,"  by  E.  P.  Peabody,  was
published  in  Boston  in  1834  (3d  ed.,  revised,  1874).
This  was  followed  in  1836  by  a  transcript  of  the
colloquies  of  the  children  with  their  teacher,  in
"  Conversations  with  Children  on  the  Gospel."  His
school  was  so  far  in  advance  of  the  thought  of  the
day  that  it  was  denounced  by  the  press,  and  as  a
result  he  gave  it  up  and  removed  to  Concord,
Mass.,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  nat-
ural theology,  reform  in  education,  diet,  and  civil
and  social  institutions.  In  order  to  disseminate
his  reformatory  views  more  thoroughly,  he  went
upon  the  lecture  platform,  where  he  was  an  attrac-
tive speaker,  and  his  personal  worth  and  originality
of  thought  always  secured  him  a  respectful  hear-
ing. In  1842  he  went  to  England,  on  the  invitation
of  James  P.  Greaves,  of  London,  the  friend  and
fellow-laborer  of  Pestalozzi  in  Switzerland.  Be-
fore his  arrival  Mr.  Greaves  died,  but  Mr.  Alcott
was  cordially  received  by  Mr.  Greaves's  friends,
who  had  given  the  name  of  "Alcott  House"  to
their  school  at  Ham,  near  London.  On  his  return
to  America,  he  brought  with  him  two  English
friends,  Charles  Lane  and  H.  G.  Wright.  Mr.  Lane
bought  an  estate  near  Harvard,  in  Worcester  co.,
Mass.,  which  he  named  "  Fruitlands,"  and  there
all  went  for  the  purpose  of  founding  a  community,
but  the  enterprise  was  a  failure.  Messrs.  Lane  and
Wright  soon  returned  to  England,  and  the  property
was  sold.  Mr.  Alcott  removed  to  Boston,  and
afterward  returned  to  Concord.  Pie  has  since  then
led  the  life  of  a  peripatetic  philosopher,  conversing
in  cities  and  villages,  wherever  invited,  on  divinity,
human  nature,  ethics,  dietetics,  and  a  wide  range
of  practical  questions.  These  conversations,  wiiieh
were  at  first  casual,  gradually  assumed  a  more
formal  character.  The  topics  were  often  printed
on  cards,  and  the  company  met  at  a  fixed  time  and
place.  Of  late  years  they  have  attracted  much
attention.  Mr.  'Alcott  has  all  through  his  life
attached  great  importance  to  diet  and  govern-
ment of  the  body, and  still more  to race and


ALCOTT


ALDANA


41


complexion.  He  has  been  regarded  as  a  leader  in
the  transcendental  style  of  thought,  but  in  later
years  has  been  claimed  as  a  convert  to  orthodox
Christianity.  He  has  published  "  Tablets  "  (1868) ;
"Concord  Days,"  personal  reminiscences  of  the
town  (1872) ;  "  Table  Talk  "  (1877) :  and  "  Sonnets
and  Canzonets"  (1877),  besides  numerous  contri-
butions to  periodical  literature,  including  papers
entitled  "  Orphic  Sayings  "  in  "  The  Dial "  (Boston,
1839-'42).  After  taking  up  his  residence  in  Con-
cord, he  allowed  the  peculiarities  of  his  mind  to
find  expression  in  quaint  and  curious  arrangement
of  his  grounds.  The  fence  enclosing  them,  built
entirely  by  himself,  is  made  wholly  of  pine  boughs,
knotted,  gnarled,  and  twisted  in  every  conceivable
shape,  no  two  pieces  being  alike.  They  seem  to  be
the  result  of  many  years  of  fragmentary  collec-
tion in  his  walks.  The  engraving  presented  on
the  previous  page  is  a  view  of  Mr.  Alcott's  home
in  Concord,  Mass.

ALCOTT,  Louisa  May,  author,  b.  in  German-
town,  now  a  part  of  Philadelphia,  29  Nov.,  1882.
She  is  a  daughter  of  Amos  Bronson  Alcott.  When
she  was  about  two  years  of  age  her  parents  re-
moved to  Boston,  and  in  her  eighth  year  to  Con-
cord, Mass.  At  the  age  of  eleven  she*  was  brought
under  the  influence  of  the  community  that  endeav-
ored to  establish  itself  near  Harvard,  in  Worcester
CO.  Thoreau  was  for  a  time  her  teacher;  but
she  was  instructed
mainly  by  her  fa-
ther. She  began
to  write  for  publi-
cation at  the  age
of  sixteen,  but  with
no  marked  success
for  fifteen  years.
During  that  time
she  devoted  ten
years  to  teaching.
In  1862  she  went
to  Washington  as  a
volunteer  nurse,
and  for  many
months  labored  in
the  military  hospi-
tals. At  this  time
she  wrote  to  her
mother  and  sisters
letters  containing
sketches  of  hospital
life  and  experience,  which  on  her  return  were  re-
vised and  published  in  book  form  (Boston,  1863),
and  attracted  much  attention.  In  1866  she  went
to  Europe  to  recuperate  her  health,  which  had
been  seriously  impaired  by  her  hospital  work,  and
on  her  return  in  1867  she  wrote  "Little  Women,"
which  was  published  the  following  year,  and  made
her  famous.  The  sales  in  less  than  three  years
amounted  to  87,000  copies.  Hei-  characters  are
drawn  from  life,  and  are  full  of  the  buoyant,  free,
hopeful  New  England  spirit  which  marks  her  own
enthusiastic  love  for  nature,  freedom,  and  life.
Her  other  stories  are  conceived  in  the  same  vein,
and  have  been  almost  equally  popular.  They  are :
"Flower  Eables  or  Fairy  Tales"  (Boston,  1855);
"  Hospital  Sketches,"  her  first  book,  now  out  of
print,  reissued  with  other  stories  (1869) ;  "  An  Old-
Fashioned  Girl "  (1869) ;  "  Little  Men  "  (1871) ;  a
series  called  "Aunt  Jo's  Scrap  Bag"  (1871-82),
containing  "My  Boys,"  "Shawl  Straps,"  "Cupid
and  Chow-Chow,"  "My  Girls,"  "Jimmy's  Cruise
in  the  Pinafore,"  and  "  An  Old-Fashioned  Thanks-
giving " ;  "  Work,  A  Story  of  Experience  "  (1873) ;
"  Eight  Cousins  "  (1874) ;  "  Rose  in  Bloom  "  (1876) ;


X- -^5v^. >^--«_o^^


"Silver  Pitchers"  (1876);  "Under  the  Lilacs"
(1878);  "Jack  and  Gill  "(1880);  "  Moods  "  (1864),
reissued  in  a  revised  edition  (1881) ;  "  Proverb
Stories  "  (1882) ;  "  Spinning- Wheel  Stories  "  (1884) ;
"Lulu's  Library,"  the  first  of  a  new  series  (1885).

ALCOTT,  May,  artist  (Mrs.  Ernest  Nieriker),
b.  in  Concord,  Mass.,  in  1840 ;  d.  in  December,  1879.
She  was  a  daughter  of  A.  B.  Alcott.  At  the  school
of  design  in  Boston,  and  in  the  studies  of  Krug,
Rimmer,  Hunt,  Vautier,  Johnston,  and  Muller  she
received  the  best  attainable  instruction,  and  subse-
quently divided  her  time  between  Boston,  London,
and  Paris.  After  her  marriage  she  lived  mainly
in  Paris.  Her  strength  was  as  a  copyist  and  as  a
painter  of  still  life,  either  in  oils  or  water-colors.
Her  success  as  a  copyist  of  Turner  was  such  as  to
command  the  praise  of  Mr.  Ruskin,  and  secure  the
adoption  of  some  of  her  work  for  the  pupils  to
copy  at  the  South  Kensington  schools  in  London.
In  these  branches  of  work  she  had  few  equals.
She  published  "  Concord  Sketches,"  with  a  preface
by  her  sister  (Boston,  1869).

ALCOTT,  William  Alexander,  author,  b.  in
Wolcott,  Conn,,  6  Aug.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Auburndale,
Mass.,  29  March,  1859.  He  supported  himself  in
youth  by  working  on  a  farm  in  summer  and
teaching  in  winter,  studied  medicine  at  Yale,  and
practised  for  several  years.  In  1832  he  associated
himself  with  William  Woodbridge  in  the  prepara-
tion of  school  geographies  and  atlases,  and  in  edit-
ing the  "  Annals  of  Education  "  and  the  "  Juvenile
Rambles,"  the  first  weekly  periodical  for  children
published  in  America.  His  interest  in  improving
the  condition  of  the  public  schools  led  to  his  writ-
ing numerous  articles  on  the  subject,  published  in
the  Hartford  and  New  Haven  journals.  For  his
paper  "  On  the  Construction  of  School-houses  "  he
was  awarded  a  premium  from  the  American  insti-
tute of  instruction.  About  1832  he  removed  to
Boston,  and  there  published  the  "Young  Man's
Guide,"  a  book  that  exerted  great  influence  by  dis-
seminating correct  physiological  principles.  Up-
ward of  100  books  and  pamphlets  were  published
by  him,  including  "The  House  I  live  in,"  "The
Young  Housekeeper,"  "  The  Library  of  Health  "  (6
vols.),  "  Moral  Reform,"  "  My  Progress  in  Error,"
and  a  '  Prize  Essay  on  Tobacco.'*  He  spent  his
winters  in  travel,  visiting  school-houses,  more  than
20,000  of  which  he  is  said  to  have  inspected,  and
lecturing.  His  name  is  identified  with  some  of  the
most  valuable  reforms  in  education,  morals,  and
physical  training  of  the  present  century.

ALDAMA,  Ig'nacio,  Mexican  patriot,  b.  in  San
Miguel  el  Grande,  Guanajuato;  d,  in  Monclova,  20
June,  1811.  He  was  a  lawyer,  but  devoted  him-
self to  commercial  projects  with  marked  success.
From  the  beginning  of  the  revolutionary  war  he
joined  Hidalgo,  was  soon  promoted  to  the  rank  of
general,  and  was  then  appointed  minister  to  the
United  States,  in  hope  of  obtaining  help  from  this
nation.  But,  on  reaching  Bejar,  he  found  that
some  insurgents,  led  by  Lambrano,  were  preparing
a  revolt  against  the  revolutionary  authorities.
These  being  overpowered  by  the  new  insurgents,
1  March,  1811,  Aldama  was  arrested  and  sent  to
Monclova,  where  he  was  executed.

ALDANA,  Ramon,  Mexican  poet,  b.  in  IMerida
de  Yucatan,  30  June,  1832 ;  d.  in  the  city  of  Mexi-
co, 16  Aug.,  1882.  He  studied  philosophy  and  law
in  his  native  city,  but  soon  devoted  himself  to
journalism  and  politics.  He  produced  four  dramas,
which  bear  the  titles  "  Honor  y  felicidad,"  "  No-
bleza  de  corazon,"  "  Una  prenda  de  venganza,"
and  "  La  cubeza  y  el  corazon,"  besides  lyric  poems,
sonnets,  and  numerous  literary  articles.


42


ALDEN


ALDEN


ALDEN,  Ebenezer,  physician,  b.  in  Randolph,
Mass.,  17  March,  1788 ;  d.  there  2(5  Jan.,  1881.  He
was  of  the  seventh  generation  from  John  Alderi  of
Mayflower  memory,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1808.  He  was  the  last  survivor  of  his  class,
which  included  his  friends  Richard  Henry  Dana,
and  Charles  Cotesworth  Pinckney,  of  South  Caro-
lina. He  studied  medicine  at  Dartmouth  and  at
the  university  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  received
his  degree  in  1812,  and  followed  his  profession
throughout  his  life  in  his  native  town.  He  published
"Historical  Sketch  of  the  Massachusetts  Medi-
cal Society "  (Boston,  1838);  "Memoir  of  Mrs.  M.
A.  0.  Clark  "  (Boston,  1844) ;  and  the  "  Alden  Me-
morial "  (Boston,  1867).  In  October,  1881.  a  me-
morial brochure  was  published,  containing  a  bio-
graphical sketch,  with  a  portrait,  of  Dr.  Alden,
together  with  the  funeral  addresses.

ALDEN,  Henry  Mills,  editor,  b.  in  Mt.  Tabor,
Vt.,  11  Nov.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
college  in  1857,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1860.  In  the  winter  of  1863-'4  he  delivered
before  the  Lowell  institute  of  Boston  a  series  of
twelve  lectures  on  "  The  Structure  of  Paganism."
In  1869  he  became  managing  editor  of  "  Harper's
Magazine."  He  is  the  author  of  "The  Ancient
Lady  of  Sorrow."  a  poem  (1872),  and,  Jointly  with
A.  H.  Guernsev,  "Harper's  Pictorial  History  of
the  Great  Rebellion"  (New  York,  1862-'65),  Mr.
Guernsey  writing  the  eastern  campaigns  and  Mr.
Alden  the  western.

ALDEN,  Ichabod,  soldier,  b,  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,
11  Aug.,  1739;  d.  10  Nov.,  1778.  He  was  a  great-
grandson  of  John  Alden  of  the  original  Plymouth
colony.  Before  the  revolution  he  was  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  Plymouth  regiment,  and  he  held
the  same  rank  in  Baldwin's  regiment  at  the  siege
of  Boston.  Subsequently  he  was  promoted  to  the
colonelcy  of  the  7th  Massachusetts  regiment.  He
was  killed  by  Indians  at  Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y.

ALDEN,  "Isabella,  author,' b,  in  New  York  in
1841.  Her  maiden  name  was  McDonald.  She  is
the  author  of  a  popular  Juvenile  series  called  the
"  Pansy  Books,"  embracing  nearly  60  titles,  most
of  which  are  adapted  to  the  use  of  Sunday-school
libraries.  Among  the  most  popular  of  these  are
"An  Endless  Chain,"  "The  King's  Daughter,"
"  Mary  Burton  Abroad,"  "  Chautauqua  Girls  at
Home,"  "  Four  Girls  at  Chautauqua,"  "  New  Year's
Tangles,"  and  "  Six  Little  Girls."  Mrs.  Alden  has
from  the  beginning  been  identified  with  the  Chau-
tauqua system  of  instruction,  and  has  also  edited
"  Pansy,"  a  Juvenile  publication.

ALDEN,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Portland,
Me.,  31  March,  1810 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  6
Feb.,  1877.  He  was  appointed  midshipman  in  1828,
and  in  tliat  capacity  accompanied  the  Wilkes  explor-
ing expedition  around  the  world  in  1838-'42.  He
was  commissioned  lieutenant  in  1841,  and  served
during  the  Mexican  war,  being  present  at  the  capture
of  Vera  Cruz,  Tuxpan,  and  Tabasco.  In  1855-'56
he  was  actively  engaged  in  the  Indian  war  on  Pu-
get's  sound.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war  he
was  in  command  of  the  steamer  "  South  Carolina,"
reenforced  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  and  was  in  an  en-
gagement at  Galveston,  Texas.  He  commanded
the  sloop  of  war  "  Richmond  "  at  the  passage  of
forts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip  and  the  capture  of
New  Orleans  (April,  1862).  and  was  also  at  Port
Hudson.  He  was  made  captain  in  1803,  and  com-
manded the  "  Brooklyn,"  participating  in  the  cap-
ture of  ]Mobile  bay  (August,  1864)  and  in  the  two
attacks  on  Fort  Fisher.  He  was  commissioned
commodore  in  1866,  and  two  years  later  was  placed
in  chai-ge  of  the  navy-yard  at  Mare  island,  Cal.


In  1869  he  was  appointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of
navigation  and  detail  in  the  navy  department.  He
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  rear  admiral  in  1871,
and  assigned  command  of  the  European  squadron.
ALDEN,  John,  magistrate  of  the  Plymouth
colony,  b.  in  England  in  1599  ;  d.  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,
12  Sept.,  1687.  He  was  hired  as  a  cooper  at  South-
ampton, where  the  "  Mayflower  "  was  undergoing
repairs,  and  signed  the  compact  in  her  cabin  in


1620.  He  married  Priscilla  Mullens  in  1621,  and
the  incident  of  his  courtship  has  been  made  the
subject  of  one  of  Longfellow's  longer  poems.  His
wisdom,  integrity,  and  decision  won  for  him  the  con-
fidence of  his  associates,  and,  although  the  yonngest
of  the  pilgrims,  he  became  one  of  the  most  important
members  of  the  colony.  The  "  Mayflower,"  shown
in  the  engraving,  was  a  vessel  of  180  tons.

ALDEN,  Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  Cairo,  N.  Y.,
4  Jan.,  1807;  d.  in  New  York,  30  Aug.,  1885.  At
the  age  of  fourteen  he  began  teaching  in  a  public
school  and  showed  great  ability  in  this  direction.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  college  in  1829,  and
studied  at  Princeton  theological  seminary,  where
for  two  years  he  was  tutor.  In  1834  he'  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in
Williamstown,  Mass.,  and  subsequently  (1835-52)
became  professor  of  Latin,  and  then  of  rhetoric  and
political  economy,  in  Williams  college.  From  1852
to  1857  he  was  professor  of  mental  and  moral  phi-
losophy at  Lafayette  college.  In  1857  he  became
president  of  Jefl'erson  coirege,  and  from  1867  to  1872
he  was  principal  of  the  Albany,  N.  Y.,  normal
school.  He  was  a  prolific  writer,  and  prepared
more  than  70  volumes,  mostly  Sunday-school  litera-
ture. Among  his  works  are  "The  Example  of
Washington,''  "  Citizen's  Manual,"  "  Christian  Eth-
ics," "The  Science  of  Government,"  "Elements
of  Intellectual  Philosophy,"  and  "First  Steps  in
Political  Economy."  He  was  also  a  constant
contributor  to  periodical  literature  and  for  some
time  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Observer  "  and  of
the  Philadelphia  "  Christian  Library." — His  son,
William  Livingston,  author,  b.  in  Williams-
town,  Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1837,  was  educated  at  Lafay-
ette and  Jefferson  colleges,  graduating  in  1858,
and  then  studied  law.  He  was  for  several  years
a  contributor  to  the  magazines,  but  has  achieved
his  reputation  principally  by  humorous  editorials,
of  which  those  in  the  New  York  "  Times "  are
the  most  famous.  In  1885  he  was  appointed  U.
S.  consul-general  at  Rome.  To  him  is  due  the
credit  of  introducing  canoeing  as  a  recreation  into
the United  States,  and  in  1870 he  founded  the


ALDEN


ALDRICH


43


*  New  York  Canoe  Club."  His  published  works
include  "  Domestic  Explosives  "  (1878) ;  "  Shoot-
ing Stars"  (1879);  "Canoe  and  Flying  Proa"
(1880);  "The  Moral  Pirates"  (1881);  "Life  of
Christopher  Columbus  "  (1882) ;  "  The  Cruise  of  the
Ghost"  (1882);  "The  Cruise  of  the  Canoe  Club"
(1883) ;  and  "  Adventures  of  Jimmy  Brown  "  (1885).

ALDEN,  Rog'er,  soldier,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn,,
11  Feb.,  1754;  d.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  5  Nov.,
1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1773,  and
served  in  the  rev^olutionary  war  as  aide  to  Gen.
Greene.  Subsequently  he  became  agent  of  the
Holland  Land  Co.,  and  resided  at  Meadville,  Pa.,
from  1795  to  1825.  He  was  appointed  ordnance
storekeeper  at  West  Point,  20  Jan.,  1825,  and  re-
mained as  such  until  his  death.  He  was  a  great-
grandson  of  John  Alden. — His  son,  Bradford  R.,
soldier,  was  b.  in  Meadville,  Pa.,  in  1800;  d.  in
Newport,  R.  L,  10  Sept.,  1870.  After  graduation
at  West  Point  in  1831  he  passed  through  the  usual
experiences  of  young  officers  in  camp  and  garri-
son life  with  the  4th  Infantry.  He  was  an  in-
structor at  West  Point  in  1833-'40,  and  then  served
for  nearly  two  years  as  aide  to  Gen.  Scott.  After
three  years  of  garrison  duty  he  was  appointed
commandant  at  West  Point,  14  Dec,  1845,  and
remained  there  until  1  Nov.,  1852.  In  the  fron-
tier service  that  followed,  he  led  an  important
expedition  against  the  Rouge  river  Indians,  was
severely  wounded  in  action,  24  Aug.,  1853,  and  re-
signed "in  consequence  on  the  29th  of  September
in  the  same  year.  He  never  fully  recovered  from
his  wound,  and  was  unable  to  serve  in  the  civil
war.  He  was  a  man  of  fine  literary  taste  and
culture,  and  passed  several  years  of  his  civil  life
in  Europe.

ALDEN,  Timothy,  clergvman,  b.  in  Yarmouth,
Mass.,  28  Aug.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  5  July,  1839.
He  studied  at  Harvard,  distinguishing  himself  by
his  knowledge  of  oriental  languages,  and  was
graduated  in  1774.  From  1799  to  1805  he  was
pastor  to  the  Congregational  church  in  Portsmouth,
N.  H.,  where  from  1800  to  1808  he  taught  school.
Subsequently  he  conducted  schools  for  young  ladies
in  Boston,  Newark,  Cincinnati,  and  East  Liberty,
Pa.  In  1817  he  founded  Alleghany  college,  Mead-
ville, Pa.,  and  became  its  first  president,  retiring
in  1831.  He  published  a  collection  of  epitaphs
and  inscriptions  (5  vols.,  1814) ;  "  An  Account  of
Sundry  Missions  among  the  Senecas  "  (1827) ;  and
other  works,  and  prepared  a  valuable  catalogue  of
the  library  of  the  New  York  historical  society.

ALDEN,  Timothy,  inventor,  b,  in  Barnstable,
Mass.,  in  1819 ;  d.  in  New  York,  4  Dec,  1858.  He
was  the  sixth  in  descent  from  John  Alden,  of
"Mayflower"  fame.  When  very  young,  setting
type  "in  his  brother's  printing  office,  he  said:  "If  I
live,  I  will  invent  a  machine  to  do  this  tiresome
work."  He  labored  steadily,  devoted  his  leisure
to  study,  and  in  1846  began  the  construction  of  a
composing  and  distributing  machine.  His  idea
was  to  arrange  the  type  in  cells  around  the  circum-
ference of  a  horizontal  wheel.  By  the  rotation  of
the  wheel,  several  receivers  are  also  made  to  ro-
tate, and  these  pick  up  the  proper  types  from
their  respective  cells.  His  brother,  Henry  W.
Alden,  made  many  improvements  after  the  death
of  the  inventor.

ALDRICH,  James,  poet,  b.  in  Suffolk  co.,  N.
Y.,  in  1810;  d.  in  October,  1856.  He  entered
early  into  mercantile  life,  but  at  twenty-six  years
of  age,  having  had  some  success  as  a  writer,  he
abandoned  business  for  literature.  Several  popu-
lar periodicals  were  conducted  by  him,  and  in  1840
he  established the "Literary  Gazette,"  in  which


appeared  many  of  his  poems,  which  pleased  the
popular  taste.  Of  these  "  A  Death-Bed  ^'  is  the  best
known,  particular  attention  being  called  to  it  by
Edgar  A.  Poe,  who  pointed  out  its  striking  resem-
blance to  a  poem  by  Hood  on  the  same  subject.  In
the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  resumed  his  business
pursuits.  See  Rufus  W.  Griswold's  "  Poets  and
Poetry  of  America."

ALDRICH,  Nelson  Wilmarth,  senator,  b.  in
Poster,  R.  L,  6  Nov.,  1841.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pur-
suits. He  was  president  of  the  Providence  common
council  in  1872-3,  a  member  of  the  Rhode  Island
general  assembly  in  1875-'6,  serving  in  1876  as
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives,  and  was
elected  to  congress  in  1878  and  1880.  He  was
elected  to  the  IT.  S.  senate  as  a  republican,  to  suc-
ceed Gen.  Burnside,  and  took  his  seat  5  Dec,  1881.

ALDRICH,  Thomas  Bailey,  author,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  11  Nov.,  1836.  His  early
youth  was  passed  in  Louisiana.  He  began  a  course
of  study  preparatory  to  entering  college,  but,  on
the  death  of  his  fa-
ther, he  abandoned
it  to  enter  the
counting-room  of
his  uncle,  a  mer-
chant in  New  York
city.  Here  he  re-
mained three  years,
and  here  he  began
to  contribute  prose
and  verse  to  vari-
ous journals.  His
"  Ballad  of  Babie
Bell"  (1856)  won
immediate  and  uni-
versal favor,  and
this,  with  other
successes,  induced
him  to  enter  upon  a
literary  career.  At
first  he  was  a  proof-
reader, then  a
"reader"  for  a  publishing-house.  He  became  a
frequent  contributor  to  "  Putnam's  Magazine,"  the
"  Knickerbocker,"  and  the  weekly  papers,  and  af-
terward to  the  New  York  "  Evening  Mirror."  In
1856  he  joined  the  staff  of  the  New  York  "  Home
Journal,"  then  under  the  management  of  Willis
and  Morris,  with  whom  he  remained  three  years.
He  was  editor  of  "Every  Saturday,"  Boston,  so
long  as  it  was  published,  1870-4.  _  For  several
years  he  had  written  almost  exclusively  for  the
"Atlantic  Monthly,"  when  in  March, '1881,  he
became  its  editor.  His  published  volumes  of  poet-
ry are  "The  Dells"  (1855);  "The  Ballad  of  Babie
Bell"  and  other  poems  (1856);  "The  Course  of
True  Love  never  did  run  Smooth  "  (1858) ;  "  Pam-
pinea  and  other  Poems"  (1861);  two  collections
of  "Poems"  (1863  and  1865);  "Cloth  of  Gold
and  other  Poems  "  (1874);  "Flower  and  Thorn;
Later  Poems"  (1876);  an  edition  de  luxe  of  his
Lyrics  and  Sonnets  (1880);  and  "Friar  Jerome's
Beautiful  Book"  (1881).  His  prose  works  are
"Daisy's  Necklace"  (1856);  "Out  of  his  Head,  a
Romance  in  Prose  "  (1862) ;  "  Story  of  a  Bad  Boy,"
which  is  in  some  degree  autobiographical  (1870);
"Marjorie  Daw  and  other  People,"  short  stories
(1873);  "  Prudence  Palfrey,"  a  novel  (1874);  "The
Queen  of  Sheba,"  a  romance  of  travel  (1877) ;  "  The
Stillwater  Tragedv"  (1880);  "From  Ponkapog  to
Pesth  "  (1883) ;  and  "  Mercedes  "  (1883).  He  has
translated  from  the  French,  BedoUierre's  "  Story  of
a  Cat." Complete  collections  of  his  prose  writings


o^.Ol^X.


44


ALDRIDGE


ALEXANDER


are  published  in  England,  France,  and  Germany,
and  translations  of  two  of  his  novels  and  several
of  his  short  stories  have  appeared  in  the  "  Revue
des  deux  Mondes."

ALDRID(xE,  Ira,  negro  tragedian,  known  as  the
"African  Roscius,"  d.  in  Lodez,  Poland,  7  Aug.,
1867.  The  place  and  date  of  his  birth  are  un-
known. Some  biographers  say  he  was  born  in
Bellair,  near  Baltimore,  about  1810:  that  he  was  a
mulatto,  apprenticed  to  a  ship-carpenter ;  acquired
a  knowledge  of  German  from  German  immigrants ;
accompanied  Edmund  Kean  to  England  as  his
servant,  where  his  natural  talent  for  the  stage  was
cultivated ;  and  subsequently  returned  to  the
United  States,  where,  in  1830-'81,  he  appeared
on  the  stage  in  Baltimore,  but  was  not  successful;
then  returned  to  England  and  began  a  career  of
fame.  Other  biographers,  claiming  to  be  better
informed,  say  that  he  was  born  in  New  York  city
about  180o,  that  his  father  was  a  full-blooded  ne-
gro, a  native  chieftain  of  Senegal,  who  came  to  the
United  States,  was  converted  and  educated,  and
became  the  pastor  of  a  coloi-ed  church  in  New
York.  lie  intended  that  his  son  Ira  should  follow
the  same  profession,  but  the  boy  had  a  passion  for
the  stage,  and  demonstrated  his  ability  in  success-
ful amateur  performances.  His  father  disapproved
of  his  course,  and  sent  him  to  England  to  be  edu-
cated for  the  ministry.  The  son  obeyed  for  a  time,
but  his  foiulness  for  the  stage  soon  took  him  away
from  his  books.  After  some  time  spent  in  prepara-
tion, he  made  his  debut  at  the  Royalty  theatre  in
London  as  Othello,  where  he  met  with  immediate
success.  In  England  he  was  generally  preferred  in
those  plays  to  which  his  color  was  appi-opriate.
He  was  highly  appi-eciated  by  Ednmnd  Kean,  and
appeared  at  Belfast  as  Othello  to  Kean's  lago.  As
an  interpreter  of  Shakespeare  he  was  very  generally
regarded  lus  one  of  the  be-^t  and  most  faithful.  He
appeared  at  Covent  Garden  as  Othello  in  1833,  and
at  the  Surrey  theatre  in  1848.  In  1852  he  visited
Germany,  where  he  played  three  years,  and  in  1857
the  king  of  Sweden  iiivited  him  to  visit  Stock-
holm. On  the  continent  he  ranked  as  one  of  the
ablest  tragedians  of  his  time.  Honors  were  show-
ered upon  him  wherever  he  appeared.  He  was
presented  by  the  king  of  Prussia  with  the  first-
class  medal  of  arts  and  sciences,  accom{)anied  by
an  autograph  letter  from  the  emperor  of  Austria  ;
the  Grand  Cross  of  Leopold  ;  a  similar  decoration
from  the  emperor  of  Russia;  and  a  magnificent
Maltese  cross,  with  the  medal  of  merit,  from  the
city  of  Berne.  Similar  honors  were  conferred  on
him  by  otiier  crowned  heads  of  Europe.  He  was
made  a  member  of  the  Prussian  academy  of  arts
and  sciences,  and  holder  of  the  large  gold  medal;
member  of  the  imperial  and  arch-ducal  institution
of  our  lady  of  the  manger  in  Austria;  of  the  Rus-
sian hof-versamlung  of  Riga ;  honorary  member  of
the  imperial  academy  of  arts  and  sciences  in  St.
Petersbui'g,  and  many  others.  His  head  was  of
uneomnion  size,  measuring  twenty-three  and  a
half  inches  in  circinnference.  He  left  a  widow,  an
English  lady,  in  London.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  oii  his  way  to  fill  a  professional  engage-
ment in  St.  Petersburg.

ALEGRE,  Francisco  J.,  Mexican  author,  b.
in  Vera  Cruz,  12  Nov.,  1729 ;  d.  16  Aug.,  1788.  He
was  a  Jesuit  priest,  and  taught  philosophy  in  Ha-
vana for  seven  years,  and  afterward  canon  law  in
Yucatan.  And  after  finishing  the  "Historia  de  la
Provincia  de  la  Compania  de  Jesus  en  la  Nueva
Espana,"  which  Father  Francisco  Florcncia  had
left  incomplete,  he  went  to  Bologna,  Italv,  where
he  was  in  charge  of  a  school  for  young  Mexican


Jesuits  until  his  death.  Alegre  was  author  of
twenty-three  works,  most  of  them  in  Latin,  on
rhetoric,  mathematics,  theology,  history,  and  the
Latin  and  Greek  classics.  Besides  the  Spanish  and
Mexican  languages,  he  knew  to  perfection  Latin,
Greek,  English,  French,  and  Italian.

ALEMANY,  Joseph  Sadoc,  archbishop,  b.  in
Vich,  in  Catalonia,  Spain,  in  1814.  Pie  entered  the
Dominican  order  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  and  studied
in  the  convents  of  Trumpt  and  Garona.  He  was
ordained  at  Viterbo,  Italy,  in  1837,  remained  a
year  and  a  half  at  Viterbo  as  sub-master  of  novices,
and  was  then  appointed  assistant  pastor  of  the
church  of  Minerva,  in  Rome,  which  office  he  con-
tinued to  discharge  up  to  1841,  when  he  volun-
teered for  the  American  mission.  After  perform-
ing missionary  duties  in  Nashville  and  Memphis,
he  was  made  provincial  of  the  order  in  the  state
of  Ohio  in  1847.  He  attended  the  general  chap-
ter of  the  Dominicans  in  Italy  in  1850,  when  his
abilities  attracted  the  attention  of  the  papal  court,
and  he  was  appomted  bishop  of  Monterey  the  same
year,  and  was  consecrated  in  the  chuix-h  of  San
Carlo  by  Cardinal  Franzoni.  He  at  once  left  Rome,
bringing  with  him  some  members  of  his  order  of
both  sexes,  through  whose  agency  he  has  founded
several  educational  institutions  in  California.  He
was  translated  to  the  see  of  San  Francisco  in  1853,
being  its  first  archbishop.  He  resigned  his  archi-
episcopal  office  in  1883,  with  the  object  of  devoting
the  rest  of  his  life  to  the  reorganization  of  his
order  in  Spain,  and  went  to  reside  in  a  Dominican
convent  in  Valencia.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Life
of  Saint  Dominick."

ALEN^A,  Jose  Martiniano  d'  (ah-lane'-sa),
Brazilian  jurist,  b.  in  Ceara  in  1829 ;  d.  in  Rio  de
Janeiro,  12  Dec,  1877.  His  law  studies  were  pur-
sued at  Sao  Paulo,  and  on  their  completion  he  went
to  Rio,  where  he  became  a  frequent  contributor  to
the  journals  of  that  city.  He  also  wrote  dramas
and  romances,  some  of  which  are  based  upon  the
Indian  legends  current  in  Brazil,  and  rank  among
the  finest  literary  productions  of  the  empire.  In
1868  he  was  elected  deputy  for  Ceara  to  represent
the  conservative  party,  and  entered  the  cabinet  as
minister  of  justice.  Two  years  later,  when  a  can-
didate for  senator,  he  was  returned  as  one  of  the
"triple  list,"  but  was  not  confirmed  by  the  em-
peror. His  reputation  at  the  bar  is  one  of  the  most
brilliant  in  the  history  of  his  country.  His  poem
"  Iracema,"  and  his  romances  of  "Guarany"and
"  Urabijara,"  are  the  best  known  of  his  literary
productions.

ALENCASTRE  NORONA  Y  SILYA,  Per-
nando  (ah-len-kas'-tra),  duke  of  Linares,  35th
viceroy  of  Mexico,  where  he  assumed  command.  15
Jan.,  1711.  The  same  year  snow  fell  for  the  fij-st
time  recorded  in  Mexico,  and  there  was  a  destruc-
tive earthquake.  Alencastre  showed  himself  most
liberal  and  charitable  toward  the  sufterers  by  the
earthquake,  as  well  as  during  the  terrible  famine
and  epidemic  that  scourged  the  country  lour  years
later.  He  established  in  Nuevo  Leon  a  colony
called  San  Felipe  de  Linares,  and  soon  after  this
he  left  Mexico,  16  Aug.,  1716.

ALEXANDER,  Abraham,  statesman,  b.  in
North  Carolina  in  1718;  d.  near  Charlotte,  23
April,  1786.  He  represented  Mecklenburg  co.  in
the  colonial  legislature  prior  to  1775,  and  when,
early  in  1775,  Joseph  Martin,  the  royalist  governor,
attempted  to  prevent  a  free  expression  of  opinion,
the  people  of  the  county  met  in  the  court-house  at
Charlotte,  at  the  summons  of  Col.  Thos.  Polk,  and
elected  Mr.  Alexander  permanent  chairman.  The
dates  of  the  preliminary  meetings  are  not  known


ALEXANDER


ALEXANDER


45


On  31  May  they  unanimously  adopted  the  Mecklen-
burg declaration  of  independence,  substantially  re-
nouncing allegiance  to  the  British  crown  and  pro-
viding for  a  civil  government  upon  a  republican
basis.  This  document,  antedated  by  more  than  a
year  the  formal  declaration  of  1776,  and  was  itself
preceded  by  several  others,  notably  that  of  Men-
don,  Mass.  It  was  in  due  form  signed,  was  read
to  mass  meetings  of  the  people  of  North  Carolina,
and  in  August,  1775,  was  transmitted  to  Philadel-
phia bv  the  hand  of  a  special  messenger.

ALEXANDER,  Archer,  freedman,  b.  near
Richmond,  Va.,  about  1810 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,
8  Dec,  1879.  He  was  a  slave,  and  fled  to  St.  Louis,
then  under  martial  law,  in  1863,  and  was  formally
liberated  the  same  year.  He  served  as  the  model
for  "  the  freedman  "  in  the  bronze  group  by  Thom-
as Ball,  standing  in  the  capitol  grounds  in  Wash-
ington, and  known  as  "  Freedom's  Memorial."  In
1881  he  was  taken  to  Missouri  by  his  young  mas-
ter. During  the  reign  of  terror  in  that  state  at  the
outbreak  of  the  war  he  learned  that  the  pro-slavery
party  had  cut  the  timbers  of  a  certain  bridge  so
that  it  should  break  down  under  a  tram  carrying  a
detachment  of  national  troops  about  to  pass  over
it.  At  the  risk  of  his  life  he  conveyed  the  informa-
tion to  a  well-known  union  man,  and  the  detach-
ment was  saved.  Alexander  was  suspected  as  the
informant  and  arrested  by  a  pro-slavery  committee.
He  made  his  escape  to  and  secured  employment  in
St.  Louis  under  a  provost  marshal's  certificate.
Until  the  emancipation  proclamation  assured  his
permanent  freedom  he  was  in  constant  danger
from  kidnappers.  Although  almost  wholly  illiter-
ate, he  had  a  shrewd  intelligence  and  was  a  skilled
and  eflficient  workman.  A  stone  commemorating
his  capture  as  a  fugitive  slave  has  been  raised  on
the  spot  where  he  was  taken  when  making  his  es-
cape from  slavery.  See  "  The  Story  of  Archer  Al-
exander" (Boston,  1886).

ALEXANDER,  Archibald,  educator,  b.  in
Rockbridge  co.,  Va.,  17  April,  1772;  d.  in  Prince-
ton, N.  J.,  22  Oct.,  1851.  His  grandfather,  of  Scot-
tish descent,  came  from  Ireland  to  Pennsylvania  in
1736,  and  after  a  residence  of  two  years  removed  to
Virginia.  William,  father  of  Archibald,  was  a  farmer

and  trader.  At
the  age  of  ten  Ar-
chibald was  sent
to  the  academy  of
Rev.  William  Gra-
hiim  at  Timber
Ridge  meeting-
house (since  de-
veloped into
Washington  and
Lee  university),
at  Lexington.  At
the  age  of  seven-
teen he  became  a
tutor  in  the  fami-
Iv  of  Gen.  John
Posey,  of  The  Wil-
derness, twelve
miles  west  of  Fred-
ericksburg, but
after  a  few  months
resumed  his  stud-
ies with  his  former  teacher.  At  this  time  his  mind
became  influenced  by  a  remarkable  movement,  still
spoken  of  as  '•  the  great  revival,"  and  he  turned  his
attention  to  the  study  of  divinity.  He  was  licensed
to  preach  1  Oct.,  1791,  ordained  by  the  presbytery  of
Hanover  9  June,  1794,  and  for  seven  years  was  an
itinerant  pastor  in  Charlotte  and  Prince  Edward  cos.


z^.-^^^^^^:-^:^^^^^


In  1796  he  became  president  of  Hampden  Sydney
college,  Va.,  but  in  1801  resigned,  and  visited  New
York  and  New  England.  During  his  tour  he  went
to  see  the  Rev.  Dr.  Waddel,  the  celebrated  blind
preacher  mentioned  by  Wirt  in  his  "  British  Spv."
The  result  of  this  visit  was  his  marriage  to  Dr.
Waddel's  daughter  Janetta.  Immediately  after  he
resumed  his  presidency,  but,  owing  to  insubordina-
tion among  the  students,  retired,  and  became  in
1807  pastor  of  the  Pine  st.  Presbyterian  church  in
Philadelphia.  The  degree  of  D.'  I),  was  conferred
on  him  by  the  college  of  New  Jersey  in  1810,  and
in  the  same  year  he  was  elected  president  of  Union
college  in  Georgia,  a  fact  which  remained  unknown
even  to  his  family  until  after  his  death.  On  the
organization  of  the  theological  seminary  at  Prince-
ton in  1812  Dr.  xMexander  was  unanimously
chosen  as  the  leading  professor.  As  the  number
of  students  increased  and  other  professors  were
added  to  the  faculty,  he  was  enabled  to  direct  his
attention  more  particularly  to  the  department  of
pastoral  and  polemic  theology,  in  promoting  which,
with  the  general  interests  of  the  institution,  he  la-
bored with  zeal  and  success  till  his  death,  a  period
of  nearly  forty  years.  His  powers  both  for  pulpit
oratory  and  polemic  disquisition  were  extraordi-
nary. He  was  always  busy,  and  from  1829  to  1850
scarcely  a  number  of  the  '"  Princeton  Review  "  ap-
peared without  an  article  from  his  pen.  His  style
was  idiomatic  and  forcible.  With  the  exception" of
occasional  sermons  and  contributions  to  periodi-
cals, he  published  nothing  until  he  had  entered  his
fifty-second  year.  His  first  work  was  "  Outlines  of
the  Evidences  of  Christianity "  (1823),  Avhich  has
been  translated  into  various  foreign  languages  and
is  used  as  a  text-book  in  colleges.  It  was  reprinted
in  London  in  1828,  and  again  with  a  new  edition
in  1833,  accompanied  with  introductory  notes  by
Rev.  John  Morison,  D.  D.  This  was  followed  by  a
"  Treatise  on  the  Canon  of  the  Old  and  New  Tes-
taments "  (1826) ;  "  Lives  of  the  Patriarchs  "  (1835) ;
"Essays  on  Religious  Experiences"  (1840);  "His-
tory of  African  Colonization  "  (1846) ;  "  Historv  of
the  Log  College  "  (1846) ;  "  History  of  the  Israelit-
ish  Nation  "  (1852),  and  other  works.  He  also  con-
tributed largely  to  periodicals.  He  left  several  works
in  manuscript,  of  which  the  "Outlines  of  Moral
Science  "  (1852)  was  pronounced  by  the  "  Westmin-
ster Review"  to  be  a  "calm,  clear  stream  of  ab-
stract reasoning,  flowing  from  a  thoughtful,  well-
instructed  mind,  without  any  parade  of  logic,  but
with  an  intuitive  simplicity  and  directness  which
gives  an  almost  axiomatic  force."  Other  posthu-
mous works  were  "  Duties  and  Consolations  of  the
Christian  " ;  "  Patriarchal  Theology  "  ;  "  History  of
the  Presbyterian  Church  in  Virginia  " ;  "  Biographi-
cal Sketches  of  Distinguished  American  Clergymen
and  Alumni  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey " ;  and
"  Church  Polity  and  Discipline."  He  left  five  sons,
of  whom  three  became  ministers,  and  one  daugh-
ter. The  eldest  son  wrote  the  life  of  his  father,
and  edited  his  posthumous  works  (New  York,  1854).
— His  son,  James  Waddel,  clergyman,  b.  near
Gordonsville,  Louisa  co.,  Va.,  13  March,  1804;  d.  at
the  Red  Sweet  Springs,  Va.,  31  July,  1859.  He  re-
ceived his  academical  training  at  Philadelphia,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1820,  and  studied  the-
ology in  Princeton  seminary.  In  1824  he  was
appointed  a  tutor,  and  during  the  same  year  he  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  Presbytery  of  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.  During  1825-'28  he  was  in  charge  of  a
church  in  Charlotte  co.,  Va.,  and  from  1828  to
1830  was  pastor  of  the  first  Presbyterian  church
in  Trenton,  N.  J.  His  health  failing,  he  resigned
this  charge  and  became  editor  of  "  The  Presbyte-


46


ALEXANDER


ALEXANDER


rian,"  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  professor  of  rhet-
oric and  belles  lettres  in  Princeton  college  from
1833  till  1844,  when  he  assumed  charge  of  the
Duane  st.  church  in  New  York  city.  From  1844
to  1851  he  was  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history
and  church  government  in  Princeton  theological
seminary,  and  in  1851  he  was"  called  to  the  pas-
torate of  the  Fifth  ave.  Presljyterian  church,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  Among  his  pub-
lished works  are  "Consolation";  "Thoughts  on
Family  Worship  " ;  "  Plain  Words  to  a  Young  Com-
municant " ;  a  series  of  essays  entitled  "The  Ameri-
can Mechanic  and  Workingman  "  ;  "  Discourses  on
Christian  Faith  and  Practice  "  (New  York,  1858) ;
"  Gift  to  the  Afflicted  "  ;  a  biography  of  Dr.  Archi-
bald Alexander  (New  York,  1854) ;  and  more  than
thirty  volumes  for  the  Amei'ican  Sunday-school
union.  He  was  also  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
"  Princeton  Review  "  and  the  "  Biblical  Repertory."
"  Forty  Years'  Familiar  Letters  of  James  W.  Al-
exander," was  publislied  by  the  surviving  corre-
spondent, the  Rev.  John  Hall,  D.  D.,  of  Trenton,
N.  J.  (2  vols.,  New  York.  1880).— His  son,  WilHaiii
Cowper,  lawyer,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1806 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  23  Aug..  1874,  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1824.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1827,
and  soon  gained  a  reputation  for  legal  knowledge
and  eloquence  and  took  part  in  political  affairs.
For  several  years  he  was  president  of  the  New
Jersey  state  seiuite.  He  was  nominated  for  gov-
ernor, and  lacked  but  a  few  votes  of  election.
After  being  a  member  of  the  peace  congress  of
18G1,  over  which  he  was  frequently  called  to  pre-
side, he  withdrew  from  politics  and  devoted  him-
self entirely  to  the  business  of  insurance,  having
been  elected  president  of  the  Equitable  Life  In-
surance Company  when  it  was  organized  in  1859,
of  which  he  was  president  at  the  time  of  his
death. — His  son,  Joseph  Addison,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  24  April,  1809 ;  d.  in  Prince-
ton, N.  J.,  28  Jan.,  18(iO,  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton, with  the  first  honor  in  his  class,  in  1820,
and  associated  himself  with  R.  B.  Patton  in  the
establishment  of  Edgehill  seminary  at  Princeton.
From  1830  to  1833  he  was  adjunct  professor  of
ancient  languages  at  Princeton,  after  which  he
spent  some  time  abroad  studying  languages.  In
1838  he  was  made  professor  of  oriental  literature
in  Princeton  Theological  Seminary,  and  in  1852
was  transferred  to  the  chair  of  biblical  and  ecclesi-
astical history,  which  he  held  until  his  death.  He
was  master  of  almost  all  of  the  modern  languages
of  Europe,  and  as  an  orientalist  had  few  superiors.
This  great  linguistic  knowledge  is  shown  in  his
numerous  exegetical  works,  which  include  "  The
Earlier  Prophecies  of  Isaiah"  (1846),  "The  Later
Prophecies  of  Isaiah"  (1847),  "Isaiah  illustrated
and  explained  "  (1851),  "  The  Psalms  translated  and
explained  "  (1850),  "  C^ommentary  on  Acts  "  (1857),
and  "  Commentary  on  Mark  "  (1858).  He  also  pub-
lished a  series  of  "Essays  on  the  Primitive  Church
Offices"  (1851),  and  numerous  articles  in  the  "  Bib-
lical Repertory  "  and  "  Princeton  Review."  Since
his  death  his  "  Sermons  "  have  been  published
(1860),  and  also  a  "Commentary  on  Matthew"  (1861),
and  "  Notes  on  New  Testament  Literature,"  pre-
pared in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Charles  Hodge  (2
vols.,  1861).  His  biography,  by  his  nephew,  Henry
Carrington  Alexander,  was  published  in  1869. —
His  son,  Samuel  Uavies,  clergyman,  b.  in  Prince-
ton, N.  J.,  in  1819,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1838,  and  studied  theology  in  Princeton  semi-
nary. He  preached  in  various  places,  and  in  1855
was  settled  over  the  .Phillips  Presbyterian  Church
in  New  York  city. He  has  contributed  numerous


papers  to  the  "  Princeton  Review,"  and  published
"  Princeton  College  during  the  Eighteenth  Cen-
tury"  (1872);  an(l  a  "  History  of  the  Presbyterian
Church  in  Ireland."

ALEXANDER,  Barton  Stone,  soldier,  b.  in
Kentucky  in  1819 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  15
Dec,  1878.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  Kentucky,  was  graduated  in  1842,
and  became  lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engineers.
He  superintended  the  repairs  at  various  fortifica-
tions, and  also  in  the  erection  of  Minot's  ledge
lighthouse,  at  the  entrance  of  Boston  harbor.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  served  tis  engineer  in  the  con-
struction of  the  defences  of  Washington,  took  part
in  the  Manassas  campaign  of  1861,  and  was  bre-
vetted  major  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services
in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  continued  with  the
army  of  the  Potomac,  rendering  important  aid  at
the  siege  of  Yorktown,  for  which  he  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel  in  1862.  In  1864  he  was  con-
sulting engineer  with  Gen.  Sheridan's  army,  and
in  1865  was  made  brevet  brigadier-general  for  meri-
torious services  during  the  war.  For  the  next  two
years  he  had  charge  of  the  construction  of  most  of
the  public  works  in  Maine,  when  he  became  senior
engineer  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  and
member  of  the  Pacific  board  of  engineers  for  forti-
fication.

ALEXANDER,  Caleb,  clergyman,  b.  in  North-
field,  Mass.,  22  July,  1775 ;  d.  in  Onondaga,  N.  Y.,
12  April,  1828.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1777,
he  studied  for  the  ministry  and  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  New  Marlboro,
N.  Y.,  in  1781-82.  In  April,  1786,  he  took  charge
of  a  church  at  Mendon,  N.  Y.,  but  left  it  the
same  year.  He  next  became  principal  of  an  acade-
my at  Onondaga,  where  he  remained  during  the
rest  of  his  life.  His  published  works  include  Latin
and  English  grammars,  an  "  Essay  on  the  Deity  of
Christ"  (1796),  "Grammar  Elements,"  a  literal
translation  of  Virgil  into  English  prose  (Worcester,
1796),  the  "Columbian  Dictionary"  (1800),  and
"  Young  Ladies'  and  Gentleman's  Instructor."

ALEXANDER,  Edmund  Brooke,  soldier,  b.
in  Hav  Market,  Prince  William  co.,  V^a.,  2  Oct.,
1802 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  3  Jan.,  1888.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1823.  After  twenty  years  of  frontier  and  garrison
duty  he  had  an  opportunity  for  service  in  Mexico,
where  he  won  a  major's  brevet  at  Cerro  Gordo  (18
April,  1847),  and  a  lieutenant-colonel's  at  Contreras
and  Churubusco  (20  Aug.,  1847).  He  became  major
of  the  8th  infantry,  10  Nov.,  1851,  and  colonel  of
the  10th  infantry,  a  new  regiment,  3  March,  1855.
In  1857-'58  he  commanded  the  Utah  expedition
until  relieved  by  Gen.  Johnston.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  retained  at  St.  Louis  on  provost-mar-
shal's duty,  involving  delicate  and  responsible
administration  of  important  matters.  He  was  also
superintendent  of  the  volunteer  recruiting  service,
and  chief  mustering  and  disbursing  officer  for  Mis-
souri. He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  13  March,
1865,  and  commanded  his  regiment  at  Fort  Snelling
till  retirement,  22  Feb.,  1869,  by  operation  of  law.

ALEXANDER,  Francis,  artist,  b.  in  Connecti-
cut in  1800.  When  eighteen  years  of  age  he  began
painting  in  water-color  without  an  instructor.
About  1820  he  went  to  New  York  and  prosecuted
his  art  studies,  as  a  pupil  of  Alexander  Robeitson.
He  worked  for  a  few  months  in  Pi-ovidence,  R.  I.,
and  subsequently  opened  a  studio  in  Boston,  where
he  gained  great  popularity  as  a  portrait-painter.
He  went  to  Europe  in  1831,  finally  taking  up  his
residence  in  Florence.  During  the  later  years  of
his  life  he  has  not  been  active  in  his  profession.


ALEXANDER


ALEXANDER


47


ALEXANDER,  Georg-e,  Canadian  senator,  b,
in  Bantfshire,  Scotland,  31  May,  1814.  He  was
educated  at  Aberdeen  university,  emigrated  to
Canada,  became  president  of  the  provincial  agri-
cultural association  of  Upper  Canada  in  1857,  and
continued  a  member  of  the  board  of  arts  and  manu-
factures until  1867.  He  represented  Gore  divis-
ion in  the  legislative  council  of  Caiuida  from  1858
until  the  union  of  the  provinces,  and  was  called  to
the  senate  30  May,  1873. He  is  a  conservative.

ALEXANDER,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  Scotland
about  1090 ;  d.  in  New  York,  2  April,  1756.  His
American  career  began  in  1715,  when  he  was
obliged  to  leave  England  on  account  of  his  active
partisanship  with  the  pretender  in  his  vain  at-
tempt to  seize  the  English  crown.  He  became
the  first  official  recorder  of  the  town  of  Perth  Am-
boy,  N.  J.,  in  1718,  but,  having  served  as  an  officer
of  engineers  in  Scotland,  he  was  appointed  survey-
or-general of  New  York  and  New  Jersey.  In  his
intervals  of  leisure  he  studied  law  and  became  emi-
nent at  the  colonial  bar.  He  was  a  constant  con-
tributor, with  Chief  Justice  Morris,  to  the  "  New
York  Weekly  Journal,"  established  in  1733.  In
1735  he  was  temporarily  disbarred  because  he
served  as  counsel  for  Peter  Zenger,  a  popular
printer  of  that  day,  who  was  accused  of  sedition,
but  he  was  reinstated  on  a  change  of  administra-
tion two  years  later.  He  held  many  public  offices,
served  for  several  years  in  the  colonial  legislature
and  council,  and  was  attorney-general  in  1721-23,
and  secretary  of  the  province  of  New  York.  He
acquired  large  wealth,  and  was  among  the  staunch-
est  of  the  pre-revolutionary  friends  of  civil  liberty.
In  company  with  Franklin  and  others,  he  founded
the  American  philosophical  society.  His  son  Will-
iam was  the  "  Lord  Stirling "  of  revolutionary
fame.  In  1756  a  ministerial  project  threatening
the  rights  of  the  colony  was  proposed,  and,  when  it
came  up  for  consideration  at  Albany,  Sec.  Alex-
ander undertook  the  journey  from  New  York  to
oppose  the  measure,  although  he  was  suffering  from
severe  illness.  His  death  resulted  from  the  fatigue
and  exposure  then  incident  to  the  trip.

ALEXANDER,  John  Henry,  scientist,  b.  in
Annapolis,  Md.,  26  June,  1812;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  2  jMarch,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  St.
John's  college  in  1826,  and  studied  law,  but  turned
his  attention  to  science.  His  first  work  was  in
engineering,  and  having  submitted  to  the  legisla-
ture a  plan  for  the  survey  of  Maryland,  in  con-
nection with  the  geological  survey,  he  became  in
1834  the  topographical  engineer  of  his  state.  As
such  he  was  engaged  until  1841,  and  during  the  in-
tervening years  he  regularly  prepared  the  annual
reports.  The  opening  of  various  iron  and  coal  de-
posits was  promoted  hj  these  reports,  and  by  his
efforts  capital  was  enlisted  in  the  working  of  the
mines.  As  an  authority  on  standards  of  weight
and  measure,  his  opinion  was  highly  regarded,  and
he  was  associated  in  much  of  the  work  conducted
under  the  direction  of  the  coast  survey  during  the
superintendency  of  Hassler  and  Bac'he.  In  1857
he  was  sent  to  England  by  the  national  govern-
ment as  delegate  to  the  British  commission  on  deci-
mal coinage.  His  views  on  this  subject  were
highly  appreciated  in  this  country,  and  he  was
about  to  be  appointed  director  of  the  mint  in
Philadelphia  when  he  died.  He  serv^ed  on  various
government  commissions,  and  his  numerous  re-
ports are  of  great  value.  At  various  times  he  was
professor  of  physics  in  St.  James's  college,  Md.,  in
the  university  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  the  universi-
ty of  Maryland.  He  was  a  member  of  many  sci-
entific societies,  among  them  the  American  philo-


sophical society  of  Philadelphia  and  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  he
was  one  of  the  incorporators  of  the  national  academy
of  sciences.  His  published  papers  appeared  prin-
cipally in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  and
Arts."  He  edited  three  editions  of  Simms's  "  Treatise
on  Mathematical  Instruments  used  in  Surveying,
Levelling,  and  Astronomy"  (Baltimore,  1835,  1889,
and  1848),  and  also  Simms's  "  Treatise  on  Level-
ling "  (1838).  Among  his  lai-gcr  works  are  "  History
of  the  Metallurgy  of  Iron,"  Parts  1  and  2  (1840-'42),
and  "  Universal  Dictionary  of  Weights  and  Meas-
ures, Ancient  and  Modern  "  (1850).  He  also  wrote
several  collections  of  religious  verse,  of  which  "  In-
troits  "  (Philadelphia,  1844)  and  "  Catena  Dominica  "
(1854)  were  published.  Several  works  in  manu-
script remained  unpublished  at  the  time  of  liis  death,
of  which  the  most  important  was  "  A  Dictionary
of  English  Surnames'^  (12  vols.,  8vo).  See  "Bio-
graphical Memoir  of  John  H.  Alexander,"  by  J.  E.
Hilgard,  in  vol.  i  of  the  "Biographical  Memoirs"
of  the  national  academy  of  sciences ;  also  "  Life
of  J.  H.  Alexander,"  bv'William  Pinkney  (1867).

ALEXANDER,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in
Mecklenburg,  N.  C,  in  1756:  d.  in  Salisburv,  8
March,  1808.  In  1776  he  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton. After  studying  medicine  he  entered  the  army
and  served  through  the  latter  part  of  the  revolu-
tionary war.  At  its  close  he  began  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  the  high  hills  of  Santee,  whence
he  removed  to  Mecklenburg.  He  was  for  several
years  a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1803-'5,  and  was  elected  by  the
legislature  governor  of  North  Carolina  in  1805.

ALEXANDER,  Stephen,  astronomer,  b.  in
Schenectady,  N.  Y.,  1  Sept.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  25  June,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1824  and  at  Princeton  Theological  Seminary  in
1832,  was  a  tutor  at  Princeton  in  1833,  and  became
adjunct  professor  of  mathematics  in  1834,  and  pro-
fessor of  astronomy  in  1840.  From  1845  to  1854
he  occupied  the  chair  of  mathematics,  and  after-
ward that  of  astronomy  and  mechanics  until  he
retired  in  1878.  He  has  written  a  great  number  of
scientific  papers,  some  of  which  have  been  trans-
lated into  other  languages.  He  was  chief  of  the
expedition  that  went  to  the  coast  of  Labrador  to
observe  the  solar  eclipse  of  18  July,  1860,  and  was
the  leader  also  of  that  sent  to  the  west  to  observe
the  eclipse  of  August,  1869.  His  principal  writings
are  "Physical  Phenomena  attendant  upon  Solar
Eclipses,"  read  before  the  American  philosophical
society  in  1843 ;  a  paper  on  the  "  Fundamental
Principles  of  Mathematics,"  read  before  the  Ameri-
can Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  in
1848 ;  another  on  the  "  Origin  of  the  Forms  and
the  Present  Condition  of  some  of  the  Clusters  of
Stars  and  several  of  the  Nebuhe,"  read  before  the
American  Association  in  1850;  others  on  the
"Form  and  Equatorial  Diameter  of  the  Asteroid
Planets  "  and  "  Harmonies  in  the  Arrangement  of
the  Solar  System  which  seem  to  be  Confirmatory
of  the  Nebular  Hypothesis  of  Laplace,"  presented
to  the  National  Academy  of  Science ;  a  "  Statement
and  Exposition  of  Certain  Harmonies  of  the  Solar
System,"  which  was  published  by  the  Smithsonian
Institute  in  1875.

ALEXANDER,  Thomas,  earl  of  Selkirk,  b.  in
1774 ;  d.  in  Pan,  France,  6  April,  1820.  He  was  the
founder  of  the  Red  river  settlement,  and  wrote  a
volume  on  "  Emigration,"  containing  a  statement
respecting  that  attempt  at  colonization  of  the  west-
ern territorv  of  Canada  (London,  1817).

ALEXANDER,  Sir  WilHam,  earl  of  Stirling,
b.  in  1580 ;  d.  in  London,  12  Sept.,  1640. When  a


48


ALEXANDER


ALGER


young  man  he  was  appointed  tutor  to  the  earl  of
Argyll  and  accompanied  him  abroad.  At  a  later
date'  he  received  the  place  of  gentleman  usher  to
Prince  Charles,  son  of  James  VL  of  Scotland,  and
continued  in  favor  at  court  after  the  king  became
James  I.  of  England.  He  attained  reputation  as
a  poet  and  writer  of  rhymed  tragedies,  and  as-
sisted the  king  in  preparing  the  metrical  version
known  tis  "  The  Psalms  of  King  David,  translated
by  King  James,"  and  published  by  authority  of
Charles  L,  in  1631,  after  his  father's  death.  Sir
William  held  a  copyright  of  this  version,  but  it
wiis  never  remunerative.  In  view  of  the  successful
result  in  Ireland  of  the  establishment  of  baronets
of  Ulster,  Sir  William  proposed  to  the  king  that
the  system  should  be  extended  to  North  America.
On  21  Sept.,  1631,  a  charter  was  issued,  granting  to
him,  "  his  heirs  and  assigns,  whomsoever,  .  .  .  the
continent,  lands,  and  islands  situate  and  lying  in
America  within  the  cape  or  promontory  commonly
called  Cape  de  Sable  ...  to  the  river  called  by  the
name  of  Santa  Cruz,  .  .  .  and  thence  northward
to  '  the  great  river  of  Canada '  [i.  e.,  the  St.  Law-
rence] ...  to  the  aforesaid  Cape  Sable,  where  the
circuit  began."  In  other  words,  the  king  made  a
present  to  the  ambitious  poet  of  what  are  now  the
provinces  of  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia.
The  magnificent  grant  was  subsequently  extended
to  include  a  large  section  of  the  present  northern
United  States  and  the  Dominion  of  Canada — an
empire  larger  than  all  the  rest  of  the  British  pos-
sessions. Charles,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne
in  1625,  not  only  confirmed  his  father's  charter,
but,  in  July  of  that  year,  gave  full  powers  to  use
the  "  mines  and  forests,  erect  cities,  appoint  fairs,
hold  courts,  grant  lands,  and  coin  money."  As
portions  of  the  domain  had  already  been  granted
by  Henry  IV.  of  France,  and  occupied  by  his  sub-
jects, wars  among  the  rival  claimants  followed  in
due  time  as  a  matter  of  course ;  but  first  the  new
American  baronetcies  were  offered  for  sale  at  £150
each,  for  which  sum  a  grant  of  land  three  miles
long  by  two  miles  broad  was  certified  to  the  pur-
chaser. Sir  William  speedily  became  involved  in
troublesome  disputes,  and  was  the  object  of  bitterly
sarcastic  attacks  on  the  part  of  his  envious  con-
temporaries; but  he  and  his  sons  persevered  in
their  efforts  to  turn  their  prodigious  possessions
to  some  practical  account.  That  they  failed  is
evident  from  the  '"noble  poverty,"  as  one  of  his
biographers  terms  it,  of  his  last  years.  He  was
appointed  secretary  of  state  for  Scotland  in  1626,
and  held  the  office  until  his  death,  representing
the  king  with  remarkable  ability  and  faithfulness,
and  receiving  his  earldom  in  1630  as  a  reward
for  his  services.  During  his  last  years  he  became
involved  in  debt,  and  he  died  insolvent.  There  are
various  editions  of  his  poems  and  tragedies.  A
complete  edition  of  his  works  was  published  at
Glasgow  in  1870,  in  three  octavo  volumes,  entitled
"  The  Poetical  Works  of  Sir  William  Alexander,
Earl  of  Stirling,  etc.,  now  first  collected  and  ed-
ited, with  Memoir  and  Notes."  See  Walpole's
"  Royal  and  Noble  Authors,"  Wilson's  "  Poets  and
Poetry  of  Scotland,"  Irving's  "  Lives  and  History,"
Anderson's  "  Scottish  Nation,"  "  A  Mapp  and  De-
scription of  New  England,  together  with  a  Dis-
course of  Plantations  and  Colonies"  (1630),  and
Rogers's  "  Memorials  of  the  Earl  of  Stirling  and
the  House  of  Alexander."

ALEXANDER,  William,  called  Lord  Stirling,
soldier,  b.Jn  New  York  city  in  1726;  d.  in  Albany,
15  Jan.,  1 783.  He  engaged  in  the  provision  busi-
ness with  his  mother,  the  widow  of  David  Provost.
In  connection  with  his  business  young  Alexander


subsequently  joined  the  British  army  in  the  com-
missariat department,  and  became  aide-de-camp  to
Gov.  Shirley.  In  1757  he  prosecuted  his  claim  to
the  earldom  of  Stirling  before  the  house  of  lords,
witliout  success.  After  his  return  in  1761  he  mar-
ried the  daughter  of  Philip  Livingston.  He  held
the  office  of  surveyor-general,  and  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  provincial  council.^  The  former  office
had  belonged  to  his  father,  James  Alexander,  who,
formerly  an  adherent  of  the  pretender,  had  come
to  America,  risen  to  be  colonial  secretary  in  New
York,  and  died  in  1756,  leaving  a  large  fortune.  He
was  an  ardent  patriot,  and  entered  the  revolution-
ary army  as  colonel  of  the  battalion  of  east  New
Jersey  in  October,  1775.  He  distinguished  himself
by  the  capture  of  a  British  armed  transport,  for
which  exploit  congress,  in  March,  1776,  appointed
him  a  brigadier-general.  At  the  battle  of  Long
Island,  26  Aug.,  1776,  his  brigade,  ordered  by  Gen.
Putnam  to  attack  a  greatly  superior  force,  was
nearly  cut  to  pieces,  and  he  himself  was  taken  pris-
oner. He  was  soon  exchanged,  and  in  February,
1777,  was  promoted  a  major-general.  When  Lee
marched  to  succor  Philadelphia  in  December,  1776,
Stirling  was  left  in  command  at  New  York.  At
Trenton  he  received  the  surrender  of  a  Hessian
regiment.  On  24  June,  1777,  at  Matouchin  (now
called  Metuchin),  he  awaited  an  attack,  contrary  to
Washington's  orders;  his  position  was  turned  and
his  division  defeated,  losing  two  guns  and  150
jnen.  At  the  battle  of  Brandywine  and  German-
town  he  acted  with  bravery  and  discretion.  At
the  battle  of  Monmouth  he  displayed  tactical
judgment  in  posting  his  batteries,  and  repelled
with  heavy  loss  an  attempt  to  turn  his  flank.  In
1779,  when  in  command  in  New  Jersey,  he  sur-
prised a  British  force  at  Paulus'  Hook.  In  1781
he  commanded  at  Albany.  He  died  of  gout,  five
days  after  the  preliminaries  of  peace  were  agreed
upon.  Lord  Stirling  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Columbia  college,  called  King's  college  before  the
revolution,  and  became  its  first  governor.  His
journey  to  England  in  1756  was  undertaken  in
order  to  give  testimony  in  behalf  of  Gen.  Shir-
ley, who  was  charged  with  neglect  of  duty.  He
wrote  "  The  Conduct  of  Major-General  Shirley,
briefly  stated,"  a  pamphlet  published  about  the
time  of  the  investigation ;  and  "  An  Account  of
the  Comet  of  June  and  July,  1770."  He  was  pro-
ficient in  the  sciences  of  mathematics  and  astrono-
my. See  "  Life  of  William  Alexander,  Earl  of
Stirling,"  by  his  grandson,  William  Alexander
Duer,  in  the  collections  of  the  New  Jersey  His-
torical Society  (1847) ;  and  Charles  Rogers's  "House
of  Alexander  "  (1877).

ALGtER,  Cyrus,  inventor,  b.  in  West  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  11  Nov.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Boston,  4  Feb.,
1856.  Early  in  life  he  became  an  iron-founder,  and
established  "his  business  in  Easton,  Mass.  In  1809
he  removed  to  South  Boston,  where  he  founded  the
works  that  since  1817  have  been  known  as  the  South
Boston  iron  company.  He  supplied  the  government
with  large  numbers  of  cannon-balls  during  the  war
of  1812,  and  his  works  became  famed  for  the  ex-
cellent ordnance  there  manufactured.  He  was
one  of  the  best  practical  metallurgists  of  his  time,
and  his  numerous  patents  of  improved  processes
show  continued  advance  in  the  art  practised  by
him.  The  first  gun  ever  rifled  in  America  was
made  at  his  works  in  1834,  and  the  first  perfect
bronze  cannon  was  made  at  his  foundry  for  the
U.  S.  ordnance  department.  The  mortar  "  Colum-
biad,"  the  largest  gun  of  cast  iron  that  had  then
been  made  in  the  United  States,  was  cast  under
his  personal  supervision. Mr.  Alger  also  devised


ALGER


ALLAN


49


numerous  improvements  in  the  construction  of
time  fuses  for  bomb-shells  and  grenades.  In  1811
he  patented  a  method  of  making  cast-iron  chilled
rolls,  and  in  1822  first  designed  cylinder  stoves.
Mr.  Alger  served  as  a  member  of  the  city  council
during  the  first  year  of  its  existence,  and  was
elected  alderman  in  1824  and  1827.

ALCrER,  Horatio,  Jr.,  author,  b.  in  Revere,
Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1852,  spent  several  years  in  journalism  and
teaching,  and  on  8  Dec,  1864,  was  ordained  pastor
over  the  Unitarian  church  in  Brewster,  Mass.
Taking  up  his  residence  in  New  York  in  18(56,  he
became  interested  in  the  condition  of  the  street
boys,  and  this  experience  gave  form  to  many  of
his  later  writings.  He  has  published  in  book-
form  "  Bertha's  Christmas  Vision  "  (Boston,  1855) ;
"  Nothing  to  Do ;  a  Tilt  at  our  Best  Society,"  a
poem  (1857) ;  "  Frank's  Campaign,  or  What  a  Boy
can  do  "  (Boston,  1864) ;  several  series  of  books  for
the  young;  "Helen  Ford,"  a  novel  (1866);  and  a
volume  of  poems.  "  Ragged  Dick,"  "  Luck  and
Pluck,"  and  "  Tattered  Tom  "  are  the  most  popu-
lar of  his  series  for  boys.

AL(xER,  Russell  Alexander,  governor  of  Mich-
igan, b.  in  Lafayette,  Medina  co.,  Ohio,  27  Feb.,
1836.  He  was  left  an
orphan  at  eleven  years
of  age,  worked  on  a
farm  till  he  was  eigh-
teen, attending  school
in  the  winters,  and
then,  after  teaching,
studied  law  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in
1859.  He  began  to
practise  in  Cleveland,
but  was  forced  by  im-
paired health  to  re-
move to  Grand  Rap-
ids, Mich.,  where  he  en-
gaged in  the  lumber
business.  He  became
captain  in  the  2d  Mich-
igan cavalry  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil
war,  and  at  Boones-
was  sent  by  Philip  II.
Sheridan,  then  colonel  of  that  regiment,  to  attack
the  enemy's  rear  with  ninety  picked  men.  The  Con-
federates were  routed,  but  Capt.  Alger  was  wounded
and  taken  prisoner.  Pie  escaped  on  the  same  day,
and  on  16  Oct.  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
6th  Michigan  cavalry.  On  28  Feb.,  1863,  he  became
colonel  of  the  5th  Michigan  cavalry,  and  on  28
June  his  command  was  the  first  to  enter  the  town
of  Gettysburg.  He  was  specially  mentioned  in
Gen.  Custer's  report  of  the  cavalry  operations  there,
and  in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  he  was  severely
wounded  at  Boonesborough,  Md..  on  8  July.  He
was  with  Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah  valley  in
1864,  and  on  11  June,  at  Trevillian  station,  by  a
brilliant  charge,  he  captured  a  large  force  of  Con-
federates. On  11  June,  1865,  he  was  given  the
brevets  of  brigadier-general  and  major-general  of
volunteers.  He  then  resumed  the  lumber  business
in  Detroit,  Mich,,  and  has  acquired  a  fortune,  serv-
ing also  as  president  or  director  of  various  corpora-
tions. His  great  pine  forest  on  Lake  Huron  com-
prises more  than  100  square  miles  and  produces
annually  more  than  75,000,000  feet  of  lumber.  In
1884  he  was  the  successful  Republican  candidate
for  governor  of  the  state,  serving  from  1885  till
1887.  His  benefactions  to  the  poor  of  the  city  of
Detroit  have  been  noteworthy.

VOL. I. — i


ville.  Miss.,


ALGER,  William  Roiinseville,  clergvman,  b.
m  Freetown,  Mass.,  30  Dec,  1822.  He  studied  for
the  ministry,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  tlieologi-
cal  school  in  1847,  and  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Harvard  in  1852.  Immediately  on  his  ordi-
nation he  became  pastor  of  a  Unitarian  church  in
Roxbury,  and  in  1855  removed  to  Boston,  where  he
became  pastor  of  the  Bullfinch  street  church,  and
finally  united  with  Theodore  Parker's  congregation
in  1868,  whom  he  succeeded  as  pastor,  then  wor-
shipping in  Music  Hall.  In  1874  he  removed  to
New  York,  and  in  1875  became  pastor  of  the  Uni-
tarian church  of  the  Messiah  in  that  city  until
1878,  when  he  moved  to  Denver,  thence  to  Chicago
in  1880,  to  Portland  in  1881,  and  returned  to  Bos-
ton. His  published  works  comprise  "  The  Poetry
of  the  Orient  ;  or  Metrical  Specimens  of  the
Thought,  Sentiment,  and  Fancy  of  the  East,"  pref-
aced by  an  elaborate  dissertation  (Boston,  1856;
new  ed.,  1861) ;  an  edition,  with  an  introduction,
of  James  Martineau's  "Studies  of  Christianity"
(1858) ;  "  A  Critical  History  of  the  Doctrine  of  a
Future  Life,"  with  a  bibliography  bv  Ezra  Abbot,
containing  5,000  titles  (1861) ;  "  The  Genius  of  Soli-
tude; or  The  Loneliness  of  Human  Life  "(1861);
"  Friendships  of  Women  "  (1867) ;  "  Prayers  olfei-ed
in  the  Massachusetts  House  of  Representatives
during  the  Session  of  1868  "  (1869) ;  "  The  End  of
the  World  and  the  Day  of  Judgment,"  and  "The
Sword,  the  Pen,  and  the  Pulpit ;  a  Tribute  to  Charles
Dickens"  (two  pamphlets,  1870);  "Life  of  Edwin
Forrest,  with  a  Critical  History  of  the  Dramatic
Art "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1877) ;  "  The  School
of  Life  "  (Boston,  1881) ;  and  "  A  Symbolic  History
of  the  Cross  of  Christ  "  (1881).

ALLAN,  George  William,  Canadian  senator,
b.  in  Toronto,  9  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at
Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto,  in  1839,  studied
law,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1846,  after  which
he  travelled  extensively.  He  was  elected  mayor
of  Toronto  in  1855,  and  has  been  president  of  the
Canadian  institute  of  the  same  city.  In  1869  he  was
appointed  government  trustee  for  municipal  bond
fund  of  the  Toronto  and  Nipissing  railway.  He
sat  in  the  legislative  council  of  Canada  for  York
division  from  1858  until  the  union,  and  was  called
to  the  senate  in  May,  1867.  Mr.  Allan  was  elected
chancellor  of  Trinity  college  in  1876.

ALLAN,  Sir  Hug-h,  ship-owner,  b.  in  Saltcoats,
Ayrshire,  Scotland,  29  Sept.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Edinburgh,
8  Dec,  1882.  After  receiving  a  limited  educa-
tion, he  entered  a
counting-house  in
Greenock  in  1823,
and  in  1824  sailed
on  his  father's  ship,
"  Favorite,"  for
Canada.  For  three
years  he  was  clerk
in  a  dry  -  goods
store  in  IVIontreal.
and  afterward  was
in  the  shipping-
house  of  James
Miller.  He  served
during  the  rebel-
lion of  1837  as  a
volunteer,  rising
finally  to  the  rank
of  captain.  Mr.
Miller  died  in  1838.
and  was  succeeded
in  business  by  the  firm  of  Edmonston  and  Al-
lan. In  1853  this  firm  began  the  construction
of  iron screw steamships, and the  "  Canadian,"


50


ALLAN


ALLEN


their  first  vessel,  made  her  first  voyage  in  1855.
During  the  Crimean  war  two  of  the  company's
steamers  were  employed  as  transport  ships,  be-
tween Portsmouth  and  Marseilles  and  the  Levant,
by  Great  Britain  and  France  and  in  1874  two
were  employed  in  a  similar  service  between  Eng-
land and  the  western  coast  of  Africa.  The  Allan
line  of  royal  mail  steamships  has  contributed  great-
ly to  the  prosperity  of  Montreal  and  of  Canadian
commerce.  Sir  Hugh  was  a  director  of  the  Mon-
treal telegraph  company,  the  Montreal  warehous-
ing company,  the  merchants'  bank  of  Canada,  the
Mulgrave  gold  mining  company,  and  for  a  short
time  of  the  Pacific  railway.  Plis  name  gained  a
place  in  the  P< 'Ui'**'*']^ij'"^y  ^^  Canada  through
his  alleged  qii^'fli^^na^Ww'U-'ction  with  the  "  Pa-
cific Scandal JRWi'^i^iswKigWted  in  1871,  as  Sir
Hugh  Allan ^r/CfiBycraiV.<*il  recognition  of  his
hospitality  tljllle  pfeiGLofyVMes,  and  his  services
to  Cunaduiiliuyi  ^^fi^^ /w'lieijk  |  He  had  a
beautiful  roAl^^^^^aWl^j^^d™^^  and

a  villa  at  Beh^jrOTP-^W^^niphremagog.

ALLAN,  Jolm^^yJiflS^.  at  the  castle  of  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  13  Jan.,  174G;  d.  in  Lubec,  Me.,
7  Feb.,  1805.  His  father  was  a  retired  British  offi-
cer, who  emigrated  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1749.  John
was  brought  up  in  agricultural  and  mercantile  pur-
suits. He  became  a  justice  of  the  peace,  and  then
clerk  of  the  supreme  court,  and  from  1770  to  1776
was  a  member  of  the  provincial  assembly.  When
the  American  colonies  engaged  in  the  struggle  for
independence  he  gave  them  active  and  efficient
aid,  securing  the  alliance  of  the  Indian  tribes  of
that  region.  Congress  nominated  him  superin-
tendent of  the  eastern  Indians,  and  gave  him  a
colonel's  commission  in  January,  1777,  and  with
his  Indians  he  protected  the  otherwise  exposed  line
of  the  northeastern  frontier.  The  Nova  Scotian
authorities  offered  a  price  for  his  apprehension,
while  his  house  was  burned  and  his  wife  thrown
into  prison.  In  1784  Col.  Allan  settled  in  Maine.
The  government  of  Massachusetts  in  1792  granted
him  a  tract  of  22,000  acres,  on  which  the  town  of
Whiting  now  stands,  and  in  1801  congress  gave
him  2,000  acres  in  Ohio  in  compensation  for  the
losses  he  sustained  for  the  patriot  cause.


ALLAN, John, antiquarian.


Ayrshire,  Scotland,  26  Feb..
19  Nov.,  1863. His  father


1777
was


b.  in  Kilbirnie,
d.  in  New  York,
tenant  farmer,
and  sent  his
sontoagram-
mar  school.
After  leav-
ing school  he
worked  on
the  farm,  but,
finding  this
labor  uncon-
genial, he  em-
igrated to
New  York  in
1794,  secured
employment
as  a  clerk  or
book  -  keeper,
and  speedily
acquired  a
high  reputa-
tion for  in-
dustry and
trustworthi-
ness. He  was
.  book  -  keeper

to  Rich i*c  Distrow,  merchant  tailors,  for  many
years,  and  to  his  clerkship  he  added  also  the  busi-


ness of  commission  agent,  and  was  at  one  time
much  employed  as  a  house  agent  and  collector  of
rents.  By  these  various  employments  he  secured
a  moderate  independence.  He  married  early  in
life,  and  occupied  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  a
house  in  Pearl  st.  opposite  Centre,  the  site  of
which  is  iM>w  part  of  the  public  street.  In  1837  he
removed  to  17  Yande water  st.,  where  he  resided
until  his  death,  and  there  found  leisure  for  grati-
fying his  taste  for  antiquarian  research.  In  a  room
at  his  house  his  valuable  and  unique  collection  of
pictures,  books,  autographs,  and  rare  and  curious
articles,  especially  attractive  to  the  antiquary  and
virtuoso,  was  frequently  viewed  by  visitors  to  the
city  and  by  others.  In  this  room,  so  garnished,  he
died.  Mr.  Allan's  collection  was  sold  at  auction  a
short  time  after  his  death,  and  the  total  receipts
amounted  to  |37,689.26.  At  that  time  but  one  of
his  children,  a  Mrs.  Stewart,  was  living,  and  he  had
appointed  her  sole  executrix  of  his  estate.  One  of
Mr.  Allan's  hobbies  was  a  fancy  for  snuff-boxes,  of
which  he  had  gathered  a  large  and  valuable  collec-
tion. Another  was  illustrating  such  works  as  Wash-
ington's Life  and  Burns's  Poems,  which  brought
extremely  high  prices  at  his  celebrated  sale.  See
Duyckinck's  "  Memorial  of  John  Allan,"  issued  by
the  Bradford  Club  (New  York,  1864).

ALLEN,  Alexander  Viets  Griswold,  author,
b.  in  Otis,  Mass.,  4  May,  1841.  He  was  graduated
at  Kenyon  college  in  1862,  and  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary  in  1865,  was  ordained  a  priest  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  that  year,  and
in  1867  became  professor  of  church  history  in  the
Episcopalian  divinity  school  at  Cambridge.  He  has
published  "  The  Greek  Theology,  and  the  Renais-
sance of  the  Nineteenth  Century,"  constituting
the  Bohlen  lectures  for  1884,  and  "  Continuity  of
Christian  Thought "  (1884).

ALLEN,  Andrew,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1740;
d.  in  London,  Eng.,  7  March,  1825.  He  received  a
classical  education,  studied  law  with  his  father,
William  Allen,  chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Philadelphia.
He  was  appointed  attorney-general  in  1766,  became
a  member  of  the  Philadelphia  committee  of  safety,
was  one  of  the  committee  of  three  appointed  by  the
colonial  congress  to  go  to  New  York  and  advise
with  the  council  of  safety  of  the  colony  and  with
Gen.  Lee  respecting  the  immediate  defence  of  the
city  of  New  York,  and  was  a  strong  advocate  for
congressional  measures,  until  the  royalist  army  had
taken  New  York  and  compelled  Washington,  with
the  broken  remains  of  his  troops,  to  cross  the  Dela-
ware. Terrified  by  the  position  of  affairs,  he  went
into  the  British  lines,  took  the  oaths  of  allegiance
to  the  king,  renouncing  those  he  had  taken  to
congress,  and  went  to  England.  As  a  result,  he
was  attainted  and  his  landed  estate  forfeited  imder
the  confiscation  act.  On  his  return  to  England  he
was  coini)ensated  with  a  pension  by  the  British
government  of  £400  per  annum.

ALLEN,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,  1789 ;  d.  at  sea,  13  Jan.,  1829.  He
was  educated  a  Presbyterian,  but  united  with  the
Episcopal  church  and"^  became  a  lay  reader,  labor-
ing among  the  colored  people  of  Charleston,  Va. ;
then  a  deacon,  and  in  1818  a  priest.  He  published
in  1815  the  weekly  "Layman's  Magazine,"  and  ni
1820  an  abridgment  of  Burnet's  "History  of  the
Reformation."  In  1821  he  was  chosen  rector  of
St.  Paul's  church,  Philadelphia.  In  1827  he  estab-
lished a  printmg-house  for  the  publication  of  tracts
and  printing  of  prayer-books.  He  published
"Christ  and  Him  Crucified,"  and  "  Livmg  Man-
ners," a  tale  (1822); "History  of  the  Church  of


ALLEN


ALLEN


51


Christ"  (1823-'24);  "The  Parent's  Counsellor,  a
Narrative  of  the  Newton  Family,"  and  a  "  Sketch
of  the  Life  of  Dr.  Pilmore,"  his  predecessor  in  St.
Paul's  church  (1825).  See  Memoirs  by  his  brother
(Philadelphia,  1832).

ALLEN,  Charles,  jurist,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,
9  Au^^,  1797;  d.  there,  6  Aug.,  1869.  Ue  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1821.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1829,  1834,  1836,  and  1840.  In  1835,
1838,  and  1839  he  sat  in  the  state  senate.  He  was
a  commissioner  to  negotiate  the  Ashburton  treaty
in  1842,  and  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas
from  1842  to  1844.  He  was  active  in  the  free-
soil  movement,  and  was  elected  to  congress  in  1848
and  reelected  in  1850.  In  1849  he  edited  the  Bos-
ton "  Whig,"  afterward  called  the  "  Republican."
He  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  superior
court  of  Suffolk  county  in  1858,  which  office  he
resigned  in  1867.

ALLEN,  David  OHver,  missionary,  b.  in  Barre,
Mass.,  in  1800;  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  17  Jidy,  1863.
He  was  graduated  at  Amherst  college  in  1823,
taught  in  Lawrence  academy,  and  then  entered
Andover  theological  seminary,  which  he  left  in
1827  to  go  as  a  missionary  to  Bombay.  He  estab-
lished schools  and  preached  in  that  province,  and
made  extensive  tours  in  western  India.  In  1844
he  took  charge  of  the  Bombay  printing  establish-
ment. He  wrote  tracts  in  Mahratta,  and  super-
vised a  new  translation  of  the  Bible  in  that  lan-
guage. Injured  in  health  by  the  Indian  climate,
he  returned  to  America  in  1853.  After  his  return
he  published  a  "  History  of  India,  Ancient  and
Modern,  Geographical,  Historical,  Political,  Social,
and  Religious  "  (Boston,  1856).

ALLEN,  Ebenezer,  soldier,  b.  in  Northamp-
ton, Mass.,  17  Oct.,  1743;  d.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,
26  March,  1806.  In  1771  he  emigrated  to  Poult-
ney,  Vt.,  and  became  a  lieutenant  in  Col.  Warner's
regiment  of  Green  Mountain  boys.  He  removed
to  Tinmouth  in  1775,  and  was  a  delegate  from  that
town  to  the  several  conventions  in  the  New  Hamp-
shire grants  in  1776,  and  to  those  that  declared  the
state  independent  and  formed  the  state  constitu-
tion during  the  following  year.  He  was  appointed
a  captain  in  Col.  Herrick's  battalion  of  rangers  in
July,  1777.  and  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle
of  Bennington.  In  September  of  the  same  year  he
captured  Mt.  Defiance  by  assault,  and  on  the  re-
treat of  the  enemy  from  Fort  Ticonderoga  made
fifty  of  them  prisoners.  Subsequently  he  was  made
major  in  the  rangers,  and  showed  himself  a  brave
and  successful  partisan  leader.  In  1783  he  re-
moved to  South  Hero,  where  he  resided  until  1800,
when  he  went  to  Burlington  and  remained  there
until  his  death.

ALLEN,  Elislia  Hunt,  statesman,  b.  in  New
Salem,  Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.
C,  1  Jan.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
college  in  1823,  and  studied  law  under  his  father,
Samuel  C.  Allen,  and  Charles  Adams.  In  1826  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise
at  Brattleboro,  but  he  soon  removed  to  Bangor,
Me.,  where  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature
and  served  continuously  from  1834  to  1841,  being
speaker  in  1838.  In  1841  he  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative to  congress,  but  he  was  defeated  by
Hannibal  Hamlin  when  a  candidate  for  reelection.
He  removed  to  Boston  in  1847,  where  he  practised
law,  and  in  1849  was  elected  to  the  legislature.
During  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  consul  at
Honolulu,  and  subsequently  he  became  prominent
in  the  affairs  of  the  Hawaiian  government.  He
was  minister  of  finance,  and  for  twenty  A'ears  was
chief  justice  of  the  kingdom. In  1856,  1864,  1870,


and  1875  he  was  the  accredited  minister  to  the
United  States.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was
dean  of  the  diplomatic  cor{)s,

ALLEN,  EHzabeth  Akers,  author,  b.  in  Strong,
Me.,  9  Oct.,  1832.  Her  maiden  name  was  Chase-
She  married  Paul  Akers,  the  sculptor  (see  Akers),
who  died  in  1861,  and  in  1865  she  married  E.  M.
Allen,  of  New  York.  She  began  to  write  at  the
age  of  fifteen,  under  the  pen  name  of  "  Florence
Percy,"  and  in  1855  published  under  that  name  a
volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Forest  Buds."  In  1858
she  became  a  contributor  to  the  "  Atlantic  Month-
ly," and  in  1866  a  collection  of  her  poems  was  pub-
lished in  Boston.  This  volume  included  the  poem
"  Rock  me  to  Sleep,  Mother,"  which  has  been  set
to  music  as  a  popular  song  by- several  composers.
A  dispute  as  to  the  authorship  of -the  words  at-
tracted wide  attention.  Mrs.  Allen  wrote  them  in
Portland,  Me.,  early  in  1859,  and  sent  them  from
Rome  in  May,  1860,  to  the  Pliiladelp]jia  "  Saturday
Evening  Post."  The  validity  of'Gher  claim  was
presumable,  not  only  from  the  fict  that  she  had
placed  the  piece  in  her  vo4unl&  before  the  discus-
sion arose,  but  also  because  she  was  the  only  claim-
ant that  had  written  poems  equal  or  superior  to
the  disputed  one.  That  she  was  the  real  author
was  demonstrated  by  William  D.  O'Connor  in  a
long  article  in  the  New  York  "  Times  "  of  27  May,
1867.  Mrs.  Allen  was  for  several  years  literary
editor  of  the  Portland,  Me.,  "  Advertiser,"  and  she
is  a  frequent  contributor  to  periodical  literature.

ALLEN,  Ethan,  soldier,  b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,
10  Jan.,  1737;  d.  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  13  Feb.,  1789.
In  early  life  he  removed  to  Bennington,  Vt.,  which
at  that  time  was  disputed  territory,  known  as  the
New  Hampshire  grants,  claimed  by  the  colonies  of
New  York  and  New  Hampshire,  In  1770  he  was
appointed  agent  to  represent  the  settlers  at  Albany,
where  litigation  on  the  claims  was  pending.  A
decision  adverse  to  them  was  rendered,  and  resist-
ance to  the  New  York  authorities  followed.  Allen
was  made  colonel  of  an  armed  force  known  as  the
"Green  Mountain  boys,"  raised  in  order  to  protect
holders  of  land  granted  by  New  Hampshire.  He
was  declared  an  outlaw,  and  £150  was  offered  for
his  capture  by  Gov.  Tryon,  of  New  York.  When
hostilities  with  Great  Britain  began,  after  the  Green
Mountain  boys  had  proved  their  patriotism  and
efficiency  by  the  capture  of  Ticonderoga  and  Crown
Point,  the  continental  congress  granted  them  the
same  pay  that  was  received  by  the  soldiers  of  the
continental  army,  and,  after  consulting  Gen.  Schuy-
ler, recommended  to  the  New  York  convention  that
they  should  be  employed  in  the  army  to  be  raised
in  defence  of  America  under  such  officers  as  they
(the  Green  Mountain  boys)  should  choose.  Allen
and  Warner  went  where  the  New  York  assembly
was  in  session,  and  requested  an  audience.  Many
members  objected  to  holding  a  public  conference
with  proclaimed  felons.  Yet  there  was  a  large
majority  in  favor  of  admitting  Ethan  Allen  to  the
floor  of  the  house,  on  the  motion  of  Capt,  Sears.
The  assembly  resolved,  in  accordance  with  the
recommendation  of  congress,  that  a  regiment  of
Green  Moimtain  boys  should  be  raised,  not  to  exceed
500  men ;  and  Allen,  in  a  letter  of  thanks  to  the
assembly,  pledged  his  word  that  they  would  re-
ciprocate the  favor  by  boldly  hazarding  their  lives
in  the  common  cause  of  America.  In  seizing  the
British  fortresses  the  Green  Mountain  boys  fore-
stalled the  action  of  congress,  who  ordered  Arnold
to  raise  troofis  for  the  purpose ;  but  before  lliat
a  force  was  collected  at  Castleton,  Vt.,  and  placed
under  the  command  of  Allen.  At  daybi'oak.  May
10,  he  effected  the  capture  of  the  entire  British


52


ALLEN


fytB.^.^^^^


forces,  who  were  called  upon  to  surrender  "  in  the
name  of  the  great  Jehovah  and  of  the  continental
congress."  The  subsequent  capture  of  Skenesbor-
ough  and  of  Crown  Point  by  forces  detached  from
Allen's  command  placed  valuable  military  stores  at

the  disposal
oftheAmer-
icans,  and
gave  them
the  mastery
of  Lake
Champlain.
The  inva-
sion of  Can-
ada was  pro-
f)0sed  by  Al-
en  to  the
New  York
authorities,
but  was  re-
jected. He
then  joined
Gen.  Schuy-
ler's forces
as  a  volun-
teer, and
was  sent  to
Canada  on
several  se-
cret mis-
sions to  ascertain  the  views  of  the  Canadians.
While  on  his  last  trip  he  was  met  by  Col.  Brown,
and  a  joint  expedition  for  the  capture  of  Montreal
was  proposed  and  eagerly  accepted.  The  project
proved  unsuccessful,  and"  Allen  was  captured  on
25  Sept.  and  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  England.  He
was  very  cruelly  treated  at  first,  and  for  a  time
was  confined  in  Pendennis  castle,  near  Falmouth ;
then  he  was  sent  to  Halifax,  N.  S.,  and  later  to
New  York,  where,  6  May,  1778,  he  was  exchanged
for  Col.  Campbell.  On  his  return  to  Vermont  he
was  placed  in  command  of  the  state  militia,  and
he  further  received  from  congress  the  commission
of  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  continental  army.  An
unsuccessful  attempt  to  bribe  him  was  made  by
the  British,  through  Beverly  Robinson,  for  his  in-
fluence toward  effecting  a  union  between  Vermont
and  Canada ;  and,  by  temporizing  with  this  offer,
he  was  able  to  prevent  any  active  demonstration
by  the  British  in  that  part  of  the  country.  Toward
the  close  of  the  war  he-  settled  in  Bennington,  and
subsequently  in  Burlington.  He  was  a  member  of
the  state  legislature,  and  also  a  special  delegate  to
congress,  where  he  ultimately  succeeded  in  obtain-
ing the  recognition  of  Vermont  as  an  independent
state.  He  was  the  author  of  a  history  of  the  con-
troversy between  New  York  and  Vermont,  a  nar-
rative of  his  captivity,  and  several  political  pam-
phlets, and  published  also  "  Reason  the  only  Oracle
of  Man  "  (Bennington,  1784).  Sketches  of  his  life
were  written  by  Jared  Sparks  (Boston,  1834),  by
Hugh  Moore  (Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  1834),  and  by  H.
W.  Du  Puy  (Buffalo,  1853).  It  is  believed  that  no
portrait  of  Allen  was  ever  made.  The  one  given
IS  copied  for  this  work  by  our  artist,  from  the  ideal
heroic  statue  at  Montpelier,  Vt.

ALLEN,  Oeorj^e,  educator,  b.  in  Milton,  Vt.,
17  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  28  May,  187G.
He  was  graduated  at  the  university  of  Vermont
in  1827,  studied  law,  and  was  adm"itted  to  prac-
tice in  1831.  Subsequently  he  studied  theology,
and  from  1834  to  1837  was  rector  of  an  Episcopal
church  at  St.  Albans,  Vt.  In  1837  he  became  pro-
fessor of  ancient  languages  in  Delaware  college,
Newark,  Del.,  and  in  1845  professor  of  ancient  lan-


ALLEN

guages,  and  then  of  Greek  alone,  in  the  university
of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia.  Prof.  Allen  pub-
lished a  "  Life  of  Philidor,"  the  chess-player  (Phila-
delphia, 1803). In  1847  he  became  a  Catholic.

ALLEN,  Grant,  naturalist,  b.  in  Kingston,
Canada,  24  Feb.,  1848.  He  studied  at  Oxford,  Eng-
land, and  was  graduated  in  1871  with  high  honors.
In  1873  he  was  appointed  professor  of  logic  and
philosophy  in  Queen's  college,  Spanish  Town,  Ja-
maica, and  from  1874  to  1877  was  its  principal.
Since  then  he  has  resided  in  England,  where  his
graceful  articles  on  popular  scientific  subjects  con-
stantly appear  in  the  current  magazines.  His  pub-
lished works  include  "Physiological  Esthetics"
(1877) ;  "  The  Color  Sense  "  (1879) ;  "  Anglo-Saxon
Britain"  (1880);  "Vignettes  from  Nature"  (1881);
"  The  Colors  of  Flowers  "  (1882) ;  "  Strange  Stories  "
(1884) ;  "  Flowers  and  their  Pedigrees  "  (New  York,
1884);  "Charles  Darwin"  (1885);  "Philistia"
(1885) ;  "  For  Mamie's  Sake  "  (1886) ;  "  Babylon  "
(1886),  and  "  In  All  Shades  "  (1886),  the  last  four
being  novels.  He  has  used  the  pen-names  of  J.
Arbuthnot  Wilson  and  Cecil  Power.

ALLEN,  Harrison,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  17  April,  1841.  He  was  graduated  at
the  medical  school  of  the  university  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1861,  in  1862  became  assistant  surgeon  in
the  U.  S.  army,  and  served  with  the  army  of  the
Potomac  until  March,  1863,  when  he  was  trans-
ferred to  hospital  duty  at  "Washington,  where  he
remained  until  his  resignation  in  December,  1865,
and  attained  the  brevet  rank  of  major.  From
1865  to  1878  he  was  professor  of  comparative  anat-
omy and  medical  zoology  in  the  university  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  since  then  he  has  filled  the  chair  of
physiology.  In  1867  he  was  elected  professor  of
anatomy  and  surgery  in  the  Philadelphia  dental
college,  and  in  1870  surgeon  to  the  Philadelphia
hospital  and  secretary  of  "its  medical  board.  Pie  is
a  member  of  numerous  medical  societies,  and  was
a  delegate  from  the  centennial  commission  to  the
international  medical  congress.  His  contributions
to  the  various  medical  journals  relate  chiefly  to
osteomyelitis,  human  anatomy,  and  morbid  anato-
my. He  has  published  "  Outlines  of  Comparative
Anatomy  and  Medical  Zoology"  (Philadelphia,
1867),  "  Studies  in  the  Facial  Region  "  (1874),  and
"An  Analysis  of  the  Life-form  in  Art"  (1875).

ALLEN,  Heman,  lawyer,  b.  in  Poultney,  Vt.,
23  Feb.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Highgate,  Vt.,  9  April,  1852.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  college  in  1795,
and  then  studied  law.  During  1808-9  he  was
sheriff  of  Chittenden  co.,  Vt.,  and  from  1811  to
1814  chief  justice  of  the  county  court.  From  1812
to  1817  he  was  an  active  member  of  the  state  legis-
lature, during  which  time  he  was  appointed  quar-
termaster of  militia  with  the  title  of  brigadier-gen-
eral. He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1817,  but
resigned  in  1818  to  accept  the  appointment  of  U.  S.
marshal  for  the  district  of  Vermont.  He  was  ap-
pointed minister  to  Chili  in  1823.  When  he  called
on  Com.  Hull  to  make  his  arrangements  to  sail  with
him  in  the  frigate  "  United  States  "  he  met  Mrs.
Hull's  sister  Elizabeth,  one  of  the  "seven  graces  of
Stratford,"  as  the  Misses  Hart  were  called,  and  in
two  weeks  they  were  married  and  sailed  in  the  frig-
ate with  the  gallant  commodore  and  Mrs.  Hull  and
Miss  Jeannette  Hart,  who  soon  afterward  made  a
conquest  of  Gen.  Bolivar,  but  refused  his  repeated
offers  of  marriage.  Mr.  Allen  continued  in  Chili
as  minister  until  1827.  In  1830  he  was  made  presi-
dent of  the  Burlington  branch  of  the  United  States
bank,  which  office  he  filled  until  the  expiration  of
its  charter  in  1836.  He  then  settled  in  Highgate,
and  resided  there  until  his  death.


I


ALLEN


ALLEN


53


ALLEN,  Henry,  founder  of  a  sect,  b.  in  New-
port, R.  L,  14  June,  1748 ;  d.  in  Northampton,  N.
H.,  2  Feb.,  1784.  In  1774  and  succeeding  years  he
made  many  converts  in  Nova  Scotia  to  his  peculiar
mystical  religious  ideas.  He  believed  that  human
souls  are  emanations  from  a  single  great  spirit,  and
that  the  Bible  is  to  be  interpreted  not  literally,  but
in  a  spiritual  sense.  He  published  a  book  of  hymns
and  several  treatises  and  sermons.  The  Allenites
became  numerous  under  his  eloquent  preaching,
but  declined  after  his  death.

ALLEN,  Henry  Watkins,  soldier  and  states-
man, b.  in  Prince  Edward  co.,  Va.,  29  April,  1820;
d.  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  22  April,  1866.  Plis  father,
a  physician  of  note,  removed  to  Lexington,  Mo,,
while  Henry  was  young.  The  latter,  at  his  solicita-
tion, was  taken  from  the  shop  where  he  was  era-
ployed  and  placed  in  Marion  college.  Mo.,  but,  in
consequence  of  a  dispute  with  his  father,  he  ran
away  and  became  a  teacher  in  Grand  Gulf.  Miss.
Then  he  studied  law,  and  was  in  successful  practice
in  1842  when  President  Houston  called  for  volun-
teers in  the  Texan  war  against  Mexico.  He  raised
a  company,  and  acquitted  himself  well  during  the
campaign,  then  resumed  his  practice  in  Grand
Gulf,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1846.
He  settled  a  few  years  later  on  an  estate  in  West
Baton  Rouge,  and  was  elected  to  the  Louisiana
legislature  in  1853.  A  year  later  he  went  to  Cam-
bridge university  to  pursue  a  course  of  legal  studies.
In  1859  he  went  to  Europe  with  the  intention  of
taking  part  in  the  Italian  struggle  for  indepen-
dence, but  arrived  too  late.  He  made  a  tour  through
Europe,  the  incidents  of  which  are  recounted  in
"  Travels  of  a  Sugar  Planter."  He  was  elected  to
the  legislature  during  his  absence,  and  on  returning
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  business  of  that  body.
He  had  been  a  whig  in  politics,  but  had  joined  the
democratic  party  when  Buchanan  was  nominated
for  president  in  1856.  When  the  civil  war  broke
out  he  volunteered  in  the  confederate  service,  was
commissioned  lieutenant-colonel,  and  was  stationed
for  some  time  at  Ship  island.  He  was  subsequently
made  colonel  of  the  4th  Louisiana  regiment,  and
was  appointed  military  governor  of  Jackson.  He
fought  gallantly  at  Shiloh,  where  he  was  wounded.
At  Vicksburg  he  rendered  important  service  in  the
construction  of  fortifications,  a  part  of  the  time
under  fire.  At  the  battle  of  Baton  Rouge  he  com-
manded a  brigade,  where  he  was  badly  wounded  in
both  legs  by  a  shell.  On  his  recovery  he  was  com-
missioned a  brigadier-general,  in  September,  1864,
and  almost  immediately  afterward  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Louisiana.  He  arranged  to  have  the  cot-
ton tax  to  the  confederate  government  paid  in
kind,  and  opened  a  route  by  which  cotton  was  ex-
ported through  Texas  to  Mexico,  and  medicine,
clothing,  and  other  articles  introduced  into  the
sttite.  These  necessities  were  sold  at  moderate
prices  and  given  to  the  poor.  In  the  suppression
of  the  manufacture  of  liquor  and  other  similar
measures  Gov.  Allen  exercised  dictatorial  powers.
After  the  war  he  settled  in  Mexico  and  established
an  English  paper,  the  "Mexican  Times."  See
"  Recollections  of  Henry  W.  Allen,"  by  Sarah  A.
Dorsey  (New  York,  1867).

ALLEN,  Ira,  soldier,  b.  in  Cornwall,  Conn.,  21
April,  1751 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  7  Jan.,  1814.
He  was  a  younger  brother  of  Ethan  Allen,  and  was
associated  with  him  in  the  dispute  between  New
York  and  New  Hampshire  over  the  land  grants,
fie  was  a  member  of  the  Vermont  legislature  in
1776-'77,  and  also  of  the  constitutional  convention
of  Vermont.  He  was  the  first  secretary  of  the
state,  then  treasurer,  and  surveyor-general. During


the  revolution  he  served  in  the  militia  and  partici-
pated in  the  battle  of  Bennington.  In  1780-'81  he
was  a  commissioner  to  congress  in  behalf  of  Ver-
mont, in  opposition  to  the  claims  of  adjoining
states.  In  1789  he  framed  the  memorial  that
led  to  the  organization  of  the  university  of  Ver-
mont. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
m  1792  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United
States.  In  1795,  having  become  senior  major-
general  of  the  militia,  he  went  to  France  and  pur-
chased arms,  which  he  expected  to  sell  to  the  state
of  Vermont,  but  on  his  return  voyage  he  was
seized  and  carried  to  England,  where  he  was
charged  with  furnishing  arms  to  the  Irish  rebels,
and  litigation  in  the  court  of  admiraltv  followed,
where,  after  eight  years,  a  decision  was  finally  ren-
dered in  his  favor.  He  suffered  imprisonment  in
France  in  1798,  and  returned  home  to  the  United
States  in  1801.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Natu-
ral and  Political  History  of  Vermont"  (London,
1798),  and  also  of  "Statements  Appended  to  the
Olive  Branch  "  (1807).

ALLEN,  Isaac,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  1741 ;  d.
in  1806.  He  was  a  loyalist  officer  of  the  revolu-
tion, who  at  the  close  of  the  war  held  the  rank  of
colonel  and  commanded  the  2d  battalion  of  New
Jersey  volunteers.  He  was  deported  to  New  Bruns-
wick with  other  tories,  and  obtained  a  grant  of
2,000  acres  above  Fredericton.  He  was  one  of  the
first  judges  appointed  in  the  province,  having  been
made  an  assistant  justice  in  1784.  In  a  test  case  to
determine  the  right  to  hold  slaves,  tried  at  Fred-
ericton in  1800,  he  decided  with  Judge  Saunders
against  the  master,  while  the  chief  justice  and  an-
other judge  upheld  the  master's  right.  As  a  result
of  this  trial,  he  received  a  challenge  to  a  duel  from
an  officer  in  the  rangers.  His  grandson,  John  C.
Allen,  became  chief  justice  of  New  Brunswick.

ALLEN,  James,  clergyjnan,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  in  1692;  d.  in  Brookline,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,
1747.  He  was  ordained  in  1718  and  became  the
first  minister  of  Brookline,  remaining  in  that
charge  until  his  death.  His  remarks  concerning
the  religious  revival  of  1743  drew  upon  him  severe
animadversion.  He  published  a  Thanksgiving  ser-
mon (1722);  a  discourse  on  Providence  (1727);  a
discourse  entitled  "The  Doctrine  of  Merit  Ex-
ploded, and  Humility  Recommended  "  (1727) ;  a
"  Fast  Sermon  on  the  Earthquake  "  (1727) ;  etc.

ALLEN,  Joel  Asaph,  naturalist,  b.  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  19  July,  1838.  He  studied  first  at  the
Wilbraham  academy,  and  then  at  the  Lawrence
scientific  school  under  Agassiz,  where  he  devoted
special  attention  to  zoology,  and  was  one  of  the  as-
sistants that  accompanied  Agassiz  on  the  expedi-
tion to  Brazil  in  1865.  He  visited  Florida  in  1869,
and  the  Rocky  mountain  region  in  1871,  with  sci-
entific exploring  parties,  and  in  1873  was  the  chief
of  an  expedition  sent  out  by  the  Northern  Pacific
railroad.  In  1870  he  became  assistant  in  ornitholo-
gy at  the  museum  of  comparative  zoology  at  Cam-
bridge, and  in  1871  received  the  Humboldt  scholar-
ship. Since  1885  he  has  been  curator  of  the  de-
partment of  mammals  and  birds  in  the  American
museum  of  natural  history.  New  York.  In  1871  he
was  made  a  fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences,  and  in  1876  a  fellow  of  the  national
academy  of  sciences.  He  is  also  a  member  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  and  of  the  American  philosophical  society.
From  1883  to  1886  he  was  president  of  the  Ameri-
can ornithologists'  union.  He  is  the  author  of  nu-
merous reports  and  scientific  papers,  among  which
are  "  On  Geographical  Variation  in  Color  among
North  American  Squirrels  "  (1874) ;  "  Notes  on  the


54


ALLEN


Mammals  of  Portions  of  Kansas,  Colorado,  Wyo-
minj?,  and  Utah  "  (1874) :  "  Geo^rraphical  Variation
in  North  American  Birds"  (1874) ;  and  "  Notes  on
the  Natural  History  of  Portions  of  Montana  and
Dakota  "  (1875).  He  has  also  written  "  Mammals
and  Winter  Birds  of  East  Florida"  (Cambridge,
1871) ;  "  The  American  Bison,  Living  and  Extmct  "
(1872) : "  Monographs  of  North  American  Rodentia,"
with  Dr.  Elliott  Coues  (1876);  "History  of  North
American  Pinnipeds,  a  Monograph  of  the  Wal-
ruses, Sea  Lions,  Sea  Bears,  and  Seals  of  North
America"  (1880).  From  1876  to  1883  he  edited
the  "  Bulletin  of  the  Nuttall  Ornithological  Club,"
and  since  then  (1884-6)  he  has  had  charge  of
"  The  Auk,"  a  quarterly  journal  of  ornithology.

ALLEN,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Rockbridge  co.,  Va.,
30  Dec,  1772 ;  killed  in  the  battle  of  the  river  Raisin,
22  Jan.,  1813.  He  was  the  son  of  an  early  settler  in
Kentucky,  and  began  the  practice  of  law  at  Shelby-
ville  in  1795.  In  1812  he  raised  a  regiment  of  rifle-
men which  was  engaged  in  the  battle  of  Browns-
town  and  formed  the  left  wing  at  the  river  Raisin.

ALLEN,  Joseph,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,  2
Sept.,  1749 ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1827.
He  was  a  nephew  of  Samuel  Adams,  and  was  en-
gaged in  trade  at  Leicester,  Mass.,  where  he  con-
tributed to  the  endowment  of  the  academy.  Re-
moving to  Worcester  in  1776,  he  was  clerk  of  Wor-
cester CO.  court  from  1776  to  1810,  a  member  of
the  state  constitutional  convention  in  1778,  a  dele-
gate to  congress  from  1811  to  1813.  and  councillor
from  1815  to  1818.

ALLEN,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Medfield,
Mass.,  15  Aug.,  1790;  d.  in  Northborough,  Mass.,  23
Feb.,  1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1811,
and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Northborough  in  1816,  which  relation  he
sustained  until  his  death.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
peace  congress  of  Paris  in  1849.  His  published
works  include  "  Historical  Account  of  North-
borough "  (1826) ;  "  History  of  the  Worcester  Asso-
ciation "  (1868) ;  and  "  Allen  Genealogy  "  (1869),  be-
sides sermons,  text-books,  and  Sunday-school  books.
— His  son,  Joseph  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Northbor-
ough, Mass.,  in  1820.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Ten
Discourses  on  Orthodoxy  "  (Boston,  1849),  setting
forth  Unitarian  doctrines  in  theology,  "  Hebrew
Men  and  Times  "  (Boston,  1861),  and  "  Christian
History  in  Three  (jreat  Periods"  (3  vols.,  1880-
'82) ;  also  of  a  number  of  classical  text-books,  of
the  "  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  Hiram  Withington,"
and  a  "  Manual  of  Devotion  "  (Boston,  1852). —
His  son,  William  Francis,  educator,  b.  in  North-
borough, Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1830.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1851,  and  became  in  1867  professor
of  ancient  languages,  and  afterward  of  the  Latin
language  and  literature,  in  the  university  of  Wis-
consin. He  has  published  a  number  of  text-books
and  a  collection  of  "  Slave  Songs  "  (1867).

ALLEN,  Moses,  clergyman,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  14  Sept.,  1748 ;  d.  Feb.  8,  1779.  He  was'
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1772,  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1774.  and  was  ordained  at  Christ's  church
parish,  south  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1775.  In  1777
he  took  charge  of  the  church  at  Midway,  Ga.  The
British  force  under  Gen.  Prevost  burned  his  church
and  devastated  the  district  in  1778.  He  oflftciated
as  chaplain  to  the  Georgia  brigade,  and  was  cap-
tured when  Savannah  was  reduced  by  the  British
in  December.  His  eloquent  patriotic  appeals  and
energetic  exertions  in  the  field  had  rendered  him
obnoxious  to  the  British,  and  they  refused  to  re-
lease him  on  parole  with  the  officers.  He  was  con-
fined in  a  loathsome  j)rison-ship,  and  was  drowned
in  attempting  to  escape.


ALLEN


ALLEN,  Nathan,  physician,  b.  in  Princeton,
Mass.,  13  April,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst college  in  1836,  after  which  he  studied  at  the
Pennsylvania  medical  college  and  received  his  de-
gree there  in  1841.  He  then  settled  in  Lowell,
Mass.,  and  acquired  a  large  practice.  Dr.  Allen  is  a
member  of  the  state  board  of  charities  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  since  1862  has  been  examining  super-
visor of  pensions.  In  1857  he  was  elected  a  trustee
of  Amherst  college.  He  is  the  author  of  "  The
Opium  Trade "  (Lowell,  1853),  and  of  numerous
pamphlets  on  social  and  physiological  subjects,
the  most  important  of  which  are  "  Medical  Prob-
lems of  the  Day"  (1874) ;  "State  Medicine  and  In-
sanity "  (1876) ;'  and  "  Normal  Standard  of  Women
for  Propagation  "  (1876).

ALLEN,  Oscar  Dana,  chemist,  b.  in  Hebron,
Me.,  25  Feb.,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Shef-
field scientific  school  in  1861,  and  ten  years  later
he  received  the  degree  of  doctor  of  philosophy  for
original  investigations,  having  in  the  mean  time
been  an  assistant  professor  there.  In  1871  he  be-
came professor  of  metallurgy  and  assaying,  and  in
1873  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of  analytical  chem-
istry and  metallurgy.  Prof.  Allen's  researches
have  been  chiefly  on  the  rare  elements  ca?sium
and  rubidium.  These  investigations  and  his  other
scientific  papers  have  appeared  principally  in  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science."  The  latest
American  edition  of  "Fresenius's  Quantitative
Analysis"  (New  York,  1881)  was  edited  and  re-
vised by  him.  He  is  a  member  of  numerous  scien-
tific societies.

ALLEN,  Panl,  editor,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I..
15  Feb.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  18  Aug.,  1826.  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  university  in  1796,  stud-
ied law,  and  became  a  newspaper  writer  in  Phila-
delphia. He  prepared  the  "  Travels  "  of  Lewis  and
Clarke  for  the  press,  and  was  afterward  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "  Federal  Republican  "  at  Baltimore.
He  suffered  the  hardships  of  poverty  and  was  for  a
time  confined  in  jail  for  a  small  debt.  He  wrote
for  a  magazine  called  the  "  Portico,"  in  association
with  Pierpont  and  Neal,  and  subsequently  edited
the  "  Journal  of  the  Times  "  and  the  "  Morning
Chronicle,"  the  latter  of  which  had  a  wide  circula-
tion. He  projected  a  "  History  of  the  Revolution,"
and  obtained  a  large  list  of  subscriptions.  The
work,  which  appeared  under  his  name  in  1819,  was
really  written  by  his  friends  John  Neal  and  Wat-
kins,  as  he  was  too  indolent  to  fulfil  his  engage-
ments either  on  this  oi*  on  a  "  Life  of  Washing-
ton," which  was  extensively  advertised  and  sub-
scribed for.  He  published  in  1821  a  poem  called
"  Noah,"  originally  in  twenty-five  cantos,  but  cut
down  by  the  advice  of  Neal  to  five.  He  published
a  small  volume  of  poems  in  1801,  and  a  "  Life  of
Alexander  I. "  in  1818.

ALLEN,  Pliilip,  statesman,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  1  Sept.,  1785 ;  d.  there,  16  Dec,  1865.  He  was
graduated  at  Rhode  Island  college  in  1803,  and
engaged  in  mercantile  business,  chiefly  in  the
West  India  trade  established  by  his  father,  who  died
in  1803.  He  began  the  manufacture  of  cotton  at
Smithfield  about  1812,  and  in  1831  established  the
print  works  at  Providence.  In  1819  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  and  served  also  as  one  of  the
commissioners  for  the  settlement  of  the  state  debt.
In  1851  he  was  elected,  as  the  candidate  of  the
democratic  party,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  and
again  in  1852  and  1853.  From  1853  and  1859  he
was  U.  S.  senator,  serving  in  the  committees  on
commerce  and  naval  affairs.

ALLEN,  Richard,  clergyman,  b.  in  1760;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  26  March,  1831. He  became  a  local


i


ALLEN


ALLEN


55


Methodist  preacher  about  1783,  and  in  1793,  at
Philadelphia,  organized  the  first  church  for  colored
people  in  the  United  States.  He  was  ordained  in
the  Methodist  ministry  in  1799,  and  was  elected
bishop  of  the  newly  formed  African  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  181 G.

ALLEN,  Richard  L.,  agricultural  writer,  b.  in
Hampton  co.,  Mass.,  in  October,  1808 ;  d.  in  Stock-
holm, Sweden,  22  Sept.,  1809.  He  abandoned
mercantile  business  in  New  York  and  followed  lit-
erary pursuits,  then  studied  law  in  Baltimore,  but
was  obliged  to  seek  a  more  active  life  on  account
of  his  health,  and  settled  on  a  farm  on  Niagara
river  in  1832.  In  1842  he  started,  in  partnership
with  his  brother,  the  "American  Agriculturist."
In  1856  the  brothers  opened  a  warehouse  for  sup-
plying improved  agricultural  implements.  He
published  •'  History  and  Description  of  Domes-
tic Animals"  (New  York,  1848);  "The  Ameri-
can Farm  Book "  (1849) ;  a  valuable  treatise  on
""The  Diseases  of  Domestic  Animals"  (1848);
"  American  Agriculture  "  ;  and  "  American  Farm-
er's Muck-Book."

ALLEN,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta  co.,
Va.,  in  1777 ;  d.  near  Carthage,  Tenn.,  19  Aug.,
1844.  He  was  a  merchant,  and  after  settling  in
Carthage  about  1804  became  clerk  of  the  county
court.  In  the  war  of  1812  he  served  with  distinc-
tion as  a  colonel  under  Jackson.  From  1819  till
1827  he  was  a*  member  of  congress.

ALLEN,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Ohio  about  1815  ;
d.  in  Greneva,  Switzerland,  6  Aug.,  1886.  He  was
graduated  at  West  Point  in  1836,  and  was  2d  lieu-
tenant in  the  Seminole  war.  In  the  Mexican  war
he  served  on  the  march  to  Monterey  as  assistant
quartermaster,  and  was  present  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz.  For  gallant  conduct  at  the  battle  of
Cerro  Gordo  he  received  the  brevet  rank  of  major.
He  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Contreras  and
Churubusco,  and  at  the  taking  of  Mexico.  After
the  Mexican  war  he  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the
Pacific  division,  and,  after  the  breaking  out  of  the
civil  war,  of  the  department  of  Missouri,  with
headquarters  at  St.  Louis,  where  he  had  charge  of
supplies  and  transportation  for  the  various  armies
in  the  Mississippi  valley.  He  was  promoted  major
in  1861,  colonel  in  1862,  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers in  1868,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
in  the  regular  army  in  1864.  From  November,
1863,  to  1866  he  was  chief  quartermaster  of  the
Mississippi  valley,  with  headquarters  at  Louisville,
and  furnished  transportation  and  supplies  to  Gen.
Sherman's  command  for  the  march  across  the
country  to  join  Gen.  Grant  at  Chattanooga,  and  he
fitted  out  the  Kentucky,  Virginia,  and  North  Caro-
lina expeditions.  He  received  the  brevet  rank  of
major-general  in  1865.  After  the  war  he  served
again  as  chief  quartermaster  of  the  Pacific,  and
was  retired  21  March,  1878.

ALLEN,  Samuel,  patentee  of  New  Hampshire,
b.  in  England  in  1686 ;  d.  in  Newcastle,  N.  H.,  5
May,  1705.  He  was  a  London  merchant,  and  in
1691  purchased  from  the  heirs  of  John  Mason
their  grant  of  land  from  the  English  crown.  The
purchase  included  Portsmouth  and  Dover,  and  ex-
tended sixty  miles  from  the  sea-coast.  The  origi-
nal settlers,  whose  titles  had  not  been  disputed  by
the  Mason  heirs,  resisted  Allen's  claim,  as  governor
and  proprietor,  under  the  royal  commission,  and
litigation  followed,  before  the  conclusion  of  which
Mr.  Allen  died,  leaving  his  heirs  a  legacy  of  suits,
which  were  carried  through  the  courts  with  all
sorts  of  incidental  chicanery — records  destroyed,
forged  Indian  deeds,  and  the  like— until  in  1715,
on  the  death  of  his  son  Thomas,  the  heirs  aban-


doned their  claim  in  despair.  Mr.  Allen's  personal
character  is  recorded  as  above  reproach.  See
Allen  vs.  Waldron,  Belknap's  New  Hampshire,  and
Savage's  Winthrop,  New  Hampshire  collections.

ALLEN,  Solomon,  preacher,  b.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  28  Feb.,  1751;  d.  in  New  York,  28  Jan.,
1821.  He  was  a  brother  of  Moses  and  Thomas
Allen,  who  were  chaplains  in  the  revolutionary
army,  while  he  fought  as  a  soldier  and  rose  to  the
rank  of  major.  As  lieutenant  he  commanded  the
guard  that  took  Major  Andre  to  West  Point.
After  the  war  he  was  engaged  in  suppressing
Shays's  rebellion.  At  the  age  of  forty  he  became  a
religious  convert,  and  at  fifty  began  the  life  of
a  missionary  preacher.  For  twenty  years  he  cir-
culated among  the  new  settlements  of  western  New
York,  where  he  was  greatly  respected  for  his  zeal-
ous devotion  and  self-sacrifice.  A  "  Sketch  of  the
Last  Hours  of  Solomon  Allen  "  was  written  by  J.
N.  Danforth.

ALLEN,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Northamp-
ton, Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1743 ;  d.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,
11  Feb.,  1810.  He  was  a  brother  of  Moses  Allen,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1762,  and  became  the
first  minister  of  Pittsfield,  where  he  was  ordained
in  1764.  He  went  as  a  volunteer  chaplain  twice
during  the  revolutionary  war,  and  participated  as  a
combatant  in  the  battle  of  Bennington.  His  min-
istry at  Pittsfield  lasted  forty-six  years.

ALLEN,  Timothy  Field,  physician,  b.  in
Westminster,  Vt.,  24  April,  1887.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Amherst  college  in  1858  and  at  the  medi-
cal school  of  the  university  of  the  citvof  New  York
in  1861.  From  1861  to  1863  he  practised  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  and  during  1862  was  acting  assistant
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  Since  1868  he  has  fol-
lowed his  profession  in  New  York.  He  became
professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  New  York  Ho-
moeopathic medical  college  in  1867,  and  since  1882
has  been  its  dean.  He  is  also  surgeon  to  the  New
York  ophthalmic  hospital.  He  has  published
"  EncyclopjBdia  of  Materia  Medica  "  (10  vols..  New
York,  1874-'79);  "Index"  to  the  same  (1881);
"  Ophthalmic  Therapeutics  "  (1878),  and  "  Characeae
Americanae  "  (Boston,  1880).

ALLEN,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia
about  1710;  d.  in  England  in  September,  1780.
He  succeeded  his  father-in-law,  Andrew  Hamilton,
as  recorder  of  Philadelphia  in  1741,  and  from  1750
to  1774  he  was  chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania.  Ben-
jamin West  was  aided  by  him,  and  Dr.  Franklin
was  enabled  to  establish  the  college  of  Philadelphia
with  his  cooperation.  He  was  a  loyalist,  and  in
1774  went  to  England,  where  he  published  "The
American  Crisis,"  setting  forth  a  plan  for  restoring
the  dependence  of  the  American  colonies.  His  son
Andrew  became  attorney-general,  and  was  after-
ward a  member  of  congress  and  of  the  committee
of  safety,  but  deserted  the  national  cause  in  1776.
William,  another  son,  served  as  lieutenant-colonel
in  the  continental  army,  but  raised  a  regiment  of
loyalists  in  1778.

ALLEN,  William,  clergyman  and  author,  b.  in
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1784;  d.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  16  July,  1868.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.
Thomas  Allen,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1802,  and  licensed  to  preach  in  1804.  He  preached
in  western  New  York  for  some  time,  and  was  then
elected  a  regent  and  assistant  librarian  of  Harvard
college.  At  Cambridge  he  prepared  the  first  edi-
tion of  the  "  American  Biographical  and  Historical
Dictionary,"  containing  sketches  of  about  700
Americans  (1809).  A  second  edition  was  printed
in  1832  with  1,800  names,  and  a  third  in  Boston  in
1857  containing  nea^  7,000*' In 1807  he  wrote

^/ SCHOOLS


66


ALLEN


ALLEN


the  notices  of  American  clergymen  contained  in
Bogue's  "  History  of  the  Dissenters."  In  1810  he
succeeded  his  father  as  pastor  of  the  church  in
Pittsfleld.  He  was  chosen  president  of  Dartmouth
college  in  1817,  and  in  1820  went  to  Bowdoin  col-
lege, over  which  institution  he  presided  until  1839,
when  he  resigned  and  devoted  himself  to  literary
studies.  He  collected  10,000  words  not  contained
in  standard  dictionaries,  and  published  them  as  a
supplement  to  Webster's  "  Dictionary."  He  wrote
''Junius  Unmasked,"  in  which  he  sought  to  prove
that  Lord  Sackville  was  the  author  of  the  Junius
letters  (Boston,  1828);  "Psalms  and  Hymns"
(1835);  "Memoirs  of  Dr.  Eleazer  Wheelock  and  of
Dr.  John  Codman"  (1853);  "A  Discourse  at  the
Close  of  the  Second  Century  of  the  Settlement  at
Northampton,  Mass."  (1854) ;  "  Wunnissoo,  or  the
Vale  of  Housatonnuck,"  a  poem  (Boston,  1856):
a  Dudleian  lecture  at  Cambridge :  a  book  of  "  Chris-
tian Sonnets"  (Northampton,  1860);  "Poems  of
Nazareth  and  the  Cross  "  (1866) ;  "  Sacred  Songs  "
(1867) ;  and  numerous  pamphlets,  and  contributed
biographical  articles  to  Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the
American  Pulpit."  See  his  "  Life,  with  Selections
from  his  Correspondence  "  (Philadelphia,  1847).

ALLEN,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  Edenton,
N.  C,  in  1806;  d.  11  July,  1879.  He  passed  part
of  his  early  life  at  Lynchburg,  Va.,  and  in  the  win-
ter of  1822  made  his  way  on  foot  to  Chillicothe,  0,,
where  his  half-sister,  the  mother  of  Allen  G.  Thur-
man,  was  living. He  attended  Chillicothe  academy

for  two  years,
then  studied
law  for  the  bar
in  the  office  of
Judge  Scott,
and  afterward
in  that  of  Col.
King,  and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  at  the  age
of  twenty-one.
He  became  the
associate  in
business  of  Col.
King,  an  elo-
quent pleader,
but  an  indolent
lawyer,  who  left
to  his  young
partner  the  la-
bor of  prepar-
ing cases  for  tri-
al. When  twenty-four  years  of  age,  Allen,  who
was  recognized  as  one  of  the  most  promising  young
lawyers  in  Ohio,  gained  a  wide  reputation  by  suc-
cessfully defending  a  prisoner  charged  with' mur-
der. The  notoriety  of  that  trial  gained  him  in
1832  the  democratic  nomination  for  representa-
tive in  the  23d  congress,  and.  although  Duncan
McArthur,  then  governor  of  the  state,  was  the
whig  candidate,  Allen  obtained  enough  votes  to
give  him  the  election  by  a  majoritv  of  one.  The
whigs  contested  the  result,  but  he  took  his  seat
22  Dec,  1833,  the  youngest  member  of  the  house.
In  1834  he  was  defeated  after  a  sharp  canvass
by  William  K.  Bond.  In  congress  he  was  recog-
nized as  a  leading  orator  on  the  democratic  side,
particularly  after  a  strong  speech  against  J.  Q.
Adams's  position  on  the  Ohio  boundary-line  ques-
tion. President  Jackson  offered  to  confer  an
office  upon  him,  but  he  said  he  would  accept  no
appointment,  and  wished  to  remain  in  public  life
only  in  an  office  to  which  the  people  should  elect
him. He worked energetically  for democratic


^^^^St^


success  in  the  Van  Buren  canvass,  1836,  and  an
address  at  a  political  dinner  in  Columbus,  which
he  accidentally  attended,  gave  him  unexpectedly
the  nomination  of  the  democratic  caucus  for  sen-
ator. He  was  elected  by  the  democratic  nuijor-
ity  in  the  legislature,  and  took  his  seat  in  March,
1837,  at  an  earlier  age  than  any  other  U.  S.
senator  was  ever  elected.  Just  before  the  close
of  his  term  he  canvassed  the  state  for  reelec-
tion, and  secured  the  return  of  a  democratic  ma-
jority to  the  legislature  pledged  to  vote  for  him.
He  was  consequently  reelected  in  1843.  In  1848,
when  the  Baltimore  convention  was  unable  to
agree  upon  either  Cass  or  Van  Buren  as  the  demo-
cratic candidate  for  president,  a  committee,  com-
posed of  supporters  of  both  the  rival  candidates,
waited  upon  Senator  Allen  in  Washington  and
urged  him  to  accept  the  nomination  for  the  sake
of  harmony.  Though  formally  offered  the  nomi-
nation with  the  assurance  that  the  convention
would  ratify  the  action  of  the  committee,  he  re-
fused, for  the  reason  that  he  had  been  the  sup-
porter and  personal  friend  and  adviser  of  Lewis
Cass,  and  could  not  honorably  abandon  his  can-
vass. He  accompanied  Mr.  Cass  on  his  election-
eering tour  in  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  when
he  appealed  vainly  for  the  suffrages  of  the  dis-
affected partisans  of  Van  Buren.  After  the  defeat
of  Cass  and  the  termination  of  his  senatorship  Mr.
Allen  took  no  part  in  public  affairs  until  he  was
elected  governor  of  Ohio  in  1873.  He  was  the
democratic  nominee  again  in  1875,  but  was  defeated
on  the  greenback  issue  by  Rutherford  B.  Hayes,
afterward  president.  Gov.  Allen  was  the  foremost
representative  and  advocate  of  the  policy  of  an
irredeemable  paper  currency,  and  therefore  the
"Ohio  idea"  was  peculiarly  associated  with  his
name.  During  his  career  in  the  senate  he  was
nicknamed  "  Earthquake  Allen,"  because  in  1841,
in  a  speech  directed  against  the  bill  to  distribute  the
proceeds  of  the  public  lands  among  the  states,  he
declared  that  its  passage  would  produce  "  an  earth-
quake of  indignation  from  one  end  of  the  union  to
the  other."  The  nickname  of  "petticoat  Alien"
was  attached  to  him  during  the  Harrison  "  hard
cider '"  canvass  of  1840,  owing  to  his  assertion  that
the  petticoat  of  the  election  banners  was  given  to
Gen.  Harrison  by  an  old  woman  to  symbolize  his
lack  of  courage.  In  Washington  he  was  known  as
the  "  Ohio  gong,"  so  powerful  was  his  voice  and  so
penetrating  its  tones.  He  is  said  to  have  originated
the  celebrated  political  catch-word  of  1844,  "  Fifty-
four  forty,  or  fight ! "  referring  to  the  Oregon
boundary  question.

ALLEN,  William  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  21  Oct.,  1784;  d.  15  Aug.,  1813.
He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1800,  was
3d  lieutenant  of  the  "  Chesapeake  "  when  she  struck
her  colors  to  the  British  frigate  "  Leopard "  in
1807,  and  drew  up  the  letter  of  the  officers  to  the
secretary  of  the  navy  urging  the  trial  of  Capt.
James  Barron  for  neglect  of  dutv.  He  became
1st  lieutenant  of  the  frigate  "  United  States "  in
1809,  and  gained  distinction  in  the  action  with  the
"Macedonian,"  25  Oct.,  1812.  In  1813  he  was
made  master-commandant,  and  carried  Mr.  Craw-
ford to  France  in  the  "  Argus,"  and  then  harassed
British  commerce  until  he  encountered  the  brig
"Pelican,"  of  the  British  navy,  14  Aug..  1813.
In  the  ensuing  severe  combat  he  was  mortally
wounded  and  his  vessel  captured.  Allen  street,
New  York,  was  named  in  his  honor.

ALLEN,  William  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Read-
field  (now  Manchester),  Me.,  27  March,  1808 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  29  Aug.,  1882. He  studied  at


ALLEN


ALLIN


57


the  Maine  conference  seminary,  and  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  college  in  1838.  From  1833  to  1836
he  taught  Latin  and  Greek  in  Cazenovia,  N.  Y.
seminary,  and  in  1836  he  became  principal  of  the
high  school  at  Augusta,  Me.  The  same  year  he
was  elected  professor  of  natural  philosophy  and
chemistry  in  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa.,  where
in  1846  he  assumed  the  duties  of  the  professorship
of  philosophy  and  English  literature,  and  in  1847-
'48  was  acting  president.  He  was  appointed  presi-
dent of  Girard  college  in  1850,  which  place  he  held
until  1862  and  again  from  1867  until  his  death.
During  1865-66  he  was  president  of  Pennsylvania
agricultural  college.  In  1872  he  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  the  American  Bible  society.  He  contrib-
uted largely  to  periodical  literature,  and  published
several  valuable  reports  on  education,

ALLEN,  William  Howard,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Hudson,  N.  Y.,  8  July,  1790 ;  killed  in  action  9  Nov.,
1822.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  1  Jan.,
1808,  and  was  promoted  lieutenant  24  July,  1813.
He  was  2d  lieutenant  of  the  "  Argus,"  and  com-
manded in  the  fight  with  the  "  Pelican  "  off  the
coast  of  England  after  Captain  Allen  and  the
first  officer  were  disabled.  He  was  killed  in  at-
tempting to  board  piratical  vessels  with  boats  near
Matanzas,  in  the  island  of  Cuba.  His  friend  Hal-
leck  made  his  early  death  the  subject  of  a  tender
and  touching  poem.

ALLEN,  Zachariali,  inventor,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  L,  15  Sept.,  1795;  d.  17  March,  1882.  He  was
descended  from  one  of  the  early  settlers  of  Provi-
dence and  was  son  and  heir  of  a  wealthy  merchant.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1815,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1817,  and  in  1822  engaged  in  manu-
facturing. He  did  much  as  a  capitalist  to  promote
the  industries  of  Rhode  Island,  and  was  the  in-
ventor of  the  automatic  cut-off  valve  for  the  steam-
engine,  extension  rollers,  an  improved  fire-engine,
and  a  hot-air  furnace.  He  also  devised  a  storage
reservoir  for  water-power,  and  first  suggested  the
system  of  mutual  insurance  adopted  by  New  Eng-
land mill-owners.  He  was  for  many  years  presi-
dent of  the  Rhode  Island  Historical  Society.  He
published,  on  returning  from  Europe  in  1825,  the
"  Practical  Tourist,"  a  treatise  on  "  Practical  Me-
chanics," speculative  works  on  physical  science  en-
titled "  Philosophy  of  the  Mechanics  of  Nature "
(1851),  and  "Solar  Light  and  Heat"  (1879),  and
articles  on  the  history  of  Rhode  Island.  See  "  Me-
morial "  of  Mr.  Allen  by  Amos  Perry  (1883).

ALLENDE,  I^nacio  (al-yen'-de),  Mexican  patri-
ot, b.  20  Jan.,  1779 ;  shot  at  Chihuahua,  1  Aug.,  1811.
He  was  a  captain  in  the  Spanish  army,  but  joined  the
rebellion  of  Hidalgo  in  1810,  and  rendered  efficient
services  by  reason  of  his  military  knowledge  and
his  influence  over  the  natives,  with  whose  aid  he
transported  heavy  artillery  across  the  mountains.
When  Hidalgo  lost  the  battle  with  the  Spanish
troops,  Allende  conducted  the  retreat,  but  was  be-
trayed into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards  near  Sal-
tillo  and  executed.  In  1824  his  remains  were
buried  in  the  vault  reserved  for  the  viceroys  and
presidents  in  the  cathedral  of  Mexico.

ALLERTON,  Isaac,  pilgrim,  b.  about  1588 ;  d.
in  New  Haven  in  1659.  He  went  from  England  to
Leyden  in  1608,  and  came  to  America  in  1620  in  the
first  voyage  of  the  "  Mayflower."  He  was  a  wealthy
and  enterprising  member  of  the  colony,  and  took  a
leading  part  in  its  affairs.  He  treated  with  Massa-
soit,  and  made  several  trips  to  England  as  the
agent  of  the  colony  to  purchase  the  rights  of  the
adventurers,  to  secure  patents  for  lands,  and  to
bring  over  the  rest  of  the  congregation  at  Leyden.
In  1631  he  had  a  dispute  with  the  colony  and  was


CJ  ^UU(/?tCuL  U/^(r7^L


■tyUL_^


dismissed  from  its  service.  He  then  took  up  his
residence  at  Marblehead,  and  established  trading-
stations  on  Kennebec  river,  at  Penobscot,  and
other  places.  Two  coasting  vessels  owned  by  him
were  wrecked,  and  two  of  his  trading-houses  were
destroyed  by  the  French  and  Indians.  In  1685  he
was  warned  by  the  Plymouth  authorities  to  depart
from  Marblehead.  Pie  was  a  burgher  of  New  Am-
sterdam, and  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  council
in  1643,  but  resided,  after  he  left  Marblehead,  at
New  Haven.  His  daughter  Mary,  who  died  in  1699,
was  the  last  survivor  of  the  "Mayflower"  company.

ALLIBONE,  Samuel  Austin,  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  April,  1816;  d.  in  Lucerne,
Switzerland,  2
Sept.,  1889.  He
gained  a  high  rep-
utation in  early
life  for  his  fa-
miliar knowledge
of  English  and
American  litera-
ture. He  applied
his  learning  to  the
preparation  of  a
great  work  enti-
tled "A  Critical
Dictionary  of
English  Litera-
ture and  British
and  American  Au-
thors," the  first
volume  of  which
appeared  in  1854,
and  the  second
and  third  in  1871.
This laborious

compilation,  exhibiting  careful  exactness  and  criti-
cal judgment,  contains  notices  of  46,499  authors,
with  40  classified  indexes  of  subjects.  Before  the
appearance  of  this  "  Dictionary  of  Authors,"  Dr.
Allibone  had  published  "  A  Review  by  a  Layman  of
a  Work  entitled  '  New  Themes  for  the  Protestant
Clergy ' "  (Philadelphia,  1852),  and  " '  New  Themes '
Condemned"  (1853).  In  1868  he  published  "An
Alphabetical  Index  to  the  New  Testament,"  and  in
1871  the  "  Union  Bible  Companion,"  the  first  part
of  which  work  was  published  separately  under  the
title  of  "  The  Divine  Origin  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,"
In  1873  appeared  his  "Poetical  Quotations,  from
Chaucer  to  Tennyson,"  with  copious  indexes,  con-
taining 13,600  passages  taken  from  550  authors,
classified  under  435  subjects.  This  was  followed
by  "Prose  Quotations,  from  Socrates  to  Macau-
lay,"  with  indexes  to  the  8,810  quotations,  contain-
ing the  names  of  544  authors  and  571  subjects
(1876),  In  1880  he  published  "  Great  Authors  of
All  Ages ;  being  Selections  from  the  Prose  Works
of  Eminent  Writers  from  the  time  of  Pericles  to
the  Present  Day,"  with  indexes.  He  published  also
"  Explanatory  Questions  on  the  Gospels  and  the
Acts"  (1869).  and  was  the  author  of  numerous  re-
ligious tracts  and  articles  in  periodicals.  The  in-
dexes to  Edward  Everett's  "Orations  and  Speeches  "
(1850-59),  and  Washington  Irving's  "Life  and
Letters"  (1861-64),  were  from  his  hand.  He  was
book  editor  and  corresponding  secretary  of  tlie
American  Sundav-school  union  from  1867  till  1873,
and  from  1877  till  1879,  when  he  became  librarian
of  the  Lenox  librarv,  resigning  in  1888,

ALLIN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1596;  d.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1671.  He
was  a  Puritan  scholar,  who  emigrated  from  Eng-
land in  1637  and  became  the  first  minister  of
Dedham, He  published  a  "Defence  of  the  Nine


58


ALLISON


ALLSTON


Propositions"  of  church  discipline,  in  which  he
had  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Shepherd,  of  Cambridge,
and  also  a  "  Defence  of  the  Synod  of  1662  against
President  Chauncey,"  besides  a  large  number  of
sermons.

ALLISON,  Burg-ess,  clergyman,  b.  in  Borden-
town,  N.  J.,  17  Aug..  1753:  d.  in  Washington,  20
Feb.,  1827.  He  became  a  convert  to  the  Bai)tist
faith  early  in  life,  and  began  to  preach  when  he
was  sixteen  years  old.  He  studied  at  Rhode  Isl-
and college  '(now  Brown  university)  in  1777,  and
subsequently  had  charge  of  a  small  congregation
at  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  where  he  established  a  classi-
cal boarding-school,  which  attained  great  reputa-
tion. In  1796  he  withdrew  from  his  teaching  and
devoted  his  time  for  several  years  to  inventing.
Some  improvements  in  the  steam-engine  and  its
application  to  navigation  are  due  to  his  efforts.
In  1801  he  resumed  his  school,  and  soon  afterward
his  pastorate,  but  ill  health  compelled  him  to  re-
linquish both.  He  was  elected  chaplain  of  the
house  of  representatives  in  1816,  and. later  became
chaplain  at  the  navy-yard,  Washington,  where  he
remained  until  his  death.  Dr.  Allison  had  consid-
erable mechanical  and  artistical  ability.  He  was
for  some  time  one  of  the  secretaries  of  the  Ameri-
can philosophical  society,  and  was  a  constant  con-
tributor to  periodical  literature.  .

ALLISON,  William  Boyd,  senator,  b.  in  Perry,
O.,  2  March,  1829.  He  spent  his  early  years  on
a  farm,  and  was  educated  at  Alleghany'  college,
Pennsylvania,  and  Western  Reserve  college,  Ohio.
He  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Ohio  until  1857,
when  he  went  to  Dubuque,  Iowa.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Chicago  convention  of  1860,  a  mem-
ber of  the  governor's  staff  in  1861,  and  rendered
vahuible  service  in  raising  troops  for  the  war.
He  was  elected  in  1862  to  the  38th  congress,  as  a
republican,  and  returned  for  the  three  succeeding
congresses,  serving  in  the  house  of  representatives
from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,  1871.  In  1873  he
was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  as  a  republican,
for  the  term  ending  in  1879,  and  he  has  been  twice
re-elected.

ALLOUEZ,  Claude  Jean,  explorer,  b.  in  France
in  1620;  d.  near  St.  Joseph's  river,  in  the  state
of  Indiana,  27  Aug.,  1689.  He  went  to  Quebec
from  France  in  1658.  As  a  Jesuit  missionary  he
traversed  the  regions  of  Lake  Superior  and  parts
of  the  Mississippi  valley,  and  left  interesting  rec-
ords of  his  experiences  and  observations.  He
founded  a  mission  at  Chemorniegon,  on  Lake  Su-
perior, in  1665,  and  in  1676  reestablished  perma-
nently at  Kaskaskia,  111.,  the  mission  that  was  be-
gun by  Marquette  but  abandoned  on  the  approach
of  La  Salle.  His  observations  on  the  Indians  were
printed  in  the  Jesuit  "  Relations."

ALLSTON,  Robert  Francis  Withers,  states-
man, b.  in  All  Saints'  parish,  S.  C,  21  April,  1801 ;
d.  near  Georgetown,  S.  C,  7  April,  1864.  In  1821
he  was  graduated  at  West  Point,  ranking  so  high
in  his  class  as  to  be  assigned  to  the  artillery ;  but
after  a  year's  service  he  resigned,  and  became  a
rice-planter,  civil  engineer,  and  surveyor  in  South
Carolina.  From  1823  to  1827  he  was  state  sur-
veyor-general. In  1828  he  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature, and  in  1832  to  the  senate,  of  which  he  be-
came successively  acting  president  and  president
(1847-56).  He  was  deputy  adjutant-general  in
1831-38,  trustee  of  South  Carolina  college,  Colum-
bia, 1841-64,  and  governor  of  the  state  in  1856-'58.
He  was  a  progressive  agriculturist,  an  active
member  of  various  societies,  and  the  author  of  a
'^Memoir  on  Rice"  (1843);  "Report  on  Public
Schools  "  (1847) ;  and  "  Essay  on  Sea-Coast  Crops  "


^^f^^:>,<^i,y^y^^^^  dss^^^^s^r.


(1854).  In  politics  he  advocated  state  sovereignty.
His  study  of  rice-culture  was  of  much  advantage
to  that  industry.

ALLSTON,  Washington,  painter,  b.  in  Wac-
camaw,  S,  C,  5  Nov.,  1779  ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
9  July,  1843.  In  early  boyhood  he  removed  to
Newport,  R.  I.,
and  there  attend-
ed school.  He
then  studied  at
Harvard  college,
and  was  gradu-
ated in  1800.  In
the  following  year
he  went  abroad
and  became  a  stu-
dent at  the  Roy-
al academy,  and
three  years  later
he  removed  to
Rome  and  there
studied  the  works
of  the  old  masters,
meanwhile  gain-
ing for  himself  a
high  reputation  as
a  colorist.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
1809  and  married  a  sister  of  Dr.  William  EUery
(^banning.  His  second  wife  was  a  sister  of  R.  H.
Dana.  From  1811  to  1818  he  resided  in  England,
and  during  these  years  produced  some  of  his  best
pictures.  Of  these,  "  The  Dead  Man  Revived "
gained  a  prize  of  200  guineas  from  the  British  insti-
tute. His  "  Uriel  in  the  Sun,"  "  Jacob's  Feast,"
and  other  smaller  pictures,  now  owned  in  Eng-
land, were  produced  at  this  time.  In  1818  he
opened  a  studio  in  Boston.  His  best -known
works  in  the  United  States  are  "  Jeremiah,"  "  The
Witch  of  Endor,"  "  Miriam,"  "  Rosalie,"  "  Madon-
na," "  Spanish  Girl,"  "  Spalatro's  Vision  of  the
Bloody  Hand,"  and  "  Belshazzar's  Feast,"  an  un-
finished composition  now  in  the  Boston  athen^um.
Among  the  portraits  painted  by  him  are  those  of
Benjamin  West,  Coleridge  the  poet,  and  one  of
himself.  His  works  show  a  high  imaginative
power,  and  his  ability  as  a  colorist  earned  for  him
the  name  of  the  "  American  Titian."  He  was  also
a  man  of  fine  literary  tastes,  and  in  1809  he  deliv-
ered a  poem  before  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  Society  at
Cambridge.  "  The  Sylphs  of  the  Seasons,"  which
was  published  in  London  in  1813,  and  later  "  The
Paint  King  "  and  "  The  Two  Painters,"  appeared.
In  1841  he  published  "  Monaldi,"  a  romance  il-
lustrating Italian  life,  and  in  1850  a  volume  of
his  "  Lectures  on  Art,  and  Poems."  See  Ware's
"  Lectures  on  the  Works  and  Genius  of  Washing-
ton Allston  "  (Boston,  1852),  and  "  Artist  Biogra-
phies, Allston  "  (1879).

ALLSTON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  1757;  d.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  26  June,  1839.  He  was  a  captain
during  the  revolutionary  war  under  Marion,  the
famous  partisan  leader.  After  the  return  of  peace
he  married  tlie  daughter  of  Rebecca  Motte,  and
became  a  successful  planter  and  a  large  slave-
owner. He  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the
South  Carolina  senate. — His  son,  Joseph,  states-
man, b.  in  South  Carolina  in  1778;  d.  10  Sept.,
1816.  He  was  for  several  years  a  prominent  mem-
ber of  tlie  South  Carolina  state  legislature,  and
governor  in  1812-14.  He  married  Theodosia,
daughter  of  Aaron  Burr,  and  from  this  fact  arose
unjust  suspicions  regarding  his  patriotism.  Dur-
ing his  term  as  governor  his  wife,  a  charming  and
accomi)Iislied  woman,  was  lost  at  sea  during  a  voy-
age from  New  York  to  Charleston.


ALMAGRO


ALMY


59


ALMAGRO,  Dieg-o  (al-raah'-gro),  soldier,  b.
about  14G3 ;  killed  in  July,  1588.  Ho  was  one  of
the  Spanish  conquerors  of  Peru,  who,  in  company
with  Francisco  Pizarro,  overthrew  the  magnificent
empire  of,  the  Incas,  which  at  the  time  was  rent  by
civil  war.  His  energy  in  forwarding  supplies  to
Pizarro,  who  had  penetrated  to  the  interior  of  the
country,  was  such  that  the  latter  was  enabled  to
prosecute  the  campaign  to  a  successful  issue.  In
1535  he  stormed  Cuzco,  the  ancient  capital  of  the
Incas.  He  was  extremely  severe  with  his  captives.
Nevertheless,  his  habitual  manners  were  so  winning
and  courteous  that  he  was  very  popular  with  his  own
soldiers.  He  had  a  quarrel  with  Pizarro  about  the
rich  spoil  of  the  Incas'  palaces,  and  Almagro  was
defeated,  captured,  and  strangled  to  death.— His
son,  Dieg'O,  vvas  born  in  1520,  and  died  in  Peru
in  1542.  His  mother  was  an  Indian  of  Panama,
but  Charles  V.  had  him  legitimated  in  1528,  and
placed  him  under  the  care  and  protection  of  an  old
officer  named  Juan  Herrada.  After  his  father's
death  young  Almagro  was  imprisoned  for  some
time,  and  as  soon  as  liberated  he  resolved  to  avenge
his  father's  execution.  In  company  with  Herrada
and  others,  he  attacked  the  house  of  Pizarro  and
killed  him,  25  June,  1541.  Then  Almagro  was  pro-
claimed governor  of  Peru,  and  went  with  troops  to
subdue  some  towns  that  would  not  recognize  his
authority ;  but  Vaca  de  Castro  routed  him  in  the
plain  of  Chupas  and  took  many  prisoners,  among
them  Almagro,  with  all  the  principal  promoters  of
the  plot,  who  were  court-martialed  and  executed.

ALMOfxUERA,  Fray  Juan  de  (al-mo-gay'-ra),
seventh  archbishop  of  Lima,  b.  in  Cordova,  Spain,
18  Feb.,  1605  ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1676.  He  was
the  confessor  of  King  Philip  IV.,  who  proposed  him,
on  17  Feb.,  1659,  for  archbishop  of  Arequipa,  Peru.
The  recommendation  was  adopted  by  the  pope,  and
Fray  Juan  de  Almoguera  was  consecrated  in  Feb-
ruary, 1661.  He  promoted  many  useful  undertak-
ings, and  remained  in  Arequipa  for  some  years,  till
he  was  translated  to  Lima,  where  he  died.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Instruccion  de  Sacerdotes  "  (1671),
which  the  inquisition  attempted  to  suppress.

ALMON,  John,  English  journalist,  b.  in  Liver-
pool, 17  Dec,  1737;  d.  in  Boxmoor,  12  Dec,  1805.
He  became  a  printer  and  pamphleteer,  and  was  en-
gaged in  1761  as  a  writer  for  the  "  Gazetteer,"  and,
after  the  production  of  "  A  Review  of  Mr.  Pitt's
Administration,"  he  enjoyed  the  favor  of  the  lead-
ers of  the  opposition  and  established  himself  as  a
publisher.  He  was  the  confidant  of  John  Wilkes,
wrote  or  edited  many  political  tracts,  and  in  1784
established  in  London  a  newspaper  called  the
"  General  Advertiser,"  which  proved  unsuccessful.
He  was  tried  in  1770  for  selling  a  reprint  of  a  let-
ter of  "Junius,"  and  in  1786  for  a  libel.  Among
his  numerous  publications  was  "  The  Remem-
brancer," a  monthly  collection  of  papers  relating
to  American  independence  (London,  1775-'83),
which  is  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  historical  in-
formation regarding  the  revolution.  His  last  pub-
lished works  were  "  Biographical,  Literary,  and
Political  Anecdotes  "  (1797),  and  the  "Correspond-
ence of  the  late  John  Wilkes,"  with  memoirs  of  his
life  (1805).

ALMONTE,  Juan  Nepomuceno  (al-mau'n-te),
Mexican  statesman,  b.  in  Valadolid,  Mexico,  in
1804:  d.  in  Paris,  20  March,  1869.  He  was  the
reputed  son  of  the  priest  Morelos,  the  famous
partisan  chief,  who  was  shot  in  1813.  His  youth
was  spent  in  the  United  States,  where  he  secured
an  excellent  education,  supporting  himself  the
while.  Returning  to  Mexico  he  entered  upon  a
military  career,  and  was  chosen  by  Santa  Anna  one


of  his  aides-de-camp,  in  which  capacity  he  served
in  the  Texan  campaign  against  Gen.  Houston,
being  made  prisoner  with  his  chief  at  the  battle  of
San  Jacinto  (1836).  On  regaining  his  liberty  he
was  made  secretary  of  state  by  the  Mexican  presi-
dent, Bustamente.  In  1840  lie  showed  great  cour-
age in  quelling  a  revolt  in  the  province  of  Urrea,
but  was  deprived  of  office  by  a  revolution  that  fol-
lowed, and  forced  to  support  himself  by  lecturing.
He  was  subsequently  appointed  minister  at  Wash-
ington ;  but  when  the  annexation  of  Texas  was  re-
solved upon  he  demanded  his  passports,  protesting
at  the  same  time  against  that  measure.  In  1845  he
was  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  of  the  republic
of  Mexico,  but  failed :  and  afterward,  on  the  eleva-
tion of  Paredes  to  power,  he  was  appointed,  first,
minister  of  war,  and  then  ambassador  to  Paris.
He  was  on  his  way  to  France  when  he  heard,  at
Havana,  of  the  return  of  Santa  Anna  to  power,  up-
on which  he  immediately  returned  to  Mexico,  and,
joining  Santa  Anna,  took  part  in  the  war  against
the  United  States,  distinguishing  himself  at  the
battles  of  Buena  Vista,  Cerro  Gordo,  and  Churubus-
co.  After  the  war  he  entered  the  ranks  of  the
liberal  opposition,  and  for  the  second  time  became
a  candidate  for  the  presidency,  but  again  without
success.  He  was,  however,  appointed  Mexican
minister  at  Paris,  which  office  he  held  at  the  period
when  President  Miramon  was  overthrown  by
Juarez  (1860).  He  returned  to  Mexico  with  the
French  expedition  in  1862.  Juarez  protested
against  his  presence  in  the  French  camp,  and  de-
manded that  Almonte  should  be  delivered  up  to
him;  but  the  French  commander  refused,  and
shortly  afterward  a  proclamation  was  issued  by
Gen.  Taboada,  declaring  Juarez  deposed,  and  Al-
monte invested  with  supreme  power  in  his  place.
He  found  himself,  however,  unable  to  organize  a
government;  and  Gen.  Forey,  on  his  arrival  in
Mexico,  annulled  Taboada's  decree,  and  announced
to  the  Mexicans  that  they  were  free  to  choose  a
new  government.  After  the  decisive  victory  of
the  French  arms.  Almonte  became  one  of  the  tri-
umvirate to  whom  they  intrusted  the  management
of  affairs  in  Mexico,  assigning  him  the  foreign  de-
partment and  the  finances.  He  was  appointed
lieutenant  of  the  empire  by  Maximilian  in  April,
1864,  and  some  weeks  later  marshal  of  the  empire.
He  adhered  to  the  fortunes  of  his  imperial  patron
throughout  his  short  reign,  and,  when  Maximilian
was  executed,  he  fled  to  Europe,  spending  his  last
days  in  exile.

ALMY,  John  Jay,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  I.,  25  April,  1814.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman in  1829,  and  rose  through  the  successive
grades  to  be  commodore.  30  Dec,  1869,  and  rear-
admiral  24  Aug.,  1873.  He  was  retired  in  July,  1876,
after  fifty-six  years  and  eleven  months  of  service.
As  midshipman  and  lieutenant  he  cruised  all  over
the  world  in  the  old  sailing  navy,  was  at  the  sur-
render of  Walker  and  his  filibusters,  commanded
the  "  Fulton  "  in  the  expedition  to  Paraguay,  was  at
the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  capture  of  Tuxpan
during  the  Mexican  war,  and  at  the  navy-yard,
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1861-'62.  As  commander  he
had  charge  successively  of  the  gunboats  "  South
Carolina,"  "  Connecticut,"  and  "  Juniata."  While
in  command  of  the  "  Connecticut "  he  captured
four  noted  blockade-runners  with  valuable  cargoes,
and  ran  ashore  and  destroyed  four  others.  As  cap-
tain he  commanded  the  "  Juniata "  which  was  in
the  South  Atlantic  squadron,  until  1867,  and  was
then  assigned  to  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard,  then  the
signal  corps,  and  after  a  cruise  in  the  Pacific  was
retired,  24  April,  1877-


60


ALMY


ALSOP


ALMY,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  L,  17  Feb.,  1761 ;  d.  5  Feb.,  1836.  He
was  a  teacher  and  a  member  of  the  society  of
Friends,  and  became  wealthy  through  marriage
with  the  only  daughter  of  Moses  Brown  and  result-
ing business  arrangements  for  the  manufacture  of
cotton  goods.  One  of  his  most  important  charities
was  the  establishment  of  the  New  England  yearly
meeting  boarding-house  in  Providence,  where  he
educated  at  his  own  expense  eighty  young  persons
selected  by  him.  He  devoted  large  sums  to  other
charitable  objects.

ALOFSEN,  Solomon,  historian,  b.  in  Amster-
dam, Netherlands,  22  Nov.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Arnheim,
Holland,  10  Oct.,  1876.  Pie  was  born  of  a  good
Dutch  family  and  came  to  the  United  States  in
early  manhood  as  secretary  of  legation,  and,  liking
the  country,  settled  in  Jersey  City.  Here  he  mar-
ried and  went  into  the  railroad  business,  being  for
a  time  secretary  of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad,
and  dealing  largely  in  investments.  His  favorite
studies  were  historical  and  ethnological,  and  he
became  a  prominent  member  of  the  societies  of
New  York  and  vicinity.  He  read  many  papers  at
the  meetings  of  the  New  York  historical  society
and  made  valuable  contributions  to  its  collections.
After  forty  years'  residence  in  the  United  States
he  returned  to  Holland,  where  he  was  made  a
member  of  the  royal  antiquarian  society.  His  li-
brary consisted  mainly  of  Americana,  and  was  es-
pecially full  in  the  department  of  the  civil  war.  It
was  carefully  catalogued  and  sold  in  Utrecht  in
June,  1876.

ALPUCHE  E  INFANTE,  Jos^  Maria,  Mexi-
can patriot,  b.  in  Campeche,  Yucatan,  9  Oct.,  1780.
He  studied  in  the  Seminario  Concilia  de  Merida,
and  became  a  priest.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
and  organizers  of  the  "  Logias  Yorkinas,"  an  ad-
vanced section  of  the  liberal  party,  and  helped
Guerrero  to  the  presidency  of  the  republic.  His
opposition  to  military  power  and  influence,  which
in  his  time  pervaded  every  branch  of  tlie  adminis-
tration, was  the  cause  of  his  banishment  to  New
Orleans.  Afterward  Alpuche,  having  returned  to
Mexico,  endured  great  hardships  as  a  prisoner  in
the  castle  of  San  Juan  de  Uliia.  The  rest  of  his
life  was  full  of  disappointment  and  sufferings,  un-
til he  died  in  the  convent  of  Santo  Domingo.

ALPUCHE,  Weiiceslas  (al-poo'-che),  Mexican
poet,  b.  in  Tihosuco,  Yucatan,  28  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  in
Tckax,  2  Sept.,  1841.  He  took  as  models  the  works
of  the  Spanish  playwrights  and  lyric  poets,  Calde-
ron.  Lope  de  Vega,  Moreto,  and  Quintana,  whom  he
tried  to  follow.  His  best  poems  are  "  Hidalgo,"
"  La  Independencia,"  and  "  La  Fama."

ALRICKS,  Hermanns,  lawyer,  b.  at  Lost  Creek
Mill,  Juniata  co..  Pa.,  in  1804;  d.  in  Ilarrisburg,
Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1874.  In  1814  his  parents  removed  to
Harrisburg.  He  received  his  early  education  in  the
academy  of  that  city,  and  read  law  there  until  he
was  prepared  for  admission  to  the  bar.  He  soon
attained  a  lucrative  practice,  and  gained  a  high
reputation  for  the  close  reasoning  requisite  in  ar-
guing before  the  orphan's  and  registrar's  courts.
He  made  it  a  rule  not  to  undertake  a  cause  unless
he  was  satisfied  of  its  justice.  As  a  collector  of
historical  traditions  he  was  well  known  to  culti-
vated people  throughout  the  state,  and  his  extraor-
dinarily tenacious  memory  enabled  him  to  hold  his
store  of  information  with  dates  and  authorities  at
the  nistant  service  of  inquirers.  The  only  public
office  he  ever  held  was  that  of  deputy  attorney-
general  in  1829,  an  appointment  that  involved  him
in  such  an  unpleasant  political  fracas  that  he  be-
came very  averse  to  office-seeking.


ALSINA,  Adolfo  (al-see'-na),  Argentine  states-
man, b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  in  1829.  He  first  attract-
ed public  notice  by  a  series  of  lectures  and  contri-
butions to  the  periodical  publications  of  Buenos
Ayres.  He  became  deputy  to  the  provincial  cham-
bers, and  was  one  of  the  most  highly  distinguished
for  eloquence  and  general  ability.  He  was  gover-
nor of  the  province  from  1866  till  1868,  and  vice-
president  of  the  Argentine  republic  from  1868  to
1872.  He  several  times  commanded  a  body  of  na-
tional guards  during  civil  disturbances.

ALSOP,  (xeor^e,  author,  b.  in  England  in  1638.
He  was  a  London  apprentice  in  his  youth,  but  re-
sided in  Maryland  in  1658-'62.  He  published  a
book  with  this  quaint  title :  "  A  Character  of  the
Province  of  Maryland,  also  a  Small  Treatise  on  the
Wild  and  Naked  Indians  or  Susquehanokes  of  Mary-
land, their  Customs,  Manners,  Absurdities,  and  Re-
ligion, together  with  a  collection  of  historical  let-
ters" (London,  1666).  This  was  republished,  with
introduction  and  notes,  by  J.  G.  Shea  (New  York,
1869),  and  again  in  Baltimore  in  1880.

ALSOP,  John,  of  the  continental  congress,  b.
in  Middletown,  Conn. :  d.  in  Newtown,  Long  Isl-
and, 22  Nov.,  1794.  He  was  a  prosperous  merchant
of  unquestioned  patriotism  and  integrity,  and  was
a  worthy  member  of  the  first  American  congress
in  1774-'76.  On  the  occupation  of  New  York  by
the  British  forces  he  withdrew  to  Middletown,
Conn.,  remaining  there  until  peace  was  concluded.
— His  son,  Richard,  aiithor,  b.  in  Middletown,
Conn.,  23  Jan.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Flatbush,  Long  Island,
20  Aug.,  1815,  studied  at  Yale  college,  but  did
not  complete  the  course,  preferring  to  devote  him-
self exclusively  to  languages  and  literature.  Al-
though he  was  brought  up  to  a  mercantile  life,  it
proved  so  irksome  that  he  soon  devoted  himself  to
letters,  and  formed  a  kind  of  literary  league,  popu-
larly known  as  the  "  Hartford  Wits."  These  in-
cluded Theodore  Dwight,  Lemuel  Hopkins,  and
Benjamin  Trumbull.  The  association,  informal  as
it  was,  made  a  notable  literary  hit,  all  of  its  mem-
bers being  among  the  intellectual  lights  of  the
time.  Alsop  was  the  leading  spirit  and  the  princi-
pal writer  of  the  "  Echo,"  a  series  of  burlesque
essays  (1791-'95).  It  comprised  travesties  and  ex-
aggerations of  current  publications,  state  papers,
and  the  like,  making  a  target  of  anything,  in  fact,
that  offered  a  mark  for  the  active  wits  of  its  edi-
tors. These  papers  were  mostly  done  into  polished
pentameters,  somewhat  ponderous  but  instinct  with
fun,  and  not  without  latent  wisdom.  Most  of  the
"  Wits  "  were  federalists,  and  the  "  Echo  "  soon  be-
came bitterly  anti-democratic.  The  whole  series
was  published  in  a  volume  in  1807.  Alsop's  other
works  include  a  "  Monody  on  the  Death  of  Wash-
ington," in  heroic  verse  (Hartford,  1800) ;  "  The
Enchanted  Lake  of  the  Fairy  Morgana"  (1808);
"The  Natural  and  Civil  History  of  Chili,"  from
the  Italian  of  Molina,  and  fugitive  pieces.  In  1815
he  edited  the  "  Captivity  and  Adventures  of  J.  R.
Jewett  among  the  Savages  of  Nootka  Sound."
He  was  an  accomplished  linguist,  acquiring  lan-
guages, as  it  seemed,  by  a  sort  of  intuition,  and
made  a  distinct  impression  on  the  drift  of  pub-
lic thought. — Another  son,  Jolin  (poet,  b.  in  Mid-
dletown, Conn.,  5  Feb.,  1776;  d.  in  Middletown,  1
Nov.,  1841),  was  a  pupil  of  Dr.  Dwight.  He  studied
in  the  law  school  of  Judge  Reeve  at  Litchfield,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  New
London.  He  afterward  became  a  bookseller  in
Hartford,  and  still  later  in  New  York.  The  latter
part  of  his  life  was  spent  in  retirement  in  Middle-
town.  His  poems  were  never  issued  in  book  form,
but  appeared  in  various  periodicals  and  collections.


ALSTON


ALVARADO


61


ALSTON,  Willis,  statesman,  b.  in  Halifax  co.,
N.  C.  He  first  appears  in  the  colonial  records  of
the  Halifax  district,  N.  C,  in  177(),  was  a  member  of
the  provincial  house  of  commons  1791-'92,  and
member  of  congress  from  1799-1803. — His  son,
Willis,  Jr.,  d.  10  April,  1887,  was  a  member  of  the
state  legislature  in  1794  and  afterward,  and  a
member  of  congress  in  1803-15  and  in  1825-31.
During  the  war  of  1812-'15  with  Great  Britain,  he
was  chairman  of  the  ways  and  means  committee
of  the  house  of  representatives.

ALTAMIRANO,  I^nacio  M.  (al-tah-me-rah'-
no),  Mexican  jurist,  b.  of  pure  Indian  parentage,  in
the  state  of  Guerrero.  He  studied  law  under  the
protection  of  a  Spanish  gentleman,  was  graduated
with  distinction,  devoted  himself  to  politics,  and
soon  became  noted  for  his  brilliant  and  fiery  ora-
tory against  his  opponents  of  the  conservative
party,  he  belonging  to  the  extreme  radical  faction.
During  the  French  invasion  and  the  empire  of
Maximilian,  Altamirano  fought  bravely  against  the
foreign  troops,  but  at  the  end  of  the  war  he  retired
from  the  army.  Since  that  time  he  has  filled
with  success  many  high  offices  in  different  depart-
ments, and  has  been  a  member  of  the  congress
several  times.  He  is  considered  the  first  of  Mexi-
can orators,  and  a  great  Oriental,  Greek,  German,,
English,  French,  and  Italian  scholar.  He  has  pub-
lished much,  both  in  prose  and  verse.

ALTHAM,  John,  missionary,  d.  in  1641.  He
was  one  of  the  two  Jesuits  who  accompanied  Leon-
ard Calvert  to  Maryland  in  1633.  On  landing  he
obtained  a  hut  from  its  Indian  owner,  which  he
fitted  up  for  religious  service,  and  it  was  after-
ward known  as  "the  first  chapel  in  Maryland."
He  studied  the  Indian  dialects  at  St.  Mary's,  and
then  preached  the  gospel  throughout  the  common-
wealth, travelling  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Sus-
quehanna. He  converted  several  chiefs,  and  by  his
mfluence  with  the  Indians  did  much  to  strengthen
the  infant  settlement.

ALVARADO,  Alonzo  d',  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in
Burgos,  Spain;  d.  in  1553.  As  an  officer  under
Cortes,  he  participated  in  the  conquest  of  Mexico
(1519),  and  went  thence  to  Peru,  where  he  served
as  one  of  Pizarro's  subordinates  in  the  subjugation
of  the  Incas.  In  1537  he  was  sent  with  500  men
to  reenforce  the  Pizarros  who  were  fighting  their
brother  Spaniards  under  Almagro  in  Peru.  He  was
intercepted,  defeated,  and  made  prisoner  by  Al-
magro before  he  could  join  the  opposing  force.
Pizarro  and  Almagro  were  soon  killed  by  their
soldiers,  and  the  strange  warfare  proceeded  be-
tween the  survivors,  Alvarado  joining  De  Castro
to  crush  Almagro  the  younger.  He  was  lieuten-
ant-general of  the  forcethat  suppressed  the  rebel-
lion of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  in  1548,  and  was  made
captain-general  of  Peru,  but  was  vanquished  in
1553,  and  did  not  long  survive  the  mortification
of  his  defeat.

ALVARADO,  Juan  Bautista,  governor  of  Cali-
fornia from  1836  till  1842.  He  was  the  leader  of
the  Californian  revolt  against  Mexican  authority.
Figueroa,  the  legitimate  governor  of  the  province,
died  in  September,  1835,  and  Chico,  a  very  obnoxious
person  in  the  eyes  of  Californians,  was  appointed
in  his  stead  by  the  Mexican  government.  His  rule
was  so  unpopular  that  he  was  forced  to  retire,  upon
which  Alvarado,  in  November,  1836,  rallied  a  force,
including  sundry  adventurers  from  the  United
States,  and  other  foreigners,  seized  INIonterey,  and
sent  the  deputy,  whom  Chico  had  left,  to  Mexico.
Independence  was  formally  declared,  and  the
legislature  elected  Alvarado  governor  ad  interim.
Southern  California  remained  loyal  for  a  time ;  but


Alvarado,  partly  by  a  show  of  force,  and  partly
through  shrewd  diplomacy,  won  over  Santa  Bar-
bara and  Los  Angelos,  and  in  January,  1837,  pro-
claimed the  whole  of  California  free  and  united.
In  June  of  the  same  year  a  Mexican  commissioner
was  sent  to  negotiate  with  the  revolted  provinces,
but  the  self-made  governor,  with  characteristic  ad-
dress, won  him  over  and  sent  him  back  to  plead
his  (Alvarado's)  cause.  In  the  meantime  the
Mexican  government  had  appointed  a  new  and
somewhat  warlike  governor  for  California,  without
consulting  Alvarado,  and  hostilities  forthwith  be-
gan. A  single  "  battle  "  took  place  at  San  Buena-
ventura, in  which  one  man  was  killed,  the  Mexican
forces  were  routed,  and  Alvarado  was  soon  recog-
nized by  the  central  government  as  governor  of
what  was  then  designated  as  the  "  Department  of
California."  For  two  years  his  jurisdiction  was  not
seriously  disputed,  but  in  1842  the  Mexican  gov-
ernment sent  a  new  military  representative,  and
Alvarado  was  deposed.  He  appeared  subsequently
as  an  intriguer  of  some  ability,  but  never  came  to
the  front  again  in  the  character  of  a  successful
leader.  The  conquest  by  the  United  States  fol-
lowed in  time  to  prevent  further  instances  of  the
local  tendency  to  revolution.

ALVARADO,  Pedro  de  (al-vah-rah'-do),  one  of
the  conquerors  of  Spanish  America,  b.  in  Badajoz,
Spain,  toward  the  end  of  the  15th  century ;  d.  in
New  Galicia  in
1541.  In  1518  he
sailed  with  his
four  brothers  for
Cuba,  whence  he
accompanied  Gri-
jalva  in  his  ex-
ploring expedi-
tion along  the
coast  of  the  Amer-
ican continent.
Grijalva  was  so
delighted  with
the  aspect  of  the
country  that  he
called  it  New
Spain,  and  sent
Alvarado  back  to
Cuba  to  report  to
Gov.  Velasquez
what  they  had
seen  and  heard,
for  the  first  time,
about  the  im-
mense empire  of
Montezuma.  In
February,  1519,  he
accompanied  Cor-
tes, and  took  an
active  part  in  all

the  incidents  of  the  conquest  of  Mexico.  Cortes,
while  engaged  in  the  battle  against  Narvaez,  left
the  city  of  Mexico  under  charge  of  Alvarado,  who
by  his  "cruelty  and  rapacity  caused  an  insurrec-
tion, and  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.  In  the
famous  retreat  of  the  night  of  1  July,  1520  {La
noche  triste),  Alvarado  distinguished  himself,  and
to  commemorate  his  bravery  an  enormous  ditch
over  which  he  leaped  to  escape  from  the  hands  of
the  enemy  is  called  to  this  day  "  El  salto  de  Alva-
rado." On  his  return  to  Spain  he  v^as  received
with  great  honor  by  Charles  V.  and  appointed
governor  of  Guatemala,  which  he  had  conquered
in  1523.  He  married  a  daughter  of  the  illustrious
house  of  La  Cueva,  from  which  the  dukes  of  Albu-
querque are  descended,  and  returned  to  America


62


ALVARENGA


ALVORD


accompanied  by  a  host  of  adventurers.  Guatemala
became  highly  prosperous  under  his  government.
Having  authority  to  extend  his  conquests,  he
headed  an  expedition  of  500  men  to  capture
Quito,  and  landed  near  Cape  San  Francisco,
whence  he  marched  into  the  interior ;  but  among
the  Andes  he  met  the  forces  of  Pizarro,  prepai-ed
to  resist  his  advance.  Disclaiming  any  intention
to  interfere  with  his  countryman's  rights,  he  re-
ceived 120,000  pieces  of  eight  as  an  indemnification
for  his  outlay  and  losses,  and  returned  peaceably  to
Guatemala.  Visiting  Spain  soon  afterward,  he
appeased  the  emperor's  displeasure  at  this  affair,
obtained  the  governorship  of  Honduras,  and  then
fitted  out  from  Guatemala  a  new  expedition  of  dis-
covery, consisting  of  12  large  ships,  two  galleys,
800  soldiers,  150  horses,  and  a  large  retinue  of  In-
dians. Sailing  W.  and  N.  W.  along  the  Mexican
coast,  he  was  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into  the
port  of  Los  Pueblos  de  Avalos,  in  Michoacan.
Here  a  messenger  from  the  Spaniards  of  the  in-
terior asked  his  assistance  in  putting  down  a  re-
volt of  the  Chichimecas  of  New  Galicia.  He
landed  with  a  portion  of  his  force,  made  a  rapid
march  to  the  encampment  of  his  countrymen,  and
with  them  attacked  the  Indians,  who  were  strongly
posted  in  the  mountai-is.  The  Spaniards  were  de-
feated and  put  to  flight,  and  Alvarado  was  killed
by  the  falling  of  his  horse.  The  expedition  was
then  abandoned.

ALVARENGA,  Manoel  Ignacio  da  Silva
(ahl-va-rayn'-gah),  Brazilian  poet.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  rhetoric  in  Rio  Janeiro.  His  poems,
which  are  graceful  and  full  of  local  color,  were
published  in  Lisbon  in  1791).

ALVAREZ,  Bernardo  d'  (al'-vah-reth),  Spanish
adventurer,  b.  in  Seville  in  1514;  d.  in  Spain  in  1584.
He  joined  the  army  in  his  boyhood,  but  was  dismissed
for  misconduct  and  transported  to  a  penal  colony
in  the  Philippine  islands.  He  escaped  thence  and
went  to  Peru,  where  he  amassed  a  large  fortune,
after  the  manner  of  the  adventurers  of  the  time.
But,  unlike  most  of  them,  he  devoted  this  wealth  to
charitable  objects.  He  founded  the  benevolent  or-
der of  St.  Bernardine,  and  in  Mexico,  V^era  Cruz,
Acapulco,  and  other  cities  of  New  Spain,  estab-
lished hospitals,  which  are  served  by  an  association
named  for  St.  Hippolite.  His  philanthropy  made
him  famous  among  the  people  who  have  been  bene-
fited by  his  gifts.

ALVAREZ,  Diego  d',  Mexican  priest,  b.  in
Guadalajara  about  1750;  d.  in  1824.  At  the  age  of
sixteen  he  had  finished  his  studies  in  philosophy,
theological  sciences,  and  canon  and  civil  law,  which
he  then  taught  in  the  seminario  conciliar  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  He  was  also  learned  in  medicine,
mathematics,  oratory,  architecture,  music,  chemis-
try, and  agriculture.  He  wrote  on  a  wide  range  of
subjects,  his  works  making  twenty-three  large  vol-
umes in  manuscript,  but  only  one  of  them,  "  Prac-
tical de  la  teologia  mistica,"  was  published.

ALVAREZ,  Juan,  Mexican  soldier,  b.  about
1790 ;  d.  in  1867.  He  was  of  Indian  blood,  and  ex-
ercised extraordinary  influence  over  the  Indians  of
southern  Mexico. He  was  governor  of  Guerrero  in

1853,  and  had  little  difficulty  in  rousing  his  moun-
taineers to  insurrection.  The  outbreak  took  place  at
Acapulco,  at  the  beginning  of  the  following  year.
In  the  decree  promulgated  by  Alvarez,  in  March,

1854,  which  became  noted  as  the  plan  of  Ayutla,
Santa  Anna's  deposition  was  officially  announced,
and  republican  institutions  were  proposed.  Santa
Anna's  power  was  overthrown  in  the  battle  of
Saltillo,  22  July,  1855,  and  Gen.  Carrera  was  in-
trusted with  the  government,  which  he  relinquished


in  September  in  favor  of  Alvarez,  whose  nomina-
tion as  president  of  Mexico  was  ratified  by  the
assembly  of  Cuernavaca,  which  for  that  purpose
he  had  convoked  himself,  4  Oct.,  1855.  On  15  Nov.
he  made  his  entry  into  Mexico,  escorted  by  a
body-guard  of  Indians.  His  abolition  of  the  priv-
ileges of  the  clergy  and  the  army  met  with  such
opposition  that  he  tendered  his  resignation,  sub-
stituting in  his  place  his  former  minister  Comon-
fort,  11  Dec;  and  after  procuring  *^200,000  from
the  national  exchequer,  and  what  arms  and  muni-
tions he  could  get,  he  returned  to  southern  Mexico.

ALVARO,  or  ALBO,  Francisco,  Spanish  sailor,
lived  in  the  lOth  century.  He  accompanied  Ma-
gellan's expedition  that  sailed  from  Spain  on  10
Aug.,  1519,  and  kept  a  log-book,  which  recounts
the  fortunes  of  the  fleet  from  the  time  they  sighted
the  cape  of  Santo  Agostinho  on  the  coast  of  Brazil.
The  original  is  preserved  in  Simancas,  Spain,  and
a  copy  is  in  the  British  museum.  It  was  printed
in  the  "  Coleccion  "  of  Navarrete,  and  is  included
in  the  documents  given  in  the  volume  of  the  Hak-
luyt  society,  containing  Lord  Stanley's  transla-
tions of  Pigafetta  and  other  records  of  Magel-
lan's voyage.

ALVORD,  Benianiin,  soldier,  b.  in  Rutland,
Vt.,  18  Aug.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  16
Oct.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1833,  served  in  the  Seminole  war
(1835-'7),  was  instructor  in  mathematics  at  West
Point  until  1839,  and  was  on  frontier,  garrison,  and
engineer  duty  until  1846,  when  he  participated  in
the  military  occupation  of  Texas,  and  subse(]uently
in  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  received  the  successive
brevets  of  captain  and  major  for  gallantry  in  sev-
eral of  the  more  important  engagements,  and  was
chief  of  staff  to  Maj.  Lally's  column  on  the  march
from  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico  in  1847.  He  was  made
paymaster  22  June,  1854,  and  served  as  such  until
1862,  when  he  became  a  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, which  grade  he  resigned  8  Aug.,  1865.  He
was  brevetted  brigadier  in  the  regular  army  in
April,  1865.  From  1872  till  his  retirement  from  ac-
tive service  in  1881  he  was  chief  of  the  pay  depart-
ment with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He  is  the
author  of  treatises  on  mathematics  and  many  essays.

ALVORD,  Corydon  A.,  printer,  b.  in  Winches-
ter, Conn.,  about  1812 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  28
Nov.,  1874.  He  learned  his  trade  in  Hartford,
and  in  1845  removed  to  New  York,  where  he
made  a  specialty  of  printing  illustrated  books,
gaining  a  high  reputation.  His  establishment  on
Vandewater  st.  was  one  of  the  most  extensive  in
the  country.  Among  its  features  were  fonts  of
ancient  and  oriental  letter,  together  with  fonts  of
old-style  type,  which  enabled  him  to  make  reprints
or  fac-similes  of  old  books  and  newspapers.  There
were  monster  vaults  deep  under  ground,  and  ex-
tending under  adjacent  buildings,  forming  a  series
of  immense  storage-rooms  guarded  by  thick  walls
and  iron  door?  as  thoroughly  protected  as  the
treasury  vaults.  These  were  'for  the  storage  of
stereotype  plates  and  valuable  engravings.  He  be-
gan a  i-eprint  of  the  old  records  of  the  city  of  New
York,  but  the  work  was  not  finished,  owing  to
changes  in  the  recorder's  office.  In  the  reproduc-
tion of  old  books  and  papers  he  succeeded  in  copy-
ing the  discolorations  made  by  age.  in  a  remarkable
degree.  He  was  an  active  member  of  the  typo-
graphical society,  and  president  of  the  typothetae.
He  acquired  a  competence,  which  was  subsequently
lost  through  the  misconduct  of  others.  In  1871  he
retired  from  business,  went  to  Hartford,  and  de-
voted his  remaining  years  to  the  preparation  of  a
local  history  of  Hartford  and  Winchester.


ALVORD


AMES


63


ALVORD,  Henry  Elijah,  educator,  b.  in  Green-
field, Mass.,  11  March,  1844.  He  was  educated  in
the  Massachusetts  public  schools,  and  subsequently
studied  in  the  Norwich  university,  where  in  18G3
he  received  the  degrees  of  C.  E.  and  B.  S.  He  en-
listed as  a  private  in  1862,  and  passed  through
every  grade  to  that  of  major,  reaching  that  rank
in  the  2d  Massachusetts  cavalry  in  1865.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  was  appointed  to  the  regular
army  with  the  rank  of  captain  of  cavalry,  and  re-
mained as  such  until  1872,  when  he  became  a  spe-
cial Indian  courier.  He  then  lectured  for  a  time  at
Williston  seminary,  Easthampton,  Mass.,  and  later
became  manager  of  the  Houghton  farm.  Orange  co.,
N.  Y.  In  1886  he  was  elected  professor  of  agricul-
ture at  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  college,  Am-
herst. Prof.  Alvord  has  been  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  the  agricultural  journals  of  this  country  and
Great  Britain,  and  is  the  author  of  the  American
sections  of  "  Dairy  Farming  "  (London,  1881).  He
is  also  well  known  as  a  lecturer  on  agricultural  topics.
ALVORD,  Thomas  (xold,  politician,  b.  in  Onon-
daga, N.  Y.,  20  Dec,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1828,  in  1832  admitted  to  the  New  York
bar,  and  in  1844  sent  to  the  legislature,  where  he
remained  for  ten  consecutive  terms.  He  was  elected
speaker  of  the  house  in  1858  and  in  1864,  was  lieu-
tenant-governor in  1865-6,  and  a  member  of  the
New  York  state  constitutional  convention  in  1867-
'8.  He  is  the  proprietor  of  extensive  salt  mines
in  central  New  York,

ALZATE  Y  RAMIREZ,  Jos6  Antonio,  Mexi-
can scientist,  b.  in  Ozumba  in  1729;  d.  in  the  city
of  Mexico,  2  Feb.,  1790.  He  was  a  correspondmg
member  of  the  French  and  Spanish  academies  of
science,  and  one  of  the  earliest  trustworthy  ob-
servers of  Mexican  meteorology.  He  attained  a
high  reputation  as  a  zoologist  and  botanist,  and
his  researches  led  the  way  for  modern  exploration
of  Mexican  antiquities.  He  published  the  "  Gaceta
de  Literatura,"  and  an  essay  entitled  "  La  limite
des  nieges  perpetuelles  en  Volean  Popocatepetl."

AMERIOO  (or  AMERICO)  VESPUCCI  (or
VESPUCIO)  (ves-putch'-ee),  Italian  navigator,  b.
in  Florence,  Italy,  9  March,  1451 ;  d.  in  Seville,
Spain,  22  Feb.,  1512.  He  was  of  a  wealthy  family
of  merchants,  and
received  his  educa-
tion from  his  uncle,
Giorgi  Antonio  Ves-
pucci, a  Dominican
friar,  a  friend  and
colleague  of  Savona-
rola. He  engaged
in  business,  first  in
Florence  and  after-
ward in  Seville,
where  he  met  Co-
lumbus, perhaps  as
early  as  1493,  and
where  in  1497  he
equipped  the  fleet
with  which  that  nav-
igator sailed  on  his
third  voyage.  He
had  previously,  in
1496,  had  charge  of
fitting  out  a  fleet  for
Amerigo sailed  from


y />^i^  ^^:^  f


the  Spanish government

Spain  in  1499  in  an  expedition  that  visited  the
neighborhood  of  Cape  Paria  and  several  hundred
miles  of  coast,  and  returned  in  June,  1500.  In
May,  1501,  he  entered  the  service  of  Emanuel,  of
Portugal,  and  participated  in  an  expedition  that
visited  the  coast  of  Brazil. In  May,  1503,  he  com-


manded a  caravel  in  a  squadron  that  sailed  for  the
discovery  of  Malacca,  but  parted  company  from
the  rest,  and  finally  made  his  way  to  the  coast  of
Brazil,  where  he  discovered  the  bay  of  All  Saints,
remained  there  two  months,  then  ran  260  leagues
farther  south,  where  he  built  a  for,t,  somewhere
near  Cape  Frio,  and,  leaving  a  colony  there,  re-
turned to  Lisbon  in  June,  1504.  Early  in  1505  he
obtained  from  King  Ferdinand  of  Spain  letters  of
naturalization,  and  on  22  March,  1508,  was  ap-
pointed pilot-major  of  the  kingdom,  an  office  that
he  held  until  his  death,  taking  charge  of  the  prepa-
ration of  a  general  description  of  coasts  and  ac-
counts of  new  discoveries,  and  also  superintending
the  construction  of  charts  and  the  examination  of
pilots.  The  controversy  as  to  whether  Vespucci
took  precedence  both  of  the  Cabots  and  of  Columbus
in  the  discovery  of  the  mainland  of  AmBrica  has
been  for  centuries  a  matter  of  dispute.  None  of
the  original  letters  of  Amerigo  bearing  on  the  sub-
ject are  extant,  except  in  translations,  and  these
differ  greatly  among  themselves  and  contain  incon-
sistencies of  fact  and  date.  It  is  not  even  known
in  what  language  the  letters  were  written.  An  ac-
count by  Amerigo  of  his  voyage  of  1499,  said  to
have  been  written  18  July,  1500,  was  published  by
Bandini  in  1745.  A  letter  of  his  to  Lorenzo  Piero
de  Medici,  a  cousin  of  Lorenzo  the  Magnificent,
describing  the  voyage  of  1501,  was  published  in
various  editions,  some  in  Latin,  others  in  German,
and  in  1789  a  new  text,  in  Italian,  was  discovered
by  Bartolozzi.  The  Strasburg  edition  of  1505  bears
the  title  "  De  Ora  Antarctica."  In  1507  a  "  Cosmo-
graphiae  Introductio  "  was  published  at  the  little
college  of  St.  Die  in  Lorraine,  and  to  it  was  ap-
pended an  account  by  Amerigo  of  his  voyages,  pur-
porting to  be  addressed  to  Rene  II.,  duke  of  Lor-
raine. Here  it  is  asserted  that  four  voyages  were
made,  the  date  of  the  first  being  fixed  at  May,
1497.  Amerigo  would  thus  have  reached  the  main-
land a  week  or  two  earlier  than  Cabot,  and  about
14  months  earlier  than  Columbus.  It  was  also
suggested  in  this  book  that  Amerigo  should  give
his  name  to  the  continent  he  had  discovered.  The
best  authorities  now  consider  the  evidence  incon-
trovertible that  this  date  of  1497  is  incorrect,  and
doubt  has  thus  been  thrown  upon  the  rest  of  Am-
erigo's narrative.  He  has  been  charged  by  many
with  deliberate  falsification,  and  most  of  his  apolo-
gists have  contented  themselves  with  defending
his  character,  rather  than  the  truth  of  his  narra-
tive, ascribing  the  inconsistencies  of  the  latter  to
the  errors  of  translators  and  copyists.  Santarem,
in  his  "  Researches,"  says  he  could  find  no  men-
tion at  all  of  Vespucci  in  the  royal  archiies  of
Portugal,  nor  in  the  diplomatic  records,  where  all
new  discoveries  were  mentioned,  and  the  fact  that
his  reputed  discovery  of  the  mainland  was  not
used  as  evidence  by  the  Spanish  government  in  an
action  at  law  in  1512,  where  it  would  have  been  in
their  favor,  seems  to  show  that  it  was  not  given
credence  at  that  day.  The  name  of  America,  how-
ever, suggested  by  the  "  Cosmographiae  Introduc-
tio," began  soon  to  be  generally  used,  and  it  was
not  until  the  publication  of  Schoner's  "  Opusculum
Geographicum "  (1533)  that  doubt  began  to  be
thrown  on  its  propriety.  See  "  Life  and  Voyages
of  Americus  Vespuciiis,"  by  C.  E.  Lester  (New
York,  1846) ;  Santarem's  "  Vespucius  and  his  Voy-
ages," translated  by  E.  V.  Childe  (Boston,  1850) :
and  Winsor's  "  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of
America"  (Boston,  1884).

AMES,  Adelbert,  soldier,  b,  in  Rockland,  Me.,
31  Oct.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  m
1861,  and  assigned  to  the  5th  artillery. He  wai=


64


AMES


AMES


wounded  at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  and  brevetted
for  gallantry  in  that  action,  and  was  present  at  the
siege  of  Yorktown,  and  the  battles  of  Gaines's  Mills,
Malvern  Hill,  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,
Antietam,  and  Gettysburg,  besides  many  of  the
minor  engagements  in  Virginia  throughout  the
civil  war.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  for  gallantry,
and  commanded  a  brigade,  and  at  times  a  division
in  the  army  of  the  Potomac,  and  in  the  operation
before  Petersburg  in  1864.  He  was  brevetted  ma-
jor-general of  volunteers  for  his  conduct  at  the
capture  of  Fort  Fisher,  13  March,  1865,  and  bre-
vetted major-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  "  gallant  and
meritorious  conduct  in  the  field  during  the  re-
bellion," and  on  30  April,  1866,  mustered  out  of
the  volunteer  service.  On  28  July,  1866,  he  was
promoted  to  the  full  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  24th
infantry.  On  15  July,  1868,  he  was  appointed  pro-
visional governor  of  Mississippi,  under  acts  of  con-
gress providing  for  such  temporary  government,
and  on  17  March,  1869,  his  command  extended  to
include  the  4th  military  district.  The  lately  in-
surrectionary states  were  at  the  time  divided  into
five  such  districts,  each  with  a  general  officer  in
command,  and  a  military  force  at  his  disposal.
Mississippi  was  among  the  last  of  the  states  to
comply  with  the  conditions  of  reconstruction,  and
in  the  interval  the  community  drifted  into  a  state
bordering  upon  anarchy,  the  provisional  governor
at  times  interfering  in  the  interest  of  order.  Un-
der his  direction  an  election  was  held  30  Nov.,  1869,
and  on  11  Jan.,  1870,  the  legislature  was  convened
by  his  direction.  Gen.  Ames  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  for  the  unexpired  terra  from  4  March,
1869.  In  1873  he  was  chosen  governor  of  Missis-
sippi by  a  popular  vote,  and  resigned  his  seat  in
the  senate.  His  administration  was  so  repugnant
to  the  democrats — or,  in  other  words,  to  the  white
population — that  between  them  and  the  republi-
cans, mostly  blacks,  a  feeling  of  hostility  arose  so
bitter  that  it  culminated  in  a  serious  riot  in  Vicks-
burg,  7  Dec,  1873,  and  this  was  followed  by  atroci-
ties all  over  the  state,  consisting  for  the  most  part
in  the  punishment,  often  in  the  murder,  of  obnox-
ious republicans,  white  and  black.  The  civil  offi-
cers were  unable  to  enforce  the  laws,  and  Gov.
Ames  appealed  to  the  general  government  for  aid.
Upon  this,  despatches  of  the  most  contradictory
character  were  forwarded  to  Washington  by  the
opposing  parties,  and,  pending  an  investigation  by
congress,  affairs  were  in  a  deplorable  state  of  disor-
ganization. An  election  held  in  November  resulted
in  a  general  defeat  of  the  republicans,  both  branches
of  the  legislature  becoming  distinctly  democratic.
Gov.  Ames  held  that  this  election  was  largely  car-
ried by  intimidation  and  fraud,  and  vainly  sought
to  secure  congressional  interference.  Soon  after
the  legislature  convened  in  January,  1876,  articles
of  impeachment  were  prepared  against  all  the  execu-
tive officers,  and,  pending  the  trials,  the  machinery
of  state  government  was  nearly  at  a  standstill.
Gov.  Ames,  seeing  that  conviction  was  inevitable,
offered  through  his  counsel  to  resign,  provided  the
articles  of  impeachment  were  withdrawn.  This
was  done,  and  he  resigned  at  once  and  removed  to
Minnesota,  where  he  continues  to  reside.

AMES,  Edward  Raymond,  bishop,  b.  in  Athens,
Ohio,  20  May,  1806 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  25  April,  1879.
He  studied  for  two  years  at  the  Ohio  State  Uni-
versity, and  m  1828  opened  a  high  school  at  Leb-
anon, 111.,  which  in  time  grew  into  McKendree
College.  Here  he  remained  until  1830,  when  he
joined  the  Indiana  Methodist  Episcopal  conference
and  became  an  itinerant  minister.  At  the  general
conference  for  1840  he  was  chosen  corresponding


secretary  of  the  missionary  society,  and  rode
through  the  South  and  West  and  among  the  Indian
tribes,  a  distance  of  more  than  25,000  miles.  He
was  a  presiding  elder  from  1844  to  1852,  and  was
then  chosen  bishop.  He  was  the  first  Methodist
bishop  to  visit  the  Pacific  coast.  During  the  civil
war  he  rendered  important  service  as  a  member  of
several  commissions.

AMES,  Fisher,  statesman,  b.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,
9  April,  1758;  d.  there.  4  July,  1808.  His  father,
a  physician,  died  when  Fisher  was  but  six  years
old,  but  his  mother  resolved,  in  spite  of  her  limited
income,  to  give  the  boy  a  classical  education.  At
the  age  of  six  he
began  the  study
of  Latin,  and  at
the  age  of  twelve
he  was  sent  to
Harvard,  where  he
was  graduated  in
1774.  Owing  to
his  extreme  youth
and  the  strait-
ened circumstan-
ces of  the  family,
he  was  obliged  to
spend  some  years
in  teaching  before
studying  law,  and
during  this  period
he  devoted  him-
self with  indefat-
igable zeal to

self-culture.  Often  in  after-life  he  spoke  of  the
ravenous  appetite  with  which  he  had  devoured  the
books  within  his  reach.  He  read  the  leading  Eng-
lish poets,  dwelling  for  hours  on  their  beauties,  and
fixing  the  most  striking  passages  in  his  memory.
He  admired  Virgil,  and  could  repeat  considerable
portions  of  the  Eclogues  and  Georgics,  and  most  of
the  fine  passages  of  the  ^neid.  He  was  a  pro-
found student  of  the  Scriptures,  and  declared  that
no  man  could  become  truly  eloquent  '•  without  be-
ing a  constant  reader  of  the  Bible  and  an  admirer
of  the  purity  and  sublimity  of  its  language."  Mr.
Ames  studied  law  in  the  office  of  William  Tudor,
and  began  practice  in  his  native  village  in  1781.
His  abilities  were  fii-st  made  known  by  several  po-
litical essays,  contributed  to  Boston  journals  under
the  signatures  of  "  Brutus  "  and  "  Camillus."  In
1788  he  was  elected  representative  in  the  state  leg-
islature, where  he  distinguished  hnnself  so  highly
that  he  was  elected  to  the  convention  that  met  in
Massachusetts  the  same  year  to  ratify  the  federal
constitution.  In  this  convention  he  urged  tlie
adoption  of  the  constitution,  and  made  also  a
speech  on  biennial  elections,  which  manifested  ex-
traordinary eloquence  and  power.  Joining  the  fed-
eral party,  he  was  elected  to  congress  in  December
of  the  same  year  for  the  district  that  then  included
Boston.  He  served  in  congress  for  eight  years,
supporting  Washington's  administration,  and  when
upon  Washington's  retirement  congress  voted  an
address  to  him,  Mr.  Ames  was  chosen  to  pronounce
it.  On  28  April,  1796,  Mr.  Ames  advocated  the
appropriation  required  for  the  execution  of  Jay's
treaty  with  Great  Britain  m  the  most  eloquent  and
powerful  speech  of  his  life.  A  member  of  the  op-
position objected  to  the  taking  of  a  vote  at  that
time,  on  the  ground  that  the  house  was  too  excited
to  come  to  a  just  decision.  Declining  health  now
compelled  Mr.  Ames  to  withdraw  from  public  life,
and  he  returned  to  his  farm  m  Dedham.  In  1798
he  wrote  "  Laocoon  "  and  other  essays  to  rouse  the
federalists  to  more  strenuous  opposition  to  the  ag-


AMES


AMES


65


gressions  of  France.  On  the  death  of  Washington
he  pronounced  his  eulogy  before  the  legislature  of
Massachusetts.  He  was  elected  president  of  Har-
vard college  in  1804,  but  declined  the  honor  on
account  of  his  health,  and  spent  his  last  years  in
retirement.  Though  not  a  deliberate  artist  in
words,  his  diction  is  highly  pictorial,  and  he
abounds  in  verbal  felicities,  in  condensed,  epigram-
matic sentences  and  illuminated  sayings  that  lin-
ger long  in  the  memory.  Pie  rarely  wrote  out  be-
forehand any  part  of  his  speeches,  but  jotted  down
a  few  heads  only,  on  which  he  studied  till  he  had
gained  a  complete  mastery  of  his  theme,  and  trust-
ed for  the  rest  to  the  inspiration  and  resources  of
the  hour.  In  person  Mr.  Ames  was  somewhat
above  the  average  stature,  well-proportioned,  and
very  erect.  His  face  had  none  of  the  strong  and
rugged  lines  that  mark  the  highest  type  of  great-
ness, but  had  a  peculiarly  benignant  expression.
His  disposition  was  amiable,  his  manners  gentle
and  winning,  and  his  character  without  a  blemish.
He  was  a  brilliant  talker,  and  one  of  the  wittiest
and  most  sparkling  of  letter-writers.  A  collection
of  his  works,  with  a  life  by  Rev.  J.  T.  Kirkland,
was  published  in  Boston  in  1809 ;  and  his  son,  Seth
Ames,  published  an  enlarged  edition  (2  vols.,  1854).
In  1871  his  grandson,  Pelham  W.  Ames,  published
a  selection  from  his  congressional  speeches,  four  of
which  are  not  contained  in  the  former  collections.

AMES,  Joseph,  painter,  b.  in  Roxbury,  N.  H.,
in  1816 ;  d.  in  New  York,  30  Oct.,  1872.  He  early
began  portrait  painting,  and,  having  attained  mod-
erate success  in  his  own  state,  opened  a  studio  in
Boston,  and  soon  established  a  reputation,  painting
the  portraits  of  several  prominent  citizens.  He
was  wholly  self-taught,  and  it  is  thought  that  some
of  his  best  work  was  done  in  this  first  period  of  his
career.  As  soon  as  he  could  save  the  means  he
went  to  Rome  and  studied  there,  painting  a  fine
portrait  of  Pius  IX.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  settled  in  Boston,  but  removed  to  Balti-
more on  account  of  his  health  in  1870.  The  change
did  him  no  good,  and  he  soon  removed  to  New
York.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  national
academy  of  design  in  1870.  His  success  in  New
York  in  genre  work,  as  well  as  in  portraiture,  was
extremely  flattering,  and  he  soon  had  more  orders
than  he  could  fill.  His  best-known  pictures  are
portraits  of  Ristori,  Prescott,  Emerson,  Rachel,
and  President  Felton,of  Harvard,  and  "Gazzaniga."
Among  his  ideal  paintings  are  "  Miranda,"  "  Night,"
"  Morning,"  "  The  Death  of  Webster,"  and  "  Maud
Muller."  The  annual  exhibition  of  1872  contained
his  last  works,  a  portrait  of  Ross  Winans  and  one
of  a  young  lady  of  Baltimore,  while  in  his  studio  he
left  a  finished  picture  of  Madame  Ristori  as  Medea.
He  died  of  brain  fever  after  a  brief  illness.  His
widow  has  executed  meritorious  busts  of  Abraham
Lincoln  and  Gov.  John  A.  Andrew,  of  Massachusetts.

AMES,  Mary  Clemmer  (Mrs.  Hudson),  author,
b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1839 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.
C,  18  Aug.,  1884.  She  was  educated  at  Westfield
(Mass.)  academy,  and  when  very  young  began  to
write  for  the  '"Springfield  Republican."  After-
ward she  became  a  correspondent  of  the  New
York  "  Independent,"  to  which,  under  the  title  of
"  A  Woman's  Letter  from  Washington,"  she  regu-
larly contributed  for  many  years.  Through  these
letters  she  was  best  known  in  the  literary  world.
At  an  early  age  she  married  the  Rev.  Daniel  Ames,
from  whom  she  was  afterward  divorced.  She  was
intimate  with  Alice  and  Phoebe  Gary,  whose  biog-
raphies she  wrote.  She  also  published  monographs
on  Charles  Sumner,  Margaret  Fuller,  George  Eliot,
Emerson,  and  Longfellow. She  wrote  three  novels,

VOL. I. — 5


"  Victoria  "  (New  York,  1864),  "  Eirene  "  (1870),  and
"His  Two  Wives"  (1874);  "Ten  Years  in  Wash-
ington" (1871),  "Outlines  of  Men,  Women,  and
Things"  (1873),  and  a  volume  of  poems  (Boston,
1882).  With  the  earnings  of  her  pen  she  bought  a
house  in  Washington,  which  was  a  social  as  well  as
a  literary  centre  for  many  years,  and  in  1883  she
married  Edmund  Hudson,  editor  and  proprietor  of
the  "  Army  and  Navy  Register."  She  was  thrown
from  a  carriage  in  1878,  and  received  injuries  from
which  she  never  wholly  recovered.  A  complete
edition  of  her  works,  in  four  volumes,  was  pub-
lished in  Boston  in  1885,  and  a  memorial  by  her
husband  in  1886.  She  was  an  earnest  and  con-
scientious writer,  and  exercised  a  powerful  and
healthful  influence  upon  public  affairs.

AMES,  Nathan  Peabody,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Chelmsford,  Mass.,  1  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Chicopee,
Mass.,  23  April,  1847.  He  began  business  in  1829,
and  became  known  as  a  skilful  sword-maker,  fur-
nishing large  numbers  by  contract  to  the  U.  S.
government.  His  business  having  increased,  he
removed  to  Cabotville,  Mass.,  and  with  his  as-
sociates incorporated  in  1834  the  Ames  Manu-
facturing Company.  In  1836  the  works  were  sup-
plemented by  the  addition  of  a  foundery  for  cast-
ing bronze  cannon  and  church-bells.  This  estab-
lishment soon  became  famous,  and  furnished  most
of  the  brass  cannon  for  the  U.  S.  army.  The
statues  of  De  Witt  Clinton,  in  Greenwood  ceme-
tery, Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  of  Washington,  in  Union  sq.,
New  York,  and  of  Franklin,  in  School  St.,  Boston,
Mass.,  were  cast  at  this  foundery.  In  1840  Mr.
Ames  visited  PJurope  for  the  purpose  of  inspecting
the  various  armories  and  of  acquiring  the  latest
information  in  regard  to  improved  processes.  In
1854  he  received  an  important  order  from  the  Brit-
ish government  for  machines  used  in  the  manufac-
ture of  muskets.

AMES,  Nathaniel,  mathematician,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  in  1708;  d.  in  Dedham,  11  July,  1764.
He  was  a  physician,  but,  inheriting  a  love  of  as-
tronomy from  his  father,  he  began  the  publication
in  1725  of  a  series  of  almanacs  that  won  great  suc-
cess. In  1735  he  removed  to  Dedham  and  kept  a
tavern.  Here  he  married  Mary  Fisher,  and  two
sons  were  born  to  them — Fisher  Ames  (g-.  u)and
Nathaniel,  who  continued  the  publication  of  his
father's  almanacs  until  1775,  when  he  became  a
surgeon  in  the  patriot  army.  He  made  several  sea
voyages,  and  published  stories  of  nautical  adven-
ture, including  "Mariner's  Sketches"  (1830)  and
"Nautical  Reminiscences"  (1832).  He  died  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  18  Jan.,  1835.

AMES,  Oakes,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Easton,
Mass.,  10  Jan.,  1804;  d.  in  North  Easton,  Mass.,  8
May,  1873.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Oliver  Ames,
a  blacksmith,  who  had  acquired  considerable  repu-
tation in  the  making  of  shovels  and  picks.  After
obtaining  a  public-school  education,  he  entered  his
father's  workshops  and  made  himself  familiar  with
every  step  of  the  manufacture.  He  became  a  part-
ner in  the  business,  and  with  his  brother,  Oliver,
Jr.,  established  the  firm  of  Oliver  Ames  «&  Sons.
This  house  carried  on  an  enormous  trade  during
the  gold  excitement  in  California,  and  again  a  few
years  later  in  Australia.  During  the  civil  war  they
furnished  extensive  supplies  of  swords  and  shovels
to  the  government.  In  the  building  of  the  Union
Pacific  railroad  they  were  directly  interested,  and
obtained  large  contracts,  which  were  subsequently
transferred  to  the  Credit  Mobilier  of  America,  a
corporation  in  which  Oakes  Ames  was  one  of  the
largest  stockholders.  In  1861  he  was  called  into
the  executive  council  of  Massachusetts. He  served


AMES


AMMEN


continuously  in  congress  from  1862  to  1873  as  repre-
sentative from  tlie  2d  Massachusetts  district.  PI  is
relations  with  the  Credit  Mobilier  led  to  an  inves-
tigation, which  resulted  in  his  being  censured  by  a
vote  of  the  house  of  representatives.  Subsequent
to  his  withdrawal  from  political  life  he  resided  at
North  Easton,  where  he  died  of  apoplexy. — His
brother,  Oliver,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Plymouth,
Mass.,  5  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  North  Easton,  Mass.,  9
March,  1877,  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
state  senate  during  1852  and  1857.  He  was  largely
interested  with  his  brother  in  the  development  of
the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  and  was  its  president
pro  tern,  from  1866  until  1868.  He  was  formally
elected  president  of  the  company  on  12  March.
1868,  and  continued  as  such  until  8  March,  1871.
He  was  connected  with  the  Credit  Mobilier,  and  in
1873  succeeded  his  brother  as  the  head  of  the  firm.

AMES.  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Providence.  R.  1.,
6  Sept.,  1806  ;  d.  there,  20  Dec,  1865.  He  was  pre-
pared for  college  at  Phillips  Andover  academy,  and
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1823.  After  gradua-
tion he  attended  the  law  lectures  of  Judge  Gould
at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  became  a  member  of  the
Rhode  Island  bar  in  1826.  He  served  in  the  Provi-
dence city  council,  was  for  many  years  in  the  state
assembly,  and  was  elected  speaker  of  that  body  in
1844  and  1845.  In  1839  he  married  Mary  Throop
Dorr,  a  niece  of  Thomas  Wilson  Dorr,  famous  as
the  leader  of  the  rebellion  in  1842.  But  this  did
not  prevent  Mr.  Ames  from  taking  a  stand  on
the  side  of  law  and  order,  and  he  served  as  quar-
termaster of  the  state  troops  during  the  whole
period  of  disturbance.  In  1853  he  was  appointed
by  the  legislature  to  represent  the  state  in  adjust-
ing the  boundary  between  Rhode  Island  and  Mas-
sachusetts. In  1855  he  was  one  of  the  commis-
sioners to  revise  the  statutes  of  Rhode  Island,  a
work  that  was  completed  in  1857  mainly  under  his
supervision.  He  was  elected  chief  justice  of  the
state  supreme  court  in  May.  1856,  and  resigned  the
office  in  November,  1865,  because  of  failing  health.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  peace  convention  in  1861.
The  law  books  of  which  he  was  author  or  edi-
tor are  "  Agnell  and  Ames  on  Corporations "  and
"  Rhode  Island  Rey)orts  "  (vols.  4  to  7).

AMHERST,  J.  H.,  actor,  b.  in  London,  England,
in  1776;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  12  Aug.,  1851.  He
first  appeared  at  the  Haymarket  theatre,  London,
in  "The  Blue  Devils."  He  came  to  the  United
States  in  1838  as  director  of  Cook's  equestrian
company,  and  first  acted  as  the  "Castilian"  in
"Mazeppa"in  Philadelphia.  After  a  moderately
successful  career  he  fell  victim  to  a  complication
of  diseases,  died  in  the  almshouse,  and  was  buried
by  the  actors'  order  of  friendship.  He  was  an  ac-
complished classical  scholar,  and  the  author  of  sev-
eral plays,  of  which  the  following  are  the  best
known :  "  Will  Watch,  or  the  Black  Phantom "
(1825) ;  "  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  Invasion  of  Russia,
or  the  Conflagration  of  Moscow "  (1850) ;  "  Ire-
land as  it  Was  "  (1850) ;  "  The  Battle  of  Waterloo  "
(1850):  and  "  Ireland  as  it  Is  "  (1850).

AMHERST,  Jeffery,  soldier,  b.  in  Riverhead.
Kent,  England,  29  Jan.,  1717:  d.  3  Aug.,  1797.  His
American  career  began  in  1758,  when  he  was  com-
missioned major-general  at  the  instance  of  William
Pitt,  and  sent  to  cooperate  with  Prideaux  in  wrest-
ing Canada  from  the  French.  From  boyhood  he
had  been  a  soldier  serving  in  Flanders  and  winning
distinction  under  the  duke  of  Marlborough.  For
his  services  m  reducing  the  French  strongholds  he
received  the  thanks  of  the  house  of  commons,  and
the  order  of  the  bath.  In  1760  he  was  appointed
governor-gener«l  of  the  British  possessions  in  Amer-


ica, but  proved  unable  to  deal  with  the  Indians
under  such  a  leader  as  Pontiac.  In  1763  he  was
made  governor  of  Virginia,  his  last  American
service.  In  England,  Pontiac's  conspiracy  was
generally  unknown,  and  as  Amherst  was  a  favorite
with  the  king,  honors  were  heaped  upon  him,
largely  because  he  steadily  favored  the  American
war.  In  1776  he  was  raised  to  the  peerage  as
Lord  Amherst,  and  in  1787  received  a  patent  as
Baron  Amherst  of  Montreal,  this  being  the  name
of  his  seat  in  Kent.  See  the  "  Gentleman's  Maga-
zine "  for  September,  1797,  Parkman's  "  Conspiracy
of  Pontiac,"  and  Bancroft's  "  History  of  the  United
States,"  vol.  iii.  A  fine  portrait  of  Gen.  Amherst
by  Gainsborough  is  in  the  national  portrait  gallery.

AMI,  Henry  M.,  Canadian  scientist,  b.  in  Belle-
Riviere,  Quebec,  23  Nov.,  1858.  He  was  graduated
at  McGill  college  in  1882,  and  in  June  of  the  same
year  was  appointed  on  the  paleontological  staff  of
the  geological  survey  of  Canada.  In  1886  he  was
assistant  paleontologist,  and  during  the  same  year
was  engaged  in  the  determination,  identification,
and  classification  of  the  fossil  remains  of  Canada,
in  connection  with  the  museum  and  geological
survey  at  Ottawa.  His  first  paper  on  geology
was  read  at  Ottawa  in  1881,  and  in  1882  his  work
on  "  The  Utica  Formation  in  Canada "  was  pub-
lished. Then  followed  "  Notes  on  Triarthrus  spi-
nosus,  Billings,"  and  various  reports  on  the  stratig-
raphy and  paleontology  of  Ottawa  and  vicinity,  and
a  catalogue  of  fossils.  In  June,  1883,  he  became
a  permanent  civil  service  officer  in  the  department
of  the  interior,  geological  survey  branch,

AMIDAS,  or  AMADAS,  Philip,  navigator,  b.
in  Hull,  England,  in  1550 ;  d.  there  in  1618.  He
was  the  son  of  a  Breton  family  who  had  for  a  cent-
tury  resided  in  England.  He  commanded  one  of
the  two  ships  in  Arthur  Barlow's  voyage  of  dis-
covery to  the  coast  of  North  Carolina  in  1584,  un-
dertaken with  a  view  to  establishing  a  permanent
colony.  They  explored  New  Inlet,  and  returned
with  glowing  accounts  of  the  grapes,  cedars,  and
other  products  of  the  country  and  of  its  people.
Amidas  was  in  charge  of  an  expedition  to  New-
foundland a  few  years  later,

AMMEN,  Daniel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ohio,  15
May,  1820,  He  was  appointed  midshipman  7  July,
1836,  and  served  as  passed  midshipman  in  the
Wilkes  exploring  expedition,  in  the  Mediterranean,
in  the  East  India  squadron,  and  on  the  coast  sur-
vey. As  lieutenant  (from  4  Nov.,  1849)  he  was  at-
tached to  a  commission  to  select  a  naval  station  on
the  Pacific  coast,  accompanied  the  expedition  to
Paraguay  river  in  1853-54,  Bnd  was  on  the  steam
frigate  "  Merrimac  "  in  1859-'60.  In  1861,  at  the  out-
break of  the  civil  war,  he  was  executive  officer  of
the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron.  At  the
reduction  of  Port  Royal,  7  Nov.,  1861,  he  com-
manded the  "  Seneca,"  and  was  sent  ashore  to  hoist
the  flag  over  the  surrendered  forts,  and  hold  them
till  the  army  took  possession.  He  was  promoted
to  be  commander  21  Feb.,  1863,  was  assigned  to  the
monitor  "  Patapsco,"  and  participated  in  the  attack
on  Fort  Macallister,  3  March,  1863.  In  May,  1864,
he  was  despatched  to  the  Pacific  in  command  of
220  seamen  as  passengers  on  board  a  California
steamer.  Two  days  out  from. New  York  a  well-
organized  attempt  at  mutiny  was  suppressed  by
Com.  Ammen  and  Boatswain  Bell,  aided  by  Capt.
Tinklepaugh,  of  the  steamer,  and  a  few  volunteers
from  among  the  passengers.  He  participated  in
the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher  in  the  winter  of
1864-'65,  was  commissioned  captain  26  July,  1866,
and  was  on  special  and  sea  service  until  11  Dec,
1877,  when  he was  made  rear-admiral and was


AMMEN


ANCHIETA


67


placed  on  the  retired  list  after  49  years  and  6
months  of  service,  lie  is  the  author  of  "  The  At-
lantic Coast,"  a  volume  in  the  series  entitled  "  The
Navy  in  the  Civil  War  "  (New  York,  1883).

AMMEN,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Botetourt  co..
Va.,  7  Jan.,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1831,  and  served  there  as  assistant  intruc-
tor  in  mathematics,  and  afterward  of  infantry
tactics  until  31  Aug.,  1832.  During  the  threatened
"  nullification  "  of  South  Carolina  he  was  on  duty
in  Charleston  harbor.  From  4  Oct.,  1834,  to  5
Nov.,  1837,  he  was  again  at  West  Point  as  an  in-
structor, and  he  resigned  from  the  army,  30  Nov.,
1837,  to  accept  a  professorship  of  mathematics  at
Bacon  college,  Georgetown,  Ky.  Thence  he  went
to  Jefferson  college,  Washington,  Miss.,  in  1839,
to  the  university  of  Indiana  in  1840,  to  Jefferson
college  again  ni  1843,  and  returned  to  Bacon  col-
lege in  1848.  From  1855  to  1861  he  was  a  civil  en-
gineer at  Ripley,  Ohio,  and  on  April  18  of  that
year  became  captain  in  the  12th  Ohio  volunteers.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  2  May,  and
participated  in  the  West  Virginia  campaign  (June
and  July)  under  McClellan.  where  the  first  consid-
erable federal  successes  of  the  war  were  gained.
After  the  campaigns  in  Tennessee  and  Mississippi
he  was  promoted  to  be  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers 16  July,  1862,  and  was  in  command  of  camps
of  instruction  in  Ohio  and  Hlinois  until  16  Dec,
1863.  From  10  April,  1864,  to  14  Jan.,  1865,  when
he  resigned,  he  was  in  command  of  the  district  of
east  Tennessee.

AMORY,  Robert,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  2
May,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1863,
and  received  his  degree  from  the  medical  depart-
ment in  1866.  After  studying  in  Paris  and  Dublin
for  a  year,  he  settled  in  Longwood  (Brookline),
Mass.  In  addition  to  the  practice  of  his  profession
he  has  taken  a  warm  interest  in  town  aflairs,  filling
several  important  positions.  He  was  appointed  in
1869  lecturer  at  Harvard  college  on  the  physiologi-
cal action  of  drugs,  and  was  afterward  professor  of
physiology  in  the  medical  school  at  Bowdoin  col-
lege, but  resigned  this  chair  in  1874.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  several  societies  of  medical  science,  and  has
published  "  Bromides  of  Potassium  and  Ammo-
nium "  (Boston,  1872),  and  "  Action  of  Nitrous
Oxide  "  (1870) ;  and  has  contributed  to  periodicals
important  papers  on  "  Chloral  Hydrates :  Experi-
ments Disproving  Evolution  of  Chloroform  in
Organism,"  "  Pathological  Action  of  Prussia  Acid,"
"  Poisons,"  etc.  He  has  also  translated  and  edited
"  Lectures  on  Physiology,"  by  Prof.  Russ,  of  the
Strasburg  university  medical  school  (Boston,
1875).  His  "  Photography  of  the  Spectrum  "  was
published  in  the  proceedings  of  the  American
academy.  He  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon  in
the  Massachusetts  volunteer  militia  in  1875,  surgeon
in  1876,  and  medical  director  of  the  1st  brigade
a  few  months  later.

AMORY,  Thomas  Coffin,  lawver,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1812 ;  d.  there,  20  Aug.,  1889.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard,  and  became  a  member
of  the  bar.  For  many  years  he  was  connected  with
the  municipal  government  of  Boston,  serving  as
alderman  and  in  important  positions  in  the  educa-
tional departments.  During  this  period  he  con-
tributed to  various  periodicals,  and  published  many
reports  and  addresses  regarding  his  official  duties.
In  1858  he  published  a  "  Life  of  James  Sullivan,"
governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  in  1868  "  The  Mili-
tary Services  of  Major-General  John  Sullivan."
This  was  followed  by  numerous  pamphlets  and  con-
tributions to  the  historical  magazines  on  subjects
connected  with  the  revolutionary  war,  among  which


were  "Old  Cambridge  and  New,"  "Our  English
Ancestors,"  "Homes  of  the  Olden  Times,"  "Old
Homes  of  New  England,"  "  The  Transfer  of  Erin,"
and  "  The  Acquisition  of  Ireland  bv  England."  In
1886  he  published  "A  Life  of  Sir  Isaac  Coffin  :  His
English  and  American  Ancestors."  He  wrote  nu-
merous poems,  the  best-known  of  which  is,  perhaps,
"  William  Blaxton,  Sole  Inhabitant  of  Boston."
This  was  written  at  a  time  when  it  was  proposed  to
pull  down  the  old  South  church,  and  was  followed  by
"  The  Siege  of  Boston  "  (Cambridge,  1888), "  Charles
River"  (1888),  and  "Miscellaneous  Poems"  (1888).

AMORY,  Thomas  J.  C,  soldier,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts about  1830 ;  d.  of  yellow  fever  in  Newbern,
N.  C,  8  Oct.,  1864.  He"  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1851,  and  served  on  garrison  and  frontier
duty  in  the  Utah  expedition  (1858-'60),  and  on  re-
cruiting service  until  1861,  when  he  became  colonel
of  the  17th  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  was  sta-
tioned at  Baltimore  with  his  regiment  until  March,
1862,  when  he  was  ordered  to  North  Carolina  and
took  part  in  the  operations  about  Newbern,  Beau-
fort, Goldsboro,  and  Kinston,  until  1  March,  1864,
when  he  was  assigned  to  a  general  command  of  the
forces  south  of  the  Trent  river,  and  on  5  July  to
the  sub-district  of  Beaufort.  He  was  promoted  to
be  major  19  September,  and  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  1  October.

AMPUDIA,  Pedro  de,  Mexican  soldier.  He
was  made  a  general  by  Santa  Anna  in  1840,  led  a
foray  on  the  Texas  frontier  under  the  command  of
Gen.  Woil  in  1842,  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
conflicts  with  the  Texan  forces  under  Summerville,
and  in  December,  1842,  commanded  the  land  forces
in  the  siege  of  Campeachy,  Yucatan.  He  was  com-
pelled to  retreat  by  Com.  Moore  on  26  June,  1843,
and  went  to  Tabasco,  where  in  1844  he  aroused
great  indignation  by  his  cruel  execution  of  Gen.
Sentmanat,  who  had  attacked  the  town.  He  was
dismissed  from  his  command,  but  on  11  April,  1846,
appeared  before  Matamoras  as  a  general  in  the
army  under  Arista.  He  was  given  command  of
Monterey,  but,  after  a  spirited  defence,  surrendered
to  Gen.  Taylor.  24  Sept.,  1846.

ANACAONA,  also  called  the  Golden  Flower,
was  an  Indian  queen,  wife  of  Caonabo,  one  of  the
five  caciques  who  possessed  the  island  of  Santo
Domingo  when  the  Spaniards  discovered  it  and
settled  there  in  1492.  She  was  celebrated  as  a  com-
poser of  ballads  and  narrative  poems,  called  are^Yos.
The  Indians,  being  ill-treated  by  the  conquerors,
revolted,  and  made  a  long  war  against  them ;  and
during  a  feast  organized  to  honor  the  queen  of
Jaragua,  who  was  friendly  to  the  Spaniards,  Gov.
Nicolas  de  Ovando  ordered  the  arrest  of  Anacaona
and  her  Indian  noblemen,  all  of  whom,  being  sus-
pected of  conspiracy,  were  executed.

ANASCO,  Juan  de  (an-yas'-co),  Spanish  trav-
eller, lived  in  Seville  in  the  first  part  of  the  16th
century.  He  was  one  of  the  most  active  of  the
officers  that  accompanied  Hernando  de  Soto  dur-
ing his  famous  expedition  to  Florida  and  the  re-
gions along  the  Mississippi  river,  from  1539  to
1543,  and  the  successful  return  of  the  expedition
was  largely  due  to  him,  who  was  their  guide  in  de-
scending the  Mississippi.

ANAYA,  Pedro  Maria  (ah-nay'-ya),  Mexican
soldier.  He  took  part  in  the  operations  against  the
American  arjny  of  occupation,  and  was  twice  presi-
dent of  Mexico  ad  interim :  while  President  Santa
Anna  was  absent  from  the  capital  (2  April  to  20
May,  1847),  and  then  in  the  absence  of  President
Pei^a  y  Pena  (26  Sept.,  1847,  to  8  Jan.,  1848).

ANCHIETA,  Jose  de  (an-chee-ay'-ta),  Portu-
guese missionary,  b.  at  Laguna,  in  Teneriffe,  Gar


ANDAGOYA


ANDERSON


nary  islands,  in  1533 ;  d.  in  Brazil,  9  June,  1597.
He  was  a  relative  of  Loyola's.  In  1553  he  went
from  Coirabra,  where  he  had  been  stationed,  as  a
missionary  to  Brazil,  where  he  founded  a  college
for  the  conversion  of  natives,  and  was  appointed
governor  of  the  converted  Indians.  His  life  was
passed  in  danger,  privation,  and  arduous  labor.
He  was  believed  by  both  whites  and  Indians  to
have  the  power  of  working  miracles,  and  was  com-
monly called  the  "  Apostle  of  Brazil."  The  acad-
emy of  sciences  at  Madrid  has  published  a  treatise
by  him  on  "  The  Natural  Productions  of  Brazil."
See  "  Vida  do  Padre  Joseph  de  Anchieta,"  by  Vas-
concellos,  and  an  earlier  biography  by  Rodriguez.

ANDAGOYA,  Pasciial  de,  Spanish  traveller,  b.
in  the  province  of  Alava,  Spain  ;  d.  in  Cuzco,  Peru,
18  June,  1548.  In  1514,  when  very  young,  he  went
out  to  Darien  with  the  governor,  Pedro  Arias.
He  was  made  inspector-general  of  the  Indians  on
the  isthmus  in  1532,  and  in  the  same  year,  hear-
ing of  a  province  farther  south  called  Biru  (Peru),
set  out  on  an  expedition  thither.  Several  chiefs  of
the  country  made  their  submission  to  him,  and
told  him  of  the  great  empire  of  the  Incas ;  but
when  he  attempted  to  make  further  discoveries,  a
severe  illness  forced  him  to  return  to  Panama,
where  he  reported  the  information  he  had  gained.
The  governor  then  handed  over  the  enterprise  to
three  partners,  one  of  whom  was  Francisco  Pizarro,
afterward  conqueror  of  Peru.  Andagoya  now
lived  at  Panama  till  1529,  when  he  was  banished
by  the  governor  to  Santo  Domingo,  but  returned
in  a  few  years  as  lieutenant  to  the  new  governor,
Barrionuevo.  He  acted  as  agent  to  Pizarro  and
the  other  conquerors  of  Peru  until  1530,  when  he
was  sent  back  to  Spain.  In  1540  he  became  gover-
nor of  the  country  around  the  San  Juan  river,  and
founded  the  town  of  Buenaventura;  but,  owing  to
a  dispute  with  a  neighboring  governor,  he  went
back  to  Spain,  where  he  spent  five  years,  returning
to  Peru  to  die.  Oviedo,  who  knew  him  well,
speaks  of  him  as  noble  minded  and  virtuous,  and
says  his  treatment  of  the  Indians  was  humane.  He
wrote  an  interesting  narrative,  which  remained
long' in  manuscript,  but  was  finally  published  by
Navarrete.  An  English  translation  by  Clements
R.  Markham  has  been  published  by  the  Hakluyt
society  (London,  1865).

ANDERS,  John  Daniel,  Moravian  bishop,  b.
in  Germany,  9  Aug.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Herrnhut,  Saxo-
ny, 6  Nov.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Mo-
ravian college  and  the  theological  seminary  at
Herrnhut,  became  a  professor  in  the  latter,  and
subsequently  took  charge  of  the  Moravian  church
in  Berlin.  There  his  learning  and  eloquence  at-
tracted no  little  attention  among  the  professors
of  the  university  and  others.  The  celebrated  Dr.
Neander  was  his  intimate  friend.  In  1827  Anders
was  appointed  to  preside  over  the  northern  district
of  the  American  Moravian  church,  and  accordingly
received  consecration  as  a  bishop  on  16  Sept.  of
that  year,  at  Herrnhut.  He  filled  this  office  until
1836,  when  he  attended  a  general  synod  of  the
Moravian  church  convened  in  Germany,  and  that
body  elected  him  to  the  supreme  executive  board  of
the  Unitas  Fratrum.  For  this  reason  he  did  not
return  to  the  United  States.

ANDERSON,  Alexander,  wood  engraver,  b.  in
New  York  city,  21  April,  1775;  d.  in  Jersey  City,
N.  J.,  17  Jan.,  1870.  At  the  age  of  twelve  years  he
made  his  first  attempts  at  engraving  on  copper,  fre-
quently using  pennies  rolled  out,  and  on  type-metal
plates.  He  received  no  instruction,  and  his  knowl-
edge was  acquired  by  watching  jewellers  and  other
workmen. Some  of  his  earliest  efforts  were  copies  of


anatomical  figures  in  medical  works.  In  deference
to  his  father's  wishes,  he  studied  in  the  medical  de-
partment of  Columbia  college,  and  was  gi-aduated
in  1 796 ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  continued  his  in-
terest in  engraving
and  produced  the
illustrations  for  a
little  book  entitled
"  Looking  Glass  for
the  Mind."  Short-
ly afterward,  on  be-
ing informed  that
it  was  possible  to
engrave  on  wood,
he  obtained  blocks
of  box -wood,  de-
signed his  own
tools,  and  produced
the  first  wood  en-
gravings ever  made
in  the  United
States.  About  1798
he  abandoned  the
practice  of  medi-
cine,  and devoted

his  attention  thenceforth  exclusively  to  engraving.
At  first  he  used  both  wood  and  metal  as  occasion
required,  but  from  about  1820  his  illustrations  were
usually  cut  in  wood,  and  for  some  time  he  was  the
only  artist  in  that  line  in  New  York.  His  best-
known  productions  include  the  illustrations  in
Webster's  "  Elementary  Spelling-Book,"  a  series  of
forty  plates  for  Shakespeare's  plays,  and  engravings
of  Bewick's  "  Birds,"  and  of  Sir  Charles  Bell's
"  Anatomy."  For  many  years  he  was  employed  by
the  American  tract  society  and  engraved  the  illus-
trations for  their  publications.  A  memorial  address
on  this  pioneer  engraver,  by  Benson  J.  Lossing,
was  published  by  the  New  York  Historical  Society,
with  38  illustrations,  many  of  them  engraved  by
Anderson  himself.

ANDERSON,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  in  Jef-
ferson CO.,  Tenn.,  10  Nov.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Knoxville,
Tenn.,  23  May,  1869.  He  was  elected  by  the  demo-
crats U.  S.  senator  from  Tennessee  in  1840,  and
was  afterward  a  legislator  and  judge  in  California,
and  framed  the  state  constitution.

ANDERSON,  Oalusha,  educator,  b.  in  Bergen,
N.  Y.,  7  March,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Ro-
chester university  in  1854,  and  at  the  theological
seminary  in  Rochester  in  1856.  He  became  distin-
guished as  a  preacher  of  the  Baptist  denomination,
and  was  called  in  1866  from  his  church  in  St.
Louis  to  the  professorship  of  homiletics,  church
polity,  and  pastoral  duties,  in  Newton  theological
institute.  From  1873  to  1878  he  preached  in  Brook-
lyn, and  then  in  Chicago,  and  in  the  latter  year  was
chosen  president  of  Chicago  university,  in  which
post  he  c(»ntinued  till  September,  1885.

ANDERSON,  George  Burg-win,  soldier,  b.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  12  April,  1831 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,
N.  C,  16  Oct.,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1852,  and  was  appointed  to  the  2d  dra-
goons, promoted  to  be  1st  lieutenant  in  1855,  and
in  1858  appointed  adjutant  of  his  regiment.  He
resigned  in  April,  1861,  and  entered  the  confed-
erate army,  where  he  was  soon  appointed  brigadier-
general  and  given  direction  of  coast  defences  in
North  Carolina.  At  the  battle  of  Antietam,  where
he  commanded  a, brigade,  he  received  a  wound  in
the  foot,  which  eventually  proved  fatal.

ANDERSON,  Henry  James,  educator,  b,  in
New  York,  6  Feb.,  1799;  d.  in  Lahore,  northern
Hindostan,  19  Oct.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at
Columbia  college with highest honors in 1818,


ANDERSON


andp:rson


69


studied  medicine,  and  received  in  1823  his  degree
from  the  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  He
devoted  his  leisure  time  to  mathematiail  investi-
gations, and  in  1825  was  appointed  professor  of
mathematics  and  astronomy  in  Columbia  college.
After  twenty-five  years  of  successful  teaching  lie
resigned  his  professorship  to  go  abroad  in  hopes  of
restoring  the  health  of  his  wife,  but  to  no  avail.
While  in  B'rance  he  became  intimately  acquainted
with  the  astronomer  Arago,  and  about  the  same
time  he  became  a  convert  to  the  Catholic  faith.
He  spent  many  years  in  wandering  over  Europe,
Asia,  and  Africa,  and  during  a  visit  to  the  Holy
Land  he  acted  as  geologist  to  the  Dead  sea  expe-
dition under  command  of  Lieut.  Lynch.  The  re-
sults were  collected  and  published  by  the  U.
S.  government  in  1848,  with  the  titles  of  "Ge-
ology of  Lieutenant  Lynch's  Expedition  to  the
Dead  Sea,"  and  "Geological  Reconnoissance  of
Part  of  the  Holy  Land."  In  1851  he  was  elected
a  trustee  of  Columbia  college,  and  in  1866  emeritus
professor  of  mathematics  and  astronomy.  In  1874
he  was  one  of  the  band  of  pilgrims  that  left  the
United  States  on  a  visit  to  Lourdes,  France,  and
was  received  by  Pius  IX.  with  special  marks  of
favor.  He  then  joined  as  a  volunteer  the  Ameri-
can scientific  expedition  sent  out  to  observe  the
transit  of  Venus,  and  proceeded  to  Australia,  hav-
ing procured  the  necessary  instruments  at  his  own
expense.  On  his  return,  he  visited  India,  and,
while  exploring  the  Himalayas,  he  was  stricken
with  the  disease  that  caused"  his  death.  He  was
active  in  advancing  the  interests  of  the  Catholic
church  in  New  York,  for  many  years  was  president
of  the  society  of  St.  Vincent  de  Paul,  was  promi-
nent in  the  originating  of  the  Catholic  union  of
New  York,  and  was  also  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Catholic  Protectory  in  Westchester,  N.  Y.

ANDERSON,  H.  T.,  clergyman,  b.  in  1811 :  d.
19  Aug.,  1872.  He  was  a  minister  of  the  denomina-
tion known  as  Campbellites  or  Disciples,  and  was
the  author  of  an  interlinear  translation  of  the  New
Testament,  and  during  the  last  five  years  of  his
life  was  engaged  in  its  revision,  taking  for  his  basis
the  text  of  Tischendorf.  This  work  was  nearly
completed  at  his  death.

ANDERSON,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rock-
bridge CO.,  Va.,  26  March,  1780 ;  d.  in  Rockford,
Tenn.,  28  Jan.,  1857.  He  studied  at  liberty  hall
academy  (afterward  Washington  college),  and  then
fitted  himself  for  a  preacher.  After  his  family
had  removed  to  Union,  Tenn.,  he  was  licensed  to
preach  in  1802,  and  was  the  Presbyterian  pastor  in
that  place  for  nine  years,  and  subsequently  in
Maryville,  where  the  southwestern  theological
seminary  was  established  through  his  efforts.

ANDiERSON,  James  Patton,  soldier,  b.  in  Ten-
nessee about  1820;  d.  in  Memphis  in  1873.  He
served  in  Mexico,  commanding  Mississippi  volun-
teers, with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  He  after-
ward settled  at  Olympia,  Washington  territory,  and
sat  in  the  house  of  representatives  as  a  delegate
from  that  territory  in  1855-57.  He  held  the  rank
of  brigadier-general  in  the  confederate  army,  dis-
tinguished himself  at  Shiloh  and  Stone  river,  and
was  promoted  to  major-general  17  Feb.,  1864,  was
assigned  to  the  command  of  the  district  of  Florida,
and  subsequently  commanded  a  division  in  Polk's
corps.  Army  of  the  Tennessee.

ANDERSON,  John  Henry,  juggler,  b.  in  Aber-
deenshire, Scotland,  about  1810.  He  appeared  on
the  stage  with  a  travelling  dramatic  company  in
1830,  and  was  known  as  a  conjurer  in  Scotland  be-
fore he  came  to  America  in  1851.  In  New  York
he  appeared  in  drama  at  the  Broadway  theatre  and


at  Castle  Garden,  and  then  opened  an  exhibition
of  sleigh t-of-hand  at  Tripier  Hall,  taking  the  pro-
fessional name  of  "  Prof.  Anderson,  the  Wizard  of
the  North."  He  attained  a  high  reputation  as  a
magician,  and  travelled  extensively  in  the  United
States  and  in  other  countries.

ANDERSON,  John  Jacob,  educator,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1821.  He  was  the  master  of  a  large
public  school  in  New  York  for  twenty  years,  and
is  the  author  of  several  text -books  of  history.
These  include  "Introductory  School  History  of
the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1865) ;  "  Pictorial
School  History  of  the  United  States"  (1863);
"Common  School  History  of  the  United  States";
"  Grammar  School  History  of  the  United  States  " ;
" A  Manual  of  General  History " ;  "A  School  His-
tory of  England  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Historical  Reader  "
(1871);  "The  United  States  Reader"  (1872);  "A
New  Manual  of  General  History"  (1869);  "A  Pic-
torial School  History "  ;  "  A  School  History  of
France";  "The  Historical  Reader";  and  "A
School  History  of  Greece."

ANDERSON,  Joseph,  statesman,  b.  near  Phila-
delphia, 5  Nov.,  1757 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  17
April,  1837.  He  studied  law,  and  at  the  beginning
of  the  revolution  was  appointed  an  ensign  in  the
New  Jersey  line.  At  the  battle  of  Monmouth  he
served  as  a  captain.  He  was  with  Sullivan  in
the  expedition  against  the  Iroquois,  and  was  pres-
ent at  Valley  Forge  and  at  the  siege  of  Yorktewn,
retiring  after  the  war  with  the  brevet  rank  of
major.  He  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Delaware.
Washington  appointed  him  in  1791  territorial  judge
of  the  region  south  of  the  Ohio  river,  and  he  took
part  in  drawing  up  the  constitution  of  Tennessee.
He  was  U.  S.  senator  from  that  state  from  1797  to
1815,  serving  on  important  committees  and  twice
acting  as  president  joro  tempore.  He  was  first  comp-
troller of  the  treasury  from  1815  till  1836.

ANDERSON,  Martin  Brewer,  educator,  b.  in
Brunswick,  Me.,  12  Feb.,  1815 ;  d.  at  Lake  Helen,
Fla.,  26  Feb.,  1890.
He was graduated  -  — ^

at  Waterville  college
in  1840,  and  then
studied  for  a  year  at
Newton,  Mass.  In
the  following  year
he  was  appointed  tu-
tor of  Latin,  Greek,
and  mathematics  at
Waterville,  and  sub-
sequently professor
of  rhetoric.  He  also
organized  and  taught
the  course  in  modern
history.  In  1850  he
resigned  his  profess-
orship and  became
proprietor  and  editor
of  the "  New York

Recorder,"  a  weekly  Baptist  journal.  In  1853  he
accepted  the  presidency  of  the  university  of  Roch-
ester, which  office  he  occupied  until  1889,  teach-
ing the  departments  of  psychology  and  political
economy.  He  travelled  in  Europe  in  1862-'63.
He  published  numerous  literary  and  philosophical
articles.  He  was  a  powerful  public  speaker,  and
during  the  civil  war  rendered  notable  service  in
arousing  and  sustaining  the  sentiment  of  loyalty
to  the  government  and  the  determination  to  carry
the  struggle  through  to  a  successful  close.  He
was  a  member  of  the  New  York  state  board  of
charities  for  thirteen  years,  also  one  of  the  com-
missioners of  the  state  reservation  at  Niagara  Falls.


^i^-A^  yh^oU<^^<ni_


70


ANDERSON


ANDERSON


ANDERSON,  Mary,  actress,  b.  in  Sacramento,

Cal.,  28  July,  1859.  She  was  brought  to  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  when  an  infant,  and  was  left  fatherless
at  three  years  of  age. She  was  educated  in  the

Ursuline  convent
_ ^  of  that  city,  and,

when  thirteen
years  old,  resolved
to  enter  the  dra-
matic profession.
She  received  a
training  in  music,
dancing,  and  lit-
erature to  that
end,  and,  after
taking  a  course
of  dramatic  les-
sons in  New  York,
on  the  advice  of
Charlotte  Cush-
man,  and  pursu-
ing elocutionary
studies  at  home
for  a  year  longer,
she  appeared  as
Juliet  at  Macau-
ley's  theatre,  in
Louisville,  27
Nov.,  1875,  and
subsequently  in  other  parts.  She  played  then  in
St.  Louis,  and  next  in  New  Orleans,  where  she  was
received  with  enthusiasm.  She  became  a  favorite
actress  in  the  principal  cities  of  the  United  States,
playing  Lady  Macbeth,  Parthenia  in  "  Ingomar,"
Pauline  in  "  The  Lady  of  Lyons,"  Galatea,  and
other  characters.  She  played  in  1883  and  the  fol-
lowing seasons  in  England,  where  she  was  greatly
admired  for  her  beauty  and  refined  acting.  See
"  The  Stage  Life  of  Mary  Anderson,"  by  William
Winter  (New  York,  1886). She  married  in  1890.

ANDERSON,  Ophelia  Brown,  actress,  b.  in
Boston,  24  July,  1813 ;  d.  in  Jamaica  Plain,  Mass.,
27  Jan.,  1852.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Mrs.  Pel-
by,  an  actress,  and  appeared  on  the  stage  in  Boston,
whert  two  years  old,  as  Cora's  child  in  "  Pizarro."
She  became  a  favorite  with  the  American  public,
and  was  the  chief  attraction  in  the  Tremont  and
National  theatres,  of  which  successively  her  father
was  the  manager.  Her  father,  William  Pelby,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  16  March,  1793  ;  d.  28  May,
1850,  managed  the  Tremont,  built  the  Warren
theatre,  and  appeared  in  London  as  Hamlet  and
Brutus  in  Payne's  play.

ANDERSON,  Rasmus  Bjorn,  author,  b.  in  Al-
bion, Wis.,  12  Jan.,  1846.  His  parents  were  Nor-
wegians, and  he  was  educated  at  the  Norwegian
Lutheran  college,  at  Decorah,  Iowa.  He  was  profes-
sor of  Scandinavian  languages  in  the  university  of
Wisconsin  from  1875  to  1884. In  1885  he  was  ap-

f)ointed  U.  S.  minister  to  Denmark.  He  has  pub-
ished  "  Julegrave  "  (1872) :  "  Den  Norske  Maalsag  "
(1874) ;  "  America  not  Discovered  by  Christopher
Columbus"  (Chicago,  1874);  "Norse  Mythology"
(1875);  "Viking  Tales  of  the  North"  (1877):
♦*  The  Younger  Edda  "  (1880) ;  and  a  translation  of
Dr.  F.  W.  Horn's  "  History  of  the  Literature  of  the
Scandinavian  North"  (1885^.

ANDERSON,  Richard  Cloiigh,  soldier,  b.  in
Hanover  co.,  Va.,  12  Jan.,  1750;  d.  near  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  16  Oct.,  1826.  As  captain  in  the  5th
Virginia  continentals,  he  led  the  advance  of  the
Americans  at  the  battle  of  Trenton  (24  Dec,  1776),
crossing  the  Delaware  river  in  the  first  boat,  and
driving  ni  the  Hessian  outposts  several  hours  be-
fore the  main  attack  was  delivered. He  was  at


the  battles  of  Brandywine  and  Germantown,  and
was  a  daring  leader  wherever  dash  and  resolution
were  needed.  He  was  at  the  death-bed  of  Pulaski,
and  the  dying  Pole  gave  him  his  sword  as  a  me-
mento. After  the  war  he  removed  to  the  wilder-
ness of  Kentucky,  near  Louisville,  and  led  the  life
of  a  pioneer  and  Indian  fighter  until  advancing
civilization  pushed  the  frontier  so  far  westward
that  he  was  too  old  to  follow.  Before  the  close  of
the  last  century  he  superintended  the  building  of
a  two-masted  vessel,  which  he  sent  to  London
laden  with  Kentucky  produce.  See  biographical
sketch  by  E.  L,  Anderson  (New  York,  1879). — His
son,  Richard  Cloiig-h,  Jr.,  lawver  (b.  in  Louisville,
Ky.,  4  Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Tubaco,  24  July,  1826),
was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  college  in
1804,  and  studied  law  with  Judge  Tucker.  He
practised  with  success  at  the  Kentucky  bar,  and,
after  sitting  in  the  legislature,  was  elected  to  con-
gress in  1817  and  again  the  following  term.  In
1822  he  was  again  returned  to  the  legislature,  and
was  chosen  speaker.  He  was  appointed  minister
to  Colombia  in  1823  and  in  1826,  when,  proceeding
to  the  Panama  congress  as  envoy  extraordinary,  he
died  on  the  journey.

ANDERSON,  Richard  Herron,  soldier,  b.  near
Statesburgh,  S.  C,  7  Oct.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Beaufort,  26
June,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1842,  assigned  to  the  2d  dragoons,  and
served  on  frontier  duty  until  1845,  when  he  joined
the  expedition  for  the  military  occupation  of  Texas.
In  the  war  with  Mexico  he  took  part  in  the  siege
of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  various  operations  preceding
and  including  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico,
12-14  Sept.,  1847.  Pie  became  first  lieutenant  of
the  2d  dragoons  13  July,  1848,  and  captain  3
March,  1855,  served  frequently  at  the  cavalry
school  for  practice  at  Carlisle  barracks,  and  was  on
duty  in  Kansas  during  the  border  troubles  of  1856-
'57.  He  was  on  duty  at  Fort  Kearney,  Nebraska,
from  1859  to  1861,  when  he  resigned,"^3  March,  to
accept  a  brigadier's  commission  from  the  confeder-
ate government.  He  was  promoted  to  major-gen-
eral in  August,  1862,  and  given  the  command  of
the  5th  division  of  Bragg's  army  in  Tennessee,  but
was  soon  ordered  to  the  army  of  Virginia,  and  was
wounded  at  Antietam.  He  commanded  a  division
at  Gettysburg  1-3  July.  1863,  and  was  promoted  to
lieutenant-general  in  May,  1864.  It  was  his  unex-
pected night  march  (because  he  could  not  find  a
suitable  place  to  encamp)  that  took  the  van  of
Lee's  army  to  the  defences  of  Spottsylvania  before
Grant  could  reach  that  place,  and  thus  prolonged  a
campaign  that  might  otherwise  have  ended  there
with  a  decisive  battle.  Gen.  Anderson  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  defence  of  Petersburg,  and
in  the  closing  engagements  that  preceded  the  sur-
render, commanded  the  4th  corps  of  the  confeder-
ate army  under  Lee.  After  the  war  he  remained
in  private  life.

ANDERSON,  Rohert,  soldier,  b.  at  "  Soldier's
Retreat,"  near  Louisville,  Ky.,  14  June,  1805 ;  d.  in
Nice,  France,  27  Oct.,  1871.  He  graduated  at
West  Point  in  1825,  and  was  appointed  second
lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery.  He  served  in  the
Black  Hawk  war  of  1832  as  colonel  of  the  Illinois
volunteers.  In  1835-37  he  was  instructor  of  artil-
lery at  West  Point,  and  in  1837-'38  he  served  in
the  Florida  war,  and  was  brevetted  captain.  Sub-
sequently he  was  attached  to  the  staff  of  Gen.
Scott  as  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  was  pro-
moted to  captain  in  1841.  He  served  in  the  Mexi-
can war,  and  was  severely  wounded  at  Molino  del
Rey.  In  1857  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  1st
artillery,  and  on  20  Nov.,  1860,  he  assumed  com-


ANDERSON


ANDRE


71


Olji'ifC-'{2iL


^CUi/cu^


raand  of  the  troops  in  Charleston  harbor,  with
headquarters  at  Fort  Moultrie.  Owing  to  threat-
ened assaults,  he
withdrew  his  com-
mand, on  the  night
of  26  Dec,  to  Fort
Sumter,  where  he
was  soon  closely  in-
vested by the confed-
erate forces.  On  13
April,  1861,  he  evac-
uated the  fort,  after
a  bombardment  of
nearly  thirty  -  six
hours  from  batteries
to  which  he  replied
as  long  as  his  guns
could  be  worked.
He  marched  out,
with  his  seventy
men,  with  the  hon-
ors of  war,  on  the
14th,  saluting  his  flag  as  it  was  hauled  down,  and
sailed  for  New  York  on  the  following  day.  In
recognition  of  this  service  he  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general in  the  U.  S.  army  by  President  Lin-
coln, and  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  de-
partment of  Kentucky,  and  subsequently  to  that
of  the  Cumberland.  In  consequence  of  failing
health,  he  was  relieved  from  duty  in  October,  1861.
He  was  retired  from  active  service  27  Oct.,  1863,
and  on  3  Feb.,  1865.  he  was  brevetted  major-gen-
eral. He  sailed  for  Europe  in  1869  for  his  health,
but  died  there.  He  translated  and  adapted  from
the  French  "  Instructions  for  Field  Artillery,
Horse  and  Foot "  (1840),  and  "  Evolutions  of  Field
Batteries"  (1860),  both  of  which  have  been  used  by
the  war  department.  It  was  largely  owing  to  his
personal  efforts  that  the  initial  steps  were  taken
organizing  the  Soldiers'  Home  in  Washington,
which  now  harbors  about  2,000  veterans  of  the
regular  army. — His  brother,  Larz,  capitalist,  b.
near  Louisville,  Ky.,  9  April,  1803;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  27  Feb.,  1878,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1822.  He  was  a  son-in-law  of  Nicholas  ..
Longworth,  of  Cincinnati,  in  which  city  he  resided
and  was  respected  for  his  profuse  charities  and
public  spirit.

ANDERSON,  Robert  Honstoun,  soldier,  b.  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  1  Oct..  1835;  d.  there,  8  Feb.,  1888.
He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1857,  and  served
in  the  9th  infantry  at  Fort  Columbus,  New  York
harbor,  and  at  Fort  Walla- walla,  Washington  ter-
ritory, until  1861,  when  he  obtained  a  leave  of
absence,  but  subsequently  resigned  (3  May,  1861),
entered  the  confederate  service  as  major,  and  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  1864.  In  1867
he  became  chief  of  police  in  Savannah,  Ga.

ANDERSON,  Rufiis,  author,  b.  in  North  Yar-
mouth, Me.,  17  Aug.,  1796 ;  d.  30  May,  1880.  He
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  college  in  1818,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1822,  and  was
ordained  as  a  minister  in  1826.  From  1824  to
1832  he  was  assistant  secretary  of  the  American
board  of  foreign  missions,  and  in  1832  he  became
secretary,  in  which  office  he  remained  until  1866,
receiving  on  that  occasion  a  testimonial  of  $20,000
from  New  York  and  Boston  merchants,  most  of
which  he  turned  over  to  the  board.  From  1867  to
1869  he  leetxired  on  foreign  missions  at  Andover
seminary.  He  visited  the  Mediterranean  missions
in  1843,  the  Indian  missions  in  1854,  and  those  in
the  Sandwich  islands  in  1863.  He  published
"  Foreign  Missions,  their  Relations  and  Claims  " ;
"  Memoir  of  Catharine  Brown  "  (1825) ;  "  Observa-


tions upon  the  Peloponnesus  and  Greek  Islands  "
(Boston,  1830) ;  "  The  Hawaiian  Islands,  their  Prog-
ress and  Condition  under  Missionary  Labors"
(1864) ;  "  A  Heathen  Nation  Civilized,"  containing
a  history  of  the  Sandwich  island  mission  (1870);
and  "  History  of  the  Missions  of  the  American
Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions  to
the  Oriental  Churches  "  (1872).

ANDERSON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Chester
CO.,  Pa.,  in  1763 ;  d.  there  14  Dec,  1829.  He  fought
through  the  revolutionary  war,  served  at  the  bat-
tle of  Brandywine  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Lafayette
as  colonel,  and  was  present  at  Valley  Forge, 'Ger-
mantown,  and  Yorktown.  He  was  a  Jeffersonian
democrat  and  held  many  public  offices.  From
1809  to  1815  he  sat  in  congress,  and  again  in  1817-
'19.  He  was  subsequently  county  court  judge  in
Delaware  co.,  and  after  that  a  collector  of  customs.
His  daughter  Evelina,  who  became  the  wife  of  Com-
modore Porter,  was  author  of  the  popular  song
"  Thou  hast  wounded  the  Spirit  that  loved  Thee."

ANDRADA  E  SYLVA,  Bonifacio  Joz6  d'
(an-drah'-da),  Brazilian  statesman,  b.  in  Santos,  13
June,  1765;  d.  near  Rio  de  Janeiro,  6  April,  1838.
Under  the  patronage  of  the  Lisbon  royal  academy
he  travelled  in  Europe,  studying  in  Paris  under
Lavoisier,  at  the  mining  school  of  Frieberg  under
Werner,  and  at  Pavia  under  Volta.  In  1800  he
became  professor  of  metallurgy  and  geognosy  at
Coimbra,  and  soon  afterward  general  intendant  of
the  Portuguese  mines.  He  took  an  active  part  in
the  construction  of  canals  and  public  works,  and
in  1812  was  named  perpetual  secretary  of  the  Lis-
bon academy  of  sciences.  He  returned  to  Brazil  in
1819,  and  became  one  of  the  champions  of  national
independence.  As  vice-president  of  the  provincial
junta  (24  Dec,  1821)  he  urged  Dom  Pedro  I.  to
remain  in  Brazil,  became  his  minister  of  the  in-
terior (16  Jan.,  1822),  was  removed  from  his  office
25  Oct.,  but  reinstated  30  Oct.,  at  the  request  of
the  people,  and  was  finally  displaced  17  July,  1823,
on  account  of  his  liberalism.  In  the  constituent
assembly  his  opposition  became  so  bitter  that  after
its  dissolution  (12  Nov.,  1823)  he  was  banished  to
France,  and  lived  in  Bordeaux  till  1829,  when  he
returned  to  Brazil.  Dom  Pedro  I.,  abdicating  7
April,  1831,  in  favor  of  Dom  Pedro  II.,  selected
Andrada  as  the  latter's  guardian  and  tutor.  In
1833  he  was  tried  on  a  charge  of  intriguing  for  the
restoration  of  Dom  Pedro  I.,  was  acquitted,  but
was  deprived  of  his  place  and  restrained  of  his
liberty.  He  wrote  on  mineralogy,  and  published
"  Poesias  d'America  Elysea "  (Bordeaux,  1825).
His  brothers,  Antonio  Carlo  and  Martim  Francisco
d'Andrada,  were  prominent  in  Brazilian  politics
and  shared  his  fate.  The  latter,  b.  in  Santos  in
1776,  d.  there  23  Feb.,  1844,  left  two  sons:  Joze
Bonifacio,  author  of  "  Rosas  e  goivos  "  (Sao  Paulo,
1849);  and  Martim  Francisco,  author  of  "Lagri-
mas  e  sorrisos "  (Rio,  1847),  and  of  the  drama
"  Januariq,  Garcia  "  (1849).

ANDRE,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  London  in
1751,  of  Swiss  parents ;  d.  at  Tappan,  N.  Y.,  2  Oct.,
1780.  In  the  autumn  of  1775  he  was  taken  prisoner
at  St.  John's  by  Gen.  Montgomery.  He  afterward
served  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Gray,  and  then  on  that
of  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  who,  in  1779,  made  him  ad-
jutant-general of  the  British  army  in  America.
Under  the  name  of  "  John  Anderson "  he  con-
ducted the  treacherous  negotiations  with  Benedict
Arnold  for  the  surrender  of  West  Point.  On  the
night  of  21  Sept.,  1780,  he  had  an  interview  with
Arnold  in  the  woods  near  Stony  Point,  and  took
breakfast  with  him  in  the  house  of  Joshua  Smith,
who  was  not  privy  to  the  plot. On  leaving  him.


72


ANDREE


*^<^^2^-^


Arnold  gave  him  six  papers  containing  full  infor-
mation as  to  the  state  of  the  defences  at  West
Point,  and  also  passes  enabling  him  to  return  either
by  land  or  by  water  to  New  York.  Smith  per-
suaded him  to  take  the  journey  by  land,  and  ac-
companied him
part  of  the  way.
Contrary  to  Clin-
ton's positive  in-
structions, Andre
adopted  a  disguise,
and,  contrary  to
Arnold's  positive
instructions,Smith
left  him  before  he
had  reached  the
British  lines.  Soon
after  Smith  left
him  he  was  stopped
by  three  young
men  whom  he  sup-
posed to  be  tories,
and  incautiously
let  them  know  that
he  was  a  British
officer.  The  young
men,  who  were  pa-
triotic Americans,  searched  his  person,  and,  finding
the  treasonable  documents  in  his  stockings,  ar-
rested him.  He  was  tried  by  a  board  of  six  major-
generals  and  eight  brigadiers,  found  guilty  of  act-
ing as  a  spy,  and  condemned  to  the  gallows.  His
remains  were  buried  on  the  spot  where  he  suffered,
but  in  1821  they  were  taken  to  England  and  in-
terred in  Westminster  Abbey.  His  hard  fate  has
been  nuieh  commiserated  on  account  of  his  enga-
ging personal  qualities,  but  the  justice  of  his  sen-
tence is  generally  conceded  by  British  writers  as
well  as  American.  Each  of  Andre's  captors — John
Paulding,  David  Williams,  and  Isaac  Van  Wart —
received  from  congress  a  silver  medal  and  an
annuity  of  $200.  His  life  has  been  written  by
Sparks,  in  his  "  American  Biographies,"  and  much
more  fully  by  Winthrop  Sargent,  "  Life  and  Career
of  Major  John  Andre  "  (Boston,  18G1).

ANDREE,  Karl  Theodor,  German  geogra-
pher, b.  in  Brunswick,  20  Oct.,  1808.  After  study-
ing at  Jena,  Gottingen,  and  Berlin,  he  became  a
journalist  and  published,  in  1850-51,  at  Brunswick,
a  work  entitled  "  Nordamerika  in  geographischen
und  geschichtlichen  Umrissen."  Among  his  other
works  are  "  Buenos  Ayres  imd  die  argentinische
Republik  "  (Leipsic,  1856) ;  "  Geographische  Wan-
derungen  "  (Dresden,  1859) ;  and  "  Geographic  des
Welthandels  "  (Stuttgart,  1863).  In  1861  he  began
the  publication  of  the  geographical  magazine
"  Globus."  During  the  American  civil  war  he  ad-
vocated the  cause  of  the  secessionists.

ANDREW,  James  Osgood,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Wilkes  CO.,  near  Washington,  Ga.,  3  May,  1794;
d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  1  March,  1871.  He  was  the  son
of  a  Methodist  minister  who  was  a  partisan  ranger
in  the  revolution.  He  entered  the  South  Carolina
conference  in  1812,  was  ordained  deacon  in  1814,
received  full  ordination  in  1816,  preached  on  cir-
cuits in  Georgia  and  North  Carolina,  was  stationed
at  Savannah,  Charleston,  Greensborough,  and
Athens,  was  presiding  elder  for  several  years,  and
in  1832  was  chosen  bishop  by  the  general  confer-
ence that  met  at  Philadelphia.  After  Emory  col-
lege was  established  in  1841,  he  resided  at  Oxford,
Ga.  In  1844  he  married  for  his  second  wife  Mrs.
Leonora  Greenwood,  of  Greensborough,  who  pos-
sessed a  few  slaves,  and  after  marriage  he  conveyed
to  his  wife  all  the  rights  in  her  property  that  the


ANDREW


law  gave  him.  He  was  himself  the  legal  owner  of
a  negro  woman,  who  had  been  left  in  his  charge
by  a  deceased  parishioner,  with  the  request  that  she
might  be  sent  to  Liberia  or  remain  with  him,  at  her
option,  and  also  of  a  boy  who  had  been  bequeathed
to  his  former  wife.  At  the  general  conference,  held
in  New  York  in  1844,  the  fact  that  Bishop  Andrew
was  a  slave-holder  was  the  subject  of  a  heated  dis-
cussion, ending  with  the  adoption  of  a  resolution,
by  a  vote  of  111  to  69,  requesting  him  to  desist
from  performing  the  offices  of  bishop  so  long  as  he
remained  a  slave-owner.  When  he  became  aware
of  the  excitement  caused  by  the  fact  that  one  of
the  bishops  of  the  church  was  interested  in  slave
property,  he  decided  to  resign  his  episcopal  office,
but  was  deterred  by  a  formal  request  from  the
southern  delegates  to  the  conference.  The  repre-
sentatives of  thirteen  southern  conferences  pro-
tested against  this  action  and  repudiated  the  juris-
diction of  the  general  convention,  and  in  May,
1846,  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  south,  was
organized  as  an  independent  body,  in  a  general
conference  held  at  Petersburg,  Va.  Bishop  An-
drew presided  as  senior  bishop  over  this  organiza-
tion until  his  death.  After  a  visit  to  California  in
1855,  to  look  after  the  interests  of  the  struggling
southern  Methodist  church  there,  he  took  up  his
residence  in  Summerfield,  Ala.  The  New  Orleans
conference  of  1866  granted  him  a  retired  relation  at
his  own  request.  He  published  a  volume  of  "  Mis-
cellanies "  and  a  work  on  "  Family  Government."

ANDREW,  John  Albion,  statesman,  b.  in
Windham,  Me.,  31  Mav,  1818 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
30  Oct.,  1867.  His  father,  descended  from  an
early  settler  of  Boxford,  Mass.,  was  a  prosperous
merchant  in  Windham.  John  Albion  was  gradu-
ated at  Bowdoin  in  1837.  He  was  a  negligent  stu-
dent, though  fond  of  reading,  and  in  his  profes-
sional life  always  felt  the  lack  of  training  in  the
habit  of  close  application.  He  immediately  en-
tered on  the  study  of  the  law  in  the  office  of  Henry
II.  Fuller,  in  Boston,  where  in  1840  he  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar.  Until  the  outbreak  of  the  war
he  practised  his  profession  in  that  city,  attaining
special  distinction  in  the  fugitive-slave  cases  of
Shadrach  Burns  and  Sims,  which  arose  under  the
fugitive-slave  law  of  1850.  He  became  interested
in  the  slavery  question  in  early  youth,  and  was  at-
tracted toward  many  of  the  reform  movements  of
the  day.  After  his  admission  to  the  bar  he  took
an  active  interest  in  politics  and  frequently  spoke
on  the  stump  on  behalf  of  the  whig  party,  of
which  he  was  an  enthusiastic  member.  From  the
year  1848  he  was  closely  identified  with  the  anti-
slavery  party  of  Massachusetts,  but  held  no  office
until  1858,  when  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the
state  legislature  from  Boston,  and  at  once  took  a
leading  position  in  that  body.  In  1860  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  Chicago  republican  convention,
and,  after  voting  for  Mr.  Seward  on  the  early  bal-
lots, announced  the  change  of  the  vote  of  part  of  the
Massachusetts  delegation  to  Mr.  Lincoln.  In  the
same  year  he  was  nominated  for  governor  by  a
popular  impulse.  Many  feared  that  the  radicalism
of  his  opinions  would  render  him  unsafe  in  action,
and  the  political  managers  regarded  him  as  an  in-
truder and  opposed  his  nomination ;  yet  he  was
elected  the  twenty-first  governor  of  Massachusetts
since  the  adoption  of  the  constitution  of  1780  by
the  largest  popular  vote  ever  cast  for  any  candidate.
Pie  was  energetic  in  placing  the  militia  of  Massa-
chusetts on  a  war  footing,  in  anticipation  of  the
impending  conflict  between  the  government  and
the  seceded  states.  He  had  announced  this  pur-
pose in  his  inaugural  address  in  1861,  and,  upon


I


ANDREW


ANDREWS


73


being  inducted  into  office,  he  sent  a  confidential
message  to  the  governors  of  Maine  and  New  Hamp-
shire, inviting  their  cooperation  in  i)reparing  the
militia  for  service  and  providing  supplies  of  war
material.  This  course  of  action  was  not  regarded
with  favor  at  the
time  by  a  majority
of  the  legislature,
although  his  oppo-
nents refrained
from  a  direct  colli-
sion. On  receiv-
ing the  president's
proclamation  of  15
April,  1861,  he  de-
spatched five  regi-
ments of  infantry,
a  battalion  of  rifle-
men, and  a  battery
of  artillery  to  the
defence  of  the  capi-
tal. Of  these,  the
Massachusetts 6th

was the first to

tread  southern  soil,
passing  through  New  York  while  the  regiments  of
that  state  were  mustering,  and  shedding  the  first
blood  of  the  war  in  the  streets  of  Baltimore,  where
it  was  assailed  by  the  mob.  Gov.  Andrew  sent  a
telegram  to  Mayor  Brown,  praying  him  to  have  the
bodies  of  the  slain  carefully  sent  forward  to  him  at
the  expense  of  the  commonwealth  of  Massachusetts.
He  was  equally  active  in  raising  the  Massachusetts
contingent  of  three  years'  volunteers,  and  was  labo-
rious in  his  efforts  to  aid  every  provision  for  the  com-
fort of  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers.  He  was  four
times  reelected  governor,  holding  that  office  till
January,  1866,  and  was  only  then  released  by  his
positive  declination  of  another  renomination,  in  or-
der to  attend  to  his  private  business,  as  the  pecuniary
sacrifice  involved  in  holding  the  office  was  more  than
he  was  able  to  sustain,  and  his  health  was  seriously
affected  by  his  arduous  labors.  In  1862  he  was
one  of  the  most  urgent  of  the  northern  governors
in  impressing  upon  the  administration  at  Washing-
ton the  necessity  of  adopting  the  emancipation  poli-
cy, and  of  accepting  the  services  of  colored  troops.
In  September,  1862,  he  took  the  most  prominent
part  in  the  meeting  of  governors  of  the  northern
states,  held  at  Altoona,  Penn.,  to  devise  ways  and
means  to  encourage  and  strengthen  the  hands  of
the  government.  The  address  of  the  governors  to
the  people  of  the  north  was  prepared  by  him.  Gov.
Andrew  interfered  on  various  occasions  to  prevent
the  federal  autiiorities  from  making  arbitrary  ar-
rests among  southern  sympathizers  in  Massachusetts
previous  to  the  suspension  of  the  habeas-corpus  act.
In  January,  1868,  he  obtained  from  the  secretary
of  war  the  first  authorization  for  raising  colored
troops,  and  the  first  colored  regiment  (54th  Massa-
chusetts infantry)  was  despatched  from  Boston  in
May  of  that  year.  Gov.  Andrew  was  particular  in
selecting  the  best  officers  for  the  black  troops  and
in  providing  them  with  the  most  complete  equip-
ment. Though  famous  as  the  war  governor  of
Massachusetts,  he  also  bestowed  proper  attention
on  the  domestic  affairs  of  the  commonwealth.  In
his  first  message  he  recommended  that  the  provi-
sion in  the  law  preventing  a  person  against  whom
a  decree  of  divorce  has  been  granted  from  marry-
ing agam,  should  be  modified ;  but  the  proposi-
tion met  with  strong  opposition  in  the  legisla-
ture, especially  from  clergymen,  and  it  was  not  till
1864  that  an  act  was  passed  conferring  power  upon
the  supreme  court  to  remove  the  penalty  resting


upon  divorced  persons.  He  also  recommended  a
reform  in  the  usury  laws,  such  as  was  finally
effected  by  an  act  passed  in  1867.  He  was  strong-
ly opposed  to  capital  punisliment,  and  recom-
mended its  repeal.  A  law  requiring  representa-
tives in  congress  to  be  residents  of  the  districts
from  which  they  are  elected  was  vetoed  by  him  on
tlie  ground  that  it  was  both  unconstitutional  and
inexpedient,  but  was  passed  over  his  veto.  Of  the
twelve  veto  messages  sent  by  Gov.  Andrew  during
his  incumbency,  only  one  other,  in  the  case  of  a
resolve  to  grant  additional  pay  to  members,  was
followed  by  the  passage  of  the  act  over  the  veto.
His  final  term  as  governor  expired  5  Jan.,  1866.  In
a  valedictory  address  to  the  legislature  he  advo-
cated a  generous  and  conciliatory  policy  toward
the  southern  states,  "  demanding  no  attitude  of
humiliation ;  infiicting  no  acts  of  humiliation."
Gov.  Andrew  was  modest  and  simple  in  his  habits
and  manner  of  life,  emotional  and  quick  in  sympa-
thy for  the  wronged  or  the  unfortunate,  exceed-
ingly joyous  and  mirthful  in  temperament,  and
companionable  with  all  classes  of  persons.  The
distinguished  ability  that  shone  out  in  his  admin-
istration as  governor  of  Massachusetts,  the  many
sterling  qualities  that  were  summed  up  in  his
character,  his  social  address,  and  the  charm  of  his
conversational  powers,  together  with  his  clear  and
forcible  style  as  an  orator,  combined  to  render  him
conspicuous  among  the  state  governors  of  the  war
period,  and  one  of  the  most  influential  persons  in
civil  life  not  connected  with  the  federal  adminis-
tration. Soon  after  the  expiration  of  his  last  term
as  governor  he  was  tendered,  but  declined,  the
presidency  of  Antioch  college,  Ohio.  He  presided
over  the  first  national  Unitarian  convention,  held
in  1865,  and  was  a  leader  of  the  conservative  wing
of  that  denomination — those  who  believed  with
Channing  and  the  early  Unitarians  in  the  super-
naturalism  of  Christ's  birth  and  mission,  as  opposed
to  Theodore  Parker  and  his  disciples.  After  retir-
ing from  public  life  Mr.  Andrew  entered  upon  a
lucrative  legal  practice.  In  January,  1867,  he  rep-
resented before  the  general  court  about  80,000  pe-
titioners for  a  license  law,  and  delivered  an  argu-
ment against  the  principle  of  total  prohibition.
His  death,  which  occurred  suddenly  from  apoplexy,
was  noticed  by  public  meetings  in  various  cities.
He  married,  25  Dec,  1848,  Miss  Eliza  Jane  Ilersey,
of  Hingham,  Mass.,  who  with  their  foiir  children
survived  him.  See  "  Memoir  of  Gov.  Andrew,  with
Personal  Reminiscences,"  by  Peleg  W.  Chandler
(Boston,  1880),  "  Discourse  on  the  Life  and  Char-
acter of  Gov.  Andrew,"  by  Rev.  E.  Nason  (Boston,
1868),  and  "  Men  of  Our  Times,"  by  Harriet  Beech-
er  Stowe.  A  life  of  Gov.  Andrew,  by  Edwin  P.
Whipple,  was  left  unfinished  at  the  time  of  Mr.
Whipple's  death  in  1886.

ANDREWS,  Annie  M.,  nurse,  b.  in  New  York
in  1835.  During  the  prevalence  of  yellow  fever  at
Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1855,  she  became  widely  known  for
her  earnest  and  devoted  labors  among  those  stricken
by  the  epidemic.  The  Howard  association  subse-
quently presented  her  with  a  gold  medal  in  ac-
knowledgment of  these  services.

ANDREWS,  Christopher  Columbus,  lawyer,
b.  in  Plillsborough,  N.  H.,  27  Oct.,  1829.  He  was
a  farmer's  son  and  attended  school  during  the
winter  until  1843,  when  he  went  to  Boston.  Later
he  attended  the  Francestown  academy,  studied  law
in  1848  at  Cambridge,  and  in  1850  wjis  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  followed  his  profession  in  Newton,
and  was  also  a  member  of  the  school  board  during
1851-52.  In  1853  he  settled  in  Boston,  but  in  the
following  year  removed  to  Kansas,  and  later  went


74


ANDREWS


ANDREWS


to  Washington  to  further  the  interests  of  Kansas
during  a  session  of  congress.  After  two  years'
service  in  the  treasury  department  as  law  clerk,  he
settled  in  St.  Cloud,  Minn.,  and  in  1859  was  elected
state  senator.  During  the  presidential  canvass  of
1860  he  actively  supported  Douglas  and  was  nomi-
nated as  elector  on  that  ticket.  In  1801  he  assisted
in  bringing  out  the  "  Minnesota  Union  "  in  support
of  the  administration,  and  for  a  time  edited  that
paper.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  enlisted  as  a  private,  but  was  commissioned
captain  in  the  3d  Minnesota  infantry.  He  was
surrendered  in  a  fight  near  Murf reesboro,  and  from
July  to  October,  1862,  was  a  prisoner.  After  his
exchange  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of
his  regiment,  and  was  present  in  the  operations
around  Vicksburg.  He  became  colonel  in  July,
1863,  and  served  in  the  campaign  that  resulted  in
the  capture  of  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  where  he  was
placed  in  command  with  a  brigade.  Here  he  was
very  active  in  fostering  the  union  element,  and
his  influence  went  far  in  the  movement  that  in
January,  1864,  resulted  in  the  reorganization  of
Arkansas  as  a  free  state,  for  which  he  received  the
thanks  of  the  constitutional  convention.  During
1864  he  was  in  command  of  the  forces  near  Au-
gusta, Ark.,  fortified  Devall's  Bluff,  Gen.  Steele's
base  of  supplies,  and  organized  numerous  success-
ful scouting  parties.  He  was  promoted  to  briga-
dier-general, and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
2d  division,  13th  corps,  and  participated  in  the
siege  and  storming  of  Fort  Blakely,  Ala.  On  9
March,  1865,  he  was  commissioned  brevet  major-
general.  Subsequently  he  commanded  the  district
of  Mobile,  and  later  that  of  Houston,  Texas.  In
the  recoDsLruction  of  that  state  Gen.  Andrews
showed  much  interest,  and  made  speeches  at  Hous-
ton and  elsewhere  which  produced  a  better  public
opinion.  Afterward  he  was  ordered  to  accompany
Gov.  A.  J.  Hamilton  to  Austin  on  his  reinstatement
to  civil  authority.  He  returned  to  St.  Cloud,  Minn.,
during  the  autumn  of  1865,  and  was  mustered  out
of  service  15  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  appoihted  minis-
ter resident  to  Sweden  and  Norway  in  1869,  and
continued  there  until  1877,  furnishing  the  U.  S.
government  with  frequent  valuable  reports  on  im-
portant subjects,  which  have  been  published  in  the
"  Commercial  Relations  of  the  United  States."  He
was  supervisor  of  the  U.  S.  census  in  the  3d  dis-
trict of  Minnesota  during  1880,  and  from  1883  till
1885  was  consul-general  to  Brazil.  Gen.  Andrews
has  also  been  a  frequent  contributor  to  current
literature,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Minnesota  and
Dacotah  "  (Washington,  1856) ;  "  Practical  Treatise
on  the  Revenue  Laws  of  the  United  States  "  (Bos-
ton, 1858) ;  "  Hints  to  Company  Officers  on  their
Military  Duties  "  (New  York,  1863) ;  "  Digest  of  the
Opinions  of  the  Attorneys-General  of  the  United
States  "  (Washington,  1867) ;  and  "  History  of  the
Campaign  of  Mobile  "  (1867).

ANDREWS,  Ebenezer  Baldwin,  geologist,  b.
in  Danbury,  Conn.,  29  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,
Ohio,  14  Aiig.,  1880.  He  was  educated  at  Williams
college  and  then  at  Marietta  college,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1842.  Then,  after  graduation  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1844,  he  became
pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  in  Housatonic,
Mass.,  1846-'50,  and  from  1850  to  1851  he  had
charge  of  a  parish  in  New  Britain,  Conn.  From
1851  to  1869  he  was  professor  of  geology  in  Mari-
etta college,  and  then  became  assistant  geologist  to
the  Ohio  state  survey.  He  contributed  papers  on
geological  subjects  to  the  "American  Journal  of
Science,"  and  the  record  of  his  work  is  given  in
the  annual  reports  of  the  Ohio  survey. He  was


also  the  author  of  a  text-book  on  "  Elementary
Geology  "  (Cincinnati,  1878).  In  1870  he  was  made
LL.  D.  by  Marietta  college.

ANDREWS,  Edmund,  surgeon,  b.  in  Putney,
Vt.,  22  April,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  the  uni-
versity of  Michigan  in  1849 ;  then,  studying  medi-
cine, he  received  his  degree  from  thcTOedical  de-
partment of  the  university  in  1852.  He  settled  in
Ann  Arbor  and  became  demonstrator  of  anatomy
and  professor  of  comparative  anatomy  in  the  uni-
versity, but  in  1856  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he
has  since  resided.  Here  he  has  filled  the  place  of
demonstrator  of  anatomy  at  the  Rush  medical  col-
lege, and  subsequently  the  chairs  of  the  principles
and  practices  of  surgery  and  of  clinical  and  mili-
tary surgery  in  the  Chicago  medical  college,  of
which  institution  he  is  one  of  the  founders.  In
1859  he  became  surgeon  to  the  Mercy  hospital,  and
during  the  civil  war  he  served  in  a  similar  capacity
with  the  1st  Illinois  light  artillery.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  medical  and  scientific  societies,
and  is  president  of  the  Illinois  state  medical  society
and  of  the  Chicago  academy  of  sciences.  Dr.
Andrews  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Michigan
state  medical  society,  and  is  a  trustee  of  the  North-
western university.  He  is  the  author  of  a  great
number  of  articles  in  different  branches  of  surgery
which  have  been  published  in  medical  journals  and
proceedings  of  the  societies  to  which  he  belongs.
Numerous  improvements  in  surgical  apparatus  and
operations  have  been  made  by  him  ;  among  them  is
the  practical  demonstration  of  the  value  of  free  in-
cision, digital  exploration,  and  disinfection  of  lum-
bar abscesses,  a  treatment  previously  forbidden.

ANDREWS,  Edward  Gayer,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  New  Hartford,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1825.  He  was
graduated  in
1847  at  the  Wes-
leyan  university
at  Middletown,
Conn.,  and,  en-
tering the  Meth-
odist ministry
the  following
became  in
a  teacher
Cazenovia,
seminary,


w^^:


vear,
1855
in
N.  Y.,

of  which  he  was
chosen  president
in  1855.  In  1850
he  was  ordained
an  elder,  and
in  1864  became
a  preacher  in
the  New  York
east  conference.
Dr.  Andrews  was

elected  a  bishop  in  1872. He  has  published  semi-
centennial addresses  delivered  in  1875  and  1881.

ANDREWS,  EHsha,  clergyman,  b.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  29  Sept.,  1768 ;  d.  3  Feb.,  1840.  He
made  the  most  of  slight  opportunities  of  education,
and  was  occupied  as  a  teacher  and  a  surveyor  until
1793,  when  he  was  ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister
at  Fairfax,  Vt.  He  preached  in  various  places  in
New  Hampshire  and  Massachusetts,  and  published,
besides  sermons  and  tracts,  "  The  Moral  Tendencies
of  Universalism  " ;  "  Review  of  Winchester's  Dia-
logues on  Universal  Restoration  " ;  and  a  "  Vindi-
cation of  the  Distinguishing  Sentiments  of  the
Baptists,"  all  published  in  Boston  before  1805;  "A
Brief  Reply  to  James  Bickerstaff's  '  Short  Epistle
to  the  Baptists ' "  (1810),  and  "  Strictures  on  the  Rev.
Mr.  Brooks's  '  Terms  of  Communion ' "  (1823).


ANDREWS


ANDREWS


75


ANDREWS,  Ethan  Allen,  educator,  b.  in  New
Britain,  Conn.,  7  April,  1787;  d.  there,  4  March,
1858.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1810,  studied
law  in  Farinington,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
spent  several  years  in  practice.  In  1822  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  ancient  languages  in  the  uni-
versity of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill.  He  re-
turned in  1828  to  teach  ancient  languages  in  the
New  Haven  gymnasium,  and  a  year  later  estab-
lished the  New  Haven  young  ladies'  institute.  In
1833  he  was  called  to  Boston  to-  succeed  Jacob
Abbott  as  principal  of  a  young  ladies'  school,  and
also  became  senior  editor  of  the  "  Religious  Maga-
zine," in  which  work  he  was  associated  with  the
Abbott  brothers.  In  1889  he  returned  to  his  native
town  and  began  the  publication  of  his  series  of
Latin  text-books.  These  include  "  First  Latin
Book";  "  Latin  Reader " ;  "ViriRomse";  "Latin
Lessons  " ;  "  Andrews'  and  Stoddard's  Latin  Gram-
mar " ;  "  Synopsis  of  Latin  Grammar  " ;  "  Questions
on  the  Latin  Grammar "  ;  "  Latin  Exercises  " ;
"  Key  to  Latin  Exercises  " ;  "  Exercises  in  Latin
Etymology  " ;  "  Caesar's  Commentaries  " ;  "  Sal-
lust  " ;  "  Ovid " ;  and  "  Latin  Dictionary."  His
most  important  work  was  the  "  Latin-English
Lexicon,"  which  is  a  condensed  translation,  with
alterations,  of  Dr.  Wilhelm  Freund's  "  Worterbuch
der  Lateinischen  Sprache."  He  was  at  work  on  a
revised  edition  of  this  book  at  the  time  of  his  death,
and  it  has  since  been  published.  For  several  years
he  was  judge  of  probate,  and  in  1851  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  legislature.

ANDREWS,  George  L.,  soldier,  b.  in  Bridge-
water,  Mass.,  31  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at
West  Point  in  1851,  the  highest  in  his  class.  He
superintended  the  erection  of  fortifications  in  Bos-
ton harbor,  and  in  1854  and  1855  was  assistant  pro-
fessor of  engineering  at  West  Point.  Resigning
1  Sept.,  1855,  he  was  employed  as  a  civil  engineer
until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  served  as
lieutenant-colonel,  and  subsequently  as  colonel  of
the  2d  Massachusetts  regiment  in  the  Shenandoah
valley,  and  conducted  the  rear-guard  in  the  retreat
at  Cedar  Mountain.  He  fought  through  Pope's
campaign,  and  was  at  Antietam.  For  distin-
guished bravery  he  was  promoted  brigadier-gen-
eral, 10  Nov.,  1862,  and  in  Banks's  expedition  led
a  brigade.  From  July,  1863,  to  13  Feb.,  1865,  he
commanded  the  Corps  d'Afrique.  For  his  services
at  the  capture  of  Mobile  he  was  brevetted  major-
general  of  volunteers,  26  March,  1865.  On  8  April,
1867,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  marshal  for  Massa-
chusetts, and  on  27  Feb.,  1871,  went  to  West  Point
as  professor  of  the  French  language.

ANDREWS,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cecil  co.,
Md.,  4  April,  1746 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  29  March,
1813.  He  was  educated  at  the  Philadelphia  college,
and  was  ordained  in  London  in  February,  1767.
He  left  his  parish  in  Queen  Anne  co.,  Md.,  on  ac-
count of  his  loyalist  sentiments,  and  taught  a  school
in  Yorktown,  became  principal  of  the  Philadelphia
Episcopal  academy  in  1785,  and  then  professor  of
moral  philosophy  ni  the  university  of  Pennsyl-
vania, of  which  institution  he  was  vice-provost  un-
til December,  1810,  and  after  that  provost  until  his
death. He  was  author  of  "  Elements  of  Logic."

ANDREWS,  Joseph,  engraver,  b.  in  Hingham,
Mass.,  17  Aug.,  1806 ;  d.  there,  9  May,  1873.  He
was  apprenticed  to  Abel  Bowen,  a  wood-engraver
of  Boston,  in  1821,  and  learned  copper-plate  en-
graving from  Hoogland.  He  went  into  business
with  his  brother,  a  printer,  at  Lancaster,  in  1827,
but  in  1835  went  to  London  and  studied  under
Joseph  Goodyear.  There  he  executed  the  plate  of
"  Annette  de  I'Arbre,"  after  West,  and  in  Paris  en-


graved the  head  of  Franklin,  painted  by  Duplessis.
In  1840  he  visited  Paris  a  second  time,  and  en-
graved six  portraits  for  the  historical  gallery  at
Versailles,  published  under  the  auspices  of  Louis
Philippe.  After  that  he  went  to  Florence  and  be-
gan the  plate  of  the  "  Duke  of  Urbino,"  after  Titian.
His  best-known  engravings  made  in  America  are
from  Stuart's  head  of  Washington  and  Rothermel's
"  Plymouth  Rock  in  1620."  He  engraved  portraits
from  paintings  by  Trumbull,  G.  P.  A.  Healy,  and
others,  of  Oliver  Wolcott,  John  Q.  Adams,  Zachaiy
Taylor,  Jared  Sparks,  Amos  Lawrence,  and  James
Graham,  and  several  ideal  scenes  after  representa-
tive American  painters.

ANDREWS,  Loren,  educator,  b.  in  Ashland  co.,
Ohio,  1  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  Gambler,  Ohio,  18  Sept.,
1861.  He  was  educated  at  Kenyon  college,  de-
voted himself  to  teaching,  and  the  excellence  of
the  present  common-school  system  of  Ohio  is
largely  due  to  his  labors.  He  filled  various  impor-
tant educational  places  until  1854,  when  he  was
elected  president  of  Kenyon  college.  During  his
administration  the  affairs  of  the  college  flourished
greatly ;  additions  were  made  to  the  faculty,  new
buildings  were  erected,  and  the  number  of  students
increased  from  thirty  to  more  than  two  hundred.
On  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war,  in  1861,  President
Andrews  raised  a  company  in  Knox  co.,  of  which
he  was  made  captain.  Later  he  was  elected  colonel
of  the  4th  Ohio  volunteers,  and,  after  service  at
Camp  Dennison,  he  was  ordered  to  Virginia.  He
was  in  the  field  a  short  time,  where  he  was
subjected  to  fatiguing  service,  and  was  afterward
stationed  at  Oakland,  remaining  until  he  was
taken  home  ill  at  the  end  of  August,  the  severe
exposure  having  brought  on  an  attack  of  camp
fever,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  died  a  few
weeks  later.

ANDREWS,  Lorrin,  missionary,  b.  in  East
Windsor,  Conn.,  29  April,  1795;  d.  in  Honolulu,
Sandwich  islands,  29  Sept.,  1868.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,  and  Princeton  theo-
logical seminary;  sailed  for  the  Hawaiian  islands
in  November,  1827,  and  preached  at  Lahaina.  In
1831  he  established  Lahainaluna  seminary,  which
subsequently  became  the  Hawaii  university,  in
which  he  was  a  professor  for  ten  years.  He  trans-
lated a  part  of  the  Bible  into  Hawaii.  Resigning
his  connection  with  the  American  board,  in  1840,
from  anti-slavery  scruples,  he  was  for  some  time
seamen's  chaplain  at  Lahaina.  In  1845  he  was  ap-
pointed judge  under  the  Hawaiian  government,
and  was  also  secretary  of  the  privy  council.  These
offices  he  held  for  ten  years.  He  prepared  a  Ha-
waiian dictionary  and  several  works  on  the  litera-
ture and  antiquities  of  the  Hawaiians.

ANDREWS,  Samuel  James,  clergyman,  b.  in
Danbury,  Conn.,  21  July,  1817.  He  was  graduated
at  Williams  college  in  1839,  and  became  a  lawyer.
Subsequently  he  was  ordained  in  the  Congrega-
tional ministry,  was  afterward  a  tutor  at  Trinity
college,  Hartford,  and  at  last  adopted  the  Irvingite
doctrines,  and  became,  in  1868,  a  pastor  of  the
Catholic  apostolic  church  in  Plartford,  Conn.
He  published  "  The  Life  of  Our  Lord  Upon  Earth  "
(New  York,  1863).

ANDREWS,  Sherlock  James,  jurist,  b.  in
Wallingford,  Conn.,  17  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  11  Feb.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1821,  after  which  he  continued  his  stud-
ies at  Yale,  where  he  followed  the  lectures  on  sci-
ence as  assistant  to  Prof.  Silliman,  and  also  the
lectures  on  law.  In  1825  he  removed  to  Ohio,  and
from  that  time  devoted  himself  to  the  profession
of  law,  and  was  constantly  engaged  in  important


76


ANDREWS


ANDREWS


litigation  before  the  state  and  federal  courts.  He
was  elected  to  congress  in  1840  as  a  whig,  and
served  for  a  single  term.  He  became  in  1848  a
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  Ohio,  and  he  was  a
member  of  the  constitutional  conventions  of  1849
and  1873,  where  his  influence  was  felt  upon  impor-
tant committees.  He  was  urged  at  one  time  to
allow  himself  to  be  a  candidate  for  governor,  but
declined  this  distinction,  as  well  as  others  for  which
his  name  was  mentioned,  because  he  preferred  to
remain  in  private  life.  For  a  time  he  shared
with  Thomas  Corwin  the  leadership  of  the  Ohio
bar.  His  wit,  his  eloquence,  his  sympathy,  his
good  sense,  and  his  integrity  gave  liim  great  power
befoi-e  a  jurv  or  before  the  public.

ANDREWS,  Stephen  Pearl,  author,  b.  in  Tem-
plcton,  Mass.,  22  March,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
21  May,  1886.  He  studied  at  Amherst  college,  and
then,  removing  to  New  Orleans,  became  a  lawyer.
He  was  the  first  counsel  of  Mrs.  Myra  Clark  Gaines
in  her  celebrated  suits.  He  was  an  ardent  aboli-
tionist, and  in  1839  removed  to  Texas,  where  he
converted  many  of  the  slave-owners,  who  were  also
large  land-owners,  by  showing  them  that  they
would  become  rapidly  rich  from  the  sale  of  land
if  immigration  were  induced  by  throwing  the  coun-
try open  to  free  labor.  Here  he  acquired  consid-
erable wealth  in  the  practice  of  his  profession.  His
impetuous  and  logical  eloquence  gained  him  a
wide  repute  and  great  personal  popularity;  but,
on  the  other  hand,  his  seemingly  reckless  and  fa-
natical opposition  to  slavery  aroused  an  intense
feeling  of  opposition,  and  his  life  was  seriously  en-
dangered. In  1843  he  went  to  England  in  the
hope  that,  with  the  aid  of  the  British  anti-slavery
society,  he  might  raise  sufficient  money  there  to
pay  for  the  slaves  and  make  Texas  a  free  state.
He  was  well  received,  and  the  scheme  was  taken
up  and  favorably  considered  by  the  British  gov-
ernment ;  but,  after  some  months  of  considtation,
the  project  was  abandoned  through  fear  that  it
would  lead  to  war  with  the  United  States,  as  the
knowledge  of  it  was  already  being  used  to  strength-
en the  movement  that  ultimately  led  to  the  annex-
ation of  Texas  and  to  the  Mexican  war.  Mr.  An-
drews went  to  Boston  and  became  a  leader  in  the
anti-slavery  movement  there.  While  in  England
he  learned  of  phonography,  and  during  seven  years
after  his  return  he  devoted  his  attention  to  its  in-
troduction, and  was  the  founder  of  the  present  sys-
tem of  phonographic  reporting.  He  removed  to
New  York  in  1847,  and  published  a  series  of  pho-
nographic instruction-books  and  edited  two  jour-
nals m  the  interest  of  phonography  and  spelling
reform,  which  were  printed  in  phonetic  type,  the
"  Anglo-Saxon  "  and  the  "  Propagandist."  He
spoke  several  languages,  and  is  said  to  have  been
familiar  with  thirty.  Among  his  works  are  one  on
the  Chinese  language,  and  one  entitled  "New
French  Instructor,"  embodying  a  new  method.
He  was  a  tireless  student  and  an  incessant  worlcer :
but  his  mental  labor  was  performed  without  effort
or  fatigue.  While  yet  a  young  man  he  announced
the  discovery  of  the  unity  of  law  in  the  universe,
and  to  the  development  of  this  theory  he  devoted
the  last  thirty-five  years  of  his  life.  The  elements
of  this  science  are  contained  in  his  "  Basic  Outline
of  Universology  "  (New  York,  1872).  He  asserted
that  there  is  a  science  of  language,  as  exact  as  that
of  mathematics  or  of  chemistry,  forming  a  domain
of  universology ;  and  by  the  application  of  this
science  he  evolved  a  "  scientific  "  language,  des-
tined, he  believed,  to  become  *'  the  universal  lan-
guage." This  scientific  universal  language  he  called
"  Alwato  "  (ahl-wah'-to). It  was  so  far  elaborated


that  for  some  years  before  his  death  he  conversed
and  corres[)onded  in  it  with  several  of  his  pupils,  and
was  preparing  a  dictionary  of  Alwato,  a  portion
of  which  was  in  type  at  the  time  of  his  decease.
The  philosophy  evolved  from  universology  he  called
"  Integralism.'"'  In  it  he  believAd  would  be  found
the  ultimate  reconciliation  of  the  great  thinkers  of
all  schools  and  the  scientific  adjustment  of  freedom
and  order,  not  by  a  superficial  eclecticism,  but  by  a
radical  adjustment  of  all  the  possible  forms  of
thought,  belief,  and  idea.  In  1882  he  instituted
a  series  of  conferences  known  as  the  "  Colloquium,"
for  the  interchange  of  ideas  between  men  of  the
utmost  diversity  of  religious,  philosophical,  and
political  views.  Among  those  associated  with  him
in  this  were  Prof.  Louis  Elsberg,  Rev.  Dr.  Rylance,
Rev.  Dr.  Newman,  Rabbi  Gottheil,  Rev.  Dr.  Samp-
son, Rev.  Dr.  Collyer,  Prof.  J.  S.  Sedgwick,  T.  B.
Wakeman,  and  Rabbi  Huebsch.  Mr.  Andrews  was
a  prominent  member  of  the  Liberal  club  of  New
York,  and  for  some  time  was  its  vice-president.
His  contributions  to  periodicals  are  numerous.
He  was  a  member  of  the  American  academy  of
Arts  and  Sciences  and  of  the  Ameripan  Ethnologi-
cal Society.  His  works  include  "  Comparison  of  the
Common  Law  with  the  Roman,  French,  or  Span-
ish Civil  Law  on  Entails  and  other  Limited  Prop-
erty in  Real  Estate  "  (New  Orleans,  1839) ;  "  Cost  the
Limit  of  Price  "  (New  York,  1851) ;  "  The  Consti-
tution of  Government  in  the  Sovereignty  of  the
Individual "  (1851) ;  "  Love,  Marriage,  and  Divorce,
and  the  Sovereignty  of  the  Individual :  a  Discus-
sion by  Henry  James,  Horace  Greeley,  and  Stephen
Pearl  Andrews,"  edited  by  Stephen  Pearl  An-
drews (1853);  "Discoveries  in  Chinese;  or,  The
Symbolism  of  the  Primitive  Characters  of  the  Chi-
nese System  of  Writing  as  a  Contribution  to  Phi-
lology and  Ethnology  and  a  Practical  Aid  in  the
Acquisition  of  the  Chinese  Language "  (1854) ;
"  Constitution  or  Organic  Basis  of  the  New  Catho-
lic Church  "  (1860) ;  "  The  Great  American  Criste,"
a  series  of  papers  published  in  the  "Continental
Monthly  "  (1863-'64) ;  "  A  Universal  Language  "
("Continental  Monthly,"  1864);  "The  Primary
Synopsis  of  Universology  and  Alwato "  (1871) ;
"Primarv  Grammar  of  Alwato"  (Boston,  1877);
"The  Labor  Dollar"  (1881);  "Elements  of  Uni-
versology "  (New  York,  1881) ;  "  Ideological  Ety-
mology "  (1881) ;  "  Transactions  of  the  Colloquium,
with  Documents  and  Exhibits  "  (vols,  i  and  ii.  New
York,  1882-'83) ;  "  The  Church  and  Religion  of  the
Future,"  a  series  of  tracts  (1886) ;  and  text-books
of  phonography.  His  dictionary  of  Alwato  was
published  posthumouslv  by  his  sons.

ANDREWS,  Timothv  Patrick,  soldier,  b.  in
Ireland  in  1794;  d.  11  March,  1868.  During  the
war  of  1812,  when  Barney's  flotilla,  in  Patuxent
river,  was  confronting  the  enemy,  he  tendered  his
services  without  the  knowledge  of  his  father,  was
employed  by  the  commodore  as  his  aide,  and  ren-
dered important  services.  Pie  subsequently  was  in
active  service  in  the  field,  and  in  1822  appoint-
ed paymaster  in  the  army.  In  1847  he  resigned
to  take  command  of  the  regiment  of  voltigeurs
raised  for  the  Mexican  war.  He  was  distinguished
in  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rey,  and  brevetted  a
brigadier-general  for  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct in  the  battle  of  Chapultepec.  On  the  close
of  the  war  and  the  disbandment  of  the  voltigeurs,
he  was  reinstated,  by  act  of  congress,  as  pay-
master, and  in  1851  was  made  deputy  paymaster-
general.  During  the  civil  war.  on  the  death  of
Gen.  Larned,  Col.  Andrews  succeeded  him  as
pavmaster-general  of  the  army.  He  was  retired
20"  Nov.,  1864.


ANDREWS


ANDROS


77


ANDREWS,  William  Draper,  inventor,  b.  in
Grafton,  Mass.,  28  May,  1818.  In  1828  the  family
removed  to  Needham.  He  was  in  a  country  store
at  Newtown  Lower  Falls  for  a  year,  and  then  re-
moved to  New  York,  where  he  was  variously  em-
ployed until  1840,  when  he  became  connected  with
a  wrecking  company.  While  he  was  thus  engaged
his  attention  was  directed  to  pumping  apparatus,
and  in  1844  he  invented  the  pioneer  centrifugal
pump,  which  was  patented  in  1846.  By  this  inven-
tion the  saving  of  imperishable  goods  from  aban-
doned wrecks  was  made  possible.  Its  mode  of  action
consisted  in  forming  channels  through  sand-bars  on
ocean  coasts,  and  in  making  earth  excavations  in
and  under  water.  This  pump  was  subsequently
introduced  and  extensively  manufactured  in  Eng-
land as  the  Gwynne  pump.  A  few  years  later  he
invented  and  patented  the  anti-friction  centrifugal
pump,  which  has  been  used  all  over  the  world.  He
also  invented  three  other  distinct  styles  and  various
modifications  of  centrifugal  pumps,  of  which  that
known  as  the  "Cataract"  is  the  most  valuable.  In
all,  Mr.  Andrews  has  received  twenty-five  United
States  and  nine  foreign  patents  on  pumps,  oscil-
lating steam-engines,  boilers,  friction  and  differ-
ential power-gearing,  siphon  gang-wells  and  at-
tachments, balanced  valves,  safety  elevators,  and
other  similar  inventions.  During  the  civil  war
each  of  the  U.  S.  monitors  was  provided  with  cen-
trifugal pumps  and  engines.  These  were  made  to
discharge  thirty  tons  of  water  a  minute,  and  ar-
ranged to  fill  compartments,  thereby  partially  sub-
merging the  monitor,  so  that  in  case  of  grounding
in  dangerous  proximity  Ic  an  enemy  they  could  be
lightened  by  pumping,  backed  off,  and  resubmerged
in  a  few  minutes.  The  pumps  made  by  Mr.  An-
drews have  been  used  in  creating  channels  through
the  sand-bars  at  the  mouth  of  St.  John's  river,  Fla.,
Cape  Fear  river,  N.  C,  and  the  Mississippi  river.
The  system  of  gangs  of  tube-wells  patented  by  him
has  been  extensively  used  in  cities.  During  the
unprecedented  draught  of  the  summer  and  autumn
of  1885,  a  series  of  four  plants  of  gang-wells,  fur-
nished by  Mr.  Andrews  to  the  city  of  Brooklyn,
yielded  for  some  time  a  daily  average  supply  of
25,000,000  gallons  of  water,  reaching  as  high  as
27,000,000  gallons  in  a  single  day.  18,400,000  gal-
lons being  their  contracted  delivery.  Mr.  Andrews
has  received  numerous  medals  and  diplomas  for  his
inventions,  both  in  this  country  and  abroad.

ANDROS,  Sir  Edmund,  colonial  governor,  b.
in  London,  England,  6  Dec,  1637;  d.  there,  24
Feb.,  1714.  His  father  was  an  officer  in  the  royal
household,  and  young  Andros  was  brought  up  at
court.  He  early  became  a  soldier,  and  served  in
the  regiment  of  foot  sent  to  America  in  1666.  In
1672  he  was  made  major  in  Rupert's  dragoons,
and  two  years  later  succeeded  his  father  as  bailiff'
of  Guernsey.  From  1674  to  1681  he  was  governor
of  the  province  of  New  York,  appointed  by  James,
duke  of  York,  and  in  this  capacity  he  became  in-
volved in  numerous  disputes  Avith  the  adjoining
colonies  on  account  of  his  extensive  claims  to  juris-
diction. In  1680  he  deposed  Philip  Carteret  and
seized  the  government  of  New  Jersey,  and  in  the
following  year  he  was  recalled  and  accused  of
maladministration.  He  was  successful  in  clearing
himself  of  all  charges,  and  then  retired  to  Guern-
sey. In  1686,  on  the  accession  of  James  II.,  he
was  appointed  governor  of  the  dominion  of  New
P]ngland,  which  included  all  the  English  North
American  settlements  between  Maryland  and  Cana-
da, except  Pennsylvania.  He  arrived  in  Boston  on
21  Dec,  1686,  and  at  once  put  into  execution  a
number  of  measures  that  were  extremely  obnoxious


to  the  colonists.  Although  proclaiming  religious
freedom,  he  restrained  the  liberty  of  the  press,  ar-
bitrarily levied  enormous  taxes,  and  compelled
land-owners  to  procure  new  titles  to  their  property,
for  which  exorbitant  charges  were  made.  These
and  similar  actions,
performed  in  ac-
cordance with  in-
structions received
in  England,  gave
great  offence.  In
October,  1687,  at
the  head  of  an
armed  force,  he
demanded  the  sur-
render of  the  char-
ter of  Connecticut,
but  its  sudden  re-
moval and  conceal-
ment in  the  "  char-
ter oak  "  prevented
the  accomplish-
ment of  this  pur-
pose. The  occur-
rence of  this  inci-
dent has  since  been
disputed,  and  his-
torical clata  have
been  accumulated
to  show  its  impos-
sibility. (See  Brodhead's  "  History  of  New  York,"
vol.  ii.,  p.  472.)  By  his  aggressions  on  the  ter-
ritory of  the  Penobscot  Indians  he  brought  on
the  Indian  war  of  1688.  The  people  of  Boston,
unable  to  endure  the  severity  of  his  administra-
tion, revolted,  and  on  18  April,  1689,  he  was  de-
posed and  imprisoned  with  fifty  of  his  followers.
In  the  following  year  he  was  sent  to  England,  and
charges  were  preferred  against  him  by  a  committee
of  colonists ;  but  the  home  authorities  deemed  it
unadvisable  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  judicial  deci-
sion, and  he  was  never  tried.  In  1692  he  again  re-
turned to  America  as  governor  of  Virginia,  and  re-
mained until  1698,  gaining  the  esteem  of  the  people
by  his  efforts  to  promote  manufactures  and  agricul-
ture. He  was  associated  in  the  founding  of  William
and  Mary  college,  which,  next  to  Harvard,  is  the
oldest  seat  of  learning  in  the  United  States.  His
quarrels  with  the  church  authorities,  and  the  influ-
ence of  Dr.  Blair,  commissary  of  the  bishop  of  Lon-
don, led  to  his  recall.  From  1704  to  1706  he  was
governor  of  the  island  of  Jersey,  and  subsequently
he  lived  in  London.  See  W'hitmore's  "  Andros
Tracts,"  with  notes  and  a  memoir  of  Sir  Edmund
Andros  (Boston,  1868) ;  "  A  Narrative  of  the  Pro-
ceedings of  Sir  Edmund  Andros  "  (Boston,  1691  and
1773) ;  *'  Collections  of  the  Boston  Historical  Socie-
ty "  (3d  series,  vii.,  150) ;  Brodhead's  "  Government
of  Sir  Edmund  Andros  in  New  England"  (Mor-
risania,  1867),  and  his  "  History  of  New  York  " ;  in-
dex to  "  O'Callaghan's  New  York  Colonial  Docu-
ments " ;  Palfrey's  "  History  of  New  England  "  (iii.,
127) ;  and  Bancroft's  "  History  of  the  United  States  "
(vol.  i..  New  York,  1882).

ANDROS,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  1  May,  1759 ;  d.  in  Berkley,  Mass.,  30  Dec,
1845.  He  joined  the  revolutionary  army  at  the
age  of  sixteen,  and  was  in  the  battles  of  Long
Island  and  White  Plains.  In  1781  he  enlisted  on
a  privateer  in  New  London,  but  was  captured  and
confined  in  the  Jersey  prison-ship  in  New  York.
A  few  months  later  he  escaped,  and  on  the  resto-
ration of  his  health  studied  theology  with  Dr.
Benedict  in  Plainfield,  Conn.  He  was  ordained  at
Berkley  in  1788,  and  for  forty-six  years  remained


78


ANGEL


ANGHIERA


in  charge  of  the  church  at  this  place.  He  pub-
lished sermons,  and  also  a  narrative  of  his  impris-
onment and  escape  from  the  Jersey  prison-ship.
An  account  of  his  life,  prepared  by  his  son,  is
given  in  Emery's  "Ministry  of  Taunton." — His
son,  R.  S.  S.  Andros,  was  born  in  Berkeley,
Mass.,  and  died  there  in  August,  1868.  He  edited
several  newspapers,  was  deputy  collector  in  Boston
for  some  years,  and  subsequently,  as  special  agent
of  the  treasury  department,  was  engaged  in  re-
organizing custom-houses  in  the  south.  He  was
the  author  of  the  "  Customs  Guide,"  a  codification
of  the  revenue  laws,  contributed  poems  to  the
"  Democratic  Review,"  and  published  "  Chocoruna
and  other  Sketches  "  (1838).

ANGEL,  Benjamin  Franklin,  diplomatist,  b.
in  Burlington,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1815.  He
was  prepared  for  college  by  C.  C.  Pelton,  who  after-
ward became  president  of  Harvard,  but  did  not
enter,  owing  to  trouble
with  his  eyes.  He
taught  school  until  he
recovered  their  use,
studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in
Geneseo  in  partner-
ship with  his  former
preceptor,  at  the  same
time  writing  edito-
rials for  the  demo-
cratic county  paper.
He  was  appointed  sur-
rogate in  1838,  and
served  in  that  office
for  four  years,  after
which  he  was  appoint-
ed master  in  chancery
and  supreme  court
commissioner,  a  judi-
cial office  conferring
concurrent  jurisdiction  with  the  judges  of  the  su-
preme court  sitting  in  chambers.  He  was  again
surrogate  from  1844  till  1847.  He  was  a  member
of  the  democratic  national  convention  at  Balti-
more in  1852.  In  1853,  his  health  having  become
impaired,  he  went  to  Honolulu,  Sandwich  islands,
as  U.  S.  consul.  In  1855  he  was  sent  by  President
Pierce  to  China  as  special  commissioner  to  settle
a  dispute  between  some  American  merchants  and
the  Chinese  government  in  regard  to  the  exaction
of  export  duties.  This  mission  was  successful,
and  he  returned  to  the  United  States  by  way  of
the  East  Indies,  Egypt,  and  Europe.  His  letters
from  Asia  were  published  in  the  newspapers  at  the
time.  On  his  return,  against  his  protest,  he  was
placed  in  nomination  for  congress,  but  was  de-
feated. On  the  accession  of  Mr.  Buchanan  to  the
presidency  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Norway
and  Sweden.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
the  autumn  of  1862,  and,  with  the  exception  of
being  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  convention  that
nominated  Gen.  McClellan  for  the  presidency  in
1864,  he  did  not  again  take  an  active  part  in  poli-
tics, but  devoted  himself  to  agriculture  at  Geneseo,
N.  Y.  He  was  president  of  the  state  agricultural
society  in  1873-'74.

ANGELL,  Henry  C,  oculist,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  27  Jan.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Hah-
nemann medical  college  of  Philadelphia  in  1853,
and  subsequently  spent  four  years  in  study  at  the
hospitals  of  London,  Paris,  Vienna,  and  Berlin,
after  which  he  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  still  re-
sides. On  the  foundation  of  the  Boston  university
school  of  medicine  he  became  its  professor  of  oph-


thalmology, which  chair  he  continues  to  occupy.
He  is  president  of  the  Philharmonic  society  of
Boston,  and  is  an  honorary  member  of  the  New
Hampshire  Historical  Society.  His  technical  writ-
ings include  "Diseases  of  the  Eye"  (6th  ed.,
Boston,  1882),  and  "How  to  Take  Care  of  Our
Eyes  "  (Boston,  1880).  Dr.  Angell  has  also  written
papers  on  art  subjects  for  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly  "
and  the  "American  Art  Review,"  and  is  the  author
of  "  The  Records  of  Wm.  M.  Hunt "  (Boston,  1879).

ANOELL,  Israel,  soldier,  b.  in  1741;  d.  in
Smithfield,  R.  I.,  in  May,  1832.  He  was  major  of
Hitchcock's  regiment  at  the  siege  of  Boston,  was
promoted  colonel  18  Jan.,  1777,  and  commanded
the  1st  Rhode  Island  regiment  during  the  re-
mainder of  the  war,  distinguishing  himself  in  the
action  at  Springfield,  N.  J.,  23  June,  1780.

ANGrELL,  James  Burrill,  educator,  b.  in  Scit-
uate,  R.  I.,  7  Jan.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  university  in  1849,  and  spent  some  time  in
Europe  studying  and  travelling.  On  his  return  in
1853  he  was  appointed  professor  of  modern  lan-
guages and  literature  in  the  university  at  which  he
was  graduated.  In  1860  he  succeeded  the  recently
elected  senator,  Henry  B.  Anthony,  as  editor  of  the
Providence  "  Daily  Journal,"  which  place  he  occu-
pied until  1866,  when  he  was  called  to  the  presidency
of  the  university  of  Vermont.  In  1871  he  became
president  of  the  university  of  Michigan,  an  office
he  has  since  continued  to  fill  except  during  the
years  1880-81,  which  he  spent  in  China  as  minister
from  the  United  States,  and  also  as  chairman  of  a
special  commission  appointed  to  negotiate  a  treaty
with  China.  This  commission  procured  a  treaty
in  commercial  matters,  and  also  one  on  Chinese
immigration.  He  has  contributed  many  articles
to  periodical  literature.

ANGrELL,  Joseph  Kinnicut,  legal  writer,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  30  April,  1794;  d.  in  Boston,  1
May,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  univer-
sity in  1813,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1816,  and
in  1820  prosecuted  in  England,  but  without  success,
a  claim  to  a  large  property.  From  1829  to  1831
he  was  editor  of  the  "  Law  Intelligencer  and  Re-
view." As  reporter  to  the  Rhode  Island  supreme
court,  he  prepared  the  first  published  reports  of
that  state.  In  association  with  Samuel  Ames,  he
wrote  a  "  Treatise  on  Corporations  "  (3d  ed.,  Boston,
1846).  His  other  works,  most  of  which  were  sev-
eral times  revised  and  reissued,  were  "  Treatise  on
the  Right  of  Property  in  Tide  Waters"  (1826);
"Inquiry  Relative  to  an  Incorporeal  Heredita-
ment "  (1827) ;  "  A  Practical  Summary  of  the  Law
of  Assignment "  (1835) ;  "  On  Adverse  "Enjoyment "
(1837) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Common  Law  in  Relation
to  Water-Courses "  (1840) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Law
concerning  the  Liabilities  and  Rights  of  Common
Carriers " ;  "A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Fire  and
Life  Insurance  "  ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Limitations  of
Actions  at  Law  and  Suits  in  Equity  and  Admiral-
ty "  (2d  ed^,  1846) ;  and  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Law
of  HighwaVs,"  left  incomplete  and  finished  by
Thomas  Durfee  (2d  ed.,  by  Choate,  1868).

ANGERS,  Real,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  1823 ;
d.  in  April,  1860.  He  studied  law  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada.  Together
with  Mr.  Aubin  he  reported  and  published  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  lower  house  in  1857-'-60.  In  addi-
tion to  being  the  author  of  a  number  of  political
essays,  he  wrote  and  published,  "Revelations  du
Crime,"  and  a  treatise  on  stenography.

ANGHIERA,  Pietro  Martire  d'  (called  in
English  Peter  Martyr),  Italian  historian,  b.  in
Arona,  on  Lake  Maggiore,  in  1455 ;  d.  in  the  city
of  Granada,  Spain,  in  1526. After  completing  his


J


ANGLIN


ANNAND


79


education  at  Rome  he  served  in  the  Milanese  army,
then  accompanied  the  Spanish  ambassador  to  Spain,
and  fought  in  the  wars  against  the  Moors,  after-
ward entered  the  church,  and  opened  a  school.  In
1501  he  was  sent  by  King  Ferdinand  as  his  ambas-
sador to  Egypt,  and  in  1505  he  became  prior  of  the
church  at  Granada.  His  "  Opus  Epistolarum  "  re-
counts all  the  important  events  that  occurred  be-
tween 1488  and  1525.  He  wrote  also  a  history  of
the  New  World,  entitled  "  De  Rebus  Oceanicis  et
Orbe  Nove,"  based  upon  original  documents  sup-
plied by  Christopher  Columbus,  and  on  the  trans-
actions of  the  council  of  the  Indies,  of  which  he
was  a  member.  His  other  works  are  an  account  of
newly  discovered  islands  and  their  inhabitants,  and
a  narrative  of  his  visit  to  Egypt  and  of  explora-
tions of  the  pyramids.  See  "  Fetrus  Martyr,"  by
H.  A.  Schumacher  (New  York,  1879).

ANOLIN,  Timothy  Warren,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Clonakilty  co.,  Cork,  Ireland,  31  Aug.,
1822.  Emigrated  to  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,
in  1849,  where  the  same  year  he  established  the
"Weekly  Freeman."  He  established  the  "  Morn-
ing Freeman,"  a  tri-weekly  paper,  liberal  in  poli-
tics, the  organ  of  the  Roman  Catholics  of  New
Brunswick,  in  1851,  and  was  its  editor  and  proprie-
tor until  1877.  On  the  government  permitting  a
prohibitory  liquor  bill  to  pass,  Mr.  Anglin  M^ent
into  opposition,. and  he  has  since  been  a  conserva-
tive. In  1860  he  was  elected  to  the  New  Bruns-
wick house  of  assembly  by  the  ?ity  and  county  of
St.  John,  which  he  represented  until  18G6,  being
the  first  Roman  Catholic  to  represent  that  con-
stituency. He  was  a  leader  of  the  opponents  of
confederation.  In  18G7  he  was  elected  to  the  Do-
minion house  of  commons  for  Gloucester  co.,  and
on  26  March,  1874,  was  elected  speaker  of  the
house.  He  retained  this  office  until  the  end  of  the
session  of  1877,  when  he  resigned,  his  seat  having
been  declared  vacant  through  a  breach  of  the  inde-
pendence of  parliament  act.  He  was  reelected
speaker  7  Feb.,  1878,  and  held  the  place  till  par-
liament was  dissolved.

ANGl  LO  Y  HEREDIA,  Antonio,  Cuban  au-
thor, b.  in  Havana  in  1887.  He  studied  law  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1863.  In  1864  he  edited  in
Madrid  the  "  Revista  Hispano-Americana."  He
has  published  "Estudios  sobre  los  Estados  Uni-
dos,"  embodying  the  results  of  his  travels  through
the  United  States;  and  "Schiller  y  Goethe,"  a
series  of  lectures  on  German  literature  delivered
in  the  Ateneo  of  Madrid  with  great  success.  An-
gulo  lost  his  reason  and  died  a  few  years  ago.

ANGULO,  Pedro  de,  missionary,  b.  in  Burgos,
Spain,  about  1500 ;  d.  in  1562.  After  finishing  his
studies  he  set  out  for  America  in  1524,  in  company
with  some  other  young  men  of  noble  birth.  He
rapidly  acquired  wealth  and  military  fame,  but  was
so  much  affected  by  the  sight  of  the  cruelties  with
which  the  Spaniards  treated  the  Indians  that  he
resolved  to  devote  himself  entirely  to  the  service
of  the  natives.  With  this  object  he  entered  a  Do-
minican convent  and  took  the  habit  of  the  order  in
Mexico  in  1528.  After  studying  for  some  years  he
was  ordained  a  priest,  and  was  then  placed  under
the  direction  of  Las  Casas,  whom  he  accompanied
into  Peru  and  other  places  where  the  protection  of
the  Indians  rendered  their  presence  necessary.  In
1541  he  was  sent  to  Guatemala  to  carry  on  the
work  among  the  Indians  which  had  been  begun
ten  years  before.  He  was  so  successful  that  ten
years  afterward  the  number  of  Christians  was  so
large,  and  the  convents  of  the  Dominicans  so  nu-
merous, as  to  require  the  erection  of  the  country
into  a  new  province  of  the  order. His  next  efforts


were  directed  to  the  conversion  of  the  people  that
lived  north  of  Guatemala.  These  Indians  were  so
fierce  and  warlike  that  the  Spaniards,  who  had
been  repelled  in  every  attempt  to  subdue  them,
called  their  country  "  the  land  of  war."  In  com-
pany with  two  other  missionaries,  Father  de  An-
gulo  went  among  them,  and,  although  at  first  re-
ceived with  distrust,  finally  succeeded  in  converting
the  entire  nation.  He  next  devoted  himself  to  the
task  of  persuading  the  Indians  to  abandon  their
nomadic  life,  succeeded  in  forming  them  into  vil-
lage communities,  and  drew  up  a  code  of  laws
suited  to  their  character  and  needs.  The  Indians
offered  to  place  their  country  under  the  protection
of  the  crown  of  Castile  and  pay  an  annual  tribute,
provided  no  attempt  was  made  on  their  liberty,
and  a  treaty  to  this  effect  was  ratified  by  the  Span-
ish court,  which  also  expressed  a  wish  that  the
name  of  the  country  should  be  changed  to  Vera-
Pax,  in  memory  of  the  event.  A  city  of  the  same
name  was  built  a  few  years  afterward,  and  Father
de  Angulo  was  chosen  its  first  bishop ;  but  before
the  bulls  arrived  from  Rome  he  died.

ANGUS,  Joseph,  English  clergyman,  b.  16  Jan.,
1816.  He  was  educated  at  Edinburgh  university,
is  president  of  Regent's  park  college,  London  (Bap-
tist), author  of  several  hand-books,  and  editor  of
the  best  edition  of  Butler's  "  Analogy  "  (1855).  He
was  one  of  the  revisers  of  the  English  New  Testa-
ment for  the  American  Bible  union,  and  visited
the  United  States  in  1873  as  a  delegate  of  the
Evangelical  alliance.

ANGUS,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia in  1784 ;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  29  May,  1840.
He  entered  the  service  in  1799  as  midshipman,  and
became  lieutenant  in  1807,  master-commandant  in
1813,  and  captain  in  1816.  He  was  severely
wounded  in  the  action  between  the  "Constella-
tion "  and  the  French  frigate  "  La  Vengeance,"
1  Feb.,  1800,  and  again  in  the  encounter  between
the  "  Enterprise  "  and  a  French  lugger.  In  the  war
of  1812  he  was  badly  wounded  in  the  attack  on  the
English  at  Black  Rock,  and  while  commanding  a
flotilla  in  Delaware  bay.  He  commanded  the  ship
that  carried  Adams  and  Clay  to  Ghent  to  arrange
the  peace  with  Great  Britain.  Owing  to  injuries
received  in  the  service,  his  mind  became  impaired,
and  he  was  dismissed,  21  June,  1824.

ANNAND,  William,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in  1808.  He  was  elected  to  the
Nova  Scotia  assembly  in  1837,  and  allied  himself
with  the  old  reform  party  that  was  led  by  Joseph
Howe,  which  established  responsible  government
in  the  province  and  introduced  various  other  re-
forms. He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
and  financial  secretary  of  Nova  Scotia  from  1859
to  1863,  and  was  called  upon  to  form  an  admin-
istration for  that  province  in  November,  1867,
a  duty  which  he  accomplished  most  successfully,
and  in  which  he  held  consecutively  the  offices  of
provincial  treasurer  and  president  of  the  council,
the  latter  being  held  conjointly  with  the  premier-
ship until  his  resignation  in  May,  1875.  On  11
May,  1875,  he  was  appointed  agent  in  London  for
the  promotion  of  immigration,  and  for  represent-
ing the  interests  of  Nova  Scotia  and  New  Bruns-
wick more  effectually  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
on  the  continent  of  Europe.  He  was  also  a  repeal
delegate  to  Great  Britain  with  Mr.  Howe  and  oth-
ers in  1866  and  1868.  Mr.  Annand  has  been  a
contributor  to  the  Nova  Scotia  press,  has  ediicd  the
"Speeches  and  Public  Letters  of  Joseph  Howe"
(Boston,  1858),  and  is  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  on
confederation  (London,  1866).  He  has  held  the
office  of  queen's  printer  for  several  years.


80


ANSCHtTZ


ANTHON


ANSCHtJTZ,  Karl,  musician,  b.  in  Coblentz,
Germany,  in  February,  1818 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
80  Dec,  1870.  His  father  was  an  eminent  musi-
cian and  was  in  charge  of  a  school  for  vocal  and
instrumental  instruction.  His  early  musical  stud-
ies were  made  under  his  father,  and  in  1887  he  was
sent  to  study  under  Frederick  Schneider,  of  Dessau,
whose  daughter  he  married.  He  then  returned  to
Coblentz,  where  he  became  conductor  of  the  royal
musical  institution  and  of  the  orchestra  at  the
theatre,  with  the  title  of  royal  musical  director.
In  1848  he  led  the  orchestra  at  Nuremburg,  and  in
1849  was  conductor  of  the  German  opera  at  Am-
sterdam. During  the  same  year  he  went  to  Lon-
don with  a  German  opera  troupe,  and  subsequently
he  became  leader  of  the  orchestra  at  Drury  Lane
theatre.  He  conducted  great  concerts  in  Exeter
hall,  at  one  of  which  he  gave  Beethoven's  ninth
symphony  with  an  orchestra  of  250  musicians  and
a  chorus  of  500  singers.  He  also  conducted  the
Italian  opera  at  Dublin,  Edinburgh,  Glasgow,  and
elsewhere  in  Great  Britain.  In  1857  he  came  to  the
United  States  with  Ullman's  Italian  opera  troupe,
which  he  conducted  until  1860.  He  founded  in
1862  the  German  opera  in  New  York,  and  was
active  in  the  establishment  of  the  New  York  con-
servatory of  music.  In  1869  he  served  as  musical
director  of  the  New  York  section  of  the  mass
choruses  at  the  Baltimore  singing  festival.  He
was  also  a  composer  of  some  ability,  and  wrote  out
for  brass  instruments  the  nine  symphonies  of  Beet-
hoven, of  which  two  were  performed.

ANSELME,  Jacques  Bernard  Modeste  d',
French  general,  b.  in  Apt,  22  July,  1740;  d.  in
September,  1814.  As  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
Soissons  regiment,  he  fought  through  the  Ameri-
can revolution.  As  lieutenant-general  he  took
Nice  and  the  fortresses  of  Montalban  and  Ville-
franche  in  1792,  but  was  defeated  at  Sospello  and
imprisoned  until  the  revolution  of  Thermidor.

ANSOROE,  Charles,  musician,  b.  in  Spiller,
Silesia,  Germany,  in  1817 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  28  Oct.,
1866.  He  was  educated  in  Breslau,  where  he  re-
ceived high  honors,  and  also  obtained  a  thorough
musical  training.  For  some  years  after  his  gradu-
ation he  devoted  his  attention  to  teaching,  and  was
further  occupied  in  editing  a  public  newspaper.
Imbued  with  the  liberal  ideas  prevalent  in  Ger-
many in  1848-'49,  he  published  articles  offensive
to  the  authorities,  for  which  he  was  tried  and  sen-
tenced to  three  years'  imprisonment.  But  he  es-
caped to  Englaftd,  where  he  was  joined  by  his
family,  and  sailed  for  the  United  States.  He  set-
tled in  Boston,  and  became  organist  and  chorister
of  the  first  clnirch  in  Dorchester,  where  he  re-
mained for  thirteen  years.  Pie  was  also  a  teacher
of  music  in  the  asylum  for  the  blind  in  South
Boston  for  four  years.  For  some  time  he  was  a
resident  editor  of  the  "Massachusetts  Teacher."
and  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  state  teachers'
association. In  1868  he  removed  to  Chicago.

ANSPACH,  Frederick  Riiiehart,  clergyman,
b.  in  central  Pennsylvania  in  January,  1815 :  d.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  16  Sept.,  1867.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Pennsylvania  college,  Gettysburg,  in  1889,
and  at  the  Lutheran  theological  seminary  in  184L
He  was  pastor  for  nine  years  of  the  churches  of
Barren  Hill  and  White  Marsh,  and  subsequently
at  Hagerstown,  Md.  A  sermon  delivered  on  the
occasion  of  the  death  of  Henry  Clay  was  his  first
publication.  His  "Sons  of  the  Sires,"  "Sepul-
chres of  our  Departed"  (Philadelphia,  1854),
"The  Two  Pilgrims"  (1857),  and  other  works  ap-
peared in  rapid  succession.  In  1857  he  removed
to  Baltimore,  where  he  became  a  contributor  to  the


"  Lutheran  Observer,"  and  in  1858  its  principal
editor,  in  which  office  he  continued  till  1861.

ANTES,  Henry,  colonist,  b.  in  Germany  in
1701;  d.  in  Fredericktown,  Pa.,  20  July,  1755.
The  name  Antes  is  a  Greek  paraphrase  of  the  Ger-
man Blume,  adopted  as  a  disguise  during  the  Ro-
manist persecutions  of  1620.  Henry  Antes  emi-
grated with  his  father's  family  to  Pennsylvania
about  1720,  and  built  a  paper-mill  on  the  Wissa-
hickon  near  Philadelphia.  Here  he  married
Christina,  daughter  of  William  Dewees,  and  be-
came a  leader  in  the  civil  and  religious  affairs  of
the  colony.  He  was  the  friend  of  Whitefield  and
Zinzendorf,  and,  after  consultation  with  the  latter,
assumed  the  leadership  of  the  religious  organization
founded  in  1741,  and  known  as  "  Unitas  Fratrum,"
or  Moravians.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Beth-
lehem.— His  son,  Philip  Frederick,  b.  2  July,
1730;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  20  Sept.,  1801,  held
several  public  offices,  was  a  member  of  the  provin-
cial council  and  of  the  general  and  state  assemblies,
judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  a  colonel
of  state  militia.  He  was  so  conspicuous  and  ardent
a  patriot  during  the  revolution  that  the  British
offered  a  reward  for  his  head.  In  1776,  in  company
with  a  Mr.  Potts  at  Warwick  furnace,  he  success-
fully cast  an  eighteen-pounder,  the  first  cannon  ever
made  in  America.  See  "  A  German  Hero,"  by  Rev.
Edwin  McMinn  (Moorestown,  N.  J.,  1886).

ANTHON,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Detroit,  14  May,
1784;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  March,  1868.  He
was  the  second  son  of  Dr.  G.  C.  Anthon,  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  college  in  1801  at  the  liead  of  liis
class,  studied  law,  and,  upon  attaining  his  majority,
was  admitted  to  practice  in  the  supreme  court.
During  the  war  of  1812  he  was  in  command  of  a
company  of  militia,  and  served  in  the  defence  of
New  York  city.  He  was  also  frequently  employed
during  this  period  as  judge-advocate.  The  estab-
lishment of  the  supreme  court  of  the  city  of  New
York  is  largely  due  to  his  efforts,  he  having  suc-
cessfully urged  its  necessity  upon  the  state  legisla-
ture. He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York
Law  Institute,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  its
president.  He  published  "  Digested  Index  to  the
Reports  of  the  United  States  Courts"  (5  vols.,
1813) ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  at  Nisi  Prius  in  the  New
York  Supreme  Court"  (1820);  "An  Analytical
Abridgment  of  Blackstone's  Commentaries,"  with
a  prefatory  essay  "  On  the  Study  of  Law  "  (2d  ed.,
1832) ;  and  "  Anthon's  Law  Student "  and  "  Ameri-
can Precedents  "  (1810). — His  brother,  Henry,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  New  York  city,  11  March,  1795 ;  d.
there,  5  Jan.,  1861,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
in  1818,  after  which  he  studied  theology  under
Bishop  Hobart  and  took  orders  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church.  In  1816,  while  still  a  deacon,
he  had  charge  of  the  parish  of  St.  Paul's  church
in  Tivoli-on-Hudson,  N.  Y. ;  but,  his  health  fail-
ing, he  removed  to  South  Carolina,  where  he  re-
mained from  1819  to  1822.  During  the  latter
year  he  became  rector  of  Trinity  church,  Utica,
where  he  remained  till  1829,  when  he  took  charge
of  St.  Stephen's  church.  New  York.  This  pastor-
ate he  resigned  in  1837  and  became  rector  of  St.
Mark's  in  the  Bowery,  continuing  there  till  his
death.  All  Souls'  church,  originally  a  chapel  of
St.  Mark's,  was  completed  afterward,  and  was
made  a  memorial  by  his  late  congregation.  A
memorial  tablet  has  been  erected  near  the  chan-
cel by  the  vestry  of  St.  Mark's.  Dr.  Anthon  pub-
lished "  Historical  Notices  of  St.  Mark's  Church
from  1795  to  1845"  (New  York,  1845).— Another
brother,  Charles,  educator,  b.  in  New  York  city,
19  Nov.,  1797;  d.  there,  29  July,  1867,  was  gradu-


J


ANTHON


ANTHONY


81


ated  at  Columbia  college  in  1815,  studied  law  in  the
office  of  liis  brother  John,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1819,  but  never  practised.  In  1820  he  was
appointed  adjunct  professor  of  Greek  and  Latin  at
Columbia  college,  and  ten  years  later  he  succeeded
to  the  full  professorship,  and  at  the  same  time  was
made  head  master  of  the  grammar  school  attached
to  the  college.  The  latter  post  he  occupied  until
1864,  when  he  was  retired.  In  1857  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  Jay  chair  of  Greek  language  and  lit-
erature. He  devoted  considerable  attention  to  the
preparation  of  text-books  for  colleges,  and  in  1822
published  a  new  edition  of  Lempriere's  "  Classical
Dictionary."  Later  appeared  an  edition  of  Horace,
with  notes  (1880);  a  "Dictionary  of  Greek  and
Roman  Antiquities  "  (1848) ;  a  "  Classical  Diction-
ary "  (1841),  and  nearly  fifty  other  volumes  of
classical  school-books,  many  of  which  were  repub-
lished in  Europe.  A  biographical  sketch  of  Charles
Anthon  appeared  in  "  The  Galaxy  "  in  1867. — Their
father,  George  Christian,  a  German  physician,
served  in  the  British  army  until  the  surrender  of
Detroit  in  1788,  attaining  the  rank  of  surgeon-gen-
eral, resigned,  married  the  daughter  of  a  French
officer,  and  settled  in  New  York  city. — Charles  Ed-
ward, numismatist,  b.  in  New  York  city,  6  Dec,
1822 ;  d.  there,  7  June,  1883,  was  a  son  of  John
Anthon,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  college  in  1889,
and  from  1858  until  1888  he  held  the  chair  of  his-
tory and  belles-lettres  in  the  College  of  the  City  of
New  York.  He  was  an  enthusiastic  collector  of
coins,  and  owned  one  of  the  most  valuable  collections
ever  gathered  in  the  United  States.  For  some  time
he  was  president  of  the  American  Numismatic  So-
ciety.— Another  son  of  John,  WilHain  Henry,
lawyer,  b.  in  New  York  city,  2  Aug.,  1827 ;  d.  there,
7  Nov.,  1875,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1848,  and
soon  became  distinguished  in  its  practice.  He  was
counsel  in  the  Brinckly  divorce  case,  and  in  1858
defended  the  rioters  who  burned  the  quarantine
buildings  on  Staten  Island.  In  1851  he  served  as
member  of  the  state  legislature,  and  during  the  civil
war  he  was  judge-advocate-general  on  Gov,  E.  D.
Morgan's  staff.—  Georg-e  Christian,  educator,  b.
in  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1820 ;  d.  in  Yon-
kers,  N.  Y.,  11  Aug.,  1877,  the  eldest  son  of  the
Rev.  Henry  Anthon,  was  graduated  at  Columbia
college  in  1839,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
practice  at  the  New  York  bar.  Pie  removed  to
New  Orleans  and  there  began  teaching,  but  re-
turned to  New  York  and  was  appointed  professor
of  Greek  in  the  university  of  the  city  of  New  York.
He  established  the  Anthon  grammar  school  in
1854,  and  was  its  principal  until  his  death.

ANTHONY,  Andrew  Varick  Stout,  artist,  b.
in  New  York  city  in  1835.  He  studied  drawing
and  engraving  under  the  best  teachers  in  New
York,  and  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the
American  water-color  society.  His  most  conspicu-
ous success  has  been  achieved  in  the  line  of  engrav-
ing. Among  his  best-known  works  are  the  illus-
trations for  Whittier's  "  Snow  Bound "  (1867),
"  Ballads  of  New  England "  (1870),  and  "  Mabel
Martin  "  (1876) ;  Longfellow's  "  Skeleton  in  Armor  "
(1877),  and  Hawthorne's  "  Scarlet  Letter "  (1878).
He  has  passed  part  of  his  professional  life  in  New
York  and  California,  but  settled  in  Boston  in  1878.

ANTHONY,  Henry  Bowen,  statesman,  b.  of
Quaker  parents,  in  Coventry,  R.  I.,  1  April,  1815 ;
d.  in  Providence,  2  Sept.,  1884.  He  was  descended
in  a  direct  line  from  John  Anthony,  who  came
from  England  about  1640  and  settled  on  the  island
of  Rhode  Island.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
university  in  1833,  and  devoted  himself  to  literary
pursuits. He  became  editor  of the  Providence

VOL. I. — 6


"  Journal "  in  1838,  and  in  1840  was  admitted  into
partnership,  the  paper  being  published  under  the
name  of  Knowles,  Vose  &  Anthony  till  the  death
of  Mr.  Vose  in  1848,  when  it  was  continued  under
the  name  of  Knowles  &  Anthony  till  1  Jan.,  1863,
when  it  became  Knowles,  Anthony  &  Danielson.
Mr.  Anthony  gave  himself  up  to  his  newspaper  with
all  the  energy  and  enthusiasm  of  his.  nature.  No
amount  of  work  staggered  him ;  early  and  late  he
was  in  his  office,  and  for  many  years  he  had  around


He  early  de-


him  a  brilliant  circle  of  young  men.
veloped  poetical  taste,
and  there  are  several
pieces  of  merit  that
bear  his  name.  His
mind  was  quick  and
accurate,  and  he  had
a  wonderful  mem-
ory; and  his  edito-
rial labors  contributed
largely  to  the  growth
of  the  art  of  journal-
ism in  New  England.
He  had  many  offers  to
go  to  other  cities  and
take  charge  of  news-
papers, but  declined
them  all.  In  1837  he
married  Sally  Rhodes
(daughter  of  the  late
Christopher  Rhodes,
of  Pawtuxet),  who
died  in  1854.  In  1849,
and  again  in  1850,  he  was  elected  governor  of  Rhode
Island.  As  a  whig  at  the  first  election  he  had  a
majority  of  1,556 ;  at  the  second,  fewer  than  1,000
votes  were  cast  against  him.  He  declined  a  third
election,  and  gave  himself  once  more  entirely  to
his  editorial  work.  This  continued  till  1859,  when
he  was  elected,  as  a  republican,  to  the  U".  S.  senate,
where  he  remained  by  reelections  till  his  death.
During  his  service  in  the  senate  he  still  contributed
largely  to  his  paper.  Three  times  he  was  elected
president  pro  tern,  of  the  senate — in  March,  1863,  in
March,  1871,  and  in  January,  1884;  but  the  last
time  his  failing  health  prevented  him  from  accept-
ing. He  was  exceedingly  popular  in  Washington,
and  often  spoken  of  as  "  the  handsome  senator."
He  served  on  many  important  committees,  and  was
twice  the  chairman  of  the  committee  on  printing,
his  practical  knowledge  of  that  subject  enabling  him
to  introduce  many  reforms  in  the  government  print-
ing. He  was  at  different  times  a  member  of  the
committees  on  claims,  on  naval  affairs,  on  mines  and
mining,  and  on  post-offices  and  post-roads.  On  the
trial  of  President  Johnson  he  voted  for  impeach-
ment. He  was  not  a  frequent  or  brilliant  speaker
in  the  senate,  but  always  talked  to  the  point,  and
commanded  attention.  He  shone  more  as  a  writer
than  as  a  speaker.  His  memorial  and  historical  ad-
dresses were  models  of  composition.  A  volume  of
these  addresses,  printed  privately  in  1875,  contains
a  tribute  to  Stephen  A.  Douglas,"  delivered  9  July.
1861 ;  one  to  John  R.  Thompson,  4  Dec,  1862 ;  one
to  William  P.  Fessenden,  14  Dec,  1869 ;  and  three
different  addresses  on  Charles  Sumner — the  first  on
the  announcement  of  his  death  in  the  senate ;  the
second  when  Mr.  Anthony,  as  one  of  the  commit-
tee appointed  by  the  senate,  gave  up  the  body  of
Mr.  Sumner  to  the  governor  of  Massachusetts ;  and
the  third  when  Mr.  Boutwell  presented  in  the  sen-
ate resolutions  of  respect  for  Mr.  Sumner's  mem-
ory. Mr.  Anthony  also  spoke  in  the  senate  on  the
death  of  William  A.  Buckingham,  and  on  21  Jan.,
1876,  delivered  a  short  address  on  the  death  of


82


ANTHONY


ANTHONY


Henry  Wilson,  vice-president  of  the  United  States.
When  che  statues  of  Gen.  Greene  and  lloger  Will-
iams were  presented  to  congress  by  the  state
of  Rhode  Island,  Mr.  Anthony  made  the  addresses,
and  he  also  made  a  short  address  at  the  presenta-
tion of  the  statues  of  Truinbull  and  Sherman.
One  of  his  best  efforts  was  when  he  introduced  the
bill  providing  for  repairing  and  protecting  the
monument  erected  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  to  the  mem-
ory of  the  chevalier  de  Tiernay,  commander  of  the
French  naval  forces  sent  out  in  1780  to  aid  the
American  revolution.  Mr.  Anthony  had  a  warm
and  affectionate  nature,  genial  manner,  a  com-
manding figure,  and  was  a  perfect  specimen  of  a
man.  In  his  last  days,  with  manly  courage,  he
calmly  waited  for  the  end.  As  soon  as  his  death
was  known,  Go\^  Bourn  and  Mayor  Doyle  issued
proclamations  to  that  effect,  and  called  upon  the
people  to  attend  the  funeral,  which  took  place  from
the  first  Congregational  church  in  Providence  on
Saturday,  6  Sept.  It  was  the  largest  funeral  ever
known  in  Rhode  Island.  Mr.  Anthony  bequeathed
a  portion  of  his  library,  known  as  the  "  Harris  Col-
lection of  American  Poetry,"  to  Brown  university.
It  consists  of  about  6,000  volumes,  mostly  small
books,  and  many  of  them  exceedingly  rare.  It  was
begun  half  a  century  ago  by  the  late  Albert  G.
Greene,  continued  by  Caleb  Fiske  Harris,  and,
after  his  death,  completed  by  his  kinsman,  the  late
senator.  The  Rev.  Dr.  J.  C.  Stockbridge,  a  mem-
ber of  the  board  of  trustees  of  the  university,  is
preparing  an  annotated  catalogue  of  the  collection.

ANTHONY,  John  Gould,  naturalist,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  17  May,  1804;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1877.  His  school  education  was
slight,  and  was  entirely  discontinued  when  he
became  twelve  years  of  age.  Business  pursuits
then  occupied  his  attention,  and,  settling  in  Cin-
cinnati, he  continued  there  for  thirty-five  years,
actively  engaged  in  commercial  occupations.  Mean-
while his  interest  in  natural  history  had  developed,
his  publications  attracted  the  attention  of  Prof.
Agassiz,  and  in  1863  he  was  asked  to  take  charge
of  the  conchological  department  of  the  museum  of
comparative  zoology,  v/here  he  remained  until  his
death.  He  accompanied  Agassiz  on  the  Thayer
expedition  to  Brazil  in  1865.  His  writings  include
the  following  papers:  "A  New  Trilobite  (Cerato-
cephala  ceralepta)  "  (1838) ;  "  Fossil  Encrinite "
(1838) ;  "  Description  of  a  New  Fossil  (Calymene
Bucklandii)"  (1839);  "Descriptions  of  Three  New
Species  of  Shells "  (1839) ;  "  Description  of  Two
New  Species  of  Anculotus  "  (1839) ;  with  G.  Graham
and  W.  P.  James,  "  Two  Species  of  Fossil  Asterias
in  the  Blue  Limestone  of  Cincinnati "  (1846) ;  "  De-
scription of  New  Fluviate  Shells  of  the  Genus  Me-
lania.  Lam.,  from  the  Western  States  of  North
America  "  (1854) ;  "  Descriptions  of  New  Species  of
American  Fluviate  Gasteropods  "  (1861) ;  "  Descrip-
tions of  Two  New  Species  of  Monocondytoca "
(1865) ;  "  Description  of  a  New  Exotic  Melania "
(1865) ;  "  Description  of  a  New  Species  of  Shells  "
(1865) ;  and  "  Descriptions  of  New  American  Fresh-
Water  Shells"  (1866).  Mr.  Anthony  was  recog-
nized as  an  authority  on  the  American  land  and
fresh-water  mollusca.

ANTHONY,  Susan  Brownell,  reformer,  b.  in
South  Adams,  Mass.,  15  Feb.,  1820.  Daniel  An-
thony, her  father,  a  cotton  manufacturer,  was  a
liberal  Quaker,  who  educated  his  daughters  with
the  idea  of  self-support,  and  employed  skilful
teachers  in  his  own  house.  After  completing  her
education  at  a  Friends'  boarding-school  in  Phila-
delphia, she  taught  in  New  York  state  from  1835
to  1850. Her  father  removed  in  1826  to  Washing-


ton CO.,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1846  settled  at  Rochester.
Miss  Anthony  first  spoke  in  public  in  1847,  and
from  that  time  took  part  in  the  temperance  move-
ment, organizing  societies  and  lecturing.  In  1851
she  called  a  temperance  convention  in  Albany,  after
being  refused  admission  to  a  previous  convention
on  account  of  her  sex.  In  1852  the  Woman's  New
York  State  Temperance  Society  was  organized.
Through  her  exertions,  and  those  of  Mrs.  E.  C.
Stanton,  women  came  to  be  admitted  to  educational
and  other  conventions  with  the  right  to  speak,  vote,
and  serve  on  committees.  About  1857  she  became
prominent  among  the  agitators  for  the  abolition  of
slavery.  In  1858  she  made  a  report,  in  a  teachers'
convention  at  Troy,  in  favor  of  the  co-education  of
the  sexes.  Her  energies  have  been  chiefly  directed
to  securing  equal  civil  rights  for  women.  In
1854-'55  she  held  conventions  in  each  county  of
New  York  in  the  cause  of  female  suffrage,  and
since  then  she  has  addressed  annual  appeals  and
petitions  to  the  legislature.  She  was  active  in  se-
curing the  passage  of  the  act  of  the  New  York
legislature  of  1860,  giving  to  married  women  the
possession  of  their  earnings,  the  guardianship  of
their  children,  etc.  During  the  war  she  devoted  her-
self to  the  women's  loyal  league,  which  petitioned
congress  in  favor
of  the  13th  amend-
ment. In  1860
she  started  a  peti-
tion in  favor  of
leaving  out  the
word  "  male "  in
the  14th  amend-
ment, and  worked
with  the  national
woman  suffrage
association  to  in-
duce congress  to
secure  to  her  sex
the  right  of  voting.
In  1867  she  went
to  Kansas  with
Elizabeth  Cady
Stanton  and  Lucy
Stone,  and  there
obtained  9,000
votes  in  favor  of  woman  suffrage.  In  1868,  with
the  cooperation  of  Mrs.  Stanton  and  Parker  Pills-
bury,  and  with  the  assistance  of  George  F.  Train,
she  began,  in  New  York  city,  the  publication  of  a
weekly  paper  called  "  The  Revolutionist,"  devoted
to  the  emancipation  of  women.  In  1872  Miss  An-
thony cast  ballots  at  the  state  and  congressional
election  in  Rochester,  in  order  to  test  the  applica-
tion of  the  14th  and  15th  amendments  of  the  U.  S.
constitution.  She  was  indicted  for  illegal  voting,
and  was  fined  by  Justice  Hunt,  but,  in  accordance
with  her  defiant'declaration,  never  paid  the  penalty.
Between  1870  and  1880  she  lectured  in  all  the
northern  and  several  of  the  southern  states  more
than  one  hundred  times  a  year.  In  1881  she  wrote,
with  the  assistance  of  her  co-editors,  Elizabeth  Cady
Stanton  and  Matilda  Joslyn  Gage,  "  The  History  of
Woman  Suffrage,"  in  two  volumes.

ANTHONY,  Susanna,  author,  b.  in  Rhode  Isl-
and in  1726;  d.  in  Newport,  23  July,  1791.  Ex-
tracts from  her  writings  on  religious  subjects  were
published,  with  a  memoir  by  Dr.  Hopkins,  in  1739.

ANTHONY,  William  Arnold,  physicist,  b.  in
Coventry,  R.  I.,  17  Nov.,  1835.  He  was  educated
at  the  Yale  (now  Sheffield)  scientific  school,  and
received  his  degree  in  1860.  From  1857  to  1860  he
was  principal  of  a  graded  school  in  Crompton,  R.  1.
During  1860-'61  he  taught  the  sciences  in  the  Provi-


ANTONELLI


APPLETON


83


dence  Conference  Seminary,  East  Greenwich,  R.  I.,
after  which,  from  1861  to  1863,  he  followed  his  pro-
fession in  various  capacities  and  in  different  locali-
ties. Again,  from  1863  to  1867,  he  taught  the
sciences  in  Franklin,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1867  he  became
professor  of  physics  and  chemistry  in  Antioch  Col-
lege, where  he  remained  until  1870,  when  he  was
called  to  occupy  a  similar  chair  in  Iowa  Agricul-
tural College.  During  1872  he  accepted  tiie  pro-
fessorship of  physics  in  the  then  recently  estab-
lished Cornell-  University,  which  he  still  occupies.
Although  his  work  has  been  principally  that  of
teaching,  he  has  found  time  to  gratify  his  fondness
for  mechanics.  He  designed  and  constructed,  dur-
ing the  years  1857-61,  two  turbines,  one  of  which
gave  an  efficiency  of  81  per  cent.,  whose  floats  were
carefully  formed  to  curves  deduced  from  a  mathe-
matical investigation  of  the  flow  of  fluids.  In  1875
he  constructed  a  Gramme  dynamo-electric  machine
for  25  amperes  and  250  volts.  This  was  built  at  a
time  when  only  the  most  general  descriptions  of
such  machines  were  at  hand.  He  has  also  made  a
large  tangent  galvanometer  which  measures  accu-
rately currents  from  -^q  to  250  amperes.  Prof.  An-
thony is  a  member  of  the  American  Association  for
the  Advancement  of  Science,  and  of  the  American
Institute  of  Electrical  Engineers.  His  published
papers  include  contributions  read  before  these  so-
cieties, and  other  numerous  scientific  articles  which
have  appeared  in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Sci-
ence," "Journal  of  the  Franklin  Institute,"  the
"  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  and  several  electrical
journals.  He  is  joint  author  with  Prof.  C.  F.
Brackett  of  an  "  Elementary  Text-book  on  Phys-
ics "  (New  York,  1885).

ANTONELLI,  Juan,  engineer,  b.  in  Gaeta,  Italy,
about  the  middle  of  the  16th  century ;  d.  in  Spain
in  1616.  He  went  to  Cuba  in  1584,  where  he  made
the  plan  and  superintended  the  construction  of  the
Morro  Castle  and  Punta  Fortress  in  Havana,  in
1589.  Before  they  were  finished  he  went  to  Vera
Cruz,  Mexico,  and  planned  the  famous  fortress  of
San  Juan  de  Ulua.  He  returned  to  Cuba,  and  af-
terward went  to  Spain,  where  he  died.

ANTONIO  DE  SEDILLA,  better  known  as
"  Pere  Antoine,"  clergyman,  b.  in  Spain  about
1730  ;  d.  in  New  Orleans  in  1829.  He  was  sent  to
Louisiana  as  commissary  of  the  inquisition,  with
power  to  put  it  in  force  in  that  colony,  and  ar-
rived there,  with  five  other  Capuchin  friars,  in  1779.
The  governor,  Miro,  fearing  a  revolution  if  the
Spanish  laws  against  heretics  were  applied,  forci-
bly seized  Era  Antonio  and  the  other  monks  and
sent  them  back  to  Spain.  Four  years  later  Pere
Antoine,  as  he  came  to  be  called,  returned  to  New
Orleans  in  the  capacity  of  priest  of  St.  Louis  cathe-
dral, the  only-church  in  the  city,  and  his  goodness
and  charity  made  him  the  idol  of  the  French  popu-
lation during  his  long  pastorate.  He  gave  all  that
he  had  to  the  poor  and  lived  a  life  of  the  greatest
abstemiousness,  sleeping  on  hard  boards  in  a  rude
hut  that  he  constructed  under  a  date-palm  tree
that  stood  in  his  garden.  When  the  United  States
purchased  Louisiana,  Claiborne  wrote  to  Jefferson
that  no  opposition  to  the  new  dominion  need  be
feared  if  Pere  Antoine  could  be  won  over.  The
president  solicited  his  interest ;  but  the  old  priest
took  no  part  in  the  crisis,  refusing  to  meddle  with
politics.  The  palnj-tree  under  which  he  lived  and
died  became,  in  memory  of  the  good  father,  a  famous
landmark  in  New  Orleans.  It  was  said  to  have
been  planted  by  a  Turk  in  1727 ;  but  Sir  Charles
Lyell,  in  his  "  Second  Visit  to  New  Orleans,"  as-
serts that  Pere  Antoine  planted  it  himself.  The
tree  was  made  the  subject  of  Aldrich's  story  of


"Pere  Autoine's  Date  Palm,"  and  of  romances  by
Dimitry  and  Lafcadro  llearn.  Many  traditions
associated  with  the  tree  are  given  in  Gayarre's
"  History  of  Louisiana."  It  bloomed  for  the  last
time  in  1853,  but  retained  some  life  and  verdure
until  in  July,  1886,  it  was  entirely  dead.

ANZOXTEtrlll,  Jose  Antonio  (an-tho-ah'ta-
gee),  Venezuelan  soldier,  b.  in  Barcelona,  Venezuela,
in  1789 ;  d.  15  Nov.,  1819.  When  the  revolutionary
war  began  he  was  twenty-one  years  old,  and  at
once  entered  the  ranks  of  the  revolutionist  army.
Promotion  followed  rapidly,  and  he  soon  became
one  of  the  chief  commanders,  and  as  such  took  part
in  the  victories  won  against  the  royal  troops  in  San
Felix  and  Boyaca.

APES,  William,  author,  b.  about  1800.  He
was  an  Indian  preacher  of  the  Pequot  tribe,  and
published  "  A  Son  of  the  Forest "  (Boston,  1831) ;
"  Experiences  of  Five  Christian  Indians  of  the  Pe-
quot Tribe  "  (1833) ;  "  Indian  Nullification  "  (1885);
and  a  "  Eulogy  on  King  Philip  "  (1836).

APODACA,  Juan  Ruiz  (ah-po-dah'-ka),  Span-
ish naval  officer,  b.  about  1770;  d.  in  1835.  He
entered  the  service  in  1770,  and  distinguished  him-
self in  several  encounters  with  the  English.  In
1807  he  was  given  the  command  of  a  fleet,  and  the
next  year  he  captured  the  French  fleet  in  Cadiz.
About  1810  he  was  appointed  captain-general  of
Cuba  and  Florida,  and  in  1816  he  was  transferred
to  Mexico  as  viceroy  of  New  Spain.  While  in  Mexi-
co he  suppressed  several  strong  bands  of  insur-
gents, and  for  this  and  other  services  he  was  re-
warded by  his  government  with  the  title  of  Count
of  Venadito.  He  returned  to  Spain  in  1822,  and
was  subsequently  promoted  to  the  rank  of  captain-
general  of  the  navy.

APPEL,  Tlieodore,  clergyman,  b.  in  Easton,
Pa.,  30  April,  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  Marshall
college,  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  in  1842,  was  ordained  in
the  Reformed  church,  and  held  pastoral  charges
in  Waynesboro,  Pa.,  and  Cavetown,  Md.  He  be-
came in  1851  professor  of  mathematics,  physics,  and
astronomy  in  Marshall  college,  at  the  same  time
acting  as  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  in  Mer-
cersburg and  editing  the  Mercersburg  "  Review,"
and  from  1853  to  1877  he  filled  the  same  chair  in
Franklin  and  Marshall  college,  Lancaster,  Pa.  From
1877  to  1886  he  was  general  superintendent  of  home
missions  for  the  eastern  part  of  the  Reformed
church,  and  travelled  on  business  connected  with
that  office  through  Pennsylvania,  Maryland,  Vir-
ginia, and  North  Carolina.  From  1881  to  1886  he
edited  the  "Reformed  Missionary  Herald."  He
has  published  "  Recollections  of  College  Life "
(Reading,  Pa.,  1886).

APPLE,  Tliomas  Gilmore,  educator,  b.  in
Easton,  Pa.,  14  Nov.,  1829.  He  was  graduated  at
Marshall  college  in  1850,  and,  entering  the  minis-
try, was  a  pastor  of  the  German  Refonned  church
from  1853  to  1865.  In  the  latter  year  be  was
chosen  president  of  Mercersburg  college,  which  he
left  in  1871,  and  became  a  professor  in  the  Lancas-
ter theological  seminary.  In  1878  he  was  elected
president  of  Franklin  and  Marshall  college.  He
edited  for  several  years  the  "  Mercersburg  Review  "
and  the  "  Reformed  Quarterly  Review."

APPLETON,  Daniel,  founder  of  the  publish-
ing house  of  D.  Appleton  &  Co.,  New  York,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  10  Dec,  1785;  d.  in  New  York,
27  March,  1849.  He  began  business  as  a  dry-goods
merchant  in  his  native  place,  but  subsequently  went
to  Boston,  and  in  1825  removed  to  New  York,
where  he  began  the  importation  of  English  books
in  conjunction  with  his  dry-goods  business.  The
book  department  was  placed  in  charge  of  William


84


APPLETON


APPLETON


Henry  Appleton,  his  eldest  son  (b.  27  Jan.,  1814).
This  was  in  Exchange  place.  He  soon  abandoned
the  sale  of  dry-goods,  and  removed  to  Clinton  Hall,
Beekman  street,  and  there  gave  his  attention  solely
to  the  importation  and  sale  of  books.  In  1835  W.
H.  Appleton  was  sent  to  represent  the  house  in
London,  and  in  the  following  year  the  father  vis-
ited Europe  and  founded  a  permanent  agency  at
16  Little  Britain.  His  first  publishing  venture
was  a  collection  of  religious  extracts  entitled
*'  Daily  Crumbs  from  the  Master's  Table,"  a  32mo

volume,  of  which
2,000  copies  were
sold.  This  was
followed  by  an-
other book  of  the
same  size  and
character,  and  in
1832,  the  cholera
year,  by  "  A  Ref-
uge in  Time  of
Plague  and  Pesti-
lence." In  Janu-
ary, 1838,  W.  H.
Appleton  was  ta-
ken into  partner-
ship, and  the  firm
removed  to  200
Broadwav.  In

1848  the  father  re-
/</)  .y  y^/^z>(7^ — tired,  and  W. H.

(^^i^^^.C^:^i?^i^ Appleton then

formed  a  copart-
nership with  his  brother,  John  Adams  Appleton  (b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1817 ;  d.  at  his  residence  on
Staten  Island,  13  July,  1881.  Three  other  sons  be-
came partners.  Daniel  Sidney,  the  fourth  son,  b.
in  Boston,  9  April,  1824,  d.  in  New  York,  12  Nov.,
1890 ;  George  Swett,  b.  in  Andover,  Mass.,  11  Aug.,
1821.  d.  at  Riverdale,  N.  Y.,  7  July,  1878  ;  Samuel
Francis,  the  youngest  son,  b.  in  Boston,  26  April,
1826,  d.  in  New  York,  25  Oct.,  1883.  The  busi-
ness was  removed  from  200  Broadway  to  the  old
Society  library  building,  corner  of  Leonard  street
and  Broadway,  and  subsequently  the  growth  of
the  city  necessitated  many  removals  farther  up-
town. In  1881  the  retail,  jobbing,  and  importing
departments  were  abandoned,  in  order  that  sole
attention  might  be  given  to  the  publications  of  the
house,  and  the  business  was  removed  to  its  present
location,  Nos.  1, 3,  and  5  Bond  street.  In  1853  a  print-
ing-office and  bindery  were  established  in  Franklin
street.  New  York  ;  but  the  publishing  business  in-
creased to  such  an  extent  that  in  1868  the  manufact-
uring department  was  removed  to  Brooklyn,  where
buildings  were  erected  that  cover  nearly  a  whole
square.  The  publications  of  the  house  extend  over
the  entire  field  of  literature.  Its  "American  Cyclo-
paedia "  is  the  largest  and  most  widely  circulated
work  of  its  kind  ever  produced  in  this  country.  The
first  edition  was  issued  in  1857-63 ;  and  a  revised
edition,  which  was  practically  a  re-writing  of  the  en-
tire work,  with  the  insertion  of  thousands  of  illus-
trations and  other  improvements,  in  1873-'76,  addi-
tions and  corrections  being  added  from  time  to  time.
The  "Annual  Cyclopaedia,"  published  in  similar
style  and  forming  an  appropriate  continuation  of
the  greater  work,  is  now  in  its  twenty-fifth  year.  Its
illustrated  books  include  "  Picturesque  America,"
"  Picturesque  Europe,"  and  "  Picturesque  Pales-
tine," besides  valuable  art  collections.  Its  text-
books embrace  every  subject  taught  in  American
schools ;  medical  books  form  a  special  department,
and  books  in  Spanish  for  the  South  and  Central
American  markets  form  another. Nearly  all  the


noted  scientists  of  Europe  and  the  United  States
are  represented  in  the  list,  which  also  in  general
literature  includes  the  names  of  Bancroft,  Bryant,
Cooper,  Dickens,  Disraeli,  Scott,  and  other  stand-
ard authors.  The  literature  of  the  civil  war  is
represented  on  both  sides,  by  Generals  Sherman
and  J.  E.  Johnston,  Admirals  Farragut  and  Porter,
Jefferson  Davis,  William  H.  Seward,  and  biogra-
phies of  Lee,  Chase,  Stonewall  Jackson,  A.  S.
Johnston,  and  other  distinguished  participants.
The  business  begun  by  Daniel  Appleton  is  now
(1891)  actively  conducted  by  the  firm  consisting  of
his  son  William  Henry,  and  his  grandsons  William
Worthen,  Daniel,  p]d\vard  Dale,  and  Daniel  Sidney
Appleton.  But  the  official  signature  of  the  firm
has  always  remained  Daniel  Appleton  &  Co.

APPLETON,  James,  temperance  reformer,  b.
in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1786:  d.  there,  25  Aug.,
1862.  When  a  young  man  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature  of  his  native  state,  and  during  the  war
with  Great  Britain  he  served  as  a  colonel  of  Massa-
chusetts militia,  and  after  the  close  of  the  war  was
made  a  brigadier-general.  During  his  subsequent
residence  at  Portland,  Me.,  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1836-'37,  but  he  returned  finally  to
his  native  town,  where  he  died.  By  his  speeches
and  publications  he  exercised  great  influence  upon
public  sentiment  in  favor  of  abolition  and  total  ab-
stinence. In  his  report  to  the  Maine  legislature  in
1837  he  was  the  first  to  expound  the  principle  em-
bodied in  the  Maine  law.  See  his  "  Life,"  by  S.
H.  Gay.

APPLETON,  Jesse,  educator,  b.  in  New  Ips-
wich, N.  H.,  17  Nov.,  1772;  d.  in  Brunswick,  Me.,
12  Nov.,  1819.  After  graduation  at  Dartmouth
college  he  spent  two  years  in  teaching  at  Dover
and  Amherst,  then  studied  theology,  and  was  or-
dained pastor  at  Hampton,  N.  H.,  in  February,
1797,  notwithstanding  his  Armenian  tendencies,
which  were  considered  heretical  at  that  time.  At
his  suggestion  the  "  Piscataqua  Evangelical  Maga-
zine" was  published,  and  while  at  Hampton  he
served  as  trustee  of  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  and
was  a  member  of  the  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.
His  daughter  married  President  Franklin  Pierce.
He  was  in  great  demand  as  a  preacher  on  occasions
of  importance.  A  volume  of  his  addresses,  with  a
biographical  sketch  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Nichols,  of
Portland,  was  published  in  1820.  Two  years  later
his  lectures  and  occasional  sermons  were  published,
with  a  memoir  by  the  Rev.  B.  Tappan.  These
and  other  writings  were  collected  in  a  two-volume
edition,  entitled  "The  Works  of  Jesse  Appleton,
D.  D."  (Andover,  1836).

APPLETON,  John,  lawver,  b.  in  Beverly,  Mass.,
11  Feb.,  1815;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  22  Aug.,  1864.
He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  college  in  1834,  in
1837  began  the  practice  of  law  in  Portland,  and
soon  afterward  became  editor  of  the  "  Eastern  Ar-
gus." At  this  time  he  was  register  of  probate  for
Cumberland  co.  In  1845  he  was  appointed  chief
clerk  of  the  navy  department,  subsequently  chief
clerk  of  the  state  department,  and  in  1848  was  sent
out  to  Bolivia  as  charge  d'affaires  for  the  United
States.  On  his  return  in  1849  he  resumed  his  law
practice  in  Portland,  and  he  was  elected  to  congress
in  1850.  In  1855-56  he  was  secretary  of  legation
in  London,  in  1857  assistant  secretary  of  state,  and
in  1860  became  minister  to  Russia.

APPLETON,  John  Howard,  chemist,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  3  Feb.,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  University  in  1863,  the  following  year  be-
came instructor  in  chemistry  there,  and  in  1868
was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  and  applied  arts.
Since  1872  he  has  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  only.


I


APPLETON


APPLING


85


Prof.  Appleton  has  written  a  series  of  chemical
text-books  that  have  had  an  extensive  sale.  They
are  "The  Young  Chemist"  (Philadelphia,  1878);
"  Qualitative  Analysis  "  (1878) ;  "  Quantitative  Anal-
ysis "  (1881) ;  and  "  Chemistry  of  Non-Metals "
(Providence,  1884),

APPLETON,  John  James,  diplomatist,  b.  in
France  about  1789;  d.  in  Rennes,  France,  4  March,
1864.  His  father  was  John  Appleton,  some  time
U.  S.  consul  at  Calais.  John  James  studied  at
Phillips  Andover  academy,  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1813.  During  President  Monroe's  ad-
ministration he  was  appointed  secretary  of  lega-
tion at  Brazil,  and  afterward  charge  d'affaires  for
the  United  States  at  Madrid  and  at  Stockholm,
At  the  latter  post  he  negotiated  the  commercial
treaty  that  still  serves  as  the  basis  of  intercourse
between  the  United  States  and  Sweden.  He  also
served  as  a  diplomatic  representative  of  the  United
States  at  Naples.  Inheriting  from  his  father  a
valuable  estate  in  France,  he  spent  the  greater
part  of  his  life  there,  making  only  occasional  vis-
its to  America.

APPLETON,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ips-
wich, Mass.,  9  Dec,  1693  ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass..
9  Feb.,  1784.  He  was  educated  at  Harvard,  taking
his  degree  in  1712,  studied  theology,  and  was  or-
dained 9  Oct.,  1717,  succeeding  Mr.  Brattle  as  Con-
gregational minister.  From  1717  to  1779  he  was
one  of  the  corporation  of  Harvard  university.  He
published  sermons  and  occasional  discourses.

APPLETON,  Samuel,  merchant,  b,  in  New
Ipswich,  N.  H.,  22  June,  1766;  d.  in  Boston,  12
July,  1853.  His  youth  was  spent  on  a  farm  and
in  teaching.  For  a  time  he  kept  a  store  in  Ips-
wich, but  he  removed  to  Boston  in  1794  and  went
into  the  importing  business  in  partnership  with
his  brother  Nathan.  He  also  established  cotton
mills  at  Waltham  and  Ijowell.  After  1799  he
passed  much  of  his  time  abroad,  until  he  retired
from  business  in  1823.  He  was  at  this  time  liter-
ally a  merchant  prince,  and,  with  true  nobility  of
character,  devoted  a  large  part  of  his  income  to
charitable  purposes.  He  made  it  a  rule  to  spend
annually  his  whole  income,  and  to  this  end  often
placed  large  sums  for  distribution  in  the  hands  of
those  who  were  likely  to  meet  cases  of  destitution.
At  his  death  the  sum  of  $200,000  was  distributed
among  charities.  See  memoir,  by  I.  A.  Jewett
(Boston,  1850). — His  brother,  Nathan,  merchant,
b.  in  New  Ipswich,  N.  H.,  6  Oct.,  1779 ;  d,  in  Bos-
ton, 14  July,  1861,  He  entered  Dartmouth  college
in  1794,  but  soon  left  to  engage  in  business  with
Samuel  in  Boston.  When  lie  became  of  age  he
was  admitted  into  partnership,  and  the  firm  was
known  as  S.  &  N.  Appleton.  In  1813  he  was  as-
sociated with  Francis  C.  Lowell,  Patrick  T.  Jack-
son, Paul  Moody,  and  others,  in  establishing  the
Waltham  cotton  manufactory,  in  which  the  first
power  loom  ever  used  in  the  United  States  was  set
up.  This  proving  successful,  he  and  others  pur-
chased the  water-power  at  Pawtucket  Falls,  and  he
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Merrimac  Manu-
facturing Company.  The  settlement  that  grew
around  these  factories  developed  into  the  city  of
Lowell,  of  which  in  1821  Mr,  Appleton  was  one
of  the  three  founders.  He  was  also  the  projector
and  chief  proprietor  of  the  Hamilton  Company.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature  in  1815,
served  during  several  terms,  and  was  elected
to  congress  in  1830  and  again  in  1842.  He  was
the  author  of  several  speeches  and  essays  on  cur-
rency, banking,  and  the  tariff,  of  which  his  "  Re-
marks on  Currency  and  Banking "  (enlarged  ed.,
1858)  is  the  most  celebrated. An  account  of  the


introduction  of  the  power  loom  and  of  the  origin
of  Lowell  was  published  by  him.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Academy  of  Science  and  Arts,  and  of  the
Massachusetts  Historical  Society.  He  accumulated
great  wealth,  and  was  noted  for  his  benevolence.
A  memoir  of  his  life  has  been  written  by  Robert
C.  Winthrop  of  Boston.

APPLETON,  Thomas  Gold,  author,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  31  March,  1812;  d.  in  New  York,  17
April,  1884.  His  early  training  was  received  at
the  Boston  Latin  school,  where  he  was  prepared  to
enter  Harvard  in  the  class  of  1831.  Among  his
classmates  were  J,  L.  Motley,  Wendell  Phillips,
and  other  distin-
guished men.  Mr.
Appleton  spent
much  of  his  time
abroad.  He  was  a
liberal  patron  of  the
fine  arts,  and  gave
efficient  aid  to  va-
rious institutions,
including  the  pub-
lic library,  the  insti-
tute of  technology,
and  the  museums  at
Boston  and  Cam-
bridge. He  was
an  amateur  painter
of  superior  merit,
and  his  water-color
sketches  of  scenes
on  the  river  Nile
are  exceptionally
good.  He  was  the
author of several

books  in  prose  and  verse.  In  poetry  his  "  Faded
Leaves "  was  well  received  by  the  reading  public.
In  prose  he  published  his  "  Nile  Journal "  (Boston,
1876),  "  Syrian  Sunshine  "  (1877),  "  Windfalls,"  and
other  works.  He  was  the  founder  of  the  Boston
literary  club,  was  highly  esteemed  for  his  genial
temper  and  courteous  manners,  and  was  looked
upon  by  those  who  knew  him  as  unrivalled  for  wit
and  humor.  A  volume  of  his  "  Life  and  Letters,"
prepared  by  Susan  Hale,  was  published  in  New
York  in  1885.

APPLETON,  William,  merchant,  b,  in  Brook-
field,  Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1786 ;  d.  in  Longwood,  near
Boston,  20  Feb.,  1862.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.
Joseph  Appleton,  of  Brookfield,  received  an  aca-
demical education,  and  at  the  age  of  fifteen  became
a  clerk  in  a  country  store  at  Temple.  In  1807  he
went  to  Boston,  where  for  over  fifty  years  he  was
a  successful  merchant,  giving  also  much  attention
to  banking  and  financial  operations.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  U.  S.  branch  bank  from  1832  to  1836,
and  was  also  president  of  the  provident  institution
for  savings  and  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital.
He  gave  $30,000  to  the  last-named  institution,  and
was  noted  for  his  benevolence.  He  was  elected  as
a  whig  to  congress,  serving  from  1851  to  1855.  and
again  was  a  member  in  the  special  session  from  4
July  to  6  Aug.,  1861,  after  which  he  resigned.

APPLINtr,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Columbia
CO.,  Gra.,  25  Aug.,  1787;  d.  at  Fort  Montgomery,
Ala.,  18  March,  1817.  He  entered  the  army  as
lieutenant  in  1808.  On  19  May,  1814,  being  then
a  major,  he  commanded  a  detachment  of  130  rifle-
men on  board  a  flotilla  bearing  cannon  and  naval
stores  from  Oswego,  N.  Y,,  to  the  unfinished  ship
"  Superior  "  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  then  blockaded  by
the  British.  Finding  it  impossible  to  run  the
blockade,  Woolsey,  the  commander  of  the  flotilla,
landed  the  stores  by  night  at  Sandy  creek. Here


86


ARACENA


ARCE


the  party  were  attacked  by  the  British,  who  ex-
pected an  easy  victory,  but  were  completely  sur-
prised by  Appling  and  his  men,  concealed  in  the
bushes  on  the  banks.  The  British  squadron,  with
170  officers  and  men,  fell  into  the  hands  of  tlie
Americans,  and  the  naval  stores  were  delivered
safely  at  Sackett's  Harbor.  For  his  conduct  in
this  engagement  Appling  was  brevetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel. He  distinguished  himself  afterward
at  Plattsbui'g,  and  was  brevetted  colonel  in  1814.
On  1  June,  1816,  he  resigned  from  the  army.

ARACENA,  1)0111  inick,  scholar,  b.  in  Santiago,
Chili,  in  1810 ;  d.  there  in  1874.  He  was  educated
at  the  school  of  the  Dominicans  in  Santiago,  and
entered  the  novitiate  of  the  order  at  the  age  of  fif-
teen. He  afterward  learned  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  the
principal  modern  languages,  and  attracted  so  much
attention  in  his  public  discussions  that  he  was  known
as  the  Pico  de  la  Mirandola  of  Chili.  During  the
twenty  years  that  he  was  professor  in  his  convent
his  knowledge  of  jurisprudence  was  so  highly  es-
teemed that  he  was  constantly  visited  by  lawyers
and  statesmen,  as  well  as  by  successive  presidents,
who  consulted  him  on  difficult  points  of  constitu-
tional law.  It  is  said  by  his  biographers  that  several
changes  in  the  laws  of  Chili  were  brought  about  by
his  advice.  He  wrote  several  works,  one  of  which,
"  Vindicacion  de  la  nota  de  Inquisidores,"  has  been
translated  into  French  by  Lacordaire.

AKAGO,  Jean  (ah-ra'-go),  Mexican  general,  b.
in  France  in  1788 ;  d.  in  1886.  From  Perpignan,
where  he  had  held  a  public  office,  he  went  to  New
Orleans,  and,  having  joined  the  expedition  of  young
Mina,  he  rendered  efficient  service  in  the  war  of  in-
dependence. In  many  of  Santa  Anna's  campaigns
the  principal  part  was  that  taken  by  Arago.

ARANGO  Y  PARRENO,  Francisco  de,  Cu-
ban statesman,  b.  in  Havana  in  May,  1765 ;  d.  there
in  1837.  He  went  to  Spain  in  1787,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1789,  and  in  1813  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative for  Cuba  in  the  Spanish  cortes,  where
he  advocated  the  abolition  of  slavery.  In  1818  he
returned  to  Havana.  He  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Sociedad  Patriotica  de  Amigos  del  Pais,
which  has  conferred  many  benefits  upon  Cuba.  To
his  exertions  were  due  the  opening  of  the  ports  of
the  island  to  foreign  commerce,  and  also  the  aboli-
tion of  the  tobacco  monopoly.  These  measures  were
the  origin  of  the  commercial  progress  and  pros-
perity of  Cuba.  Agriculture  also  owes  much  to
Arango,  who  introduced  new  methods  of  cultivat-
ing the  land,  and  also  the  Othai'ti  sugar  cane,  which
supplanted  the  Creole  cane  and  has  been  a  source  of
immense  wealth.  Arango  wrote  numerous  pam-
phlets and  memoirs,  some  of  which  have  been  trans-
lated into  French  and  English.  Humboldt  called
him  "  one  of  the  first  of  the  Spanish  statesmen."

ARANGO,  Rafael  de,  soldier,  b.  in  Havana  in
1788 ;  d.  there  in  1850.  He  took  part  in  the  upris-
ing in  Madrid  on  2  May,  1808,  against  the  French
invasion,  under  Napoleon  I.  This  was  the  begin-
ning of  the  peninsular  war  for  independence,  so
fatal  to  the  French  armies.  Arango  retired  from
active  military  service  in  1821  as  a  colonel  of  cav-
alry, went  to  Cuba,  where  he  wrote  an  historical
sketch  with  the  title  of  "  El  dos  de  Mayo,"  and  pub-
lished also  a  "  Prontuario  de  Agricultura  "  (1828).

ARANGO  Y  ESCAND6n,  Alejandro  (ah-
ran'-go  e  es-kah-oo-don'),  Mexican  author,  b.  in
Puebla,  8  July,  1821.  He  was  educated  in  Madrid
and  Paris,  and  has  filled  several  high  offices,  but
declined  to  accept  any  compensation  for  his  public
services.  His  library  is  one  of  the  richest  in  Mexi-
co. A  volume  of  poems  and  the  excellent  "  Ensayo
historico  sobre  Fray  Luis  de  Leon  "  are  among  his


best  works.  The  last  named  won  him  membership
in  both  the  Royal  Spanish  academy  and  the  aead-
emv  of  history  of  Spain,

ARANZAZU,  Juan  de  Dios  (ar-an-thah'-thoo),
Colombian  statesman,  b.  in  Antioquia  near  the
close  of  the  18th century;  d.  in  1845.  He  began
his  political  career  when  very  young,  and  filled
high  offices  since  1823  until  1841,  then  taking
charge  of  the  executive.  He  distinguished  himself
for  his  ability,  great  learning,  and  spirit  of  justice  in
his  public  dealings.

ARAUJO  Y  RIO,  Jos6,  Spanish  governor  of
Guatemala,  under  Kings  Philip  V.  and  Ferdinand
VI.,  from  1742  until  1751.  Pie  succeeded  Gen.
Rivera  y  Villalon,  and  was  replaced  by  Gen.  Vaz-
quez Priego.

ARBOLEDA,  Julio  (ar-bo-lay'-dah),  Colombian
poet,  d.  in  1872.  He  received  his  education  in  Eu-
rope, and  wrote  in  French,  English,  and  Italian,  as
well  as  in  his  own  language.  His  poems,  entitled
"  Dios  y  la  virtud,"  "  Estoy  en  la  carcel,"  "  Me  au-
sento,"  "  Te  quiero,"  and  the  long  one  called  "  Gon-
zalo  de  Oyon,"  deserve  especial  notice.  He  was  as-
sassinated, it  is  supposed,  by  political  enemies.  A
collection  of  his  poetry  was  republished  in  New
York  in  1884.

ARBUCKLE,  Mattliew,  soldier,  b.  in  Green-
brier CO.,  Va.,  in  1776;  d.  at  Fort  Smith,  Ark.,  11.
June,  1851.  He  entered  the  army  as  an  ensign  in
1799,  became  a  captain  in  1806,  major  in  1812,  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1814,  colonel  of  the  7th  infantry
in  1820,  and  brevet  brigadier-general  in  1830.  In
1817  he  was  successful  in  an  expedition  against  the
Fowltoun  Indians,  and  in  1846-'47  served  in  the
Mexican  war.  He  commanded  at  New  Orleans,
Fort  Gibson,  and  Fort  Smith.  During  much  of  his
life  he  was  brought  constantly  in  contact  with  the
Indians  of  the  frontier,  and,  by  his  knowledge  of
their  character,  always  kept  their  confidence.

ARBUTHNOT,  Marriot,  British  admiral,  b.
in  1711 ;  d.  in  London,  31  Jan.,  1794.  He  was  a
nephew  of  Dr.  John  Arbuthnot,  the  poet.  He  be-
came post-captain  in  1747,  and  in  1775  was  made
naval  commissioner  at  Halifax,  where  he  resided
until  1778.  He  returned  to  England  a  rear  admiral,
and  in  1779  was  made  vice  admiral,  and  command-
er-in-chief on  the  American  station.  Soon  after
arriving  at  his  destination  he  was  blockaded  in  New
York  harbor  by  the  French  fleet  under  D'Estaing.
In  December,  1779,  he  conveyed  the  troops  of  Sir
Henry  Clinton  to  Charleston,  and  cooperated  with
him  in  laying  siege  to  that  city.  The  fleet  appeared
off  the  harbor  on  9  March,  1780,  and  entered  it  on
9  April.  After  a  short  siege  the  city  surrendered
on  12  May,  and  was  given  up  to  pillage.  For  this
success  Arbuthnot  received  the  thanks  of  parlia-
ment. On  16  March,  1781,  Arbuthnot  obtained
some  advantage  over  the  French  fleet  in  an  engage-
ment off  the  capes  of  Virginia.  In  1793  he  was
made  admiral  of  the  blue.  At  the  time  of  his  ser-
vice in  America,  Arbuthnot  was  old  and  inefficient,
and  Sir  Henry  Clinton  complained  bitterly  to  the
home  government  of  his  incapacity.

ARCE,  Francisco,  pioneer,  b.  in  Lower  Cali-
fornia in  1822 ;  d.  in  1878.  From  the  age  of  eleven
he  lived  in  Alta  California.  At  the  time  of  the
American  conquest  in  1846  he  was  a  military  officer,
and  was  secretary  to  Gen.  Jose  Castro,  commander
of  the  Californian  forces.  His  name  is  known  from
his  connection  with  a  party  of  men  who,  in  June,
1846,  were  bringing  horses,  generally  supposed  to
belong  to  the  Californian  government,  from  Sono-
ma to  the  south.  Capt.  John  C.  Fremont,  then  in
command  of  an  American  surveying  party  in  the
territory,  incited  American  settlers  to  assail  the


ARCE


ARCHIBALD


87


party,  seize  upon  the  horses,  and  begin  hostilities
against  the  Californian  government.  From  this
Arce-affair  of  6  June  dates  the  l)eginning  of  the
"  Bear  Flag  "  revolt  and  of  the  seizure  of  Califor-
nia by  the  Americans.

ARCE,  Manuel,  Mexican  priest,  b.  in  Aguasca-
lientes,  5  April,  1725 ;  d.  in  Bologna,  Italy,  28  June,
1785.  He  was  a  Jesuit,  was  distinguished  for  his
learning,  and  was  in  succession  rector  of  the  col-
leges belonging  to  his  order  in  Puebla.  Zacatecas,
and  Guadalajara,  and  then  took  charge  of  the  Jes-
uit missions  among  the  Chiehimecan  Indians.  When
Charles  III.  of  Spain  expelled  the  Jesuits  from  his
dominions,  25  June,  1767,  Father  Arce  went  to
Bologna,  Italy,  and,  with  funds  furnished  mostly
by  other  Jesuits  belonging  to  rich  Mexican  fami-
lies, he  founded  a  benevolent  institution  for  the
old  and  needy,  called  the  Hospital  for  Septua-
genarians. There  he  personally  attended  to  every-
thing concerning  the  care  of  the  inmates,  even  to
cleaning  their  rooms  and  cooking  their  food,  un-
til his  death.

ARCH  BOLD,  Oeor^e,  chemist,  b.  in  Ford  Flod-
den  Field,  Scotland,  4  May,  1848.  He  studied
chemistry  in  Berwick-on-Tweed,  Edinbui'gh,  Lon-
don, and  Berlin,  and  has  published  many  papers
on  chemical  subjects.  He  came  to  the  IJnited
States  in  1881,  and  has  since  devoted  his  attention

Erincipally  to  the  manufacture  of  starch,  in  which
e  has  made  important  investigations. Dr.  Arch-
bold  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies.

ARCHDALE,  John,  English  governor  of  North
Carolina.  He  was  a  son  of  Thomas  Archdale  of
Loaks,  in  Chipping  Wycomb,  Bucks  co.,  England,
and  came  to  New  England  in  1664  as  agent  of  his
brother-in-law,  Gov.  Gorges  of  Maine.  He  visited
North  Carolina  in  March,  1686,  and  was  commis-
sioner for  Gorges  in  Maine  in  1687-'88.  He  be-
came governor  of  North  Carolina  in  1695,  and  held
the  office  for  about  two  years.  He  was  sagacious,
prudent,  and  moderate,  and  under  his  administra-
tion the  province  made  great  progress  in  internal
improvements.  He  introduced  rice  culture  into
Carolina  by  distributing  among  some  friends  a
bag  of  seed  rice  brought  by  the  captain  of  a  vessel
from  Madagascar.  Archdale  was  formerly  a  mem-
ber of  the  society  of  Friends,  and,  while  enforcing
a  militia  law,  exempted  all  Friends  from  service.
By  his  moderation  he  quieted  the  troubles  between
the  colonists  and  their  feudal  sovereigns,  and,  by
establishing  a  special  board  for  deciding  contests
between  white  men  and  Indians,  he  won  the  friend-
ship of  the  latter.  His  conscientious  scruples  con-
cerning the  required  oaths  prevented  his  taking  a
seat  in  parliament,  to  which  he  was  elected  in  1698.
Archdale  published  "  A  New  Description  of  the
Fertile  and  Pleasant  Province  of  Carolina,  with  a
Brief  Account  of  its  Discovery,  Settling,  and  Gov-
ernment up  to  this  Time,  with  several  Remarkable
Passages  during  My  Time"  (London,  1707).  See
Hewatt's  "  Historical  Account  of  the  Rise  and
Progress  of  the  Colonies  of  South  Carolina  and
Georgia"  (London,  1779);  Holmes's  "Annals  of
America  "  (Cambridge,  1829) ;  and  Bancroft's  "  His-
tory of  the  United  States  "  (New  York,  1884).

ARCHER,  Branch  T.,  Texan  revolutionist,  b.
in  Virginia  in  1790;  d.  in  Brazoria  co..  Texas,  22
Sept.,  1856.  He  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia,
and  was  for  many  years  a  physician  and  politician
in  his  native  state,  being  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture several  times.  In  1831  he  removed  to  Texas,
and  became  a  prominent  actor  in  the  movements
preliminary  to  the  revolution.  On  3  Nov.,  1835,  he
presided  over  the  famous  "  consultation  "  held  by
the  American  settlers,  and  with  Col.  Stephen  Aus-


tin and  N.  H.  Wharton  formed  a  board  of  three
commissioners  to  solicit  aid  from  the  United  States
in  the  struggle  for  Texan  independence.  He  was  a
member  of  the  first  Texan  congress  in  1836,  and
afterward  went  to  Washington,  where  he  became
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives  and  secre-
tary of  war  from  1839  to  1842,  when  by  reason  of
ill  health  he  was  obliged  to  retire  to  private  life.

ARCHER,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Harford  co.,
Md.,  6  June,  1741 :  d.  there  in  1810.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1760,  and  studied  theology,
but  relinquished  this  on  account  of  a  throat  trouble,
and,  after  studying  medicine,  received  in  1768,  from
the  Philadelphia  medical  college,  the  first  medical
diploma  issued  on  this  continent.  He  raised  and
commanded  a  military  company  at  the  beginning
of  the  revolution,  was  for  several  years  a  member
of  the  legislature,  and  was  chosen  presidential  elec-
tor in  1801.  From  1801  to  1807  he  was  a  member
of  congress  from  Maryland.  He  made  several  dis-
coveries in  medicine,  which  have  been  adopted  by
the  profession. — His  son,  Stevenson,  jurist,  b.  in
Harford  co.,  Md. ;  d.  5  June,  1848,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1805,  and  studied  law.  He  be-
came a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals,  and  was  ap-
pointed chief  justice  in  1845,  holding  the  office
until  his  death.  He  served  in  congress  from  4
Nov.,  1811,  to  3  March,  1817,  and  from  6  Dec,
1819,  to  3  March,  1821.  During  his  last  term  he
was  a  member  of  the  committee  on  foreign  af-
fairs. In  the  interval  from  1817  to  1819  he  was
U.  S.  judge  for  the  territory  of  Mississippi.  In
politics  he  was  a  democrat.

ARCHER,  Samuel  B.,  soldier,  b.  about  1790;
d.  in  Philadelphia,  11  Dec,  1825.  He  was  ap-
pointed to  the  army  from  Virginia,  12.  March,
1812,  as  captain  in  "the  2d  artillery,  and,  on  27
May,  1813,  was  brevetted  major  "  for  gallantry  and
good  conduct  in  the  cannonade  and  bombardment
of  Fort  George,  on  26  and  27  May,  1813."  He  was
distinguished  at  Stony  Creek,  6  June,  1813,  and,  on
10  Nov.,  1821,  became  inspector-general,  with  the
rank  of  colonel.

ARCHER,  William  S.,  statesman,  b.  in  Amelia
CO.,  Va.,  5  March,  1789;  d.  there,  28  March,  1855.
His  family  was  of  Welsh  origin,  and  his  father  and
grandfather  both  served  with  honor  in  the  revolu-
tion. The  former,  Maj.  John  Archer,  was  aide  to
Gen.  Wayne,  and  acquitted  himself  with  gallantry
at  the  capture  of  Stony  Point ;  the  latter,  Col.  Will-
iam Archer,  died  on  a  British  prison-ship.  William
S.  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  in  1806,
and  studied  law.  He  served  in  the  legislature,
with  the  exception  of  one  year,  from  1812  to  1819.
From  1820  till  1835  he  was  a  representative  in  con-
gress, where,  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  for-
eign relations,  and  member  of  the  committee  on
the  Missouri  compromise,  he  exerted  great  influ-
ence. From  1841  till  1847  he  was  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  senate,  and  in  this  body  also  was  at  the  head
of  the  committee  on  foreign  relations.

ARCHIBALD,  Sir  Adams  George,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Truro,  N.  S.,  3  May,  1814.  He  is  the
son  of  Samuel  Archibald,  and  grandson  of  the  late
James  Archibald,  judge  of  the  coui't  of  common
pleas.  N.  S.  He  was  educated  at  Pictou  academy,
and  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Prince  Edward  island
in  1838,  and  to  that  of  Nova  Scotia  in  1839.  He
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  of  Nova
Scotia,  first,  as  solicitor-general,  from  14  Aug.,  1856,
until  14  Feb.,  1857;  secondlv,  as  attorney-general,
from  10  Feb.,  1860,  until  11  June,  1863.  He  was  a
delegate  to  England  in  1857  to  arrange  terms  of
settlement  with  the  British  government  and  the
general  mining  association  in  respect  to  Nova  Sco-


88


ARCHIBALD


ARGUELLO


tian  mines,  and  also  to  ascertain  the  views  of  the
government  relative  to  the  projected  union  of  the
British-American  provinces.  He  was  a  delegate  to
Quebec,  on  the  subject  of  tiie  Intercolonial  railway,
in  1861 ;  to  the  Charlottetown  union  conference,
1864 ;  and  to  the  final  conference,  1866-'67,  in  Lon-
don to  complete  the  terms  of  union.  He  was
sworn  of  the  privy  council  1  July,  1867,  and  was
secretary  of  state  for  the  provinces  from  1  July,
1867,  until  his  resignation  in  1868 ;  was  lieutenant-
governor  of  Manitoba  and  the  northwest  territories
from  20  May,  1870,  until  May,  1873,  when  he  re-
signed and  was  a  judge  in  equity  of  Nova  Scotia
from  24  June,  1873,  until  4  July  of  the  same  year,
when  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Nova
Scotia.  He  was  one  of  the  directors  of  the  Canadian
Pacific  railway,  under  Sir  Hugh  Allan,  in  1873,  and
in  1885  was  knighted.  He  represented  Colchester
in  the  Nova  Scotia  assembly  from  1851  to  1859,  and
when  that  county  was  divided  was  elected  for
South  Colchester,  of  which  he  was  the  representa-
tive until  the  union  of  the  provinces  in  1867;  and
sat  for  Colchester  in  the  house  of  commons  until
appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Manitoba.

ARCHIBALD,  Thomas  Dickson,  Canadian
senator,  b.  in  Onslow,  N.  S.,  in  1813.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Pictou  academy.  In  1832  he  entered  into
partnership  with  his  brother  in  a  general  business
in  connection  with  the  Sydney  mines.  He  was  con-
sular agent  of  the  United  States  at  Sydney  until
he  was  called  to  the  senate,  was  a  member  of  the
executive  council  of  Nova  Scotia  from  1860  to  1863,
and  sat  in  the  legislative  council  of  Nova  Scotia
from  1856  until  the  date  of  the  union  of  the  prov-
inces, 1867,  when  he  was  called  to  the  senate.

ARCOS  Y  MORENO,  Alonso,  Spanish  general.
He  was  the  governor  of  Guatemala  from  1754  to
1760,  under  Kings  Ferdinand  VI.  and  Charles  III,
He  replaced  governor  Juan  de  Velarde  y  Cienfu-
gos,  who  again  held  office  after  Arcos  was  recalled.

ARfiCHAGA,  Juan  de,  Cuban  jurist,  b.  in  Ha-
vana in  the  first  half  of  the  16th  century.  He
studied  in  his  native  city,  and  went  to  Spain,  was
graduated  as  LL,  D.  at  Salamanca  in  1662,  and  be-
came a  professor  there.  In  the  same  year  he  pub-
lished in  that  city  his  "  Arechaga  Comentaria  Juris
Civilis,"  and  in  1666  his  "Extemporaneas  Comen-
tationes."  Arechaga  went  in  1671  to  Mexico,  where
he  filled  important  offices,  being  finally  appointed
governor  and  captain-general  of  the  province  of
Yucatan, The  date  of  his  death  is  not  known.

ARENALES,  Jos6  (ah-reh-nah'-les),  Argentine
geographer,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  about  1790.  He
entered  the  army  when  quite  young,  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  of  artillery  about
1825,  and  in  1833  took  charge  of  the  topographical
department  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  then  travelled
through  almost  every  portion  of  South  America.
His  highly  interesting  report  of  some  of  these
travels  was  published  under  the  title  of  "  Noticias
historicas  y  descriptivas  sobre  el  gran  pais  del
Chaco  y  Rio  Berraejo,  con  observaciones  relativas  a
un  plan  de  navegacion  v  de  colon izacion."

ARENTS,  Albert,  metallurgist,  b.  in  Clausthal,
Germany,  14  March,  1840,  He  was  educated  at  the
mining  schools  in  Clausthal  and  Berlin,  study-
ing also  at  the  university  of  Berlin,  After  coming
to  the  United  States  he  was  variously  occupied  as
mining  superintendent  and  also  in  charge  of  met-
allurgical mills  and  smelting  works  in  Arizona,
California,  Colorado,  Nevada,  and  Utah.  He  has
contributed  valuable  technical  papers  to  the  "  Trans-
actions of  the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engi-
neers," having  been  elected  a  member  of  that  so-
ciety in  1882. Among  his  inventions  are  the  siphon


tap,  now  everywhere  used  on  lead  furnaces,  the  Eu-
reka lead  furnace,  extensively  employed  throughout
Colorado  and  Utah,  and  the  well-known  roasting
furnace  that  bears  his  name,

AREY,  Harriet  Ellen  (Grannis),  author,  b,  in
Cavendish,  Vt,,  14  April,  1819.  Her  father,  John
Grannis,  was  a  member  of  the  Canadian  parliament
at  the  breaking  out  of  the  rebellion  of  1837,  and
was  obliged  to  flee  to  the  United  States,  where  he
afterward  held  positions  of  trust.  The  daughter
became  a  school-teacher  in  Cleveland,  and  a  con-
tributor to  periodicals.  She  married  Oliver  Arey
in  1848,  and  edited  the  "  Youth's  Casket "  and  the
"  Home  Monthly."  Her  principal  work  is  "  House-
hold Songs  and  other  Poems  "  (New  York,  1854).

ARGrALL,  Sir  Samuel,  English  deputy  gov-
ernor of  Virginia,  b.  in  Bristol,  England,  in  1572 ;
d.  in  1639.  He  was  one  of  the  early  adventurers
to  Virginia,  his  first  public  exploit  being  the  ab-
duction of  Pocahontas.  By  the  present  of  a  copper
kettle,  Argall  induced  the  Indian  in  charge  of  the
girl  to  entice  her  on  board  his  vessel,  hoping  to  re-
ceive a  large  ransom  from  her  father;  but  this
Powhatan  refused  to  give.  When  Sir  Thomas
Dale  was  governor  of  Virginia,  in  1613,  Argall  with
his  sanction  commanded  an  expedition  that  de-
stroyed the  French  settlements  of  St,  Croix  and
Port  Royal  in  Nova  Scotia,  and  that  of  St.  Saviour
on  Mt,  Desert  island.  As  deputy  governor  of  Vir-
ginia from  1617  to  1619  he  distinguished  himself
by  many  acts  of  tyranny  and  rapacity,  so  that  he
was  recalled  to  England  in  1619.  He  had  amassed
a  fortune  by  trading  in  violation  of  law,  but  was
shielded  from  punishment  by  his  partner,  the  earl
of  Warwick.  He  was  hated  by  the  colonists  for
his  enactment  of  severe  sumptuary  laws,  and  for
his  arbitrary  conduct  in  general.  Argall  took  part
in  the  expedition  against  the  Algerines  in  1620,
was  knighted  in  1623,  and  in  1625  joined  an  expe-
dition against  the  Spanish.  Purchas  gives  an  ac-
count of  his  voyage  from  Jamestown  in  1610,  and
has  also  preserved  his  letter,  written  in  1618,  about
his  voyage  to  Virginia.  After  the  death  of  Lord
Delaware,  Capt,  Argall  took  charge  of  his  estate,
and  was  accused  by  Lady  Delaware,  in  letters  still
in  existence,  of  the  grossest  peculation.  See
Beverley's  "  History  of  the  Present  State  of  Vir-
ginia "  (London,  1705) ;  Abiel  Holmes's  "  Annals
of  America "  (Cambridge,  1829) ;  Marshall's  "  Life
of  Washington " ;  Bancroft's  "History  of  the  Unit-
ed States "  (New  York,  1884) ;  and  "  Virginia  Ve-
tusta  "  (Albany,  1885).

ARGENSON  D',  Pierre  de  Yoyer,  viscount,
French  governor  of  Canada,  k  in  1626  ;  d.  in  France
about  1709.  He  came  of  a  noble  family  of  Tour-
aine,  and  distinguished  himself  in  several  military
engagements.  He  became  governor  of  Canada  on
27  Jan.,  1657,  and  held  the  office  until  1661.  Un-
der his  administration  Canada  was  not  only  occu-
pied in  repelling  Indian  incursions,  but  was  torn
by  internal  quarrels.  He  made  some  progress,
however,  in  discovery  in  the  region  on  Hudson  bay
and  beyond  Lake  Superior.

ARGUELLO,  Luis  Antonio,  governor  of  Cali-
fornia, b.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  1784;  d.  there
in  1830.  He  was  a  member  of  a  large  and  influen-
tial family,  was  governor  of  California  from  No-
vember, i822,  till  November,  1825,  and  had  been
military  officer  under  the  Spanish  government.  He
was  the  first  governor  under  the  Mexican  rule,  and
the  only  one  under  the  Mexican  empire.  He  was
also  the  first  native  of  California  called  to  serve  in
this  capacity.  While  in  office  he  was  led  into  nu-
merous dealings  with  the  Russians,  who  had  founded
a  colony  in  the  northern  part  of  the  territory,  and


I


ARIAS


ARMAND


his  policy  toward  them  was  highly  liberal,  even  dan-
gerously so.  Before  he  became  governor  he  had
acquired  some  note  by  an  exploring  expedition  into
the  unknown  northern  parts  of  California. — His  sis-
ter, Coiicepcion  (b.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  in  1790 ;
d.  in  Benecia  in  1857),  was  noted  for  her  romance
with  Rezanof,  the  first  Russian  explorer  that  showed
definite  designs  upon  any  part  of  California.  In
1806  Rezanof,  in  the  interests  of  the  Russian  col-
ony at  Sitka,  had  resolved  to  open  trade  with  the
Californians,  and  to  establish,  if  possible,  a  Russian
colony  in  the  territory.  To  further  his  ends,  he
became  betrothed  to  the  young  Concepcion,  hoping
for  personal  aid  from  the  influential  Argiiello  fam-
ily. He  returned  to  Russia  to  get  further  govern-
ment approval  for  his  projects,  and  suddenly  died
while  absent.  Concepcion  never  married,  and  died,
a  nun,  half  a  century  later.  Her  social  position
gave  her  story  prominence,  and  it  has  been  used
by  Bret  Harte  in  one  of  his  best-known  poems.

ARIAS,  Francisco  Gabino,  Argentine  trav-
eller, b.  in  Salto,  Buenos  Ayres  ;  d.  about  1808.  In
1774,  when  a  colonel  in  the  army,  he  explored  the
desert  known  as  "  Gran  Chaco."  On  2  June,  1780,
he  undertook  an  expedition  having  for  its  object
the  pacification  of  the  Indians,  which  lasted  until
31  Jan.,  1781,  and  in  1782  he  explored  the  river
Bermejo,  and  proved  that  it  flowed  into  the  Para-
guay and  not  into  the  Parana,  as  had  formerly  been
supposed.  He  also  gave  valuable  information  about
the  navigability  of  the  river  and  the  character  of
the  tribes  living  near  it.  His  narrative  of  this  ex-
pedition was  published  by  his  son.  Dr.  Jose  Anto-
nio Arias,  by  order  of  the  government.

ARIAS  i)E  BENAVIDES,  Pedro  (ah  -ree-as
day  ben-ah-vee'-des),  Spanish  physician  of  the  16th
century,  b.  in  Toro.  He  travelled  extensively  in
western  America,  and  made  curious  and  interest-
mg  studies  about  the  remedies  used  by  the  Indians
for  wounds,  ulcers,  and  some  specific  diseases.  His
observations  were  published  in  Spain  under  the
title  of  "  Secretos  de  chirurgia  especial  de  las  enfer-
medades  de  morbo  gallico  y  laraparones,  y  la  ma-
nera  como  se  curan  los  indios  de  llagas  y  heridas,
con  otros  secretos  hasta  agora  no  escritos."  The
dates  of  his  birth  and  death  are  not  known.

ARILLAGA,  Basilio  Manuel,  Mexican  scholar,
b.  about  1785  ;  d.  in  August,  1867.  Dr.  Arillaga
was  probably  the  most  erudite  scholar  that  Mex-
ico has  ever  produced,  and  at  various  times  had
under  his  tutorship  the  most  eminent  men  of  his
country.  In  1865  the  Abbe  Testory,  head  chaplain
of  the  French  forces,  wrote  a  pamphlet  in  defence
of  the  nationalization  of  church  property,  in  the
course  of  which  he  characterized  the  Mexican  clergy
as  ignorant  and  corrupt.  Dr.  Arillaga  replied  to
this  attack  in  three  pamphlets,  which  are  master-
pieces of  learning,  statistics,  wit,  and  sarcasm.  Dr.
Arillaga  was  superior  of  the  Jesuits  in  Mexico,  and
rector  of  the  college  of  San  Ildefonso.  He  was  ar-
rested by  the  liberal  authorities,  together  with
Bishop  drmaechea,  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  thrown  into
the  prison  of  San  Ildefonso,  where  he  died.

ARISMENDI,  Juan  Bautista,  Venezuelan
general,  b.  in  the  island  of  Margarita  in  1786,  He
was  a  captain  when  the  revolution  broke  out.  and
took  command  of  the  patriots  and  drove  the  Span-
ish Gen.  Morillo  from  the  island  after  a  long  con-
flict. He  was  one  of  the  leaders  that  assembled  a
provincial  congress  at  Angostura  on  20  July,  1817,
and  put  at  the  head  of  the  government  a  trium-
virate of  which  Bolivar  was  a  member.  In  1819
he  assisted  Bolivar  and  Paez  to  drive  Morillo  from
New  Granada  and  from  the  greater  part  of  Vene-
zuela. In  Bolivar's  absence  the  Angostura  congress


^.J^^


forced  Zea,  whom  he  had  appointed  vice-president,
to  resign,  and  chose  Arismendi  in  his  place.  On
his  return  Bolivar  restored  Zea  and  exiled  Aris-
mendi to  Margarita.  Notwithstanding  this,  Aris-
mendi espoused  the  cause  of  Bolivar  during  the
insurrection  headed  by  Paez,  in  1826,  and  rendered
great  service  to  the  nation.

ARISTA,  Mariano  (ah-rees'-tah),  Mexican  gen-
eral, b.  in  the  state  of  San  Luis  Potosi,  26  July,
1802 ;  d.  on  board  the  English  steamer  "  Tagus "
going  from  Lisbon  to  France,  7  Aug.,  1855.  Hav-
ing distinguished  himself  in  the  successive  wars
that  establislied  first  the  independence  of  Mexico
and  afterward  the  republican  form  of  government,
he  attained  a
high  position  in
the  Mexican  ar-
my, and  in  1836
was  second  in
command  to
Santa  Anna,
then  general-in-
chief.  By  the
revolutions  that
continually  agi-
tated Mexico  he
was  twice  de-
prived of  his
command ;  but
his  military

knowledge  was
indispensable  to
every  dominant
party,  and  he
was  quickly  re-
stored and  pro-
moted. In  the
war  with  the
United  States
he  commanded
at Palo Alto

and  Resaca  de  la  Palma ;  and  after  its  close  was
appointed  in  June,  1848,  minister  of  war  under
President  Herrera.  In  1850  he  was  elected  presi-
dent of  Mexico,  but  he  resigned  that  office  6
Jan.,  1853,  and  retired  to  his  farm,  and  was  ban-
ished soon  afterward.  In  1881  his  remains  were
sent  home  to  Mexico.

ARISTIZABAL,  Gabriel  de,  Spanish  admiral,
b.  in  Madrid  in  1743  ;  d.  in  1805.  In  1795  he  con-
ceived and  carried  out  the  idea  of  transferring  to
Havana  the  remains  of  Christopher  Columbus,
which,  with  those  of  his  son  Diego,  had  been  in  the
cathedral  of  the  city  of  Santo  Domingo,  in  the
island  of  Santo  Domingo,  since  1536.  Doubts
have  arisen  about  the  genuineness  of  these  remains
through  the  alleged  discovery,  in  1877,  in  the  same
cathedral,  of  what  have  been  claimed  to  be  the  true
remains  of  Columbus.

ARMAND,  Charles  Trefin,  Marquis  de  la  Rou-
aire,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Fougeres,  France,  14  April,
1751 ;  d.  near  Lambelle,  30  Jan..  1793.  At  an  early
age  he  entered  the  Garde  du  Corps  in  Paris,  but
fought  a  duel  about  an  actress,  was  dismissed
from  the  service,  and  in  consequence  left  France.
Coming  to  the  American  colonies,  he  volunteered
in  the  cause  of  the  revolution,  10  May,  1777,  and
received  from  congress  a  commission  as  colonel
under  the  name  of  Charles  Armand.  He  partici-
pated in  the  engagement  at  Red  Bank,  was  with
Lafayette  in  New  Jersey,  and  was  active  in  West-
chester CO.,  N.  Y.,  opposing  the  forces  of  Simcoe,
Emmerick,  and  Baremore,  the  latter  of  whom  he
captured  near  Kingsbridge,  8  Nov.,  1779.  The
following  year  his  corps  was  incorporated  with


90


ARMENDARIZ


ARMSBY


Pulaski's.  In  1781,  becoming  dissatisfied  with  the
promotions  in  the  army,  and  seeing  no  chance  of
advancement,  he  returned  to  France,  procured
clothing  and  accoutrements  from  his  own  means,
and  crossed  the  Atlantic  again  in  time  to  partici-
pate in  the  victory  at  Yorktown.  March  26,  1783,
congress  confen-ed  on  him  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general.  He  was  very  severe  in  his  denunciation
of  Gen.  Gates  on  account  of  the  defeat  at  Cam-
den. In  1783  he  returned  to  France  and  became
an  actor  in  the  French  revolution,  taking  part
with  the  royalists  of  La  Vendee.  Five  years  later
he  was  appointed  one  of  twelve  deputies  sent  to
Paris  by  Brittany  to  demand  the  preservation  of
the  privileges  of  that  province,  and  in  1791  became
the  leader  of  a  secret  organization  whose  ramifica-
tions extended  throughout  Brittany,  Anjou,  and
Poitou,  its  purpose  being  to  act  with  the  army  of
the  allies.  But  the  design  was  betrayed,  and  he  be-
came a  fugitive.  From  various  retreats  he  directed
for  several  months  the  preparations  for  revolt,  but
the  execution  of  Louis  XVI.  gave  his  system  such  a
shock  that  he  rapidly  sank  under  a  nervous  malady.
He  was  urbane  and  polished  in  manner,  an  eloquent
and  persuasive  speaker,  a  gallant  leader,  and  a  man
greatlv  beloved.

ARMENDARIZ,  Lope  Diaz  de  (arr-men-dah  -
reeth),  marquis  of  Caldereita,  16th  Spanish  viceroy
of  Mexico.  His  administration  began  16  Sept.,
1635,  He  promoted  public  works  and  organized  a
special  fleet  to  check  smuggling.  After  founding
the  colony  of  Caldereita  in  Nuevo  Leon,  he  pro-
jected other  settlements,  but  was  recalled  to  Spain.

ARMISTEAD,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Newmar-
ket, Va.,  10  April,  1780;  d.  in  Baltimore,  25  April,
1818.  The  name  is  derived  from  Hesse  Darm-
stadt, whence  came  the  ancestor  of  the  family.
Five  brothers  took  part  in  the  war  of  1812 — three  in
the  regular  army,  and  two  in  the  militia.  George
was  appointed  second  lieutenant  8  Jan.,  1779,  pro-
moted first  lieutenant  in  April,  captain  6  Nov.,  1806,
and  major  of  the  3d  artillery  3  March,  1813.  He
distinguished  himself  at  the  capture  of  Fort  George
from  the  British,  near  the  mouth  of  Niagara  river
in  Canada,  27  May,  1813,  and  was  bre vetted  lieu-
tenant-colonel for  his  successful  defence  of  Fort
McIIenry,  near  Baltimore,  against  the  British  fleet,
under  Admiral  Cochrane,  14  Sept.,  1814.  His
steadfast  bravery  on  this  occasion  no  doubt  saved
Baltimore  from  capture,  and  the  citizens  presented
him  with  a  handsome  service  of  silver,  the  centre-
piece being  in  the  form  of  a  bomb-shell.

ARMISTEAD,  Lewis  Addison,  soldier,  b.  in
Newbern,  N.  C,  18  Feb.,  1817 ;  d.  at  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  3  July,  1863.  He  was  a  son  of  Gen.  Walker
Keith  Armistead.  He  entered  West  Point  in  1834,
but  left  it  in  1836.  He  was  appointed  second  lieu-
tenant in  the  6th  infantry  10  July,  1839,  became
first  lieutenant  in  March,' 1844,  and  received  bre-
vets for  gallantry  at  Contreras,  Churubusco,  Molino
del  Rey,  and  Chapultepec  in  1847.  Promoted  to  be
captain  3  March,  1855,  he  rendered  good  service  in
Indian  warfare,  but  resigned  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  and  with  much  reluctance  entered
the  confederate  service,  receiving  a  brigadier-gen-
eral's commission  in  1862.  He  was  wounded  at
Antietam,  17  Sept.  of  that  year.  At  Gettysburg
he  was  one  of  the  few  in  Pickett's  division  who
nearly  reached  the  federal  lines  in  the  desperate
charge  made  on  the  third  day,  was  mortally  wound-
ed, and  died  a  prisoner.

ARMISTEAD,  Walker  Keith,  soldier,  brother
of  George,  b.  in  Virginia  about  1785;  d.  in  Upper-
ville,  Va.,  13  Oct.,  1845.  His  name  stands  third  on
the consecutively numbered  list of  West  Point


graduates,  and  at  the  head  of  the  class  of  1803,
the  second  class  that  was  graduated.  This  of  itself
was  no  especial  distinction,  since  there  were  only
three  men  in  the  class,  but  Armistead  proved  him-
self an  excellent  engineer,  and  superintended  the
defences  of  Norfolk,'Va.,  in  1808-11.  At  this  time
he  ranked  as  captain,  and  was  promoted  to  be  major
of  engineers  10  July,  1810.  In  1811  he  was  on  duty
at  the  military  academy.  During  the  war  of  1812
he  was  chief  engineer,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  army  on  the  Niagara  frontier.  He
was  superintendent' of  the  defences  of  Norfolk  and
the  Chesapeake  in  1813-'18,  when  he  was  pro-
moted to  be  colonel  of  engineers  and  chief  engineer
of  the  army,  Nov.  18.  In  the  reorganization  of  the
army,  1  June,  1821,  he  became  colonel  of  the  3d  ar-
tillery, and,  remaining  in  that  grade  for  ten  years,
was  bre  vetted  brigadier.  He  served  in  the  Flor-
ida war,  and  was  appointed  on  various  important
boards  and  commissions,  and  in  command  of  t]\e
3d  artillery  at  Fort  Moultrie,  S.  C,  in  1844,  when
he  was  granted  sick  leave,  from  which  he  was  never
able  to  return  to  duty.

ARMITAGrE,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pontc
fract,  England,  2  Aug.,  1819.  In  his  youth  he  was
a  Wesleyan  preacher,  and,  coming  to  New  York  in
1838,  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal church.  In  1848  he  embraced  the  doctrines
of  the  Baptist  church,  and  as  a  pastor  in  New  York
attained  prominence  as  one  of  the  leading  writers
and  pulpit  orators  of  that  denomination.  He  in-
terested himself  in  the  movement  for  Bible  revision,
especially  in  regard  to  what  he  believed  to  be  the
correct  translation  of  the  Greek  word  for  baptism,
and  was  one  of  the  founders  in  1850  of  the  Ameri-
can Bible  Union,  of  which  society  he  afterward
became  president.  Since  1848  he  has  been  pastor
of  the  Fifth  avenue  Baptist  church.  New  York  city.
He  has  published  "  Lectures  on  Preaching,  its  Ideal
and  Inner  Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1880),  and  "  A  His-
tory of  the  Baptists  "  (New  York,  1886).

ARMITAOE,  William  Edmond,  bishop  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  diocese  of  Wisconsin,  b.
in  New  York  city,  6  Sept.,  1830 ;  d.  in  St.  Luke's
Hospital,  New  York,  7  Dec,  1873.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  college  in  1849,  studied  in  the
General  Theological  Seminary,  was  ordained  in
1852,  spent  seven  years  of  his  ministry  in  New
Hampshire  and  Augusta,  Me.,  then  became  rec-
tor of  St.  John's  church,  Detroit.  In  1866  he  went
to  the  Holy  Land,  and  during  his  absence  was
elected  assistant  bishop  of  Wisconsin,  receiving
consecration  to  the  office  6  Dec,  1866,  soon  after
his  return.  He  took  up  his  residence  in  Milwaukee,
and  began  the  necessary  steps  for  the  founding  of
a  cathedral  chapter.  The  death  of  the  venerable
Bishop  Kemper  in  May,  1870,  caused  his  elevation  to
the  vacant  see.  A  tumor  at  the  base  of  the  spinal
column  gave  him  much  suffering  during  the  latter
years  of  his  life,  and  in  1873  he  went  to  St.  Luke's
hospital.  New  York,  for  relief.  An  examination  by
eminent  surgeons  caused  them  to  inform  him  that
it  was  impossible  for  him  to  survive  more  than  a
week  without  an  operation,  and  at  the  same  time
they  told  him  that  if  it  should  prove  unsuccessful,
his  system  would  receive  such  a  shock  that  he  would
not  probably  live  more  than  a  few  hours.  The  opera-
tion was  performed  on  Friday,  and  he  lived  till  3
A.  M.  of  Sunday.

ARMSBY,  James  H.,  phvsician,  b.  in  Sutton,
Mass.,  31  Deg.,  1809 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  3  Dec,
1875.  Plis  early  years  were  spent  on  his  father's
farm  and  in  the  common  school,  with  a  short  time
in  the  Worcester  and  Monson  academies.  He
studied  with  Dr.  Alden  March  in  Albany,  and  was


1


ARMSTRONG


ARMSTRONG


91


graduated  in  1833  at  the  Vermont  academy  of
medicine.  He  taught  for  a  year  in  a  private  medi-
cal school,  and  from  1834  to  1840  was  professor  of
anatomy  and  physiology  in  the  Vermont  academy
of  medicine.  He  conceived  the  idea  of  founding  a
university  in  Albany,  raised  $10,000  for  the  object,
and  delivered-in  that  city  the  first  American  course
of  medical  lectures  illustrated  with  dissections  of
the  human  body.  He  made  two  visits  to  Europe,
one  in  1839  and  one  in  1845,  for  the  purpose  of  in-
specting the  principal  schools  of  the  old  world,  and
went  to  Naples  in  1861  as  U.  S.  consul.  He  was
one  of  the  originators  of  the  Young  Men's  Christian
association,  and  was  also  instrumental  in  founding
the  Dudlev  observatory.

ARMSTRONG,  Darid  Hartley,  senator,  b.  in
Nova  Scotia,  21  Oct.,  1812.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education  at  the  Maine  Wesleyan  seminary,
and,  having  removed  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  16  Sept.,
1837,  opened  and  taught  the  first  public  school  in
the  state,  1  April,  1838.  He  was  comptroller  of  St.
Louis  from  1847  to  1850,  and  member  of  the  board
of  police  commissioners  from  1873  to  1875  and
again  in  1877,  serving  as  its  vice-president  and  fill-
ing other  local  offices.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  Missouri  as  a  democrat  in  October,  1877,
to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  death  *of  Lewis
V.  Bogv,  and  served  until  1879.

ARMSTRONG,  David  Maitland,  artist,  b.  in
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  about  1837.  He  was  graduated
at  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  in  1858,  studied  law
in  New  York,  and  practised  that  profession  for
a  short  time.  It  soon  became  evident  to  him  that
his  choice  of  the  law  was  a  mistake,  and  he  turned
his  attention  to  art.  He  studied  in  Rome  and
Paris  under  the  best  teachers,  and  divided  his
time  mainly  between  Italy  and  New  York.  For
four  years  he  was  U.  S.  consul-general  for  Italy,  resi-
dent at  Rome,  and  was  director  of  the  American
art  department  at  the  Paris  exposition  of  1878,  when
he  received  the  decoration  of  the  legion  of  honor.

ARMSTRONG,  George  Dodd,  author,  b.  in
Mendham,  N.  J.,  15  Sept.,  1813.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1832,  was  a  teacher  for  three
and  a  half  years,  and  then  entered  the  union  theo-
logical seminary,  Prince  Edward  co.,  Va.  Two
years  later  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  and
mechanics  in  Washington  college,  now  Washington
and  Lee  university,  Lexington.  In  1851  he  re-
signed his  professorship  and  took  pastoral  charge
of  a  church  in  Norfolk.  The  degree  of  S.  T.  D.
was  conferred  on  him  by  the  college  of  William
and  Mary  in  1854.  He  has  contributed  from  an
early  age  to  periodicals,  and  published  "The  Chris-
tian Doctrine  of  Slavery "  (New  York,  1857) ;
"  Scriptural  Examination  of  the  Doctrine  of  Bap-
tism," and  "The  Theology  of  Christian  Experi-
ence "  (1857) ;  "  The  Summer  of  the  Pestilence :  a
History  of  the  Ravages  of  the  Yellow  Fever  in
Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1855  "  (Philadelphia,  1857) :  "  Sac-
raments of  the  New  Testament "  (1880) ;  and  "  The
Books  of  Nature  and  Revelation  collated  "  (1886).

ARMSTRONG,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Shel-
byville,  Ky.,  17  Jan.,  1794;  d.  27  Aug.,  1868.  He
joined  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1809,  and  was
assigned  to  the  sloop  of  war  "  Frolic,"  which  was
ca;ptured  by  the  British  20  April,  1814,  her  guns
having  been  thrown  overboard  during  the  chase  in
the  hope  of  escaping  from  a  superior  enemy.  He
rose  by  the  regular  steps  of  promotion  to  be  a
captain  in  1841.  He  commanded  the  East  India
squadron  in  1855,  and  assisted  at  the  capture  of  the
barrier  forts  near  Canton,  China,  in  1857.  He  was
in  command  of  the  navy-yard  at  Pensacola,  Fla.,
when  that  state  seceded  in  1861,  and  surrendered


without  resistance  when  a  greatly  superior  military
force  demanded  possession.  In"  1866  he  was  pro-
moted to  be  commodore.

ARMSTRONG,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania in  the  early  part  of  the  18th  century  ;'d.
in  Carlisle,  Pa..  3  March,  1795.  Of  his  early  life
little  is  known.  He  served  as  a  colonel  in  the  suc-
cessful defence  of  Fort  Moultrie,  Charleston  har-
bor, in  the  summer  of  1776,  and  commanded  the
Pennsylvania  militia  in  the  defence  of  German-
town  in  October,  1777.  He  was  a  member  of  con-
gress from  2  Dec,  1793-,  till  the  day  of  his  death.

ARMSTRONG,  James,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Berthier,  province  of  Quebec,  27  April,  1821.  He
was  called  to  the  bar  in  1844,  became  queen's  coun-
sel in  1867,  was  nominated  crown  prosecutor  for  the
district  of  Richelieu  in  1864,  and  was  appointed
chief  justice  of  St.  Lucia,  West  Indies,  by  the  im-
perial government  in  1871.  Subsequently  he  was
appointed  chief  justice  of  Tobago,  West  Indies,
which  office  he  held  conjointly  with  the  chief  jus-
ticeship of  St.  Lucia  until  his  resignation  in  1882.
St.  Lucia  was  one  of  the  French  colonies  acquired
by  Great  Britain  by  conquest  in  1795,  and  the
French  laws  were  allowed  to  remain  in  force.
Some  unimportant  changes  were  afterward  made,
but  as  far  back  as  1845  the  chief  justice  made  a  re-
port upon  the  laws,  in  which  he  said  that  no  one
knew  what  the  law  of  the  colony,  really  was.  Such
was  the  state  of  the  law  when  Mr.  Armstrong  be-
came judge,  partly  owing  to  the  appointment  of
judges  who  knew  nothing  of  French  jurisprudence,
and  particularly  of  that  of  ante-revolutionary
France.  The  criminal  law  of  France  before  the
revolution  was  in  force  in  St.  Lucia  for  many  years,
portions  of  the  English  law  being  from  time  to
time  introduced.  Chief  justice  Armstrong  con-
vinced the  imperial  government  of  the  absolute
necessity  of  introducing  the  English  criminal  law
into  the  colony,  subject  to  the  enactments  of  the
colonial  legislature.  A  code  of  civil  law,  based  in
great  measure  upon  the  civil  code  of  Quebec,  was
compiled  by  Mr.  Armstrong  and  the  governor  of
St.  Lucia.  Mr.  Armstrong  afterward  prepared  a
code  of  civil  procedure,  which  the  legislature
adopted,  and  passed  resolutions  thanking  hira  for
his  labors.  He  wa's  created  a  companion  of  the
order  of  St.  Michael  and  St.  George  in  1857.  He
is  the  author  of  a  treatise  on  the  law  of  marriage
in  the  province  of  Quebec,  written  before  the  civil
code  came  into  force,  and  a  treatise  on  the  laws  of
intestacy  in  the  diiierent  provinces  and  northwest
territories  of  the  dominion  (1886).  He  is  president
of  the  Montreal  and  Sorel  railway.

ARMSTRONG,  James  F.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Jersey,  20  Nov.,  1817 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
19  April,  1873.  He  was  appointed  midshipman
from  Connecticut  in  1832.  His  first  service  was  on
the  sailing  frigate  "  Delaware "  in  the  Mediterra-
nean, whence  he  was  transferred  to  the  sloop  "  Bos-
ton" in  the  West  India  squadron,  in  1837.  He
became  passed  midshipman  23  June,  1838,  and  lieu-
tenant 8  Dec,  1842,  and  in  this  grade  was  alter-
nately on  sea  and  shore  duty  until  the  civil  war,
when  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  steamer
"  Sumpter  "  on  the  blockading  squadron.  As  com-
mander, dating  from  27  April,  1861,  he  continued
on  the  blockading  service,  took  part  in  the  capture
of  Fort  Macon,  25  April,  1862,  and  was  subse-
quently commissioned  captain  16  July,  1862.  His
last  cruise  was  in  1864,  after  which  he  was  on  the
reserve  list  until  1871,  when  he  was  reinstated  and
was  detailed  for  shore  duty  on  the  Pacific  coast.

ARMSTRONG,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  the  north  of
Ireland  in  1725 ;  d.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  9  March,  1795,


92


ARMSTRONG


ARMSTRONG


He  served  with  distinction  in  the  war  with  France
in  17o5-'6,  cornmanding  an  expedition  against  the
Indians  at  Kittanning,  destroying  their  settlement
and  taking  the  stores  sent  to  them  by  the  French.
For  this  service  the  corporation  of  Philadelphia
gave  him  a  vote  of  thanks,  a  medal,  and  a  piece  of
plate.  He  was  commissioned  as  a  brigadier-general
in  the  continental  army  1  March,  1776,  served  at
Fort  Moultrie,  and  commanded  the  Pennsylvania
militia  at  the  battles  of  Brandywine  and  German-
town,  but  left  the  army  4  April,  1777,  on  account
of  dissatisfaction  in  regard  to  rank.  He  was  sent
to  congress  in  1778-80,  and  again  in  1787-'8,  and
held  many  local  public  offices. — His  youngest
son,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  25  Nov.,
1758;  d.  in  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  1  April,  1843.
He  served  in  the  war  of  the  revolution,  en-
listing in  1775  while  yet  a  student  at  Princeton.
His  first  training  was  in  the  Potter  Pennsylvania
regiment,  from  which  he  went  as  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  Mercer,  whom,  when  fatally  wounded,  he
carried  in  his  arms  from  the  Princeton  battle-
field. He  then  became  an  aide  on  the  staff  of  Gen.
Gates,  and  served  with  him  through  the  campaign
against  Burgoyne,  which  closed  at  Saratoga.  In
1780  he  received  the  appointment  of  adjutant-gen-
eral of  the  southern  army,  but,  in  consequence  of
illness,  retired  before  the  battle  of  Camden.  He
afterward  resumed  his  place  on  Gen.  Gates's  staff,
with  the  rank  of  major,  which  he  held  until  the
close  of  the  war.  While  in  camp  at  Newburg,  N.
Y.,  10  March,  1783,  he  wrote  the  first  of  the  two
celebrated  "Newburg  Letters."  The  communica-
tion, which  was  anonymous,  set  forth  the  services
and  destitution  of  the  soldiers,  and  called  a  meet-
ing of  the  officers  of  the  army  for  the  considera-
tion of  measures  to  redress  the  army  grievances,
being  intended  to  arouse  congress  to  a  sense  of  jus-
tice to  the  army  then  about  to  be  disbanded.  Wash-
ington, who  was  in  camp  at  the  time,  met  the  in-
flammatory document  by  issuing  general  orders
forbidding  the  meeting,  when  suddenly  the  second
address  appeared.  This  also  was  anonymous,  but
Washington  overruled  the  threatened  embarrass-
ment by  attending  the  meeting  in  person.  He
shrewdly  quieted  Gates  by  making  him  chair-
man, and  then  rallied  his  faithful  brother  officers
to  his  support.  In  calm  and  dignified  tones  he
answered  the  argument  of  the  "anonymous  ad-
dresser," but  intimated  that  he  "  was  an  insidious
foe,  some  emissary  perhaps  from  New  York,  sow-
ing the  seeds  of  discord  and  separation  between
the  civil  and  military  powers  of  the  continent."  At
the  time  of  making  this  address  Washington  did
not  know  the  anonymous  author,  but  a  private
letter  afterward  written  by  him  expressed  his  con-
fidence in  the  good  motives  that  had  dictated  the
letters,  "though  the  means  suggested  were  cer-
tainly liable  to  much  misunderstanding  and  abuse."
The  "  addresses  "  were  pointed  and  vigorous,  writ-
ten in  pure  English,  and  for  the  purpose  for  which
they  were  designed— a  direct  appeal  to  feeling
—they  showed  the  hand  of  a  master.  After  the
war,  Maj.  Armstrong  was  made  secretary  of  state,
and  also  adjutant-general  of  Pennsylvania,  under
Dickenson  and  Franklin.  In  1787  he  was  sent  as
member  to  the  old  congress,  and  was  also  appointed
one  of  the  judges  for  the  western  territory,  but  the
latter  honor  was  declined,  as  well  as  all  other  pub-
lic offices,  for  a  period  of  about  eleven  years.  In
1789  he  married  a  sister  of  Chancellor  Livingston,
and,  purchasing  a  farm  in  New  York,  devoted  him-
self to  agriculture.  He  was  a  U.  S.  senator  in
1800-'2,  and  again  in  1803-'4.  In  1804-'10  he  was
minister  to  France,  and  filled the  position  with


distinguished  ability,  also  acting  after  1806  as
minister  to  Spain.  The  commission  of  briga-
dier-general was  conferred  on  him  6  July,  1812,
and  he  was  assigned  to  the  district  including  the
city  and  harbor  of  New  York.  In  1813-'14  he  was
secretary  of  war,  and  effected  many  salutary  changes
in  the  army.  But  his  lack  of  success  in  the  opera-
tions against  Canada,  and  the  sack  of  Washington
city  by  the  British  in  August,  1814,  rendered  him
unpopular.  He  was  censured,  and  obliged  to  resign
in  September,  1814.  In  his  subsequent  retirement
at  Red  Hook,  N.  Y.,  he  prepared  and  published  the
following  works:  "Notices  of  the  War  of  1812"
(New  York,  1836;  new  ed.,  1840);  "Memoirs  of
Gens.  Montgomery  and  Wayne  " ;  "  Treatise  on  Ag-
riculture"; "Treatise  on  Gardening";  and  a
"  Review  of  Gen.  Wilkinson's  Memoirs."  He  also
partially  prepared  a  "Notices  of  the  American
Revolution,"  and  several  biographical  notices. — His
son,  Henry  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,  9  May,
1791 ;  d.  in  Red  Hook,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y..  10  Nov.,
1884.  His  early  years  were  spent  in  France,  where
his  father  was  Anierican  minister  to  the  court  of  the
first  Napoleon,  and  his  education  was  received  at  a
French  military  school,  where  he  went  bare-headed
for  years,  hats  of  all  kinds  being  considered  effemi-
nate. Before  leaving  France,  in  1811,  young  Arm-
strong frequently  saw  Napoleon  and  many  of  his
marshals.  At  the  beginning  of  the  second  war
with  Great  Britain  in  1812,  he  entered  the  army  as
captain  in  the  13th  infantry,  and  served  through-
out the  war  with  great  gallantry  and  distinction.
He  was  severely  wounded  at  the  assault  upon
Queenstown  heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  and  shared  in
the  capture  of  Fort  George,  27  May,  1813,  the  battle
of  Stony  Creek,  5  June,  1813,  and  the  sortie  from
Fort  Erie,  15  Aug.,  1814.  On  the  return  of  peace
in  1815  he  retired  from  the  army  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  regiment  of  rifles.
For  nearly  seventy  j^ears  Col.  Armstrong  lived  the
life  of  a  country  gentleman  on  his  estate  on  the
banks  of  the  Hudson.  His  mind  was  richly  stored
with  reminiscences  of  the  many  eminent  persons
whom  he  had  met  during  his  long  life.

ARMSTRONG,  Moses  K.,  author  and  politi-
cian, b.  in  Milan,  Ohio,  19  Sept.,  1832.  He  was
educated  at  Huron  institute  and  Western  Reserve
college,  Ohio,  went  to  Minnesota  in  1856,  was
elected  surveyor  of  Mower  co.,  and  in  1858  was
appointed  surveyor  of  U.  S.  lands.  On  the  admis-
sion of  Minnesota  as  a  state  he  removed  to  Yank-
ton, then  an  Indian  village  on  Missouri  river ;  and,
on  the  organization  of  Dakota  in  1861,  he  was  elect-
ed to  the  legislature  of  the  territory,  being  reelected
in  1861  and  1862,  and  acting  the  last  year  as  speaker.
He  became  editor  of  the  "  Dakota  Union  "  in  1864,
was  elected  territorial  treasurer,  appointed  clerk
of  the  supreme  court  in  1865,  elected  to  the  terri-
torial senate  in  1866,  and  in  1867  was  chosen  its
president,  publishing  the  same  year  his  history  of
Dakota.  He  acted  as  secretary  of  the  peace  com-
mission to  the  Sioux ;  was  employed  from  1866  to
1869  in  establishing  the  great  meridian  and  stand-
ard lines  for  U.  S.  surveys  in  southern  Dakota  and
the  northern  Red  river  valley,  detecting  the  errors
of  locating  the  international  boundary-line  near
Pembina  since  1823 ;  in  1869  was  elected  again  to
the  territorial  senate.  In  1872  he  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  the  first  national  bank  of  the  territory,
and  he  was  elected  to  the  42d  and  43d  congresses,
as  a  democrat.  He  established  the  first  democratic
newspaper  in  the  territory.

ARMSTRONG,  Richard,  British  soldier,  b.
about  the  middle  of  the  18th  century;  d.  about
1823. He entered  the Queen's rangers  as  cap-


ARMSTRONG


ARNOLD


93


tain,  afterward  became  major,  and  at  all  times
showed  the  greatest  efficiency  as  a  partisan  officer
on  the  royalist  side  during  the  war  of  the  revo-
lution. In  1783  he  was  appointed  with  Capt.  Saun-
ders to  prepare  a  parting  address  for  Col.  John
G.  Simcoe,  the  intrepid  leader  of  the  rangers.  He
was  advanced,  26  Jan.,  1797,  to  a  colonelcy ;  25  Sept.,
1803,  to  a  major-generalship ;  and  25  Oct.,  1809,  to
a  lieutenant-generalship.

ARMSTRONG,  Richard,  missionary,  b.  in
Northumberland  co..  Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1805;  d.  in
Honolulu,  Sandwich  islands,  23  Sept.,  1860.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college.  Pa.,  and,  after  a
course  of  theology  in  Princeton  seminary,  went  in
1832  to  the  Sandwich  islands.  For  eight  months
he  was  in  charge  of  the  mission  at  Nukahiva,  in  the
Marquesas  group;  then  went  to  Walluka,  whence
after  five  years  he  returned  to  Honolulu  to  take
the  station  made  vacant  by  the  return  of  Mr.  Bing-
ham to  the  United  States."^  In  December,  1847,  the
king  made  him  minister  of  instruction  and  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  education,  and  he  was  also
appointed  to  a  seat  in  the  house  of  nobles,  and  to
a  membership  in  the  privy  council.  His  death  was
caused  by  the  kick  of  a  vicious  horse.

ARMSTRONG,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  east
Tennessee  in  1790;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  23
Feb.,  1854.  He  commanded  a  company  of  Tennes-
see artillery  under  Jackson  in  the  Creek  war  of
1813-'14  with  distinguished  bravery.  At  the  battle
of  Talladega,  Ala.,  24  Jan.,  1814,  he  was  danger-
ously wounded,  but  recovered,  and  again  distin-
guished himself  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans,  and
in  1836,  as  brigadier-general,  commanded  the  Ten-
nessee mounted  volunteers  at  the  battle  of  Wahoo
swamp.  He  was  postmaster  at  Nashville  from
1829  to  1845,  when  he  was  sent  as  consul  to  Liver-
pool, remaining  until  1852.  He  subsequently  became
the  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  "Washington
Union,"  and  was  the  confidential  adviser  of  Mr.
Polk  during  his  presidency.  Gen.  Jackson  be-
queathed to  him  his  sword.

ARMSTRONG,  Samuel  T.,  governor  of  Mas-
sachusetts, b.  in  1784 ;  d.  26  March,  1850.  He  was  a
bookseller  in  Boston,  and  among  other  works  pub-
lished a  stereotype  edition  of  Scott's  family  Bible,
which  was  widely  circulated.  He  became  mayor  of
Boston  and  lieutenant-governor  of  Massachusetts,
and  in  1836  the  election  of  Governor  Davis  to  the
U.  S.  senate  made  him  governor  for  the  remainder
of  the  term.  He  made  a  fortune  in  his  business,
and,  as  he  had  no  children,  it  was  reported  that  he
intended  to  leave  large  amounts  to  charitable  insti-
tutions ;  but  if  so,  his  designs  were  frustrated  by  his
sudden  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  prudential
committee  of  the  American  board  of  commission-
ers for  foreign  missions.

ARMSTRONG,  WilHam  Jessiip,  clergyman,
b.  in  Mendham,  N.  J.,  29  Oct.,  1796 ;  lost  at  sea,
27  Nov.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1816,  and  studied  in  the  theological  school  (Presby-
terian) of  that  college.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1818,  and  went  to  Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  as  a  mis-
sionary, but  returned  to  Trenton  to  take  charge  of
a  congregation.  Here  he  remained  three  years,  and
then  accepted  an  invitation  from  the  first  Presby-
terian church  in  Richmond,  Ya.,  where  he  remained
until  1834.  He  then  became  secretary  of  the  Pres-
byterian board  of  foreign  missions  for  Virginia  and
North  Carolina,  and  at  the  same  time  agent  for  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis-
sions for  the  same  district.  In  September  of  the  same
year  he  became  secretary  to  the  last-named  society.
After  a  residence  of  two  years  and  a  half  in  Boston,
he  removed  to  New  York. In  1840  he  received  the


degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Princeton.  He  was  lost  in
the  wreck  of  the  steamer  "Atlantic."  A  memoir  by
Henry  Read,  with  a  selection  of  Dr.  Armstrong's
sermons,  was  published  in  1853.

ARNOLD,  Aaron,  merchant,  b.  in  the  Isle  of
Wight  in  1794 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  March,
1876.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  but  early
showed  a  fondness  for  mercantile  pursuits,  and  in
1823  emigrated  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  lived  for
three  years,  studying  carefully  the  comparative
business  advantages  of  the  different  cities  of  the
country.  He  finally  selected  New  York  as  the
most  desirable  place,  and  with  his  nephew,  George
A.  Hearn,  established  there,  in  1827,  a  wholesale
and  retail  dry-goods  store,  under  the  firm  name  of
Arnold  &  Hearn.  In  1842  Mr.  Hearn  was  suc-
ceeded by  Mr.  Arnold's  son-in-law,  James  M.  Con-
stable, and  the  name  of  the  firm  was  changed  to
Aaron  Arnold  «&  Co.  In  1853  Mr.  Arnold's  son
Richard  and  J.  P.  Baker  were  admitted  to  the  firm,
which  then  became  known  by  its  present  title,
Arnold,  Constable  &  Co.  In  1869  Mr.  Arnold  left
the  active  management  of  the  business,  and  for
some  time  before  his  death  was  confined  to  his
house.  His  success  is  ascribed,  by  those  who
knew  him  well,  to  his  sterling  honesty,  his  saga-
city, and  his  steadfast  adherence  to  his  friends.

ARNOLD,  Albert  Nicholas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Cranston,  R.  I.,  12  Feb.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Cranston,  R.  I.,
11  Oct.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1838,
studied  at  Newton  theological  seminary,  and  on
14  Sept.,  1841,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Bap-
tist church  at  Newburyport,  Mass.  From  1844
to  1854  he  was  a  missionary  to  Greece,  from  1855
to  1857  he  was  professor  of  church  history  at
Newton  seminary,  and  in  1858  he  became  pastor  at
Westborough,  Mass.,  where  he  remained  until  1864.
He  was  then  chosen  professor  of  biblical  interpre-
tation and  pastoral  theology  in  the  Baptist  semi-
nary at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  and  from  1869  to  1873
held  the  professorship  of  New  Testament  Greek  in
Baptist  theological  seminary  at  Chicago.  Dr.  Ar-
nold published,  in  1860, "  Prerequisites  to  Commun-
ion," and  in  1871  "  One  Woman's  Mission."

ARNOLD,  Benedict,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  England,  21  Dec,  1615 ;  d.  20  June,  1678,
He  lived  for  some  time  in  Providence,  and  in  1637
was  one  of  thirteen  who  signed  a  compact  agreeing
to  subject  themselves  to  any  agreements  made  by  a
majority  of  the  masters  of  families.  In  1645  his
knowledge  of  the  native  tongues  gained  him  the
office  of  messenger  to  negotiate  with  the  Indians,
and  on  one  occasion  they  accused  him  of  misrepre-
sentation. In  1653  he  moved  to  Newport,  and  in
1654  was  elected  assistant  for  that  town.  In  1657
he  was  one  of  the  purchasers  of  the  island  of  Con-
anicut.  On  19  May,  1657,  Roger  Williams  having
retired  from  the  presidency  of  the  colony,  Arnold
was  elected  to  the  office,  and  he  was  again  assist-
ant in  1660.  On  22  May,  1662,  he  was  again
elected  president,  and  under  the  royal  charter
given  in  1663  he  was  the  first  governor  of  the  col-
ony. To  this  office  he  was  reelected  in  May,  1664,
and  in  1669,  1677,  and  1678.  Gov.  Arnold  was  in-
strumental in  bringing  about  the  reconciliation  and
union  of  the  two  colonies  of  Rhode  Island  and
Providence  plantations.

ARNOLD,  Benedict,  soldier,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  14  Jan.,  1741 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  14
Jvme,  1801.  His  ancestor,  William  Arnold  (b.  in
Leamington,  Warwickshire,  in  1587),  came  to  Prov-
idence in  1636,  and  was  associated  with  Roger
Williams  as  one  of  the  fifty-four  proprietors  in  the
first  settlement  of  Rhode'  island.  His  son  Bene-
dict moved  to  Newport,  and  was  governor  of  the


94


ARNOLD


ARNOLD


colony  from  1663  to  1666,  1669  to  1672,  1677  to
1678,  when  he  died.  His  son  Benedict  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly  in  1695.  His  son  Benedict,
third  of  that  name,  moved  to  Norwich  in  1780 ;
was  cooper,  ship-owner,  and  sea-captain,  town  sur-
veyor, collector,  assessor,  and  selectman.  He  mar-
ried, 8  Nov.,  1733,  Hannah,  daughter  of  John  Wa-
terman, widow  of  Absalom  Knig.  Of  their  six
children,  only  Benedict  and  Hannah  lived  to  grow
up.  Benedict  received  a  respectable  school  educa-
tion, including  some  knowledge  of  Latin.  Pie  was
romantic  and  adventurous,  excessively  proud  and
sensitive,  governed  rather  by  impulse  than  by
principle.  He  was  noted  for  physical  strength  and
beauty,  as  well  as  for  bravery.  He  possessed  im-
mense capacity  both  for  good  and  for  evil,  and  cir-
cumstances developed  him  in  both  directions.  At
the  age  of  fifteen  he  ran  away  from  home  and  en-
listed in  the  Connecticut  army,  marching  to  Albany
and  Lake  George  to  resist  the  French  invasion ;
but,  getting  weary  of  discipline,  he  deserted  and
made  his  way  home  alone  through  the  wilderness.
He  was  employed  in
a  drug  shop  at  Nor-
wich until  1762,  when
he  removed  to  New
Haven  and  established
himself  in  business  as
druggist  and  book-
seller. He  acquired
a  considerable  prop-
erty, and  engaged  in
the  West  India  trade,
sometimes  command-
ing his  own  ships,  as
his  father  had  done.
He  also  carried  on
trade  with  Canada,
and  often  visited  Que-
bec. On  22  Feb.,  1767,
he  married  Margaret,
daughter  of  Samuel
Mansfield.  They  had  three  sons,  Benedict,  Richard,
and  Henry.  She  died  19  June,  1775.  On  one  of
his  voyages,  being  at  Honduras,  he  fought  a  duel
with  a  British  sea-captain  who  called  him  a  "  d — d
Yankee " ;  the  captain  was  wounded  and  apolo-
gized. He  occasionally  visited  England.  At  noon
of  20  April,  1775,  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Lexing-'
ton  reached  New  Haven,  and  Arnold,  who  was  cap-
tain of  the  governor's  guards,  about  60  in  number,
assembled  them  on  the  college  green  and  offered
to  lead  them  to  Boston.  Gen.  Wooster  thought  he
had  better  wait  for  regular  orders,  and  the  select-
men refused  to  supply  ammunition  ;  but,  upon  Ar-
nold's threatening  to  break  into  the  magazine,  the
selectmen  yielded  and  furnished  the  ammunition,
and  the  company  marched  to  Cambridge.  Arnold
immediately  proposed  the  capture  of  Ticonderoga
and  Crown  Point,  and  the  plan  was  approved  by
Dr.  Warren,  chairman  of  the  committee  of  safety.
Arnold  was  commissioned  as  colonel  by  the  pro-
vincial congress  of  Massachusetts,  and  directed  to
raise  400  men  in  the  western  counties  and  surprise
the  forts.  The  same  scheme  had  been  entertained
in  Connecticut,  and  troops  from  that  colony  and
from  Berkshire,  with  a  number  of  "  Green  inoun-
tain  boys,"  had  already  started  for  the  lakes  under
command  of  Ethan  Allen.  On  meeting  them  Ar-
nold claimed  the  command,  but  when  it  was  re-
fused he  joined  the  expedition  as  a  volunteer  and
entered  Ticonderoga  side  by  side  with  Allen.  A
few  days  later  Arnold  captured  St.  John's.  Massa-
chusetts asked  Connecticut  to  put  him  in  command
of  these  posts,  but  Connecticut  preferred  Allen.


^^c^'7W:rr:Sz^


Arnold  returned  to  Cambridge  early  in  July,  pro-
posed to  Washington  the  .expedition  against  Que-
bec by  way  of  the  Kennebec  and  Chaudiere  rivers,
and  was  placed  in  command  of  1,100  men  and
started  from  Cambridge  11  Sept.  The  enterprise,
which  was  as  difficult  and  dangerous  as  Hannibal's
crossing  of  the  Alps,  was  conducted  with  consum-
mate ability,  but  was  nearly  ruined  by  the  miscon-
duct of  Col.  Enos,  who  deserted  and  returned  to
Massachusetts  with  200  men  and  the  greater  part
of  the  provisions.  After  frightful  hardships,  to
which  200  more  men  succumbed,  on  13  Nov.,  the
little  army  climbed  the  heights  of  Abraham.  As
Arnold's  force  was  insufficient  to  storm  the  city,
and  the  garrison  would  not  come  out  to  fight,  he
was  obliged  to  await  the  arrival  of  Montgomery,
who  had  just  taken  Montreal.  In  the  great  assault
of  31  Dec,  in  which  Montgomery  was  slain,  Arnold
received  a  wound  in  the  leg.  For  his  gallantry  he
was  now  made  brigadier-general.  He  kept  up  the
siege  of  Quebec  till  the  following  April,  when
Wooster  arrived  and  took  command.  Arnold  was
put  in  command  of  Montreal.  The  British,  being
now  heavily  reenforced,  were  able  to  drive  the
Americans  from  Canada,  and  early  in  June  Arnold
effected  a  junction  with  Gates  at  Ticonderoga,
During  the  summer  he  was  busily  occupied  in
building  a  fleet  with  which  to  oppose  and  delay
the  advance  of  the  British  up  Lake  Champlain.
On  11  Oct.  he  fought  a  terrible  naval  battle  near
Valcour  island,  in  which  he  was  defeated  by  the
overwhelming  superiority  of  the  enemy  in  number
of  ships  and  men ;  but  he  brought  away  part
of  his  flotilla  and  all  his  surviving  troops  in  safety
to  Ticonderoga,  and  his  resistance  had  been  so  ob-
stinate that  it  discouraged  Gen.  Carleton,  who  re-
tired to  Montreal  for  the  winter.  This  relief  of
Ticonderoga  made  it  possible  to  send  3,000  men
from  the  northern  army  to  the  aid  of  Washington,
and  thus  enabled  that  commander  to  strike  his
great  blows  at  Trenton  and  Princeton.

Among  Allen's  men  concerned  in  the  capture  of
Ticonderoga  in  the  preceding  year  was  Lieut.  John
Brown,  of  Pittsfield,  who  on  that  occasion  had
some  difficulty  with  Arnold.  Brown  now  brought
charges  against  Arnold  of  malfeasance  while  in
command  at  Montreal,  with  reference  to  exactions
of  private  property  for  the  use  of  the  army.  The
charges  were  investigated  by  the  board  of  war,
which  pronounced  them  "cruel  and  groundless"
and  entirely  exonerated  Arnold,  and  the  report
was  confirmed  by  congress.  Nevertheless,  a  party
hostile  to  Arnold  had  begun  to  grow  up  in  that
body.  Gates  had  already  begun  to  intrigue  against
Schuyler,  and  Charles  Lee  had  done  his  best  to  ruin
Washington.  The  cabal  or  faction  that  afterward
took  its  name  from  Conway  was  already  forming.
Arnold  was  conspicuous  as  an  intimate  friend  of
Schuyler  and  Washington,  and  their  enemies  be-
gan by  striking  at  him.  This  petty  persecution  of
the  commander-in-chief  by  slighting  and  insulting
his  favorite  officers  was  kept  up  until  the  last  year
of  the  war,  and  such  men  as  Greene,  Morgan,  and
Stark  were  almost  driven  from  the  service  by  it.
On  19  Feb.,  1777,  congress  appointed  five  new
major-generals — Stirling,  Mifflin,  St.  Clair,  Stephen,
and  Lincoln — thus  passing  over  Arnold,  who  was
the  senior  brigadier.  None  of  these  officers  had
rendered  services  at  all  comparable  to  his,  and,  com-
ing as  it  did  so  soon  after  his  heroic  conduct  on
Lake  Champlain,  this  action  of  congress  naturally
incensed  him.  He  behaved  very  well,  however,  and
expressed  his  willingness  to  serve  under  the  men
lately  his  juniors,  while  at  the  same  time  he  re-
quested congress  to  restore  him  to  his  relative  rank.


ARNOLD


ARNOLD


The  last  week  in  April  2,000  British  troops  under
Gov.  Tryon  invaded  Connecticut  and  destroyed
the  military  stores  at  Dan  bury.  They  were  opposed
by  Wooster  with  600  men,  and  a  skirmish  ensued,
in  which  that  general  was  slain.  By  this  time
Arnold,  who  was  at  New  Haven,  on  a  visit  to  his
family,  arrived  on  the  scene  with  several  hundred
militia,  and  there  was  a  desperate  fight  at  Ridge-
field,  in  which  Arnold  had  two  horses  shot  from  un-
der him.  The  British  were  driven  to  their  ships,
and  narrowly  escaped  capture.  Arnold  was  now  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  major-general  and  presented
by  congress  with  a  fine  horse,  but  his  relative  rank
was  not  restored.  While  he  was  at  Philadelphia
inquiring  into  the  reasons  for  the  injustice  that  had
been  done  him,  the  country  was  thrown  into  con-
sternation by  the  news  of  Burgoyne's  advance  and
the  fall  of  Ticonderoga.  At  Washington's  sug-
gestion, Arnold  again  joined  the  northern  army,
and  by  a  brilliant  stratagem  dispersed  the  army  of
St.  Leger,  which,  in  cooperation  with  Burgoyne,
was  coming  down  the  Mohawk  valley,  and  had  laid
siege  to  Fort  Stanwix.  After  Schuyler  had  been
superseded  by  Gates,  Arnold  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  left  wing  of  the  army  on  Bemis
heights.  In  the  battle  of  19  Sept.,  at  Freeman's
farm,  he  frustrated  Burgoyne's  attempt  to  turn  the
American  left,  and  held  the  enemy  at  bay  till  night-
fall. If  properly  reenforced  by  Gates,  he  would
probably  have  inflicted  a  crushing  defeat  upon  Bur-
goyne. But  Gates,  who  had  already  begun  to  dis-
like him  as  a  friend  of  Schuyler,  was  enraged  by
his  criticisms  on  the  battle  of  Freeman's  farm,  and
sought  to  wreak  his  spite  by  withdrawing  from  his
division  some  of  its  best  troops.  This  gave  rise  to
a  fierce  quarrel.  Arnold  asked  permission  to  return
to  Philadelphia,  and  Gates  granted  it.  But  many
officers,  knowing  that  a  decisive  battle  was  immi-
nent, and  feeling  no  confidence  in  Gates,  entreated
Arnold  to  remain,  and  he  did  so.  Gates  issued  no
order  directly  superseding  him,  but  took  command
of  the  left  wing  in  person,  giving  the  right  wing
to  Lincoln.  At  the  critical  moment  of  the  decisive
battle  of  7  Oct.,  Arnold  rushed  upon  the  field  with-
out orders,  and  in  a  series  of  magnificent  charges
broke  through  the  British  lines  and  put  them  to
flight.  The  credit  of  this  great  victory,  which  se-
cured for  us  the  alliance  with  France,  is  due  chiefly
to  Arnold,  and  in  a  less  degree  to  Morgan.  Gates
was  not  on  the  field,  and  deserves  no  credit  what-
ever. Just  at  the  close  of  the  battle  Arnold  was
severely  wounded  in  the  leg  that  had  been  hurt  at
Quebec.  He  was  carried  on  a  litter  to  Albany,  and
remained  there  disabled  until  spring.  On  20  Jan.,
1778,  he  received  from  congress  an  antedated  com-
mission restoring  him  to  his  original  seniority  in  the
army.  On  19  June,  as  he  was  still  too  lame  for  field
service,  Washington  put  him  in  command  of  Phila-
delphia, which  the  British  had  just  evacuated.  The
tory  sentiment  in  that  city  was  strong,  and  had
been  strengthened  by  disgust  at  the  alliance  with
France,  a  feeling  which  Arnold  seems  to  have
shared.  He  soon  became  engaged  to  a  tory  lady,
Margaret,  daughter  of  Edward  Shippen,  afterward
chief  justice  of  Pennsylvania.  She  was  celebrated
for  her  beauty,  wit,  and  nobility  of  character.  Dur-
ing the  next  two  years  Arnold  associated  much  with
the  tories,  and  his  views  of  public  affairs  were  no
doubt  influenced  by  this  association.  He  lived  ex-
travagantly, and  became  involved  in  debt.  He  got
into  quarrels  with  many  persons,  especially  with
Joseph  Reed,  president  of  the  executive  council  of
the  state.  These  troubles  wrought  upon  him  until
he  made  up  his  mind  to  resign  his  commission,  ob-
tain a  grant  of  land  in  central  New  York,  settle  it


with  some  of  his  old  soldiers,  and  end  his  days  in
rural  seclusion.  His  request  was  favorably  enter-
tained by  the  New  York  legislature,  but  a  long  list
of  charges  now  brought  against  him  by  Reed  drove
the  scheme  from  his  mind.  The  charges  were  in-
vestigated by  a  committee  of  congress,  and  on  all
those  that  affected  his  integrity  he  was  acquitted.
Two  charges — first,  of  having  once  in  a  hurry  grant-
ed a  pass  in  which  some  due  forms  were  overlooked,
and,  secondly,  of  having  once  used  some  public
wagons,  which  were  standing  idle,  for  saving  private
property  in  danger  from  the  enemy — were  proved
against  him;  but  the  committee  thought  these
things  too  trivial  to  notice,  and  recommended  an
unqualified  verdict  of  acquittal.  Arnold  then,
considering  himself  vindicated,  resigned  his  com-
mand of  Philadelphia.  But  as  Reed  now  repre-
sented that  further  evidence  was  forthcoming,  con-
gress referred  the  matter  to  another  committee,
which  shirked  the  responsibility  through  fear  of
offending  Pennsylvania,  and  handed  the  affair
over  to  a  court-martial.  Arnold  clamored  for  a
speedy  trial,  but  Reed  succeeded  in  delaying  it
several  months  under  pretence  of  collecting  evi-
dence. On  26  Jan.,  1780,  the  court-martial  ren-
dered its  verdict,  which  agreed  in  every  particular
with  that  of  the  committee  of  congress;  but  for


the  two  trivial  charges  proved  against  Arnold,  it  was
decided  that  he  should  receive  a  reprimand  from
the  commander-in-chief.  Washington,  who  con-
sidered Arnold  the  victim  of  persecution,  couched
the  reprimand  in  such  terms  as  to  convert  it  into
eulogy,  and  soon  afterward  offered  Arnold  the
highest  command  under  himself  in  the  northern
army  for  the  next  campaign.  But  Arnold  in  an
evil  "hour  had  allowed  himself  to  be  persuaded  into
the  course  that  has  blackened  his  name  forever.
Three  years  had  elapsed  since  Saratoga,  and  the
fortunes  of  the  Americans,  instead  of  improving,
had  grown  worse  and  worse.  France  had  as  yet
done  but  little  for  us,  our  southern  army  had  been
annihilated,  our  paper  money  had  become  worth-
less, our  credit  abroad  had  hardly  begun  to  exist.
Even  Washington  wrote  that  "  he  had  almost  ceased
to  hope."  The  army,  clad  in  rags,  half-starved  and
unpaid,  was  nearly  ripe  for  the  mutiny  that  broke
out  a  few  months  "later,  and  desertions  to  the  Brit-
ish lines  averaged  more  than  100  a  month.  The
spirit  of  desertion  now  seized  upon  Arnold,  with
whom  the  British  commander  had  for  some  time
tampered  through  the  mediation  of  John  Andre  and
an  American  loyalist,  Beverley  Robinson,  Stung
by  the  injustice"  he  had  suffered,  and  influenced  by
h'ls  tory  surroundings,  Arnold  made  up  his  mind
to  play  a  part  like  that  which  Gen.  Monk  had
played  in  the  restoration  of  Charles  II.  to  the  Brit-
ish throne.  By  putting  the  British  in  possession
of  the  Hudson  river,  he  would  give  them  all  that
they  had  sought  to  obtain by  the  campaigns  of


96


ARNOLD


ARNOLD


1776-'77 ;  and  the  American  cause  would  thus  be-
come so  hopeless  that  an  opportunity  would  be
offered  for  negotiation.  Arnold  was  assured  that
Lord  North  would  renew  the  liberal  terms  already
offered  in  1778,  which  conceded  everything  that
the  Americans  had  demanded  in  1775.  By  render-
ing a  cardinal  service  to  the  British,  he  might  hope
to  attain  a  position  of  such  eminence  as  to  conduct
these  negotiations,  end  the  war,  and  restore  Amer-
ica to  her  old  allegiance,  with  her  freedom  from
parliamentary  control  guaranteed.  In  order  to
realize  these  ambitious  dreams,  Arnold  resorted  to
the  blackest  treachery.  In  July,  1780,  he  sought
and  obtained  command  of  West  Point  in  order  to
surrender  it  to  the  enemy.  When  his  scheme  was
detected  by  the  timely  capture  of  Andre,  he  fled  to
the  British  at  New  York,  a  disgraced  and  hated
traitor.  Instead  of  getting  control  of  affairs,  like
Gen.  Monk,  he  had  sold  himself  cheap,  receiving  a
brigadier-general's  place  in  the  British  army  and  a
paltry  sum  of  money.  In  the  spring  of  1781  he
conducted  a  plundering  expedition  into  Virginia ;
in  September  of  the  same  year  he  was  sent  to  at-
tack New  London,  in  order  to  divert  Washington
from  his  southward  inarch  against  Cornwallis.  In
the  following  winter  he  went  with  his  wife  to  Lon-
don, where  he  was  well  received  by  the  king  and
the  tories,  but  frowned  upon  by  the  whigs.  In
1787  he  removed  to  St.  John's,  New  Brunswick,
and  entered  into  mercantile  business  with  his  sons
Richard  and  Henry.  In  1791  he  returned  to  Lon-
don and  settled  there  permanently.  In  1792  he
fought  a  bloodless  duel  with  the  earl  of  Lauder-
dale, for  a  remark  which  the  latter  had  made  about
him  in  the  house  of  lords.  His  last  years  were  em-
bittered by  remorse.  The  illustration  on  page  95
is  a  view  of  Col.  Beverley  Robinson's  house,  oppo-
site West  Point,  which  was  occupied  by  Arnold  as
his  headquarters.  It  is  now  the  property  of  Hon.
Hamilton  Fish.  His  life  has  been  written  by
Sparks  in  vol.  iii.  of  his  "  American  Biographies,"
and  more  fully  by  Isaac  Newton  Arnold,  "  Life
of  Benedict  Arnold,  his  Patriotism  and  his  Trea-
son" (Chicago,  1880).— His  fifth  son,  Sir  James
Robertson,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1780 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  27  Dec,  1854.  He
entered  the  royal  engineers  in  1798,  and  attained
the  rank  of  colonel.  From  1816  to  1823  he  was  at
the  head  of  the  engineers  in  Nova  Scotia  and  New
Brunswick.  In  1841  he  was  transferred  from  the
engineers,  and  in  1851  was  made  lieutenant-general.
He  served  with  credit  in  various  parts  of  the  world,
displaying  especial  courage  in  the  attack  on  Suri-
nam, where  he  received  a  severe  wound.  He  was
aide-de-camp  to  both  William  IV.  and  Victoria.
He  bore  a  strong  personal  resemblance  to  his  father.
— Benedict's  seventh  son,  William  Fitch,  the  only
one  that  left  issue,  b.  25  June,  1794,  was  a  captain  in
the  British  army.  His  son,  Edwin  Gladwin,  rec-
tor of  Barrow  in  Cheshire,  inherited  the  family  seat
of  Little  Missenden  Abbey,  Buckinghamshire,  and
the  grant  of  land  near  Toronto,  now  of  great  value.
ARNOLD,  George,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  24  June,  1884 ;  d.  at  Strawberry  Farms,  N.  J.,
3  Nov.,  1865.  While  he  was  still  an  infant  his
parents  removed  to  Illinois,  but  in  1849  returned
to  the  east  and  settled  at  Strawberry  Farms.  As
he  showed  a  talent  for  drawing,  he  was  placed  m
the  studio  of  a  portrait  painter  in  New  York  ;  but
he  soon  abandoned  the  idea  of  becoming  an  artist,
and  adopted  literature  as  a  profession.  He  became
a  contributor  to  "  Vanity  Fair,"  the  "  Leader,"  and
other  periodicals,  writing  stories,  poems,  sketches,
and  art  criticisms.  Some  of  his  poems  are  of  re-
markable sweetness. He  was  best  known  during


his  lifetime  as  the  author  of  the  "  McArone  "  pa-
pers, which  established  his  reputation  as  a  humor-
ist. These  were  begun  in  "  Vanity  Fair  "  in  1860,
and  continued  there  and  in  other  papers  until  his
death.  He  was  also  the  author  of  several  bio-
graphical works.  During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Arnold
did  military  duty  for  a  long  time  at  one  of  the
forts  on  Staten  Island.  His  poems  were  collected
and  edited,  with  a  memoir,  by  William  Winter,
appearing  in  two  volumes  (1867-'68),  afterward
consolidated  in  one.  The  "  Jolly  Old  Pedagogue  "
is  his  best-known  poem.

ARNOLD,  Isaac  Newton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Hart-
wick,  Otsego  CO.,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Chi-
cago, 24  April,  1884.  His  father,  Dr.  George  W.
Arnold,  was  a  native  of  Rhode  Island,  whence  he
removed  to  western  New  York  in  1800.  After
attending  the  district  and  select  schools,  Isaac
Arnold  was  thrown  on  his  own  resources  at  the
age  of  fifteen.  For  several  years  he  taught  school
a  part  of  each  year,  earning  enough  to  study  law,
and  at  the  age  of  twenty  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
In  1836  he  removed  to  Chicago,  where  he  spent  the
rest  of  his  life,  and  was  prominent  as  a  lawyer  and
in  politics.  He  was  elected  city  clerk  of  Chicago
in  1837,  and,  beginning  in  1843,  served  several
terms  in  the  legislature.  The  state  was  then
heavily  in  debt,  and  Mr.  Arnold  became  the  ac-
knowledged champion  of  those  who  were  opposed
to  repudiation.  In  1844  he  was  a  presidential
elector,  and  in  1860  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
republican,  serving  two  terms.  At  the  battle  of
Bull  Run  he  acted  as  volunteer  aide  to  Col.
Hunter,  and  did  good  service  in  caring  for  the
wounded.  While  in  congress  he  was  chairman  of
the  committee  on  the  defences  and  fortifications  of
the  great  lakes  and  rivers,  and  afterward  chairman
of  the  committee  on  manufactures,  serving  also  as
member  of  the  committee  on  roads  and  canals.
He  voted  for  the  bill  abolishing  slavery  in  the  dis-
trict of  Columbia,  and  in  March,  1862,  he  intro-
duced a  bill  prohibiting  slavery  in  every  place  un-
der national  control.  This  bill  was  passed  on  19
June,  1862,  after  much  resistance,  and  on  15  Feb.,
1864,  Mr.  Arnold  introduced  m  the  house  of  rep-
resentatives a  resolution,  which  was  passed,  declar-
ing that  the  constitution  of  the  United  States  should
be  so  amended  as  to  abolish  slavery.  His  ablest
speech  in  congress  was  on  the  confiscation  bill,  and
was  made  2  May,  1862.  In  1865  President  John-
son appointed  him  sixth  auditor  to  the  U.  S.
treasury.  Mr.  Arnold  was  an  admirable  public
speaker,  and  delivered  addresses  before  various
literary  societies,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  He
had  been  intimate  with  Abraham  Lincoln  for
many  years  before  Mr.  Lincoln's  election  to  the
presidency,  and  in  1866  he  published  a  biogra-
phy of  hira  (new  ed.,  rewritten  and  enlarged,
Chicago,  1885).  This  was  followed  in  1879  by  a
"  Life  of  Benedict  Arnold,"  which,  while  acknowl-
edging the  enormity  of  Arnold's  treason,  vindicates
and  praises  him  in  other  respects.  The  author
claimed  no  relationship  with  the  subject  of  his
work.  His  life  of  Lincoln  is  valuable  for  the  clear-
ness with  which  it  shows  the  historical  relations  of
the  president  to  the  great  events  of  his  adminis-
tration ;  and  the  author's  death  is  said  to  have
been  caused,  in  part,  by  his  persistent  labor  in  com-
pleting his  last  revision  of  this  work.  Mr.  Arnold
was  for  many  years  president  of  the  Chicago  his-
torical society,  and  Hon.  E.  B.  Washburne  deliv-
ered an  address  on  his  life  before  the  society,  21
Oct.,  1884  (Chicago,  1884).

ARNOLD,  Jonathan,  statesman,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  14  Dec,  1741 ;  d.  in  St.  Johnsbury,


ARNOLD


ARNOLD


97


Vt.,  2  Feb.,  1798.  He  studied  medicine,  and  began
practice.  In  1774  he  was  a  charter  member  of  the
Providence  grenadiers.  He  was  a  member  of  the
general  assembly  in  1776,  and  author  of  the  act  of
May,  1776,  repealing  the  law  providing  for  the
oath  of  allegiance  to  England.  During  the  revo-
lutionary war  he  was  a  surgeon  in  the  array,  and
director  of  the  army  hospital  at  Providence.  After
the  war  he  removed  to  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  where  in
1782  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  Orange  co.
court,  an  office  which  he  held  until  his  death.
Fi'om  1782  to  1784  he  was  a  member  of  the  con-
tinental congress. — His  son,  Lemuel  Hasting-s,
statesman,  b.  in  St.  Johnsbury,  Vt.,  29  Jan.,  1792 ;
d.  in  Kingston,  R.  I.,  27  June.  1852,  was  graduated
at  Dartmouth  in  1811,  studied  law,  and  practised
in  Providence  from  1814  to  1821,  after  which  he
engaged  in  manufactures.  From  1820  to  1831  he
was  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  of  his  state.
He  was  elected  governor  of  Rhode  Island  in  1831
and  again  in  1832.  During  the  Dorr  rebellion  of
1842,  he  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council.
He  was  a  representative  in  congress  from  1  Dec,
1845,  till  3  March,  1847.— Richard,  son  of  Lem-
uel Hastings,  soldier,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  12
April,  1828;  d.  on  Governor's  Island,  New  York
harbor,  8  Nov.,  1882.  He  was  a  son  of  Gov.  L.
H.  Arnold,  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1850.
He  took  part  in  the  Northern  Pacific  railroad
exploration  in  1853,  and  was  aide  to  Gen.  Wool
in  California  from  1855  to  1861.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  was  made  captain  in
the  5th  artillery,  and  served  at  Bull  Run  and
through  the  peninsular  campaign.  On  29  June,
1862,  he  was  brevetted  major  for  services  at  the
battle  of  Savage  Station,  Va.,  and  on  29  Nov.  he
was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  On  8
July,  1863,  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  in
the  regular  army  for  services  at  the  siege  of  Port
Hudson,  Pie  commanded  a  cavalry  division  in
Gen.  Banks's  Red  river  expedition  in  1864,  and  later
in  the  same  year  rendered  important  services  at
the  reduction  of  Fort  Morgan,  Mobile  bay,  for
which,  on  22  Aug.,  1865,  he  was  made  brevet  major-
general  of  volunteers.  For  his  services  through
the  war  he  was,  on  13  March,  1865,  brevetted  colo-
nel, brigadier-general,  and  major-general  in  the
regular  army.  After  the  close  of  the  war  he  com-
manded various  posts,  and  on  5  Dec,  1877,  was
made  acting  assistant  inspector-general  of  the  de-
partment of  the  east.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  major  in  the  5th  artillery.

ARNOLD,  Lewis  G.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  Jersey
in  December,  1815 ;  d.  in  South  Boston,  22  Sept.,
1871.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1837.
He  served  as  second  lieutenant  in  the  Florida  war  of
1837-38  with  the  2d  artillery,  and  as  first  lieuten-
ant in  the  same  regiment,  on  the  Canada  fron-
tier, at  Detroit,  in  1838-39.  In  1846  he  accom-
panied his  regiment  to  Mexico,  and  was  engaged
on  the  southern  line  of  operations  under  Gen.
Scott,  being  present  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  in
which  he  was  slightly  wounded ;  in  the  battles  of
Cerro  Gordo  and  Amozoque ;  the  capture  of  San
Antonio,  and  the  battle  of  Churubusco.  In  the
last-named  battle  he  led  his  company  with  con-
spicuous gallantry,  and  in  the  storming  of  the  tete
de  pont  was  severely  wounded.  He  was  brevetted
captain  20  Aug.,  1847,  foi-  gallant  conduct  at  Con-
treras  and  Churubusco,  and  major,  13  Sept.,  for
gallant  conduct  at  Chapultepec  Pie  served  again
in  Florida  in  1856,  and  commanded  a  detachment
in  a  conflict  with  a  large  force  of  Seminoles  at  Big
Cypress  on  7  April  of  that  year.  The  breaking
out  of  the  war  in  1861  found  Maj.  Arnold  at  the

VOL.  I. — 7


Dry  Tortugas,  whence  he  was  transferred  to  Fort
Pickens  on  2  Aug.  He  remained  there  until  9
May,  1862,  being  in  command  after  25  Feb. On

9  Oct.,  1861,  he  aided  in  repelling  the  attack  of  the
confederates  on  Santa  Rosa  island,  and  command-
ed a  detachment  sent  the  next  morning  to  pursue
them  to  the  mainland.  In  the  successive  bombard-
ments of  Fort  Pickens,  which  followed  in  Novem-
ber, January,  and  May,  Maj.  Arnold,  as  executive
officer  of  the  work,  distinguished  himself  by  his
energy,  judgment,  and  gallantry.  In  recognition
of  the  value  of  his  services  on  these  occasions  he
was  brevetted  a  lieutenant-colonel,  to  date  from  22
Nov.,  1861 ;  appointed  a  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, to  date  from  24  Jan.,  1862 ;  and  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  department  of  Florida,  with
his  headquarters  first  at  Fort  Pickens  and  after-
ward at  Pensacola.  On  1  Oct.,  1862,  he  was  placed
in  command  of  the  forces  at  New  Orleans  and  Al-
giers, Louisiana,  which  command  he  retained  until

10  Nov.,  when  he  was  disabled  by  a  stroke  of  pa-
ralysis, from  which  he  never  recovered.  In  Febru-
ary, 1864,  all  hope  of  his  restoration  to  active  life
having  been  abandoned.  Gen.  Arnold  was  retired,

ARNOLD,  Peleg,  jurist,  b.  in  Smithfield,  R.  I„
in  1752 ;  d.  there,  13  Feb.,  1820.  He  received  a
liberal  education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  Rhode  Island  bar.  He  was  a  member  of  the
general  assembly  of  his  state,  and  from  9  April,
1787,  to  1  Nov.,  1789,  was  a  delegate  to  congress
under  the  confederation.  In  October,  1788,  he  re-
turned to  Rhode  Island  especially  to  represent  to
the  assembly  the  importance  of  immediate  action
on  the  federal  constitution.  He  was  afterward
chief  justice  of  the  Rhode  Island  supreme  court.

ARNOLD,  Samuel  Grreene,  historian,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  12  April,  1821;  d.  there,  12
Feb.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1841,
spent  two  years  in  a  Providence  counting-house,
and  visited  Europe,  On  his  return  he  studied
law,  being  graduated  at  Harvard  law  school  in
1845,  and  was  admitted  to  the  Rhode  Island  bar;
but  before  practising  he  again  travelled  extensively
in  Europe,  the  east,  and  South  America.  In  1853
he  was  chosen  lieutenant-governor  of  his  state,
being  the  only  man  elected  on  the  whig  ticket,
and  he  again  occupied  that  office  in  1861  and  1862.
On  the  breaking  out  of  the  civil  war  he  was  for  a
few  weeks  in  command  of  a  battery  of  artillery  and
aide  to  Gov.  Sprague.  From  1  Dec,  1862,  to  3
March,  1863,  he  served  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  hav-
ing been  chosen  to  fill  out  the  term  of  J.  F.  Sim-
mons, resigned.  He  published  a  valuable  "  His-
tory of  the  State  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence
Plantations  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1860).  He  was
the  author  of  "  The  Spirit  of  Rhode  Island  His-
tory," a  discourse  delivered  on  17  Jan.,  1853,  be-
fore the  Rhode  Island  historical  society,  of  which
he  was  for  some  time  the  president,  an  address  be-
fore the  American  institute  in  New  York  in  Octo-
ber, 1850,  and  numerous  other  addresses,  and  arti-
cles in  periodicals.

ARNOLD,  Tliomas  Dickens,  lawyer,  b.  in
Spottsylvania  co.,  Va.,  3  May,  1798 ;  d.  in  Jones-
boro',  Tenn.,  26  May,  1870.  He  was  a  farmer  boy,
and  his  education  was  obtained  almost  entirely  by
his  own  efforts,  and,  to  stimulate  himself,  he  taught
the  farmer's  children.  When  war  was  declared  in
1812,  his  strong  physique  and  sturdy  appearance
permitted  his  enlistment,  although  he  was  but
fourteen  years  of  age.  During  the  march  to  Mo-
bile a  young  soldier,  the  only  son  of  a  poor  widow,
was  tried  by  court-martial  and  shot  by  order  of
Gen.  Jackson  for  the  offence  of  straggling,  aiul  the
circumstances  of  the  execution  made  a  deep  im-


s


98


AROSEMENA


ARTAGUIETTE


pression  on  the  mind  of  young  Arnold,  who  de-
■  nounced  the  act  as  unwarranted  tyranny,  and  in
after  years  remembered  and  acted  upon  his  con-
victions in  his  hostility  to  President  Jackson.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in
March,  1822,  and,  quickly  attaining  distinction  in
his  profession,  was  elected  to  congress  in  1831
on  the  whig  ticket  after  he  had  been  twice  de-
feated. Taking  a  prominent  stand  on  the  political
issues  of  the  day,  he  was  fearless  in  his  criticism,
and  generally  opposed  the  administration.  On  14
May,  1832,  he  made  a  speech  against  Senator  Hous-
ton and  a  certain  Maj.  Morgan  A.  Heard,  who  had
had  some  connection  with  the  western  army.  In
this  speech  he  used  the  expression  "  capable  of  any
crime,"  and  indulged  in  severe  personalities.  On
leaving  the  capitol,  and  while  yet  in  the  midst  of
more  than  200  senators  and  members,  he  was  as-
saulted by  Heard,  who  fired  upon  him  with  a
horse  pistol,  wounding  him  in  the  arm,  and  then
struck  him  with  a  cane.  Arnold  knocked  his  as-
sailant down,  wrenched  away  the  pistol,  and  car-
ried it  off  as  a  trophy,  while  Heard  was  left  for
several  hours  where  he  fell.  The  admirers  of  Mr.
Arnold  presented  him  the  next  day  with  a  highly
wrought  sword-cane  with  the  inscription,  "  Pre-
sented to  Thomas  D.  Arnold  for  his  brave  defence
against  the  attack  of  Morgan  A.  Heard."  In  1836
he  was  elected  brigadier-general  of  Tennessee  mili-
tia, and  in  1841  was  returned  to  congress,  serving
from  31  May,  1841,  till  3  March,  1843,  when  he  re-
tired from  political  life  and  devoted  himself  to  the
practice  of  law.  He  had  a  notable  controversy  with
William  G.  Brownlow.

AROSEMENA,  Justo,  Colombian  jurist,  b.  in
Panama  in  1817.  He  has  been  secretary  of  state
several  times,  president  of  the  congress,  and  Co-
lombian minister  successively  to  Venezuela,  Peru,
Bolivia,  Chili,  Central  America,  France,  England,
and  the  United  States.

ARPIN,  Paul,  journalist,  b.  in  France  in  1811 ;
d.  in  New  York  city,  18  May,  1865.  He  was  the
oldest  French  journalist  in  the  United  States.  For
many  years  he  edited  the  "  New  Orleans  Bee,"  and
after  that  took  charge  of  the  New  York  "  Courrier
des  Etats  Unis."  He  wrote  largely  for  the  "  Amer-
ican Cyclopaedia,"  contributing  biographical  notices
of  eminent  Frenchmen,  including  Lavoisier,  La
Harpe,  Necker,  Pascal,  and  Palissy.

ARRASCAETA,  Enrique  de  (ahr-ras-ah-a'-ta),
Uruguayan  poet,  b.  in  Montevideo  in  1819.  He
has  been  a  journalist,  deputy,  and  minister  of  the
republic  of  Uruguay ;  but  his  highest  reputation
comes  from  his  numerous  elegant  poems.

ARRATE,  Jose  Felix  de,  Cuban  author,  b.
in  Havana  in  1697 ;  d.  in  1766.  He  studied  law
in  Mexico,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
returned  to  his  native  city,  where  he  filled  some  im-
portant offices.  In  1761  wrote  a  history  of  Ha-
vana, the  first  historical  work  on  a  Cuban  subject,
fb  which  he  gave  the  title  of  "  Llave  del  Nuevo
Mundo  y  Antemural  de  las  Indias  Occidentales,"
alluding  to  the  important  geographical  and  stra-
tegical situation  of  the  capital  of  Cuba.  This  work
remained  unedited  imtil  1830,  when  it  was  pub-
lished by  the  real  sociedad  economica  of  Havana.
A  new  edition  was  brought  out  in  1876,  forming
part  of  the  collection  entitled  "  Los  tres  primeros
historiadores  de  Cuba."  Arrate  wrote  also  poems
and  a  comedy,  which  are  lost.

ARRIAtrA,  Pablo  Jos6  (ahr-ree-ah-ga),  Span-
ish author,  b.  in  Vergara,  Spain,  in  1562.  He  was
sent  to  Peru,  and  there  founded  several  Jesuit  col-
leges, being  afterward  prefect  of  Arequipa  and
Lima. He  perished in  a  shipwreck  in  1622. Of


the  works  that  he  left  finished  at  his  death,  those
entitled  "  Extirpaeion  de  la  idolatria  de  los  indios
del  Peru "  and  "  Directorio  espiritual "  are  the
most  important.

ARRILLACtA,  Jos6  Joaquin,  b.  in  Aya,  prov-
ince of  Guipiizcoa,  Spain,  in  1750 ;  d.  at  Soledad
Mission,  California,  24  July,  1814.  In  his  youth
Arrillaga  was  a  volunteer  in  Mexico,  rose  in  the
service,  became  captain  in  1783,  and  in  the  same
year  took  office  as  lieutenant-governor  of  the  two
Californias.  In  1792,  on  the  death  of  Romeu,  he
was  appointed  governor,  and  after  an  interval
passed  once  more  as  lieutenant-governor,  from
1794  to  1804,  he  received  a  permanent  appointment
as  governor  of  Alta  California,  26  March,  1804,
and  retained  the  office  until  his  death.  Of  all  the
Spanish  governors  of  the  newly  settled  land,  he
was  the  most  uniformly  successful  in  winning  the
approval  of  both  civilians  and  the  Catholic  clergy.

ARRINGTON,  Alfred  W.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Iredell
CO.,  N.  C,  in  September,  1810;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,
31  Dec,  1867.  He  was  the  son  of  Archibald  Ar-
rington,  a  whig  member  of  congress  from  North
Carolina  from  1841  to  1845.  •  In  1829  young  Ar-
rington,  who  had  received  a  good  education  in  his
native  state,  was  received  on  trial  as  a  Methodist
circuit  preacher  in  Indiana,  and  in  1832-'33  he
preached  as  an  itinerant  in  Missouri,  his  remarka-
ble mental  powers  and  his  eloquence  everywhere
drawing  crowds  to  hear  him.  In  1834  he  aban-
doned the  ministry  and  studied  law,  being  admitted
soon  after  to  the  Missouri  bar.  He  removed  in
1835  or  1836  to  Arkansas,  attained  distinction  in
his  profession,  and  was  sent  to  the  legislature.  In
1844  he  was  nominated  an  elector  on  the  whig  tick-
et, but  withdrew  his  name,  and  avowed  himself  a
democrat.  Soon  afterward  he  removed  to  Texas,
and  in  1850  was  elected  judge  of  the  12th  district
court,  over  which  he  presided  till  1856.  His  health
failing,  he  was  compelled  to  seek  a  more  northern
climate  and  removed  to  Madison,  Wis.,  where  he
remained  but  a  short  time.  In  1857  he  went  to
Chicago,  which  thenceforward  was  his  home.  In
that  city  he  soon  won  a  very  high  reputation  as  a
constitutional  lawyer,  practising  constantly  before
the  U.  S.  district  and  circuit  courts  and  the  su-
preme court  at  Washington.  His  death  was  hast-
ened by  overwork.  He  wrote  much  under  the  sig-
nature of  "  Charles  Summerfield,"  and  was  the  au-
thor of  an  "  Apostrophe  to  Water,"  which  he  puts
into  the  mouth  of  an  itinerant  Methodist  preacher,
and  which  was  often  quoted  with  great  effect  by
John  B.  Grough.  A  volume  of  his  poems,  with  a
sketch  of  his  character  and  a  memoir,  was  published
in  Chicago  in  186^.  His  works  in  book  form  include
"  Sketches  of  the  Southwest,"  and  "  The  Rangers
and  Regulators  of  the  Tanaha  "  (New  York,  1857).
ARTAGUIETTE,  Diron  d',  French  soldier,
came  to  Louisiana  as  intendant  commissary  of  the
colony  in  1708.  Until  he  took  charge  of  affairs  and
introduced  order,  the  settlement  could  not  be  called
a  colony.  He  had  a  part  in  the  government  of
Louisiana,  acting  as  Bienville's  principal  coadjutor
until  1711,  when  he  returned  to  France,  later  be-
coming a  director  in  Law's  Mississippi  company. —
Diron  d'Artag-uiette,  probably  the  son,  was  ap-
pointed inspector-general  of  the  French  troops  in
Louisiana,  and  from  1718  to  1742  rendered  impor-
tant services  in  the  wars  with  the  Indians  and  in
civil  affairs.  He  died  at  Cape  Frangois,  St.  Do-
mingo, where  he  filled  the  position  of  king's  lieu-
tenant.— Pierre  d'Artaguiette,  a  younger  broth-
er, distinguished  himself  in  the  Natchez  war,  and
as  a  recognition  of  his  merit  was  in  1734  appoint-
ed governor  of  the  Illinois  country,  with  post  at


"^ A-nl-  +  n^' ^-


ARTEAGA


ARTHUR


Fort  Chartres.  He  administered  the  affairs  of  this
command  for  two  years,  when  he  was  ordered  to
collect  troops  to  lead  against  the  Chickasaws.  The
expedition  sailed  in  February,  1734,  and  the  vil-
lages were  reached  in  May.  The  expected  forces
from  Louisiana  under  Bienville  had  not  appeared,
and  D'Artaguiette  attacked  the  Indians  alone.  The
French  were  at  first  successful,  but  were  finally
overpowered,  and  with  Vincennes  and  others  he
was  made  prisoner  and  burnt  at  the  stake.

ARTEAGA,  Jos6  Maria  (ar-tay-ah'-ga),  Mexi-
can soldier,  b.  in  Aguas  Calientes  about  1830 ;  d.
21  Oct.,  1865.  He  had  only  a  primary  school  edu-
cation, his  parents  being  very  poor,  and  at  once  be-
gan to  learn  the  trade  of  a  tailor ;  but  when  nine-
teen years  old  he  entered  the  army  as  a  sergeant.
He  took  an  active  part  in  military  operations  dur-
ing the  long  strifes  between  the  different  parties
before  the  French  invasion,  and  then  he  fought  the
invaders  bravely.  By  successive  promotions  he  at-
tained the  rank  of  general.  The  troops  of  Maxi-
milian captured  him  in  the  battle  of  Amatlan  and
took  him  to  Uruapan,  where  he  was  executed.

ARTEAGA,  Sebastian  de,  Mexican  painter,
flourished  about  1643.  He  was  one  of  the  best  art-
ists of  the  old  Mexican  school.  Among  his  best
works  are  the  "  Apostle  St.  Thomas "  and  the
"  Marriage  of  the  Virgin  Mary,"  the  former  being
in  the  museum  of  paintings  of  the  city  of  Mexico.
He  was  a  high  officer  of  the  inquisition.

ARTHUR,  Chester  Alan,  twenty-first  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Franklin
CO.,  Vt.,  5  Oct.,  1830 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  Nov.,
1886.  His  father  was  Rev.  William  Arthur  (given
below).  His  mother  was  Malvina  Stone.  Her
grandfather,  Uriah  Stone,  was  a  New  Hampshire
pioneer,  who  about  1763  migrated  from  Hampstead
to  Connecticut  river,  and  made  his  home  in  Pier-
mont,  where  he  died  in  1810,  leaving  twelve  chil-
dren. Her  father  was  George  Washington  Stone.
She  died  16  Jan.,  1869,  and  her  husband  died  27  Oct.,
1875,  at  Newtonville,  N.  Y.  Their  children  were
three  sons  and  six  daughters,  all  of  whom,  except
one  son  and  one  daughter,  were  alive  in  1886.

Chester  A.  Arthur,  the  eldest  son,  prepared  for
college  at  Union  Village  in  Greenwich,  and  at
Schenectady,  and  in  1845  he  entered  the  sopho-
more class  of  Union.  While  in  his  sophomore
year  he  taught  school  for  a  term  at  Schaghticoke,
Rensselaer  co.,  and  a  second  term  at  the  same
place  during  his  last  year  in  college.  He  joined
the  Psi-Upsilon  society,  and  was  one  of  six  in  a
class  of  one  hundred  who  were  elected  members
of  the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society,  the  condition
of  admission  being  high  scholarship.  He  was
graduated  at  eighteen  years  of  age,  in  the  class
of  1848.  While  at  college  he  decided  to  become
a  lawyer,  and  after  graduation  attended  for  several
months  a  law  school  at  Ballston  Spa,  returned  to
Lansingburg,  where  his  father  then  resided,  and
continued  his  legal  studies.  During  this  period
he  fitted  boys  for  college,  and  in  1851  he  was  prin-
cipal of  an  academy  at  North  Pownal,  Bennington
CO.,  Vt.  In  1854,  James  A.  Garfield,  then  a  student
in  Williams  college,  taught  penmanship  in  this
academy  during  his  winter  vacation.

In  1853,  Arthur,  having  accumulated  a  small
sum  of  money,  decided  to  go  to  New  York  city.
He  there  entered  the  law  office  of  Erastus  D.  Cul-
ver as  a  student,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  during
the  same  year,  and  at  once  became  a  member  of
the  firm  of  Culver,  Parker  &  Arthur.  Mr.  Culver
had  been  an  anti-slavery  member  of  congress  from
Washington  county  when  Dr.  Arthur  was  pastor
of  the  Baptist  church  in  Greenwich  in  that  county.


Dr.  Arthur  had  also  enjoyed  the  friendship  of
Gerrit  Smith,  who  had  often  been  his  guest  and
spoken  from  his  pulpit.  Together  they  had  taken
part  in  the  meeting  convened  at  Utica,  21  Oct.,
1835,  to  form  a  New  York  anti-slavery  society.
This  meeting  was  broken  up  by  a  committee  of  pro-
slavery  citizens ;  but  the  members-  repaired  to  Mr.
Smith's  home  in  Peterborough,  and  there  completed
the  organization.  On  the  same  day  in  Boston  a
women's  anti-slavery  society,  while  its  president
was  at  prayer,  was  dispersed  by  a  mob,  and  William
Lloyd  Garrison  was  dragged  through  the  streets
with  a  rope  around  his  body,  threatened  with  tar  and
feathers,  and  for  his  protection  lodged  in  jail  by  the
mayor.  From  these  early  associations  Arthur  natu-
rally formed  sentiments  of  hostility  to  slavery,  and
he  first  gave  them  public  expression  in  the  Lemmon
slave  case.  In  1852  Jonathan  Lemmon,  a  Virginia
slave-holder,  determined  to  take  eight  of  the  slaves
of  his  wife,  Juliet — one  man,  two  women,  and  five
children — to  Texas,  and  brought  them  by  steamer
from  Norfolk  to  New  York,  intending  to  re-ship
them  from  New  York  to  Texas.  On  the  petition
of  Louis  Napoleon,  a  free  colored  man,  on  6  Nov.,
a  writ  of  habeas  corpus  was  issued  by  Judge  Elijah
Paine,  of  the  superior  court  of  New  York  city,  and
after  arguments  by  Mr.  Culver  and  John  Jay  for
the  slaves,  and  H.  D.  Lapaugh  and  Henry  L.  Clin-
ton for  the  slave-holder,  Judge  Paine,  on  13  Nov.,
released  the  slaves  on  the  ground  that  they  had
been  made  free  by  being  brought  by  their  master
into  a  free  state.  The  decision  created  great  ex-
citement at  the  south,  and  the  legislature  of  Vir-
ginia directed  its  attorney-general  to  appeal  to  the
higher  courts  of  New  York.  The  legislature  of
New  York  passed  a  resolution  directing  its  gov-
ernor to  defend  the  slaves.  In  December,  1857,  the
supreme  court,  in  which  a  certiorari  had  been
sued  out,  affirmed  Judge  Paine's  decision  (People
V.  Lemmon,  5  Sandf.,  681),  and  it  was  still  further
sustained  by  the  court  of  appeals  at  the  March
term,  1860  (Lemmon  v.  People,  20  N.  Y.  Rep.,
562).  Arthur,  as  a  law  student,  and  after  his  ad-
mission to  the  bar,  became  an  earnest  advocate  for
the  slaves.  He  went  to  Albany  to  secure  the  in-
tervention in  their  behalf  of  the  legislature  and
the  governor,  and  he  acted  as  their  counsel  in  ad-
dition to  attorney-general  Ogden  Hoffman,  E.  D.
Culver,  Joseph  Blunt,  and  (after  Mr.  Hoffman's
death)  William  M.  Evarts.  Charles  O'Conor  was
employed  as  further  counsel  for  the  slave-holder,
and  argued  his  side  before  the  court  of  appeals,
while  Mr.  Blunt  and  Mr.  Evarts  argued  for  the
slaves.  Until  1855  the  street-car  companies  of  New
York  city  excluded  colored  persons  from  riding
with  the  whites,  and  made  no  adequate  provision  for
their  separate  transportation.  One  Sunday  in  that
year  a  colored  woman  named  Lizzie  Jennings,  a  Sab-
bath-school superintendent,  on  the  way  home  from
her  school,  was  ejected  from  a  car  on  the  Fourth
avenue  line.  Culver,  Parker  &  Arthur  brought  a
suit  in  her  behalf  against  the  company  in  the  su-
preme court  in  Brooklyn,  the  plaintiff  recovered  a
judgment,  and  the  right  of  colored  persons  to  ride  in
any  of  the  city  cars  was  thus  secured.  The  Colored
People's  Legal  Rights  Association  for  years  cele-
brated the  anniversary  of  their  success  in  l^iis  case.
Mr.  Arthur  became  a  Henry  Clay  whig,  and  cast
his  first  vote  in  1852  for  Winfield  Scott  for  presi-
dent. He  participated  in  the  first  republican  state
convention  at  Saratoga,  and  took  an  active  part  in
the  Fremont  campaign  of  1856.  On  1  Jan.,  1861,
Gov.  Edwin  D.  Morgan,  who  on  that  date  entered
upon  his  second  term,  and  between  whom  and  Mr.
Arthur  a  warm  friendship  had  grown  up,  appointed


100


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


him  on  his  staff  as  engineer-in-chief,  with  the  rank
of  brigadier-general.  He  had  previously  taken
part  in  the  organization  of  the  state  militia,  and
had  been  judge-advocate  of  the  second  brigade.
When  the  civil  war  began,  in  April,  1861,  his  active
services  were  required  by  Gov.  Morgan,  and  he  be-
came acting  quartermaster-general,  and  as  such  be-
gan in  New  York  city  the  work  of  preparing  and
forwarding  the  state's  quota  of  troops.  In  Decem-
ber he  was  called  to  Albany  for  consultation  con-
cerning the  defences  of  New  York  harbor.  On  24
Dec.  he  summoned  a  board  of  engineers,  of  which
he  became  a  member ;  and  on  18  Jan.,  1863,  he  sub-
mitted an  elaborate  report  on  the  condition  of  the
national  forts  both  on  the  sea-coast  and  on  the  in-
land border  of  the  state.  On  10  Feb.,  1862,  he  was
appointed  inspector-general,  with  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general, and  in  May  he  inspected  the  New
York  troops  at  Fredericksburg  and  on  the  Chicka-
hominy.  In  June,  1862,  Gov.  Morgan  ordered  his
return  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  he  acted
as  secretary  of  the  meeting  of  the  governors  of  the
loyal  states,  which  was  held  at  the  Astor  House,
New  York  city,  28  June.  The  governors  advised
President  Lincoln  to  call  for  more  troops ;  and  on
1  July  he  called  for  300,000  volunteers.  At  Gov.
Morgan's  request,  Gen.  Arthur  resumed  his  former
work,  resigned  as  inspector-general,  and  10  July
was  appointed  quartermaster-general.  In  his
annual  report,  dated  27  Jan.,  1863,  he  said:
"  Through  the  single  office  and  clothing  depart-
ment of  this  department  in  the  city  of  New  York,
from  1  Aug.  to  1  Dec,  the  space  of  four  months,
there  were  completely  clothed,  uniformed,  and
equipped,  supplied  with  camp  and  garrison  equi-
page, and  transported  from  this  state  to  the  seat  of
war,  sixty-eight  regiments  of  infantry,  two  battal-
ions of  cavalry,  and  four  battalions  of  artillery."
He  went  out  of  office  31  Dec,  1862,  when  Horatio
Seymour  succeeded  Gov.  J^Iorgan,  and  his  succes-
sor, Quartermaster-General  S.  V.  Talcott,  in  his  re-
port of  31  Dec,  1863,  spoke  of  the  previous  admin-
istration as  follows  :  "  I  found,  on  entering  on  the
discharge  of  my  duties,  a  well-organized  system  of
labor  and  accountability,  for  which  the  state  is
chiefly  indebted  to  my  predecessor,  Gen.  Chester
A.  Arthur,  who  by  his  practical  good  sense  and
unremitting  exertion,  at  a  period  when  everything
was  in  confusion,  reduced  the  operations  of  the
department  to  a  matured  plan,  by  which  large
amounts  of  money  were  saved  to  the  government,
and  great  economy  of  time  secured  in  carrying  out
the  details  of  the  same."

Between  1862  and  1872  Gen.  Arthur  was  engaged
in  continuous  and  active  law  practice — in  partner-
ship with  Henry  G.  Gardner  from  1862  till  1867,
then  for  five  years  alone,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1872,  he
formed  the  firm  of  Arthur,  Phelps  &  Knevals.
He  was  for  a  short  time  counsel  for  the  depart-
ment of  assessments  and  taxes,  but  resigned  the
place.  During  all  this  period  he  continued  to  take
an  active  interest  in  politics ;  was  chairman  in  1868
of  the  central  Grant  club  of  New  York ;  and  became
chairman  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  repub-
lican state  committee  in  1879.

On  20  Nov.,  1871,  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Grant  collector  of  the  port  of  New  York,
and  assumed  the  office  on  1  Dec. ;  was  nomi-
nated to  the  senate  6  Dec,  confirmed  12  Dec,  and
commissioned  for  four  years  16  Dec  On  17  Dec,
1875,  he  was  nominated  for  another  term,  and  by
the  senate  confirmed  the  same  day.  without  ref-
erence to  a  committee — a  courtesy  never  before  ex-
tended to  an  appointee  who  had  not  been  a  sena-
tor. He  was  commissioned  18  Dec,  and  retained


the  office  until  11  July,  1878,  making  his  seryice
about  six  and  two  thirds  years.

The  New  York  republican  state  convention,  held
at  Syracuse,  22  March,  1876,  elected  delegates  to
the  national  convention  in  favor  of  the  nomination
of  Senator  Conkling  for  president.  The  friends  of
Mr.  Conkling  in  the  state  convention  were  led  by
Alonzo  B.  Cornell,  then  naval  officer  in  the  New
York  custom-house.  A  minority,  calling  them-
selves reform  republicans,  and  favoring  Benjamin
H.  Bristow  for  president,  were  led  by  George  Will-
iam Curtis.  At  the  national  convention  at  Cincin-
nati, 14  June,  sixty-nine  of  the  New  York  delegates,
headed  by  Mr.  Cornell,  voted  for  Mr.  Conkling,  and
one  delegate,  Mr.  Curtis,  voted  for  Mr.  Bristow.
At  the  critical  seventh  ballot,  however,  Mr.  Conk-
ling's  name  was  withdrawn,  and  from  New  York
sixty-one  votes  were  given  for  Rutherford  B.  Hayes,
against  nine  for  James  G.  Blaine ;  and  the  former's
nomination  was  thus  secured.  At  the  New  York
republican  state  convention  to  nominate  a  gov-
ernor, held  at  Saratoga,  23  Aug.,  Mr.  Cornell  and
ex-Gov.  Morgan  were  candidates,  and  also  William
M.  Evarts,  supported  by  the  reform  republicans
led  by  Mr.  Curtis.  Mr.  Cornell's  name  was  with-
drawn, and  Gov.  Morgan  was  nominated.  In  the
close  state  and  presidential  canvass  that  ensued,
Messrs.  Arthur  and  Cornell  made  greater  exertions
to  carry  New  York  for  the  republicans  than  they  had
ever  made  in  any  other  campaign ;  and  subsequent-
ly Gen.  Arthur's  activity  in  connection  with  the
contested  countings  in  the  southern  states  was  of
vital  importance.  Nevertheless,  President  Hayes,
in  making  up  his  cabinet,  selected  Mr.  Evarts  as
his  secretary  of  state,  and  determined  to  remove
Messrs.  Arthur  and  Cornell,  and  to  transfer  the
power  and  patronage  of  their  offices  to  the  use  of  a
minority  faction  in  the  republican  party.  The
president  had,  however,  in  his  inaugural  of  5
March,  1877,  declared  in  favor  of  civil  service  re-
form— "  a  change  in  the  system  of  appointment  it-
self ;  a  reform  that  shall  be  thorough,  radical,  and
complete ;  that  the  officer  should  be  secure  in  his
tenure  so  long  as  his  personal  character  remained
untarnished,  and  the  performance  of  his  duties
satisfactory."  In  his  letter  of  acceptance  of  8
July,  1876,  he  had  used  the  same  words,  and
added :  "  If  elected,  I  shall  conduct  the  admin-
istration of  the  government  upon  these  princi-
ples, and  all  constitutional  powers  vested  in  the
executive  will  be  employed  to  establish  this  re-
form." It  became  necessary,  therefore,  before  re-
moving Arthur  and  Cornell,  that  some  foundation
should  be  laid  for  a  claim  that  the  custom-house
was  not  well  administered.  A  series  of  investiga-
tions was  thereupon  instituted.  The  Jay  commis-
sion was  appointed  14  April,  1877,  and  during  the
ensuing  summer  made  four  reports  criticising  the
management  of  the  custom-house.  In  September,
Sec.  Sherman  requested  the  collector  to  resign,  ac-
companying the  request  with  the  offer  of  a  foreign
mission.  The  newspapers  of  the  previous  day
announced  that  at  a  cabinet  meeting  it  had  been
determined  to  remove  the  collector.  The  latter
declined  to  resign,  and  the  investigations  were  con-
tinued by  commissions  and  special  agents.  To  the
reports  of  the  Jay  commission  Collector  Arthur
replied  in  detail,  in  a  letter  to  Sec.  Sherman,  dated
23  Nov.  On  6  Dec,  Theodore  Roosevelt  was  nomi-
nated to  the  senate  for  collector,  and  L.  Bradford
Prince  for  naval  officer;  but  they  were  rejected
12  Dec,  and  no  other  nominations  were  made,  al-
though the  senate  remained  in  session  for  more
than  six  months.  On  11  July,  1878,  after  its  ad-
journment, Messrs.  Arthur  and  Cornell  were  sus-


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


101


pended  from  office,  and  Edwin  A.  Merritt  was
designated  as  collector,  and  Silas  W.  Burt  as  naval
officer,  and  they  took  possession  of  the  offices.
Their  nominations  were  sent  to  the  senate  3  Dec,
1878.  On  15  Jan.,  1879,  Sec.  Sherman  communi-
cated to  the  senate  a  full  statement  of  the  causes
that  led  to  these  suspensions,  mainly  criticisms  of
the  management  of  the  custom-house,  closing  with
the  declaration  that  the  restoration  of  the  sus-
pended officers  would  create  discord  and  conten-
tion, be  unjust  to  the  president,  and  personally  em-
embarrassing  to  the  secretary,  and  saying  that,  as
Collector  Arthur's  term  of  service  would  expire  17
Dec,  1879,  his  restoration  would  be  temporary,  as
the  president  would  send  in  another  name,  or  sus-
pend him  again  after  the  adjournment  of  the  senate.
On  31  Jan.,  1879,  Collector  Arthur,  in  a  letter  to
Senator  Conkling,  chairman  of  the  committee  on
commerce,  before  which  the  nominations  were
pending,  made  an  elaborate  reply  to  Sec  Sher-
man's criticisms,  completely  demonstrating  the
honesty  and  efficiency  with  which  the  custom-house
had  been  managed,  and  the  good  faith  with  which
the  policy  and  instructions  of  the  president  had
been  carried  out.  A  fair  summary  of  the  merits
of  the  ostensible  issue  is  contained  in  Collector  Ar-
thur's letter  of  23  Nov.,  1877,  from  which  the  fol-
lowing extract  is  taken:  "The  essential  elements
of  a  correct  civil  service  I  understand  to  be :  first,
permanence  in  office,  which  of  course  prevents  re-
movals except  for  cause ;  second,  promotion  from
the  lower  to  the  higher  grades,  based  upon  good
conduct  and  efficiency ;  third,  prompt  and  thor-
ough investigation  of  all  complaints,  and  prompt
punishment  of  all  misconduct.  In  this  respect  I
challenge  comparison  with  any  department  of  the
government  under  the  present,  or  under  any  past,
national  administration.  I  am  prepared  to  demon-
strate the  truth  of  this  statement  on  any  fair  in-
vestigation." In  a  table  appended  to  this  letter  Col-
lector Arthur  showed  that  during  the  six  years  he
had  managed  the  office  the  yearly  percentage  of
removals  for  all  causes  had  been  only  2|  per  cent.
as  against  an  annual  average  of  28  per  cent,  under
his  three  immediate  predecessors,  and  an  annual
average  of  about  24  per  cent,  since  1857,  when  Col-
lector Schell  took  office.  Out  of  923  persons  who
held  office  when  he  became  collector,  on  1  Dec,
1871,  there  were  531  still  in  office  on  1  May,  1877,
having  been  retained  during  his  entire  terra.  In
making  promotions,  the  uniform  practice  was  to
advance  men  from  the  lower  to  the  higher  grades,
and  all  the  appointments  except  two,  to  the  one
hundred  positions  of  $2,000  salary,  or  over,  were
made  in  this  method.  The  expense  of  collecting
the  revenue  was  also  kept  low ;  it  had  been,  under
his  predecessors,  between  1857  and  1861,  -^  of  one
per  cent,  of  the  receipts :  between  1861  and  1864,
1^^-;  in  1864  and  1865,  l-i^^o ;  between  1866  and
1869,  fo%;  in  1869  and  1870,  i^o^o  ;  in  1870  and
1871,  -1^0-;  and  under  him,  from  1871  to  1877,  it
was  T^lfo  of  one  per  cent.  The  influence  of  the  ad-
ministration, however,  was  sufficient  to  secure  the
confirmation  of  Mr.  Merritt  and  Mr.  Burt  on  3
Feb.,  1879,  and  the  controversy  was  remitted  to
the  republicans  of  New  York  for  their  opinion.
Mr.  Cornell  was  nominated  for  governor  of  New
York  3  Sept.,  1879,  and  elected  on  4  Nov.;  and
Mr.  Arthur  was  considered  a  candidate  for  U.  S.
senator  for  the  term  to  begin  4  March,  1881.

On  retiring  from  the  office  of  collector.  Gen.  Ar-
thur resumed  law  practice  with  the  firm  of  Arthur,
Phelps,  Knevals  &  Ransom.  But  he  continued  to
be  active  in  politics,  and,  in  1880,  advocated  the
nomination  of Gen.  Grant  to  succeed  President


Hayes.  He  was  a  delegate  at  large  to  the  Chicago
convention,  which  met  2  June,  and  during  the
heated  preliminary  contest  before  the  republican
national  committee,  which  threatened  to  result  in
the  organization  of  two  independent  conventions,
he  conducted  for  his  own  side  the  conferences  with
the  controlling  anti-third  term  delegates  relative
to  the  choice  of  a  temporary  presiding  officer,  and
the  arrangement  of  the  preliminary  roll  of  dele-
gates in  the  cases  to  be  contested  in  the  con-
vention. The  result  of  the  conferences  was  an
agreement  by  which  all  danger  was  avoided,  and
when,  upon  the  opening  of  the  convention,  an  at-
tempt was  made,  in  consequence  of  a  misunder-
standing on  the  part  of  certain  Grant  delegates,  to
violate  this  agreement,  he  resolutely  adhered  to
it,  and  insisted  upon  and  secured  its  observance.
After  the  nomination,  10  June,  of  Gen.  Garfield
for  president,  by  a  combination  of  the  anti-third
term  delegates,  a  general  desire  arose  in  the  con-
vention to  nominate  for  vice-president  some  advo-
cate of  Grant  and  a  resident  of  New  York  state.
The  New  York  delegation  at  once  indicated  their
preference  for  Gen.  Arthur,  and  before  the  roll-
call  began  the  foregone  conclusion  was  evident:
he  received  468  votes  against  283  for  all  others,
and  the  nomination  was  made  unanimous.  In
his  letter  of  acceptance  of  5  July,  1880,  he  em-
phasized the  right  and  the  paramount  duty  of  the
nation  to  protect  the  colored  citizens,  who  were
enfranchised  as  a  result  of  the  southern  rebellion,
in  the  full  enjoyment  of  their  civil  and  political
rights,  including  honesty  and  order,  and  excluding
fraud  and  force,  in  popular  elections.  He  also
approved  such  reforms  in  the  public  service  as
would  base  original  appointments  to  office  upon
ascertained  fitness,  fill  positions  of  responsibility
by  the  promotion  of  worthy  and  efficient  officers,
and  make  the  tenure  of  office  stable,  while  not  al-
lowing the  acceptance  of  public  office  to  impair
the  liberty  or  diminish  the  responsibility  of  the
citizen.  He  also  advocated  a  sound  currency,  popu-
lar education,  such  changes  in  tariff  and  taxation
as  would  "relieve  any  overburdened  industry  or
class,  and  enable  our  manufacturers  and  artisans
to  compete  successfully  with  those  of  other  lands,"
national  works  of  internal  improvement,  and  the
development  of  our  water-courses  and  harbors
wherever  required  by  the  general  interests  of  com-
merce. During  the  canvass  he  remained  chair-
man of  the  New  York  republican  state  commit-
tee. The  result  was  a  plurality  for  Garfield  and
Arthur  of  21,000  in  the  state,  against  a  plurality
of  32,000  in  1876  for  Tilden  and  Hendricks,  the
democratic  candidates  against  Hayes  and  Wheeler.
Vice-President  Arthur  took  the  oath  of  office
4  March,  1881,  and  presided  over  the  extra  session
of  the  senate  that  then  began,  which  continued  un-
til 20  May.  The  senate  contained  37  republicans  and
37  democrats,  while  Senators  Mahone,  of  Virginia,
and  Davis,  of  Illinois,  who  were  rated  as  ind^end-
ents,  generally  voted,  the  former  with  the  repub-
licans and  the  latter  with  the  democrats,  thus
making  a  tie,  and  giving  the  vice-president  the
right  to  cast  the  controlling  vote,  which  he  several
times  had  occasion  to  exercise.  The  session  was
exciting,  and  was  prolonged  by  the  efforts  of  the
republicans  to  elect  their  nominees  for  secretary
and  sergeant-at-arms,  against  dilatory  tactics  em-
ployed by  the  democrats,  and  by  the  controversy
over  President  Garfield's  nomination,  on  23  March,
for  collector  of  the  port  of  New  York,  of  William
H.  Robertson,  who  had  been  the  leader  of  the  New
York  anti-third  term  delegates  at  the  Chicago  con-
vention. During  this  controversy  the  vice-presi-


102


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


dent  supported  Senators  Conkling  and  Piatt  in
their  opposition  to  the  confirmation.  On  28  March
he  headed  a  remonstrance,  signed  also  by  the  sen-
ators and  by  Postmaster-General  James,  addressed
to  the  president,  condemning  the  appointment,
and  asking  that  the  nomination  be  withdrawn.
When  the  two  senators  hastily  resigned  and  made
their  unsuccessful  contest  for  a  reelection  by  the
legislature  of  New  York,  then  in  session  at  Albany,
he  exerted  himself  actively  in  their  behalf  during
May  and  June.

President  Garfield  was  shot  2  July,  1881,  and
died  19  Sept.  His  cabinet  announced  his  death  to
the  vice-president,  then  in  New  York,  and,  at  their
suggestion,  he  took  the  oath  as  president  on  the
20th,  at  his  residence,  123  Lexington  avenue,  before
Judge  John  R.  Brady,  of  the  New  York  supreme
court.  On  the  22d  the  oath  was  formally  admin-
istered again  in  the  vice-president's  room  in  the
capitol  at  Washington  by  Chief-Justice  Waite,  and
President  Arthur  delivered  the  following  inaugu-
ral address :

"  For  the  fourth  time  in  the  history  of  the  re-
public its  chief  magistrate  has  been  removed  by
death.  All  hearts  are  filled  with  grief  and  horror
at  the  hideous  crime  which  has  darkened  our  land ;
and  the  memory  of  the  murdered  president,  his
protracted  sufferings,  his  unyielding  fortitude,  the
example  and  achievements  of  his  life,  and  the
pathos  of  his  death,  will  forever  illumine  the  pages
of  our  history.  For  the  fourth  time  the  officer
elected  by  the  people  and  ordained  by  the  constitu-
tion to  fill  a  vacancy  so  created  is  called  to  assume
the  executive  chair.  The  wisdom  of  our  fathers,
foreseeing  even  the  most  dire  possibilities,  made
sure  that  the  government  should  never  be  imper-
illed because  of  the  uncertainty  of  human  life.
Men  may  die,  but  the  fabrics  of  our  free  institu-
tions remain  unshaken.  No  higher  or  more  assur-
ing proof  could  exist  of  the  strength  and  perma-
nence of  popular  government  than  the  fact  that,
though  the  chosen  of  the  people  be  stn"  3k  down,
his  constitutional  successor  is  peacefully  installed
without  shock  or  strain,  except  the  sorrow  which
mourns  the  bereavement.  All  the  noble  aspirations
of  my  lamented  predecessor  which  found  expres-
sion in  his  life,  the  measures  devised  and  suggested
during  his  brief  administration  to  correct  abuses
and  enforce  economy,  to  advance  prosperity  and
promote  the  general  welfare,  to  insure  domestic  se-
curity and  maintain  friendly  and  honorable  rela-
tions with  the  nations  of  the  earth,  will  be  gar-
nered in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  it  will  be  my
earnest  endeavor  to  profit  and  to  see  that  the  na-
tion shall  profit  by  his  example  and  experience.
Prosperity  blesses  our  country,  our  fiscal  policy  is
fixed  by  law,  is  well  grounded  and  generally  ap-
proved. No  threatening  issue  mars  our  foreign  in-
tercourse, and  the  wisdom,  integrity,  and  thrift  of
our  people  may  be  trusted  to  continue  undisturbed
the  present  assured  career  of  peace,  tranquillity,
and  welfare.  The  gloom  and  anxiety  which  have
enshrouded  the  country  must  make  repose  espe-
cially welcome  now.  No  demand  for  speedy  legisla-
tion has  been  heard ;  no  adequate  occasion  is  ap-
parent for  an  unusual  session  of  congress.  The
constitution  defines  the  functions  and  powers  of  the
executive  as  clearly  as  those  of  either  of  the  other
two  departments  of  the  government,  and  he  must
answer  for  the  just  exercise  of  the  discretion  it  per-
mits and  the  performance  of  the  duties  it  imposes.
Summoned  to  these  high  duties  and  responsibili-
ties, and  profoundly  conscious  of  their  magnitude
and  gravity,  I  assume  the  trust  imposed  by  the
constitution,  relying  for  aid  on Divine  guidance


and  the  virtue,  patriotism,  and  intelligence  of  the
American  people."

He  also  on  the  same  day  appointed  Monday,  26
Sept.,  as  a  day  of  mourning  for  the  late  president.
On  28  Sept.  he  issued  a  proclamation  convening
the  senate  in  extraordinary  session,  to  meet  10  Oct.,
in  order  that  a  president  pro  tern,  of  that  body
might  be  elected.  The  meml^ers  of  the  cabinet
were  requested  to  retain  their  places  until  the  regu-
lar meeting  of  congress  in  December,  and  did  re-
main until  their  successors  were  appointed,  except
Sec.  Windom,  who,  desiring  to  become  a  candidate
for  senator  from  Minnesota,  resigned  from  the
treasury  24  Oct.  Edwin  D.  Morgan  was  nomi-
nated and  confirmed  secretary  of  the  treasury,  but
declined  the  appointment ;  and  Charles  J.  Folger,
of  New  York,  was  then  nominated  and  confirmed,
was  commissioned  27  Oct.,  and  qualified  14  Nov.
He  died  in  office,  4  Sept.,  1884.  The  other  mem-
bers of  the  cabinet  of  President  Arthur,  and  the
dates  of  their  commissions,  were  as  follows :  State
department,  Frederick  T.  Frelinghuysen,  of  New
Jersev,  12  Dec,  1881 ;  treasury,  Walter  Q.  Gresham,
of  Indiana,  24  Sept.,  1884;  Hugh  McCulloch,  of
Maryland,  28  Oct.,  1884;  war,  Robert  T.  Lincoln,
of  Illinois,  5  March,  1881  (retained  from  Garfield's
cabinet);  nav}%  William  E.  Chandler,  of  New
Hampshire,  12  April,  1882 ;  interior,  Henry  M.
Teller,  of  Colorado,  6  April,  1882;  attorney-gen-
eral, Benjamin  H.  Brewster,  of  Pennsylvania,  19
Dec,  1881 ;  postmaster-general,  Timothy  0.  Howe,
of  Wisconsin,  20  Dec,  1881  (died  in  office,  25  March,
1883);  Walter  Q.  Gresham,  3  April,  1883;  Frank
Hatton,  of  Iowa,  14  Oct.,  1884.  Messrs.  Freling-
huysen, McCulloch,  Lincoln,  Chandler,  Teller,
Brewster,  and  Hatton  remained  in  office  until  the
end  of  the  presidential  term,  4  March,  1885.

The  prominent  events  of  President  Arthur's  ad-
ministration, including  his  most  important  recom-
mendations to  congress,  may  be  here  summarized :
Shortly  after  his  accession  to  the  presidency  he
participated  in  the  dedication  of  the  monument
erected  at  Yorktown,  Va.,  to  commemorate  the
surrender  of  Lord  Cornwallis  at  that  place,  19  Oct.,
1781.  Representatives  of  our  French  allies  and  of
the  German  participants  were  present.  At  the
close  of  the  celebration  the  president  felicitously
directed  a  salute  to  be  fired  in  honor  of  the  British
flag,  "  in  recognition  of  the  friendly  relations  so
long  and  so  happily  subsisting  between  Great
Britain  and  the  United  States,  in  the  trust  and
confidence  of  peace  and  good-will  between  the  two
countries  for  all  the  centuries  to  come,  and  espe-
cially as  a  mark  of  the  profound  respect  enter-
tained by  the  American  people  for  the  illustrious
sovereign  and  gracious  lady  who  sits  upon  the
British  throne."  On  29  Nov.,  1881,  an  invitation
was  extended  to  all  the  independent  countries  of
North  and  South  America  to  participate  in  a
peace  congress,  to  be  convened  at  Washington  22
Nov.,  1882.  The  president,  in  a  special  message,
18  April,  1882,  asked  the  opinion  of  congress  as  to
the  expediency  of  the  project.  No  response  being
elicited,  he  concluded,  9  Aug.,  1882,  to  postpone
indefinitely  the  proposed  convocation,  believing
that  so  important  a  step  should  not  be  taken  with-
ont  the  express  authority  of  congress;  or  while
three  of  the  nations  to  be  invited  were  at  war ;  or
still,  again,  until  a  programme  should  have  been
prepared  explicitly  indicating  the  objects  and
limiting  the  powers  of  the  congress.  Efforts  were
made,  however,  to  strengthen  the  relations  of  the
United  States  with  the  other  American  nationali-
ties. Representations  were  made  by  the  adminis-
tration with  a  view  to  bringing  to  a  close  the  de-


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


103


vastating  war  between  Chili  and  the  allied  states
of  Peru  and  Bolivia.  Its  friendly  counsel  was
offered  in  aid  of  the  settlement  of  the  disputed
boundary-line  between  Mexico  and  Guatemala,  and
was  probably  influential  in  averting?  a  war  between
those  countries.  On  29  July,  1882,  a  convention
was  made  with  Mexico  for  relocating  the  boundary
between  that  country  and  the  United  States  from
the  Rio  Grande  to  the  Pacific,  and  on  the  same  day
an  agreement  was  also  effected  permitting  the
armed  forces  of  either  country  to  cross  the  frontier
in  pursuit  of  hostile  Indians.  A  series  of  recipro-
cal commercial  treaties  with  the  coUiitries  of  Amer-
ica to  foster  an  unhampered  movement  of  trade
was  recommended.  Such  a  treaty  was  made  with
Mexico,  20  Jan.,  1883,  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant  and  Mr.
Wm.  H.  Trescott  being  the  U.  S.  commissioners,
and  was  ratified  by  the  senate  11  March,  1884.
Similar  treaties  were  made  with  Santo  Domingo
4  Dec,  1884 ;  and  18  Nov.,  1884,  with  Spain,  rela-
tive to  the  trade  of  Cuba  and  Porto  Rico,  both  of
which,  before  action  by  the  senate,  were  withdrawn
by  President  Cleveland,  who,  in  his  message  of  8
Dec,  1885,  pronounced  them  inexpedient.  In  con-
nection with  commercial  treaties  President  Arthur
advised  the  establishment  of  a  monetary  union  of
the  American  countries  to  secure  the  adoption  of
a  uniform  currency  basis,  and  as  a  step  toward  the
general  remonetization  of  silver.  Provision  for  in-
creased and  improved  consular  representation  in
the  Central  American  states  was  urged,  and  the
recommendation  was  accepted  and  acted  upon  by
congress.  A  Central  and  South  American  commis-
sion was  appointed,  under  the  act  of  congress  of  7
July,  1884,  and  proceeded  on  its  mission,  guided
by  instructions  containing  a  statement  of  the  gen-
eral policy  of  the  government  for  enlarging  its  com-
mercial intercourse  with  American  states.  Reports
from  the  commission  were  submitted  to  congress
in  a  message  of  13  Feb.,  1885.  Negotiations  were
conducted  with  the  republic  of  Colombia  for  the
purpose  of  renewing  and  strengthening  the  obliga-
tions of  the  United  States  as  the  sole  guarantor  of
the  integrity  of  Colombian  territory,  and  of  the
neutrality  of  any  interoceanic  canal  to  be  con-
structed across  the  isthmus  of  Panama.  By  cor-
respondence upon  this  subject,  carried  on  with  the
British  government,  it  was  shown  that  the  provi-
sions of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty  of  19  April,
1850,  can  not  be  urged,  and  do  not  continue  in
force  in  justification  of  interference  by  any  Euro-
pean power,  with  the  right  of  the  United  States
to  exercise  exclusive  control  over  any  route  of  isth-
mus transit,  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  and  pur-
pose of  the  so-called  "  Monroe  doctrine."  As  the
best  and  most  practicable  means  of  securing  a  canal,
and  at  the  same  time  protecting  the  paramount  in-
terests of  the  United  States,  a  treaty  was  made  with-
the  republic  of  Nicaragua,  1  Dec,  1884,  which  au-
thorized the  United  States  to  construct  a  canal,
railway,  and  telegraph  line  across  NicaragUan  ter-
ritory by  way  of  San  Juan  river  and  Lake  Nica-
ragua. This  treaty  was  rejected  by  the  senate,  but
a  motion  was  made  to  reconsider  the  vote.  Before
final  action  had  been  taken  it  was  withdrawn,  12
March,  1885,  by  President  Cleveland,  who  withheld
it  from  re-submission  to  the  senate,  and  in  his  mes-
sage of  8  Dec,  1885,  expressed  his  unwillingness  to
assert  for  the  United  States  any  claim  of  paramount
privilege  of  ownership  or  control  of  any  canal
across  the  isthmus.  Satisfaction  was  obtained
from  Spain  of  the  old  claim  on  account  of  the
"Masonic,"  an  American  vessel,  which  had  been
seized  at  Manila  unjustly,  and  under  circumstances
of  peculiar  severity. From  the  same  government


was  also  secured  a  recognition  of  the  conclusive-
ness of  the  judgments  of  the  U.  S.  courts  natural-
izing citizens  of  Spanish  nativitv.  From  the
British  government  a  full  recognition  of  the  rights
and  immunities  of  naturalized  American  citizens
of  Irish  origin  was  obtained,  and  all  such  that  were
under  arrest  in  England  or  Ireland,  as  suspects,
were  liberated.  Notice  was  given  to  England,  un-
der the  joint  resolution  of  congress  of  3  March,
1883,  of  the  termination  of  the  fishery  clauses  of
the  treaty  of  Washington.  A  complete  scheme
for  re-organizing  the  extra-territorial  jurisdiction
of  American  consuls  in  China  and  Japan,  and  an-
other for  re-oyganizing  the  whole  consular  service,
were  submitted  to  congress.  The  former  recom-
mendation was  adopted  by  the  senate.  The  bal-
ance of  the  Japanese  indemnity  fund  was  returned
to  Japan  by  act  of  22  Feb.,  1883,  and  the  balance
of  the  Chinese  fund  to  China  by  act  of  3  March,
1885.  A  bill  that  was  passed  by  congress  prohibit-
ing the  immigration  of  Chinese  laborers  for  a  terra
of  twenty  years  was  vetoed,  4  April,  1882,  as  being
a  violation  of  the  treaty  of  1880  with  China,  which
permitted  the  limitation  or  suspension  of  immigra-
tion, but  forbade  its  absolute  prohibition.  The
veto  was  sustained  and  a  modified  bill,  suspend-
ing immigration  for  ten  years,  was  passed  6  May,
1882,  which  received  executive  approval,  and  also
an  amendatory  act  of  5  July,  1884.  Outstand-
ing claims  with  China  were  settled,  and  addition-
al regulations  of  the  opium  traffic  established.
Friendly  and  commercial  intercourse  with  Corea
was  opened  under  the  most  favorable  auspices,  in
pursuance  of  the  treaty  negotiated  on  22  May,
1882,  through  the  agency  of  Com.  R.  W.  Shufeldt,
U.  S.  N.  The  friendly  offices  of  the  United  States
were  extended  to  Liberia  in  aid  of  a  settlement,
favorable  to  that  republic,  of  the  dispute  concern-
ing its  boundary-line,  with  the  British  possession
of  Sierra  Leone.  The  flag  of  the  international  as-
sociation of  the  Congo  was,  on  22  April,  1884,  rec-
ognized first  by  the  United  States.  A  commercial
agent  was  appointed  to  visit  the  Congo  basin,  and
the  government  was  represented  at  an  international
conference'  at  Berlin,  called  by  the  emperor  of
Germany,  for  the  promotion  of  trade  and  the  es-
tablishment of  commercial  rights  in  the  Congo
region.  The  renewal  of  the  reciprocity  treaty  with
Hawaii  was  advised.  Remonstrances  were  ad-
dressed to  Russia  against  any  proscriptive  treat-
ment of  the  Hebrew  race  in  that  country.  The
international  prime  meridian  of  Greenwich  was  es-
tablished as  the  result  of  a  conference  of  nations,
initiated  by  the  U.  S.  government,  and  held  at
Washington,  1  Oct.  to  1  Nov.,  1884.  In  response
to  the  appeal  of  Cardinal  John  McCloskey,  of  New
York,  the  Italian  government,  on  4  March,  1884,
was  urged  to  exempt  from  the  sale  of  the  property
of  the  propaganda  the  American  college  in  Rome,
established  mainly  by  contributions  from  the  Unit-
ed States,  and  in  consequence  of  this  interposition
the  college  was  saved  from  sale  and  virtual  confis-
cation. On  3  Aug.,  1882,  a  law  was  passed  for
returning  convicts  to  Europe,  and  on  26  Feb.,  1885,
importation  of  contract-laborers  was  forbidden.

The  suspension  of  the  coinage  of  standard  silver
dollars,  and  the  redemption  of  tlie  trade  dollars,
were  repeatedly  recommended.  The  repeal  of  the
stamp  taxes  on  matches,  proprietary  articles,  play-
ing-cards, bank  checks  and  drafts,  and  of  the  tax
on  surplus  bank  capital  and  deposits,  was  recom-
mended. These  taxes  were  repealed  by  act  of
congress  of  3  March,  1883 ;  and  by  executive  order
of  25  June,  1883,  the  number  of  internal  revenue  col-
lection districts  was  reduced  from  126  to  83, The


104


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


tax  on  tobacco  was  reduced  by  the  same  act  of  con-
gress :  and  in  his  last  annual"  message,  of  5  Dec,
1884,  the  president  advised  the  repeal  of  all  internal
revenue  taxes  except  those  on  distilled  spirits  and
fermented  liquors.  Congress  was  advised  to  under-
take the  revision  of  the  tariff,  but  ''  without  the
abandonment  of  the  policy  of  so  discriminating  in
the  adjustment  of  details  as  to  afford  aid  and  pro-
tection to  American  labor."  The  course  advised
was  the  organization  of  a  tariff  commission,  which
was  authorized  by  act  of  congress  of  15  May,  1882.
The  report  of  the  commission  submitted  to  con-
gress 4  Dec.  was  made  the  basis  of  the  tariff  revis-
ion act  of  3  March.  1883.  On  12  July,  1882,  an  act
became  a  law  enabling  the  national* banks,  which
were  then  completing  their  twenty-year  terms,  to
extend  their  corporate  existence.  Overdue  five  per
cent,  bonds  to  the  amount  of  $469,651,050,  and
six  per  cent,  bonds  to  the  amount  of  $203,573,750,
were  continued  (except  about  $56,000,000  which
were  paid)  at  the  rate  of  3-J  per  cent,  interest.  The
interest-bearing  public  debt  was  reduced  $478,785,-
950,  and  the  annual  interest  charge  $29,831,880
during  the  presidential  term.  On  1  July,  1882,
*'  An  act  to  regulate  the  carriage  of  passengers  by
sea  ■ '  was  vetoed  because  not  correctly  or  accurately
phrased,  although  the  object  was  admitted  to  be
meritorious  and  philanthropic.  A  modified  bill
passed  congress,  and  was  approved  2  Aug.  The
attention  of  congress  was  frequently  called  to  the
decline  of  the  American  merchant  marine,  and
legislation  was  recommended  for  its  restoration,
and  the  construction  and  maintenance  of  ocean
steamships  under  the  U.  S.  flag.  In  compliance
with  these  recommendations,  the  following  laws
were  enacted :  26  June.  1884,  an  act  to  remove
certain  burdens  from  American  shipping ;  5  July,
1884,  an  act  creating  a  bureau  of  navigation,  under
charge  of  a  commissioner,  in  the  treasury  depart-
ment ;  and  3  March,  1885,  an  amendment  to  the
postal  appropriation  bill  appropriating  $800,000
for  contracting  with  American  steamship  lines  for
the  transportation  of  foreign  mails.  Reasonable
national  regulation  of  the  railways  of  the  country
was  favored,  and  the  opinion  was  expressed  that
congress  should  protect  the  people  at  large  in  their
inter-state  traffic  against  acts  of  injustice  that  the
state  governments  might  be  powerless  to  prevent.

The  attention  of  congress  was  often  called  to
the  necessity  of  modern  provisions  for  coast  de-
fence. By  special  message  of  11  April,  1884,  an
annual  appropriation  of  $1,500,000  for  the  arma-
ment of  fortifications  was  recommended.  In  the  last
annual  message  an  expenditure  of  $60,000,000,  one
tenth  to  be  appropriated  annually,  was  recommend-
ed. In  consequence,  the  fortifications  board  was
created  by  act  of  3  March,  1885,  which  made  an
elaborate  report  to  the  49th  congress,  recommend-
ing a  complete  svstem  of  coast  defence  at  an  ulti-
mate cost  estimated  at  $126,377,800.  The  gun-
foundry  board,  consisting  of  army  and  navy  officers,
appointed  under  the  act  of  3  March,  1883,  visited
Europe  and  made  full  reports,  advising  large  con-
tracts for  terms  of  years  with  American  manufac-
turers to  produce  the  steel  necessary  for  heav}'  can-
non, and  recommending  the  establishment  of  one
army  and  one  navy  gun  factory  for  the  fabrication
of  modern  ordnance.  This  plan  was  commended
to  congress  in  a  special  message  26  March,  1884,
and  in  the  above-mentioned  message  of  11  April ;
also  in  the  annual  message  of  that  year.  In  the
annual  message  of  1881  the  improvement  of  Missis-
sippi river  was  recommended.  On  17  April,  1882,
by  special  message,  congress  was  urged  to  provide
for  "  closing  existing  gaps  in  levees,"  and  to  adopt


a  system  for  the  permanent  improvement  of  the
navigation  of  the  river  and  for  the  security  of  the
valley.  Special  messages  on  this  subject  were  also
sent  8  Jan.  and  2  April,  1884.  Appropriations  were
made  of  $8,500,000  for  permanent  work ;  and  in
1882  of  $350,000,  and  in  1884  of  over  $150,000,  for
the  relief  of  the  sufferers  from  floods,  the  amount  in
the  latter  year  being  the  balance  left  from  $500,000
appropriated  on  account  of  the  floods  in  the  Ohio.
These  relief  appropriations  were  expended  under  the
personal  supervision  of  the  secretary  of  war.  On  1
Aug.,  1882,  the  president  vetoed  a  river-and-harlwr
bill  making  appropriations  of  $18,743,875,  on  the
ground  that  the  amount  greatly  exceeded  "the
needs  of  the  countr\' "  for  the  then  current  fiscal
year,  and  because  it  contained  "  appropriations  for
purposes  not  for  the  common  defence  or  general
welfare,"  which  did  not  "promote  commerce
among  the  states,  but  were,  on  the  contrary,  entire-
ly for  the  benefit  of  the  particular  localities  "  where
it  was  "proposed  to  make  the  improvements."
The  bill,  on  2  Aug.,  passed  congress  over  the  veto
by  122  yeas  to  59  nays  in  the  house,  and  41  yeas  to
16  nays  in  the  senate.  In  connection  with  this
subject  it  was  suggested  to  congress,  in  the  annual
messages  of  1882,  1883,  and  1884,  that  it  would  be
wise  to  adopt  a  constitutional  amendment  allow-
ing the  president  to  veto  in  part  only  any  bill  ap-
propriating moneys.  A  special  message  of  8  Jan.,
1884,  commended  to  congress,  as  a  matter  of  great
public  interest,  the  cession  to  the  United  States  of
the  Illinois  and  Michigan  canal  in  order  to  secure
the  construction  of  the  Hennepin  canal  to  connect
Lake  Michigan  by  way  of  Illinois  river  with  the
Mississippi.  Unlawful  intrusions  of  armed  settlers
into  the  Indian  territory  for  the  purpose  of  locat-
ing upon  lands  set  apart  for  the  Indians  were  pre-
vented, or  the  intruders  were  expelled  bvthe  army.
On  2  July,  1884,  the  president  vetoed'  the  bill  to
restore  to  the  army  and  place  on  the  retired  list
Maj.-Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter,  who,  on  the  sentence
of  a  court-martial,  approved  by  President  Lincoln
27  Jan..  1863,  had  been  dismissed  for  disobedience
of  orders  to  march  to  attack  the  enemy  in  his
front  during  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.  The
reasons  assigned  for  the  veto  were,  (1)  that  the  con-
gress had  no  right  "  to  impose  upon  the  president
the  duty  of  nominating  or  appointing  to  office  any
particular  individual  of  its  own  selection,"  and  (2)
that  the  bill  was  in  effect  an  annulment  of  a  final
judgment  of  a  court  of  last  resort,  after  the  lapse
of  many  years,  and  on  insufficient  evidence.  The
veto  was  'overniled  in  the  house  by  168  yeas  to  78
nays,  but  was  sustained  in  the  senate  by  27  to  27.

A  new  naval  policy  was  adopted  prescribing  a
reduction  in  the  number  of  officers,  the  elimina-
tion of  dnmkards,  great  strictness  and  impartiality
in  discipline,  the  discontinuance  of  extensive  re-
pairs of  old  wooden  ships,  the  diminution  of  navy-
yard  expenses,  and  the  beginning  of  the  construc-
tion of  a  new  navy  of  modern  steel  ships  and  guns
according  to  the  plans  of  a  skilful  naval  ad-
visory board.  The  first  of  such  vessels,  the  cruis-
ers "Chicago,"  "Boston,"  and  "Atlanta,"  and  a
steel  despatch-boat,  "  Dolphin,"  with  their  arma-
ments, were  designed  in  this  country  and  built  in
American  workshops.  The  gun  foundry  board  re-
ferred to  above  was  originated,  and  its  reports  were
printed  with  that  of  the  department  for  1884.  A
special  message  of  26  March.  1884,  urged  continued
progress  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  nnxr,  the
granting  of  authority  for  at  least  three  additional
steel  cruisers  and  four  gun-boats,  and  the  finishing
of  the  four  double-turreted  monitors.  Two  cruis-
ers and  two  gun-boats  were  authorized  by  the  act


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


105


of  3  March,  1885.  An  Arctic  expedition,  consist-
ing of  the  steam  whalers  "  Thetis  "  and  "  Bear,"
together  with  the  ship  "  Alert,"  given  by  the  Brit-
ish admiralty,  was  fitted  out  and  despatched  under
the  command  of  Commander  Winfield  Scott  Schley
for  the  relief  of  Lieut.  A.  W.  Greely,  of  the  U.  S.
army,  who  with  his  party  had  been  engaged  since
1881  in  scientific  exploration  at  Lady  Franklin
bay,  in  Grinnell  Land ;  and  that  officer  and  the
few  other  survivors  were  rescued  at  Cape  Sabine
22  June,  1884.  On  recommendation  of  the  presi-
dent, an  act  of  congress  was  passed  directing  the
return  of  the  "  Alert "  to  the  English  government.

The  reduction  of  letter  postage  from,  three  to
two  cents  a  half  ounce  was  recommended,  and  was
effected  by  the  act  of  3  March,  1883  ;  the  unit  of
weight  was  on  3  March,  1885,  made  one  ounce,
instead  of  a  half  ounce;  the  rate  on  transient
newspapers  and  periodicals  was  reduced,  9  June,
1884,  to  one  cent  for  four  ounces,  and  the  rate  on
similar  matter,  when  sent  by  the  publisher  or  from
a  news  agency  to  actual  subscribers  or  to  other
news  agents,  including  sample  copies,  was  on  3
March,  1885,  reduced  to  one  cent  a  pound.  The
fast-mail  and  free-delivery  systems  were  largely
extended  ;  and  also,  on  3  March,  1883,  the  money-
order  system.  Special  letter  deliveries  were  estab-
lished 3  March,  1885.  The  star  service  at  the  west
was  increased  at  reduced  cost.  The  foreign  mail
service  was  improved,  the  appropriation  of  $800,-
000,  already  alluded  to,  was  made,  and  various
postal  conventions  were  negotiated.

Recommendations  were  made  for  the  revision  of
the  laws  fixing  the  fees  of  jurors  and  witnesses,
and  for  prescribing  by  salaries  the  compensation
of  district  attorneys  and  marshals.  The  prosecu-
tion of  persons  charged  with  frauds  in  connection
with  the  star-route  mail  service  was  pressed  with
vigor  (the  attorney-general  appearing  in  person  at
the  principal  trial),  and  resulted  in  completely
breaking  up  the  vicious  and  corrupt  practices  that
had  previously  flourished  in  connection  with  that
service.  Two  vacancies  on  the  bench  of  the  su-
preme court  were  filled — one  on  the  death  of
Nathan  Clifford,  of  Maine,  by  Horace  Gray,  of
Massachusetts,  commissioned  on  20  Dec,  1881.
For  the  vacancy  occasioned  by  the  retirement  of
Ward  Hunt,  of  New  York,  Roscoe  Conkling  was
nominated  24  Feb.,  1882,  and  he  was  confirmed  by
the  senate  ;  but  on  3  March  he  declined  the  office,
and  Samuel  Blatchford,  of  New  York,  was  ap-
pointed and  commissioned  23  March,  1882.

Measures  were  recommended  for  breaking  up
tribal  relations  of  the  Indians  by  allotting  to  them
land  in  severalty,  and  by  extending  to  them  the
laws  applicable  to  other  citizens ;  and  liberal  ap-
propriations for  the  education  of  Indian  children
were  advised.  Peace  with  all  the  tribes  was  pre-
served during  the  whole  term  of  the  administra-
tion. Stringent  legislation  against  polygamy  in
Utah  was  recommended,  and  under  the  law  en-
acted 22  March,  1882,  many  polygamists  were
indicted,  convicted,  and  punished.  The  Utah
commission,  to  aid  in  the  better  government  of
the  territory,  was  appointed  under  the  same  act.
The  final  recommendation  of  the  president  in  his
messages  of  1883  and  1884  was,  that  congress
should  assume  the  entire  political  control  ot  the
territory,  and  govern  it  through  commissioners.
Legislation  was  urged  for  the  preservation  of  the
valuable  forests  remaining  upon  the  public  do-
main. National  aid  to  education  was  repeatedly
urged,  preferably  through  setting  apart  the  pro-
ceeds of  the  sales  of  public  lands.

A  law  for  the  adjudication  of  the  French  spolia-


tion claims  was  passed  20  Jan.,  1885,  and  prepara-
tion was  made  for  carrying  it  into  effect.  Con-
gress was  urged  in  every  annual  message  to  pass
laws  establishing  safe  and  certain  methods  of  as-
certaining the  result  of  a  presidential  election,  and
fully  providing  for  all  cases  of  removal,  death,  res-
ignation, or  inability  of  the  president,  or  any  of-
ficer acting  as  such.  In  view  of  certain  decisions
of  the  supreme  court,  additional  legislation  was
urged  in  the  annual  message  of  1883  to  supple-
ment and  enforce  the  14th  amendment  to  the  con-
stitution in  its  special  purpose  to  insure  to  mem-
bers of  the  colored  race  the  full  enjoyment  of  ci\il
and  political  rights.  The  subject  of  reform  in  the
methods  of  the  public  service,  which  had  been  dis-
cussed by  the  president  in  his  letter  of  23  Nov.,
1877,  while  collector,  to  Sec.  Sherman,  and  in  his
letter  of  15  July,  1880,  accepting  the  nomination  for
vice-president,  was  fully  treated  in  all  his  annual
messages,  and  in  special  messages  of  29  Feb.,  1884,
and  11  Feb.,  1885.  The  "act  to  regulate  and  im-
prove the  civil  service  of  the  United  States"  was
passed  16  Jan.,  1883,  and  under  it  a  series  of  rules
was  established  by  the  president,  and  the  law  and
rules  at  all  times  received,  his  unqualified  support,
and  that  of  the  heads  of  the  several  departments.
The  final  distribution  of  the  moneys  derived  from
the  Geneva  award  among  meritorious  sufferers  on
account  of  the  rebel  cruisers  fitted  out  or  harbored
in  British  ports  was  provided  for  by  the  act  of  5
June,  1882.  In  the  annual  message  of  1884  a
suitable  pension  to  Gen.  Grant  was  recommended,
and,  upon  his  announcement  that  he  would  not
accept  a  pension,  a  special  message  of  3  Feb.,  1885,
urged  the  passage  of  a  bill  creating  the  office  of
general  of  the  army  on  the  retired  list,  to  enable
the  president  in  his  discretion  to  appoint  Gen.
Grant.  Such  a  bill  was  passed  3  March,  1885,  and
the  president  on  that  day  made  the  nomination,
and  it  was  confirmed  in  open  session  amid  demon-
strations of  approval,  in  a  crowded  senate-chamber,
a  few  minutes  before  the  expiration  of  the  session.

The  president  attended,  as  the  guest  of  the  city
of  Boston,  the  celebration  of  the  Webster  Histori-
cal society  at  Marshfield,  Mass.,  and  made  brief
addresses  in  Faneuil  Hall,  11  Oct.,  1882,  and  at
Marshfield,  13  Oct.  He  commended  the  Southern
Exposition  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  by  a  letter  of  9
June,  1883,  attended  its  oj)ening,  and  delivered  an
address  on  2  Aug.  He  aided  in  many  ways  the
World's  Industrial  and  Cotton  Centennial  Expo-
sition at  New  Orleans ;  and  on  16  Dec,  1884,  in  an
address  sent  by  telegraph  from  the  executive  man-
sion in  Washington,  he  opened  the  exposition,  and
set  in  motion  the  machinery  by  the  electric  current.
On  25  Sept.,  1883,  he  was  present  at  the  unveil-
ing of  the  Burnside  monument  at  Bristol,  R.  I.
On  26  Nov.,  1883,  he  attended  the  unveiling  of  the
statue  of  Washington  on  the  steps  of  the  sub-
treasury  building  in  New  York  city ;  and  21  Feb.,
1885,  he  made  an  address  at  the  dedication,  at  the
national  capital,  of  the  Washington  monument,
which  had  been  completed  during  his  term.

President  Arthur's  name  was  presented  to  the
republican  presidential  convention  that  met  at
Chicago  3  June,  1884,  by  delegates  from  New.  York,
Pennsylvania,  Mississippi,  North  Carolina,  and
Louisiana.  On  the  first  ballot  he  received  278
votes  against  540  for  all  others,  276  on  the  second,
274  on  the  third,  and  207  on  the  fourth,  which  re-
sulted in  the  nomination  of  James  G.  Blaine.
He  at  once  telegraphed  to  Mr.  Blaine, "  As  the  can-
didate of  the  republican  party  you  will  have  my
earnest  and  cordial  support,"  and  in  the  canvass
which  ensued  he  rendered  all possible  assistance


106


ARTHUR


ARTHUR


to  the  republican  cause  and  candidates.  The
national  convention,  in  its  resolutions,  declared
that  "  in  the  administration  of  President  Artliur
we  recognize  a  wise,  conservative,  and  patriotic
policy,  under  which  the  country  has  been  blessed
with  remarkable  prosperity,  and  we  believe  his
eminent  services  are  entitled  to  and  will  receive  the
hearty  approval  of  every  citizen."  The  conven-
tions in  all  the  states  had  also  unanimously  passed
resolutions  commendatory  of  the  administration.

Mr.  Arthur  married,  29  Oct.,  1859,  Ellen  Lewis
Herndon,  of  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  who  died  12
Jan.,  1880,  leaving  two  children,  Chester  Alan
Arthur,  b.  25  July,  1865,  and  Ellen  Herndon  Ar-
thur, b.  21  Nov.,  1871.  Their  first  child,  William
L.  H.  Arthur,  was  b.  10  Dec,  1860,  and  d.  8  July,
1863.  Mrs.  Arthur  was  the  daughter  of  Command-
er William  Lewis  Herndon,  of  the  U.  S.  navy,  who,
in  1851-'2,  explored  the  Amazon  river  under  or-
ders of  the  government.  He  perished  in  a  gale
at  sea,  13  Sept.,  1857,  on  the  way  from  Havana  to
New  York,  while  in  command  of  the  merchant-
steamer,  "  Central  America." (See  Herxdox.)

In  person,  Mr.  Arthur  was  tall,  large,  well-propor-
tioned, and  of  distinguished  presence.  His  man-
ners were  always  affable.  'He  was  genial  in  domestic
and  social  life,  and  warmly  beloved  by  his  personal
friends.  He  conducted  his  official  intercourse  with
unvarying  courtesy,  and  dispensed  the  liberal  hos-
pitalities of  the  executive  mansion  with  ease  and
dignity,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  meet  universal
commendation  from  citizens  and  foreigners  alike.
He  had  a  full  and  strong  mind,  literary  taste  and
culture,  a  retentive  memory,  and  was  apt  in  il-
lustration by  analogy  and  anecdote.  He  reasoned
coolly  and  logically,  and  was  never  one-sided.  The
style  of  his  state  papers  is  simple  and  direct.  He
was  eminently  conscientious,  wise,  and  just  in  pur-
pose and  act  as  a  public  official ;  had  always  the
courage  to  follow  his  deliberate  convictions,  and
remained  unmoved  by  importunity  or  attack.  He
succeeded  to  the  presidency  under  peculiarly  dis-
tressing circumstances.  The  factional  feeling  in
the  Republican  party,  which  the  year  before  had
resulted  in  the  nomination  of  Gen.  Garfield  for
president  as  the  representative  of  one  faction,  and
of  himself  for  vice-president  as  the  representative
of  the  other,  had  measurably  subsided  during  the
canvass  and  the  following  winter,  only  to  break  out
anew  immediately  after  the  inauguration  of  the
new  administration,  and  a  fierce  controversy  was
raging  when  the  assassination  of  President  Gar-
field convulsed  the  nation  and  created  the  gravest
apprehensions.  Cruel  misjudgments  were  formed
and  expressed  by  men  who  would  now  hesitate  to
admit  them.  The  long  weeks  of  alternating  hope
and  fear  that  preceded  the  president's  dlfeth  left
the  public  mind  perturbed  and  restless.  Doubt
and  uneasiness  were  everywhere  apparent.  The
delicacy  and  discretion  displayed  by  the  vice-presi-
dent had  compelled  approval,  but  had  not  served
wholly  to  disarm  prejudice,  and  when  he  took  the
murdered  president's  place  the  whole  people  were
in  a  state  of  tense  and  anxious  expectancy,  of
which,  doubtless,  he  was  most  painfully  conscious.
All  fears,  however,  were  speedily  and  happily  dis-
pelled. The  new  president's  inaugural  was  ex-
plicit, judicious,  and  reassuring,  and  his  purpose
not  to  administer  his  high  office  in  the  spirit  of
former  faction,  although  by  it  he  lost  some  friend-
ships, did  much  toward  healing  the  dissensions
within  the  dominant  party.  His  conservative  ad-
ministration of  the  government  commanded  uni-
versal confidence,  preserved  public  order,  and
promoted business  activity. If his conduct of


affairs  be  criticised  as  lacking  aggressiveness,  it
may  coiifidently  be  replied  that  aggressiveness
would  have  been  unfortunate,  if  not  disastrous.
Rarely  has  there  been  a  time  when  an  indiscreet
president  could  have  wrought  more  mischief.  It
was  not  a  time  for  showy  exploits  or  brilliant  ex-
perimentation. Above  all  else,  the  people  needed
rest  from  the  strain  and  excitement  mto  which
the  assassination  of  their  president  had  plunged
them.  The  course  chosen  by  President  Ai-thur
was  the  wisest  and  most  desirable  that  was  possible.
If  apparently  negative  in  itself,  it  was  positive,
far-reaching,  and  most  salutary  in  its  results.  The
service  which  at  this  crisis  in  public  affairs  he  thus
rendered  to  the  country  must  be  accounted  the
greatest  of  his  personal  achievements,  and  the
most  important  result  of  his  administration.  As
such,  it  should  be  placed  in  its  true  light  before
the  reader  of  the  future ;  and  in  this  spirit,  for  the
purpose  of  historical  accuracy  only,  it  is  here  given
the  prominence  it  deserves.  His  administration,
considered  as  a  whole,  was  responsive  to  every
national  demand,  and  stands  in  all  its  departments
substantially  without  assault  or  criticism.

He  died  suddenly,  of  apoplexy,  at  his  residence,
No.  123  Lexington  avenue.  New  York,  Thursday
morning,  18  Nov.,  1886.  The  funeral  services  were
held  on  the  following  Monday,  at  the  Church  of
the  Heavenly  Rest.  President  Cleveland  and  his
cabinet,  Chief-Justice  Waite,  ex-President  Hayes.
James  G.  Blaine,  Gens.  Sherman,  Sheridan,  and
Schofield,  and  the  surviving  members  of  Presi-
dent Arthur's  cabinet,  were  in  attendance.  On  the
same  day  a  special  train  conveyed  his  remains  to
Albany,  where  they  were  placed  by  the  side  of  his
wife  in  the  familv  burial-place  in  Rural  cemetery.

ARTHUR,  Sir  Georg^e,  Bart.,  British  states-
man, b.  in  Plymouth,  England,  21  June,  1784 ;  d.
19  Sept.,  1854  He  entered  the  army  in  1804,  and
served  in  Sir  James  Craig's  expedition  to  Italy  in
1806.  The  following  year  he  went  to  Egypt,  and
was  severely  wounded  in  the  attack  upon  Rosetta.
He  served  as  a  captain  under  Sir  James  Kempt  in
Sicily  in  1808,  and  in  the  Walcheren  expedition  in
1809,  in  which  latter  he  so  greatly  distinguished
himself  that  he  was  thanked  in  general  orders,  was
appointed  a  deputy  assistant  adjutant-general  on
the  field,  and  upon  his  return  to  England  had  the
freedom  of  the  city  of  London  conferred  upon  him
and  received  a  sword  of  honor.  He  was  afterward
military  secretary  to  Sir  George  Don,  governor  of
Jersey,  and  in  1812,  having  attained  his  majority
in  the  7th  West  India  regiment,  he  joined  it  in
Jamaica,  and  within  a  short  time  was  appointed
assistant  quartermaster-general  of  the  forces  in
that  island.  In  1814  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  Britisli  Honduras,  holding  at  the  same
time  the  rank  of  colonel  on  the  staff,  thus  exercis-
ing the  military  command  as  well  as  the  civil  gov-
ernment. While  acting  in  this  capacity  Col.  Ar-
thur suppressed  a  serious  outbreak  of  the  slave
population  of  Honduras.  His  despatches  relative
to  the  revolt  and  the  subject  of  slavery  in  the  West
Indies  attracted  the  attention  of  Mr.  Wilberforce
and  other  philanthropists,  and  contributed  in  no
slight  degree  to  the  subsequent  abolition  of  slavery
within  the  British  empire.  In  1822  he  left  Hon-
duras for  England,  and  in  1823  was  appointed
lieutenant-governor  of  Van  Dieman's  Land  (then
the  principal  British  penal  colony),  having  com-
mand of  the  military  forces  as  well.  His  attempts
at  introducing  reforms  in  the  transportation  system
were  not  successful,  as  the  colonists  and  their
friends  at  home,  who  were  determined  to  put  an
end  to  the  system  altogether,  never  allowed his


ARTHUR


ARZAO


107


plans  a  fair  trial.  He  returned  to  England  in
March,  1887,  was  knighted,  and  at  the  close  of  that
year  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper
Canada,  having  also  the  rank  of  major-general  on
the  staff.  The  state  of  Canada  at  this  time  was
critical,  as  in  both  Upper  and  Lower  Canada  at-
tempts had  been  made,  a  few  months  before  Col.
Arthur's  arrival,  to  subvert  the  British  authority,
and,  shortly  after  he  had  taken  charge  of  the  gov-
ernment, Upper  Canada  was  invaded  by  a  band  of
American  sympathizers.  The  invasion  was  no
more  successful  than  the  preceding  attempts  at  re-
volt, and  much  credit  was  awarded  to  Sir  George
Arthur  for  his  successful  arrangements  for  the  de-
fence of  the  colony.  The  union  of  Upper  and
Lower  Canada  took  place  in  1841,  Lord  Sydenham
being  the  first  governor-general,  and  at  his  request
Sir  George  Arthur  continued  for  a  time  to  conduct
the  administration  of  Upper  Canada  as  deputy  gov-
ernor, it  being  specially  stipulated  by  him  that  he
would  receive  no  remuneration  for  his  services.  He
returned  to  England  in  1841,  and  was  created  a
baronet  in  recognition  of  his  services  in  Canada.
On  8  June,  1842,  he  assumed  the  office  of  governor
of  the  Indian  presidency  of  Bombay,  which  he  re-
tained until  1846.  During  this  period  (a  most
critical  one  in  the'  history  of  India)  he  displayed
great  tact  and  ability,  and  assisted  very  materi-
ally in  extending  and  strengthening  British  rule
in  that  country.  The  suppression  of  the  insurrec-
tion in  Kolapun  was  largely  due  to  his  judicious
and  prompt  measures,  and  he  was  appointed  pro-
visional governor-general,  but  did  not  assume  office,
as  he  was  compelled  by  ill-health  to  leave  India  be-
fore Lord  Hardinge  vacated  the  governor-general-
ship. Sir  George  Arthur,  during  his  administra-
tion of  the  affairs  of  the  presidency,  perfected  the
Deccan  survey,  the  object  of  which  was  to  equalize
and  decrease  the  pressure  of  the  land  assessment  on
the  cultivators  of  the  Deccan  ;  and  gave  his  hearty
support  to  the  project  of  a  railway  line  from  Bom-
bay to  Callian,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  germ
of  the  great  Indian  peninsular  railway,  while  during
his  administration  the  reclamation  of  the  foreshore
of  the  island  of  Bombay  was  projected.  On  his  re-
turn to  England  in  1846  he  was  made  a  privy
councilloi-,  and  in  1853  he  received  the  colonelcy  of
the  50th  Queen's  own  regiment.

ARTHUR,  Timothy  Shay,  author,  b.  near
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  in  1809;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  6
March,  1885.  When  he  was  about  eight  years  of
age  his  parents  moved  to  Baltimore,  Md.,  where  he
received  a  little  education,  was  apprenticed  to  a
trade,  and  was  a  clerk  for  several  years.  In  1833
he  visited  the  west  as  the  agent  of  a  banking  con-
cern. He  had  meantime  educated  himself  by  read-
ing and  study,  and  when  he  returned  to  Baltimore
he  became  editor  of  "  The  Athenaeum."  In  1841
he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where  the  rest  of  his
life  was  passed,  and  where,  in  1852,  he  founded
''  Arthur's  Home  Magazine,"  of  which  he  was  edi-
tor until  within  a  few  weeks  of  his  death.  He  was
a  voluminous  writer  of  tales  of  domestic  life,  and
also  prepared,  with  the  aid  of  W.  H.  Carpenter,  a
series  of  histories  of  the  different  states  of  the
union.  The  entire  number  of  volumes  of  Mr.  Ar-
thur's works  exceeds  one  hundred,  and  of  these
more  than  half  have  been  republished  in  England,
where  his  writings  have  had  a  large  circulation.
Among  his  books  are  "Lights  and  Shadows  of
Real  Life,"  "  Tales  for  Rich  and  Poor "  (6  vols.),
"  Library  for  the  Household "  (12  vols.),  "  Ten
Nights  in  a  Bar-Room,"  and  "  Steps  to  Heaven."
His  stories  all  have  some  moral  end  in  view,  many
of  them  being  devoted  to  the  support  of  the  tem-


perance cause.  Although  they  do  not  possess  great
merit  as  literature,  they  have  been  widely  read  and
gamed  him  much  popularity.  His  book,  "The
Good  Time  Coming  "  (1855),  was  accused  of  "  verg-
ing on  spiritualism  and  Swedenborgianism."

ARTHUR,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Antrim,
Ireland,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  Newtonville,  near  Albany
N.  Y.,  27  Oct.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Belfast
college,  came  to  the  United  States,  studied  law  for
a  short  time,  and  was  then  called  to  the  Baptist
ministry.  After  preaching  in  Vermont  and  west-
ern New  York,  he  was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  Cal-
vary Baptist  church  of  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained from  1855  to  1863.  He  afterward  removed
to  Schenectady,  where  he  published  a  magazine
called  the  "  Antiquarian,"  to  whose  pages  he  con-
tributed much  curious  learning  on  a  variety  of
topics.  He  published  an  "  Etymological  Diction-
ary of  Family  and  Christian  Names  "  (New  York,
1857),  which  was  favorably  received  both  in  this
country  and  in  Europe.  During  the  last  ten  years
of  his  life  he  lived  in  retirement,  preaching  occa-
sionally, and  giving  much  time  to  literary  pursuits.
Dr.  Arthur  was  noted  for  his  attainments  in  the
classics  and  in  history,  both  sacred  and  profane.
His  son,  Chester  Alan  Arthur,  was  twenty-first
president  of  the  United  States.

ARTIGAS,  Jose  (ar-tee'-gas),  a  South  Ameri-
can soldier,  b.  in  Montevideo,  Uruguay,  in  1755  ;  d,
in  Paraguay  in  1851.  He  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy
landed  proprietor,  and  for  a  time  led  an  adventur-
ous life  as  a  gaucho,  and  then  served  as  captain  in
the  light  cavalry  of  the  provinces,  but  on  account
of  some  difficulty  with  the  governor  passed  in  1811
into  the  service  of  the  junta  of  Buenos  Ayres,  then
in  insurrection  against  Spain.  At  the  head  of  a
band  of  gauchos  he  defeated  the  Spaniards  in  sev-
eral encounters,  and  vigorously  supported  the  re-
publican army  that  besieged  the  Portuguese  troops
from  Brazil,  who  then  occupied  Montevideo.  But,
being  passionate  and  scheming,  he  soon  acted  in-
dependently, and  finally  detached  his  men  from
the  besieging  army,  whereupon  Posadas,  director
of  the  junta,  outlawed  him  and  set  a  price  upon
his  head.  But  the  gauchos  flocked  to  his  standard,
and  Artigas,  having  defeated  the  troops  sent  against
him,  obliged  his  enemies  to  cede  to  him  the  whole
of  Uruguay  (1814).  He  then  compelled  the  Portu-
guese to  abandon  their  attempt  to  regain  possession
of  Montevideo,  which  had  surrendered.  He  now
acted  as  dictator  in  Uruguay,  and  in  1815  made  an
unsuccessful  attempt  against  Buenos  Ayres.  After
various  contests  he  was  twice  defeated,  in  1819  and
1820,  and  fled  to  Paraguay,  where  Dr.  Francia,  the
dictator,  banished  him  to  Candelaria.  Here  he  de-
voted himself  to  husbandry  and  philanthropic  work.

ARVELO,  Rafael  (arr-va'-lo),  Venezuelan
statesman,  b.  in  Valencia,  Venezuela,  in  1814 ;  d.
after  1870.  While  quite  young  he  went  to  Bogota,
where  he  finished  his  education.  After  returning
to  his  own  country  he  soon  became  noted  for  his
political  and  literary  abilities.  He  was  provincial
governor,  minister  of  foreign  affairs,  and  president
of  the  republic  of  Venezuela,  ad  interim.  But  his
greatest  fame  in  that  country  he  owed  to  his  satiri-
cal poems  and  epigrams,  which  are  very  popular.

ARZAO,  Antonio  Rodriguez  (ar-thah'-o),
Brazilian  traveller,  who  in  company  with  Antonio
Suarez  explored  in  1714  the  deserts  of  Sao  Paulo,
where  they  discovered  a  large  region  rich  in  gold
and  diamonds,  which  the  Indians  called  Hyvi-turuy
("  place  beaten  by  winds  "),  but  the  discoverers  gave
it  the  name  of  Cerro  do  Frio.  Several  other  mem-
bers of  Arzao's  family  made  similar  expeditions  and
discoveries  in  the  interior  of  Brazil.


108


ASBOTH


ASBURY


ASBOTH,  Alexander  Sandor,  soldier,  b.  in
Keszthely,  Hungary,  18  Dec,  1811 ;  d.  in  Buenos
Ayres,  S.A.,  21  Jan.,  1868.  He  was  educated  in
Oldenburg,  and  served  for  some  time  as  a  cuirassier
in  the  Austrian  army.  Subsequently  he  studied  law
at  Presburg,  and  then,  turning  his  attention  to  en-
gineering, was  employed  upon  various  important
works  in  the  Banat.  He  served  with  Kossuth  in
the  Hungarian  war  of  1848-'9,  and  participated  in
the  battles  of  Tomasovacz,  Kapolna,  and  Nagy
Sarlo.  He  followed  Kossuth  to  Turkey,  shared  his
confinement  at  Kutaieh,  and  on  his  release  came
with  him  to  the  United  States  in  1851,  where  he
soon  became  a  citizen.  He  pursued  various  occu-
pations, and  on  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war  in
1861  offered  his  services  to  the  government.  In
July  he  was  sent  to  Missouri  as  chief  of  staff  to
Gen.  Fremont,  and  on  26  Sept.  was  appointed
brigadier-general  and  commanded  the  4th  division
in  Fremont's  western  campaign.  He  was  next  as-
signed to  the  command  of  a  division  in  Gen.  Cur-
tis's  army,  and  during  the  Arkansas  campaign  oc-
cupied Bentonville  and  Fayetteville.  He  partici-
pated in  the  battles  of  Pea  Ridge,  and  was  severely
wounded.  In  1863  he  was  placed  in  command  of
Columbus,  Ky.,  and  in  August  of  the  same  year  was
assigned  to  the  district  of  west  Florida,  with  head-
quarters at  Fort  Pickens.  He  was  badly  wounded
in  the  battle  of  Marianna,  27  Sept.,  1864,  his  left
cheek-bone  being  broken  and  his  left  arm  fractured
in  two  places.  For  his  services  in  Florida  he  was
brevetted  major-general  13  March,  1865,  and  re-
signed in  the  following  August.  In  1866  he  was
sent  as  U.  S.  minister  to  the  Argentine  Republic
and  Uruguay,  where  he  died  in  consequence  of  the
wounds  in  his  face.

ASBURY,  Francis,  M.  E.  missionary  bishop,  b.
in  Handsworth,  Staffordshire,  England,  20  Aug.,
1745;  d.  in  Spottsylvania,  Va.,  31  March,  1816.
His  parents,  devout  Methodists,  must  have  been
among  the  earlier  disciples  of  Wesley.  Hands-
worth  was  hardly
a  day's  ride  from
Oxford,  where  the
Wesleys  organ-
ized their  "  Holy
Band,"  and  the
lad  must  have  im-
bibed Wesleyan-
ism  from  the  time
when  he  first  saw
the  light.  He  was
converted  at  the
age  of  thirteen,
through  the  influ-
ence of  the  "  itin-
erants," who  were
already  beginning
their  labors.  He
received  the  rudi-
ments of  an  edu-
cation at  the  vil-
lage school  of
Barre,  and  was  indentured  to  a  maker  of  "  buckle
chapes,"  or  tongues,  at  the  age  of  fourteen.  At  this
time  the  Wesleys,  John  and  Charles,  had  well  in
hand  the  movement  out  of  which  grew  the  great  reli-
gious denomination  that  bears  their  name.  Method-
ist chapels  were  being  founded  all  over  the  United
Kingdom,  and  the  inspired  idea  of  "  itinerant  preach-
ers," or  "  circuit  riders,"  was  making  its  power  felt.
Under  such  conditions  the  latent  talents  of  young
Asbury  speedily  developed.  At  sixteen  he  was  a
local  preacher,  and  at  twenty-two  he  was  regularly
enrolled  among  the  itinerants  by  Wesley  himself.


This  was  in  1767,  almost  before  the  spirit  of  politi-
cal discontent  was  making  itself  felt  in  the  Ameri-
can colonies,  where  Wesleyanism  had  already  been
planted  in  a  congenial  soil.  In  1771  Asbury,  who
by  that  time  had  begun  to  show  his  qualities  as  an
executive  as  well  as  a  preacher,  was  designated  by
Wesley  as  a  missionary  to  America,  and,  with  the
Rev.  Richard  Wright  as  his  companion,  he  landed
at  Philadelphia  27  Oct.,  1771.  The  first  Methodist
meeting-house  in  America  was  only  three  years
old,  and  altogether  there  were  only  about  300  com-
municants in  the  country,  these  'being  mainly  in
New  York  and  Philadelphia.  During  the  follow-
ing year  Asbury  was  appointed  "  general  assistant
in  America,"  with  power  of  supervision  over  all  the
preachers  and  societies,  but  was  superseded  in  1773
by  an  older  minister,  Mr.  Thomas  Rankin.  By  this
time  the  spirit  of  revolution  was  abrofid,  and  Mr.
Rankin,  unequal  to  the  crisis,  returned  to  England
as  soon  as  the  storm  broke.  Asbury,  however,  with
the  true  spirit  of  an  apostle,  remained  at  his  post.
With  prophetic  vision  he  recognized  the  opportu-
nity of  his  chosen  church,  and  determined  to  stand
by  it  during  a  period  that  threatened  its  founda-
tions. His  political  sympathies  were  fully  with
the  patriot  cause,  but  he,  in  common  with  many
other  Methodists,  fell  under  suspicion  of  toryism,
because  of  their  refusal  to  take  the  prescribed  oath
of  allegiance,  they  being  conscientiously  opposed  to
all  oaths.  Several  writs  were  served  upon  Method-
ist preachers ;  but  Mr.  Asbury's  prudence  and  ad-
dress were  such  that  he  avoided  trouble  until  1776,
when  he  was  arrested  and  fined  five  pounds.  In
March,  1778,  he  considered  himself  in  such  danger
that  he  took  refuge  in  the  he  use  of  Judge  Thomas
White,  of  Delaware,  and  there  remained  practically
a  prisoner  for  two  years  before  he  ventured  freely
to  resume  his  labors.  To  use  his  own  words,  it  was
"  a  season  of  the  most  active,  the  most  useful,  and
the  most  suffering  part  of  my  life."  At  last  the
authorities  became  convinced  that  the  "non-
jurors," as  they  called  themselves,  were  acting
from  religious,  not  political,  motives,  and  the  itin-
erants were  permitted  to  resume  their  circuits.

On  the  restoration  of  peace  it  became  evident  to
the  American  Methodists  that  the  organization  of
an  independent  church  was  necessary.  Until  this
time  Wesley,  an  ordained  priest  of  the  English
church,  had  loyally  maintained  his  ecclesiastical  re-
lations and  recognized  only  the  bishops  of  the  "  es-
tablishment "  as  authorized  to  administer  the  sac-
rament. He  became  convinced,  however,  that  his
American  disciples  would  not  long  submit  to  such
leading-strings,  and  proceeded  wisely  to  study  the
question  of  presbyter  and  bishop,  reaching  the  con-
clusion that  in  the  primitive  church  the  two  offices
were  identical.  He  therefore  assumed  the  office  of
bishop,  formally  consecrated  the  Rev.  Thomas  Coke,
LL.  D,,  of  Oxford,  and  sent  him  to  America  to
perpetuate  the  apostolic  succession  in  its  Wesleyan
aspect  on  this  side  of  the  water.  At  a  conference
held  in  1784,  Dr.  Coke  appeared  in  his  robes  of
office  and,  pursuant  to  Wesley's  instructions,  con-
secrated Francis  Asbury  joint  bishop  with  himself
over  the  American  church,  which  forthwith
adopted  as  its  official  designation  "  The  Method-
ist Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States  of  Amer-
ica." From  this  time  until  he  was  no  longer  able
to  travel.  Bishop  Asbury's  labors  were  incessant,
and  he  deserves  to  rank  with  the  great  evangelists
of  all  time.  The  civil  history  of  the  United  States
might  have  been  very  different  had  Asbury  failed
to  be  on  the  ground  to  assume  the  office.  Like  a
good  general,  he  even  kept  his  skirmishers — that  is,
his  "circuit  riders  "—abreast with the leading


i


ASGILL


ASHBURTON


109


pioneers,  and  he  himself,  frequently  under  escort
of  a  score  or  two  of  frontiersmen  to  guard  against
Indians,  rode  to  and  fro,  often  in  the  advance  and
always  near  enough  to  see  what  was  going  on.  The
first  ordination  in  the  Mississippi  valley  was  per-
formed by  him.  Rude,  unlettered  men  most  of
these  itinerants  were,  and  the  bishop  himself  had
but  a  slender  equipment  of  scholastic  knowledge.
Nevertheless,  they  largely  shaped  the  destiny  of  the
west.  There  is  nothing  authentic  in  frontier  litera-
ture more  romantic  than  "  Asbury's  Journals "  (3
vols.,  New  York,  1852),  with  their  unconscious  rec-
ord of  a  zeal  and  self-sacrifice  that  rivals  anything
in  history.  In  spite  of  his  defective  early  educa-
tion, he  managed  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  Greek
and  Hebrew,  and,  contrary  to  the  usual  impression,
laid  during  the  first  year  of  his  episcopate  the  foun-
dation of  the  first  Methodist  college,  that  at  Abing-
don, Md.  Annually  he  rode  on  horseback  or  by
primitive  conveyances  about  6,000  miles,  and  this,
for  the  most  part,  over  the  rough  roads  and
through  the  nearly  trackless  forests  that  covered
the  continent  beyond  the  narrow  belt  of  sea-coast
settlements.  In  character  and  temperament  he
was  bold,  aggressive,  enthusiastic,  gentle  in  man-
ners, but  of  unflinching  firmness.  His  native  wis-
dom and  intuitive  perceptions  made  good  the  lack
of  artificial  training,  and  lent  him  an  insight  that
was  well-nigh  infallible.  Wesley  could  never  have
done  what  Asbury  did.  Indeed,  he  tried  to  do
it,  and  failed,  not  comprehending  the  spirit  of
freedom  that  was  abroad  in  the  American  air.
Asbury  was  instantly  in  sympathy  with  that
spirit,  and  two  million  American  Methodists  attest
the  ability  with  which  he  fulfilled  his  mission.  The
noblest  monument  to  his  memory  is  the  great  church,
which  grew  under  his  personal  leadership  from  a
scattered  band  of  316  members  and  four  preachers
to  a  powerful  denomination  214,000  strong,  con-
trolled by  bishops,  2,000  local  preachers,  and  700
itinerants.  See  "Asbury's  Journals"  (New  York,
1852) ;  Bangs's  "  History  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal Church  "  (1839) ;  Strickland's  "  Life  of  Asbury  "
(1858) ;  Wakely's  "  Heroes  of  Methodism  "  (1859) ;
Stevens's  "  Memorials  of  Methodism  " ;  "  Centenary
of  Methodism"  (1866);  and  Larrabee's  "Asbury
and  his  Co-laborers  "  (2  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1853).

ASCxILL,  Sir  Charles,  soldier,  b.  in  England,
7  April,  1762;  d.  there,  23  July,  1823.  He  was  a
son  of  Sir  Charles  Asgill,  a  London  alderman,  first
baronet  of  that  name.  When  sixteen  years  of  age
he  entered  the  1st  foot  guards,  and  in  1781  became
a  captain.  He  served  in  the  United  States  under
Cornwallis,  and  was  included  in  the  surrender  at
Yorktown.  Particular  interest  is  attached  to  this
young  officer  on  account  of  his  narrow  escape
from  death.  Capt.  Joseph  Huddy,  of  the  New  Jer-
sey line,  had  been  captured,  falsely  charged  with
having  been  concerned  in  the  death  of  Philip
White,  a  desperate  tory,  who  was  killed  while  try-
ing to  escape  from  his  guard,  and  then  hanged
by  the  British  troops.  In  retaliation,  Washington
was  authorized  by  congress  to  select  by  lot  from
among  his  prisoners  an  officer  of  equal  rank  to  be
executed  immediately,  and  Asgill  was  chosen,  but
his  death  was  postponed  while  an  investigation  as
to  the  exact  cause  of  Capt.  Huddy's  execution  was
being  made  in  the  British  army.  Meanwhile  six
months  elapsed,  and,  in  response  to  an  appeal  made
by  the  queen,  Marie  Antoinette  of  France,  con-
gress directed  that  Capt.  Asgill  be  set  at  liberty.
After  his  return  to  England,  he  served  in  Flanders,
and  later  was  in  command  of  the  garrison  in  Dub-
lin during  the  rebellion  in  Ireland.  He  became
colonel  of  the  11th  regiment, and in 1807  was


made  general  in  the  British  array.  On  the  death
of  his  father  he  succeeded  to  the  estate  and  the
baronetcy.  His  story  was  made  the  ground-work
of  a  tragic  drama  by  "Madame  de  Sevigne.

ASHBUKN,  George  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  Geor-
gia ;  d.  1  April,  1868.  During  the  civil  war  he
was  a  strong  opponent  of  secession,  and  raised  a
company  of  southern  loyalists,  subsequently  en-
larged to  a  regiment,  of  which  he  was  colonel.  On
his  return  home  after  the  war  he  boldly  advocat-
ed the  congressional  plan  of  reconstruction.  He
was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  Georgia  constitutional
convention  of  1867,  and  did  much  toward  perfect-
ing the  constitution  of  his  state.  His  political  ene-
mies, unsuccessful  in  provoking  him  to  violence,
caused  his  death.  This  crime  was  investigated  by
Gen.  Meade,  and  it  was  shown  conclusively  by
whom  the  murder  was  committed.

ASHBURNER,  Charles  Albert,  geologist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  Feb.,  1854 ;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
24  Dec,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Pennsylvania  in  1874.  During  the  summer  of
1872  he  was  engaged  on  the  survey  of  Delaware
river,  and  on  his  graduation  he  accepted  a  place
in  tha  light-house  survey  service.  In  1874  the
geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania  was  reorganized
with  the  appointment  of  Prof.  J.  P.  Lesley  as  state
geologist,  and  Mr.  xVshburner  at  once  resigned  from
the  U.  S.  service  to  become  an  assistant  on  the  sur-
vey. He  was  actively  employed  during  the  latter
part  of  1874  in  the  surveys  of  Mifflin  and  Juniata
COS.,  and  in  1875  was  appointed  assistant  geologist,
with  charge  of  the  surveys  in  McKean,  Elk,  Forest,
and  Cameron  cos.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  geolo-
gist in  charge  of  the  survey  of  the  anthracite  coal
fields,  where  he  originated  a  method  for  surveying
and  representing  the  geology  of  this  great  coal-bed
which  has  received  the  approbation  of  mining  en-
gineers and  geologists  both  in  the  United  States
and  in  Europe.  The  ability  and  skill  with  which
this  undertaking  was  performed  led  to  his  being
appointed  in  1885  geologist  in  charge  of  all  the
office  and  field  work  of  the  survey.  Mr.  Ashburner
was  a  member  of  the  American  Philosophical  So-
ciety, the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,
and  other  scientific  societies,  to  whose  proceedings
he  contributed  valuable  papers.  He  also  contrib-
uted to  the  scientific  and  technical  journals,  and
prepared  more  than  twenty  of  the  reports  of  the
geological  survey. In  1889  he  was  made  Sc.  D.

ASHBURTON,  Lord,  Alexander  Baring,
statesman,  b.  in  England,  27  Oct.,  1774;  d.  at
Longleat,  the  seat  of  the  marquis  of  Bath,  18  May,
1848.  He  was  the  second  son  of  Sir  Francis  Bar-
ing, described  by  Lord  Erskine  as  "  the  first  mer-
chant in  the  world,"  and  was  educated  with  a  view
to  succeeding  his  father  in  the  great  mercantile
house  of  Baring  Brothers  &  Co.  Sir  Francis,  fore-
seeing the  vast  commercial  interests  involved,  sent
Alexander  to  America  to  study  the  commercial  out-
look and  enlarge  the  business  relations  of  the  house.
In  1798  he  married  the  daughter  of  senator  Will-
iam Bingham,  of  Philadelphia,  and  shortly  after-
ward returned  to  England  and  became  the  head
of  the  house  when  his,  father  died,  in  1810.  Two
years  before  this  he  had  published  a  tract  entitled
"  An  Inquiry  into  the  Causes  and  Consequences  of
the  Orders  in  Council,  and  an  Examination  of  the
Conduct  of  Great  Britain  toward  the  Neutral  Com-
merce of  America,"  this  passed  rapidly  through
several  editions,  but  failed  to  prevent  the  war  of
1812.  Throughout  that  war  the  Barings,  as  the
bankers  of  the  United  States  government,  con-
tinued to  pay  the  interest  on  the  debt  as  held
abroad,  without  remittances,  and  without  instruc-


110


ASHBY


ASHLEY


tions.  Mr.  Baring  was  raised  to  the  peerage  as
Lord  Ashburton  in  1885,  and  in  1842  he  was  sent
as  special  minister  to  the  United  States  to  negoti-
ate a  treaty  adjusting  the  northeastern  boundary.
Daniel  Webster  was  at  that  time  secretary  of  state.
The  two  countries  were  on  the  verge  of  war,  but
through  the  friendly  consultations  of  these  two
statesmen  an  amicable  arrangement  was  reached,
which  was  ratified  9  Aug.,  1842,  and  is  known
as  the  "Ashburton  Treaty."  See  Broughham's
"Speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  Ashbur-
ton Treaty"  (London,  1843);  Featherstonhaugh's
"Observations  upon  the  Treaty  of  Washington"
(London,  1843) ;  and  Lord  Palmerston's  "  Speech
in  the  House  of  Commons  on  the  Ashburton
Treaty,"  quoted  in  Daniel  Webster's  works.

ASHBY,  Turner,  soldier,  b.  at  Rose  Hill,
Fauquier  co.,  Va.,  in  1824 ;  killed  in  action  near
Harrisonburg,  6  June,  1862.  He  was  a  grandson
of  Capt.  Jack  Ashby,  who  commanded  a  company
in  the  3d  Virginia  regiment  in  the  revolutionary
war.  During  early  life  he  was  a  grain-dealer  in
Markham,  Va.,  and  afterward  a  planter  and  local
politician.  On  the  breaking  out  of  the  civil  war  he
raised  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  and,  being  a  fine  horse-
man, a  soldier  by  nature,  and  possessed  of  remark-
able personal  daring,  he  soon  distinguished  himself.
He  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  confeder-
ate provisional  army  in  1862,  but  met  his  death
shortly  afterward  in  a  skirmish  preceding  the  bat-
tle of  Cross  Keys,  Va.

ASHE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Grovely,  Brunswick
CO.,  N.  C,  in  1720 ;  d.  in  Sampson  co.,  24  Oct.,  1781.
He  was  a  member  of  the  colonial  assembly  for  sev-
eral years,  and  its  speaker  from  1762  to  1765.  He
warmly  opposed  the  stamp-act,  and  by  the  aid  of
an  armed  force  compelled  the  stamp-master  to  re-
sign. In  1771  he  assisted  Gov.  Tryon  in  suppressing
the  outbreak  of  the  regulators,  although  afterward
he  became  a  zealous  whig.  He  warmly  espoused
the  cause  of  the  colonists  at  the  beginning  of  the
war,  and  in  1775,  at  the  head  of  500  men,  partici-
pated in  the  attack  and  destruction  of  Fort  John-
son, for  which  he  was  publicly  denounced  as  a  rebel.
He  was  a  member  of  the  first  provincial  congress
of  North  Carolina,  and  subsequently  raised  and
equipped  a  regiment  at  his  own  expense.  On  23
April,  1776,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
the  Wilmington  district,  and  in  the  latter  part  of
1778  joined  Gen.  Lincoln's  army  in  South  Carolina.
Early  in  the  following  year  he  was  sent  to  drive  the
British  from  Augusta,  but  on  4  March,  at  Brier
creek,  he  was  surprised  and  totally  defeated  by  the
enemy  under  Gen.  Prevost.  He  "then  returned  to
Wilmington,  but  was  captured  by  the  British  when,
in  1781,  that  town  fell  into  their  hands.  Both  he
and  his  family  were  cruelly  treated,  and  he  died
from  the  effects  of  small-pox  contracted  while  in
prison. — His  brother,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  on  Cape
Fear  river,  JST.  C,  in  1725;  d.  in  Rocky  Point,  3
Feb.,  1813.  He  was  the  brother  of  Gen.  John  Ashe,
and  a  lawyer  by  profession.  He  was  a  member  of
the  council  of  safety  and  of  the  provincial  congress
of  North  Carolina  during  1774-'6,  and  in  1777
was  appointed  chief  justice,  which  office  he  held
till  1796,  when  he  became  governor  of  the  state.
Although  principally  employed  in  civil  capacities,
yet  in  some  of  the  emergencies  of  the  times  he
served  as  a  soldier. — Samuel's  son,  John  Baptista,
soldier,  b.  in  Rocky  Point,  N.  C,  in  1748 ;  d.  in
Halifax,  N.  C,  27  Nov.,  1802,  became  a  captam  in
the  continental  army  at  the  outbreak  of  the  revo-
lutionary war,  and  served  continuously  until  the
battle  of  Eutaw,  where  he  especially  distinguished
himself  and  received  the  rank  of  colonel. He  was


a  member  of  the  house  of  commons  of  North
Carolina  in  1786,  and  also  of  the  state  senate  in
1789  and  1795.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  last  con-
tinental congress  in  1787-8,  and  member  of  the
first  and  of  the  second  congress,  1789-'93.  In
1802  he  was  elected  governor  of  North  Carolina,
but  died  before  his  inauguration.

ASHE,  Thomas,  author.  He  is  supposed  to  be
the  "  T.  A.,  gent.,"  who  visited  this  country  as  a
clerk  on  board  his  majesty's  ship  "  Riclimondj^"  and
on  his  return  to  England,  in  1682,  published  "  Caro-
lina ;  or  a  Description  of  the  Present  State  of  that
Country,  and  the  Natural  Excellencies  thereof:
namely,  the  Healthfulness  of  the  Air,  Pleasantness
of  the  Place,  Advantages  and  Usefulness  of  those
Rich  Commodities  there,  Plentifully  Abounding,
which  much  Increase  and  Flourish  by  the  Industry
of  the  Planters  that  Daily  Enlarge  that  Colony."
This  description  is  reprinted  in  "  Historical  Collec-
tions of  South  Carolina  "  (New  York,  1836).

ASHE,  Thomas,  author,  b.  near  Dublin,  Ire-
land, 15  July,  1770;  d.  in  Bath,  England,  17  Dec,
1835.  For  a  short  while  he  served  in  the  English
army,  and  then  filled  a  clerical  position  in  Dublin.
He  spent  several  years  in  foreign  travel,  and  pub-
lished accounts  of  his  experiences,  among  which,
besides  his  "Memoirs  and  Confessions"  (3  vols.,
1815).  are  "  Memoirs  of  Mammoth  and  other  Bones
found  in  the  Vicinity  of  the  Ohio  "  (1806) ;  "  Travels
in  America  in  1806  "  (1808) ;  and  "  A  Commercial
and  Geographical  Sketch  of  Brazil  and  Madeira "
(1812). He  also  wrote  several  novels.

ASHLEY,  Chester,  senator,  b.  in  Westfield,
Mass.,  1  June,  1790 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  27
April,  1848.  At  an  early  age  he  was  removed  to
New  York  and  settled  in  Hudson,  where  he  re-
ceived a  liberal  education,  studied  law,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  its  practice.  In  1817  he  went  to  Illinois,
and  after  two  years  he  settled  in  Little  Rock,  then
a  mere  landing,  in  the  territory  of  Arkansas.  On
the  death  of  William  S.  Fullerton  he  was  elected
to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  took  his
seat  4  Dec,  1844. Pie  was  reelected  in  1846.

ASHLEY,  James  Monroe,  congressman,  b.  near
Pittsburg, Pa., 14 Nov., 1824. His education
was  acquired  while  a  clerk  on  boats  on  the  Ohio
and  Mississippi  rivers. Later  he  worked  in  print-
ing-offices, and  became  editor  of  the  "  Dispatch,",
and  afterward  of  the  "  Democrat,"  at  Portsmouth,
Ohio. He  then  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to ■
the  bar  of  Ohio  in  1849,  but  never  practised. Sub- fl
sequently  he  settled  in  Toledo,  where  he  became m
interested  in  the  wholesale  drug  business. He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  republican  in  1859,  and
was  reelected  four  times,  serving  continuously  from ■
5  Dec,  1859,  till  3  March,  1869. He  was  for  four ■
terms  chairman  of  the  committee on  territories, '
and  it  was  under  his  supervision  that  the  terri-
tories of  Arizona,  Idaho,  and  Montana  were  organ-
ized. He  was nominated  for  the  41st  congress,
but  was  defeated,  and  in  1869  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  Montana. In  1866  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  loyalist  convention  held  in  Philadelphia.

ASHLEY,  WiUiam  H.,  congressman,  b.  in
Powhatan  co.,  Va.,  about  1778 ;  d.  near  Boone ville,
Mo.,  26  March.  1838.  He  received  a  public-school
education,  and  in  1808  migrated  to  Upper  Louisi-
ana (now  Missouri),  where  he  became  a  brigadier-
general  of  militia.  He  was  an  enterprising  fur-
trader,  and  in  1822  organized  a  company,  300
strong,  which  penetrated  to  the  Rocky  mountains
and  formed  trading  relations  with  the  Indian  tribes.
He  realized  a  handsome  fortune  from  this  venture.
He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Illinois  in  1820.  and
he  represented  Missouri  in  congresses  in  1831-7.


ASHMEAD


ASPINWALL


111


ASHMEAD,  Isaac,  printer,  b.  in  Germantown,
Pa.,  22  Dec,  1790;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  1  March,  1870.
He  was  apprenticed  to  William  Bradford,  and  in  1821
founded  what  isnowtheoldestprintingestablishment
in  Philadelphia.  He  set  up  the  first  power-presses
ever  used  in  that  city,  and  introduced  composition
rollers.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American
Sunday-School  Union,  and  printed  its  publications.
He  also  aided  in  establishing  the  "  American  Pres-
byterian "  and  the  "  Presbyterian  Quarterly."

ASHMUN,  Eli  Porter,  senator,  b.  in  Bland-
ford,  Mass.,  24  June,  1770;  d.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  10  May,  1819.  He  received  a  classical  edu-
cation, and  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  by  Middlebury  college  (1807)  and
by  Harvard  (1809).  He  studied  law,  and  practised
at  Blandford  several  years.  For  some  time  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  legislature,  serving  on  vari-
ous occasions  in  the  upper  and  lower  branches.
He  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Massachusetts  from
December,  1816,  till  May,  1818,  when  he  resigned.
ASHMUN,  Greorge,  statesman,  b.  in  Blandford,
Mass.,  25  Dec,  1804 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  17
July,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1823,
studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1828  at
Springfield,  Mass. In  1833, 1835, 1836,  and  1841  he

was  elected  a
member  of  the
lower  branch  of
the  Massachu-
setts legisla-
ture, and  dur-
ing the  last
term  he  was
speaker  of  the
house.  He  was  a
state  senator  in
'38-9.  He  was
elected  to  con-
gress in  1845,
and  served  con-
tinuously until
1851,  being  a
member  of  the
committees  on
the  judiciary,
Indian  affairs,
and  rules.  He
was  a  great  ad-
mirer of  Daniel  Webster,  and  although  he  did  not
follow  the  latter  in  his  abandonment  of  the  Wil-
mot  proviso,  defended  him  in  the  ensuing  quarrels ;
his  replies  to  Charles  J.  Ingersoll,  of  Pennsylvania,
and  Charles  Allen,  of  Massachusetts,  when  they
assailed  Webster  with  personal  and  political  bitter-
ness, were  among  the  strongest  efforts  of  his  career
in  congress.  Subsequent  to  his  retirement  from
political  life  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession.  In  1860  he  was  president  of
the  Chicago  convention  that  nominated  Lincoln
for  president.  It  is  said  to  have  been  through  his
influence  that  in  1861  Senator  Douglas,  of  Illinois,
was  won  over  to  the  support  of  the  administration,
and  the  results  of  a  subsequent  interview  at  the
White  house  between  Lincoln,  Douglas,  and  Ash-
mun,  were  of  great  importance  to  the  country.  In
1866  he  was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  national  union
convention,  held  in  Philadelphia,  but  he  took  no
part  in  its  deliberations.  He  was  also  for  some
time  a  director  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad.

ASHMUN,  Jeliudi,  missionary,  b.  in  Cham-
plain,  N.  Y.,  in  April,  1794;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
25  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  the  univer-
sity of  Vermont  in  1816,  taught  for  a  short  time
in  the  Maine  charity  school,  prepared  for  the  Con-


gregational ministry,  and  became  a  professor  in
the  Bangor  theological  seminary.  Removing  to
the  District  of  Columbia,  he  united  with  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church  and  became  editor  of  the
"Theological  Repertory,"  a  monthly  magazine
published  in  the  interest  of  that  church.  His  true
mission  was  inaugurated  when  he  became  agent
of  the  colonization  society,  and  took  charge  of  a
reenforcement  for  the  colony  at  Liberia,  on  the
western  coast  of  Africa.  He  sailed  19  June,  1822,
and  found  the  colony  in  a  wretched  state  of  disor-
der and  demoralization,  and  apparently  on  the
point  of  extinction  through  incursions  of  the
neighboring  savages.  With  extraordinary  energy
and  ability  he  undertook  the  task  of  reorganiza-
tion. In  November  he  was  attacked  by  a  force  of
savages,  whose  numbers  he  estimated  at  800.  With
only  35  men  and  boys  to  help  him,  he  repelled  the
attack,  which  was  renewed  by  still  greater  num-
bers a  few  days  later,  with  a  like  result.  He  dis-
played remarkable  personal  valor  throughout  these
encounters,  and  when,  six  years  later,  his  health
compelled  him  to  leave  Africa,  he  had  established
a  comparatively  prosperous  colony  1,200  strong.
He  died  almost  immediately  after  his  arrival  in
the  United  States.  He  was  author  of  "  Memoirs  of
Samuel  Bacon"  (Washington,  1822),  and  of  many
contributions  to  the  "African  Repository."  His
life  was  written  by  R.  R.  Gurley  (New  York,  1839).

ASHMUN,  John  Hooker,  jurist,  b.  in  Bland-
ford, Mass.,  3  July,  1800;  d.  in  Cambridge,  1
April,  1833.  He  was  the  son  of  Senator  Eli  P.
Ashmun,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1818,  and,
on  the  establishment  of  the  law  department  of  that
university,  appointed  its  first  professor,  under  the
endowment  of  Isaac  Royall.  Prior  to  this  he  was
associated  with  Judge  Howe  and  Elijah  J.  Mills  in
establishing  a  law  school  in  Northampton.  Judge
Story  pronounced  his  funeral  discourse,  and  spoke
highly  of  his  professional  attainments.

ASPER,  Joel  F.,  journalist,  b.  in  Adams  co.,
Pa.,  20  April,  1822 ;  d.  in  Chillicothe,  Mo.,  1  Oct.,
1872.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1844,  elected
a  justice  of  the  peace  in  1846,  and  prosecuting  at-
torney for  the  county  in  1847.  In  1849  he  edited
the  "  Western  Reserve  Chronicle,"  and  in  1850  be-
came editor  of  the  "  Chardon  Democrat."  In  1861
he  raised  a  company  and  was  commissioned  a
captain.  He  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Win-
chester, and,  after  being  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1862,  was  mustered  out  in  1863  on  ac-
count of  wounds.  In  1864  he  removed  to  Missouri
and  founded  the  Chillicothe  "  Spectator."  He  was
elected  to  congress  in  1868,  and  served  on  the  com-
mittee on  military  affairs.

ASPINWALL,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  23  May,  1786 ;  d.  11  Aug.,  1876.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  and  studied  law
with  William  Sullivan.  He  was  major  of  the  9th
U.  S.  infantry  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  for  gallant
conduct  at  Sackett's  Harbor  received  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel,  and  that  of  colonel  for  the
sortie  from  Fort  Erie,  in  which  he  lost  an  arm.
From  1815  to  1853  he  was  U.  S.  consul  at  London.

ASPINWALL,William,  physician,  b.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  23  May,  1743 ;  d.  16  April,  1823.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  university  in  1764,  stud-
ied medicine  in  Philadelphia,  and  practised  in
Brookline.  He  fought  as  a  volunteer  at  Lexing-
ton, and  afterward  became  a  surgeon  in  the  revo-
lutionary army,  and  had  partial  charge  of  a
military  hospital  at  Jamaica  Plain.  After  the  war
he  interested  himself  in  vaccination,  built  a  small-
pox hospital  at  Brookline,  and  succeeded  in  estab-
lishing that  remedy  into  American  practice. He


112


ASPINWALL


ASTOR


was  a  prominent  Jeffersonian  republican,  and  a
meniber  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature,  and  also
of  the  executive  council.

ASPINWALL,  William  H.,  merchant,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  Dec,  1807;  d.  there,  18  Jan.,
1875.  He  was  trained  in  the  house  of  G.  Gr.  &  S.
Rowland,  his  uncles,  and  taken  into  the  firm  in
1882.  In  1837  the  new  firm  of  Rowland  &  Aspinwall
was  established.  This  house  had  the  largest  Pacific
trade  of  any  firm  in  New  York,  besides  doing  an
extensive  business  with  the  East  and  West  Indies,
England,  and  the  Mediterranean.  In  1850  he  re-
tired from  the  active  management  of  the  firm,  and
secured  the  contract  for  a  line  of  mail  steamers
from  the  isthmus  of  Panama  to  California,  and  a
concession  from  the  government  of  New  Granada
for  the  construction  of  a  railroad  across  the  isth-
mus. The  road  was  completed  after  many  diffi-
culties, and  opened  on  17  Feb.,  1855,  the  eastern
terminus  being  named  Aspinwall.  Mr.  Aspinwall
was  president  of  the  Pacific  mail  steamship  com-
pany until  1856.  He  travelled  much  in  the  last
twenty  years  of  his  life,  and  made  an  important
collection  of  paintings,  which  were  sold  by  his  fam-
ily in  1886. — His  son,  Lloyd,  b.  in  New  York  city  in
1830,  d.  in  Bristol,  R.  L,  4  Sept.,  1886,  commanded
the  22d  N.  Y.  militia  in  its  three  months'  service
before  Gettysburg,  had  charge  of  the  purchase  of
vessels  for  the  Newbern  expedition,  was  president
of  a  board  to  revise  army  regulations,  was  Gen.
Burnside's  aide  at  Fredericksburg,  and  after  the
war  was  a  brigadier-general  in  the  national  guard.
ASTOR,  John  Jacob,  merchant,  b.  in  Walddorf,
near  Heidelberg,  Germany,  17  July,  1763;  d.  in
New  York,  29  March,  1848.  He  was  the  fourth  son
of  a  butcher  in  Walldorf,  and  until  he  was  sixteen

years  of  age  he
worked  with  his
father.  He  then
joined  an  elder
brother  in  Lon-
don, who  was
employed  in  the
piano  and  flute
factory  of  their
uncle,  of  the
firm  of  Astor
&  Broadwood,
widely  known
afterward  as
Broadwood  &
Co.  His  broth-
er Henry  had
settled  in  New
York,  and  his
intention  was
to  emigrate  to
the  United  States  as  soon  as  he  could  save  enough
money.  In  1783  he  sailed  for  Baltimore  with  a
small  invoice  of  musical  instruments  to  sell  on
commission.  On  shipboard  he  met  with  a  furrier,
who  told  him  of  the  profits  to  be  made  in  buying
furs  from  the  Indians  and  frontiersmen  and  sell-
ing them  to  the  large  dealers,  and,  in  order  to
become  familiar  with  the  fur  business,  he  entered
into  the  employ  of  a  Quaker  furrier  in  New  York
and,  when  he  had  mastered  the  numerous  details
of  the  trade,  began  business  on  his  own  account,
opening  a  shop  in  "Water  street,  in  which  he  worked
early  and  late,  except  when  absent  on  his  pur-
chasing trips.  Soon  after  he  established  himself
in  New  York  he  visited  London,  formed  connec-
tions with  houses  in  the  fur  trade,  and  made  ar-
rangements with  Astor  &  Broadwood  to  become
their  agent  in  America. After  his  return  to  New


York  he  opened  a  wareroom  for  the  sale  of  musical
instruments,  becoming  the  first  regular  dealer  in
such  articles  in  the  United  States.  He  married
Sarah  Todd,  who  brought  him  a  dowry  of  only
$300,  but  who  possessed  a  frugal  mind  and  a  busi-
ness judgment  that  he  declared  to  be  better  than
that  of  most  merchants,  and  she  assisted  him  in  the
practical  details  of  his  business.  Before  the  close  of
the  century  Astor  possessed,  as  the  result  of  fifteen
years  of  constant  work,  a  fortune  of  $250,000.  He
then  for  the  first  time  took  a  house  separate  from
his  store.  With  sagacious  management  the  busi-
ness prospered  to  such  an  extent  that  he  was  able  to
ship  furs  in  his  own  vessels  and  bring  back  Euro-

Sean  goods.  He  made  frequent  voyages  up  the
lohawk,  to  buy  directly  from  the  Indians,  and  also
dealt  largely  with  the  great  English  fur  companies.
About  1809  he  conceived  a  national  scheme  to  ren-
der American  trade  independent  of  the  Hudson
bay  company,  and  to  carry  civilization  into  the
wilderness,  for  which  he  asked  the  aid  of  congress.
His  project  was  to  establish  a  chain  of  trading
posts  from  the  lakes  to  the  Pacific,  to  plant  a  cen-
tral depot  at  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river,  and  to
acquire  one  of  the  Sandwich  islands  and  establish  a
line  of  vessels  between  the  western  coast  of  America
and  the  ports  of  China  and  India.  Two  expeditions
were  sent,  one  by  land  and  the  other  by  sea,  to  open
up  intercourse  with  the  Indians  of  the  Pacific  coast.
In  1811  the  settlement  of  Astoria  was  planted  at
the  mouth  of  the  Columbia  river,  but  the  war  of
1812  interfered  with  Astor's  gigantic  enterprise  and
caused  its  abandonment.  The  story  of  this  far-
reaching  scheme  has  been  well  told  in  Irving's
"Astoria."  At  this  time  Astor  bought  American
government  securities  at  60  or  70cents,  which  after
the  war  doubled  in  value.  After  the  conclusion  of
peace  he  carried  on  his  operations  without  govern-
ment support,  and  established  a  trade  with  many
countries,  particularly  China,  but  never  realized  the
project  of  founding  settlements  in  the  northwest.
He  invested  his  gains  in  real  estate  outside  the
compact  portion  of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  as
the  city  extended  he  erected  many  handsome  build-
ings. His  judgment  in  business  was  remarkably
sagacious,  his  habits  industrious  and  methodical,
and  his  memory  exceedingly  tenacious,  retaining
the  slightest  details.  For  the  last  twenty-five  years
of  his  life  he  lived  in  quiet  retirement.  In  this
period,  in  consultation  with  literary  and  practical
men,  he  matured  a  plan  for  establishing  a  public
library  in  New  York,  the  first  suggestion  of  which
had  come  from  Washington  Irving.  He  left
$400,000  for  founding  the  Astor  library,  which  pro-


pHH }}■  Inmml,


vision  was  carried  out  by  his  son,  William  B.  Astor.
He  made  other  bequests'  for  benevolent  objects,  in
addition  to  liberal  gifts  during  his  lifetime,  one  of
which  was  $50,000  to  found  the  Astor  House  in
Walldorf,  his  birthplace,  an  institute  for  the  edu-


ASTOK


ATAHUALPA


113


..'-^Vj./^i^


cation  of  poor  children,  combined  with  an  asylum
for  the  aged  and  needy.  His  fortune  at  the  time
of  liis  death  was  estimated  at  $20,000,000.  Fitz-
Greene  Halleck,  the  poet,  who  was  his  secretary
for  seventeen  years,  expressed  the  opinion  that  Mr.
Astor  would  have  been  eminently  successful  in  any
profession.— His  eldest  son,  Williaiii  Backhouse,
capitalisi.,  b.  in  New  York,  19  Sept.,  1792;  d.  in
that  city,  24  Nov.,  1875. Until  he  was  sixteen  he

went  to  the
public  schools,
employing  his
spare  hours  and
vacations  in
assisting  his
father  in  the
store.  He  was
then  sent

to  Heidelberg,
and  after  two
years  went  to
Gottingen  in
1810,  and  chose
as  his  tutor  a
student,  after-
ward known  as
the  Chevalier
Bunsen,  with
whom  he  also
travelled.  On
his  return  to
New  York  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  his  father
engaged  in  the  China  trade,  and  took  him  into
partnership.  The  house  was  known  as  John  Jacob
Astor  &  Son  from  1815  till  1827.  In  the  latter  year
the  firm,  which  was  one  of  the  largest  in  the  China
trade,  was  dissolved,  the  Astors  retired  from  the
Canton  trade,  and  the  American  fur  company  was
formed,  with  William  B.  Astor  as  its  president,
though  the  father  took  the  more  active  part  in  the
-4)usiness,  which  for  several  years  yielded  large  pro-
fits. Finally  the  elder  Astor  withdrew,  and  was  soon
followed  by  his  son,  and  from  that  time  forth  neither
of  them  engaged  again  in  commerce.  When  John
Jacob  Astor  died  in  1848,  he  made  his  eldest  son  his
sole  heir,  although  he  provided  well  for  his  other
relatives.  William  was  already  rich,  having  been
successful  in  business,  and  having  received  from
his  uncle,  Henry,  a  fortune  of  |500,000,  and
from  his  father  the  title  to  the  Astor  House  prop-
erty as  a  gift.  William  B.  Astor,  then  fifty-six
years  of  age,  gave  himself  to  the  preservation  and
growth  of  the  vast  property.  He  added  to  the  be-
quest of  his  father  for  the  Astor  library  the  sum  of
$250,000,  of  which  he  paid  during  his  lifetime
$201,000  in  land,  books,  and  money.  The  edifice
was  completed  under  his  directions  in  May,  1858.
In  1855  he  presented  to  the  trustees  the  adjoining
lot,  and  erected  thereon  a  similar  structure,  which
was  completed  in  1859.  He  next  gave  $50,000  for
the  purchase  of  books.  He  gave  much  patient  atten-
tion for  many  years  to  the  administration  of  the
library.  Following  the  example  of  his  father,  he
invested  in  real  estate,  principally  situated  below
Central  park,  between  4th  and  7tii  avenues,  which
rapidly  increased  in  value.  For  about  thirteen
years  prior  to  1873  he  was  largely  engaged  in  build-
ing, until  much  of  his  hitherto  unoccupied  land
was  covered  by  houses,  mostly  of  the  first  class.
He  was  said  to  own  in  1867  as  many  as  7^0  houses,
and  he  was  also  heavily  interested  in  railroad,  coal,
and  insurance  companies.  Besides  other  charitable
gifts,  he  gave  $50,000  to  St.  Luke's  hospital,  and  in
his  will  he  left  $200,000  to  the  Astor  librarv,  in  ad-
dition to  $49,000,  the  unexpended  balance  of  his


earlier  donation.  His  estate,  estimated  at  $45,000,-
000,  was  divided  by  his  will  between  his  two  sons,
John  Jacob  and  William  Astor,  who  were  given
only  a  life  interest  in  the  residuary  estate,  which
descends  to  their  children.  The  gifts  and  be-
quests of  William  B.  Astor  to  the  Astor  library
amounted  altogether  to  about  $550,000.  In  1879
his  eldest  son,  John  Jacob,  presented  three  lots
adjoining  the  library  building,  and  erected  on  them
a  third  structure  similar  to  the  others,  and  added
a  story  to  the  central  building.  The  edifice  is
represented  on  page  112.  His  outlav,  exclusive  of
land,  was  about  $250,000,  making  the  entire  gift
of  the  Astor  family  more  than  $1,000,000.— Will-
iam Waldorf,  son  of  John  Jacob,  was  graduated
at  Columbia  law  school  in  1875.  He  served  one
term  in  the  New  York  state  senate,  and  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  congress.  He  was  U.  S.
minister  to  Italy  from  1882  till  1885,  and  has  pub-
lished *'  Valentino,"  an  Italian  romance  (New  York,
1886),  and  "  Sforza,  a  Story  of  Milan  "  (1889).

ATAHUALPA,  or  ATABALIPA  (ah  -ta-oo-al  -
pa),  inca  of  Peru  at  the  time  of  the  invasion  of  the
Spaniards,  d.  29  Aug.,  1538.  He  was  the  son  of
Huayna  Capac.  The  laws  of  Peru  required  that
the  principal  wives  of  the  incas  should  be  blood
relatives,  and  that  no  children  of  other  parentage
should  be  legitimate.  Atahualpa's  mother  had
been  a  princess  of  Quito;  nevertheless,  at  the  re-
quest of  his  father,  the  heir  to  the  throne,  Huascar,
consented  to  divide  the  kingdom  with  Atahualpa,
on  condition  only  that  he  should  render  homage  to
him,  and  not  make  conquests  beyond  his  own  do-
minions. This  liberal  conduct  was  infamously  re-
quited by  Atahualpa,  who,  having  secretly  got
together  a  large  army,  attacked  Huascar  in  Cuzco,
took  him  prisoner,  and  exterminated  all  his  adhe-
rents, putting  his  family  and  immediate  depend-
ents to  death  in  the  most  atrocious  tortures.  Such
is  the  story  told  by  Spanish  annalists,  whose  testi-
mony is  doubtful,
seeing  that  the
murder  of  Huas-
car, their  pseudo-
ally,  and  the  tyr-
anny of  Atahu-
alpa were  among
the  causes  of  his
own  execution.
Pizarro  and  his
followers  were
now  in  Peru,
and  Atahualpa
opened  negotia-
tions with  them.
His  proposals
were  received  in
a  friendly  man-
ner by  Pizarro,
and  an  interview
was arranged

(1532),  which  Atahualpa  attended,  followed  by  a
large  number  of  unarmed  subjects.  Father  Vicente
de  Valverde  explained  to  him,  through  an  interpre-
ter, the  mysteries  of  religion,  and  that,  on  account  of
their  heathenism,  the  pope  had  granted  his  kingdom
to  the  Spaniards.  Atahualpa  professed  not  to  un-
derstand the  tenor  of  this  discourse,  and  would  not
resign  his  kingdom,  wliereupon  a  massacre  of  the
assembled  crowd  was  at  once  begun  by  the  Span-
ish soldiers,  who  seized  Atahual})a  and  threw  hira
into  prison.  On  the  arrival  of  Almagro  the  cupid-
ity of  the  adventurers  was  excited  by  the  magnifi-
cent proposals  that  Atahualpa  made  for  his  ran-
som, and  with  a  desire  of  seizing  the  whole  it  was


114


ATCHISON


ATKINSON


determined  to  put  him  to  death.  During  his  im-
prisonment Atahualpa  gave  orders  for  the  execu-
tion of  his  brother  Huascar,  which  were  obeyed.
This  was  one  of  the  charges  against  him  on  the
court  martial  by  which  he  was  tried,  and,  being
found  guilty,  was  sentenced  to  be  burned,  a  penalty
commuted  for  strangulation  by  the  garrote  on  his
accepting  baptism  at  the  hands  of  the  priests  ac-
companying the  invaders.

ATCHISON,  David  R.,  senator,  b.  in  Frog-
town,  Ky..  11  Aug.,  1807.  He  received  a  liberal
education,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  Lib-
erty CO.,  Mo.  In  1834  and  1888  he  sat  in  the  Mis-
souri legislature.  In  1841  he  was  appointed  judge
of  the  Platte  county  circuit  court,  and  in  1843
appointed  U.  S.  senator  in  the  place  of  Lewis
F.  Linn,  deceased,  and  was  subsequently  elected
and  reelected,  sitting  until  1855.  He  was  prom-
inent in  the  legislation  on  the  organization  of  the
territories  of  Kansas  and  Nebraska,  and  was  a
leader  of  the  pro-slavery  faction  in  the  Kansas
troubles  of  185G-'7.

ATEMPANECATL  (ah-tem-pah-na-ka'tl),  one
of  the  two  famous  generals  and  advisers  of  Mocte-
zuma  I.,  king  of  Mexico.  While  the  latter  was  at-
tending to  the  wants  of  his  people  during  a  great
famine,  Atempanecatl  and  Cihuacoatl  continued
the  pending  wars  with  the  utmost  success.

ATHERTON,  Charles  Gordon,  senator,  b.  in
Amherst,  N.  H.,  4  July,  1804 ;  d.  in  Manchester,
N.  H.,  15  Nov.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1822,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825.
He  practised  at  first  in  Nashua  and  then  in  Dun-
stable. After  being  a  democratic  member  of  the
legislature  for  five  years,  and  for  four  years  speaker
of  the  house,  he  was  elected  to  congress  in  1837
and  sat  in  the  lower  house  until  1843.  He  intro-
duced in  1838  the  resolution,  which  remained  in
force  until  1845,  declaring  that  all  .bills  or  peti-
tions, of  whatever  kind,  on  the  subject  of  slavery,
should  be  tabled  without  debate,  and  should  not  be
taken  again  from  the  table.  This  was  called  "  the
Atherton  gag."  From  1843  to  1849  he  was  a  sena-
tor from  New  Hampshire,  and  in  1852  he  was  again
elected  to  the  senate  and  served  as  chairman  of  the
finance  committee.

ATHERTON,  Charles  Humphrey,  lawyer,  b.
in  Amherst,  N.  H.,  14  Aug.,  1773 ;  d.  'in  Amherst,
8  Jan.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1794,  studied  law,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  entered
on  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  his  native  town.
His  reputation  for  solid  attainments  and  exact
habits  of  investigation  kept  him  at  the  head  of  the
Hillsborough  co,  bar  for  years.  He  filled  the  office
of  register  of  probate  for  thirty-nine  years  (1798-
1837),  served  in  congress  from  15  Dec,  1815,  to  3
March,  1817,  and  was  a  representative  in  the  legis-
lature in  1823,  1838,  and  1839.  He  prepared  vari-
ous papers  for  the  state  historical  society.

ATHERTON,  Humphrey,  soldier,  d.  in  Boston,
17  Sept.,  16()1.  He  emigrated  from  England  about
1636,  settled  at  Dorchester,  and  was  a  deputy  to
the  general  court.  In  1654  he  succeeded  Robert
Sedgwick  as  commander  of  the  military  forces,
with  the  title  of  major-general,  and  was  much  em-
ployed in  negotiations  with  the  Indians.  He  was
killed  by  falling  from  his  horse  while  he  was  re-
viewing the  militia  on  Boston  common.

ATHERTON,  Joshua,  lawyer,  b.  in  Harvard,
Mass.,  20  June,  1737 ;  d.  in  Amherst,  N.  H.,  3  April,
1809.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1762,  stud-
ied law,  and  began  practice  in  Petersham.  Shortly
afterward  he  removed  to  Litchfield,  and  in  1773,
having  been  appointed  register  of  probate  in  Hills-
borough CO.,  he  settled  in  Amherst. Here  he  ac-


cumulated much  property  and  was  successful  in
his  profession.  During  the  revolutionary  war  he
was  a  firm  loyalist,  and  suffered  in  consequence
both  from  loss  of  property  and  from  cruel  indig-
nities. In  1779  he  took  the  oath  of  allegiance  to
New  Hampshire,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in
the  supreme  court.  Later  he  became  a  member  of
the  convention  appointed  to  consider  the  federal
constitution,  and  opposed  its  adoption  on  account
of  the  provisions  concerning  slaves  and  slavery.
Subsequently  he  was  elected  to  the  New  Hamp-
shire legislature,  and  in  1793  he  was  made  attorney-
general  of  the  state.  He  was  also  for  a  time  com-
missioner for  the  U.  S.  direct  tax.

ATKINS,  Henry,  navigator  of  the  18th  cen-
tury. He  made  numerous  trading  voyages  to  Da-
vis straits,  and  also  explored  much  of  the  coasts  of
Labrador  between  the  years  1729  and  1758.  An
account  of  his  experiences  has  been  published  in
the  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections."

ATKINSON,  Edward,  economist,  b.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1827.  His  education  was  ob-
tained principally  at  private  schools,  and  his  repu-
tation has  been  made  by  the  numerous  pamphlets
and  papers  that  he  has  contributed  to  current  lit-
erature on  economic  topics.  The  subjects  treated
embrace  such  general  topics  as  banking,  competi-
tion, cotton,  free  trade,  mechanical  arts,  and  pro-
tection. The  most  important  of  his  addresses  are
"Banking,"  delivered  at  Saratoga  in  1880  before
the  American  Bankers'  Association ;  "  Insufficiency
of  Economic  Legislation,"  delivered  before  the
American  Social  Science  Association ;  "  What  makes
the  Rate  of  Wages,"  before  the  British  Association
for  the  Advancement  of  Science ;  address  to  the
chief  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  at  their  con-
vention in  Boston  in  1885 ;  vice-presidential  ad-
dress on  the  "  Application  of  Science  to  the  Pro-
duction and  Consumption  of  Food,"  before  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, in  1885 ;  and  "  Prevention  of  Loss  by  Fire,"
before  the  millers  of  the  west,  in  1885.  His  pam-
phlets and  books  include  the  following : "  Cheap  Cot-
ton by  Free  Labor  "  (Boston,  1861) ;  "  The  Collection
of  Revenue  "  (1866) ;  "Argument  for  the  Conditional
Reform  of  the  Legal-Tender  Act "  (1874) ;  "  Our
National  Domain"  (1879);  "Labor  and  Capital —
Allies,  not  Enemies  "  (New  York,  1880) ;  "  The  Fire
Engineer,  the  Architect,  and  the  Underwriter"
(Boston,  1880);  "The  Railroads  of  the  United
States"  (1880);  "Cotton  Manufacturers  of  the
United  States  "  (1880) ;  "  Addresses  at  Atlanta,  Ga.,
on  the  International  Exposition  "  (New  York,  1881) ;
"What  is  a  Bank!"  (1881);  " Right  Methods  of
Preventing  Fires  in  Mills  "  (Boston,  1881) ;  "  The
Railway  and  the  Farmer  "  (New  York,  1881) ;  "  The
Influence  of  Boston  Capital  upon  Manufactures,"
in  "  Memorial  History  of  Boston  "  (Boston,  1882) ;
and  "  The  Distribution  of  Products  "  (New  York,
1885).  In  1886  he  began  the  preparation  of  a  series
of  monographs  on  economic  questions  for  periodi-
cal publication.  Through  his  efforts  was  estab-
lished the  Boston  manufacturers'  mutual  fire  in-
surance company,  an  association  consisting  of  a
number  of  manufacturers  who,  for  their  mutual
protection,  adopted  rules  and  regulations  for  the
economical  and  judicious  management  of  their
plants.  He  has  invented  an  improved  cooking-
stove,  called  the  "  Aladdin  Cooker."

ATKINSON,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  1782 ;  d.  at
Jefferson  Barracks,  Mo.,  14  June,  1842.  At  the  age
of  twenty-six  he  was  appointed,  from  North  Caro-
lina, captain  in  the  3d  infantry.  On  25  April,  1813,
he  was  made  inspector-general,  and  during  the  fol-
lowing year  he  became  colonel  of  the  45th  infantry.


ATKINSON


ATTA-CULLA-CULLA


115


He  was  advanced  to  the  grade  of  brigadier-general
13  May,  1821,  and  was  made  adjutant-general  31
June.  He  served  with  distinction  in  the  Black
Hawk  war,  and  was  in  command  of  the  U.  S.  forces
in  the  engagements  on  Bad  Axe  river,  1  and  2
Aug.,  1832,  where  the  Indians  were  defeated.

ATKINSON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Deerfield,
N.  J.,  6  Sept.,  1835.  He  was  admitted  to  the  min-
istry in  the  New  Jersey  Methodist  Episcopal  con-
ference in  1853,  and  has  been  pastor  of  churches  in
Paterson,  Newark,  and  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  and  in
Chicago,  111.,  and  Bay  City  and  Adrian,  Mich.
Dickinson  College  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  M.  A.  in  1809,  and  Illinois  Wesleyan  univer-
sity gave  him  that  of  D.  D.  in  1878.  He  is  the
author  of  the  well-known  hymn  "  We  Shall  Meet
Beyond  the  River."  Dr.  Atkinson  has  for  more
than  thirty  years  contributed  to  the  periodical
press,  especially  that  of  his  own  denomination.
He  has  published  "  The  Living  Way  "  (New  York,
1850) ;  "  Memorials  of  Methodism  in  New  Jersey  "
(Philadelphia,  1860) ;  "  The  Garden  of  Sorrows "
(New  York,  1868);  "The  Class  Leader"  (1874);
and  "  Centennial  History  of  American  Method-
ism "  (New  York,  1884).

ATKINSON,  Thomas,  bishop  of  the  Episcopal
church,  b.  in  Mansfield,  Va.,  6  Aug.,  1807 ;  d.  in
Wilmington,  N.  C,  4  Jan.,  1881. He  entered  Yale

college,  but  left
before  completing
the  course,  and
went  to  Hampden-
Sidney  college,
Virginia,  where
he  graduated  in
1825.  He  studied
law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and
practised  for  nine
years.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in
Norfolk,  18  Nov.,
1836,  and  priest  in
the  followi  ng  year.
Dr.  Atkinson  held
several  rector-
ships in  Virginia,
and  was  rector  of
St.  Peter's  church,
Baltimore,  Md.,
at  the  time  of  his  election  to  the  episcopate  of
North  Carolina,  26  May,  1853.  He  was  consecrat-
ed bishop  in  St.  John's  chapel,  New  York,  17  Oct.,
1853.  Bishop  Atkinson  was  an  able  and  efficient
administrator  of  his  diocese  and  prominent  in  the
councils  of  the  church.  In  1873  he  was  given  an
assistant,  Dr.  Tlieodore  Benedict  Lyman,  who  suc-
ceeded him  in  1881.

ATLEE,  John  Lig'ht,  physician,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter, Pa.,  2  Nov.,  1799;  d.  there,  1  Oct.,  1885.  He
was  a  son  of  Col.  W.  P.  Atlee,  and  grandson  of
Judge  W.  A.  Atlee.  He  studied  medicine  with  Dr.
Samuel  Humes  in  Philadelphia,  and  was  graduated
at  the  university  of  Pennsylvania  in  1820.  He  re-
turned to  his  native  city,  began  practice,  and  soon
became  successful,  especially  in  surgical  cases.  Dr.
Atlee's  operation  for  double  ovariotomy,  in  1843,
was  the  first  in  the  history  of  medicine.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Lancaster  city  and
county  medical  society  in  1843,  and  twice  served
as  its  president.  He  assisted  in  organizing  the
Pennsylvania  medical  society  in  1848,  and  became
its  president  in  1857,  and  was  also  one  of  the  or-
ganizers of  the  American  medical  association  in
Philadelphia,  and  was elected  vice-president in


y/2^r*^


^/<^^3?S3U-^


1865,  and  president  in  1882.  At  the  union  of
Franklin  and  Marshall  colleges,  in  1853,  he  became
professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology,  and  con-
tinued there  until  1869.  He  was  a  school  director
for  forty  years,  was  president  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees of  the  Pennsylvania  state  lunatic  asylum  at
Harrisburg,  was  elected  honorary  fellow  of  the
American  gynecological  society  in  1877,  and  was
a  trustee  of  numerous  public  institutions.— His
brother,  Washington  Lemuel,  surgeon  and  au-
thor, b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  22  Feb.,  1808;  d.  6
Sept.,  1878.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  placed
in  a  store,  where  he  remained  but  eighteen  months,
when  he  entered  the  office  of  his  brother.  After
studying  there  and  with  Dr.  George  MeClellan,
of  Philadelphia,  he  received  his  diploma,  in  1829,
from  the  Jefferson  medical  college,  in  that  city.
Soon  afterward  he  married,  and  settled  in  the  vil-
lage of  Mount  Joy,  where  he  practised  until  1834.
During  the  next  ten  years  he  practised  in  his  na-
tive place,  and  while  there  suggested  the  remark-
able series  of  experiments  on  the  body  of  an
executed  criminal,  which  are  described  in  the
"  American  Journal  of  the  Medical  Sciences  "  for
1840.  In  1845  he  became  professor  of  medical
chemistry  in  the  medical  department  of  Pennsyl-
vania college  at  Philadelphia,  but  resigned  his
chair  in  1853  and  devoted  himself  to  his  private
practice,  which  became  very  large.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  Philadelphia  county  medical  association
in  1874,  and  of  the  state  association  in  1875,  and
was  also  vice-president  of  the  American  medical
association.  Dr.  Atlee  was  noted  for  his  advocacy
of  the  difficult  operation  of  ovariotomy,  which  he
was  one  of  the  first  to  practise.  He  ably  defended
its  propriety  when  it  was  in  universal  disrepute,
and,  by  his  great  skill  in  over  300  cases,  he  aided
in  making  it  one  of  the  legitimate  operations  of
surgery.  When  he  first  performed  this  operation
in  Philadelphia  he  was  denounced  by  medical
men  on  all  sides  as  a  dangerous  man.  Few  sur-
geons dared  to  be  present  at  his  operations,  and
there  was  even  talk  of  having  him  arrested.  Dr.
Atlee  was  also  noted  for  his  skill  in  the  remov-
al of  uterine  fibroid  tumors.  He  was  a  brilliant
speaker  and  debater,  and  a  copious  writer  on  medi-
cine, chemistry,  and  botany,  having  published  over
eighty  articles  in  various  journals.  Among  his
writings  are  "Ovarian  Tumors"  (Philadelphia,
1873) ;  an  address  before  the  Philadelphia  county
medical  association,  1  Feb.,  1875,  on  "Struggles
and  Triumphs  of  Ovariotomy  " ;  a  paper  on  "  Fi-
broid Tumors  of  the  Uterus,"  read  before  the  in-
ternational medical  congress  in  Philadelphia  in
September,  1876;  and  a  prize  essay  on  the  same
subject.  '

ATONDO  Y  ANTILL6n,  Isidoro,  Spanish
navigator,  lived  in  the  latter  part  of  the  17th  cen-
tury. He  was  placed  in  charge  of  an  expedition
sent  to  California,  in  1678,  to  establish  colonies
in  that  part  of  the  continent.  After  exploring  the
coast,  he  founded  the  town  of  San  Bruno,  and
took  possession  of  Lower  California  in  the  name  of
the  king  of  Spain.

ATTA-CULLA-CULLA,  Indian  chief,  lived  in
the  18th  century.  About  1738  he  was  chosen  vice-
king  under  Oconostota,  their  archimagus.  In  1755,
three  years  after  the  outbreak  of  hostilities  between
the  French  and  the  English,  he  was  party  to  a
treaty  that  ceded  to  the  English  a  site  for  forts.
The  tribe,  having  be(\n  attacked  by  white  settlers  in
retaliation  for  thefts  committed  in  the  Fort  Du-
quesne  expedition,  m«de  war  upon  the  English,  and
reduced  to  famine,  and  finally  massacred,  the  gar-
rison of  Fort  Loudon. Capt.'  Stuart  was  saved  by


116


ATTUCKS


AUCHMUTY


Atta-Ciilla-Culla  and  conducted  secretly  to  the
British  headquarters  on  the  frontier  of  Virginia.
Through  Atta-Culla-Culla's  influence  Capt.  Stuart
was  received  by  the  Cherokees,  after  peace  was  re-
stored, as  the  British  agent  and  superintendent  of
Indian  atfairs  at  the  south.

ATTUCKS,  Crispus,  a  mulatto,  or  half-breed
Indian,  killed  5  March,  1770,  in  what  is  known  as
the  Boston  massacre.  He  was  a  resident  of  Frara-
ingham.  On  the  day  of  the  massacre  he  was  promi-
nent in  a  crowd  of  people  who  were  jeering  at  the
soldiers  and  annoying  them  in  every  possible  way.
Finally  Preston,  the  captain  of  the  day,  ordered  his
men  to  fire,  and  Attucks  was  the  first  to  fall.
Preston  and  six  of  his  men  were  tried  and  acquitted
by  a  Boston  jury.  John  Adams,  who  defended
them,  charged  Attucks  with  having  "  undertaken
to  be  the  hero  of  the  night,"  and  with  having  pre-
cipitated a  conflict  by  his  "  mad  behavior."  He  is
E raised  by  others  for  his  courage,  and  is  said  to
ave  been  leaning  quietly  on  a  stick  at  the  moment
he  was  killed.  He  was  about  fifty  years  of  age  at
the  time  of  the  aft'air.  His  body,  together  with
those  of  the  other  victims,  was  borne  in  great  pomp
through  the  streets  of  Boston,  and  all  were  de-
posited in  one  common  vault.  All  the  shops  were
closed,  and  the  bells  of  the  city  and  neighboring
towns  were  tolled.  See  Bancroft's  "  History  of  the
United  States,"  and  also  an  article  on  Attucks  in
the  "  American  Historical  Record  "  for  1872.

ATWATER,  Caleb,  lawyer,  b.  in  North  Adams,
Mass.,  25  Dec,  1778;  d.  in  Circleville,  Ohio,  13
March,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  college
in  1804,  studied  law,  and  became  a  successful  prac-
titioner. He  moved  to  Ohio  in  1811,  where  for
some  years  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-
ture, and  postmaster  of  Circleville.  He  was  also
Indian  commissioner  under  Jackson.  He  published
"A  Tour  to  Prairie  du  Chien  "  (1831);  "Western
Antiquities  "  (1833) ;  "  Writings  of  Caleb  Atwater  "
(1833);  "History  of  Ohio"  (1838);  and  an  "Essay
on  Education  "  (1841).  An  article  on  the  "  Writings
of  Caleb  Atwater  "  is  to  be  found  in  the  Cincinnati
"  Western  Monthly  Magazine  "  for  1834.

ATWATER,  Lyman  Hotchkiss,  scholar,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  20  Feb.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Prince-
ton. N.  J.,  17  Feb.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1831,  and  at  the  theological  seminary  in
1834.  In  1833  he  was  a  tutor  in  Yale  college,  and
in  1835  became  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  at  Fairfield,  Conn.,  where  he  remained  un-
til 1854,  contributing  meanwhile  to  various  re-
ligious periodicals.  In  1854  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  mental  and  moral  philosophy  in  Princeton,
and  in  1869  he  became  professor  of  logic  and  of
moral  and  political  science,  and  editor  of  the
"  Princeton  Review."  He  was  also  acting  president
of  the  college  for  several  years.  He  published  a
"  Manual  of  Elementary  Logic  "  (1867).

ATWATER,  Wilbur  Olin,  chemist,  b.  in
Johnsburg,  N.  Y.,  3  May,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,
in  1865,  then  studied  chemistry  at  New  Haven,  and
received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Yale  in  1869,
after  which  he  spent  some  time  at  the  universities
of  Leipsic  and  Berlin,  Germany.  Subsequent  to
his  return  to  the  United  States,  during  1871-2,
he  held  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  East  Tennessee
university,  and  in  1873  he  was  called  to  fill  a  simi-
lar appointment  in  the  Maine  state  college.  In  the
same  year  he  returned  to  Wesleyan  imiversity  as
professor  of  chemistry.  From  1875  to  1877  he  was
director  of  the  Connecticut  agricultural  experi-
mental station.  His  published  papers  are  very
numerous, and have appeared in the scientific


journals  of  Germany  and  France,  as  well  as  in
those  of  the  United  States.  In  conjunction  with
G.  B.  Goode  he  is  the  author  of  "  The  American
Menhaden"  (New  York,  1879).  He  has  made  a
special  study  of  the  composition  of  food  material,
and  constructed  charts  to  show  the  relative  values.
See  "  Annual  Cyclopa:;dia  "  for  1883.

AUBER,  Pierre  Alexandre,  French  natural-
ist, b.  in  Havre  in  1784;  d.  in  Cuba  in  1843.  He
went  to  Cuba  in  1833,  and  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  botany  in  the  university  of  Havana  and
director  of  the  botanic  garden.  He  projected  the
first  railway  in  Cuba,  which  was  built  in  1835,  the
first  in  any  Spanish-speaking  country.

AUBER,  Virginia  Felicia,  Cuban  author,  b.
in  Coruiia,  Spain,  in  1825.  She  went  to  Cuba  in
1833  and  resided  there  until  1873,  >yhen  she  re-
turned to  Europe.  She  wrote  nmch  under  the  pen
name  "Felicia,"  and  published  several  novels,  the
best  of  which  are  "  Perseverancia,"  "  Otros  tiempos,"
"  Un  amor  misterioso,"  and  "  Una  habanera."

AUBREY,  Lady  Letitia,  of  Worminghurst,  Sus-
sex, England,  was  the  daughter  of  William  Penn,
and  was  made  owner  and  ruler  of  the  "  Barony
of  Nazareth,"  a  tract  of  5,000  acres  in  the  heart  of
Northampton  co.,  Pa.  Her  title  was  confirmed  by
deed  of  her  half  brothers,  under  date  of  September,
1731,  "  on  yielding  and  paying  therefor,  to  the  said
John  Penn,  Thomas  Penn,  and  Richard  Penn.  their
heirs  and  assigns.  One  Red  Rose,  on  the  24th  day  of
June  yearly,  if  the  same  shall  be  demanded,  in  full
for  ail  services,  customs,  and  rents."  Authentic
copies  of  the  deed  are  in  existence,  and  according
to  tradition  the  rent  was  formally  paid  with  due
ceremony  by  Lady  Letitia.  The  "  Red  Rose  Tav-
ern "  was  until  1783  the  principal  inn  of  the  barony.
The  land  was  sold  to  the  Moravians  in  1741.

AUBREY,  Capt.  d',  knight  of  St.  Louis,  d,  24
Feb.,  1770.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  French  army.
On  14  Sept.,  1758,  he  defeated  Maj.  Grant  at
Fort  Duquesne.  In  1759  he  was  taken  prisoner  by
Sir  William  Johnson  at  Niagara.  In  New  Orleans
he  was  commandant,  and  on  4  Feb.,  1765,  succeeded
to  the  government.  He  surrendered  the  colony  to
Ulloa  in  March,  1766;  but,  after  the  expulsion  of
that  governor  jn  1768,  he  resumed  the  administra-
tion until  Gen.  O'Reilly  came  in  July,  1769.  On
his  return  voyage  to  France  he  was  wrecked  and
drowned  in  the  Graronne.

AUCHMUTY,  Robert  (ok-mu'-te),  lawyer,  b.  in
Scotland ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  April,  1750.  He
was  descended  from  a  family  settled  in  Fife,  Scot-
land, in  the  14th  century.  His  father  removed  to
Ireland  in  1699,  and  the  son  emigrated  to  America
and  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  practised  law  with
success.  He  was  appointed  to  the  court  of  admi-
ralty in  1703,  which  office  he  resigned  shortly  after-
ward ;  but  he  was  reappointed  in  1733.  He  was  in
England  in  1741  as  agent  for  the  colony,  and  in
that  year  published  in  London  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  The  Importance  of  Cape  Breton  to  the  British
Nation,  and  a  Plan  for  Taking  the  Place." — His
son,  Robert,  b.  in  Boston ;  d.  in  Marylebone,  Eng-
land, in  December,  1788.  He  was  an  eloquent  and
successful  advocate  in  Boston,  was  one  of  the  coun-
sel for  the  soldiers  engaged  in  the  Boston  massacre,
and  became  a  judge  of  admiralty  in  1769,  but  in  1776,
being  a  zealous  loyalist,  withdrew  to  England.  His
and  Hutchinson's  letters  from  Boston,  sent  over  by
Franklin,  in  1773,  caused  great  excitement. — Anoth-
er son,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  16  Jan.,
1722;  d.  in  New  York,  6  March,  1777,  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1742,  studied  theology  in
England,  and  was  appointed  assistant  minister  of
Trinity  church  in  New  York. In  1764  he  became


J


AUDENRIED


AUDUBON


117


rector,  and  had  charge  of  all  the  churches  in  the
city.  He  continued  to  read  prayers  for  the  king
during  the  revolution,  until  Lord  Stirling,  in  com-
mand at  New  York,  compelled  him  to  desist ;  where-
upon he  locked  the  churches  and  withdrew  to  New
Jersey,  ordering  that  no  services  should  be  held
until  the  prayers  could  be  read  without  abridg-
ment. When  the  British  captured  New  York  he
passed  the  American  lines  amid  great  hardships.
He  found  his  church  and  parsonage  burned  and
the  church  records  destroyed.  The  exposure  that
he  underwent  in  order  to  evade  the  American  sen-
tries caused  his  death. — Sir  Samuel,  British  gen-
eral, son  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Samuel,  b.  in  New  York,
22  June,  1758;  d.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,  11  Aug.,  1822,
was  graduated  at  King's  college  in  1775,  and  volun-
teered in  the  British  army  in  August,  1776 ;  was
commissioned  for  gallant  conduct  at  the  battle  of
Long  Island,  and  served  in  three  campaigns  against
the  Americans.  He  obtained  a  captaincy,  and
served  in  India  from  1783  to  1796.  In  1800  he  was
adjutant-general  in  Abercrombie's  Egyptian  expe-
dition, in  1803  was  made  a  knight  of  the  bath  went
in  1806  to  South  America  as  a  brigadier-general,  and
in  February,  1807,  captured  Montevideo.  In  1810
he  was  in  command  in  the  Carnatic,  and  in  1811  he
reduced  Java.  Returning  to  England  in  1813,  he
was  made  a  lieutenant-general,  and  in  1822  was
appointed  commander-in-chief  in  Ireland.

AUDENRIED,  Joseph  Crain,  soldier,  b.  in
Pottsville,  Pa.,  6  Nov.,  1839 ;  d.  in  Washington,  3
June,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1861,
was  brevetted  second  lieutenant,  4th  cavalry,  and
assisted  in  organizing  and  drilling  the  troops  then
assembled  in  Washington.  He  took  part  in  the
first  campaign  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Tyler,  and
served  with  the  2d  artillery  till  March,  1862.  Dur-
ing the  peninsular  campaign  he  was  acting  assist-
ant adjutant-general  to  Gen.  Emory's  cavalry  com-
mand. In  July,  1862,  he  became  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  Sumner,  commanding  2d  army  corps,  and
acted  in  this  capacity  until  the  death  of  Gen.  Sum-
ner in  March,  1863.  He  was  wounded  at  Antietam.
and  brevetted  captain.  He  reported  as  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Grant  in  June,  1863,  and  witnessed
the  surrender  of  Vicksburg.  fie  Joined  the  staff
of  Gen.  Sherman  at  Memphis  on  1  Oct.,  1863,  and
shared  in  the  Chattanooga  and  Knoxville  cam-
paign, that  to  Meridian,  the  Atlanta  campaign,  the
march  to  the  sea,  and  that  through  the  Carolinas.
He  accompanied  Gen.  Sherman  during  his  several
tours  through  the  great  west,  among  the  Indians,
and  through  Europe,  and  continued  to  discharge
the  duties  of  aide-de-camp  to  the  general  of  the
army  until  his  death.

AUDUBON,  John  James,  natiiralist,  b.  near
New  Orleans,  La.,  4  May,  1780;  d.  near  New  York
city,  27  Jan.,  1851.  Plis  grandfather  was  a  fisher-
man of  La  Vendee,  in  France,  and  his  father,  who
had  worked  his  way  up  to  the  command  of  a
French  man-of-war,  and  had  acquired  a  plantation
in  Louisiana,  married  there  a  lady  of  Spanish  de-
scent, named  Anne  Moynette.  When  very  young,
Audubon  lived  for  a  short  time  on  a  plantation  be-
longing to  his  father  in  Santo  Domingo,  and,  after
his  mother's  death  in  a  negro  insurrection,  was
taken  to  France  to  be  educated.  His  parents  had
encouraged  in  him  a  love  of  nature  almost  before
he  was  able  to  walk,  and  he  had  long  amused  him-
self by  trying  to  transfer  to  paper  the  graceful
forms  of  the  tropical  birds  with  which  he  was  fa-
miliar. Although  his  efforts  fell  so  far  short  of
his  ideal  that  he  was  accustomed  to  make  a  bonfire
of  them  on  each  birthday,  they  nevertheless  showed
talent,  and  his  father  placed  him  in  the  studio  of


the  celebrated  painter  David.  Here  he  was  set  to
drawing  horses'  heads  and  the  limbs  of  giants,  in-
stead of  his  favorite  birds.  He  persevered,  how-
ever, in  this  one  study,  while  he  neglected  all  the
others,  preferring  to  spend  his  time  in  excursions
through  the  woods,  gathering  specimens  and  mak-
ing drawings  of
birds.  Seeing
his  tastes,  his
father,  who  had
designed  him  for
the  navy,  gave
up  his  plan,  and
sent  the  boy,
then  seventeen
years  old,  to  a
farm  belonging
to  him  at  Mill
Grove,  near  Phil-
adelphia. Here
young  Audubon
spent  his  time  in
hunting,  fishing,
drawing,  and
collecting  speci-
mens of  natural
history.  A  visit
to  France,  made  to  lay  before  his  father  some  griev-
ances against  the  agent  who  had  charge  of  the  prop-
erty, enabled  Audubon  to  add  largely  to  his  collec-
tions. His  house  at  Mill  Grove  became  a  museum,
filled  with  stuffed  animals,  and  decorated  with  fes-
toons of  birds'  eggs,  and  with  drawings  of  birds
and  beasts.  He  Isecame  an  excellent  marksman,
and  was  also  at  this  time  quite  a  dandy,  if  we  may
credit  his  own  account.  While  at  Mill  Grove  he
fell  in  love  with  Lucy  Bake  well,  daughter  of  an
Englishman  who  had  come  to  America  a  few  years
before,  and  whose  property  adjoined  that  of  Audu-
bon. At  the  desire  of  Mr.  Bake  well,  who  thought
him  somewhat  unpractical,  he  entered  the  employ
of  a  firm  in  New  York,  where  he  soon  demon-
strated his  lack  of  interest  in  anything  but  natural
history,  collecting  specimens  with  his  usual  earnest-
ness, and  letting  business  take  care  of  itself.  It  is
related  that  his  neighbors  at  one  time  made  a  legal
complaint  against  him  on  account  of  the  disagree-
able odor  from  the  drying  bird-skins  in  his  room.
He  soon  returned  to  his  home,  and,  thinking  he
might  be  more  successful  in  the  west,  formed  a
partnership  with  Ferdinand  Rosier,  a  friend,  and,
having  sold  his  farm,  started,  in  1808,  for  Jjouis-
ville,  Ky.,  with  a  stock  of  goods  bought  with  the
proceeds.  Before  setting  out  he  married  Miss
Bakewell,  and  the  journey  to  Louisville,  part  of
which  was  made  in  a  flat-boat,  was  their  bridal
tour.  In  Louisville,  Audubon  left  business  to  Ro-
sier, and  spent  his  time  in  the  more  congenial  oc-
cupation of  tramping  the  woods  in  search  of  birds
and  in  drawing  pictures  of  them.  In  his  store  at
Louisville  he  met  Alexander  Wilson,  the  celebrated
ornithologist,  who  had  come  to  solicit  Audubon's
subscription  to  his  book  on  American  birds,  and
was  naturally  astonished  when  he  was  shown  draw-
ings superior  to  his  own,  some  of  them  represent-
ing birds  he  had  never  seen.  Audubon  relates
that  he  gave  Wilson  considerable  aid  in  his  search
for  specimens,  but  the  latter  seems  to  have  been
somewhat  jealous  of  the  rival  he  had  so  unexpect-
edly discovered,  and  afterward  wrote  disparagingly
of  his  visit  to  Louisville.  Audubon's  business  did
not  prosper,  and,  after  two  removals  in  a  vain  search
for  better  success,  the  partnership  was  dissolved  in
1812,  and  Audubon  settled  with  his  wife  and  their
son  Victor  at  Hendersonville,  where  his  second  son,


118


AUDUBON


AUDUBON


John,  was  afterward  born.  He  embarked  in  a  busi-
ness venture  with  his  brother-in-law  at  New  Or-
leans, and  was  again  unsuccessful.  During  this
time  he  was  still  devoting  himself  completely  to
natural  history,  making  long  excursions  into  the
surrounding  country,  sometimes  tramping  for  days
through  pathless  thickets  with  only  dog  and  gun
for  companions,  and  all  the  time  adding  new  draw-
ings to  his  collection.  Some  birds  he  was  obliged
to  shoot,  afterward  ingeniously  supporting  them  in
natural  positions  while  he  painted  them :  others  he
drew  with  the  aid  of  a  telescope,  representing  them
amid  their  natural  surroundings.

Audubon's  appearance  was  now  very  different
from  that  of  the  young  proprietor  of  Mill  Grove.
After  some  of  his  long  tramps  through  the  forests,
unshaven  and  unshorn,  his  rifle  on  his  shoulder  and
his  color-box  strapped  on  his  back,  lie  looked  the
veritable  "  American  woodsman  "  he  was  afterward
so  fond  of  styling  himself.  He  seems  to  have  done
all  this  with  no  incentive  but  the  love  of  nature ;
the  idea  of  publication  had  not  yet  entered  his
mind.  About  this  time  his  father  died,  leaving
him  an  estate  in  France  and  the  sum  of  $17,000.
The  latter  was  held  in  trust  by  a  friend  in  Rich-
mond, Va.,  who  failed  shortly  afterward,  and  Au-
dubon received  not  a  penny.'  His  devotion  to  his
favorite  pursuit  continued  to  bring  him  into  finan-
cial trouble,  and  he  was  obliged  to  earn  money  by
giving  drawing  lessons  and  taking  crayon  portraits
in  Louisville  and  Cincinnati.  His  friends  not  un-
"naturally  looked  on  him  as  a  madman,  but  his  wife
encouraged  and  assisted  him  in  every  way.  To  ob-
tain money  for  the  education  of  her  children,  she
became  a  governess  in  New  Orleans,  whither  her
husband  went  in  1820,  and  where  she  joined  him  a
year  later,  and  again  in  Natchez,  where  they  went
in  1822.  She  afterward  established  a  school  at
Bayou  Sara,  to  help  him  in  the  publication  of  his
work,  and  in  this  school  he  aided  her,  for  some
time,  by  teaching  music  and  dancing.

The  idea  of  giving  his  collection  of  drawings  to
the  world  was  first  suggested  to  him  by  Prince
Canino,  son  of  Lucien  Bonaparte,  whom  he  met  in
Philadelphia.  Audubon  had  gone  to  that  city  in
1824,  after  earning  the  necessary  money  in  various
ways,  on  one  occasion  by  painting  the  interior  of  a
steamboat.  About  this  time  two  hundred  drawings,
the  labor  of  years,  were  destroyed  in  a  single  night
by  rats,  and  the  fact  that,  after  a  day  or  two  of
natural  despondency,  he  went  bravely  to  work  to
replace  his  loss,  illustrates  Audubon's  energy  and
perseverance.  In  Philadelphia  he  met  several  noted
artists,  but  the  idea  of  publication  seems  to  have
had  little  encouragement.  After  returning  to
Bayou  Sara,  where  he  had  left  his  wife,  he  sailed
from  New  Orleans,  in  1826,  for  England,  intending
to  seek  aid  there,  though  he  had  not  a  friend  in  the
country.  On  his  arrival  he  began  to  exhibit  his
drawings  in  public,  and,  though  at  first  he  met  with
discouragements,  the  value  and  merit  of  his  work
was  soon  recognized  by  European  naturalists.  The
friends  that  he  made  during  this  visit  included
Herschel,  Sir  Walter  Scott,  and  "Christopher
North  "  in  Great  Britain,  and  Cuvier,  Humboldt,  and
St.  Hilaire  in  France.  In  1827  he  issued  the  pros-
pectus of  his  famous  work,  "  The  Birds  of  America,"
which  was  published  in  numbers,  eacli  containing
five  plates.  The  whole  book  consisted  of  four  folio
volumes  of  plates,  and  $1,000  was  the  price  of  each
copy.  The  entire  cost  of  the  work  exceeded  $100,-
000,  and,  at  the  time  when  the  prospectus  was  is-
sued, Audubon  had  not  enough  money  to  pay  for
the  first  number.  The  influence  of  Sir  Thomas
Lawrence,  the  painter,  enabled  the  naturalist  to


sell  several  pictures  at  fair  prices,  and  with  the
proceeds  he  paid  the  engraver's  first  bill  of  £60.
After  this  Audubon  painted  frequently,  often  sup-
porting himself  entirely  in  this  way.  He  was
obliged  not  only  to  be  his  own  publisher,  but  to
keep  the  book  constantly  before  the  public  by  per-
sonal solicitation.  In  1828  he  spent  two  months  in
Paris  canvassing  for  subscribers,  and  in  1829  re-
turned to  America  for  the  same  purpose ;  never-
theless, owing  to  the  price  of  the  book,  people  were
slow  to  give  him  their  names,  and  many  of  those
who  did  so  did  not  scruple  to  withdraw  them.  In
this  way  he  lost  fifty  subscribers  during  the  prepa-
ration of  the  first  volume.  But,  notwithstanding
all  drawbacks,  the  work  went  steadily  forward.
The  first  volume  Avas  issued  in  London  in  1880,
and  the  last  in  1839.  Immediately  after  the  pub-
lication of  the  first  volume  Audubon  began  to  write
his  "  Ornithological  Biographies,"  consisting  of  the
letter-press  to  the  "  Birds,"  together  with  reminis-
cences of  personal  adventure  and  descriptions  of
scenery  and  character.  The  work  consisted  of
five  octavo  volumes  (Edinburgh,  1831-'9).  During
this  time  Audubon  continued  the  collection  of  ma-
terial in  the  United  States,  and,  although  sea-
voyages  were  misery  to  him,  made  several  trips  to
England,  where  he  wrote  much  of  the  text  of  his
work.  On  two  of  these  journeys  he  was  accom-
panied by  his  wife,  and  she  frequently  travelled
with  him  while  he  obtained  subscribers.  In  1840
he  left  England  for  the  last  time,  and  thence-
forward lived  with  his  two  sons  and  their  families
at  his  house  on  Hudson  river.  The  place,  which
he  named  Minniesland,  is  now  within  the  New  York
city  limits,  in  what  is  known  as  "  Audubon  Park."
From  1840  to  1844  he  was  occupied  with  the  pub-
lication of  a  smaller  edition  of  his  work,  which  was
completed  in  seven  octavo  volumes.  The  classi-
fication of  the  matter  in  this  edition  adds  to  its
scientific  value.  In  the  folio  edition  the  method
of  publication  of  course  prevented  any  attempt  at
orderly  arrangement,  and  the  only  effort  had  been
to  make  the  numbers  uniform  in  interest.  Before
the  publication  of  the  last  volume  of  the  "  Birds,"
Audubon  had  prc^'ected  a  similar  work  on  the
"  Quadrupeds  of  America,"  and  with  the  help  of
his  sons,  Victor  Gifford  and  John  Woodhouse,  and
of  Rev.  John  Bachman,  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  had
gathered  much  material.  He  had  planned  an  ex-
tensive trip  to  the  Rocky  mountains  in  pursuance
of  his  design,  but  was  persuaded  by  his  friends  to
give  it  up,  as  he  was  now  an  old  man.  Much  of
the  work  on  the  "  Quadrupeds  of  America "  was
done  by  his  sons.  A  large  number  of  the  animals
was  secured  and  painted  by  John,  while  nearly  all
the  landscapes  are  the  work  of  Victor.  The  first
volume  was  issued  in  1846,  and  the  last  in  1854,
after  Audubon's  death,  under  the  superintendence
of  his  son  John.  After  he  had  reached  his  sixty-
seventh  year  Audubon's  mind  began  to  weaken,
and  during  the  last  four  years  of  his  life  he  was
able  to  do  little  work.  He  was  buried  in  Trinity
church  cemetery,  which  adjoined  his  property.  His
son,  John  Woodhouse,  died  21  Feb.,  1862,  while  pre-
paring a  third  edition  of  the  "  Birds  of  America."
Irs,  Audubon  survived  her  husband  many  years,


and  prepared  from  his  diary  a  biography,  which
was  published  in  New  York  in  1868.  Mrs.  Audu-
bon died  at  the  home  of  her  sister-in-law,  in  Shelby-
ville,  Ky.,  19  June,  1874.  Audubon  was  a  man  of
fine  personal  appearance.  He  seems  to  have  been
attached  to  his  family,  and  to  have  been  happy  in
his  home,  yet  he  chafed  under  the  confinement  of
domestic  fife,  and  longed  to  be  continually  in  the
woods. After  the  recognition  of  his  genius,  honors


J


AUER


AUSTEN


119


■were  showered  upon  him.  At  the  time  of  his  death
he  was  a  fellow  of  the  Linnaean  and  zoological  so-
cieties of  London,  of  the  natural  history  society  of
Paris,  of  the  Wernerian  society  of  Edinburgh,  of
the  lyceum  of  natural  history  of  New  York,  and  an
honorary  member  of  the  society  of  natural  history
at  Manchester,  of  the  royal  Scottish  academy  of
painting,  sculpture,  and  architecture,  and  of  many
other  scientific  bodies.  See,  besides  works  already
mentioned,  Dunlap's  "  History  of  the  Rise  and
Progress  of  the  Arts  of  Design  "  (New  York,  1834) ;
Griswold's  "  Prose  Writers  of  America  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1847);  Mrs.  Horace  St.  John's  "Audubon,
the  Naturalist,  in  the  New  World"  (New  York,
1856) ;  Samuel  Smiles's  "  Brief  Biographies  "  (Bos-
ton, 1861) ;  and  Rev,  C.  C.  Adams's  "  Journal  of
the  Life  and  Labors  of  J.  J.  Audubon."

AUER,  John  GrOttHeb,  missionary  bishop  of
the  American  Episcopal  church,  b.  in  Wiirtemberg,
Germany,  18  Nov.,  1832  ;  d.  16  Feb.,  1874.  He  was
a  Lutheran  minister,  but  applied  for  and  took
orders  in  the  Episcopal  church,  being  ordained  at
Cavalla,  Africa,  in  1862.  At  a  special  meeting  of
the  general  convention,  in  October,  1872,  Dr.  Auer
was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  Cape  Palmas,  in
Africa.  He  was  consecrated  17  April,  1873,  but
was  stricken  down  with  fever,  and  his  term  of
service  was  less  than  one  year.

AUGrUR,  Christopher  Colon,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  in  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in
1843,  having  been  appointed  to  the  academy  from
Michigan.  During  the  Mexican  war  he  served  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Hopping,  and,  after  his  death,
to  Gen.  Caleb  Cushing. He  was  promoted  captain

1  Aug.,  1852,
and  served
with  distinc-
tion in  a  cam-
paign against
the  Indians
in  Oregon  in
1856.  On

14  May,  1861,
he was ap-
pointed ma-
** .  "W^'^^r^fcs.i^  jor in the

13th  infant-
ry, and  was
for  a  time
commandant
l^  —  "^  ~  \  -  -  - '  (  of  cadets  at
West  Point.
In  November
of  that  year
he  was  com-
missioned a
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and  jomed  McDow-
ell's corps.  In  July,  1862,  he  was  assigned  to  a  di-
vision under  Gen.  Banks,  and  in  the  battle  of  Cedar
Mountain,  9  Aug.,  was  severely  wounded.  He  sat
on  the  military  court  that  investigated  the  sur-
render of  Harper's  Perry.  He  was  promoted  major-
general  9  Aug.,  1862,  and  in  November  Joined  his
corps  and  took  part  in  the  Louisiana  campaign.  At
the  siege  of  Port  Hudson  he  commanded  the  left
wing  of  the  army,  and  for  meritorious  services  on
that  occasion  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in
the  U.  S.  army,  13  March,  1865,  receiving  on  the
same  date  the  brevet  of  major-general  for  services
in  the  field  during  the  rebellion.  From  13  Oct.,
1863,  to  13  Aug.,  1866,  he  was  commandant  of  the
Department  of  Washington ;  from  15  Jan.,  1867,  to
13  Nov.,  1871,  of  the  Department  of  the  Platte ;  then
of  the  Department  of  Texas  until  March,  1875 ;  of
the  Department  of  the  Gulf  until  1  July,  1878,  and


^.-{^(^^"-T-^^


subsequently  of  the  Department  of  the  South  and
the  Department  of  the  Missouri,  and  in  1885  was
retired.  On  15  Aug.,  1886,  he  was  shot  and  dan-
gerously wounded  by  a  negro  whom  he  attempted
to  chastise  for  using  coarse  language  in  front  of  his
house  in  Washington.— His  son,  Jacob  Arnold,  is
a  captain  in  the  5th  U.  S.  cavalry.

AUGrUR,  Hezekiah,  sculptor,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  21  Feb.,  1791 ;  d.  there,  10  Jan.,  1858.  He  was
unsuccessful  in  business,  and  turned  his  attention  to
sculpture  and  mechanical  inventions.  He  was  al-
most wholly  self-taught,  but  was  possessed  of  con-
siderable native  talent.  His  best  work,  "  Jephtha
and  his  Daughter,"  is  in  the  Trumbull  gallery,  Yale
college.  His  most  important  invention  was  a  ma-
chine for  carving  wood,  which  came  into  general
use.  He  was  given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  by  Yale
in  1833,  though  he  was  not  a  graduate.

AUGUSTUS,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  1785  ;
d.  in  Boston,  21  June,  1859.  He  was  a  shoemaker,
doing  business  in  Boston,  and  devoted  his  means
and  his  labors  to  aiding  and  reclaiming  the  poor
and  the  vicious.  For  more  than  twenty  years  he '
was  a  constant  visitor  to  the  police  courts,  seeking
subjects  for  his  charitable  efforts,

AULICK,  John  H.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Winches-
ter, Va.,  in  1789 ;  d.  at  Washington,  D.  C,  27  April,
1873.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman  in  1809,
and  in  1812  served  on  the  "  Enterprise  "  in  all  the
engagements  of  that  vessel,  carrying  into  port  the
British  ship  "  Boxer "  and  the  privateers  "  Fly "
and  "  Mars,"  which  the  "  Enterprise  "  captured.
He  afterward  served  on  the  "  Saranac,"  "  Ontario,"
"  Constitution,"  and  "  Brandywine,"  and  was  in
command  of  the  Washington  navy-yard  from  1843
to  1846.  He  commanded  the  "  Vincennes  "  in  1847,
and  the  East  India  squadron,  making  his  last  cruise
in  1853.  In  1861  he  retired  with  the  rank  of  cap-
tain, and  in  July,  1862,  was  made  a  commodore  on
the  retired  list.  ^

AULNAY  DE  CHARNISE. See  Charnise.

AURELIO  I.,  Antonio,  the  name  assumed  by
M.  de  Founens,  a  French  adventurer,  b.  about
1830.  He  lived  among  the  Araucanians,  in  Chili,
and  was  elected  king  by  them.  He  formed  a  con-
stitution, and  his  movements  at  first  created  merri-
ment in  Chili,  but  the  government  found  it  neces-
sary to  get  rid  of  him.  Early  in  1862  disguised
Chilians  were  sent  to  Araucania,  and,  when  they
reached  the  place  where  the  so-called  king  held  his
court,  a  policeman  seized  him,  put  him  upon
his  horse,  and  succeeded  in  escaping  with  him  from
the  pursuing  Indians.  The  adventurer  v/as  im-
prisoned for  some  time.

AURY,  Louis  de.  New  Grenadian  naval  officer,
b.  about  1780.  He  became  a  lieutenant  in  the
navy  of  his  native  country  in  1813,  and  command-
ed the  naval  force  of  New  Grenada  at  the  siege  of
Cartagena.  In  1816  he  went  to  Texas  with  Herrero
as  commander  of  the  united  fleets,  and  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  Texas  and  Galveston  island.
In  July,  1817,  he  took  part  in  McGregor's  expedi-
tion to  Florida,  and  afterward  he  was  engaged  in
the  campaigns  of  the  revolted  South  American  re-
publics. He  resided  some  time  in  New  Orleans,
and  subsequentlv  went  to  Havana.

AUSTEN,  Peter  Townsend,  chemist,  b.  in
Clifton,  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  10  Sept.,  1852.  He
was  graduated  at  Columbia  school  of  mines,  in  the
course  in  analytical  and  applied  chemistry,  in
1873.  He  then  studied  for  three  years  under  Prof.
Hof mann  in  the  university  of  Berlin,  and  received
the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,  for  original  work,  from  the
university  of  Zurich.  On  his  return  from  Europe
he  became  in  1876  instructor  in  chemistry  at  Dart-


120


AUSTIN


AUSTIN


mouth  college,  and  in  1877  professor  of  general
and  applied  chemistry  in  Rutger's  college,  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.  In  1872  he  was  chemist  to  the
Richmond  co.,  N.  Y.,  board  of  health,  and  in  1885
was  chemist  to  the  Newark  board  of  health.  He
became  a  member  of  the  New  Brunswick  board  of
health  in  1885.  Since  1884  he  has  been  president
of  the  Union  Paint  Company,  Newark,  N.  J.  He  is
a  member  of  the  London,  Paris,  Berlin,  St.  Peters-
burg, and  other  chemical  societies,  and  also  a  fel-
low of  the  American  association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science.  Dr.  Austen  has  been  an  industri-
ous worker,  and  while  much  of  his  investigation
has  been  for  industrial  purposes,  he  has  found  time
to  devote  some  attention  to  purely  scientific  re-
search. His  papers,  which  include  nearly  fifty
titles,  have  appeared  principally  in  the  proceedings
of  the  Berlin  chemical  society,  and  in  the  "  Ameri-
can Chemical  Journal."  He  is  a  regular  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Textile  Colorist "  of  Philadelphia,  and
to  the  "  Druggists'  Circular  "  of  New  York,  and  he
has  published  "  Kurze  Einleitung  zu  den  Nitrover-
bindungen "  (Leipsic,  1876).  "  Pinner's  Organic
Chemistry"  was  translated  and  revised  by  him
(New  York,  1883),  and  he  has  lectured  on  "  Science-
teaching  in  Schools."  "Scientific  Speculations,"
and  "  The  Chemical  Factor  in  History."

AUSTIN,  Benjamin,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,
18  Nov.,  1752 ;  d.  there,  4  May,  1820.  He  was
a  merchant  in  Boston,  and  was  a  political  writer
before  the  revolution.  In  the  controversy  that
raged  during  the  administration  of  John  Adams
he  wrote  fierce  newspaper  articles,  filled  with  per-
sonalities, in  advocacy  of  republican  views,  and
was  bitterly  assailed  in  turn.  After  the  triumph
of  the  republican  party  President  Jefferson  ap-
pointed him  commissioner  of  loans  for  Massachu-
setts. He  was  a  member  at  different  times  of  both
houses  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  He  wrote
a  series  of  articles  for  the  "  Independent  Chroni-
cle," under  the  name  of  "  Honestus,"  and  another
series  signed  "  Old  South."  The  latter  were  print-
ed in  a  volume  in  1803.  His  son,  Charles  Austin,
in  1806  assailed  Thomas  0.  Selfridge  in  State  street,
Boston,  for  slandering  his  father,  and  was  killed
by  Selfridge,  who  was  tried  and  acquitted.  A  re-
port of  the  trial  was  published  in  Boston  in  1807.

AUSTIN,  Coe  Finch,  botanist,  b.  in  Finch-
ville,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  June,  1831 ;  d.  in  Clos-
ter,  N.  J.,  18  March,  1880.  He  was  educated
chiefly  at  Rankin's  academy,  Deckertown,  N.  J.
Subsequent  to  his  graduation  he  devoted  some
time  to  lecturing  on  chemistry  and  botany,  but
afterward  settled  in  Closter,  where  he  resided  dur-
ing the  latter  part  of  his  life.  For  many  years  he
was  curator  of  the  herbarium  at  Columbia  college.
He  was  recognized  as  an  authority  on  mosses,  both
in  this  country  and  in  Europe.'  His  published
work  includes  "  Musci  Appalachiani "  (1870),  a  val-
uable description  of  American  mosses,  for  the
preparation  of  which  he  made  numerous  journeys
through  the  eastern,  middle,  and  southern  states.

AUSTIN,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  m  1760;  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  5  Feb.,  1831.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  college  in  1779,  and  in
1788  was  settled  as  the  Presbyterian  minister  in
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.  In  1795,  after  his  recovery
from  a  fever,  he  began  to  preach  the  second  advent
of  Christ,  which  he  prophesied  would  occur  in  May,
1796.  When  the  day  passed  by  he  renewed  his
predictions,  which  created  great  excitement,  and  in
1797  he  was  dismissed  from  his  church.  After  re-
covering from  his  delusion  he  was  installed,  in
1815,  as  pastor  at  Bozrah,  Conn.,  where  he  offici-
ated until  his  death. He  published  "  The  Ameri-


can Preacher,"  by  various  ministers :  "  The  Down-
fall of  Babylon";  a  "Commentary  on  the  Bible,"
and  several  millennial  pamphlets  and  sermons.

AUSTIN,  James  Treeotliic,  lawyer,  b.  in
Boston,  7  Jan.,  1784;  d.  there,  8  May,  1870.  He
was  the  son  of  Jonathan  L.  Austin,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1802.  In  1806  he  married  the
daughter  of  Elbridge  Gerry.  He  was  town  ad-
vocate in  1809,  member  of  the  state  legislature  and
attorney  for  the  county  of  Suffolk  in  1812-32,  and
attorney-general  of  Massachusetts  in  1832-43.  He
delivered  an  oration  at  Lexington  on  the  4th  of
July,  1815,  and  subsequently  was  called  upon  for
like  services  on  other  public  occasions.  Many  of
these  orations  were  published,  and  he  published  a
"  Life  of  Elbridge  Gerry  "  (Boston,  1828).  In  poli-
ties he  was  an  anti-federalist,  and  was  a  pronounced
opponent  of  the  abolition  movement.

AUSTIN,  Jonathan  Loring,  patriot,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, 2  Jan.,  1748 ;  d.  there,  10  May,  1826.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  college  in  1766,  and  became
a  merchant  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H,  When  Lang-
don's  regiment  was  raised  he  became  its  major,  and
subsequently  was  aide  to  Gen.  Sullivan.  He  was
secretary  to  the  Massachusetts  board  of  war  until
October,  1777,  and  was  sent  to  France  with  des-
patches to  Dr.  Franklin  announcing  the  defeat  of
Burgoyne  and  asking  for  clothing  and  stores  for
the  army.  He  remained  with  Dr.  Franklin  as  his
private  secretary,  being  sent  as  his  agent  to  Lon-
don. In  May,  1779,  he  arrived  in  Philadelphia  with
despatches  from  the  commissioners  to  congress.
He  was  sent  to  Europe  again  in  January,  1780,  to
negotiate  a  loan  for  the  state  of  Massachusetts,  and
was  captured  on  the  way,  but  was  set  free  in  Eng-
land. He  failed  to  secure  the  loan,  and  returned
in  the  autumn  of  1781.  In  1786  he  delivered  the
4th  of  July  oration  in  Boston.  He  was  a  state
senator  for  several  terms,  and  elected  state  treas-
urer, and  subsequently  secretary  of  state.

AUSTIN,  Jonathan  Williams,  soldier,  b.  in
Boston,  18  April,  1751 ;  d.  in  the  south  in  the  sum-
mer of  1778.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1769,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  John  Adams,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1772.  In  the  Middle-
sex convention  in  1774  he  was  chairman  of  the
committee  that  drew  up  the  resolutions.  He
served  as  a  major  in  the  revolutionary  war,  and
was  commandant  at  Castle  William  in  1776.

AUSTIN,  Moses,  Texan  pioneer,  b.  in  Durham,
Conn. ;  d.  in  Louisiana,  10  June,  1821.  He  re-
moved to  the  west  in  1798,  and  engaged  in  lead-
mining.  In  1820  he  went  to  Texas,  and  from  Bex-
ar forwarded  to  the  Mexican  commandant  at  Mon-
terey a  petition  for  permission  to  colonize  300
American  families  in  that  section.  Returning  to
Missouri  in  search  of  emigrants,  he  was  robbed  and
exposed  to  hardships  that  caused  his  death.  The
Mexican  authorities  granted  a  tract  of  land  for  a
colony,  and  his  son,  Stephen  F.  Austin,  founded
the  settlement.

AUSTIN,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  7  Oct.,  1760 ;  d.  in  Glastonbury,  Conn.,  4
Dec,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1783,
studied  theology,  was  ordained,  and  settled  for
three  years  m  Fair  Haven,  Conn.  He  was  dis-
missed 19  Jan.,  1790,  and  became  pastor  of  the
First  Congregational  church  in  Worcester,  Mass.,
where  he  remained  until  1815.  In  1807  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Wilhams  college.
After  leaving  Worcester  he  was  chosen  president
of  the  university  of  Vermont,  where  he  remained
imtil  1821,  when  he  resigned  on  accoimt  of  ill
health  and  removed  to  Newport,  and  there  preached
for  several  years. His  published  writings  include


AUSTIN


AVERELL


121


a  treatise  on  baptism,  a  number  of  controversial
letters  (1805-'6),  and  occasional  sermons.

AUSTIN,  Stephen  F.,  pioneer,  b.  about  1790 ;
d.  in  Texas,  27  Dec,  1836.  He  was  the  son  of*
Moses  Austin,  an  enterprising  pioneer  from  Con-
necticut, who  in  1820  obtained  from  Mexico  au-
thority to  colonize  300  families  in  Texas,  but  died
before  the  project  could  be  accomplished.  Stephen
obtained  a  confirmation  of  the  grant,  and,  hav-
ing already  selected  the  present  site  of  Austin,  he
founded  what  soon  grew  into  a  thriving  settlement.
He  was  entitled  to  a  large  tract  for  each  200  fami-
lies induced  to  settle,  and  proved  himself  an  able
diplomatist  by  inducing  unmarried  young  men  to
pair  off  together  and  call  themselves  families.  In
this  way  he  soon  acquired  a  large  tract  of  fertile
land,  and,  being  clothed  with  almost  absolute  au-
thority, he  practically  ruled  the  whole  community,
and  successfully  fought  the  warlike  tribes  of  In-
dians in  the  vicinity.  In  1833  the  American  set-
tlers, were  so  powerful  that  they  became  uneasy
under  Mexican  rule,  and  Austin  went  so  far  that
he  was  arrested  and  imprisoned  for  several  months.
On  his  liberation  in  1835  he  took  part  with  the  revo-
lutionists, was  appointed  commander-in-chief,  and
straightway  undertook  to  expel  the  Mexicans,  send-
ing for  Gen.  Sam.  Houston  to  lend  his  aid.  In
November  of  that  year  he  was  sent  as  commission-
er to  the  United  States  to  secure  recognition  from
the  government  at  Washington.  In  this  capacity
he  acted  with  prudence  and  patience,  and  in  his
opinion  could  even  then  have  obtained  recognition
of  Texan  independence  had  he  been  properly  pro-
vided with  credentials.  In  July,  183(5,  ho  returned
to  Texas  to  prosecute  the  work,  but  died  without
witnessing  the  result  of  his  labors.

AUSTIN,  William,  author,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  2  March,  1778  ;  d.  there,  27  June,  1841.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1798,  and  studied
law.  His  published  works  are  "  Oration  on  the  An-
niversary of  the  Battle  of  Bunker  Hill "  (Charles-
town,  1801) ;  "  Letters  from  London "  (Boston,
1804) ; "  Essay  on  the  Human  Character  of  Jesus
Christ "  (1807) ;  "  Peter  Rugg,  the  Missing  Man,"
in  the  "  New  England  Galaxy,"  and  "  The  Late
Joseph  Natterstone,"  in  the  "New  Englander."
The  most  successful  of  these  was  "  Peter  Rugg,"  a
legendary  tale,  which  made  a  great  sensation.
About  1805  he  was  wounded  in  a  duel  with  James
H.  Elliott,  caused  by  a  political  quarrel.

AVELEDO,  Agustin  (ah-va-lay'-do),  Venezue-
lan scientist,  b.  in  Caracas,  31  Aug.,  1836.  He
founded  a  meteorological  observatory  and  an  or-
phan asylum,  and  later  became  the  director  of  the
Colegio  de  Santa  Maria.  He  has  published  articles
on  meteorological  subjects,  and  is  a  corresponding
member  of  several  European  societies.

AVELLANEDA,  Gertrudis  Gomez  de  (ah-
vail-yahn-ay'-da),  Spanish  author,  b.  in  Puerto
Principe,  Cuba,  in  1816 ;  d.  in  Seville  in  June,
1864.  Her  father  was  a  Spanish  naval  officer,  and
after  his  death  she  went  to  Spain,  where  her  first
drama,  "  Leoncia,"  was  favorably  received  at  Ma-
drid in  1840.  In  1845  she  was  crowned  with  laurel
in  the  presence  of  the  court  and  received  a  prize,
for  a  poem  exalting  the  clemency  of  the  queen.
In  1846  she  married  Pedro  Sabador,  a  young  Span-
ish politician,  who  died  in  the  same  year,  and  she
afterward  lived  in  retirement  at  Madrid  and  Se-
ville. She  wrote  lyrical  poetry  (2  vols.,  2d  ed.,
Mexico,  1852),  sixteen  dramas,  and  eight  volumes
of  prose,  which  gave  her  a  high  reputation.

AVELLANEDA,  NieoUs,  Argentine  presi-
dent, b.  1  Oct.,  1836.  When  only  twenty-five
years  of  age he  was  made  professor  of  political


economy  in  the  university  of  Buenos  Ayres,  where
he  had  studied  law,  as  he  had  studied  also  at  Cor-
doba. Not  long  afterward  President  Sarmiento
appointed  him  a  member  of  his  cabinet,  and  in
1874  Avellaneda  himself  became  president  of  the
republic.  His  administration  was  prosperous,  not-
withstanding some  internal  troubles,  like  those
which  gave  cause  for  a  campaign  against  the  In-
dians in  1876.  Avellaneda  was  president  until  2
Oct.,  1880,  when  his  minister  of  war.  Gen.  Roca,
succeeded  him.  Avellaneda  gained  considerable
fame  by  his  radical  reform  in  the  system  of  divis-
ion of  public  lands ;  and  he  is  the  author  of  an
important  work  on  that  subject,  entitled  "  Estudios
sobre  tierras  publicas."

AVERELL,  William  Woods,  soldier,  b.  in
Cameron,  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Nov.,  1832.  His
grandfather,  Ebenezer  Averell,  was  a  captain  in  the
revolutionary  army  under  Sullivan.  Young  Aver-
ell was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  Military  Academy
in  June,  1855,  and  assigned  to  the  mounted  riflemen.
He  served  in  garrison  and  at  the  school  for  practice
at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  until  1857,  when  he  was  ordered
to  frontier  duty,
and  saw  a  great
deal  of  Indian
fighting,  mainly
against  the  Kio-
was  and  Nava-
jos.  He  was  se-
verely wounded
in  a  night  attack
by  the  Navajos
in  1859,  and  was
on  sick-leave  un-
til the  outbreak
of  the  civil  war
in  1861.  He  was
promoted  to  be
first  lieutenant
of  the  mounted
riflemen  14  May,
1861,  and  was  on
staff  duty  in  the

neighborhood  of  Washington,  participating  in  the
battle  of  Bull  Run  and  other  engagements  until  23
Aug.,  1861,  when  he  was  appointed  colonel  of  the
3d  Pennsylvania  cavalry,  and  commanded  the  cav-
alry defences  in  front  of  Washington.  He  was  en-
gaged with  the  army  of  the  Potomac  in  its  most  im-
portant campaigns.  In  March,  1863,  he  began  the
series  of  cavalry  raids  in  western  Virginia  that  made
his  name  famous.  The  first  notable  one  was  on  the
16th,  17th,  and  18th  of  March,  and  included  the
battle  of  Kelly's  Ford,  on  the  upper  Rappahannock.
In  August  he  drove  a  confederate  force  over  the
Warm  Spring  mountains,  passed  through  several
southern  counties,  and  near  White  Sulphur  Springs
attacked  a  force  posted  in  Rocky  Gap,  for  the  pos-
session of  which  a  fight  ensued,  lasting  two  days
(26  and  27  Aug.).  Averell  was  repulsed  with  heavy
loss,  but  made  his  way  back  to  the  union  lines
with  150  prisoners.  On  5  Nov.  he  started  with
a  force  of  5,000  men  and  drove  the  confeder-
ates out  of  Greenbrier  co.,  capturing  three  guns
and  about  100  prisoners.  In  December  he  was
again  in  motion,  advancing  with  a  strong  force
into  southwestern  Virginia.  On  16  Dec.  he  struck
the  Virginia  and  Tennessee  railroad  at  Salem,
Gen.  Longstreet's  base  of  supplies.  He  destroyed
the  railroad,  severing  an  important  line  of  commu-
nication between  the  confederate  generals  Lee  and
Bragg,  and  burned  a  large  quantity  of  provisions,
clothing,  and  military  equipments.  When  he  be-
gan his  retreat  the  alarm  had  been  given,  and  all


Mj^.


122


AVERILL


AVEZZANA


the  mountain  passes  were  held  by  the  confederates.
He  captured  a  bearer  of  despatches,  learned  the
enemy's  plans,  and  forced  the  position  defended  by
Gen.  W.  S.  Jackson  ("Mud wall,"  as  he  was  called,
to  distinguish  him  from  his  more  famous  name-
sake). A  second  line  concentrated  to  cut  off  his
retreat,  but  he  led  his  command  over  a  road  sup-
posed to  be  impassable,  and  reached  the  federal
lines  with  200  prisoners  and  150  horses,  having
lost  11  men  killed  or  drowned  and  90  missing.
"My  command,"  he  said  in  his  report  (31  Dec,
1863),  "has  marched,  climbed,  slid,  and  swum
three  hundred  and  forty  miles  since  the  8th  inst."
After  the  exposure"  and  hardships  of  this  raid  he
was  obliged  to  ask  for  sick-leave,  extending  to
February.  On  his  return  to  duty  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  2d  cavalry  division,  and  from  that
time  until  September,  1864,  the  fighting  was  al-
most continuous.  He  was  wounded  in  a  skirmish
near  Wytheville,  but  was  in  the  saddle  and  under
fire  again  two  days  afterward,  destroying  a  section
of  the  Tennessee  railroad.  In  June  he  crossed  the
Alleghany  mountains,  in  July  he  was  fighting  in
the  Shenandoah  valley  and  at  Winchester.  In
August  he  was  in  fights  at  Moorfield,  Bunker  Hill,
Martinsburg,  and  elsewhere,  and  ended  the  cam-
paign with  the  battles  of  Opequan  (19  Sept.),  Fish-
er's Hill  (22  Sept.),  and  Mount  Jackson  (23  Sept).
In  the  meantime  he  had  been  brevetted  through
the  different  grades  of  his  regular  army  rank  until
he  was  brevet  major-general.  On  18  May,  1865,
he  resigned.  He  was  consul-general  of  the  United
States  in  the  British  provinces  of  North  America
from  1866  till  1869,  when  he  became  president  of  a
large  manufacturing  company.  He  discovered  a
process  for  the  manufacture  of  cast-steel  directly
from  the  ore  in  one  operation  (1869-'70),  invented
the  American  asphalt  pavement  (Jan.,  1879),  and
the  Averell  insulating  conduits  for  wires  and  con-
ductors (1884-'5),  and  also  a  machine  for  laying
electric  conductors  underground  (1885).

AVERILL,  John  T.,  soldier,  b.  in  Alna,  Maine,
1  March,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  Maine  Wes-
leyan  university,  settled  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,  and
engaged  in  manufacturing,  but  laid  aside  his  busi-
ness in  August,  1862,  and  entered  the  army  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  6th  Minnesota  infantry.
The  brevet  of  brigadier-general  was  conferred  on
him  when  he  was  mustered  out  of  service.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  republican  in  1871,  by  a
close  vote,  and  reelected  by  a  large  majority.

AVERY,  Benjamin  P.,  journalist,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1829;  d.  in  Pekin,  China,  8  Nov.,
1875.  After  receiving  a  good  English  education
and  learning  wood-engraving,  he  went  to  Califor-
nia with  the  "  Argonauts  of  '49,"  and  engaged  for
a  time  in  gold-mining.  In  1856  he  established  at
North  San  Juan  a  weekly  paper  called  the  "  Hy-
draulic Press."  In  1860  he  became  assistant  editor
on  the  "  Marysville  Appeal,"  in  1861  was  chosen
state  printer,  afterward  served  on  the  staff  of  the
"San  Francisco  Bulletin,"  and  in  1872  undertook
the  editorship  of  the  "Overland  Monthly."  He
was  appointed  minister  to  China  in  1874.

AVERY,  Waightstill  or  Waitstill,  lawyer,  b.
in  Groton,  Conn.,  3  May,  1745;  d.  in  Burke  co.,
N.  C,  in  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1776,  and  went  to  Mecklenburg,  N.  C,  where  he
became  a  lawyer.  In  1775  he  took  part  in  the  con-
vention and  signed  the  paper  known  as  the
"Mecklenburg  Declaration,"  and  in  the  same  year
he  was  sent  to  the  Hillsborough  congress.  In  i776
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  congress,  and  in
1777  the  first  attorney-general  of  the  state.  In
1779  he  was  a  colonel  of  militia  in  active  service.


AVEZAC,  Auguste  Genevieve  Valentin  d'»

lawyer,  b.  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1777;  d.  15  Feb.,
1851.  He  belonged  to  a  French  family  settled  in
Hayti,  who  were  driven  from  the  island  and  took
refuge  in  the  United  States  in  consequence  of  the
uprising  of  the  blacks.  He  was  educated  at  a
military  school  in  France,  and  afterward  studied
medicine  in  North  Carolina  and  practised  in  Acco-
mac  CO.,  Va.  Following  the  advice  of  his  brother-
in-law,  Edward  Livingston,  he  obtained  admission
to  the  Louisiana  bar,  after  that  state  was  received
into  the  union,  and  became  a  successful  advo-
cate, especially  in  criminal  cases.  In  the  war  of
1812  he  served  as  judge-advocate  when  Gen.  Jack-
son was  in  Louisiana,  and  acted  as  aide  to  that
general  at  the  battle  of  New  Orleans.  ^  In  1829  he
received  from  President  Jackson  the  appointment
of  secretary  of  legation  at  the  Hague,  and  in  1831
acted  as  charge  d'affaires.  On  returning  home  he
took  up  his  residence  in  New  York,  and  was  elected
to  the  legislature  of  that  state  in  1841  and  in  1843.
From  1845  to  1849  he  was  again  charge  d'affaires
at  the  Hague.  He  wrote  "  Keminiscences  of  Ed-
ward Livingstone." — His  uncle,  Pierre  Valentin
Dominique  Julian  d'Avezac,  son  of  Pierre  Valen-
tin, a  Frfench  lawyer,  who  became  an  enterprising
planter  in  Santo  Domingo,  was  born  in  Santo  Do-
mingo in  1769,  and  removed  to  New  Orleans,  where
he  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  He  trans-
lated Scott's  "  Marmion "  into  French,  and  made
the  French  translation  of  the  penal  code  of  Louisi-
ana. He  became  president  of  a  college  established
in  New  Orleans,  and  died  in  1831. — Jean  Pierre
Valentin  (b.  in  1756,  d.  in  Santo  Domingo  in
1803),  another  son  of  Pierre  Valentin  d'Avezac,
was  a  deputy  sent  from  the  colony  to  France  in
1790  to  oppose  the  revolutionary  movement.

AVEZZANA,  Giuseppe,  soldier,  b.  in  Chieri,
Piedmont,  19  Feb.,  1797.  His  American  career  be-
gan soon  after  the  restoration  of  Ferdinand  VII.  to
the  Spanish  throne,  September,  1823.  Avezzana
fought  against  the  restoration,  was  captured  and
held  for  several  weeks  as  a  prisoner,  and  sailed  for
America  on  being  set  free.  Prior  to  this  time  he
served  under  Napoleon  I.  from  1813  until  the  fall
of  the  empire,  and  then,  joining  the  Sardinian
army,  found  himself  in  1815  arrayed  against  his
old  leader,  who  had  made  his  escape  from  Elba.
Wherever  there  was  a  chance  to  fight  for  liberty,
Avezzana  was  at  hand,  and  hardly  was  he  fairly  es-
tablished on  American  soil  when  he  found  himself
called  upon  to  defend  the  state  of  Tamaulipas
against  his  old  enemies  the  Spaniards,  who  invaded
the  territory  under  Gen.  Barradas  in  June,  1827.
He  was  obliged  to  retire  at  first  before  superior
numbers,  but  soon  rallied  a  force  sufficient  to  over-
throw the  invaders,  and  afterward  resumed  his
peaceful  vocations.  In  1832  a  revolution  was  or-
ganized by  Santa  Anna  against  the  government  of
President  Bustamente,  and  Avezzana  was,  as  al-
ways, ready  to  lead  the  revolt.  Left  in  command
at  Tampico  by  Gen.  Montezuma,  who  went  to  stir
up  the  revolutionists  elsewhere,  he  manoeuvred  so
successfully  with  a  small  force  that  they  captured
three  times  their  number  of  government  troops  at
Ciudad  Victoria,  with  artillery  and  supplies.  From
this  time  he  gave  the  enemy  no  rest,  but  retrieved  the
disasters  that  had  befallen  Santa  Anna  and  Monte-
zuma, and  mainly  through  his  able  military  lead-
ership the  liberal  cause  triumphed.  Avezzana  im-
mediately resigned  his  command,  and  in  1834- went
into  business  in  New  York  city,  where  he  married
an  Irish  lady  and  led  a  quiet  mercantile  life  until
the  revolution  of  1848  fired  his  patriot  blood
again,  and  he  promptly  responded  to  the  call  of


AVILES


AYRES


123


Italy.  He  was  absent  just  a  year,  and  only  returned
to  America  after  he  had  fought  the  Austrians  and
Sardinians  at  Genoa,  and  with  a  few  thousand  fol-
lowers had  defended  Rome  for  two  months  against
the  allied  armies,  100,000  strong.  Once  he  sought
refuge  on  board  an  American  and  once  on  board  a
British  man-of-war,  and  at  last,  when  the  cause  of
freedom  was  hopelessly  crushed,  escaped  with  his
usual  good  luck  to  America  and  resumed  his  mer-
cantile life  in  New  York.

AVILES,  Pedro  Menendez  de  (ah-vee-les'),
Spanish  sailor,  b.  in  1523  ;  d.  in  1574.  He  rendered
good  services  to  Emperors  Maximilian  and  Charles
V.  when  fighting  under  letters  of  marque  against
the  French  fleets.  He  was  appointed  captain-gen-
eral of  the  route  to  the  West  Indies,  and  conquered
Florida,  of  which  he  became  both  military  and
civil  governor.  He  died  while  making  prepara-
tions to  join  the  armada  that  was  sent  by  Philip
II.  against  England.

AXAYACATL  (ah-sha-ya-ka'-tl),  the  eighth
Mexican  king,  d.  in  1477.  He  eifected  the  con-
quest of  Tehuantepec  as  far  as  Huatulco.  The
Tlaltelolcans  and  other  people  attacked  the  Mexi-
cans again,  but  were  repulsed,  their  king,  Moqui-
huix,  was  killed,  and  the  Tlaltelolco  country  re-
mained under  Mexican  rule.  Axayacatl,  having
thus  united  the  two  kingdoms,  began  a  campaign
against  the  inhabitants  of  the  Tolocan  and  Txtla-
huaca  valleys,  but  it  was  ended  by  his  death.

AXICO  AT,  a  Zutuhil  king,  one  of  the  sons  of  the
Quiche  king,  Axopil,  flourished  in  the  11th  century,
Axicoat,  being  ambitious,  declared  war  against  his
brother  Jintemal,  the  Cakchiquel  king,  and  their
father  had  to  mediate  between  them  to  restore
peace.  But  just  before  Axopil  died  he  gave  his  Quiche
kingdom  to  Jintemal,  which  caused  a  new  and  ter-
rible war  with  Axicoat,  both  wishing  to  possess  all
the  territories  near  the  borders  of  Lake  Atitlan.

AXOPIL,  son  and  successor  of  Nima-Quiche  (or
Great-Quiche),  king  of  the  Quiche  tribes  that  went
to  Central  America  after  the  fall  of  the  Mexican
empire  of  Tula,  about  1052.  Axopil  was  an  able
chieftain,  who  extended  the  limits  of  his  nation
and  promoted  its  civilization  and  prosperity.  In
his  old  age  he  divided  his  dominions,  giving  the
Cakchiquel  kingdom  to  his  son  Jintemal,  and  that
of  Zutuhil,  or  Atitlan,  to  his  son  Axicoat,  keeping
for  himself  the  kingdom  of  Quiche.

AYALA,  Juan  Baiitista  de,  explorer,  known
only  in  connection  with  the  early  exploration  of
San  Francisco  bay  in  1775.  The  bay  had  been
discovered  only  six  years  before.  Ayala  was  a
Spanish  lieutenant,  in  command  of  the  transport
"  San  Carlos,"  and  his  was  the  first  European  ves-
sel to  enter  the  Golden  Gate.  He  remained  about
forty  days,  making  surveys,  and  on  his  return  to
Monterey  reported  concerning  the  excellent  char-
acter of  the  harbor.  The  visit  of  Sir  Francis  Drake
in  the  Kith  century  can  not  have  been  actually
made  to  the  bay  of  San  Francisco,  hence  the  as-
sured priority  of  Ayala  as  explorer  in  this  place.

AYER,  James  Cook,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Gro-
ton.  Conn.,  5  May,  1818 ;  d.  in  Winchendon,  Mass.,
3  July,  1878.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  removed
to  Lowell,  and  there  resided  with  his  imcle.  His
education  was  obtained  at  the  public  schools,  where
at  one  time  he  was  a  classmate  of  Gen.  Butler,  and
subsequently  at  the  Westford  academy,  after  which
he  was  apprenticed  to  James  C.  Robbins,  a  drug-
gist in  Lowell.  While  there  he  studied  medicine,
and  later  he  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  university  of  Pennsylvania.  He  never
practised,  but  devoted  his  principal  attention  to
pharmaceutical  chemistry  and  the  compounding  of


medicines.  His  success  in  this  line  was  very  great,
and  soon  led  him  to  establish  in  Lowell  a  factory
for  the  manufacture  of  his  medicinal  preparations,
which  became  one  of  the  largest  of  its  kind  in  the
world,  and  was  magnificently  equipped.  He  accu-
mulated a  fortune  estimated  at  120,000,000.  Much
of  his  success  was  due  to  his  advertising,  and  he
published  annually  an  almanac,  5,000,000  copies  of
which  were  gratuitously  distributed  each  year.
Editions  in  English,  French,  German,  Portuguese,
and  Spanish,  were  regularly  issued.  In  1874  he
accepted  the  republican  nomination  for  congress  in
the  7th  Massachusetts  district,  but  was  defeated.
Anxiety  and  care  brought  about  a  brain  difficulty,
and  for  some  time  prior  to  his  death  he  was  eon-
fined  in  an  asylum.

AYLLON,  Lucas  Yazquez  de  (ah-eel-yon),
Spanish  adventurer,  d.  in  Virginia,  18  Oct.,  1526.
He  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  superior  court
in  Santo  Domingo.  Cortes  sent  him  to  negotiate
an  agreement  with  Velazquez,  but  he  did  not  suc-
ceed in  effecting  it  either  with  Velazquez  or  with
Narvaez,  who  commanded  the  fleet  of  the  latter.
Ayllon  sent  an  expedition  to  Florida  in  1520,  under
Gordillo,  who,  in  1521,  landed  in  lat.  33°  30',  and
carried  oft'  into  slavery  seventy  Indians.  Ayllon
obtained  a  grant  of  the  new  country,  fitted  out  an-
other vessel,  which  restored  the  captives,  and  in
1526  sailed  himself  with  500  colonists,  landed  at
the  mouth  of  the  Santee,  sailed  northward  to  the
Chesapeake,  and  on  the  site  of  Jamestown  founded
the  settlement  of  San  Miguel  de  Guandape,  which,
after  his  death  from  swamp  fever,  was  abandoned
by  the  colonists,  only  150  of  whom  reached  San
Domingo  alive.

AYLMER,  Mathew,  soldier,  b.  in  England,  24
May,  1775 ;  d.  in  London,  23  Feb.,  1850.  On  the
death  of  his  father,  he  became  fifth  lord  Aylmer  in
1785,  and  two  years  later  he  became  ensign  of  the
49th  foot.  He  served  at  the  siege  of  Copenhagen
in  1807,  and  in  Portugal  in  1809.  He  was  colonel
of  the  18th  foot,  and  on  25  May,  1827,  was  raised
to  the  rank  of  general.  From  1830  to  1833  he  was
governor-general  of  Canada,  and  became  exceed-
ingly popular.  During  his  administration  he
caused  suitable  monuments  to  be  erected  to  Wolfe
and  Montcalm  in  Quebec.  In  1825  he  assumed  the
additional  surname  of  Whitworth.

AYOLAS,  Juan  de  (ay-o'-las),  Spanish  governor
of  Paraguay,  d.  in  1538.  He  was  a  companion  of
Pedro  de  Mendoza  in  the  conquests  along  the  bor-
ders of  Plata  river.  He  ascended  the  Parana  and
Paraguay  rivers,  routed  the  Indians,  and  founded
both  the  colony  and  the  city  of  Asuncion.  Then
he  crossed  the  continent  with  200  men,  as  far  as
to  the  borders  of  Peru,  and  was  killed  by  savages.

AYRES,  Ronieyn  Beck,  soldier,  b.  at  East
Creek,  N.  Y.,  20  Dec.  1825 ;  d.  in  Fort  Hamilton,
N.  Y.,  4  Dec,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1847,  going  at  once  to  Mexico  as  lieuten-
ant in  the  3d  artillery,  and  remaining  in  garrison
at  Fort  Preble,  Mexico,  until  1850.  From  that
time  till  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war  he  was  on
frontier  and  garrison  duty  in  various  parts  of
the  country.  In  1859-61  he  was  at  the  artillery
school  for  practice  at  Fortress  Monroe.  In  May,
1861,  he  was  promoted  to  be  captain  in  the  3d  ar-
tillery, and  he  was  present  at  all  the  early  engage-
ment's of  the  war  about  the  defences  of  Washing-
ton. After  serving  as  chief  of  artillery  in  W.  F.
Smith's  division  and  of  the  6th  army  corps,  he  ac-
companied the  army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  Penin-
sular campaign  of  1862,  and  thence  to  the  Mary-
land campaign,  ending  with  the  battle  of  Antietam.
He  was  obliged  to  take  a  sick-leave  of  nearly  three


124


AZANZA


AZPILCUETA


months,  but  was  in  the  saddle  again  in  December
and  engaging  in  the  winter  campaign  on  the  Rap-
pahannock. He  was  at  Fredericksburg,  Chancel-
lorsvile,  and  the  intervening  engagements  of  less
moment.  As  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  from
29  Nov.,  1862,  he  commanded  a  division  of  the  oth
corps  at  Gettysburg,  and  was  then  ordered  to  New
York  city  to  suppress  the  draft  riots.  In  1864  he
was  with  his  command  in  the  movement  against
Richmond,  beginning  with  the  battles  of  the  Wil-
derness (May,  1864).  He  was  wounded  at  the  siege
of  Petersburg  in  June,  returned  to  duty  in  August,
and  was  present  at  the  final  engagements,  ending
with  the  surrender  of  Lee's  army  at  Appomattox,
9  April,  1865.  During  this  period  he  received
successive  promotions  and  brevets  in  his  regular
army  grade  until  he  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
28th  infantry  and  brevet  major-general.  He  was
mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service  as  major-
general  30  April,  1866.  Since  the  war  he  had
served  on  various  important  commissions  and
boards.  He  was  promoted  in  regular  course  to  the
colonelcy  of  the  3d  artillery,  18  July,  1879.

AZANZA,  Mig-uel  Jos6  (ah-than'-thah),  the
54th  viceroy  of  Mexico,  b.  about  1750.  After  ren-
dering good  service  to  Spain  as  a  diplomatist  and
soldier,  he  was  appointed  viceroy  of  New  Spain  and
took  command  at  Orizaba,  31  May,  1798.  Under
his  rule  Mexican  commerce  and  industries,  espe-
cially silk,  cotton,  and  woollen  manufacturing,  were
very  much  promoted,  notwithstanding  several
public  calamities  like  the  hurricane  that  almost
destroyed  the  city  of  Acapulco  in  July,  1799,  and
the  terrible  earthquake  of  March,1800.  In  Novem-
ber of  the  previous  year  a  great  conspiracy  to
assassinate  the  wealthy  Spaniards  was  discovered.
Azanza  was  recalled  to  Spain  in  May,  1800.

AZARA,  Felix  de  (ath'-a-ra),  Spanish  natural-
ist, b.  in  Aragon,  18  May,  1746;  d.  there  in  1811.
He  became  a  brigadier-general  in  the  Spanish  army,
and  was  wounded  in  the  war  against  the  Algerine
pirates  (1775).  In  1781  he  went  to  South  America
as  one  of  the  commissioners  to  settle  the  boundary
between  the  Spanish  and  Portuguese  possessions ;
and  his  researches,  prosecuted  for  twenty  years,
made  him  an  authority  on  the  natural  and  political
history  of  Paraguay  and  the  Plata  region.  His
"  Essai  sur  I'histoire  naturelle  des  quadrupedes  de
la  province  du  Paraguay"  was  first  published  in
French  (Paris,  1801),  and  afterward  in  Spanish
(Madrid,  1802),  under  the  auspices  of  his  brother,
the  Chevalier  Jose  Nicolas  de  Azara  (b.  in  1731,  d.
in  Paris  in  1804),  Spanish  ambassador  to  France,
who  made  a  Spanish  translation  of  Middleton's
Cicero,  Felix  de  Azara's  masterpiece,  "  Voyage
dans  I'Amerique  meridionale  depuis  1781  jusqu'en
1801 "  (4  vols.,  Paris,  1809),  translated  by  Sonnini,
was  edited  by  Walckenaer,  the  French  naturalist,
whose  commentaries,  as  well  as  those  of  Sonnini
and  Cuvier,  give  additional  value  to  the  work.  It
contains  a  narrative  of  the  discovery  and  conquest
of  Paraguay  and  the  Plata  river,  and  ornitho-
logical descriptions.  A  Spanish  translation  by
Varela  was  published  in  Montevideo.

AZEVEDO,  Antonio  Araujo  de  (ah-thay-vay-
do),  count  of  Barca.  Portuguese  statesman,  b.  in
1784 ;  died  in  1817.  After  cooperating  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  academy  of  sciences  at  Lisbon,  he
represented  his  government  in  Holland,  France,
Prussia,  and  Russia.  He  was  first  minister  of  John
VI.,  whom  he  followed  to  Brazil  in  1807.  There  he
was  minister  of  the  navy  and  of  foreign  affairs,  and
took  great  interest  in  promoting  education  and  in-
dustry. He  taught  the  Brazilians  how  to  manufac-
ture porcelain,  made  special  studies  and  experi-


ments in  his  own  splendid  botanical  garden,  as  well
as  the  first  trials  for  the  acclimatization  and  culture
of  the  tea-plant  in  Brazil,  and  was  the  founder  of
a  school  of  fine  arts.  His  works  include  two  trage-
dies and  a  translation  of  Virgil's  pastorals.

AZEYEDO  COUTINHO,  Joz6  Joaquim  da
Cunha  (ah-thay-vay'-do  cu-teen'-yo),  Portuguese
bishop,  the  last  inquisitor-general  of  Portugal  and
Brazil,  b.  in  Campos  dos  Goitacazes,  Brazil,  8  Sept.,
1742 ;  d.  12  Sept.,  1821.  He  studied  at  Coimbra  in
Portugal,  received  orders,  and  soon  became  promi-
nent both  in  the  church  and  in  politics.  In  1794
he  was  made  bishop  of  Pernambuco.  In  1818  he
was  appointed  inquisitor-general,  and  shortly  be-
fore his  death  he  was  elected  to  the  cortes.  He
published  "Ensaio  economico  sobre  o  commercio
de  Portugal  e  suas  colonias  "  (1792) ;  a  pamphlet
against  the  proposed  abolition  of  the  slave-trade
(1788);  and  a  memoir  on  the  conquest  of  Rio  de
Janeiro  by  Duguay-Trouin  in  1711.

AZEVEDO,  Ig-njicius,  Portuguese  Jesuit,  b.  in
Oporto  in  1527 ;  killed  at  sea  in  1570.  He  was  the
eldest  son  of  one  of  the  noblest  houses  in  Portugal,
but  relinquished  his  rights  of  primogeniture  in  fa-
vor of  his  brother  Francis,  and  entered  the  society
of  the  Jesuits  at  Coimbra  in  1548.  Here  his  absti-
nences and  mortifications  were  so  excessive  that  his
superiors  had  to  compel  him  to  moderate  them.
Before  he  was  twenty  years  old  he  was  appointed
rector  of  the  new  college  of  St.  Antony  at  Lisbon.
Being  wearied  with  the  honors  paid  him  and  the
marks  of  veneration  that  he  attracted,  he  asked  to
be  sent  on  a  mission  to  the  Indians ;  he  embarked
for  Brazil,  and  he  remained  there  three  years.  His
labors  in  civilizing  the  savages  were  very  success-
ful. Being  recalled  by  his  superiors,  he  returned
to  Lisbon,  but  had  hardly  reached  the  city  when  he
planned  another  voyage  to  America.  He  went  to
Rome  to  give  an  account  of  his  journey,  obtained
the  approval  of  the  pope  for  his  new  projects,  and
received  permission  to  select  suitable  companions
in  Spain  and  Portugal.  A  large  number  of  young
Jesuits  agreed  to  follow  him  to  Brazil,  and  he  em-
barked with  thirty-nine  of  them  on  board  a  m.er-
chant  vessel  at  Lisbon,  leaving  the  others  to  follow.
The  Portuguese  vessel  was  attacked  near  the  island
of  Palma  by  Jacques  Sourie,  of  La  Rochelle,  vice-
admiral  of  the  queen  of  Navarre,  and  a  fierce
Calvinist.  The  Portuguese  captain,  not  thinking
his  crew  sufficient  for  the  defence  of  the  ship,
wanted  to  arm  the  Jesuits,  but  was  opposed  by
Azevedo,  who  exhorted  the  sailors,  however,  to
fight,  and  ordered  his  followers  to  attend  to  the
other  needs  of  the  ship,  which  was  now  surrounded
by  the  boats  of  Sourie.  Three  Frenchmen  attempt-
ed to  board  the  Portuguese  vessel,  but,  not  being
seconded  by  their  companions,  they  were  taken  by
the  Portuguese,  decapitated,  and  thrown  into  the
sea.  Sourie,  rendered  furious  by  this,  attacked  the
vessel  with  greater  violence  than  ever,  and  the  cap-
tain and  several  of  the  sailors  were  killed,  and  the
rest  surrendered.  Sovirie,  who  regarded  Azevedo
and  his  Jesuits  as  the  authors  of  the  death  of  his
three  sailors,  massacred  them  with  every  circum-
stance of  crueltv,  and  threw  them  into  the  sea.

AZPILCUETA,  Juan(ath-peel-que'-tah).  Span-
ish missionary,  b.  in  Navarre  in  1515.  He  was  a
member  of  both  the  families  to  which  Loyola  and
Xavier  belonged,  and  became  a  Jesuit  in  1544.  He
was  sent  to  Brazil,  where,  after  learning  the  lan-
guage of  the  Indians,  he  surpassed  all  other  mission-
aries in  effecting  conversions.  He  wrote  j)rayers
and  religious  songs  in  that  language,  made  impor-
tant geographical  discoveries  in  Brazil,  and  accom-
panied the  first  expedition  to  the  Minas  territory.


BABBITT


BABCOCK


125


B


BABBITT,  Edwin  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Connecti-
cut about  1802;  d.  at  Fortress  Monroe,  10  Dec,
1881.  He  was  appointed  to  West  Point  from  In-
diana, and  was  graduated  in  1826.  He  became
first  lieutenant,  8d  infantry,  81  March,  1834,  as-
sistant quartermaster,  10  March,  1836,  and  cap-
tain, 3d  infantry,  1  July,  1839.  He  served  in  the
Florida  war  of  1837-8,  and  in  the  Mexican  war
during  1847-8.  On  30  May,  1848,  he  was  bre-
vetted  major  "  for  meritorious  conduct  while  serv-
ing in  the  enemy's  country."  He  was  made  chief
quartermaster  of  the  department  of  Oregon  14
Nov.,  1860,  and  of  the  department  of  the  Pacific
13  Sept.,  1861,  serving  there  until  29  July,  1866,
when  he  was  retired  from  active  service,  being  over
sixty-two  years  old.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  for  his  services  on  13  March,  1865.  Gen.
Babbitt,  notwithstanding  his  retirement,  served  as
chief  quartermaster  of  the  department  of  the  Co-
lumbia from  1866  till  1867,  and  had  charge  of  the
clothing  depot  of  the  division  of  the  Pacific  from
1867  till  1869.

BABBITT,  Isaac,  inventor,  b.  in  Taunton,
Mass.,  26  July,  1799;  d.  in  Somerville,  Mass.,  26
May,  1862.  He  was  a  goldsmith  by  trade,  and
early  turned  his  attention  to  the  production  of
alloys,  and  in  1824  made  in  Taunton  the  first
britannia  ware  manufactured  in  the  United  States.
As  this  proved  financially  unsuccessful,  he  with-
drew, and  in  1834  removed  to  Boston,  where  he
engaged  with  the  South  Boston  Iron  Company,  bet-
ter known  as  Alger's  foundries.  While  there  em-
ployed, in  1839,  he  discovered  the  now  well-known
anti-friction  metal  that  bears  his  name  and  is  so
extensively  used  in  lining  boxes  for  axles  and  gud-
geons. For  this  invention  he  received  in  1841  a
gold  medal  from  the  Massachusetts  charitable  me-
chanic's association,  and  afterward  congress  granted
him  120,000.  He  subsequently  patented  this  ma-
terial in  England  (1844)  and  in  Russia  (1847).
For  some  time  he  devoted  his  attention  to  the
production  of  the  metal,  and  he  was  also  engaged
in  the  manufacture  of  soap.

BABCOCK,  Charles  A.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  12  June,  1833;  d.  in  New  Or-
leans, 29  June,  1876.  He  was  appointed  from
Michigan,  as  a  midshipman,  8  April,  1850,  became
passed  midshipman  in  1856,  lieutenant  in  1859,
lieutenant-commander  in  1862,  and  commander  in
1869.  From  1862  to  1864  he  commanded  the
steamer  "  Morse,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockad-
ing squadron.  While  co-operating  with  the  army
on  the  James,  York,  and  Pamunkey  riv^ers,  he  de-
feated the  confederates  in  several  actions,  and  was
highly  commended  by  Rear- Admiral  Lee,  who  in

1864,  when  commanding  the  Mississippi  squadron,
selected  Babcock  as his fleet-captain. In  June,

1865,  he  superintended  the  erection  of  an  ord-
nance depot  at  Jefferson  barracks,  Missouri.  He
was  afterward  attached  to  the  Pensacola  navy-
yard,  and  in  1868-'9  commanded  the  steamer
"  Nvack,"  of  the  South  Pacific  squadron.

BABCOCK,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Rhode  Island
in  1736 :  d.  in  1800.  He  was  a  son  of  Chief  Justice
Babcock,  of  Rhode  Island,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1752,  entered  the  army,  became  a  captain  at
eighteen  years  of  age,  and  at  nineteen  served  un-
der Col.  Williams  at  Lake  George.  He  was  major
in  1756,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1757,  and  in  1758
colonel  of  a  Rhode  Island  regiment  that  took  part
in  the  unsuccessful  attempt  to  capture  Ticondero-


ga.  Here  he  was  wounded  in  the  knee.  He  was
afterward  present  at  the  capture  of  the  place  by
Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst,  in  1759.  He  settled  at  Ston-
ington,  Conn.,  and  in  February,  1776,  was  made
commander  of  the  troops  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  but
in  May  was  removed  on  account  of  insanity.

BABCOCK,  James  F.,  Journalist,  b.  in'Conneo-
ticut  in  1809 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  18  June,
1874.  He  began  newspaper  work  at  an  early  age,
and  in  1830  became  editor  of  the  New  Haven
"Palladium,"  which  soon  began  to  issue  a  daily
edition  and  which  he  conducted  for  thirty-one
years.  He  controlled  the  nominations  of  the  whig
party  for  many  years,  and,  though  hostile  to  the
free-soil  party  at  its  inception,  he  finally  gave  it  a
hearty  welcome  in  1854.  He  retained  his  prestige
with  the  republican  party  for  some  years,  took  an
active  part  in  furthering  the  national  cause  during
the  war,  and,  shortly  after  his  resignation  as  editor
of  the  "  Palladium,"  was  appointed,  by  President
Lincoln,  collector  of  the  port  of  New  Haven.  He
retained  that  office  under  President  Johnson,  whose
policy  he  supported ;  and,  after  the  rupture  between
the  president  and  the  republicans,  Mr.  Babcock
acted  with  the  democratic  party,  and,  after  an  an-
gry and  excited  contest,  was  nominated  by  them
for  congress,  but  was  defeated  by  the  republican
nominee.  He  was  elected  by  the  democrats  to  the
state  legislature  in  1873.  The  legislature  of  1874
elected  him  Judge  of  the  police  court  of  New  Haven.

BABCOCK,  James  Francis.,  chemist,  b.  in
Boston,  23  Feb.,  1844.  He  was  educated  at  the
Lawrence  scientific  school,  where  he  devoted  his
attention  principally  to  chemistry.  Subsequently
he  opened  a  laboratory  in  Boston,  and  he  has  since
been  occupied  as  an  analytical  chemist,  also  testify-
ing as  a  chemical  expert  in  important  capital  and
patent  cases.  For  five  years  he  was  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  Boston  university,  and  in  1881  he
accepted  that  chair  in  the  Massachusetts  college  of
pharmacy.  In  1870  he  was  inspector  of  milk  in  the
city  of  Boston,  and  for  ten  years  he  filled  the  place
of  "state  assayer  of  liquors.  His  publications  have
been  principally  official  reports  relating  to  the
chemistry  of  food  and  on  sanitary  topics.  He  is
well  known  as  the  inventor  of  a  fire-extinguisher,

BABCOCK,  Orville  E.,  soldier,  b.  in  Franklin,
Vt.,  25  Dec,  1835 ;  drowned  in  Mosquito  Inlet,  Fla.,
2  June,  1884,  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point,
and  entered  the  engineer  corps  as  2d  lieutenant
6  May,  1861.  Promoted,  17  Nov.,  1861,  to  a  first
lieutenancy,  he  constructed,  in  February,  1862,  a
pontoon  bridge  at  Harper's  Ferry  for  Banks's  move-
ment to  Winchester.  He  was  made  a  captain  in
the  engineer  corps  on  1  June,  1863,  and  was  with
the  9th  corps  at  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg,  and
in  the  east  Tennessee  campaign,  taking  part  in  the
battle  of  Blue  Lick  Springs  and  subsequent  ac-
tions, and  at  the  siege  of  Knoxville.  On  29  March,
1864,  he  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  and  ap-
pointed aide-de-camp  to  Gen,  Grant,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  served  in  the  battles  of  the  Wilderness
and  subsequent  operations  of  the  army  of  the  Po-
tomac. On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  At  the  surrender
of  Lee  at  Appomattox  he  selected  the  place  where
the  generals  met.  He  was  promoted  a  colonel  in
the  regular  army  on  25  July,  1866,  and  served  as
aide-de-camp  to'  the  general-in-chief  until  Gen.
Grant  was  inaugurated  president,  when  he  was  as-
signed to  dutv  with  the  president  and  acted  as  his


126


BABCOCK


BACHE


secretary.  He  was  appointed  superintending  engi-
neer of  public  buildings  and  grounds  in  1871,  and
supervised  the  construction  of  Washington  aque-
duct, the  chain  bridge  across  the  Potomac,  Ana-
eosta  bridge,  and  the  east  wing  of  the  department
offices,  and  also  the  plans  for  the  improvement  of
"Washington  "and  Georgetown  harbors.  In  Janu-
ary, 1876,  he  was  indicted  by  the  grand  jury  of  St.
Louis  for  complicity  in  revenue  frauds.  He  de-
manded a  court  martial,  but  was  brought  to  trial
in  the  civil  court  in  February  and  acquitted,  with
the  aid  of  a  deposition  by  President  Grant.

BABCOCK,  Rufus,  clergyman,  b.  in  North
Colebrook,  Conn.,  18  Sept.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Salem,
Mass.,  4  May,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1821,  and  acted  as  tutor  in  Columbian  college
(now  university),  D.  C,  for  two  years.  He  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Pough-
keepsie  in  1823,  and  became  associate  pastor  with
Dr.  Bolles,  of  the  first  Baptist  church  in  Salem,
Mass.,  in  1826.  He  was  elected  president  of  Wa-
ter ville  college.  Me.  (now  Colby  university),  in
1833 ;  but  in  1836,  his  health  failing,  he  resigned
and  soon  returned  to  ministerial  duties,  first  as
pastor  of  the  Spruce  street  church  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  remained  three  years  and  a  half,  then  of
his  former  charge  in  Poughkeepsie,  and  finally
as  pastor  of  the  first  Baptist  church  in  Paterson,
N.  J.  For  many  years  he  took  a  leading  part  in
the  great  movements  of  the  Baptist  denomination
in  the  United  States.  He  was  three  times  elected
corresponding  secretary  of  the  American  and  For-
eign Bible  society.  He  was  also  corresponding
secretary  of  the  Sunday-school  union  of  Philadel-
phia, and  of  the  American  colonization  society,  and
district  secretary  of  the  Baptist  publication  society,
Philadelphia.  t)r.  Babcock  founded,  and  for  five
years  edited,  the  "  Baptist  Memorial,"  a  monthly
magazine  of  biography  and  current  religious  in-
telligence. He  published  "  Claims  of  Education
Societies  "  (1829) ;  "  Review  of  Beckwith  on  Bap-
tism" (1829);  "Making  Light  of  Christ"  (1830);
"  Memoirs "  of  Andrew  Fuller  (1830),  George
Learned  (1832),  Abraham  Booth,  and  Isaac  Back-
us ;  "  History  of  Waterville  College  "  (1836) ;  "  Tales
of  Truth  for  the  Young  "  (1837) ;  "  Personal  Recol-
lections of  Dr.  John  M.  Peck  "  (1858) ;  and  "  The
Emigrant's  Mother  "  (1859).  He  likewise  contrib-
uted to  Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the  American  Pulpit."

BABY,  Francois,  Canadian  engineer,  d.  5  Aug.,
1864.  He  did  much  toward  improving  the  naviga-
tion of  the  lower  St.  Lawrence  by  building  wharves,
providing  for  a  new  system  of  light-houses,  and
introducing  steam  tugs.  He  was  a  member  of  the
executive  and  legislative  council,  and  adjutant-
general  for  the  province  of  Quebec. — His  grandson,
Louis  Francois  Greorg-e,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Montreal,  26  Aug.,  1834.  He  is  descended  from
Jacques  Baby  de  Ranville,  an  officer  in  the  cele-
brated regiment  Carignan  Sallieres,  which  came
to  Canada  in  1662.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Sulpice
college,  Montreal,  and  at  the  college  of  Joilette ;
studied  law,  and  was  called  to  the  bar  of  Lower
Canada,  in  1857.  He  was  elected  a  representative
for  Joliette  in  1872,  re-elected  in  1874.  and  again  in
1878,  and  on  28  Oct.  of  the  latter  year  was  sworn
of  the  privy  council  as  minister  of  inland  revenue.
He  is  a  conservative  in  politics.

BACA,  Luis  (bah'-cah),  Mexican  composer,  b.  in
Durango,  15  Dec,  1826 ;  d.  in  1855.  He  received
his  first  education  in  Mexico,  and  then  went  to
Paris  to  study  medicine,  but  devoted  himself  en-
tirely to  music.  In  Paris,  where  he  made  the  ac-
quaintance of  Donizetti,  he  composed  two  operas,
"T,f.nnr.r"  .:.,iri "  Glovauua  dl  Castlglla,"  a  cele-


Leonor"  and


brated  "  Ave  Maria,"  and  other  popu.ar  pieces. He
soon  returned  to  Mexico,  and  died  tliere.

BACHE,  Theopliylact  (baitch),  merchant,  b.  in
Settle,  in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  England
17  Jan.,  1734;  d.  in  New  York,  30  Oct.,  1807.  He
landed  in  New  York  17  Sept.,  1751,  took  charge  of
the  business  of  Paul  Richard,  who  died  in  1756,  be-
came the  owner  of  merchant  vessels,  and  engaged
in  privateering.  He  was  identified  with  the  resist-
ance to  the  crown  in  1765,  and  in  1770  was  one  of
the  committee  to  carry  out  the  resolutions  of  non-
intercourse.  In  1774  he  was  one  of  the  committee
of  correspondence  appointed  when  the  port  of  Bos-
ton was  closed.  He  supported  the  first  continental
congress ;  but  when  hostilities  actually  began  he
remained  so  far  neutral  as  to  incur  the  suspicions
of  the  committee  of  safety.  He  remained  in  New
York  during  the  British  occupation  of  the  city,
and  befriended  American  officers  held  there  as  pris-
oners of  war.  In  1777  he  was  chosen  the  fifth  pres-
ident of  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce. —
His  brother,  Richard,  b.  in  Settle,  12  Sept.,  1737,
d.  in  Berks  co..  Pa.,  29  July,  1811,  was  the  eigh-
teenth child,  and  followed  Theophylact  to  the  colo-
nies. He  went  to  Philadelphia  in  1770,  and  estab-
lished himself  in  business  as  his  brother's  agent,
underwriting  marine  insurance  risks,  and  accumu-
lating a  handsome  fortune.  At  the  beginning  of
the  revolution  he  was  chairman  of  the  Republican
Society  in  Philadelphia.  He  married  Sarah,  the
only  daughter  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  3  Oct.,  1767.
Franklin  appointed  him  secretary,  comptroller,  and
register-general,  to  date  from  29  Sept.,  1775 ;  and
this  office  he  held  until  November,  1776,  when  he
became  postmaster-general,  and  continued  as  such
till  1782.  He  was  an  earnest  patriot  during  the
revolutionary  struggle. — Sarah,  philanthropist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  11  Sept.,  1744,  d.  5  Oct.,  1808,
was  the  only  daughter
of  Benjamin  Franklin
and  the  wife  of  Richard
Bache,  who  succeeded
Dr.  Franklin  as  postmas-
ter-general. She  was  the
chief  of  the  patriotic
band  of  ladies  who  made
clothing  for  the  half-clad
soldiers  and  sought  to
mitigate  their  sufferings
during  the  severe  win-
ter of  1780.  More  than
2,200  women  were  at  one
time  employed  under  her
direction  in  sewing  for
the  army.  For  this  work
she  collected  large  sums,
Morris  and  other  patri-
ots being  among  the  contributors.  The  Marquis
de  Chastellux,  then  visiting  Philadelphia,  was
charmed  with  the  appearance  of  Mrs.  Bache,  and
recommended  her  to  the  ladies  of  Europe  as  a
model  of  domestic  virtues  and  feminine  patriotism.
On  other  occasions  she  collected  medicines  and
delicacies  for  the  soldiers  in  the  hospitals,  and
nursed  the  sick  and  wounded  with  her  own  hand^.
She  had  eight  children. — Benjamin  Franklin,
son  of  Richard,  journalist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  13
Aug.,  1769;  d.  there,  10  Sept.,  1798.  He  accom-
panied his  grandfather,  Benjamin  Franklin,  to
Paris,  and  received  his  education  in  France  and
Geneva.  While  in  Paris  he  learned  printing  and
type-founding  at  the  publishing  house  of  the  broth-
ers Didot.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
1785,  and  studied  for  a  time  in  the  college  of  Phila-
delphia. In  1790  he  began  publishing  the  "  General


qA/^^c^


BACHE


BACHE


127


Advertiser,"  afterward  known  as  the  "Aurora,"
which  violently  opposed  the  administrations  of
both  Washington  and  Adams,  and  was  one  of  the
ablest  and  most  influential  journals  of  the  time. —
Alexander  Dallas,  son  of  Kichard,  scientist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  July,  1806;  d.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  17  Feb.,  1867.  He  early  showed  an
unusual  aptitude  for  learning,  and  his  first  in-
struction was  received  at  a  classical  school  in
Philadelphia.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  U.  S.  Military  Academy,  where,  al-
though the  youngest  member  of  his  class,  he  was  at
us  liead  when  graduated  in  1825.  His  failure  to
receive  a  demerit  during  the  lour  years  is  cited
as  one  of  the  few  instances  of  that  character  in
the  history  of  the  academy,  so  noted  for  its  rigid
discipline.  On  his  graduation  he  was  appointed
lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engineers,  but  was  re-
tained at  the  academy  as  assistant  professor  of  en-
gineering during  1826,  when,  until  1829,  he  served
as  assistant  engineer  in  the  construction  of  Fort
Adams,  at  Newport,  11.  I.,  under  Col.  J.  Gr.  Totten.
Here  he  met  Miss  Nancy  Clarke  Fowler,  who  after-
ward became  his  wife  and  also  his  associate  in  the
Preparation  of  much  of  his  published  material.  In
828  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  natural  phi-
losophy and  chemistry  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania, which
he  occupied  un-
til 1841.  His
resignation  from
the  army  is  dated
1  June,  1829.
Soon  after  his
arrival  in  Phila-
delphia he  be-
came a  member
of  the  Frank-
lin Institute,  and
at  once  actively
participated  in
its  work,  as  its
"  Journal "  be-
tween 1826  and
1836  abundant-
ly testifies.  His
most  important
labor  at  this  time  was  undoubtedly  the  investi-
gations relating  to  the  bursting  of  steam  boilers.
His  valuable  researches  in  various  branches  of
physics  and  chemistry,  published  in  the  "  Trans-
actions of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,"
of  which  he  was  a  prominent  member,  belong  to
these  years,  and  his  first  meteorological  investiga-
tions date  from  this  period.  In  1836  he  was  in-
trusted with  the  organization  of  Girard  College,
Philadelphia,  became  its  first  president,  and  was
sent  to  Europe  to  study  the  systems  of  education
and  methods  of  instruction  and  discipline  adopted
there.  On  his  return  in  1839  the  results  were  em-
bodied in  a  report  made  to  the  trustees,  which  did
much  to  improve  the  theory  and  art  of  education
in  this  country.  Owing  to  the  unfinished  condi-
tion of  the  college,  and  in  consequence  of  some
delay  in  the  adjustment  of  its  funds,  it  was  not
deemed  advisable  to  organize  it  at  once  for  active
operations ;  therefore  Prof.  Bache  offered  his  ser-
vices to  the  municipal  government.  He  became
principal  of  the  high  school,  and  during  1841-'2
was  superintendent  of  the  public  schools.  The
system  developed  by  him  while  in  office  has  since
been  generally  regarded  as  a  model,  and  has  been
introduced  in  several  cities  of  the  union.  While
in  Philadelphia  he  established,  and  for  some  years
directed,  a  raagnetical  and  meteorological  observa-


c^. .^. (^.=^^


tory,  which  was  largely  supported  by  the  American
Philosophical  Society.  In  1842,  having  satisfac-
torily completed  his  labors  in  the  cause  of  public
instruction,  he  returned  to  his  chair  at  the  univer-
sity, where  he  remained  until  November,  1843,
when  he  was  appointed  to  succeed  the  late  P.
R.  Hassler  as  superintendent  of  the  coast  survey,
which  place  he  held  until  his  death.  The  survey
originally  recommended  to  congress  by  President
Jefferson  in  1807  was  not  definitely  established
until  ten  years  later,  when,  by  the  appointment  of
Mr.  Hassler  as  superintendent,  its  actual  existence
began.  Under  his  direction  it  flourished  at  times,
and  the  work,  though  limited  in  scope,  continued
until  his  death ;  but  with  the  advent  of  Prof.
Bache  the  undertaking  assumed  larger  propor-
tions, and  improved  plans  for  extended  operations
were  put  into  execution.  During  his  able  admin-
istration the  practical  value  of  the  survey  was  thor-
oughly demonstrated.  In  the  accomplishment  of
his  designs  he  was  not  only  aided  by  congress,  but
his  efforts  were  likewise  greatly  encouraged  by  the
approval  of  scientific  societies  and  their  leaders.
During  the  civil  war  he  greatly  assisted  the  naval
and  military  forces  by  placing  the  resources  of  the
coast  survey  at  their  disposal,  and  from  June  to
December,  1863,  he  was  chief  engineer  for  devising
and  constructing  the  defences  of  Philadelphia,
when  it  was  threatened  by  the  invasion  of  Penn-
sylvania. In  addition  to  his  work  on  the  coast
survey,  he  was  ex-officio  superintendent  of  weights
and  measures,  and  served,  until  his  death,  on  the
light-house  board.  He  was  one  of  the  incorpora-
tors of  the  Smithsonian  Institute,  1846,  and  an-
nually during  his  life  was  reelected  by  congress.
He  was  active  in  its  direction  and  in  the  shaping  of
its  policy.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  elected  a
vice-president  of  the  U.  S.  Sanitary  Commission,
and  rendered  efficient  aid  in  its  work.  The  Uni-
versity of  New  York  in  1836,  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1837,  and  Harvard  in  1851,  con-
ferred upon  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  served
as  president  of  the  American  Philosophical  Society,
and  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advance-
ment of  Science,  and  was  the  first  presiding  officer
of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  as  well  as  one
of  its  incorporators  and  most  active  members.  The
Royal  Society  of  London,  the  Institute  of  France,
the  Royal  Academy  of  Turin,  the  Imperial  Geo-
graphical Society  of  Vienna,  and  many  similar  or-
ganizations, included  him  among  their  honorary
members.  The  excellence  of  his  work  on  the  coast
survey  was  acknowledged  by  different  foreign  gov-
ernments, and  he  was  the  recipient  of  several  med-
als for  his  prominence  in  the  field  of  science.  His
published  papers  include  more  than  150  titles  and
include  various  topics  in  physics,  chemistry,  and
engineering.  His  most  extensive  work  was  the
"  Observations  at  the  Magnetic  and  Meteorological
Observatory  at  the  Girard  College  "  (3  vols.,  1840-
'7).  His  property,  to  the  extent  of  $42,000,  was
left  in  trust  to  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences ;
the  income  is  to  be  devoted  to  physical  research.
See  the  "  Memoir  of  Alexander  Dallas  Bache,"  by
Joseph  Henry,  with  a  list  of  his  papers  published
in  Volume  I.  of  the  "Biographical  Memoirs"  of
the  National  Academy  of  Sciences.  This  memoir
appears  in  the  Smithsonian  Report  for  1870,  and
also  as  a  special  issue  in  the  publications  of  the
Smithsonian  Institute.— Franklin,  son  of  Benja-
min Franklin  Bache,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 25  Oct.,  1792;  d.  there,  19  March,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1810,  and  received  his  medical  diploma  from
the  same  university  in  1814. In  1813  he  entered


128


BACHE


BACK


the  army  as  assistant  surgeon,  and  in  1814  was
appointed  surgeon.  In  1816  he  resigned,  and  be-
gan the  practice  of  his  profession  in  Philadelphia.
From  1824' to  1886  he  was  physician  to  the  Walnut
street  prison ;  from  1836  to  1832,  professor  of
chemistry  in  the  Franklin  Institute ;  from  1829
to  1886,  physician  to  the  Eastern  penitentiary;
from  1881  to  1841,  professor  of  chemistry  in  the
Philadelphia  College  of  Pharmacy ;  and  from
1841  to  his  decease  was  professor  of  chemistry  in
Jefferson  Medical  College.  In  1854  and  1855  he
was  president  of  the  American  Philosophical  So-
ciety, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  president  of  the
deaf  and  dumb  asylum  corporation.  In  1819  he
published  a  "  System  of  Chemistry  for  the  Use  of
Students  of  Medicine,"  and  in  connection  with  Dr.
Greorge  Wood  he  prepared,  in  1880,  a  "  Pharma-
copoeia "  that  was  adopted  by  a  national  conven-
tion of  physicians,  and  becalne  the  basis  of  the
present  Uo  S.  Pharmacopoeia  and  U.S.  Dispensa-
tory. Of  the  latter  work  he  was  the  editor,  with
Dr.  Wood,  from  1888  till  his  death.  He  published
a  "  Supplement  to  Henry's  Chemistry "  (1828) ;
"  Letters  on  Separate  Confinement  of  Prisoners "
(1829-'30) ;  and  "  Introductory  Lectures  on  Chem-
istry" (1841-'52).  He  also  edited  several  works,
from  1828  to  1832  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  North  American  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"
and  contributed  largely  to  scientific  journals.  A
memoir  of  him  was  published  by  Dr.  George  B,
Wood  (Philadelphia,  1865). — Hartiiian,  another
son  of  Benjamin  Franklin  Bache,  engineer,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1797;  d.  there,  8  Oct.,  1872.
He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1818,  and  made
brevet  captain  of  staff,  and  assistant  topographical
engineer.  For  forty-seven  years  he  was  constantly
employed  on  topographical  surveys  and  works  of
hydrographic  and  civil  engineering,  under  the  di-
rection of  the  war  department,  till  7  March,  1867,
when  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.  He  became
brevet  major  of  engineers,  24  July,  1828 ;  major,  7
July,  1838 ;  lieutenant-colonel,  6  Aug.,  1861 ;  colo-
nel, 8  March,  1863 ;  and  on  13  March,  1865,  he  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  brigadier-general,  the  highest
grade  in  the  engineer  corps,  for  long,  faithful,
and  meritorious  services.  Among  his  engineering
works  of  conspicuous  merit  were  the  construction
of  the  Delaware  breakwater  and  the  successful
application  of  iron-screw  piles  for  the  foundation
of  light-houses  upon  sandy  shoals  and  coral-reefs.
He  was  engineer  of  the  '4th  light-house  district
from  1859,  and  a  member  of  the'light-house  board
from  1862  to  1870.— Benjamin  Franklin,  great-
grandson  of  Benjamin  Franklin,  surgeon,  b.  in
Monticello,  Va.,  7  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
2  Nov.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1819,  and  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1823,  entered  the  navy
as  assistant  surgeon  in  1824,  and  became  surgeon
in  1828.  From  1832  to  1836  he  was  stationed  at
Pensacola  navy-yard,  and,  while  on  leave  from  1888
to  1841,  he  was  professor  of  natural  science  and
natural  religion  in  Kenyon  College,  Ohio.  He  was
fleet-surgeon  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron  in
1841-4,  and  of  the  Brazil  squadron  in  1847-'50.
From  1850  to  1854  he  was  at  the  New  York  naval
hospital,  and  then  organized  at  New  York  the
laboratory  that  furnishes  all  medical  supplies  to
the  navy.  He  was  director  of  this  from  1853  to
1871,  and  in  1861  did  great  service  to  the  govern-
ment by  restocking  the  laboratory  on  his  own  re-
sponsibility. In  1863  he  was  placed  on  the  retired
list,  but  continued  to  act  as  superintendent  of  the
laboratory  until  1871,  when  he  was  appointed  medi-
cal director,  with  the  relative  rank  of  commodore,


and  retired  from  active  service. — Henry  W.,  en-
gineer, b.  in  1839 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  7  Nov.,  1878.
He  was  a  descendant  of  Sarah  Bache,  and  a  son  of
Prof.  Henry  Bache,  of  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  He
was  engaged  in  the  same  work,  and  while  on  duty
in  Florida  contracted  a  malarial  fever  which  re-
sulted in  his  death.

BACHI,  Pietro,  educator,  b.  in  Sicily  in  1787;
d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Aug.,  1853.  He  was  a  gradu-
ate of  the  university  of  Padua  and  a  lawyer  by  pro-
fession, was  implicated  in  Murat's  attempt  to  seize
the  throne  of  the  two  Sicilies,  and  was  obliged  in
consequence  to  flee  from  Italy  in  1815.  He  resided
in  England  till  1825,  and  then  came  to  the  United
States.  From  1826  to  1846  he  was  teacher  of  Italian
and  Spanish  in  Harvard  college.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  several  grammars  and  phrase-books  and  a
book  of  fables  for  learning  Italian,  and  of  "  A  Com-
parative View  of  Spanish  and  Portuguese  Lan-
guage "  (Cambridge).

BiACHILLER  Y  MORALES,  Antonio  (bah-
cheel'-yer-e-mo-ral'-les),  Cuban  author,  b.  in  Havana
in  1812.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.  He
edited  various  newspapers  and  reviews,  filled  suc-
cessively several  chairs  in  the  university  of  Havana,
has  been  director  of  the  institute  of  higher  educa-
tion, and  held  important  public  offices.  He  is  a
corresponding  member  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries
of  northern  Europe,  and  also  of  the  historical  soci-
eties of  New  York  and  Pennsylvania.  His  princi-
pal works  are  "  Prontuario  General  de  Agricultura,"
"  Filosofia  del  Derecho,"  "Tradiciones  Americanas"
(1845) ;  "  AntigUedades  Americanas,"  "  Apuntes
para  la  Historia  de  las  Letras  en  la  Isla  de  Cuba"
(8  vols.,  1862) ;  "  Cuba  PrimitiA-a,"  on  the  origin,
languages,  traditions,  and  history  of  the  Greater
Antilles  and  the  Bahama  islands ;  and  "  Cuba :
Monografia  Historica."

BACHMAN,  John,  naturalist,  b.  in  Dutchess
CO.,  N.  Y.,  4  Feb.,  1790 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  25
Feb.,  1874.  He  was  associated  with  Audubon  in
the  preparation  of  his  work  on  ornithology,  and
was  the  principal  author  of  the  "  Quadrupeds  of
North  America,"  which  the  Audubons  illustrated.
He  also  wrote  "  Two  Letters  on  Hybridity "
(1850) ;  "  Defence  of  Luther  and  the  Reformation  "
(Charleston,  1858) ;  "  Characteristics  of  Genera  and
Species,  as  Applicable  to  the  Doctrine  of  the  Unity
of  the  Human  Race  "  (1854) :  "  Notice  of  the  Types
of  Mankind  by  Nott  and  Gliddon"  (1854);  and
"  Examination  of  Prof.  Agassiz's  Sketch  of  the
Natural  Provinces  of  the  Animal  World,"  etc.
(1855),  and  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Medical
Journal "  of  South  Carolina.  In  1813  he  was  li-
censed to  preach,  and  from  1815  until  his  death
was  pastor  of  the  Lutheran  church  in  Charles-
ton.

BACK,  Sir  George,  explorer,  b.  in  Stockport,
England,  6  Nov.,  1796;  d.  in  London,  28  June,
1878.  He  entered  the  British  navy  in  1808,  and  in
1817  accompanied  the  Buchan  expedition  to  Spitz-
bergen.  In  1819  he  accompanied  Sir  John  Frank-
lin's expedition  to  the  Arctic  regions,  and  again  in
1825,  In  1883  he  commanded  a  search  party  sent
out  for  Sir  John  Ross,  then  in  the  polar  seas,  and
in  1836  he  made  his  final  A^oyage  to  the  north  in
command  of  the  "  Terror."  He  showed  great  sa-
gacity in  his  management,  and  the  ultimate  return
of  the  first  two  expeditions  was  credited  to  the
ability  with  which  he  directed  the  forces  under  his
charge.  He  received  a  gold  medal  from  the  geo-
graphical society  in  1887,  and  two  years  later  was
knighted.  He  was  made  rear  admiral  in  1857,  and
admiral  in  1867.  He  is  the  author  of  a  "  Narrative
of the Arctic Land Expedition," etc. (London.


BACKUS


BACON


129


1836),  and  of  a  "  Narrative  of  the  Expedition  in
H.  M.  Ship  ' Terror '"  (1838).

BACKUS,  Azel,  educator,  b.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,
13  Oct.,  1705;  d.  9  Dec,  1817.  His  parents  were
Congregationalists,  but  while  at  Yale  he  imbibed
deistical  opinions.  He  was  graduated  in  1787
with  a  higli  reputation  for  schokirship,  and  taught
school  for  a  time  at  Wethersfield,  Conn.  Under
the  influence  of  his  uncle,  the  Rev.  Charles  Back-
us, he  became  a  Christian  and  entered  the  minis-
try, although  at  one  time  he  was  on  the  point  of
joining  the  army.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1789,  and  in  1791  became  the  successor  of  Dr.  Bel-
lamy at  Bethlehem,  Conn.,  where  he  also  carried  on  a
successful  school.  Here  he  remained  until,  at  the
foundation  of  Hamilton  college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  in
1812,  he  was  chosen  its  first  president,  and  was  in-
augurated on  3  Dec.  of  that  year.  Princeton  gave
him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1810.  He  took  great
interest  in  the  political  questions  of  the  day,  and
published  a  number  of  sermons  (1797-1813),  among
which  are  the  annual  "  election  sermon,"  delivered
in  1798  before  the  Connecticut  legislature,  and  one
on  the  death  of  Gov.  Wolcott  (1797).

BACKUS,  Charles,  theologian,  b.  in  Franklin,
Conn.,  9  Nov.,  1749;  d.  in  Somers,  Conn.,  30  Dec,
1803.  He  lost  his  parents  early  in  childhood,  and
was  educated  by  his  friends.  After  his  graduation
at  Yale  in  1769  he  studied  theology  under  Dr.
Hart,  of  Preston,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1773,
and  on  10  Aug.,  1774,  became  pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church  in  Somers,  where  he  remained
until  his  death.  Here  he  established  a  sort  of
divinity  school,  receiving  theological  students  into
his  family.  Nearly  fifty  were  thus  trained,  among
them  Dr.  Woods,  of  Andover,  President  Moore,
of  Amherst,  President  Davis,  of  Hamilton,  and
other  eminent  divines.  Dr.  Backus  was  invited  to
fill  the  chair  of  theology  at  Dartmouth,  and  after-
ward that  at  Yale,  but  declined  in  both  cases.  He
Was  a  plain  but  impressive  speaker,  and  a  fervent
extemporaneous  preacher.  He  published  a  large
number  of  sermons  (1795-1801),  including  one  to
freemasons  (1795) ;  "  Five  Discourses  on  the  Truth
of  the  Bible  "  (1797),  and  an  historical  discourse  on
the  town  of  Somers  (1801).  He  also  published  a
volume  on  regeneration.  An  article  on  his  divin-
ity school,  by  J.  Vaill,  appeared  in  the  "  Congrega-
tional Quarterly  "  for  1864.

BACKUS,  Electiis,  soldier,  d.  7  June,  1813.
He  was  appointed  major  of  light  dragoons  7  Oct.,
1808,  and  lieutenant-colonel  15  Feb.,  1804.  He
was  in  command  of  the  American  forces  at  Sack-
ett's  Harbor  in  1813,  when,  hearing  of  a  projected
attack  by  the  British,  he  summoned  Gen.  Brown,
who  gathered  as  many  militia  as  possible  and  took
chief  command.  The  attack  was  made  on  29  May,
and,  although  the  militia  behaved  badly,  the  British
were  finally  defeated.  Col.  Backus  fell  mortally
wounded  while  fighting  bravely  at  the  head  of  his
men. — His  son  Electus  (b.  in  New  York  in  1804 ;  d.
in  Detroit,  Mich.,  7  June,  1862)  was  graduated  at
West  Point  in  1824.  He  was  aide  to  Gen.  Hugh
Brady  from  1828  to  1837,  and  became  captain  17
Oct.,  1837.  In  1838-'40  he  served  in  the  Seminole
war,  and  afterward  in  the  Mexican  war,  being
brevetted  major  on  23  Sept.,  1846,  "  for  gallant  and
meritorious  conduct  at  Monterey."  In  1847  he
was  in  command  of  the  fortress  of  San  Juan
d'Ulloa.  He  became  major  in  the  3d  infantry  on
10  June,  1850,  served  in  the  Navajo  expedition  in
1858,  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  19  Jan.,  1859,  and
colonel  6th  infantry  20  Feb.,  1862.  Just  before  his
death,  in  the  early  part  of  the  civil  war,  he  was
mustering  and  disbursing  officer  at  Detroit.


BACKUS,  Franklin  T.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Lee,
Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  6  May,  1813 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  14  May,  1870.  He  lived  on  a  farm  near  Lan-
sing, N.  Y.,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1836,  studied
law  in  Cleveland,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1839.  He  was  elected  prosecuting  attorney  of  the
county  in  1841,  and  was  sent  to  the  Ohio  house
of  representatives  in  1846,  and  to  the  state  senate
in  1848.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  peace  congress
at  Washington  in  1861.  He  supported  McClellan
for  president  in  1864,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
national  convention  that  met  at  Philadelphia  in
1866  to  form  a  new  party.  He  gained  especial  dis-
tinction in  the  early  part  of  his  career  as  prose-
cuting attorney  at  the  trial  of  Brooks,  who  was
sentenced  to  life-long  imprisonment  for  wrecking
a  train,  and  as  attorney  for  the  Oberlin  rescuers,
who  had  assisted  in  the  escape  of  a  slave.  In  his
latter  years  he  was  much  consulted  in  railroad
cases,  and  was  influential  in  settling  the  principles
governing  the  Ohio  courts  regarding  railroads.

BACKUS,  Isaac,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  9  Jan.,  1724;  d.  20  J^ov.,  1806.  He  became
identified  with  the  "  Separatist "  movement,  began
to  preach  in  1746,  was  ordained  in  Middleborough,
Mass.,  13  April,  1748,  and  became  pastor  at  Titicut,
in  that  town,  of  a  new  Congregational  society,
which  had  been  formed  in  consequence  of  a  dis-
pute regarding  the  settlement  of  a  minister.  In
1749  some  of  his  congregation  began  to  sympathize
with  the  Baptists,  and  he  finally  united  with  these
and  formed  a  Baptist  church  in  Middleborough  in
1756,  having  been  immersed  in  1751.  He  held
open  communion  for  some  years,  but  at  length
abandoned  it.  Throughout  his  life  he  was  an  ear-
nest and  consistent  advocate  of  the  utmost  relig-
ious freedom.  In  1774  he  was  sent  as  the  agent  of
the  Warren  association  of  Baptist  churches  to
claim  from  congress,  for  the  Baptists,  the  same
rights  as  those  accorded  other  churches.  He  vin-
dicated his  course  by  a  paper  in  the  "  Boston
Chronicle,"  2  Dec,  1779,  arguing  against  a  pro-
posed article  in  the  Massachusetts  bill  of  rights,
in  1788  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
adopted  the  federal  constitution,  and  made  a  speech
in  its  favor.  Dr.  Backus  was  for  thirty-four  years
a  trustee  of  Rhode  Island  college,  now  Brown  uni-
versity. He  was  a  voluminous  writer,  his  most  im-
portant work  being  a  "  History  of  New  England,
with  Special  Reference  to  the  Baptists "  (3  vols.,
1777-96),  with  an  abridgment,  bringing  the  work
down  to  1804.  A  new  edition,  carefully  edited  by
Rev.  David  Weston,  of  Madison  university,  was
published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Backus  histori-
cal society  of  Newton  Centre,  Mass.  (2  vols.,  1871).
This  work,  though  partisan,  is  still  valuable  to  the
student  of  New  England  history.  Dr.  Backus  also
wrote  a  history  of  Middleborough  in  the  3d  volume
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  collections.  See
Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the  American  Pulpit."

BACON,  David,  missionary,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Conn.,  in  1771 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  27  Aug.,
1817.  His  labors  and  sufferings  as  missionary  to
the  Ojibbewa  Indians  in  the  territory  of  Michigan,
and  afterward  as  founder  of  a  Christian  town  at
Tallmadge,  Ohio,  have  been  narrated  in  a  "  Sketch
of  the  Rev.  David  Bacon,"  by  Rev.  Leonard  Ba-
con, D.  D.  (Boston,  1876).— His  son.  Leonard,
clergyman,  b.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  19  Feb.,  1802 ;  d.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  24  Dec,  1881.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,  and  studied  theology  at
Andover.  In  March,  1825,  he  was  ordained  pastor
of  the  1st  church  in  New  Haven,  and  continued
in  this  office  until  his  death— fifty-seven  years.
From  1866,  being  relieved  of  the  niain  burden  of


130


BACON


BACON


pastoral  work,  he  occupied  the  chair  of  didactic
theology  in  Yale  until  1871,  and  thereafter  was
lecturer  on  ecclesiastical  polity  and  American
church  history.  He  was  a  representative  of  the
liberal  orthodoxy  and  historic  polity  of  the  ancient
New  England  churches.  His  life  was  incessantly
occupied  in  the  discussion  of  questions  bearing  on
the  interests  of  humanity  and  religion.  Probably
no  subject  of  serious  importance  that  came  into
general  notice  during  his  long  career  escaped  his
earnest  and  active  attention.  A  public  question
which  absorbed  much  of  his  thought  after  1828
was  that  of  slavery.  His  constant  position  was
that  of  resistance  to  slavery  on  the  one  hand,  and
of  resistance  to  the  extravagances  of  certain  abo-
litionists on  the  other;  and  he  thought  himself
well  rewarded  for  forty  years  of  debate,  in  which,
as  he  was  wont  to  say  of  himself,  quoting  the  lan-
guage of  Baxter,  that,  "  where  others  had  had  one
enemy  he  had  had  two,"  when  he  learned  that
Abraham  Lincoln  referred  to  his  volume  on  slavery
as  the  source  of  his  own  clear  and  sober  convictions
on  that  subject.  He  was  a  strong  supporter  of  the
union  throughout  the  civil  war,  and  took  active

part  in  the  va-
^^  rious constitu-

^^\  tional,  econom-

^^%,  leal,  and  moral

discussions to
j,  which it gave

rise.  He  was  in-
fluential in  se-
curing the re-
,  pealof  the"om-

<f  nibus clause "

in  the  Connec-
\ ticut divorce
, ,f /  , , ' law. In  March,


rr


i-Zi^ I


1874,  he  was
moderator  of
the  council  that
rebuked  Henry
Ward  Beecher's
society  for  ir-
regularly expel-
ling Theodore  Tilton,  and  in  February,  1876,  of  the
advisory  council  called  by  the  Plymouth  society.
During  his  later  years  he  was,  by  general  consent,
regarded  as  the  foremost  man  among  American
Congregationalists.  He  became  known  in  oral  de-
bate, in  which  he  excelled,  by  his  books,  and  pre-
eminently by  his  contributions  to  the  periodical
press.  From  1826  till  1838  he  was  one  of  the  edi-
tors of  the  "  Christian  Spectator."  In  1843  he  aided
in  establishing  "  The  New  Englander  "  review,  to
which  he  continued  to  contribute  copiously  until
his  death.  In  that  publication  appeared  many
articles  from  his  pen  denouncing,  on  religious  and
political  grounds,  the  policy  of  the  government  in
respect  to  slavery.  With  Drs.  Storrs  and  Thompson
he  founded  the  "  Independent "  in  1847,  and  contin-
ued with  them  in  the  editorship  of  it  for  sixteen
years.  He  had  great  delight  in  historical  studies,
especially  in  the  history  of  the  Puritans,  both  in
England  and  in  America.  Besides  innumerable
pamphlets  and  reviews,  he  published  "  Select
Works  of  Richard  Baxter,"  with  a  biography
(1830);  "Manual  for  Young  Church-Members"
(1833);  "Thirteen  Historical  Discourses"  on  the
200th  anniversi;,ry  of  the  beginning  of  the  1st
church  in  New  Haven  (1839) ;  "  Views  and  Re-
views ;  an  Appeal  against  Division  "  (1840) ;  "  Sla-
very Discussed  in  Occasional  Essays "  (1846) ;
"  Christian  Self-Culture  "  (1863)  ;  ""Four  Com-
memorative Discourses "  (1866) ;  "  Genesis  of  the


New  England  Churches  "  (1874) ;  "  Sketch  of  Rev.
David  Bacon  "  (1876) ;  and  "  Three  Civic  Orations
for  New  Haven"  (1879). — Delia,  daughter  of
David,  author,  b.  in  Tallniadge,  Oliio,  2  Feb.,  1811 ;
d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  2  Sept.,  1859.  She  was  a
teacher,  resided  for  some  time  in  Boston,  and  there
delivered  a  course  of  lectures.  She  published  anony-
mously "  Tales  of  the  Puritans  "  (New  Haven),  and
"  The  Bride  of  Fort  Edward,"  a  drama  (New  York,
1839).  Later  she  published  in  London  and  Boston
"  Philosophy  of  the  Plays  of  Shakespeare  Unfold-
ed" (1857),  with  a  preface  by  Nathaniel  Haw-
thorne, in  which  she  sought  to  prove  that  Lord
Bacon,  conjointly  with  other  writers,  was  the
author  of  the  Shakespearean  plays.  See  Haw-
thorne's "  Recollections  of  a  Gifted  Woman  "  in  his
"Our  Old  Home,"  and  Mrs.  Farrar's  "Recollec-
tions of  Seventy  Years." — Leonard's  son,  Leonard
Woolsey,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn,,  1
Jan.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1850,
then  studied  theology  at  Andover  and  Yale,  and
medicine  at  Yale,  receiving  his  degree  in  1855.
He  served  as  pastor  of  Congregational  or  Presby-
terian churches  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  Litclifield  and
Stamford,  Conn.,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  Baltimore,
Md.,  and  then  spent  five  years  in  Europe,  chiefly
at  Geneva.  Returning  in  'l877,  he  served  as  pastor
in  Norwich,  Conn.,  and  Philadelphia,  Pa.  He  has
written  much  for  the  periodical  press,  and  pub-
lished, besides  pamphlets  and  musical  composi-
tions, "The  Vatican  Council"  (1872);  "Church
Papers"  (1876);  "A  Life  worth  Living:  Life  of
Emily  Bliss  Gould  "  (1878) ;  "  Sunday  Observance
and  Sunday  Law,"  including  six  sermons  on  the
Sabbath  question,  by  his  brother,  George  Blagdon
Bacon  (1882) ;  "  The  Simplicity  that  is  in  Christ "
(1886) ;  and  sundry  translations  from  the  French
and  German,  and  compilations  of  psalmody. — An-
other son,  Theodore,  lawyer,  and  his  five  brothers,
have  won  professional  and  literary  distinction. — A
daughter,  Rebecca  Taylor,  became  distinguished
by  her  philanthropic  labors  in  the  founding  of  the
Hampton,  Va.,  institute  and  the  New  Haven  school
of  nursing.

BACON,  David  Francis,  physician,  b.  in  Pros-
pect, Conn.,  80  Nov.,  1813;  d.  in  New  York,  23
Jan.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1831,
and  at  the  medical  school  in  1836.  Soon  after  the
completion  of  his  studies  he  was  sent  as  principal
colonial  physician  to  Liberia  by  the  American
colonization  society.  During  the  greater  part  of
his  life  he  resided  in  New  York,  and  was  actively
interested  in  politics.  He  was  a  frequent  contrib-
utor to  periodical  literature,  and  published  "  Lives
of  the  Apostles  "  (New  York,  1835),  and  also  "  Wan-
derings on  the  Seas  and  Shores  of  Africa"  (1843).

BACON,  David  W.,  Roman  Catholic  bishop,
b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  New  York,  5
Nov.,  1874.  He  received  a  classical  training  in  the
New  York  Roman  Catholic  schools,  whence  he
proceeded  to  Mount  St.  Mary's  college  and  semi-
nary, Emmettsburg,  Md.,  and  having  completed
his  course  returned  to  New  York,  where  he  was  or-
dained in  1888,  and  soon  afterward  became  pastor  of
the  church  of  the  Assumption  iif  Brooklyn.  He  was
unwearied  in  his  efforts  for  the  extension  of  the
Roman  Catholic  church  in  that  city,  and,  though
his  own  congregation  was  the  largest  in  Brooklyn,
he  was  not  satisfied  until  he  had  purchased  the
land  and  erected  the  church  of  St.  Mary,  Star  of  the
Sea,  at  the  corner  of  Court  and  Luqueer  streets,
the  largest  church  edifice  in  the  city,  where  he  was
pastor  during  the  last  years  of  his  residence  in
Brooklyn.  In  1855  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of
the  newly  created  diocese  of  Portland,  Me,,  which


BACON


BACON


131


embraced  the  states  of  Maine  and  New  Hampshire.
His  labors  here  were  unremitting,  and  were  at-
tended with  great  success.  In  August,  1874,  he  made
a  voyage  to  Europe  for  his  health,  which  had  been
impaired  by  his  labors,  but  it  was  too  late  for  him
to  be  benefited.  On  his  arrival  in  France  he  was
obliged  to  go  immediately  into  the  hospital  at
Brest,  where  he  remained  until  he  was  carried  on
board  ship  to  return,  and,  on  his  arrival  in  New
York,  was  carried  to  St.  Vincent's  hospital,  where
he  died  the  next  evening.  He  was  a  man  of  fine
personal  presence  and  an  accomplished  scholar.

BACON,  Edmund,  lawyer,  b.  in  Virginia  in
January,  1776 ;  d.  in  Edgefield,  S.  C,  2  Feb.,  1826.
While  quite  young  he  was  chosen  by  the  citizens
of  Augusta,  Ga.,  where  he  was  at  school,  to  wel-
come Washington,  then  on  an  official  tour  through
the  south  as  president.  "  This  delicate  and  honor-
able task,"  says  a  contemporary  historian,  Judge
O'Neall,  "  he  accomplished  in  an  address  so  fortu-
nate as  to  have  attracted  not  only  the  attention  of
that  great  man,  but  to  have  procured  from  him,
for  the  orator,  a  present  of  several  law  books."  He
was  graduated  at  the  Litchfield,  Conn,,  law  school
and  settled  in  Savannah,  where  he  acquired  a  for-
tune at  the  bar  before  attaining  the  age  of  thirty-
three.  He  was  retained  in  the  settlement  of  the
estate  of  Gen.  Nathaniel  Greene,  near  Savannah,
and  it  is  a  curious  coincidence  that  a  quotation
from  one  of  the  law  books  presented  to  Mr.  Bacon
by  Gen.  Washington  enabled  him  to  gain  a  mooted
point  for  the  succession  to  the  estate  of  the  second
general  of  the  revolution.  Owing  to  ill  health,  he
removed  in  search  of  a  more  healthful  location  to
Edgefield,  where  he  soon  became  a  leading  practi-
tioner. He  is  the  "Ned  Brace  "of  Judge  Long-
street's  "  Georgia  Scenes,"  and  as  a  wit  and  humor-
ist was  conspicuous  among  his  contemporaries.  He
displayed  a  lavish  hospitality,  and  was  the  acknowl-
edged autocrat  of  the  table,  insomuch  that  on  a
certain  occasion,  when  the  learned  Dr.  Jonathan
Maxcy,  president  of  South  Carolina  college,  was
present  as  a  guest,  no  sooner  had  Mr,  Bacon  left
the  room  than  Dr.  Maxcy  enthusiastically  ex-
claimed. "  A  perfect  Garrick,  sir !  A  living,  breath-
ing, acting  Garrick ! "

BACON,  Edwin  Munroe,  journalist,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I,,  20  Oct.,  1844.  He  was  educated
in  private  schools,  finishing  his  studies  in  the
academy  at  Foxboro,  Mass.  At  the  age  of  nine-
teen he  was  appointed  on  the  staff  of  the  Boston
"  Advertiser,"  and  has  since  been  connected  as  re-
porter, correspondent,  managing  editor,  and  edi-
tor-in-chief with  various  journals.  He  was  chief
editor  of  the  Boston  "  Globe  "  during  its  career  as
an  independent  paper.  In  May,  1866,  he  assumed
the  editorial  control  of  the  Boston  "  Post."  The
degree  of  A.M.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Dart-
mouth in  1879.  He  has  edited  several  works,
among  them  "  King's  Hand-Book  of  Boston  "  and
"  Boston  Illustrated,"  and  written  a  "  Dictionary
of  Boston  "  (Boston,  1883,  new  ed.,  1886).

BACON,  Ezekiel,  jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  1
Sept.,  1776 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  18  Oct.,  1870.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  college  in  1794,  studied  law
in  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,  law  school,  and  began
practice  at  Stockbridge,  Mass.  He  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1806-'7;  a  representative  in
congress  from  1807  to  1813;  chief  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  the  western  district  of
Massachusetts  in  1813,  and  from  that  year  till  1815
first  comptroller  of  the  U.  S.  treasury.  He  re-
moved to  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1816 ;  was  a  'member  of
the  legislature  of  that  state,  judge  of  the  court  of
common  pleas,  and  a  member  of  the  state  constitu-


tional convention  of  1821.  In  1824  he  was  a  demo-
cratic candidate  for  congress,  but  was  defeated.
He  published  "  Recollections  of  Fifty  Years  "  (1843).

BACON,  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,
in  1840.  He  volunteered  in  the  13th  Massachusetts
infantry  for  the  civil  war,  and  was  wounded.  In
1864  he  went  to  Paris  and  entered  the  Ecole  des
beaux  arts,  studying  also  under  Cabanel  and  Ed-
ward Frere.  His  best-known  work  is  "  Boston  Boys
and  General  Gage,"  which  was  first  exhibited  in
the  Paris  salon  of  1875  and  at  the  Philadelphia
centennial  in  1876.  His  favorite  subjects  are  fig-
ures so  treated  as  to  tell  a  story,  historical  or  im-
aginative, in  the  most  effective  manner.  His  pro-
fessional residence  is  for  the  most  part  in  Paris,
and  he  is  a  frequent  exhibitor  at  the  salon.  The
titles  of  some  of  his  more  important  pictures  are
"Paying  the  Scot"  (1870);  "Franklin  at  Home"
(1876) ;  "  Les  Adieux  "  and  "  Land  !  Land !  "  (1878) ;
"In  Normandy"  (Paris  salon,  1878);  "The  Luck
of  Roaring  Camp  "  (1881) ;  and  "  Lover's  Quarrel "
(1882) ;  "  Le  Plainariste."

BACON,  John  Edmund,  lawyer,  b.  in  Edge-
field C.  H.,  S.  C,  3  March,  1832.  He  was  a  grand-
son of  Edmund  Bacon,  was  graduated  at  South
Carolina  college  in  1851,  and  studied  afterward  at
Leipsic,  Germany.  He  read  law  at  Litclifield,
Conn.,  and  soon  won  distinction  at  the  bar.  His
aptitude  for  the  languages,  ancient  and  modern,
led  to  his  appointment  as  secretary  of  legation  to
St.  Petersburg  in  1858,  and  he  acted  as  charge
d'affaires  until  the  arrival  of  the  Hon.  F.  W.  Pickens
as  U.  S,  minister.  In  1859  he  married  at  St.  Peters-
burg Rebecca  Calhoun,  youngest  daughter  of  Gov.
Pickens.  While  on  his  wedding  tour  he  heard  of
the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  and  sent  his  resignation
to  the  department  of  state.  In  1861  he  returned  to
South  Carolina,  entered  the  confederate  army  as  a
private,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major.  In  1866
he  was  sent  with  Gov.  James  L.  Orr  to  arrange  with
President  Johnson  for  the  restoration  of  South
Carolina  to  the  union.  In  1867  he  was  elected  dis-
trict judge,  but  was  soon  afterward  deposed  by  the
federal  general  then  in  command  of  that  depart-
ment. In  1872  he  was  a  democratic  nominee  for
congress,  but  was  defeated  by  R.  B.  Elliott,  the
able  negro  politician.  Judge  Bacon  has  travelled
extensively  in  Russia,  and  has  occupied  his  leisure
time  in  the  collection  and  preparation  of  materials
for  a  future  history  of  that  coimtry.  In  1886  he
was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  for  the  United
States  in  Uruguay  and  Paraguay.

BACON,  Nathaniel,  "  the  Virginia  rebel,"  a
colonial  leader,  b.  in  Suffolk,  England,  about  1630 ;
d.  in  January,  1677.  He  was  educated  in  the  inns
of  court,  London,  and  settled  on  a  large  estate  near
the  head  of  James  river  in  Virginia.  He  became  a
member  of  the  council  in  1672,  and  gained  great
popularity  by  his  winning  manners  and  eloquent
speech.  The  Virginians  were  dissatisfied  with  the
measures  taken  by  Gov.  Berkeley  for  defence
against  the  Indians,  and  chose  Bacon,  on  the  out-
break of  a  fresh  Indian  war,  to  lead  the  colonial
military  forces.  Although  the  governor  refused  to
commission  him,  a  force  collected  and  defeated  the
Indians.  On  29  May,  1676,  Gov.  Berkeley  pro-
claimed Bacon  a  rebel,  and  sent  a  force  against
him.  He  was  captured  and  ti'ied  before  the  gov-
ernor and  council  on  10  June,  when  he  was  ac-
quitted, restored  to  his  seat  in  the  council,  and
promised  a  commission  as  general  for  the  Indian
war.  But  the  governor  refused  to  issue  the  prom-
ised commission.  The  high  rates  of  taxation,  the
attempts  of  the  governor  to  curtail  the  franchise,
and  other  unpopular  measures,  in  conjunction  with


132


BACON


BADGER


his  inefficient  Indian  policy,  fed  the  popular  dis-
content. Upon  compulsion  of  the  rebels,  Gov.
Berkeley  in  July  dismantled  the  obnoxious  forts,
dissolved  the  assembly,  and  issued  writs  for  a  new
election.  When  he  failed  to  carry  out  his  prom-
ises, Bacon  returned  at  the  head  of  500  men  and
compelled  Berkeley  to  issue  the  promised  commis-
sion. He  then  prosecuted  the  operations  against
the  Indians  with  vigor;  but,  being  again  pro-
claimed a  rebel,  he  issued  a  counter-manifesto,  6
Aug.,  and,  marching  upon  Williamsburg,  drove  the
governor  across  the  bay  to  Accomac.  In  Septem-
ber he  again  routed  the  governor's  forces  and
burned  Jamestown,  while  Gov.  Berkeley  was  obliged
to  take  refuge  on  board  an  English  ship.  A  num-
ber of  women,  wives  of  the  governor's  adher-
ents, were  seized  and  held  as  hostages  by  the  rebels.
Bacon  died  before  carrying  out  his  plans  for  at-
tacking the  governor  at  Accomac,  and  Ingram,  who
succeeded  in  the  command  of  the  colonial  forces,
was  won  over  by  the  governor,  and,  after  the  execu-
tion of  a  number  of  Bacon's  principal  adherents,
the  rebellion  was  extinguished.  His  career  fur-
nished the  subject  for  a  novel  by  William  Car-
ruthers,  of  Virginia.  See  Force's  "  Tracts  Relating
to  the  Origin,  Settlement,  and  Progress  of  the  Colo-
nies "  :  also  Sparks's  "  American  Biography."

BACON,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sturbridge,
Mass.,  22  July,  1781 ;  d.  in  Kent,  Cape  Shilling,
Africa,  8  May,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1808,  and  then  studied  law,  which  he  sub-
sequently practised  in  Pennsylvania.  For  a  time
he  edited  the  "Worcester  ^gis,"  and  later  the
Lancaster,  Pa.,  "  Hive,"  and  then  was  ordained
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry.  In  1819  he
was  appointed  by  the  U.  S.  government  one  of  three
agents  to  colonize  Africa  with  negroes,  under  the
auspices  of  the  American  colonization  society.
The  expedition  sailed  for  Sierra  Leone,  reaching
that  port  on  9  March,  1820,  and  a  settlement  was
made  at  Campelar,  on  the  Sherboro  river.  Here
his  two  associates  died,  and  he  in  declining  health
was  removed  to  Kent,  where  his  last  days  were
spent.  See  "  Memoirs  of  Rev.  Samuel  Bacon,"  by
Jehudi  Ashmun  (1822).

BACON,  WiHiain  Thompson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Woodbury,  Conn.,  24  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  iii  Derby,
Conn.,  18  May,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1837,  delivering  the  valedictory  poem.  Then  he
studied  at  the  Yale  divinity  school,  and  from  1842
to  1845  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Trumbull,  Conn.  For  some  time  he  was  one  of
the  editors  of  the  "  New  Englander,"  and  during
several  years  editor  and  proprietor  of  the  "  Journal
and  Courier,"  of  New  Haven.  He  then  resumed
his  ministerial  labors,  and  was  in  charge  of  parishes
in  Kent  and  in  Derby,  Conn.  Two  volumes  of
poems  written  by  him  were  published  in  Cam-
bridge, the  first  in  1837  and  the  second  in  1848.

BADEAU,  Adam,  author,  b.  in  New  York  city,
29  Dec,  1831.  His  education  was  received  through
private  instruction  and  at  a  boarding-school  in  Tar-
rytown,  N.  Y.  He  volunteered  in  the  military  ser-
vice of  the  United  States  in  1862,  and  was  appoint-
ed aide  on  the  staff  of  Brig.-Gen.  Thomas  W.  Sher-
man. In  that  capacity  he  served  in  Louisiana  until
27  May,  1863,  when  he  was  severely  wounded,  al-  |
most  at  the  same  time  with  his  commanding  offi-
cer, in  leading  an  assault  on  the  confederate  works
at  Port  Hudson.  In  March,  1864,  he  was  appoint-
ed military  secretary  to  Gen.  Grant,  with  the  rank,
first  of  lieutenant-colonel  and  afterward  of  colonel.
On  this  duty  he  accompanied  the  general  in  the
Wilderness  and  Appomattox  campaigns,  and  re-
mained on  his  stall  until  March,  1869,  when  he  was


retired  from  the  army  with  the  full  rank  of  cap-
tain and  the  brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general,  U.
S.  A.  He  also  received  a  similar  brevet  in  the  vol-
unteer service.  From  May  to  December,  1869,  he
was  secretary  of  legation  at  London.  During  1870
he  was  sent  to  Madrid  as  a  bearer  of  government
despatches,  and  in  May  returned  to  London  as  con-
sul-general, retaining  that  office  until  September,
1881.  In  1877  and  1878  he  was  given  leave  of  ab-
sence by  the  state  department  to  accompany  Gen.
Grant  on  his  tour  round  the  world.  He  was  con-
sul-general at  Havana  from  May,  1882,  until  April,
1884,  and  then  resigned  because  he  was  not  permit-
ted by  the  state  department  to  substantiate  charges
of  corruption  of  which  he  accused  its  administra-
tion. He  had  been  appointed  U.  S.  minist  or  to  Brus-
sels in  1875,  and  to  Copenhagen  in  1881,  but  declined
both  appointments.  He  has  published  "  The  Vaga-
bond," a  collection  of  essays  (New  York,  1859);
"  Military  History  of  Ulysses  S.  Grant "  (3  vols.,
1867-'81) ; "  Conspiracy :  a'Cuban  Romance  "  (1885) ;
"  Aristocracy  in  England  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Grant  in
Peace  "  (1886).

BADGrER,  George  Edmund,  statesman,  b.  in
Newbern,  N.  C,  13  April,  1795 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,
N.  C,  11  May,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813,  and  studied  law  in  Raleigh.  In  1816  he
was  elected  to  the  state  legislature,  and  devoted
the  next  four  years  of  his  life  to  law  and  legisla-
tion. From  1820  to  1825  he  was  judge  of  the
North  Carolina  superior  court  at  Raleigh.  In  1840
he  was  a  prominent  advocate  of  the  election  of
Gen.  Harrison  to  the  presidency,  and  in  March,
1841,  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  navy.  On  the
death  of  President  Harrison,  and  the  separation  of
Mr.  Tyler  from  the  whig  party,  Mr.  Badger  re-
signed, giving  the  veto  of  President  Tyler  on  the
second  bank  bill  as  his  reason.  The  whigs  of
North  Carolina  returned  him  at  the  first  opportu-
nity to  the  senate.  He  was  elected  to  fill  a  vacan-
cy in  1846,  and  in  1848  reelected  for  a  full  term.
In  1853  President  Fillmore  nominated  him  as  a
judge  of  the  U,  S.  supreme  court,  but  the  senate
refused  to  confirm  the  nomination.  At  the  expi-
ration of  his  senatorial  term  he  retired  from  pub-
lic life  and  devoted  himself  wholly  to  his  profes-
sion. In  February,  1861,  when  the'  proposition  to
hold  a  convention  for  the  purpose  of  seceding  from
the  union  was  submitted  to  the  people  of  his  state,
he  consented  to  serve  as  a  union  candidate  if  the
convention  should  be  called.  The  proposition  was
defeated  by  the  people ;  but  when,  in  May,  1861,
the  convention  was  finally  called,  he  served  in  it
as  a  representative  from  Wake  co.  He  spoke  ably
in  defence  of  the  union,  and  after  the  ordinance  of
secession  was  passed  was  known  as  a  member  of
the  conservative  party.  Mr,  Badger  was  a  vigor-
ous speaker,  but  wrote  little.  He  excelled  in  de-
bate and  was  a  man  of  profound  research,

BADOER,  Joseph,  soldier,  b,  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1722;  d,  4  April,  1803,  He  held
several  civil  and  military  offices  in  his  native  place,
but  removed  to  Gilmanton,  N,  H.,  in  1763.  He  be-
came a  colonel  in  the  revolutionary  army  in  1771,
and  was  mustering  officer  of  troops  in  his  part  of
the  state,  and  a  member  of  the  provincial  congress.
He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  in  1780,  was
judge  of  probate  from  1784  to  1797,  and  in  1788
was  a  member  of  the  convention  that  adopted  the
federal  constitution.  In  1784  and  1790-'l  he  was
a  member  of  the  state  coimcil.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  Gilmanton  academy,

BADGER,  Joseph,  missionary,  b.  in  Wilbra-
ham,  Mass.,  28  Fob,,  1757;  d,  in  Perrysburg,  Oliio,
5  May,  1846, His  early  education  was  obtained


BADGER


BADIN


133


entirely  from  his  parents.  At  eighteen  years  of
age  hejoined  tlie  revolutionary  army.  Four  years
Ititer  he  entered  the  family  of  Rev.  Mr.  Day,  father
of  President  Day  of  Yale,  and  began  study  with
boys  of  eight  or  nine  years.  Soon  afterward  he
determined  to  become  a  clergyman,  and  entered
Yale  college  in  1781.  He  at  first  supported  him-
self by  manual  labor  and  afterward  by  teaching
school,  the  sum  of  $200,  in  continental  money,
which  he  had  saved,  scarcely  serving  to  buy  him  a
coat.  He  was  graduated  in  1785,  studied  divinity,
and  in  1787  became  pastor  at  Blandford,  Mass.,
where  he  remained  until  1800.  In  that  year  the
missionary  society  sent  him  to  the  unsettled  part
of  the  country  northwest  of  the  Ohio  river.  Here
he  endured  great  hardships  for  thirty  years,  going
from  settlement  to  settlement,  over  a  country  where
there  were  neither  roads  nor  bridges,  and  often
passing  the  night  in  the  branches  of  a  tree.  This
mode  of  life  gave  him  great  familiarity  with  the
country,  which  was  of  use  to  the  American  army
during  the  war  of  1812,  when  he  served  as  chap-
lain. He  became  an  intimate  friend  of  Gen.  Har-
rison, who  gave  him  his  appointment.  In  1835  he
retired  and  lived  with  a  daughter  until  his  death.
See  an  autobiographical  letter  in  the  "American
Quarterly  Register  "  (vol.  xiii.,  Andover).

BADOER,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Gilman-
ton,  N.  H.,  16  Aug.,  1792;  d.  12  May,  1852.  His
father,  revolting  against  the  Calvinism  in  which  he
had  been  educated,  had  become  a  deist,  and  Joseph
was  given  no  religious  training.  When  he  was
ten  years  old  his  family  removed  to  Crompton,
Canada,  then  almost  a  wilderness.  He  was  con-
verted in  1811  while  visiting  his  native  place,  and
in  1812  was  baptized  and  began  preaching  without
connecting  himself  with  any  regular  church.  He
travelled  tor  a  time  with  a  young  man  named
Adams,  who  shortly  afterward  united  with  the
Methodists;  but  Baclger  determined  to  "go  forth
and  preach  a  free  salvation  to  all  who  would  hear."
After  laboring  for  two  years  in  Lower  Canada  with
great  success.  Badger  received  ordination  at  the
hands  of  the  Free-will  Baptists,  but  maintained  his
independent  position.  In  1814  he  returned  to
New  Hampshire  and  preached  with  remarkable
success,  though  his  methods  made  him  unpopular
with  the  Calvinists.  In  1817  he  preached  as  an
itinerant  in  the  state  of  New  York,  and  the  churches
that  he  founded  joined  the  denomination  known  as
Christians.  After  a  preaching  tour  through  the
west  in  1825  and  a  visit  to  Boston,  Mr.  Badger  re-
turned to  New  York,  where  he  edited  the  "  Palla-
dium," at  that  time  the  organ  of  the  Christian  de-
nomination. A  stroke  of  paralysis  forced  him  to
give  up  work,  but  he  preached  again  for  some
time  before  the  final  shock.  See  "  Life  of  Joseph
Badger,"  by  E.  G.  Holland  (New  York,  1854).

BADGER,  Miltou,  clergyman,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  6  May,  1800 ;  d.  in  Madison,  Conn.,  1  March,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  with  honor  in
1823.  After  spending  a  year  in  teaching  in  New
Canaan,  ConUo,  he  began  his  theological  studies  at
Andover  theological  seminary,  but  in  1826  removed
to  New  Haven  to  become  a  tutor  in  Yale  college,
and  finished  his  preparation  for  the  ministry  there.
He  was  ordained  3  Jan.,  1828,  as  pastor  of  the
South  Congregational  church  in  Andover,  Mass.,
and  remained  there  until  1835,  when  he  became
associate  secretary  of  the  American  home  mission-
ary society.  He  was  soon,  by  the  resignation  of
Dr.  Peters,  placed  in  the  position  of  senior  secre-
tary, and  for  thirty-four  years  he  performed  the
duties  of  his  office  with  great  faithfulness  and  skill.
He  possessed  a  vigorous  constitution,  but  the  con-


stant pressure  of  his  work  proved  too  much  for
hnn,  and  in  1869  he  was  compelled,  l)y  the  mani-
festations of  the  disease  that  finally  ended  his  life,
to  withdraw  from  active  duties.

BADGER,  Oscar  C,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Wind-
ham, Conn.,  12  Aug.,  1823.  Pie  entered  the  navy
from  Pennsylvania,  as  a  midshipman,  9  Sept.,  1841,
served  on  the  steamer  "  Mississippi  "  on  the  eastern
coast  of  Mexico  d\n-ing  the  war  with'  that  country,
and  participated  in  the  attat-k  on  Alvarado  in  1846.
He  was  made  passed  midshipman  10  Aug.,  1847,
from  that  time  until  1852  was  on  various  ships  of
the  Pacific  squadron,  and  in  1853-4  at  the  naval
observatory.  On  15  Sept.,  1855,  he  was  made  lieu-
tenant, and,  while  attached  to  the  sloop  "John
Adams  "  in  1855-'6,  he  commanded  a  party  that
attacked  and  destroyed  the  village  of  Vutia,  Feejee
i3lands.  In  1861-'2  he  commanded  the  steamer
"Anacostia,"  of  the  Potomac  flotilla,  and  Lieut.
Wyman,  the  commander  of  the  flotilla,  often  men-
tioned in  his  reports  the  precision  of  fire  of  Bad-
ger's vessel.  He  was  made  lieutenant-commander
on  16  July,  1862,  and  commanded  the  iron-elads
"  Patapsco  "  and  "  Montauk  "  in  the  engagements
with  the  forts  and  batteries  in  Charleston  harbor
in  1863.  In  the  night  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  1
Sept.,  1863,  he  was  on  the  flag-ship  "  Weehawken,"
as  acting  fleet  captain,  when  he  was  severely
wounded  in  the  leg  by  a  metallic  splinter.  After
this  he  was  on  shore  duty  until  1866,  and  on  23
July  of  that  year  was  made  commander.  From
1866  to  1867  he  conmianded  the  "  Peoria,"  of  the
North  Atlantic  squadron,  and  received  a  vote  of
thanks  from  the  legislatures  of  the  islands  of  An-
tigua and  St.  Kitts  for  services  rendered  to  the
authorities.  From  1868  to  1870  he  was  at  the
Portsmouth  navy-yard.  In  1872  he  was  made  cap-
tain, and  on  15  Nov.,  1881,  commodore.  In  1885
he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.

BADGER,  William,  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire, b.  in  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  13  Jan.,  1779;  d.
there,  21  Sept.,  1852.  In  his  youth  he  devoted  him-
self to  business.  He  was  in  the  lower  house  of  the
state  legislature  from  1810  to  1812,  and  from  1814
to  1816  in  the  state  senate,  of  which  he  was  the
president  in  1816.  He  was  associate  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  from  1816  to  1821,  and  from
1822  to  1832  high  sheriff  of  Strafford  co.  He  was
governor  from  1834  to  1836.

BADIN,  Stephen  Theodore,  clergyman,  b.  in
Orleans,  France,  in  1768 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati  in  1853.
His  parents  regarded  the  mental  qualities  that  he
developed  in  his  boyhood  as  extraordinary,  and,  al-
though very  poor,  gave  him  a  classical  education.
He  was  sent  for  three  years  to  the  college  Mon-
tagu in  Paris,  where  he  acquired  a  thorough  classi-
cal training,  and  entered  the  Sulpician  seminary
at  Tours  in  1789,  with  the  object  of  becoming  a
priest.  He  immigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1792
and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Carroll  in  the  old  ca-
thedral of  Baltimore  in  1793,  being  the  first  priest
ordained  in  the  United  States.  He  went  to  George-
town college  soon  afterward  to  perfect  himself  in
the  knowledge  of  the  English  language,  and  was
then  appointed  to  do  missionary  work  in  Ken-
tucky, which  at  that  period  formed  a  part  of  the
diocese  of  Baltimore.  He  took  up  his  residence  in
Scott  CO.,  occasionally  making  excursions  to  the
Catholic  settlements  in  other  parts  of  the  territory.
His  mission  extended  over  hundreds  of  miles,  and
he  was  obliged  to  be  almost  constantly  on  horse-
back, in  which  way  he  travelled  more  than  100,000
miles.  In  1790,  when  his  sufferings  and  hardships
were  greatest,  he  was  offered  the  rectorship  of  St.
Genevieve  by  the  Spanish  governor  of  the  town.


134


BADLAM


BAFFIN


but  did  not  even  return  an  answer.  Father  Badin
was  for  about  tliree  years  the  only  priest  in  Ken-
tucky. In  1797  Bishop  Carroll  appointed  him
vicar-general,  and  sent  him  an  assistant,  who  died
in  the  following  year.  The  death  or  withdrawal  of
other  priests,  who  had  been  assigned  to  the  same
mission,  left  Father  Badin  alone  again  in  Kentucky
in  1803,  and  as,  through  emigration  from  Mary-
land, the  Catholic  population  was  rapidly  increas-
ing, his  missionary  duties  were  of  a  very  exhaust-
ing nature.  In  1805  he  published  his  "  Principles
of  Catholics,"  the  first  Catholic  work  printed  in  the
west.  He  organized  a  mission  at  Louisville  in  1806,
and  in  1811  built  the  church  of  St.  Louis  in  that
city.  In  1812  he  erected  the  church  of  St.  Peter  in
Lexington,  principally  through  the  aid  of  his  Prot-
estant friends.  Owing  to  a  misunderstanding
between  him  and  Bishop  Flaget  as  to  the  settle-
ment of  title  to  certain  properties  that  had  been
acquired  by  Father  Badin  for  the  church  before
the  creation  of  the  diocese  of  Bardstown,  the  latter
left  Kentucky  in  1819,  and  spent  nine  years  travel-
ling through  Europe.  On  his  return  he  took
charge  of  the  Monroe  mission,  Michigan  territory,
for  a  year  and  a  half.  From  1830  to  1836  lie
was  connected  with  the  Pottawattamie  Indians  on
St.  Joseph's  river,  Indiana.  He  was  successful,  not
only  in  converting  them  to  Christianity,  but  in
forming  them  to  the  habits  of  civilized  life.  He
established  schools  among  them,  and  in  a  few  years
all  the  young  people  of  the  tribe  had  learned  to
read  English.  The  last  three  years  of  Father  Ba-
din's  life  were  spent  in  Cincinnati  as  the  guest  of
Archbishop  Purcell.  Father  Badin  was  the  author
of  several  Latin  poems  in  hexameter  verse.  The
principal  are  "  Carmen  Sacrum,"  a  translation  of
which  was  printed  at  Frankfort;  the  "Epice-
dium,"  written  on  the  death  of  Col.  Joe  Daviess  at
the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  translated  by  Dr.  Mitch-
ell, of  New  York ;  and  "  Sanctissimae  Trinitatis
Laudes  et  Invocatis  "  (Louisville,  1843).

BADLAM,  Ezra,  soldier,  b.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  25
May,  1746;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  5  April,  1788.
He  was  a  brother  of  Gen.  Stephen  Badlam,  was  a
captain  in  Grilley's  artillery  regiment  at  the  siege
of  Boston  in  1775,  was  in  L.  Baldwin's  regi-
ment in  1776,  was  present  at  Trenton  and  Prince-
ton, and  from  7  July,  1777,  to  31  Dec,  1780,
was  lieutenant-colonel  of  Bailey's  regiment,  the  2d
Massachusetts.  He  was  in  M.  Jackson's  regiment
from  1780  to  1782,  and  was  taken  prisoner  by  the
British  Col.  Norton  at  White  Plains,  3  Feb.,  1780.
He  afterward  served  as  a  colonel  in  the  suppression
of  Shays's  rebellion. — His  brother,  Stephen,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Milton,  Mass.,  25  March,  1748;  d.  in
Dorchester,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1815.  He  entered  the
army  in  1775,  became  lieutenant  of  artillery,  and
soon  rose  to  the  rank  of  major,  commanding  the
artillery  in  the  department  of  Canada.  In  July,
1776,  he  took  possession  of  the  eminence  opposite
Ticonderoga,  naming  it  Mount  Independence  on
the  18th  of  that  month,  on  receipt  of  the  news  that
the  declaration  had  been  adopted  by  congress.  In
August,  1777,  he  did  good  service  at  Fort  Stanwix
under  Willet,  and  in  1799  was  made  brigadier-gen-
eral of  militia.  When  a  captain  in  New  York  he
became  acquainted  with  Alexander  Hamilton,  who
frequently  asked  his  advice  in  matters  of  tactics.
He  was  throughout  his  life  a  great  admirer  and
supporter  of  Gen.  Washington,  by  whom  he  was
much  esteemed.  His  later  years  were  passed  in
Dorchester,  Mass.,  where  he  was  prominent  in  local
affairs  and  in  the  church.

BAENA,  Antonio  Ladislao  Monteiro  (bah-
ay'-na),  Portuguese  historian,  d.  about  1851. He


went  to  Brazil,  and  was  for  many  years  in  the  mili-
tary service  of  that  empire.  He  made  explora-
tions in  the  province  of  Para,  and  published  a  full
description  of  it,  in  a  book  entitled  "  Ensaio  Coro-
grafico  sobre  a  Provinzia  do  Para"  (1839),  and
other  valuable  works.

BAERLE,  or  BARLJEUS,  Gaspard  van,
Dutch  author,  b.  in  Antwerp  in  1584 ;  d.  in  1648.  He
was  professor  of  philosophy  and  theology  in  Ley-
den  (1617)  and  Amsterdam  (1631).  His  works  are :
"  Poemata  Epistolae "  (2  vols.),  and  "  Rerum  in
Brasilia  gestarom  Historia  "  (Amsterdam,  1647).

BAEZ,  Buenaventura  (bah'-eth),  president  of
the  Dominican  republic,  b.  in  Azua,  Santo  Do-
mingo, early  in  the  19th  century.  He  inherited  a
large  fortune  from  his  father,  a  mulatto,  who  was
prominent  in  the  revolution  of  1808;  cooperated
with  Santana  in  the  establishment  of  Dominican
independence;  and  was  president  from  1849  till
1853,  when  he  was  supplanted  by  Santana,  who  ex-
pelled him  from  the  country.  After  the  deposi-
tion of  Santana  in  May,  1856,  Baez,  who  had  spent
the  interval  in  New  York,  resumed  the  presidency,
6  Oct.,  1856;  but  was  again  supplanted  by  San-
tana, 11  June,  1858,  and  obliged  to  remain  abroad
till  after  the  evacuation  of  Dominica  by  the  Span-
iards in  1865.  In  December  of  that  year  he  was
elected  for  a  third  term.  This  was  interrupted  in
March,  1866,  by  an  insurrection  led  by  Gen.  Pimen-
tel  in  favor  of  Cabral,  in  consequence  of  which
Baez  was  banished  to  St.  Thomas.  A  new  revolu-
tion in  December,  1867,  drove  Cabral  from  power
and  restored  Btiez.  After  various  direct  and  indi-
rect negotiations,  he  signed,  29  Nov.,  1869,  two
treaties  with  President  Grant,  one  for  the  cession
of  the  bay  of  Samana,  and  the  other  for  the  annex-
ation of  the  Dominican  republic  to  the  United
States,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  people  of  the
republic,  which  was  ostensibly  obtained  in  an  elec-
tion (decreed  by  Baez,  16  Feb.,  1870)  held  under  the
protection  of  American  men-of-war.  The  U.  S.
senate,  however,  refused  to  ratify  the  treaty.  A
commission,  appointed  by  President  Grant,  under
authority  of  congress,  to  visit  and  examine  the
island,  reported  in  April,  1871,  in  favor  of  annexa-
tion;  but  the  measure  was  pressed  no  further.  Its
failure  encouraged  Cabral  and  Pimentel  to  renew
the  civil  war.

BAFFIN,  William,  navigator,  supposed  to  have
been  born  in  London  about  1584 ;  d.  in  Kishm,  Per-
sia, 23  Jan.,  1622.  He  is  first  mentioned  in  1612  as
pilot  of  the  "  Patience,"  one  of  the  vessels  that  ac-
companied James  Hall  in  his  voyage  of  discovery
to  Greenland.  An  account  of  the  expedition  was
written  by  him  on  his  return,  part  of  which,  pub-
lished by  Purchas,  has  been  preserved.  In  1613,
having  entered  the  service  of  the  Muscovy  Com-
pany, he  became  chief  pilot  of  seven  vessels,  and
visited  the  Spitzbergen  coast  for  fishing.  Purchas
also  preserved  an  account  of  this  voyage,  written
by  Baffin.  Again,  in  1614,  he  made  a  similar  trip.
In  1615  he  piloted  the  "  Discovery,"  commanded  by
Robert  Bylot,  in  her  search  for  the  northwest  pas-
sage. His  original  manuscript  description  of  this
voyage,  containing  much  valuable  information,  is
preserved  in  the  British  museum.  In  1616  he  again
sailed  with  the  "Discovery,"  passed  up  through
Davis  strait,  reaching  as  far  as  78°  N.  latitude,  and
cruised  around  the  open  sea  now  known  as  Baffin's
bay.  His  narrative  of  this  voyage  was  published
by  Purchas,  probably  in  an  imperfect  form,  and
his  opinion  is  there  recorded  against  the  existence
of  a  northwest  passage.  He  then  joined  the  East
India  Company  and  made  voyages  to  the  east  un-
der Capt.  Shilling  in  1617  and  1620. His  final


BAGBY


BAILEY


135


voyage  was  made  as  master  of  the  "  London  "  in
1621,  sent  out  for  the  purpose  of  driving  the  Portu-
guese from  Ormuz.  During  the  siege,  while  en-
gaged in  making  measurements,  he  was  sliot,  and
died  almost  immediately.  Baffin  was  the  first  to
determine  longitude  by  observing  the  time  of  the
moon's  culmination.  See  "  The  Voyages  of  William
Baffin,  1612-32,"  edited,  with  notes  and  an  intro-
duction, by  Clements  R.  Markham,  C.  B.,  P.  R.  S.,
published  i)y  the  Hakluyt  society  (London,  1881).

BAGBY,  ArtFmr  Pendleton,  governor  of  Ala-
bama, b.  in  Virginia  in  1794;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,
21  Sept.,  1858.  He  received  a  liberal  education,
and  settled  in  Alabama  in  1818.  He  soon  gained
a  reputation  as  a  criminal  lawyer,  and  in  1820-'2
was  sent  to  the  legislature,  where  he  was  chosen
speaker  of  the  house.  He  was  governor  from  1837
to  1841,  when  he  was  sent  as  a  democrat  to  the  U.
S.  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resigna-
tion of  Clement  C.  Clay.  Here  he  served  until  16
June,  1848,  when  he  accepted  the  office  of  minister
to  Russia.  On  14  May,  1849,  he  withdrew  and  re-
turned home.  He  was  afterward  one  of  the  com-
mission appointed  to  codify  the  laws  of  Alabama.

BACkBY,  Georg-e  William,  author,  b.  in  Buck-
ingham CO.,  Va.,  13  Aug.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  29  Nov.,  1888.  He  was  educated  at  Edgehill
school,  Princeton,  N.  J.,  and  at  Delaware  college,
Newark,  Del.,  leaving  the  latter  at  the  end  of  his
sophomore  year.  Subsequently  he  studied  medi-
cine and  was  graduated  at  the  medical  department
of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  In  1853  he  be-
came editor  of  the  Lynchburg  (Va.)  daily  "  Ex-
press," and  was  for  some  time  the  Washington
correspondent  of  the  New  Orleans  "  Crescent,"
Charleston  "  Mercury,"  and  Richmond  "  Dispatch."
From  1859  he  was,  until  its  suspension  near  the
end  of  the  war,  editor  of  the  "  Southern  Literary
Messenger,"  and  at  the  same  time  associate  editor
of  the  Richmond  "  Whig,"  and  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Southern  Illustrated  News."  From  1
Ja,n.,  1870,  to  1  July,  1878,  he  was  state  librarian  of
Virginia.  He  lectured  frequently,  and  met  with
success  as  a  humorist  in  many  parts  of  Virginia
and  Maryland.  He  was  the  author  of  many  hu-
morous articles  published  under  the  pen  name  of
"  Mozis  Addums."  His  sketches  were  collected  and
published  bv  Mrs.  Bagby,  as  "The  Writings  of
Dr.  Bagby  "  '(3  vols.,  Richmond,  1884-'6).

BACxIOLI,  Antonio,  musician,  b.  in  Bologna,
Italy,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  New  York^  11  Feb.,  1871.  He  be-
gan the  study  of  music  early  in  life,  and,  after  a  pre-
paratory course  in  several  schools,  entered  the  con-
servatory at  Naples,  and  remained  there  for  several
years  under  Zingarelli.  In  1832  he  arrived  in  New
York  as  musical  director  of  the  Montresor  troupe,
the  first  Italian  opera  company  that  ever  visited
the  United  States.  After  a  successful  season  the
opera  troupe  went  to  Havana ;  but  Bagioli  re-
mained in  New  York  and  established  himself  as  a
teacher  of  music,  attaining  a  success  probably  un-
surpassed by  any  professor  in  this  country.  He
published  "  One  Hour  of  Daily  Study  for  the  Ac-
quirement of  a  Correct  Pronunciation  of  the  Vow-
els, which  is  the  only  Method  to  become  a  Perfect
Vocalist "  (New  York,  1864).— His  only  daughter,
Theresa,  married  Gren.  Daniel  E.  Sickles.

BAOLEY,  John  Judson,  politician,  b.  in  Me-
dina, N.  Y.,  24  July,  1832 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,
Cal.,  27  July,  1881.  He  received  a  common-school
education  in  Lockport,  N.  Y.,  and  in  early  life  emi-
grated with  his  father,  settling  in  Constantine,
Mich.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  went  to  Detroit  and
secured  employment  in  a  tobacco  factory.  On  at-
taining his  majority  he  began  a  business  of  his  own


in  the  same  line,  and  was  continuously  engaged
with  it  until  his  death,  accumulating  a  large
property.  He  held  numerous  positions  of  public
trust  m  the  Detroit  city  government,  and  in  1868-
9  was  chairman  of  the  republican  state  central
committee,  gaining  great  credit  for  the  abilitv  with
which  he  conducted  the  presidential  canvass  of
1868.  In  1872  he  was  the  republican  candidate  for
governor,  and  was  elected  by  a  majority  exceeding
that  of  the  Grant  electors.  He  was  reelected  in
1874.  His  administrations  were  marked  by  his  in-
terest in  all  measures  tending  to  the  public  good.
The  educational  and  charitable  institutions  were
benefited  by  the  judicious  legislation  urged  by
him,  and  the  status  of  the  liquor  traffic  owes  its  im-
proved condition  to  his  recommendations.  In  1881
he  was  prominently  mentioned  as  a  candidate  for
the  U.  S.  senate,  but  lost  the  nomination  in  the  re-
publican caucus  by  a  single  vote.  He  was  actively
identified  with  the  Unitarian  church  in  Detroit,
and  his  donations  to  various  charitable  institutions
were  large  and  numerous.

BAOOT,  Sir  Charles,  British  diplomatist,  b.  in
Blithfield,  Stafford  co.,  England,  23  Sept.,  1781 ;  d.
in  Kingston,  Canada,  18  May,  1843.  He  was  the
second  son  of  William,  first  Lord  Bagot.  In  1807
he  was  made  under  foreign  secretary  of  state ;  in
1814  was  sent  on  a  special  mission  to  Paris ;  was
minister-plenipotentiary  at  Washington  from  1816
to  1819;  in  1820  was  appointed  ambassador  to
Russia;  in  1824  was  sent  on  a  similar  mission  to
Holland ;  and  in  1834  was  sent  as  a  special  ambas-
sador to  Austria.  On  10  June,  1842,  after  the
death  of  Lord  Sydenham,  he  became  governor-gen-
eral of  British  North  America,  which  office  he  re-
tained until  his  death.

BAHNSON,  Oeorge  Frederick,  Moravian
bishop,  b.  in  Christiansfeld,  Denmark,  16  Sept.,
1805 ;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  C,  11  Sept.,  1869.  He  was
educated  at  the  Moravian  college  and  the  theologi-
cal seminary  in  Germany,  and  in  1829  emigrated  to
the  United  States  and  entered  the  boarding-school
at  Nazareth,  Pa.,  as  a  tutor.  Five  years  later  he
began  his  ministerial  career.  The  two  churches  in
which  he  labored  longest  and  with  most  success
were  those  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  Salem,  N.  C.  He
was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  at  Bethlehem,
13  May,  1860,  and  presided  over  the  southern  dis-
trict. In  1869  he  went  to  Europe  to  attend  the
general  synod  of  the  Moravian  church,  and  in  the
course  of  the  journey  his  health  failed,  and  he  died
a  few  weeks  after  his  return.  Bishop  Bahnson  was
a  man  of  commanding  presence,  a  powerful  preach-
er, and  a  ripe  scholar.

BAILEY,  Ann,  scout,  d.  in  Harrison  township,
Gallia  co.,  Ohio,  23  Nov.,  1825.  She  was  reputed
to  have  been  born  in  Liverpool,  England,  about
1725,  to  have  been  kidnapped  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen, carried  off  to  Virginia  and  sold,  and  to  have
married  a  man  named  Trotter  when  thirty  years  of
age.  Trotter  was  a  member  of  Col.  Lewis's  regi-
ment, and  was  killed  by  the  Indians  in  the  battle
of  Point  Pleasant  on  10  Oct.,  1774.  His  widow,
moved  by  revenge,  assumed  male  clothing  and
adopted  the  life  of  a  scout  and  spy,  and  was  often
employed  to  convey  information  to  the  command-
ants of  forts.  In  1790  she  married  a  soldier  named
John  Bailey,  stationed  at  Fort  Clendenin,  on  Kana-
wha river.  She  was  exceedingly  exjiert  with  the
rifle,  possessed  a  black  horse  of  remarkable  intelli-
gence, and  made  many  perilous  journeys  from  the
settlements  on  the  James  and  Potomac  rivers  to
Fort  Clendenin  and  other  distant  outposts.  On
one  occasion  she  rescued  the  garrison  of  the  fort
from  destruction  by  bringing  a  supply  of  ammu-


136


BAILEY


BAILEY


nition  from  Fort  L^nion,  now  Lewisburg.  After
the  Indian  war,  during  which  her  second  husband
was  killed,  she  lived  with  her  son,  William  Trot-
ter, on  Kanawha  river,  and  removed  with  him  in
1818  to  Ohio,  where,  in  old  age,  she  taught  school,
displaying  great  mental  and  physical  vigor.

BAILEY,  Anna  Warner,  known  as  "  Mother
Bailey,"  patriot,  b.  in  Groton,  Conn.,  11  Oct.,  1758 ;
d.  there  in  1850.  She  was  the  wife  of  Capt.  Elijah
Bailey,  of  Groton.  She  witnessed  the  massacre  at
Fort  Griswold  on  6  Sept.,  1781,  and  on  7  Sept.
walked  to  the  scene  of  carnage,  three  miles,  to
search  for  an  uncle,  whom  she  found  fatally
wounded.  At  his  request  to  see  his  wife  and  child
she  ran  home,  saddled  a  horse  for  the  feeble
mother,  and  carried  the  child  herself  to  the  dying
patriot.  In  July,  1813,  when  the  British  threat-
ened to  attack  New  London,  Mother  Bailey  ren-
dered great  aid  to  its  defenders  by  tearing  up  flan-
nel garments  for  cartridges.

BAILEY,  Ebenezer,  educator,  b.  in  West  New-
bury, Mass.,  25  June,  1795;  d.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  5
Aug.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1817,
after  which  he  taught  school,  and  also  entered  his
name  as  a  law  student.  Afterward  he  became  a
tutor  in  Virginia,  but  in  1819  returned  to  New-
buryport,  and  there  opened  a  private  school  for
young  ladies.  In  1823  he  was  appointed  master  of
the  Franklin  grammar  school,  and  in  1825  teacher
of  the  Boston  high  school  for  girls.  This  school
proved  unsuccessful,  and  Josiah  Quincy,  then
mayor,  pronounced  it  an  entire  failure.  Mr.  Bailey
at  once  replied  with  vigor  in  a  "  Review  of  the
Mayor's  Report  upon  the  High  School  for  Girls  "
(Boston,  1828).  Subsequently  he  had  charge  of  the
young  ladies'  high  school,  and  in  1830  was  active
in  the  establishment  of  the  American  Institute  of
Education,  afterward  filling  various  offices  in  that
body.  In  1838  he  established  a  boys'  school  at
Roxbury,  which,  in  1839,  was  moved  to  Lynn.
Mr.  Bailey  was  the  successful  competitor  for  the
prize  ode  delivered  at  the  Boston  theatre  in  com-
memoration of  Washington's  death.  Afterward
he  was  on  several  occasions  poet  at  the  *  B  K  an-
niversaries of  Harvard.  Mr.  Bailey  was  at  various
times  a  member  of  the  city  council  of  Boston,  di-
rector of  the  home  of  reform,  president  of  the  Bos-
ton lyceum,  and  director  of  the  Boston  mechanics'
institute.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
Boston  "  Courier  "  and  other  periodicals,  and  edited
"  The  Young  Ladies'  Class-Book  "  (Boston,  1831) ;
"  Blakewell's  Philosophical  Conversations  "  (1832) ;
and  "  First  Lessons  on  Algebra  "  (1833).

BAILEY,  Gamaliel,  journalist,  b.  in  Mount
Holly,  N.  J.,  3  Dec,  1807;  d.  at  sea,  5  June,
1859.  He  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia,  and
after  obtaining  his  degree  in  1828  sailed  as  a  ship's
doctor  to  China.  He  began  his  editorial  career  in
the  office  of  the  "  Methodist  Protestant "  in  Balti-
more, but  in  1831  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where
he  served  as  hospital  physician  during  the  cholera
epidemic.  His  sympathies  being  excited  on  the  oc-
casion of  the  expulsion  of  a  number  of  students  on
account,  of  anti-slavery  views  from  Lane  seminary,
he  became  an  active  agitator  against  slavery,  and
in  1836  he  associated  himself  with  James  G.  Birney
in  the  conduct  of  the  "  Cincinnati  Philanthropist,"
the  earliest  anti-slavery  newspaper  in  the  west,  of
which  in  1837  he  became  sole  editor.  Twice  in  that
year,  and  again  in  1841,  the  printing-office  was
sacked  by  a  mob.  He  issued  the  paper  regularly
until  after  the  presidential  election  of  1844,  when
he  was  selected  to  direct  the  publication  of  a  new
abolitionist  organ  at  Washington.  The  first  num-
ber of  the  "National  Era,"  published  under  the


auspices  of  the  American  and  foreign  anti-slavery
society,  appeared  1  Jan.,  1847.  In  1848  an  angry
mob  laid  siege  to  the  office  for  three  days,  and
finally  separated  under  the  influence  of  an  elo-
quent harangue  by  the  editor.  The  "  Era,"  in
which  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin  "  originally  appeared,
ably  presented  the  opinions  of  the  anti-slavery
party.  Dr.  Bailey  died  while  on  a  voyage  to  Eu-
rope for  his  health.

BAILEY,  Gilbert  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dalton,  Pa.,  17  Oct.,  1822.  He  was  educated  at
Oberlin,  and,  after  studying  theology,  became  a  Bap-
tist clergyman,  holding  pastorates  in  various  places
in  New  York  and  Illinois  till  1863,  when  he  was
made  superintendent  of  the  Baptist  missions  in
Illinois,  and  from  1867  till  1875  was  secretary  of  the
Baptist  Theological  Union  in  Chicago.  The  system
of  "  minister's  institutes,"  now  prevalent  in  the
Baptist  denomination,  was  originated  by  him  in
1864,  and  they  were  subsequently  conducted  by
him  in  Chicago,  Upper  Alton,  and  Bloomingdale,
111.  He  resumed  his  preaching  and  had  charge  of
churches  in  Pennsylvania,  Michigan,  and  Iowa,
was  a  secretary  of  the  Italian  Bible  and  Sunday-
school  mission  in  1880-'l,  and  missionary  in
southern  California  in  1885-'6.  Besides  numerous
tracts  and  uncollected  poems,  he  has  published  a
"  History  of  the  Illinois  River  Baptist  Association  "
(New  York,  1857) ;  "  Caverns  of  Kentucky ''  (Chi-
cago, 1863) ;  "  Manual  of  Baptism  "  (Philadelphia,
1863);  "The  Trials  and  Victories  of  Religious
Liberty  in  America  "  (1876) ;  "  Three  Discourses  on
the  History,  Wonders,  and  Excellence  of  the  Bible  "
(Ottumwa,  1882) ;  "  The  Word  and  Works  of  God  "
(Philadelphia,  1883) ;  "  Prize  Discourse  on  Slander  "
(Washington,  1884) ;  and  "  Ingersollism  Exposed  "
(Ottumwa,  1884).

BAILEY,  Guilford  Dudley,  soldier,  b.  in  Mar-
tinsburg,  N.  Y.,  4  June,  1834;  killed  in  action,
31  May,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point
in  1856,  and  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery.  He  served
on  frontier  and  garrison  duty,  was  at  Fort  Leaven-
worth during  the  Kansas  disturbances  of  1857-'9,
and  at  West  Point  as  instructor  for  a  short  time  in
1859.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  stationed
at  Fort  Brown,  Texas,  but,  with  his  immediate
superior,  Capt.  Stoneman,  refused  to  surrender
when  Gen.  Twiggs  attempted  to  give  up  his  en-
tire command  to  the  confederates,  and  effected  his
escape  into  Mexico.  Reporting  for  duty  as  soon  as
he  could  reach  the  north,  he  was  sent  with  Hunt's
battery  to  the  relief  of  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.  Re-
turning on  account  of  sickness,  he  organized  and
was  appointed  colonel  of  tlie  1st  N.  Y.  light  artil-
lery volunteers  (25  Sept.,  1861),  joined  the  Army  of
the  Potomac,  was  detailed  as  chief  of  artillery  in
Gen.  Casey's  division  during  the  Peninsular  cam-
paign, and  was  killed  among  his  guns  at  the  battle
of  Seven  Pines.  A  monument  has  been  raised  to
his  memory  in  the  cemetery  at  Poughkeepsie.

BAILEY,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Newbury,  Mass.,
2  July,  1728;  d.  in  Newbury,  Vt.,  1  March,  1816.
He  settled  in  Hampstead  in  1745,  and  served  as  a
captain  during  the  French  war  in  1756.  He  was
with  Col.  Munroe  in  the  siege  of  Fort  William
Henry,  and  was  among  those  who  escaped  the
subsequent  massacre  on  7  Aug.,  1757.  He  was  also
present  at  the  capture  of  Ticonderoga  and  Crown
Point  in  1759.  In  1764  he  removed  to  Vermont,
and  there  obtained  a  township.  Later  he  was  ap-
pointed Ijrigadier-general  of  militia  by  the  state
of  New  York.  During  the  revolutionary  war  he
was  commissary-general  of  the  northern  depart-
ment, and  in  that  capacity  did  much  in  benefiting
the  cause  of  the  Americans.


BAILEY


BAILEY


137


BAILEY,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Kowley,  Mass.,
16  April,  1781 ;  d.  in  Annapolis,  N.  S.,  26  July,  1808.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1755,  after  which
he  visited  England,  was  ordained  a  priest  in  the
church  of  England,  and  became  a  missionary  in
Pownalborough,  now  Wiscasset,  Maine.  During
the  revolutionary  war  he  was  a  loyalist,  and  in
1779  he  retired  to  Nova  Scotia.  He  was  called  to
the  rectorship  of  St.  Luke's  church  in  Annapolis,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  See  "  Memoirs
of  the  Life  of  the  Rev.  Jacob  Bailey,  A.  M.,"  by
William  S.  Bartlett  (Boston,  1854).

BAILEY,  Jacob  Whitman,  naturalist,  b.  in
Ward  (now  Auburn),  Mass.,  29  April,  1811 ;  d.  in
West  Point,  N".  Y.,  26  Feb.,  1857.  He  received  a
common-school  education  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  and
then  studied  at  West  Point,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1832.  He  was  appointed  lieutenant  in  the
artillery,  and  during  the  following  six  years  served
at  various  military  stations  in  South  Carolina  and
Virginia.  From  1834  until  his  death  he  was  succes-
sively assistant,  acting,  and  full  professor  of  chem-
istry, mmeralogy,  and  geology,  at  the  military  acad-
emy. His  scientific  reputation  was  achieved  princi-
pally by  his  researches  in  microscopy,  and  he  may
be  regarded  as  the  pioneer  in  this  means  of  investi-
gation in  the  United  States.  The  indicator  bear-
ing his  name,  and  other  improvements  in  the  con-
struction of  the  microscope,  were  devised  by  him.
He  made  numerous  collections ;  that  of  microscopic
objects  containing  over  3,000  slides,  and  his  collec-
tion of  algae  about  4,500  specimens.  These,  to-
gether with  his  books  and  papers,  were  bequeathed
to  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history.  In  1856
he  was  elected  president  of  the  American  associa-
tion of  the  advancement  of  science,  and  he  was  a
member  of  many  other  scientific  bodies  both  in  this
country  and  Europe.  He  was  the  author  of  more
than  fifty  papers,  which  appeared  in  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science  and  Arts,"  "Transactions
of  the  Association  of  Geologists  and  Naturalists,"
"The  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,"
and  "  Journal  of  Microscopic  Science,"  and  also  of
a  volume  of  "Microscopic  Sketches,"  which  con-
tained about  3,000  original  figures,  and  a  paper  on
infusorial  fossils  in  California  in  the  reports  of
the  Pacific  railway  survey.  See  the  sketch  of
his  life  and  scientific  labors  given  in  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science  and  Arts "  (2d  series,  vol.
XXV.) — His  son,  Lorin^  Woart,  chemist  and
geologist,  b.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  28  Sept.,  1839,
studied  at  Brown  university  and  then  at  Harvard,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1859.  In  1861  he  was
appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and  natural  his-
tory in  the  university  of  New  Brunswick,  at  Fred-
erieton.  For  many  years  he  has  been  connected
with  the  geological  survey  of  Canada,  to  whose
reports  he  has  regularly  contributed  accounts  of
his  work.  He  has  written  scientific  papers  for
the  "  Canadian  Naturalist "  and  "  Canadian  Rec-
ord," and  has  published  "  Mines  and  Minerals  of
New  Brunswick"  (1864)  and  the  "Geology  of
Southern  New  Brunswick"  (1865). — Another  son,
William  Whitman,  botanist,  b.  in  West  Point,
N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1864,  after  which  he  devoted  special  attention  to
botany  at  Harvard  under  the  direction  of  Prof.
Asa  Gray  and  Prof.  G.  L.  Goodale.  In  1867  he
served  as  botanist  to  the  LT.  S.  geological  survey
of  the  40th  parallel,  and  from  1869  to  1871  was
assistant  liVn-arian  of  the  Providence  athenwum.
In  1877  he  became  instructor  of  botany  at  Brown,
and  in  1881  professor.  He  is  a  contributor  of  prose
and  verse  to  periodicals,  and  has  published  a  "  Bo-
tanical Collector's  Hand-Book  "  (Boston,  1881).


BAILEY,  James  E.,  senator,  b.  in  Montgomery
CO.,  Tenn.,  15  Aug.,  1822.  He  was  educated  at
Clarksville  academy  and  at  the  university  of  Nash-
ville, was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  the  prac-
tice of  law  at  Clarksville  in  1843.  In  1853  he  was
elected  to  the  Tennessee  house  of  representatives.
He  served  in  the  confederate  army,  though  not  an
original  secessionist.  He  was  a  member  of  the
court  of  arbitration  in  1874,  by  appointment  of  the
governor  of  Tennessee,  and  was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor from  Tennessee  in  place  of  Andrew  Johnson,
taking  his  seat  29  Jan.,  1877.

BAILEY,  James  Montgomery,  author,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  25  Sept.,  1841.  He  received  a  common-
school  education  and  became  a  carpenter.  In  1860
he  removed  to  Danbury,  Conn.,  where  he  worked
at  his  trade  for  two  years,  occasionally  contribut-
ing to  the  newspapers,  and  then  enlisted  in  the
17th  Connecticut  regiment,  with  which  he  served
until  the  end  of  the  war.  After  his  return  he
purchased,  in  1865,  the  Danbury  "  Times,"  which
he  afterward  consolidated  with  the  "  Jeif ersonian,"
acquired  in  1870,  under  the  name  of  the  Danbury
"  News."  For  this  paper  he  wrote  short,  humorous
articles,  generally  descriptive  of  every-day  mishaps,
which  were  reprinted  in  other  journals  throughout
the  country.  In  1873  a  demand  for  his  paper  was
found  outside  of  Danbury,  and  its  circulation  rose
to  30,000  copies.  His  first  printed  book  was  "  Life
in  Danbury  "  (Boston,  1873),  a  collection  of  articles
from  his  newspaper.  The  same  year  he  published
"  The  Danbury  News  Man's  Almanac."  In  1874
he  visited  Europe  for  his  health,  and  after  his  re-
turn delivered  a  lecture  which  was  published  in  a
volume  in  1878,  with  the  title  "  England  from  a
Back  Window."  He  published  in  1877  "  They  All
do  it,"  in  1879  "  Mr.  Phillips's  Goneness,"  and  in
1880  "  The  Danbury  Boom."

BAILEY,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Hanover,  Mass.,
30  Oct.,  1730;  d.  there,  27  Oct.,  1810.  He  was
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Plymouth  regiment  at  the
beginning  of  the  revolutionary  war,  and  succeeded
Col.  John  Thomas  in  its  command.  When  the
continental  army  was  organized  he  became  colonel
of  the  2d  Massachusetts,  in  which  command  he  re-
mained during  the  war,  earning  distinction,  espe-
cially in  the  campaign  against  Burgoyne.

BAILEY,  Joseph,  farmer,  b.  in  Salem,  Ohio.  28
April,  1827 ;  killed  near  Nevada,  Newton  co..  Mo.,
21  March,  1867.  He  entered  the  military  service
of  the  United  States  2  July,  1861,  as  captain  in  the
4th  Wisconsin  infantry.  The  regiment  was  or-
dered to  Maryland  and  assigned  to  the  expedition
under  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler,  which  occupied  New  Or-
leans after  its  reduction  by  Farragut's  fleet,  in
April,  1862.  Bailey  was  appointed  acting  engi-
neer of  the  defences  of  New  Orleans  in  December,
1862,  and  while  so  detailed  was  promoted  to  be
major  (30  May,  1863).  A  month  later  (June  24)  he
became  lieutenant-colonel.  In  August.  1863,  the
regiment  was  changed  from  infantry  to  cavalry,
and  Lieut.-Col.  Bailey  was  sent  home  on  recruiting
service,  returning  to  duty  with  his  regiment  in
February,  1864,  in  time  to' accompany  the  army  of
Gen.  N.  P.  Banks  in  the  Red  river  campaign.
Here  occurred  the  opportunity  that  enabled  Lieut.-
Col.  Bailey  to  achieve  one  of  the  most  brilliant
feats  ever  accomplished  in  military  engineering.
The  expedition  had  been  carefully  timed  to  co-
incide with  the  regular  annual  spring  rise  in  Red
river,  in  order  that  the  navy  might  cooperate
and  the  river  serve  as  a  base  of  supplies.  The
army,  under  Gen.  Banks,  advanced  south  of  the
river,  accompanied  and  supported  by  a  fleet  of
twelve  gun-boats  and  thirty  transports. The  ad-


138


BAILEY


BAILEY


vance  suffered  a  defeat  at  Sabine  Cross  Roads  on
8  April,  and  retreated  to  Alexandria,  where  it
was  found  that  the  water  had  fallen  so  much  that
it  was  impossible  for  the  fleet  to  pass  below  the
falls.  Rear-Admiral  Porter,  commanding  the
squadron,  was  reluctantly  making  preparations  to
save  what  stores  he  could  and  to  destroy  his  gun-
boats, preparatory  to  retreating  with  the  army,  as
he  was  advised  that  the  land  position  was  not  ten-
able, when  Lieut.-Col.  Bailey  proposed  to  build  a
dam  and  deepen  the  water  in  mid-channel  so  that
the  gun-boats  could  pass.  The  regular  engineers
condemned  the  project  as  impracticable ;  but
Lieut.-Col.  Bailey  persevered,  and,  in  the  face  of
discouraging  opposition  and  indifference  on  the
part  of  the  navy,  finally,  on  30  April,  procured  the
necessary  authority  from  Gen.  Banks.  When  the
work  was  actually  begun,  there  was  no  lack  of  men
or  of  zeal.  Gen.  Jas.  Grant  Wilson,  then  a  mem-
ber of  Gen.  Banks's  staff,  strongly  advocated  the
scheme,  and  aided  in  the  construction  of  the  dam.
Details  of  3,000  soldiers  were  kept  at  work  night
and  day,  and  several  hundred  lumbermen  from
Maine  regiments  did  good  service  in  felling  and
moving  trees.  The  fatigue  parties  relieved  one  an-
other at  regular  intervals,  all  working  with  re-
markable endurance,  often  up  to  their  necks  in
water,  and  under  a  semi-tropical  sun.  The  rapids
to  be  deepened  were  about  a  mile  long  'and  from
700  to  more  than  1,000  feet  wide,  with  a  current
of  ten  miles  an  hour.  On  the  north  bank  a  tree
dam  was  built,  while  on  the  south  side,  there  being
no  timber,  a  series  of  heavy  cribs  were  con-
structed from  material  obtained  by  demolishing
several  old  mills,  while  the  brick,  iron,  and  stone
required  to  sink  and  hold  them  in  place  were  pro-
cured by  tearing  down  two  sugar-houses  and  tak-
ing up  a  quantity  of  railroad  iron  buried  in  the
vicinity.  The  dams,  thus  built  on  both  sides  of
the  river,  left  an  opening  of  sixty-six  feet.  So  en-
ergetically and  systematically  was  the  work  pushed
that  on  the  morning  of  12  May  the  whole  fleet
passed  safely  down  the  falls  without  loss.  The
Mississippi  squadron  was  saved  through  the  native
engineering  skill  of  a  Wisconsin  farmer.  His  ser-
vices received  prompt  recognition,  and  on  7  June
he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  and  on  30  June
was  promoted  to  the  full  grade  of  colonel,  and
subsequently  received  the  formal  thanks  of  con-
gress. The  officers  of  the  fleet  presented  him  with
a  sword  and  a  purse  of  $3,000.  After  this  feat
Gen.  Bailey's  military  record  was  highly  creditable.
In  November,  1864,  he  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers,  and  had  command  of  the
engineer  brigade  of  the  military  division  of  the
west  Mississippi  and  of  different  cavalry  brigades
until  he  resigned,  7  July,  1865.  After  leaving  the
army  he  settled  as  a  farmer  in  Newton  co..  Mo.,
and  was  elected  sheriff,  an  office  which  he  filled
with  his  accustomed  firmness  and  daring.  He
met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  two  desperadoes,
upon  whom  he  had  personally  served  warrants,
and  whom,  with  characteristic  fearlessness,  he  was
escorting  to  the  county-seat  without  assistance.  It
is  interesting  to  know"  that  che  main  portion  of  the
dam,  constructed  under  such  haste,  was  in  place
twenty-two  years  afterward,  and  bade  fair  to  last
indefinitely.  It  is  still  known  as  "  Bailey's  Dam."
BAILEY,  Joseph  Mead,  jurist,  b.  in  Middle-
bury,  Vt.,  22  June  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
the  university  of  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in  1854,  and  in
1856  began  the  practice  of  law  at  Freeport,  111.
jHe  was  a  memoer  of  the  Illinois  legislature  in
1866-'70  and  presidential  elector  of  the  same  state
in  1876. He  was  chosen  a  judge  in  the  13th  judi-


cial circuit,  Illinois,  in  1877,  judge,  of  the  first
division  appellate  court  in  1878,  and  chief  justice
of  that  court  in  1879.  He  became  a  tiiistee  of  the
university  of  Chicago  in  1878.

BAILiEY,  Riifiis  William,  educator,  b.  in
North  Yarmoutli,  Me.,  13  April,  1793 ;  d.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Tex.,  25  April,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  college  in  1813,  and  taught  in  the
academies  at  Salisbury,  N.  H.,  and  Blue  Hill,  Me.,
then  studied  law  with  Daniel  Webster,  but  at  the
end  of  a  year  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, and  on  the  completion  of  his  studies  was  li-
censed, and  began  preaching  at  Norwich  Plain,  at
the  same  time  filling  the  place  of  teacher  of  moral
philosophy  in  the  military  school.  In  1824  he  was
installed  pastor  of  the  church  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,
where  he  remained  four  years.  He  was  then
obliged  to  remove  to  the  south  for  the  sake  of  his
health,  and  subsequently  taught  for  more  than
twenty  years  in  North  Carolina,  South  Carolina,
and  Virginia,  in  the  latter  state  travelling  at  one
time  extensively  as  agent  of  the  colonization  so-
ciety. In  1854  he  was  elected  professor  of  languages
in  Austin  college,  at  Huntsville,  Texas,  and  in
1858  became  its  president.  He  was  the  author  of
a  series  of  newspaper  letters  on  slavery,  subse-
quently published  in  a  volume  under  the  title  of
"  The  Issue  " ;  also  of  a  volume  of  sermons  entitled
"  The  Family  Preacher  " ;  of  letters  to  daughters,
entitled  '*  The  Mother's  Request " ;  of  a  "  Primary
Grammar,"  and  of  a  "  Manual  of  English  Gram-
mar," used  extensively  in  southern  schools.

BAILEY,  Silas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Massachusetts
about  1812;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  11  June,  1874.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1834,  studied  at
Newton  theological  seminary,  and  was  for  a  time  a
pastor  in  Massachusetts.  He  became  principal  of
Worcester  academy  about  1840,  and,  after  several
years,  was  elected  president  of  Granville  college,
afterward  Dennison  university,  Granville,  Ohio,
where  he  remained  for  ten  years.  He  then  became
president  of  the  newly  established  college  at  Frank-
lin, Ind.,  where  he  remained  until  his  health  failed.
After  filling  a  pastorate  at  Lafayette  for  three
years  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  theology
at  Kalamazoo  college,  Mich.  He  bequeathed  his
library  to  Franklin  college.  Dr.  Bailey  published
sermons,  addresses,  and  reviews.

BAILEY,  Theodorus,  senator,  b.  in  Dutchess
CO.,  N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,  1758;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6
Sept.,  1828.  He  was  a  representative  in  congress
from  New  York  from  1793  to  1797,  and  from  1799
to  1803.  In  1803. he  was  chosen  a  senator  from
New  York,  but  resigned  in  the  following  year  and
accepted  the  postmastership  of  New  York  city,
which  office  he  held  until  his  death.— His  nephew,
Theodorus,  naval  oflScer  (b.  in  Chateaugay.  N.  Y.,
12  April,  1805 ;  d.  in  W^ashington,  D.  C,  10  Feb.,
1877),  was  appointed  a  midshipman  from  New
York,  1  Jan.,  1818,  and  received  his  commission  as
lieutenant  3  March,  1827.  His  first  cruise  was  on
board  the  "  Cyane,"  Capt.  Trenchard,  which  cap-
tured several  slavers  on  the  coast  of  Africa  in
1820-'l.  He  then  made  a  three  years'  cruise  in
the  Pacific  on  the  "Franklin."  In  1833-'6  he
sailed  on  a  cruise  round  the  world  on  board  the
"  Vincennes."  After  serving  on  the  frigate  "  Con-
stellation," in  which  he  again  sailed  round  the
world,  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  store-
ship  "  Lexington  "  in  1846,  in  which,  on  the  break-
ing out  of  the  Mexican  war,  he  conveyed  to  Cali-
fornia, by  way  of  Cape  Horn,  an  artillery  company
and  several  officers  who  afterward  became  famous,
including  Henry  W.  Halleck,  William  T.  Sherman,
and  E.  0.  C.  Ord. Lieut.  Bailey  rendered  elficient


BAILEY


BAILY


139


c//C^^nx^T3ax^


^/


aid  to  the  Pacific  squadron  by  fitting  out  and  lead-
ing numerous  expeditions.  He  made  use  of  his
vessel,  an  old  razee,  as  an  armed  cruiser,  and,  after
landing  the  troops  at  Monterey,  blockaded  and
captured  San  Bias,  and  was  actively  employed
with  the  land  forces  in  the  conquest  of  California.
He  was  commissioned  as  commander  6  March,
1849,  and  as  captain  15  Dec,  1855.  On  6  Sept.,
1853,  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  "  St.
Mary's,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,  and  cruised  for

three  years.  Ar-
riving oppor-
tunely at  Pana-
ma during  the
riots,  he  took
steps  to  sup-
press them  that
were  success-
ful and  satis-
factory alike
to  the  citizens
and  the  gov-
ernment. On
the  same  cruise
he  was  instru-
mental in  re-
storing friendly
relations  with
the  inhabitants
of  the  Fiji  isl-
ands. At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  frigate  "  Colorado,"  of  the  western
Gulf  blockading  squadron,  and  on  2  May,  1861,
cooperated  with  Gen.  Harvey  Brown  in  the  opera-
tions before  Pensacola.  He  reconnoitred  the  posi-
tion of  the  "  Judah,"  going  up  to  her  side  in  his
gig  on  the  night  of  13  Sept.,  1861,  and  matured
the  plan  by  which  Lieut.  Russell  cut  out  and
burned  that  confederate  privateer  a  few  hours
later.  Joining  Farragut's  squadron  at  New  Or-
leans, as  second  in  command,  he  led  the  attack
in  April,  1862,  commanding  the  right  column  of
the  fleet  in  the  passage  of  the  forts  St.  Philip  and
Jackson,  and  leading  the  fleet  in  the  capture  of  the
Chalmette  batteries  and  of  the  city.  He  led  the
attack  in  the  gunboat  "  Cayuga,"  passing  up,  ahead
of  the  fleet,  through  the  flre  of  five  of  the  forts,
sustaining  unaided  the  attack  of  the  confederate
vessels,  rams,  and  fire,  and  passed  through  them
to  the  city.  Admiral  Farragut  sent  Bailey  to  de-
mand the  surrender  of  New  Orleans.  Accom-
panied by  Lieut.  George  H.  Perkins,  he  passed
through  the  streets  in  the  midst  of  a  hooting  mob,
who  threatened  the  officers  with  drawn  pistols  and
other  weapons.  In  his  official  report  of  the  vic-
tory, dated  24  April,  1862,  Capt.  Bailey  used  the
famous  phrase :  "  It  was  a  contest  of  iron  hearts
in  wooden  ships  against  iron-elads  with  iron  beaks
— and  the  iron  hearts  won."  The  important  part
actually  taken  by  Bailey  was  not  adequately  recog-
nized in  the  first  official  account,  though  Admiral
Farragut  commended  his  gallantry  and  ability  in
the  official  report,  and  sent  him  to  Washington
with  the  despatches  announcing  the  victory.  The
mistake  was  afterward  rectified  by  Admiral  Farra-
gut, and  the  correction  appended  to  the  report  of  the
secretary  of  the  navy  for  1869.  Ho  was  promoted
commodore  after  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  re-
ceiving his  commission  16  July,  1862,  and  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  eastern  Gulf  blockad-
ing squadron.  Although  his  health  was  impaired,
he  displayed  energy  and  perseverance  in  breaking
up  l)lockade-running  on  the  Florida  coast,  and
within  eighteen  months  more  than  150  blockade-


runners  were  captured  through  his  vigilance.  After
the  war  he  was  commandant  of  the  Portsmouth
navy-yard  from  1865  to  1867.  On  25  July,  1866,
he  was  commissioned  as  rear-admiral,  and  on  10
Oct.,  1866,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.

BAILLAIROE,  Oeorg-e  Frederick,  Canadian
engmeer,  b.  in  Quebec,  16  Oct.,  1824.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  seminary  of  Quebec,  and  in  1844  en-
tered the  civil  service  of  Canada  in  the  department
of  engineering.  In  1871  he  was  appointed  assist-
ant chief  engineer  of  the  department  of  public
works.  He  was  superintending  engineer  of  the
Ottawa  and  St.  Lawrence  canals  in  1877-8,  and
in  1879  became  deputy  minister  of  public  works.

BAILLARGEON,  Charles  Francis,  arch-
bishop of  Quebec,  b.  at  Crane  Island,  District  of
Quebec,  26  April,  1798  ;  d.  13  Oct.,  1870.  He  was
educated  at  the  college  of  St.  Nicolet,  where  he
distinguished  himself  and  pursued  a  superior  course
of  studies.  In  1850  he  was  sent  to  Home  by  the
bishops  of  the  province  of  Quebec,  as  their  agent
in  some  important  religious  questions,  and  was
there  consecrated  a  bishop  in  part.,  23  Feb.,  1851,
by  Cardinal  Franzoni,  prefect  of  the  Propaganda.
Subsequently  he  became  bishop,  and  then  arch-
bishop of  Quebec  in  1867,  and  went  three  times  to
Rome  in  the  interest  of  his  diocese,  and  also  to
assist  at  the  oecumenical  council  held  in  that  city
in  1868-'9.  He  established  the  temperance  and
St.  Vincent  de  Paul  societies  in  Quebec  in  1846,
and  afterward  the  brothers'  school  and  St.  John
the  Baptist  church,  and  also  contributed  largely
to  many  charitable  institutions.  He  published  a
translation  of  the  New  Testament,  catechism,  and
other  works. — His  brother,  Pierre,  Canadian  phys-
ician, b.  at  Crane  Island,  province  of  Quebec,  8
Nov.,  1812.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  college,
and  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  from  Harvard
college.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Boston  medical
association,  a  visiting  physician  to  the  Quebec  gen-
eral hospital,  and  president  of  the  dental  associa-
tion of  the  province  of  Quebec.  He  was  called  to
the  senate  on  26  March,  1874.

BAILLY,  Joseph  A.,  sculptor,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  in  1825.  He  began  his  career  as  a  wood-
carver,  immigrated  to  Philadelphia  in  1825,  and
pursued  his  occupation  with  success.  Later  he  ap-
plied himself  to  marble  sculpture,  and  became  a
professor  in  the  Pennsylvania  academy  of  fine  arts.
He  has  produced  a  statue  of  Washington,  which
was  placed  in  front  of  the  Philadelphia  state-house
in  1869 ;  a  colossal  statue  of  Witherspoon ;  the
companion  groups  called  "•  The  First  Prayer  "  and
"  Paradise  Lost " ;  portrait  busts  of  Gen.  Grant
and  Gen.  Meade ;  an  equestrian  statue  of  President
Blanco  of  Venezuela,  and  "  Spring."

BAILY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  near  Blackburn,
Lancashire,  England,  24  Feb.,  1644 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  Dec,  1697.  He  began  preaching  at  the
age  of  twenty-two  at  Chester,  but  was  thrown  into
jail  on  account  of  his  congregational  doctrines.
After  his  release  he  went  to  Ireland  and  continued
his  ministry  in  Limerick,  where  at  the  end  of  fourteen
years  he  was  again  imprisoned  for  nonconformity.
Set  free  on  the  condition  of  leaving  the  country,
and  prohibited  even  from  preaching  a  farewell  dis-
course to  his  church,  he  came  to  New  England
about  1684  and  was  ordained  minister  of  the  church
at  Watertown,  6  Oct.,  1685.  In  1692  he  returned
to  Boston,  and  in  July  of  the  following  year  be-
came assistant  minister  of  the  first  church  in  that
city.  A  volume,  issued  in  Boston  in  1689,  contains
sketches  of  a  series  of  his  sermons  and  a  reprint  of
a  letter  of  farewell,  addressed  to  his  congregation
at  Limerick  in  lieu  of  a  parting  sermon.


140


BAINBRIDGE


BAINBRIDGE


BAINBRIDGE,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  in  1808 ;  d.  Mt  sea  near  Galveston,  81  May,
1857.  He  was  appointed  to  West  Point  from  Massa-
chusetts, was  graduated  in  1831,  served  as  lieuten-
ant on  frontier  duty,  became  a  captain  15  June,
1886,  and  served  in  the  Florida  war,  in  the  military
occupation  of  Texas,  and  in  the  war  with  Mexico.
For  gallantry  at  Monterey,  where  he  was  severely
wounded  in  storming  the  enemy's  works,  he  was
brevetted  major,  28  Sept.,  1846.  He  became  major
in  the  7th  infantry  16  Feb.,  1847,  and  was  engaged
in  Contreras  and  Churubusco,  gaining  the  brevet
of  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  conduct,  and  in
the  assault  and  capture  of  Mexico.  In  1849  and
1850  he  served  in  the  Seminole  war.  He  was  pro-
moted to  a  lieutenant-colonelcy  11  June,  1851,  and
served  in  Texas  until  his  death  on  board  the
steamer  "  Louisiana,"  burned  in  Galveston  bay.

BAINBRIDGE,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  7  May,  1774;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
28  July,  1888.  His  ancestor,  who  in  1600  settled
in  New  Jersey,  was  the  son  of  Sir  Arthur  Bain-
bridge,  of  Durham  co.,  England.  Capt.  Bainbridge's
father  was  a  descendant  in  the  fifth  generation
from  Sir  Arthur.  William,  his  fourth  son,  was  dis-
tinguished for  his  adventurous  disposition  in  early
youth,  and,  with  a  good  education,  he  elected  to

follow  the  sea.
He  entered  the
merchant  ma-
rine at  the  age
of  fifteen,  and
at  nineteen  be-
camecommand-
er  of  a  mer-
chant ship.  In
1796,  while  com-
manding the
N  ship  "  Hope,"
^  on  his  passage
'  from  Bordeaux
to  the  island
of  St.  Thom-
as, he  was  at-
tacked by  a
British  schoon-
er of  eight
guns  and  thir-
ty men.  Bain-
bridge  returned
the  fire  and
kept  it  up  until
the  schooner  struck  her  colors.  The  armament  of
the  "  Hope  "  consisted  of  four  9-pounders  and  nine
men.  He  could  have  retained  the  schooner  as  a
prize,  but  he  merely  bailed  the  captain  and  told
Iiim  to  "  go  about  his  business  and  report  to  his
masters  that  if  they  wanted  his  ship  they  must
send  a  greater  force  to  take  her,  and  a  more  skil-
ful commander."  This  performance  gave  him  a
reputation  in  Philadelphia,  and  he  could  have  had
command  of  any  ship  sailing  from  that  port.  On
one  occasion,  when  the  English  razee  "Indefati-
gable," under  the  command  of  Sir  Edward  Pellew,
afterward  Lord  Exmouth,  impressed  a  seaman  from
on  board  the  "  Hope,"  Bainbridge  boarded  the  first
English  merchantman  he  encountered  at  sea  and
took  out  of  her  the  best  seaman  she  had  on  board ;  he
then  told  the  British  captain  that  he  might  report
that  William  Bainbridge  had  taken  one  of  his
majesty's  subjects  in  retaliation  for  a  seaman  taken
from  the  American  ship  "  Hope,"  by  Lieut.  Norton,
of  the  "  Indefatigable."  Though  this  afforded  no
redress  for  the  original  injury,  it  was  designed  to
show  British  naval  officers  that  the  rights  of  Ameri-


ey


can  citizens,  as  far  as  they  were  entrusted  to  Capt.
Bainbridge's  care,  were  not  to  be  molested  with
impunity.  In  1798  Bainbridge  married,  at  the
island  of  St.  Bartholomew,  Miss  Susan  Hyleger,
daughter  of  a  respectable  merchant,  and  grand-
daughter of  John  Hyleger,  of  Holland,  for  many
years  governor  of  St.  Eustatia.

On  the  organization  of  a  navy  in  1798,  to  pro-
tect American  commerce  against  French  cruisers,
his  character  for  bravery  and  intelligence  se-
cured for  Bainbridge  the  command  of  the  schooner
"Retaliation,"  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-com-
mandant. He  was  soon  afterward  captured  bv
the  French  frigates  "  Volontier  "  and  "  Insurgent,''
but  the  schooner  was  returned  to  Bainbridge  by
the  governor  of  Guadaloupe,  and  he  proceeded  with
her  to  the  United  States,  carrying  many  American
prisoners,  for  whom,  by  his  tact,  he  had  obtained
their  liberty.  For  his  services,  Bainbridge  was  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  master-commandant,  and  given
the  command  of  the  brig  "  Norfolk,"  of  eighteen
guns.  The  "  retaliation  act "  against  French  citizens
captured  on  the  ocean,  in  the  quasi  war  with  France,
passed  at  that  time  (1798),  was  due  to  Bainbridge's
report  of  the  outrages  committed  on  American
prisoners  in  the  island  of  Guadaloupe.  The  "  Nor-
folk "  was  sent  to  the  West  Indies  to  report  to  Com.
Christopher  R.  Perry,  and  performed  most  impor-
tant service,  capturing  the  French  lugger  "  Re-
publican "  and  destroying  other  vessels.  As  an
acknowledgment  of  these  services,  the  merchants
of  Havana  presented  him  with  a  most  compliment-
ary letter  when  he  left  the  station.  In  May,  1800,
Bainbridge  was  ordered  to  take  command  of  the
frigate  "  George  Washington,"  to  cany  tribute  to
the  Dey  of  Algiers.  On  his  arrival  at  Algiers,  much
to  his  disgust,  Bainbridge  felt  obliged  to  accede
to  a  demand  of  the  Dey  to  carry  presents  to  Con-
stantinople, and  also  an  ambassador  to  the  Ottoman
porte.  A  refusal  to  comply  with  this  demand
would  have  resulted  in  depredations  by  the  Alge-
rines  on  American  commerce,  the  American  govern-
ment not  having  realized  the  degradation  entailed
on  it  by  paying  tribute  so  that  its  merchant
ships  might  pursue  their  vocations  without  being
boarded  by  pirates.  At  Constantinople  Bainbridge
was  received  very  kindly,  and  while  there  he  paved
the  way  to  the  first  treaty  between  the  United
States  and  the  porte.  Returning,  he  arrived  off  Al-
giers 21  Jan.,  1801,  and  the  Dey  did  all  he  could  to
entice  him  into  his  power  and  force  him  to  return
to  Constantinople  with  presents,  etc. ;  but  the
"  George  Washington  "  was  anchored  beyond  reach
of  the  guns  of  the  forts,  and  there  remained  until
the  Dey  had  given  a  solemn  promise  (after  Moslem
fashion)  that  he  would  not  require  Bainbridge  to
return.  On  this  occasion  Bainbridge  had  the  pleas-
ure of  bringing  an  order  from  the  sultan  for  the
liberation  of  400  Maltese,  Venetians,  and  Sicilians,
and,  on  his  presenting  a  firman  from  the  Capudan
pacha  at  Constantinople  (a  great  friend  of  Bain-
bridge), the  Dey  from  that  moment  treated  him
with  great  consideration.

On  20  May,  1801,  Bainbridge  was  appointed  to
command  the  "  Essex,"  forming  part  of  the  squad-
ron under  Com.  Richard  Dale,  to  cruise  against  the
Barbary  powers.  In  1803  he  was  employed  in  su-
perintending the  construction  of  the  "  Syren  "  and
"  Vixen,"  after  which,  on  20  May,  he  was  ordered
to  command  the  "  Philadelphia,"  of  44  guns,  of
Com.  Preble's  squadron,  fitting  out  to  cruise  against
Tripolitan  corsairs.  Bainbridge  sailed  before  the
rest  of  the  fleet,  and,  on  his  arrival  in  the  ]\[editer-
ranean,  captured  the  Moorish  ship-of-war  "  Mesh-
boha," of  22 guns, for  molesting  an American


BAINBRIDGE


BAINBRIDGE


141


vessel.  He  also  recaptured  the  American  brig
"  Celica,"  and  this  seasonable  check  to  Moorish  ra-
pacity prevented  further  depredations  upon  Ameri-
can commerce  by  the  Moors.  On  Bainbridge's
arrival  off  Tripoli  he  gave  chase  to  a  Tripolitan
corsair  and  struck  on  a  rock,  by  which  the  "  Phila-
delphia" was  wrecked,  and  she  was  then  sur-
rounded by  Tripolitan  gun-boats  and  forced  to  sur-
render, not  being  able  to  use  her  guns.  This
happened  on  1  Nov.,  1804.  The  "  Philadelphia  "  was
floated  off  the  rock  by  the  Tripolitans  and  carried
into  the  port  of  Tripoli,  where  she  was  afterward
burned  by  Decatur.  The  first  suggestion  for  destroy-
ing the  ''  Philadelphia  "  is  said  to  have  been  sent  to
Com.  Preble  in  a  letter  from  Bainbridge  while  he
was  a  prisoner.  Bainbridge  and  his  officers  and
crew  remained  prisoners  for  nineteen  months  during
the  Tripolitan  war,  suffering  many  privations,  and
being  subjected  to  all  the  dangers  of  the  fire  from
the  American  fleet.  When  peace  was  restored  and
they  obtained  their  liberty,  a  court  of  inquiry  was
held  on  Bainbridge,  and  he  was  acquitted  of  all
blame  for  the  loss  of  the  "  Philadelphia."

A  short  time  after  his  return  to  the  United
States  Bainbridge  was  ordered  to  command  the
navy-yard  at  New  York ;  but  his  embarrassed  cir-
cumstances, owing  to  his  long  captivity,  obliged
him  to  obtain  a  furlough  and  once  more  enter  the
merchant  service,  where  he  continued  until  1808.
In  anticipation  of  a  war  with  England  he  was  or-
dered back  to  the  service  in  March,  1808,  and  in
December  was  placed  in  command  of  the  frigate
"  President,"  in  which  he  sailed  on  a  cruise  in  the  fol-
lowing year.  No  war  occurring,  he  again  obtained  a
furlough,  and  proceeded  on  a  voyage  in  a  merchant
ship  to  St.  Petersburg.  He  continued  in  the  mer-
chant service  until  1811,  when,  hearing  that  an  en-
gagement had  taken  place  between  the  "  President "
and  the  British  ship-of-war  "  Little  Belt,"  he  left
his  ship  at  St.  Petersburg  and  returned  to  the
United  States.  In  anticipation  of  the  war  with
Great  Britain  the  government  had  determined  to
lay  up  all  the  ships  of  the  navy  in  ordinary ;  but,
owing  to  the  representations  of  Capts.  Bainbridge
and  Stewart,  this  idea  was  abandoned.  Bainbridge
was  now  ordered  to  command  the  Charlestown  navy-
yard  ;  but  on  the  declaration  of  war,  8  June,  1812,
he  solicited  the  command  of  a  frigate,  and  his  re-
quest was  complied  with  by  giving  him  command
not  only  of  the  "  Constitution,"  but  of  the  frigate
"  Essex,"  Capt.  David  Porter,  and  the  sloop  "  Hor-
net," Capt.  James  Lawrence.  Bainbridge  took  the
"  Constitution  "  immediately  after  Hull  arrived  in
her  from  his  victory  over  the  "  Guerriere."

The  "Constitution"  parted  company  with  the
"  Hornet "  off  St.  Salvador  on  20  Dec,  1812,  and
three  days  later  fell  in  with  the  British  frigate
"  Java,"  of  49  guns  and  upward  of  400  men.  After
an  action  of  one  hour  and  fifty-five  minutes  the
"JaA^a"  surrendered,  having  been  completely  dis-
mantled and  not  having  a  single  spar  standing.
Her  loss  was  60  killed  and  101  wounded,  while  the
"  Constitution  "  lost  but  9  killed  and  25  wounded.
Among  the  latter  was  Com.  Bainbridge,  who  was
struck  twice  during  the  engagement.  The  "  Java  "
was  blown  up  after  the  prisoners  were  removed.  In
his  treatment  of  the  prisoners  Bainbridge  was  most
magnanimous,  and  he  received  many  acknowledg-
ments for  his  kindness.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States  he  was  received  with  high  honors
and  ordered  to  command  the  Charlestown  navy-
yard,  where  he  laid  the  keel  of  the  line-of-batl  l"e-
ship  "  Independence."  No  squadron  of  equal
strength  ever  sailed  from  any  country  and  accom-
plished the  results  that  the  three  historic  vessels


of  Com.  Bainbridge's  command,  the  "Constitu-
tion," "  Essex,"  and  "  Hornet "  realized.

While  Bainbridge  was  in  command  at  Charles-
town the  British  blockaded  Boston  harbor,  and  his
views  for  the  defence  of  that  port  encountered
great  opposition.  Politics  ran  high,  and  the  oppo-
sition party  was  indifferent  with  regard  to  the  pul)-
lic  property,  which  they  said  belonged  to  the  ad-
ministration, while  the  commodore  insisted  that  it
belonged  to  the  nation  and  should  be  protected  at
all  hazards.  The  governor  and  council  of  Massa-
chusetts appointed  a  committee  to  consult  with
Bainbridge,  and,  on  its  presuming  to  dictate  to
him,  he  informed  it  that  he  should  defend  his  com-
mand to  the  last  extremity,  let  the  consequences  be
what  they  might,  and  that  if  the  citizens  of  Bos-
ton chose  to  make  their  interests  separate  from
those  of  the  nation,  the  terrible  consequences  might
fall  where  they  deserved ;  to  him,  duty  and  honor
dictated  the  course  he  should  pursue.  Great  diver-
sity of  opinion  existed  in  Massachusetts  with  re-,
gard  to  defending  the  harbors  along  the  coast,  and
even  Boston  itself ;  but,  owing  to  Bainbridge's  pa-
triotic importunities  and  devoted  zeal  as  an  officer,
sustained  as  he  was  by  many  eminent  citizens  of
Boston,  a  proper  system  of  defence  was  adopted
and  the  danger  was  averted.

Com.  Bainbridge  was  the  first  that  advocated  a
board  of  commissioners  for  the  navy.  His  long  ex-
perience in  naval  concerns  satisfied  him  that  the
administration  of  the  navy  could  never  be  wisely
conducted  without  a  preponderance  of  professional
men  in  connection  and  working  in  accord  with  the
civil  element.  Shortly  after  the  beginning  of  the
war  with  Great  Britain,  war  was  declared  against
the  United  States  by  Algiers,  and  on  the  conclusion
of  peace  with  Great  Britain  congress  declared  war
against  the  regency  of  Algiers  and  fitted  out  a  large
squadron  under  the  command  of  Bainbridge,  in
1815,  to  protect  American  commerce  in  the  Medi-
terranean. Peace  was  soon  settled  honorably  by
Decatur,  and  at  the  same  time  Bainbridge  brought
the  Bashaw  of  Tripoli  to  a  sense  of  the  resources
of  the  United  States,  and  exhibited  his  large  force
in  all  the  ports.  The  only  way  in  which  peace
could  be  maintained  with  these  people,  so  faithless
in  regard  to  political  obligations,  was  by  operating
on  their  fears.  After  making  the  necessary  ar-
rangements for  the  protection  of  American  com-
merce in  the  Mediterranean,  Bainbridge  returned
to  the  United  States  on  15  Nov.,  1815.  A  month
later  the  commodore  established  the  first  naval
school  (in  the  Boston  yard)  for  officers,  and  in  1817
he  was  appointed  one  of  a  board  to  locate  navy-
yards.  In  October,  1819,  the  first  board  convened
for  the  examination  of  young  officers  for  promo-
tion that  had  ever  been  assembled  in  the  United
States,  under  Bainbridge  as  presiding  officer.  In
November  of  the  same  year  he  was  ordered  to  the
command  of  the  new  line-of-battle-ship  "  Colum-
bus," and  appointed  to  command  the  Mediterranean
squadron.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  af-
ter his  cruise  in  1821,  he  was  ordered  to  the  Phila-
delphia station,  where  his  professional  abilities  were
brought  into  play  in  fitting  out  the  ship-of-the-
line  "North  Carolina."  In  1823  he  was  changed
to  the  command  of  the  Boston  station,  and  soon
afterward  was  appointed  naval  commissioner.

At  the  time  of  the  difficulty  between  Decatur
and  Barron,  Bainbridge  was  in  Washington  city,
and  acted  as  Decatur's  second  in  the  duel  that  led
to  his  death  and  to  Barron's  being  severely  wounded.
After  severing  his  connection  with  the  board  of
commissioners.  Com.  Bainbridge  commanded  sev-
entl  navy-yards,  until  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life


142


BAINES


BAIRD


he  became  a  great  sufferer  from  physical  troubles.
In  1833  he  was  attacked  by  pneumonia,  and  died
on  38  July  of  that  year.  His  remains  were  in-
terred in  Christ  church  burying-ground,  in  Phila-
delphia. Com.  Bainbridge  was  a  model  of  a  naval
officer.  He  was  six  feet  in  height,  and  had  a  finely
moulded  and  nniscular  frame,  which  enabled  him
to  endure  any  amount  of  fatigue.  His  complexion
was  rather  fair,  his  beard  dark  and  strong,  his  eyes
black,  animated,  and  expressive.  His  deportment
was  commanding,  his  dress  always  neat;  his  tem-
perament was  ardent  and  somewhat  impetuous,
though  he  could  qualify  it  with  the  greatest  cour-
tesy and  the  most  attractive  amenity.

BAINES,  Allen  Mackenzie,  Canadian  physi-
cian, b.  in  Toronto,  12  May,  1853.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Cobourg,  and  at  Upper  Canada  college,
Toronto,  studied  medicine,  received  degrees  from
both  Trinity  college,  Toronto,  and  Toronto  univer-
sity, and  afterward  attended  medical  lectures  and
hospitals  in  London,  England,  where  he  took  the
degree  of  L.  K.  C.  P.  He  returned  to  Canada  in
1882  and  settled  as  a  physician  in  Toronto.  Dr.
Baines  is  examiner  in  toxicology  and  medical  juris-
prudence in  Trinity  college,  and  likewise  physician
for  the  home  for  incurables,  Toronto,  and  the  in-
fants' home  in  the  same  city.

BAIRD,  Absalom,  soldier,  b.  in  Washington,
Pa.,  20  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  Wash-
ington college  in  1841  and  studied  law.  In  1845
he  entered  the  West  Point  academy,  was  graduated
in  1849,  and  served  as  second  lieutenant  in  the
Florida  hostilities  from  1850  to  1853.  He  was
{)romoted  first  lieutenant  24  Dec,  1853-,  and  from
1853  to  1859  was  stationed  at  West  Point  as  assist-
ant professor  of  mathematics.  In  March,  1801,
he  took  command  of  tlie  light  battery  for  the  de-
fence of  Washington,  and  on  11  May  was  brevet-
ted  captain  and  appointed  assistant  in  the  adju-
tant-general's department.  In  July,  1861,  he
served  as  adjutant-general  of  Tyler's  division  in
the  defence  of  Washington  and  in  the  Manassas
campaign,  being  present  at  Blackburn's  Ford  and
at  Bull  Rim.  He  was  promoted  captain  3  Aug.,
18G1,  served  as  assistant  adjutant-general  and  was
promoted  major  12  Xov.,  1861,  and  served  as
assistant  inspector-general  and  chief  of  staff  of  the
fourth  army  corps  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
where  he  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown
and  the  battle  of  Williamsburg.  He  commanded
a  brigade  of  the  Army  of  the  Ohio  from  May  to
September,  1862,  and  was  engaged  in  the  capture
of  Cumberland  Gap.  From  October,  1862,  to  June,
1863,  he  commanded  the  3d  division  of  the  Army  of
Kentucky  about  Lexington  and  Danville  and  in
the  operations  of  Gen.  Rosecrans  in  Tennessee,
being  engaged  at  Tullahoma,  the  capture  of  Shel-
byville,  Dutch  Gap,  Pigeon  Mountain,  and  Chicka-
mauga.  For  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in
the  last  action  he  received  the  brevet  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel. In  operations  about  Chattanooga  he
commanded  a  division  of  the  14th  army  corps  and
gained  tlie  brevet  rank  of  colonel.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge,  was  in
numerous  skirmishes  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy  in
the  invasion  of  Georgia,  and  was  present  at  the
surrender  of  Atlanta.  He  was  brevetted  major-
general  of  volunteers  for  services  in  the  capture  of
Atlanta,  in  the  pursuit  of  Hood's  army  and  the
march  to  the  sea,  and  the  cajiture  of  Savannah.
He  participated  in  the  mareli  through  the  Caro-
linas,  was  engaged  at  Bentonville  and  Raleigh,  and
was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Johnston's  army
at  Durham  station.  For  his  services  in  the  At-
lanta campaign he  received the brevet  rank  of


brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army  on  13  March
1865,  with  that  of  major-general  for  services  during
the  rebellion.  He  served  as  inspector-general  of
the  department  of  the  lakes  from  1866  to  1868,  of
the  department  of  Dakota  till  1870,  of  the  division
of  the  south  till  1872,  and  subsequently  as  assistant
inspector-general  of  the  division  of  the  Missouri.

BAIRD,  Henry  Carey,  author,  b.  in  Brides-
burg,  Pa.,  10  Sept.,  1825.  In  1845  he  became  a
partner  in  the  publishing  house  of  Carey  &  Hart,
of  Philadelphia,  and  in  1849  established  the  new
house  of  Henry  Carey  Baird  &  Co.,  which  has  pub-
lished a  large  number  of  technical  industrial  works
and  various  economical  treatises.  He  was  at  first
a  whig,  and  subsequently  a  republican  in  politics,
but  in  1875  he  joined  the  national  greenback  party
and  became  one  of  its  leaders.  He  has  written  on
economical  questions,  advocating  views  similar  to
those  of  Henry  C.  Carey,  his  uncle.  He  published
a  collection  of  his  works  in  Philadelphia  in  1875.

BAIRD,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fayette  co,,
Pa.,  6  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Yonkers,  N.  Y.,  15  Mai-eh,
1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college.  Pa.,
in  1818,  and  taught  a  year  at  Bellefont,  where  he
began  his  career  as  a  newspaper  writer.  He  stud-
ied theology  at  Princeton,  1819-'22,  and  taught
an  academv  there  for  five  years,  preaching  occa-
sionally. In  1827
he  became  agent
in  New  Jersey
for  the  Ameri-
can Bible  society,
engaged  in  the
distribution  of
Bibles  among  the
poor,  and  also
labored  among
the  destitute
churches  of  the
Presbyterian  de-
nomination as  an
agent  of  the  New
Jersey  mission-
ary society.  In
1829  he  became
agent  for  the
American  Sun-
day-school union,
and  travelled  ex-
tensively for  the

society.  In  1835  he  went  to  Europe,  where  he  re-
mained eight  years,  devoting  himself  to  the  promo-
tion of  Protestant  Christianity  in  southern  Europe,
and  subsequently  to  the  advocacy  of  temperance
reform  in  northern  Europe.  On  the  formation
of  the  foreign  evangelical  society,  since  merged  in
the  American  and  foreign  Christian  union,  he  be-
came its  agent  and  corresponding  secretary.  In
1842  he  published  "  A  View  of  Religion  in  Amer-
ica" in  Glasgow.  In  1843  he  returned  home,
and  for  three  years  engaged  in  promoting  the
spread  of  Protestantism  in  Europe.  In  1846  he
visited  Europe  to  attend  the  world's  temperance
convention  in  Stockholm  and  the  meeting  of  the
evangelical  alliance  in  London,  and  on  his  return
he  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on  the  "  Continent
of  Europe."  In  1862  he  vindicated  in  London  be-
fore large  audiences  the  cause  of  the  union  against
secession  with  vigorous  eloquence.  Among  his
other  published  works  are  a  "  View  of  the  Valley
of  the  Mississippi "  (1832) ;  "  History  of  the  Tem-
perance Societies"  (1836);  "Visit  to  Northern
Europe"  (1841);  "Protestantism  in  Italy"  (Bos-
ton, 1845) ;  "  Impressions  and  Experiences  of  the
West  Indies  and  North  America  in  1849  "  (Pliila-


/^ . J^cAyi^tM


BAIRD


BAKER


143


delphia,  1850),  revised,  with  a  supplement,  in  1855 ;
"  History  of  the  Albigenses,  Waldenses,  and  Vau-
dois."  i^reneh.  Dutch,  German,  Swedish,  Finnish,
and  Russian  translations  were  made  of  the  "  His-
tory of  the  Temperance  Societies,"  and  French,
German,  Dutch,  and  Swedish  translations  of  the
'•View  of  Religion  in  America."  See  "  Life  of  the
Rev.  R.  Baird,"  by  H.  M.  Baird  (New  York,  1865).
—His  son,  Charles  Waishing'toii  Baird,  b.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  38  Aug.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Rye,  K  Y.,
10  Feb.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the  univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1848  and  at  the
IJnion  theological  school  in  1852.  He  officiated  as
American  chaplain  at  Rome  till  1853,  was  subse-
quently settled  over  the  Dutch  Reformed  church
of  Bergen  Hill,  Brooklyn,  and  after  1861  over  the
Presbyterian  church  at  Rye,  N.  Y.  A  translation
of  Malon's  "  Romanism "  (New  York,  1844),  and
one  of  Merle  d'Aubigne's  "  Discourses  and  Essays  "
(1846).  were  his  first  literary  productions.  He
published  anonymously  "  Eutaxia,  or  the  Presby-
terian Liturgies"  (New  York,  1855),  revised  and
reprinted  under  the  title  "A  Chapter  of  Liturgies"
(London,  1856);  "A  Book  of  Public  Prayer,  com-
piled from  the  Authorized  Formularies  of  the
Presbyterian  Church  "  (1857).  Mr.  Baird  was  rec-
ognized as  the  first  investigator  and  collector  of
the  Presbyterian  liturgies.  He  afterward  gave  his
attention  to  other  subjects,  and  published  "  Chron-
icles of  a  Border  Town,  a  History  of  Rye.  N.  Y."
(New  York,  1871) ;  "  History  of  Bedford  Church  "
(New  York,  1882) ;  "  History  of  the  Huguenot  Emi-
gration to  America  "  (1885),  a  French  version  of
which  was  subsequently  issued  in  Toulouse,  France.
—Henry  Martyii  Baird,  another  son,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  17  Jan.,  1832;  after  graduation  at  the
university  of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1850,  studied
in  Greece,  and,  after  pursuing  a  course  of  theology  in
Union  and  Princeton  seminaries,  became  a  tutor  in
1855,  and  in  1859  professor  of  Greek  at  Princeton
colle^'e.  He  published  "Narrative  of  a  Residence
and  Travels  in  Modern  Greece  "  (New  York,  1856) ;
"  Life  of  Robert  Baird,  D.  D."  (1865) ;  a  "  History
of  the  Rise  of  the  Huguenots"  (1879);  and  "The
Huguenots  and  Henrv  of  Navarre"  (2  vols.,  1886).

BAIRD,  Samuel  iToIiii,  author,  b.  in  Newark,
Ohio,  in  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Centre  col-
lege, Ky.,  studied  theology  at  New  Albany,  and
preached  in  various  pulpits  until,  in  1865,  "he  re-
tired from  the  ministry,  owing  to  declining  health.
He  made  a  special  study  of  Presbyterian  ecclesi-
astical polity,  and  published  "  The  Assembly's
Digest " ;  "  The  Church  of  Christ,  its  Constitution
and  Order " ;  "A  History  of  the  Early  Polity  of
the  Presbyterian  Church  'in  the  Training  of  Minis-
ters " ;  "A  History  of  the  New  School  and  of  the
Questions  involved  in  the  Disruption " ;  "  The
Socinian  Apostasy  of  the  English  Presbvterian
Church";  "The  First  Adam  and  the  Second";
"The  Elohim  revealed  in  the  Creation  and  Re-
demption of  Man  "  (Philadelphia) ;  "  Collection  of
tlie  Acts,  Deliverances,  and  Testimonies  of  the
Supreme  Judicatory  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,
from  its  Origin  in  America  to  the  "Present  Time"
(1855) ;  and  "  History  of  the  New  School "  (1868).

BAIRD,  Spencer  Fullerton,  naturalist,  b.  in
Reading,  Pa.,  3  Feb.,  1823;  d.  in  Wood's  Holl,
Mass.,  19  Au^.,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  Dick-
inson college  in  1840,  and  in  1842  followed  a  course
at  the  College  of  Physicians  and  Surgeons  in  New
York.  In  1845  he  became  professor  of  natural
sciences  in  Dickinson  College,  and  a  few  years  later
assumed  also  the  chair  of  chemistry.  At  the  age
of  twenty-seven  he  was  appointed  assistant  secre-
tary of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  and  after  the


death  of  Prof.  Henry  in  May,  1878,  he  succeeded  to
the  full  secretaryship.  In  1871  he  was  nominated
U.  S.  commissioner  of  fish  and  fisheries,  and  after
his  appointment  very  much  of  his  time  was  devoted
to  the  duties  of  that  office.  He  received  tl>e  honor-
ary degrees  of  M.  D.  in  1848  from  the  Philadelphia
Medical  College,  that  of  doctor  of  physical  science
in  1856  from  Dickinson  College,  and  that  of  LL.  1).
from  Columbian  University  in  1875.  His  work
in  connection  with  the  fisheries  received  univer-
sal recognition,  and  he  was  awarded  several  medals
and  decorations  from  foreign  powers.  He  was
an  honorary  member  of  many  scientific  societies,
and  a  member  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sci-
ences from  its  organization,  a  fellow  of  the  Ameri-
can Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science
during  many  years,  and  was  its  permanent  secre-
tary in  1850  and  1851.  His  literary  work  was
very  extensive,  and  a  complete  bibliographv  from
1843  to  1882.  including  nearly  1,200  titles,  was
prepared  by  George  Brown  Goode,  and  published
as  No.  20  of  the  "  Bulletins  of  the  U.  S.  National
Museum."  His  works  include  the  editing  and
translations  of  the  "  Iconographic  Encyclopaedia  "
(New  York,  1852) ;  "The  Birds  of  North  America,"
with  John  Cassin  (Philadelphia,  1860);  "Mam-
mals of  North  America"  (Philadelphia,  1859),  and
"  Review  of  American  Birds  in  the  Museum  of
the  Smithsonian  Institution "  (1864).  More  re-
cently he  was  engaged  upon  a  "  History  of  North
American  Birds,"  in  connection  with  F.  M.  Brewer
and  R.  Ridgeway  (5  vols.,  Boston,  1874-'84).  From
1870  to  1878  he  was  the  scientific  editor  of  Harper
&  Brothers'  periodicals,  including  the  "  Annual
Record  of  Science  and  Industry,"  which  appeared
for  the  years  1872-'8.  The  annual  reports  of  the
Smithsonian  Institution,  from  1878  till  his  death,
were  edited  by  him,  and  also  the  various  reports
of  the  U.  S.  Commission  of  Fish  and  Fisheries.

BAKER,  Abijah  R.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Frank-
lin, Mass.,  30  Aug.,  1805.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  college  in  1830,  and  became  principal  of
Dorchester  academy,  and,  after  his  graduation  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1835,  a  teacher  of
the  English  department  of  Phillips  academy.  He
was  settled  as  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church
at  Medford,  Mass.,  in  1836,  and  in  1849  assumed  a
pastorate  in  Lynn.  "While  teaching  in  Andover  he
prepared  "The  School  History  of  the  United
States,"  combining  history  with  geography.  Dur-
ing his  pastorate  at  Medford  he  published  "The
Catechism  Tested  by  the  Bible,"  graduated  ques-
tion -  books  on  the  "  Westminster  Shorter  Cate-
chism "  for  Sunday-school  classes,  of  which  100,000
copies  were  sold  the  first  year,  and  translations
were  made  into  French,  Arabic,  Armenian,  and
Hawaii.  At  Lynn  he  edited,  with  his  wife's  coop-
eration, "  The  Mother's  Assistant "  and  "  The
Happy  Home,"  two  monthly  magazines.  He  sub-
sequently removed  to  Wellesley,  Mass.,  and  then
to  South  Boston.  He  published  numerous  Sunday-
school  books,  edited  an  American  edition  of  Cob-
bin's  "  Child's  Commentary,"  and  prepared  an
elaborate  "Exposition  of  the  Sermon  on  the
Mount,"  in  connection  with  which  he  wrote  a
treatise  on  prayer  and  one  on  Christian  character.
A  "  Question-Book  on  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount "
was  issued  in  1863. — His  wife,  Harriette  Newell
Woods,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Leonard  Woods,
president  of  Andover  seminary,  was  born  in  1815
in  Andover.  She  published,  under  tlie  pen-name
of  "  Mrs.  Madeline  Leslie,"  in  1855,  "  The  Courte-
sies of  Wedded  Life,"  followed  by  "  Cora  and  the
Doctor,"  printed  anonymously,  and  has  since  issued
nearly  200  moral  and  religious  tales  for  Sunday-


144


BAKER


BAKER


schools ;  some  of  them  appeared  under  her  own
name  or  initials,  some  under  that  of  "  Aunt  Ilat-
tie,"  hut  most  of  them  under  her  pen-name.  They
inchide  the  "  Home  Life,"  "Silver  Jjake,"  "Golden
Spring,"  "  Leslie  Stories,"  "  Brookside,"  and  "  Tim  "
series,  the  latter  containing  the  popular  tale  of
"Tim,  the  Scissors-Grinder."

liAKER,  Beiijaiuiii  Franklin,  musician,  b.
in  Wenham,  Mass.,  10  July,  IHII.  Jle  studied
music,  and  began  to  teach  in  18J31.  In  1839-'47  he
was  musical  director  in  Dr.  Channing's  church  in
Boston,  and  in  1841  he  inaugurated  a  series  of  suc-
cessful musical  conventions.  From  1842  to  1848
he  was  superintendent  of  musical  instruction  in
the  grammar  schools,  aiul  met  8,000  pupils  a  week.
He  introduced  music  into  the  public  schools  of
Lowell  and  Lawrence,  became  editor  of  the  Boston
"  Musical  Journal,"  and,  from  its  foundation  in
1857,  was  princii)a-l  of  the  Boston  music  school.

BAKER,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  about  1775;  d.  in
Detroit,  Mich.,  10  Oct.,  188G.  He  was  appointed
ensign  of  the  l()th  infantry  8  Jan.,  179!),  was  made
adjutant  in  1802,  captain  in  1812,  and  the  same
year  was  brevetted  major  for  gallantry  in  the  dis-
astrous affair  at  Brownstown,  Mich.  (5  Aug.,  1812),
known  as  Van  Home's  defeat.  Recovering  from
the  wounds  received  at  that  time,  he  was  promoted
to  be  major  15  April,  1814,  and  was  in  the  engage-
ment at  Lyon's  Creek,  li)  Oct.,  1814.  After  the
war  of  1812  he  was  ])romoted  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  ()tii  infantry,  and  commanded  that  regiment  at
the  battle  of  the  Bad  Axe  river,  in  the  Black  Hawk
war,  1  Aug.,  1832.

BAKER,  Daniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Midway,
Liberty  co.,  Ga.,  17  Aug.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Austin,
Texas,'lO  Dec,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1815,  studied  theology  in  Winchester,  and
on  5  IMarch,  1818,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Pres-
byterian church  in  Harrisburg,  Va.  This  charge
he  resigned  in  1821,  and  soon  afterward  went  to
Wasliington,  D.  C,  where  he  remained  until  1828.
He  gained  such  a  reputation  as  an  effective  preacher
that  his  services  were  in  demand  as  a  revivalist.
After  1880  he  continued  as  an  evangelist,  travel-
ling in  the  south,  and  at  last  settled  in  Austin,
Texas,  where  he  founded  a  college  and  became  its
first  president.  Among  his  published  works  are
"  A  Scriptural  View  of  Baptism  " ;  "  An  Affectionate
Address  to  Mothers,"  and  one  to  "  Fathers  "  ;  "  Bap-
tism in  a  Nutshell,"  and  "  Revival  Sermons."  His
memoirs,  prepared  by  his  son,  were  published  in
Philadelphia  in  1859.

BAKER,  David  Jewett,  lawyer,  b.  in  East
Haddain.  Conn.,  7  Sept.,  1792;  d.  in  Alton,  111.,  G
Aug.,  1809.  In  his  boyhood  he  worked  on  a  farm,
but  secured  a  classicaredueation,  was  graduated  at
Hamilton  college  in  1810,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1819.  He  began  practice  in  Kaskaskia,  111.,
attained  a  high  })osition  in  the  state  bar,  and  was
made  i)robate  judge  of  Randolph  co.,  although
he  so  strenuously  opposed  the  introduction  of
slavery  into  the  state  that  his  life  was  threatened.
In  18.30-'l  he  was  U.  S.  senator,  and  carried
through  congress  the  important  measure  of  selling
the  public  lands  to  actual  settlers  in  tracts  of  forty
acres.  He  was  V.  S.  district  attorney  for  Illinois
from  1833  to  1841,  and  afterward  resumed  the
practice  of  law.

BAKER,  Edward  Dickenson,  soldier,  b.  in
London,  England,  24  Feb.,  1811 ;  killed  at  the  bat-
tle of  Ball's  Bluff,  21  Oct.,  1801.  He  came  to  the
United  States  at  the  age  of  five  with  his  father,
who  died  in  Philadelphia  while  Edward  was  yet  a
youth.  The  boy  supported  himself  and  his  younger
brother  by  working  as  a  weaver,  and  occupied  his


6u/y1c<y^


leisure  hours  in  study.  Impelled  to  seek  his  for-
tune in  the  far  west,  he  removed  with  his  brother
to  Springfield,  111.,  where  he  studied  and  soon  be-
gan the  practice  of  law.  His  genius  for  oratorv
rapidly  gained  him  distinction  and  popularity,  and,
entering  the  political  field  as  a  whig,  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1837,  of  the  state  sen-
ate in  1840,  and  representative  in  congress  in  1844.
When  the  Mexican  war  began  he  raised  a  regiment
in  Illinois  and  mai'ched  to  the  Rio  Grande.  Tak-
ing a  furlough
to  speak  and
vote  in  favor  ol
the  war  in  the
house  of  rep-
resentatives, he
returned  and
overtook  his
regiment  on  the
march  from  Ve-
ra Cruz.  He
fought  with  dis-
tinction in  ev-
ery action  on  the
route  to  Mex-
ico, and  after
the  wounding
of  Gen.  Shields
at  Cerro  Gordo
commanded  the
brigade  and  led
it  during  the
rest  of  the  war.

On  his  return  to  Galena,  111.,  he  was  again  eloetod
to  congress,  serving  from  3  Dec.  1849,  till  3  INlavch,
1851 ;  but,  becoming  interested  in  the  Panama  rail-
road, he  declined  a  renomination  in  1850.  In  1851
he  settled  in  San  Francisco,  where  he  took  rank  as
the  leader  of  the  California  bar  and  the  most
eloquent  orator  in  the  state.  The  death  of  Sena-
tor Broderick,  who  fell  in  a  duel  in  1859,  was  the
occasion  of  a  fiery  oration  in  the  public  square
of  San  Francisco.  He  received  a  republican  nomi-
nation to  congress,  but  failed  of  election.  Remov-
ing to  Oregon,  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
in  18G0  by  a  coalition  of  republicans  and  Douglas
democrats.  The  firing  upon  Fort  Sumter  prompt-
ed him  to  deliver  a  passionate  address  in  Union
square.  New  York,  in  which  he  pledged  his  life
and  his  declining  strength  to  the  service  of  the
union.  He  raised  the  California  regiment  in  New
York  and  Philadelphia,  but  declined  a  commission
as  general  of  brigade.  In  the  disastrous  assault  at
Ball's  Bluff  he  commanded  a  brigade,  and,  exposing
himself  to  the  hottest  fire,  fell  mortally  wounded
while  leading  a  charge.

BAKER,  George  Aiig-iistus,  painter,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1821 ;  d.  there,  2  April,  1880.  His  artis-
tic education  was  begun  by  his  father,  an  artist  of
merit,  and  his  first  professional  years  were  devoted
to  the  then  popular  miniatures  on  ivory ;  but  he
soon  became  a  portrait  painter  of  rare  excellence,
his  favorite  subjects  being  women  and  children.
In  1844  he  went  to  Europe  and  spent  two  years  in
study.  Returning  to  New  York,  he  opened  a  stu-
dio, and  soon  ranked  among  the  best  portrait  paint-
ers of  the  time.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
national  academy  of  design  in  1851.  During  the
last  twenty-five  years  of  his  life  he  had  few  rivals.
His  portraits  are  characterized  by  a  wonderful  rich-
ness of  coloring  and  a  life-like  rendering  of  flesh-
tints.  They  are  chiefly  in  private  collections.  The
best  known  of  his  ideal  works  are  "  Love  at  First
Sight,"  "  Wild  Flowers,"  "  Children  of  the  Wood,"
"  Faith,"  and  "  The  May  Queen." — His  son,  George


BAKER


BAKER


145


Augustus,  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  the
City  of  New  York,  and  from  tlie  Columbia  College
law  school,  in  1870,  at  pi-esent  practising  in  New
York  city.  He  has  published  "'  Point  Lace  and
Diamonds,"  a  volume  of  vers  de  societe  (New  York,
187-*)).  and  "  Bad  HaVjits  of  Good  Society  "  (1876).

BAKER,  George  Bernard,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Dunham,  province  of  Quebec,  29  Jan.,
1834.  He  was  graduated  at  the  university  of  Bish-
op's college,  Lennoxville,  in  1855,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1800.  He  represented
Missisquoi  in  the  house  of  commons  from  1870  until
1874,  when  he  retired,  was  elected  by  acclamation
to  the  Quebec  legislature  in  1875,  and  in  1876  was
appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and
solicitor-general.  In  1878  he  was  elected  to  the
dominion  parliament. He  is  a  liberal-conservative.

BAKER,  Henry  Brooks,  surgeon,  b.  in  Brat-
tlel)orough,  Vt.,  29  Dec,  1837.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and  studied  medicine  at  the
University  of  Michigan  in  1861-2.  He  served
through  the  civil  war  with  the  20th  Michigan  in-
fantry, and  from  July,  1864,  was  its  assistant  sur-
feon."  He  was  graduated  at  Bellevue  Hospital
_Iedical  College  in  1866,  and  then  began  to  prac-
tise in  Lansing,  Mich.,  where  he  has  since  per-
formed important  operations.  In  1870  he  took
charge  of  the  vital  statistics  of  Michigan,  and  in
1873  he  became  secretary  of  the  State  Board  of
Health.  In  his  official  capacity  he  has  edited  and
published  '•  Statistics  of  Michigan  "  (Lansing,  1870),
"  Vital  Statistics  of  Michigan,"  registration  re-
ports (1870-'6),  and  the  "  Reports  of  the  State
Board  of  Health"  (1872-'85).  His  own  papers,
which  are  quite  numerous,  principally  on  sanitary
subjects,  have  appeared  in  various  medical  jour-
nals, chiefly  those  of  Detroit.  Dr.  Baker  has  devoted
much  time  to  studies  relative  to  the  causation  of
diphtheria,  typhoid  fever,  cholera,  and  pneumonia.
The  results  tlius  far  obtained,  have  appeared  in  the
"  Transactions  of  the  American  Public  Health  As-
sociation "  and  "  Transactions  of  the  American  Cli-
matological  Association,"  1886.  He  is  a  member
of  the  American  Climatological  Association,  the
Royal  Meteorological  Society  of  England,  and  the
French  Society  of  Hygiene.

BAKER,  James  h.,  soldier,  b.  in  Monroe,  But-
ler CO.,  Ohio,  6  May,  1829.  He  was  educated  at
the  Wesleyan  university  of  Ohio.  Subsequently  he
be<iame  a  teacher,  and  took  charge  of  a  female
seminary  at  Richmond,  Ind.  In  1853  he  purchased
the  "  Scioto  Gazette,"  and  became  its  editor.  He
was  elected  secretary  of  state  for  Ohio  in  1855,  and
became  afterward  secretary  of  state  for  Minnesota.
He  served  as  a  colonel  in  "the  army  in  1862-'3,  was
appointed  provost-marshal  for  the  department  of
Missouri,  and  served  in  this  capacity  until  the  close
of  the  war,  having  been  made  in  the  meantime  a
brigadier-general.  After  the  war  he  was  appointed
regLstei-  of  public  lands  at  Booneville,  Missouri,  and
retained  the  office  two  years,  after  which  he  retired
to  his  farm  in  Minnesota.  From  1871  to  1875  he
was  commissioner  of  pensions.

BAKER,  Lafayette  C.  chief  of  the  U.  S.  se-
cret service,  b.  in  Stafford,  Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  l3
Oct.,  1826;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  2  July,  1868.  His
grandfather.  Remember  Baker,  was  one  of  Ethan
Allen's  captains.  Baker's  father  inherited  the  curi-
ous baptismal  name  of  the  Green  Mountain  Boy,  as
well  as  his  adventurous  spirit,  and  in  1839  removed
to  Michigan  and  settled  where  Lansing,  the  capital,
now  stands.  Young  Baker  took  part  in  the  work
of  making  a  home  in  the  wilderness,  but  in  1848
went  to  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  and  in  1853
to  San  Francisco,  in  each  of  these  cities  working  as
VOL. I. — 10


a  mechanic.  When  the  lawless  element  became
dominant  in  San  Francisco  in  1856,  Mr.  Baker
joined  the  vigilance  committee  and  took  an  active
part  in  the  summary  proceedings  that  restored
order  in  the  city.  He  went  to  New  York  on  busi-
ness in  1861,  expecting  to  return  at  once,  but  the
civil  war  intervened,  and  he  went  to  Washington
and  offered  his  services.  At  the  suggestion  of  Gen.
Hiram  Walbridge,  of  New  York,  he  was  introduced
to  Gen.  Scott,  and,  as  a  result  of  the  interview,
he  started  on  foot  for  Richmond,  where,  in  spite
of  arrest,  imprisonment,  and  several  interviews
with  Jefferson  Davis,  while  under  suspension  as
a  spy,  he  succeeded  in  collecting  much  informa-
tion and  returning  to  Washington  after  an  ab-
sence of  three  weeks.  This  was  but  the  first  of  a
series  of  adventures  involving  high  executive  ability
and  a  wonderful  talent  for  tracing  conspiracy  and
frustrating  the  designs  of  confederate  spies  and
agents.  As  soon  as  his  abilities  were  demonstrated
t9  the  satisfaction  of  the  government,  he  was  placed
at  the  heiul  of  the  bureau  of  secret  service,  with
almost  unlimited  resources  at  his  command,  and  in
February,  1862,  the  bureau  was  transferred  to  the
war  department.  Mr.  Baker  was  commissioned
colonel,  and  suV«equently  brigadier-general.  His
duties  naturally  made  him  enemies  in  influential
quarters,  and  charges  of  a  serious  nature  were
several  times  preferred  against  him,  but  were  never
substantiated.  When  President  Lincoln  was  assas-
sinated. Col.  Baker  organized  the  pursuit  of  the
murderer,  and  was  present  at  his  capture  and  death.
His  agents  effected  the  capture  of  the  other  par-
ticipants in  the  plot.  Gen.  Baker  published  a
"  History  of  the  United  States  Secret  Sers^ice "
(Philadelphia,  1868),  which  is  necessarily  semi-bio-
graphical, and  touches  authoritatively  man^  dis-
puted passages  in  the  secret  history  of  the  civil  war.
BAKER,  Marcus,  explorer,  b.  in  Ostemo,  Kala-
mazoo CO.,  Mich.,  23  Sept.,  1849.  He  was  educated
at  Kalamazoo  College  and  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, graduating  in  1870 ;  in  1870-'l  was  made  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  Albion  College,  and  in
1871-*3  tutor  of  mathematics  in  the  University  of
Michigan.  In  1873  he  became  connected  withthe
U.  S.  Coast  and  Geodetic  Survey,  attaining  in  1886
the  grade  of  assistant  geographer.  During  this
time  he  spent  several  years  in  explorations  and
surveys  in  Alaska,  and  traversed  the  entire  Pacific
coast  from  southern  California  to  the  Arctic  ocean.
From  July,  1882,  to  August,  1884,  he  was  in  charge
'  of  the  Los  Angeles  magnetic  observatory,  estab-
j  lished  by  the  U.  S.  signal  service.  He  has  devoted
j  much  time,  with  William  H.  Dall.  to  the  com-
I  pilation  of  material  for  a  Coast  Pilot  of  Alaska,
I  and  also  to  the  "Alaska  Coast  Pilot.  Appendix  I.,
Meteorology  and  Bibliography"  (Washington,  1879).
Mr.  Baker  has  contributed  mathematical  papers  to
the  scientific  journals,  and  has  been  one  of  the  sec-
retaries of  the  Philosophical  society,  Washington.

BAKER,  Nathaniel  Bradley,  governor  of
New  Hampshire,  b.  in  IIills1xjrough*(now  Ilenniker),
N.H.,29  Sept.,  1818;  d.  in  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  11
Sept.,  1876.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips  Exeter
academy  and  Harvard  college,  being  graduated  in
!  1839,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Franklin  Pierce,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842.  For  three  years
he  was  joint  proprietor  and  editor  of  the  "New
Hampshire  Patriot."  In  1845  he  was  appointed
clerk  of  the  court  of  common  pleas,  and  in  1846
clerk  of  the  superior  court  of  judicature  for  Merri-
mac  CO.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1851,
was  chosen  speaker  of  the  house,  and  served  two
terms.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1852,  and
1  in  1854  was  elected  governor  of  tne  state  on  the


146


BAKER


BALBOA


democratic  ticket.  His  term  expired  in  1855,  and
in  185G  he  removed  to  Clinton,  Iowa,  and  engaged
in  the  practice  of  law.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in  1859,  and  acted  with  the  republicans  in
the  scbsion  of  1860  and  .the  extra  session  of  18G1.
In  July,  18G1,  he  was  appointed  adjutant-general  of
Iowa,  which  office  he  held  until  the  time  of  his
death.  In  this  capacity  he  w^as  noted  for  his  effi-
ciency during  the  war,  and  was  very  popular  with  the
soldiers,  to  whose  comfort  and  w^elfare  he  greatly
contributed.  When  grasshoppers  devastated  largo
portions  of  the  northwest,  and  many  families  were
threatened  with  starvation,  Gen.  Baker's  measures
for  their  relief  were  energetic  and  effective.

BAKER,  Osiium  Cleaiider,  clergvman,  b.  in
Marlow,  N.  11.,  80  July,  1812  ;  d.  in  Concord,  X.  II.,
20  Dec,  1871.  Having  received  good  preliminary
training,  Mr.  Baker,  at  the  age  of  fifteen,  entered
the  academy  at  Wilbraham,  Mass.,  and  remained
there  as  a  student  for  three  years.  At  that  time
(1831)  the  Kev.  Wilbur  Fisk  was  principal  of  the
academy,  and,  as  one  of  the  leading  educators  of
the  Methodist  church,  was  invited  to  become  presi-
dent of  Weslcyan  university,  newly  chartered,  at
Middletown,  by  the  state  of  Connecticut.  Mr.
Baker  entered  as  one  of  the  first  class,  and  studied
for  three  years,  failing,  through  ill  health,  to  com-
plete the  full  course.  Such  was  his  proficiency,
however,  that  he  received  the  usual  degree.  In
1884  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  teach  in  the  semi-
nary at  Newbury,  Vt.,  and  from  1839  till  1844  was
its  principal.  During  this  period  he  became  first  a
local  and  afterward  an  itinerant  preacher,  and,  un-
der the  conviction  that  his  duty  lay  in  this  direc-
tion, he  resigned  the  charge  of  the  seminary,  and
for  the  next  three  years  was  engaged  in  pastoral
work  in  the  neighborhood  of  Rochester  and  Man-
chester, N.  II.  In  1847  he  was  appointed  presid-
ing elder,  and  the  same  year  was  chosen  a  pro-
fessor in  the  general  biblical  institute  in  Concord,
N.  H.,  which  has  since  become  the  school  of  the-
ology of  Boston  university.  This  chair  he  ac-
cepted with  great  reluctance,  such  was  his  devotion
to  pastoral  work,  but  filled  it  so  acceptably  that  he
was  elected  president  of  the  school,  and  remained
there  until  1852,  when  he  was  elected  bishop  by  the
quadriennial  general  conference  of  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church.  He  was  by  nature  a  scholarly,
unassuming  man,  but  an  excellent  presiding  and
administrative  officer,  and  proved  himself  highly
efficient.  As  a  preacher  he  was  able,  though  not
impassioned,  and  was  an  earnest  advocate  of  thor-
ough theological  training  for  all  ministers.  He
Eublished  "Guide-Book  in  the  Administration  of
»iscipline  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church"
(New  York.  1855).

BAKER,  Remember,  pioneer,  b.  in  Woodbury,
Conn.,  about  1740;  d.  near  Isle  aux  Noix,  Lake
Champlain,  in  August,  1775.  He  served  m  the
French  war  of  1757-'9,  and  was  in  the  bloody  at-
tack on  Ticondoroga  in  1758.  He  went  to  Arling-
ton, in  the  New  Hampshire  grants,  in  1764,  settled
there,  and  became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  "  Green
Mountain  Boys,"  aiding  Ethan  Allen  in  his  struggles
against  the  claims  of  New  York  to  that  part  of  the
country.  He  was  outlawed  by  Gov.  Tryon,  of  New
York,  a  price  being  set  upon  his  head,  and  on  one  oc-
casion he  was  actually  captured,  but  was  rescued  on
the  same  day,  after  "he  had  been  cruelly  maimed.
He  was  with  Ethan  Allen  at  the  capture  of  Tieon-
deroga,  10  May,  1775,  and  with  Seth  Warner  at
Crown  Point  two  days  afterward.  He  met  his
death  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians  when  on  a  scout-
ing expedition  on  Richelieu  river,  the  outlet  of
Lake  Champlain.


BAKER,  William  Bliss,  artist,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  1859.  He  studied  art  at  the  national  acad-
emy of  design  from  1876  till  1880,  and  first  exhib-
ited there  in  1879.  He  took  the  first  prize  in  the
antique  school  of  the  academy  in  1879,  and  was
awarded  the  third  Hallgarten  prize,  of  -f  100,  in  1884
for  his  "  Woodland  Brook."  Among  his  recent
paintings  exhibited  at  the  National  Academy  are
"In  the  Old  Pasture";  "Pleasant  Day  at  'Lake
George  "  (1883) ;  "  October  Morning  "  (1884) ;  "  Soli-
tude "  (1885) ;  and  "  Under  the  Apple-Trees  "  (1886)

BAKER,  William  H.,  artist,  b.  in  1825;  d.  iii
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  29  IMay,  1875.  He  was  brought
up  to  mercantile  pursuits  in  New  Orleans,  after-
ward studied  art,  and  became  a  portrait  painter
there.  He  removed  in  1865  to  New  York,  where
he  painted  portraits  and  ideal  subjects.  Mr,  Baker
exhibited  in  the  national  academy  "Cupid  Dis-
armed"  (1866) ;  "A  Floral  Offering"  (1869);  and
"Cupid  Reprimanded"  (1871).  In  1869  he  re-
moved to  Brooklyn  and  became  principal  of  the
free  school  of  design  of  the  Brooklyn  art  associa-
tion. He  exhibited  there  "  May  Flowers  "  (1870) ;
"  Red  Riding-Hood  "  (1871) ;  "  Morning  Glories,"
"  Home  Regatta,"  and  "  Cherry  Time "  (1872) ;
"  Lilies  of  the  Field  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Truants  from
School "  (1875).  One  of  his  best  portraits  is  that
of  Bishop  Quintard,  of  Tennessee,  painted  for  the
Episcopal  general  convention.  Mr.  Baker  was  a
successful  art  teacher.  As  a  painter  he  was  pains-
taking, but  never  achieved  greatness.

BAKER,  William  Mumiord,  author,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  27  June,  1825 ;  d.  in  South  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  20  Aug.,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1846,  studied  theology  for  two  years
with  his  father,  the  Rev.  Daniel  Baker,  and  spent
one  year  in  the  Princeton  seminary.  He  then
joined  his  father  in  Texas,  and  was  a  pastor  in  Gal-
veston, and  subsequently  in  Austin,  from  1850  to
1865.  After  fifteen  years  of  service  in  Texas,  Mr.
Baker  accepted  a  charge  at  Zanesville,  Ohio,  whence
he  was  transferred  to  Newburyport,  Mass.  In  1874
he  became  pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  South
Boston.  His  most  important  work  was  "  Inside :  A
Chronicle  of  Secession  "  (New  York,  1866),  written
secretly  during  the  war,  while  he  lived  in  Austin,
and  giving  a  peculiarly  vivid  picture  of  southern
life  and  sentiment  at  that  time.  It  was  published
under  the  name  of  "  G.  F.  Harrington."  He  also
wrote  the  "  Life  and  Labors  "  of  his  father  (Phila-
delphia, 1858),  which  had  a  large  circulation.  His
other  books  are  mostly  tales,  including  "  Oak  Mot "
(Philadelphia,  1868) ;  "  Mose  Evans  "  (Boston,  1874) ;
"  Carter  Quarterman  "  (New  York,  1876) ;  "  A  Year
worth  Living"  (Boston,  1878);  "Colonel  Dun-
woodie"  (New  York,  1878);  "The  Virginians  in
Texas"  (New  York,  1878);  "Thirlmore,"  and  "The
New  Timothy  "  (New  York,  1870) ;  "  His  Majesty
Mvself "  (Boston,  1879);  and  "Blessed  Saint  Cer-
tainty "  (Boston,  1881).  Many  of  these  were  pub-
lished as  serials.  "  The  Ten  Theophanies ;  or.  The
Manifestations  of  Christ  before  His  Birth  in  Beth-
lehem "  (New  York,  1883),  was  completed  shortly
before  his  death,  and  is  regarded  by  those  who
knew  him  as  in  some  sort  a  record  of  the  writer's
own  religious  experiences  and  struggles.  Since
his  death  has  ap[ieared  "  The  Making  of  a  Man "
(Boston,  1884).

BALBOA,  Vasco  Nunez  de,  Spanish  discov-
erer, b.  in  Xeres  de  los  Caballeros,  Extremadura,
Spain,  in  1475;  d.  in  Castilla  de  Oro,  Darien,  in
1517.  He  was  a  bankrupt  nobleman  who  escaped
from  his  creditors  to  Hispaniola  and  afterward
joined  an  expedition  under  Martin  Fernandez  de
Enciso,  one  of  Ojeda's  lieutenants,  to  the  hitter's


BALBUENA


BALCH


147


Darien  colony  of  San  Sebastian.  After  meeting
with  misfortune  through  shipwreck  and  hostile
natives,  and  learning  of  the  destruction  and  aban-
donment of  the  colony,  they  finally  founded  a  town,
wliich  they  called  Santa  Maria  de  la  Antigua  de
Dtirien.  Enciso  forbade  his  men  to  trade  with
the  natives,  and  was  deposed  by  Balboa,  who  claimed
that  they  were  no  longer  within  the  boundaries  of
Ojeda's  province,  andhence  owed  his  lieutenant  no
obedience.  The  settlement  split  into  factions,  and
tinally  Enciso  and  Zamudio,  the  latter  as  Balboa's
representative,  were  sent  to  Spain  to  lay  their  griev-
ances before  the  king.  In  the  meanwhile  Balboa
explored  the  country,  gained  the  good  will  of  the
nativ'es  by  his  treatment  of  them,  and  was  told  of
a  sea  that  lay  southward,  and  of  a  land  where
gold  abounded  (Peru).  He  was  now  commis-
sioned as  governor  of  Antigua  by  Admiral  Diego
Columbus ;  but,  hearing  from  Spain  that  the  king
inclined  to  side  with  Enciso,  he  determined  to  dis-
cover the  new  sea  of  which  he  had  heard,  and  so
atone  for  his  faults.  He  left  Antigua  for  this  pur-
pose on  1  Sept.,  1513,  and  after  laboring  on  for  many
days  amid  tangled  forests,  up  rugged  heights,  fight-
ing the  natives  continually,  until  the  explorers  were
exhausted,  foot-sore,  and  famished,  they  ascended  a
mountain  on  the  morning  of  the  2oth,  whence  he  saw
the  new  sea.  Balboa  nan^ed  it  "  Mar  del  Sur,"  and
took  possession  of  it  and  all  its  coasts  in  the  name
of  his  royal  master  and  mistress.  Three  days  later
he  reached  the  beach  at  a  place  still  known  by  the
name  he  gave  it,  the  gulf  of  San  Miguel.  After  a
short  voyage  of  exploration  and  the  collection  of
tribute  from  neighboring  tribes,  he  set  out  for
home,  and  reached  Antigua  in  safety  in  January,
1514,  after  what  must  be  considered  a  wonderful
exploit  when  we  take  into  account  his  small  force
and  the  almost  insurinountable  difficulties  of  the
route.  But  Balboa's  exploit  was  in  vain.  A  new
governor,  Pedrarias,  arrived  at  Antigua  in  the  fol-
lowing June,  and  his  predecessor  was  put  on  trial
on  various  charges.  He  was  acquitted  of  the  most
serious,  but  Avas  sentenced  to  pay  a  large  fine.  Soon
after  this  the  king  of  Spain,  hearing  of  Balboa's
great  discovery,  gave  him  a  special  commission  to
explore  the  shore  of  the  "  southern  sea,"  and  made
him  governor  of  Panama  and  Coyba.  Pedrarias
withheld  this  commission  at  first,  but,  becoming
reconciled  to  Balboa,  finally  allowed  him  to  begin
preparations  for  his  voyage,  and  promised  him  his
daughter  in  marriage.  Vessels  were  built,  though
with  difficulty,  on  the  Pacific  side  of  the  isthmus,  and
Balboa,  after  making  a  few  unimportant  discover-
ies, sent  his  friend  Garabito  to  investigate  a  rumor
that  Pedrarias  had  been  superseded.  The  rumor
was  untrue,  and  Garabito,  proving  a  false  friend,
told  the  governor  that  Balboa  had  no  idea  of  mar-
rying his  daughter,  but  intended  to  found  for  him-
self a  government  on  the  shores  of  the  Pacific.
Pedrarias  was  enraged  at  this,  enticed  Balboa  with-
in his  grasp,  and  secured  his  conviction  on  a  charge
of  treason,  together  with  charges  on  which  he  had
previously  been  acquitted.  The  next  day  Balboa
with  four  of  his  companions  was  executed,  pro-
testing to  the  last  his  innocence  and  loyalty.  See
Quintana's  *'  Vidas  de  Espaiioles  celebres  "  (3  vols.,
1807-34) ;  Irving's  "  Voyages  and  Discoveries  of
the  Companions  of  Columbus  "  (New  York,  1831) ;
and  Winsor's  "Narrative  and  Critical  History  of
America"  (Boston,  1884).

^  BALBUENA,  Bernardo  de  (bahl-bwa'-na),
Spanish  poet,  b.  in  Valdepenas  in  1568;  d.  in
Porto  Rico  in  1627.  He  was  educated  in  Mexico,
became  provost  in  Jamaica,  and  in  1620  bishop  of
Porto  Rico. He  wrote  "  El  Siglo  de  Oro  "  ("  The


Age  of  Gold  "),  a  pastoral  romance,  the  scene  of
which  is  laid  in  the  new  world ;  "  La  Grandeza  Me-
jicana  "  (new  ed.,  1821) ;  and  "  El  Bernardo  "  (3  vols.,
Madrid,  1624 ;  new  ed..  1808),  an  epic,  which  is  one
of  his  most  finished  productions.  He  had  a  fine
library,  which  was  lost  when  the  Dutch  sacked
Porto  Rico  in  1625.

BALCARRES,  Alexander  Lindsay,  earl  of,
British  soldier,  b.  in  1752 ;  d.  in  London,'27  March.
1825.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  fifth  earl  of
Balcarres,  whom  he  succeeded  in  1767.  He  be-
came an  ensign  in  the  53d  foot,  and  was  made
major,  9  Dec,  1775.  In  this  country  he  saw  three
years  of  service  under  Carleton  and  Burgoyne.  He
was  present  at  the  defeat  of  the  Americans  under
Gen.  Thomson  at  Three  Rivers,  1  June,  1776,  and
commanded  the  light  infantry  at  Ticonderoga  and
at  Hubbardton,  Vt.,  7  July,  1777.  At  the  latter  place
he  was  wounded,  thirteen  balls  passing  through  his
clothes.  On  19  Sept.  he  commanded  the  advanced
corps  of  the  army  on  the  heights  of  Saratoga,  and
on  the  death  of  Gen.  Eraser,  8  Oct.,  at  Stillwater,
was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  24th  foot.  He
became  major-general  in  1793,  commander  at  Ja-
maica, lieutenant-governor  of  that  island  in  1794,
lieutenant-general  in  1798,  and  general  in  1803.

BALCH,  George  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Tennes-
see, 3  Jan.,  1821.  He  became  a  midshipman,  by
appointment  from  Alabama,  30  Dec,  1837,  and  was
assigned  to  the  sloop  "  Cyane,"  of  the  Pacific  squad-
ron. He  was  promoted  to  passed  midshipman,  29
June,  1843,  and  remained  on  special  duty  until  the
war  with  Mexico,  when  he  was  assigned  to  active
duty,  and  engaged  in  the  first  attack  on  Alvarado
by  Com.  Connor,  1  Nov.,  1846.  Throughout  this
war  he  was  with  the  naval  squadron,  serving  at
the  successful  attack  upon  Vera  Cruz  and  in  the
"  mosquito  fleet "  under  Com.  Tatnall.  In  1849-'50
he  was  at  the  naval  observatory,  Washington,  and
was  promoted  lieutenant,  16  Aug.,  1850.  While
with  the  sloop  "  Plymouth,"  in  the  Pacific  squad-
ron, he  was  wounded  during  a  fight  between  Chinese
imperialists  and  rebels,  and  from  this  date  until  the
outbreak  of  the  civil  war  he  was  on  duty  with  the
various  home  and  foreign  squadrons.  In  1860,
while  in  command  of  the  frigate  "  Sabine,"  he  fell
in  with  the  U.  S.  transport  "  Governor  "  in  a  sinking
condition,  and  rescued  nearly  400  marines  under
Lieut.-Col.  Reynolds,  the  transport  sinking  just  af-
ter the  transfer  was  made.  In  1861-2  he  was  in
command  of  the  "  Pocahontas,"  in  the  south  At-
lantic squadron,  and  volunteered  to  command  boats
taking  possession  of  Tybee  island.  Commissioned
as  commander,  16  July,  1862,  he  was  actively  en-
gaged along  the  South  Atlantic  coast,  and  effect-
ively cooperated  with  the  land  forces  on  various
occasions,  especially  on  16  July,  1862,  when,  in
command  of  the  "  Pawnee,"  he  repelled  an  attack
by  two  batteries  of  artillery.  In  this  affair  the
"  Pawnee  "  was  struck  forty-six  times.  While  in  com-
mand of  this  vessel.  Commander  Balch  captured
two  confederate  guns,  and  was  engaged  in  the  com-
bined operations  of  the  navy  under  Rear  Admiral
Dahlgren  and  the  army  under  Gen.  Foster  in  Stone
river,  and  on  9  Feb.,  1865,  with  two  other  vessels
ascended  Togoda  creek,  S.  C,  and  silenced  three
batteries.  On  25  July,  1866,  he  was  promoted  cap-
tain. He  was  with  the  North  Atlantic  squadron
in  1868-9,  and  on  shore  duty  at  Washington  un-
til 1872.  He  became  commodore  13  Aug.,  1872,
rear  admiral  5  June,  1878,  and  was  superintendent
of  the  naval  academy  until  1880,  when  he  went  on
his  last  cruise,  terminating  in  January,  1883,  and
was  placed  on  the  retired  list,  having  attained  the
limit  of  age  for  active  service.


148


BALDWIN


BALDWIN


BALDWIN,  Abraham,  statesman,  b.  in  Guil-
ford, Conn.,  (j  Nov.,  1754;  d.in  Washington,  D.  C,
4  March,  1807.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1772,
and  held  a  tutorship  there  from  1775  to  1779.
From  1777  until  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  a  chap-
lain in  the  army.
At  Gen.  Greene's
request,  he  re-
moved in  1784  to
Savannah,  where
he  was  admitted
to  the  Georgia
bar,  and  in  the
same  year  sent  to
the  state  legisla-
ture. Here  he
originated  the
plan  of  the  uni-
versity of  Geor-
gia, drew  up  the
charter  by  which
it  was  endowed
with  40,000  acres
of  land,  and,  not-

%^y^i^i<^<i^<^^^^UJ^c^,.^y^ withstanding  the

prejudices  of

many  members  of
the  assembly  against  the  project,  secured  its  suc-
cess. He  was  afterward  president  of  the  univer-
sity for  several  years.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
continental  congress  from  1785  to  1788,  and  was
a  member  of  the  constitutional  convention,  25
May  to  17  Sept.,  1787,  taking  an  active  part  in
its  discussions.  He  was  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  1789  until  1799,  and  was  then  sent  to
the  senate,  where  he  remained  until  his  death,
serving  again  as  its  president  pro  tempor-e  in  1801
and  in  1802.  While  in  congress  he  voted  in  favor  of
locating  the  seat  of  government  on  the  Potomac.
After  the  death  of  his  father,  in  1787,  he  took
charge  of  his  six  half-brothers  and  sisters  and  edu-
cated them.  One  of  these  was  Henry  Baldwin,
noticed  below ;  another  was  the  wife  of  Joel  Bar-
low, the  poet.  A  large  number  of  needy  young  men
owed  to  him  the  means  of  obtaining  an  education.
BALDWIN,  Ashbel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  7  March,  1757 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
8  Feb.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  college  in
1776,  and  was  a  quartermaster  in  the  revolutionary
army.  On  3  Aug.,  1785,  he  was  ordained  to  the
diaconate  by  Bishop  Seabury  in  Middletown.  This
was  the  first  Episcopal  ordination  in  the  United
States.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  September  fol-
lowing, and  became  rector  of  St.  Michael's  church,
Litchfield,  where  he  remained  till  1793.  From
1793  to  1824  he  was  rector  of  Christ  church,  Strat-
ford. He  then  held  parishes  in  Wallingt'ord,  Meri-
den.  North  Haven,  and  Oxford,  until  in  1832  he
became  disabled  by  age.  His  records  show  that  he
had  preached  10,000  times,  and  baptized  3,010  per-
sons. He  was  secretary  of  the  general  convention,
and  also  of  the  diocesan  convention  of  Connecticut.
BALDWIN,  Charles  H.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  3  Sept.,  1822 ;  d.  there,  17  Nov.,  1888.
He  entered  the  navy  in  1839,  and  became  passed
midshipman  2  July,  1845.  In  the  war  with  Mexico
he  served  on  the  frigate  "  Congress,"  and  was  in
two  shore  engagements  near  Mazatlan  while  that
place  was  occupied  by  the  U.  S.  forces.  In  Novem-
ber, 1853,  he  was  made  lieutenant,  and  on  28  Feb.,
1854,  he  resigned.  He  re-entered  the  service  in
1861,  and  commanded  the  steamer  "Clifton,"  of
the  mortar  flotilla,  at  the  passage  of  forts  Jackson
and  St.  Philip,  24  April,  1862,  and  at  the  first  at-
tack on  Vicksburg,  28  June,  1862. On  18  Nov.,


1862,  he  became  commander,  and  in  1868  and  1869
was  fleet-captain  of  the  North  Pacific  squadron.
Pie  was  made  captain  in  1869,  and  in  1869  and
1871  was  ordnance  inspector  at  Mare  island,  Cal.
On  8  Aug.,  1876,  he  was  made  commodore,  and
from  1876  to  1879  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  ex-
aminers. On  31  Jan.,  1883,  he  was  raised  to  the  rank
of  rear  admiral,  and  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  Mediterranean  squadron.  He  attended  offi-
cially the  coronation  of  the  emperor  of  Russia,
and  "in  1884  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.

BALDWIN,  George  Colfax,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pompton,  N.  J.,  21  Oct.,  1817.  He  was  graduated
at  Madison  university,  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  and  has
been  for  many  years  pastor  of  the  First  Baptist
church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.  He  is  author  of  "  Repre-
sentative Women  of  the  Bible"  (New  York,  1855);
"Representative  Men  of  the  New  Testament"
(1859) ;  "  The  Model  Prayer  " ;  a  volume  of  lectures
(Boston,  1870),  and  other  works.

BALDWIN,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  14  Jan.,  1780;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  21
April,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  college  in
1797,  studied  law,  and  became  a  prominent  mem-
ber of  the  bar.  Removing  to  Pennsylvania,  he  set-
tled at  Pittsburg,  and  in  1817  was  sent  to  congress
as  a  federalist,  and  was-  twice  reelected.  He  re-
signed in  1822,  and  in  1830  was  made  justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  In  the  same  year  Yale
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  He  was  the
author  of  "  A  General  View  of  the  Origin  and  Na-
ture of  the  Constitution  and  Government  of  the
United  States  "  (Philadelphia,  1837).

BALDWIN,  Henry  Porter,  governor  of  Michi-
gan, b.  in  Coventry,  R.  I.,  22  Feb.,  1814.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  became  a  clerk  in  Paw-
tucket,  where  he  remained  eight  years,  and  on
becoming  of  age  engaged  in  business  on  his  own
account  in  Woonsocket.  In  1838  he  moved  to
Detroit,  where  he  became  a  prominent  merchant
and  president  of  the  second  national  bank,  and
was  in  1861  and  1862  a  member  of  the  state  senate.
He  was  governor  from  1869  to  1873,  and  in  1879
was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  death  of  senator  Zachariah  Chandler,
serving  until  1881.  While  governor  he  secured  an
appropriation  for  the  enlargement  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Michigan,  and  projected  the  state  capitol
at  Lansing.  Mr.  Baldwin  is  a  prominent  member
of  the  Episcopal  church  and  well  known  for  his
many  acts  of  liberality  and  public  spirit.

BALDWIN,  Jeduthan,  soldier,  b.  in  Woburn.
Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1732;  d.  in  Brookfield,  Mass.,  4
June,  1788.  He  commanded  a  company  during
the  French  and  Indian  war,  and  served  in  the  ex-
pedition against  Crown  Point  during  the  autumn
of  1775.  In  the  siege  of  Boston  he  displayed  engi-
neering ability,  designing  the  defences  of  the  Ameri-
can forces,  and  on  16  March,  1776,  was  made  as-
sistant engineer,  with  the  rank  of  captain,  to  the
continental  troops.  He  was  subsequently  ordered
to  New  York  and  became  lieutenant-colonel  26
April,  1776.  In  September,  1776,  he  was  sent  to
Canada,  and  later  was  made  engineer,  with  the
rank  of  colonel.  He  served  under  Gen.  St.  Clair
at  Ticonderoga  in  1777,  and  with  his  regiment  was
at  West  Point  in  1780.  He  resigned  from  the
army  on  26  April,  1782.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  provincial  congress  in  1774-'5.  He
bequeathed  £100  to  Leicester  (Mass.)  academy.

BALDWIN,  John  Denison,  journalist,'!),  in
North  Stonington,  Conn.,  28  Sept.,  1809;  d.  m
Worcester,  Mass..  8  July,  1883.  He  supported
himself  from  the  age  of  fourteen,  pursued  academi-
cal, legal,  and  theological  studies  in  New  Haven.


BALDWIN


BALDWIN


149


and  received  the  honorary  degree  of  master  of  arts
from  Yale  college.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1833,  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  North  Branford,
Conn.,  for  several  years,  and  made  a  special  study
of  archaeology.  He  became  editor  of  the  "  Repub-
lican," an  anti-slavery  journal,  published  in  Hart-
ford, and  subsequently  of  the  "  Commonwealth,"
published  in  Boston.  From  1859  he  owned  and
edited  the  "  Worcester  Spy."  He  was  elected  to
conoress  in  1863,  and  reelected  twice.  He  pub-
lished "  Raymond  Hill,"  a  collection  of  poems
(Boston,  1847) ;  "  Prehistoric  Nations  "  (New  York,
1869) ;  and  "  Ancient  America  "  (1872).

BALDWIN,  Joseph  Gr.,  jurist,  b.  in  Sumter,
Ala. ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  30  Sept.,  1864.
From  1857  to  1863  he  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  California,  and  he  was  chief  justice  from
January,  1863,  until  January,  1864.  He  was  the
author  of  "Flush  Times  in  Alabama  and  Missis-
sippi "  (New  York,  1853),  a  popular  book,  "  Party
Leaders"  (1854),  and  a  volume  of  humorous  legal
sketches  (San  Francisco,  1879).

BALDWIN,  Loammi,  engineer,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mass.,  21  Jan.,  1745 ;  d.  there,  20  Oct.,  1807.  He
received  a  common-school  education,  and,  subse-
quently devoting  his  attention  to  mathematics,
studied  at  Harvard  under  Prof.  Winthrop,  after
which  he  became  a  surveyor  and  engineer.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Middl-esex  co.  convention  held  in
August,  1774.  During  the  revolutionary  war  he
entered  the  service  as  a  major,  and  was  in  the  bat-
tle at  Lexington,  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island,  and
took  part  in  the  surprise  of  the  Hessians  at  Tren-
ton ;  but  after  reaching  the  rank  of  colonel  he  was
compelled,  in  1777,  to  retire  in  consequence  of
failing  health.  From  1780  to  1794  he  was  sheriff
of  Middlesex  co.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massa-
chusetts state  legislature  from  1778  to  1779,  and
again  in  1780.  From  1794  to  1804  he  was  superin-
tendent of  the  Middlesex  canal,  and  one  of  its
principal  owners.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the
American  Academy  of  Sciences. — His  son,  Loammi,
b.  in  Woburn,  16^  May,  1780,  d.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  30  June,  1838,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1800,  studied  law,  and  became  a  civil  engineer.
The  dry  docks  at  Charlestown  and  at  Newport  were
constructed  under  his  supervision.  Since  his  death
a  memorial  of  him,  and  of  his  father,  has  appeared
from  the  pen  of  a  grandson. — Another  son,  James
Fowle,  engineer,  b.  in  Woburn,  Mass.,  29  April,
1782,  d.  in  Boston,  20  May,  1862,  was  educated
at  the  academies  in  Billerica  and  Westford,  after
which  he  entered  on  mercantile  pursuits  in  Boston,
but  later  joined  his  brother  in  the  construction  of
the  dry  dock  at  the  Charlestown  navy-yard.  In
1828  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commissioners
to  make  a  survey  for  a  railroad  from  Boston  to
Albany,  and  from  1830  to  1835  he  was  engaged  on
the  construction  of  the  Boston  and  Lowell  rail-
road. He  was  appointed  in  1837  one  of  the  com-
missioners to  examine  and  report  upon  the  means
of  supplying  Boston  with  pure  water,  and  recom-
mended Long  Pond.  His  plan  was  adopted  in
1846,  and  the  work  was  completed  in  1848.  He
was  at  one  time  state  senator  from  Suffolk  co.,  and
also  for  some  years  water  commissioner.

BALDWIN,  Matthias  William,  manufactu-
rer, b.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J..  10  Dec,  1795  ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  7  Sept.,  1866.  Having  a.  natural  in-
clination for  mechanical  contrivances,  he  was  ap-
prenticed at  the  age  of  sixteen  to  a  firm  of  jewel-
lers in  Frankford,  Pa.  On  the  expiration  of  his
service  he  became  a  journeyman,  and  in  1819  he
established  his  own  business.  While  thus  occupied
he  devised  and  patented  a  process  for  plating  with


gold,  which  has  since  been  universally  adopted.
He  then  undertook  the  manufacture  of  book-bind-
ers' tools  and  calico-printers'  rolls,  and  his  factory
was  the  first  to  render  this  country  independent  of
foreign  supply.  About  1828  his  attention  was  di-
rected to  the  manufacture  of  steam-engines,  and  at
this  time  he  constructed  a  five-horse-power  engine,
which  was  employed  in  his  own  works.  The  com-
mendations that  the  new  engine  received  induced
him  to  enter  into  the  manufacture  of  stationary
engines,  and  his  business  became  extensive  and
profitable.  In  the  latter  part  of  1830  he  was  per-
mitted to  see  a  locomotive  which  had  just  been  re-
ceived from  England,  and  after  four  months'  labor
he  succeeded  in  producing  a  beautiful  model,  which
was  exhibited  in  Philadelphia.  His  first  loco-
motive, called  the  "  Ironsides,"  was  made  for  the
Philadelphia  and  Germantown  railway,  and  was
placed  on  the  road  23  Nov.,  1832.  It  was  a  success,
and  "  Poulson's  American  Advertiser  "  of  that  pe-
riod contains  the  following  notice :  "  The  locomo-
tive-engine, built  by  M.  W.  Baldwin,  of  this  city,
will  depart  daily,  when  the  weather  is  fair,  with  a
train  of  passenger-cars.  On  rainy  days  horses  will
be  attached."  During  the  next  three  years  he  re-
ceived orders  for  nine  or  ten  locomotives,  and  in
1835  he  moved  to  the  corner  of  Broad  and  Hamil-
ton streets.  His  inventions  and  improvements  in
the  construction  of  locomotives  are  very  numerous,
and  among  these  perhaps  the  most  important  was
the  flexible  truck  locomotive,  patented  in  August,
1842.  His  works  have  acquired  a  world-wide  repu-
tation, and  his  locomotives  have  been  sent  to
nearly  every  foreign  country.  It  is  estimated  that
over  1,500  locomotives  left  these  works  completed
prior  to  his  death.  Mr.  Baldwin  was  a  member  of
the  constitutional  convention  of  1837,  and  in  1853
of  the  state  legislature.  He  was  also  for  several
years  president  of  the  Horticultural  Society  of  Phil-
adelphia. An  extended  sketch  of  his  life,  by  the
Rev.  Wolcott  Calkins,  has  been  privately  printed.

BALDWIN,  Rohert,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Toronto,  12  May,  1804;  d.  at  Spadina,  near  To-
ronto, 9  Dec,  1858.  He  entered  upon  the  practice
of  law  in  1825,  and  continued  this  profession  during
his  political  career ;  was  elected  to  the  Upper  Cana-
da assembly  in  1829  as  a  liberal ;  visited  England
in  1836  in  the  interests  of  responsible  government,
and  while  there  endeavored  to  impress  upon  Lord
Glenelg  the  need  there  was  of  applying  the  English
principle  of  responsibility  to  the  Canadian  execu-
tive. Though  he  found  an  able  advocate  in  Lord
Durham,  his  mission  was  a  failure,  as  it  was  many
years  before  Canada  M'as  granted  responsible  gov-
ernment. On  18  Feb.,  1836,  Mr.  Baldwin  was  first
sworn  in  as  an  executive  councillor ;  in  1840  he  be-
came solicitor-general,  and  in  1842  premier  and
attorney-general  of  Upper  Canada  in  the  Hincks-
Baldwin  administration,  which  portfolio  he  re-
tained until  the  following  year.  In  1848  he  re-
sumed office  under  the  Baldwin-Lafontaine  gov-
ernment, finally  quitting  official  life  in  1851.
Though  regarded  as  the  father  of  the  reform  party
in  Canada,  he  was  not  an  extremist,  and  his  politi-
cal views  were  more  nearly  in  accord  with  those  of
the  present  liberal-conservatives  than  with  those
that  were  held  by  the  successors  of  the  reform  par-
ty in  Canada.

'  BALDWIN,  Roger  Sherman,  jurist,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1793  ;  d.  there,  19  Feb.,  1863.
He  affords  an  admirable  instance  of  all  that  is  best
in  the  intellectual  and  moral  life  of  New  England.
By  descent  and  education  he  was  of  genuine  Puritan
stock.  His  father,  Simeon  Baldwin,  was  descended
from  one  of  the  original  New  Haven  colonists,  and


150


BALDWIN"


BALFOUR


^^?P


his  mother  was  the  daughter  of  Roger  Sherman,  a
signer  of  the  declaration  of  independence,  both
families  being  from  the  earliest  times  identified
with  the  cause  of  civil  and  religious  liberty.  Roger
Sherman  Baldwin  entered  Yale  at  the  age  of  four-
teen, and  was  graduated  with  high  honors  in  1811.
Beginning  his  legal  studies  in  his  father's  office,  he
finished  them  in  the  then  famous  law  school  of
Judges  Reeve  and  Gould,  at  Litchfield,  Conn. By

the  time  that  he
was  ready  for  ad-
mission to  the
bar,  in  1814,  he
had  developed  a
mastery  of  the
principles  of  law
that  was  consid-
ered very  remark-
able in  so  young
a  man.  His  hab-
its of  concentra-
tion, his  com-
mand of  pure
and  elegant  Eng-
lish, the  precis-
ion and  definite-
ness  of  his  meth-
ods, soon  brought
him  into  promi-
nence in  his  pro-
fession, and  at
a  comparatively
early  age  he  at-
tained distinction  at  the  bar.  His  preference  was  for
cases  involving  the  great  principles  of  jurisprudence
rather  than  those  that  depended  upon  appeals  to  the
feelings  of  jurymen.  Nevertheless,  he  commanded
rare  success  as  a  jury  lawyer,  being  gifted  with  a
certain  dignified  and  lofty  eloquence  that  carried
conviction  and  sustained  the  current  belief  that  he
would  not  undertake  the  defence  of  a  cause  of
whose  justice  he  was  not  personally  convinced.  One
of  the  most  famous  cases  in  which  he  was  engaged
was  that  of  the  "Amistad  captives"  (1839),  now
well-nigh  forgotten,  but  which  assumed  interna-
tional importance  at  the  time.  A  shipload  of
slaves,  bound  to  Cuba,  had  gained  possession  of
the  vessel.  They  were  encountered  adrift  on  the
high  seas  by  an  American  vessel  and  brought  into
New  York,  where  they  were  cared  for.  The  Span-
ish authorities  claimed  them  as  the  property  of
Spanish  subjects,  and  the  anti-slavery  party  at  the
north,  then  becoming  a  formidable  element  in  na-
tional politics,  interested  itself  in  their  behalf.
The  case  was  first  tried  in  a  Connecticut  district
court,  decided  against  the  Spanish  claim,  and  car-
ried to  the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States.
The  venerable  John  Quincy  Adams  and  Mr.  Bald-
win were  associated  as  counsel,  the  latter  practi-
cally conducting  the  case.  His  plea  on  this  occa-
sion showed  such  a  grasp  of  the  legal  technicalities
involved,  that  such  men  as  Chancellor  Kent  rated
him  with  the  leading  jurists  of  the  time.  After
serving  his  own  state  in  assembly  and  senate  (1837-
'41),  he  was  elected  governor  in  1844,  and  reelected
for  the  following  term.  In  1847  he  was  appointed
to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Jabez  W.  Huntington
as  U.  S.  senator.  He  at  once  took  a  leading  place
among  the  statesmen  of  the  period,  was  reelected
for  a  second  term,  and  always  advocated  the  causie
of  equal  rights  for  all  during  the  heated  controver-
sies preceding  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war.  In
1860  he  was  one  of  the  two  electors  "  at  large  "  for
the  choice  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and  in  1860  was  ap-
pointed by  Gov.  Buckingham  a  member  of  the


"  peace  congress  "  of  1861,  consisting  of  five  dele-
gates from  each  state,  who,  it  was  hoped,  would
devise  a  basis  of  amicable  settlement  of  the  differ-
ences between  north  and  south.  In  his  opening
address,  John  Tyler,  of  Virginia,  president  of  the
congress,  said :  "  Connecticut  is  here,  and  she
comes,  I  doubt  not,  in  the  spirit  of  Roger  Sher-
man, whose  name,  with  our  very  children,  has  be-
come a  household  word,  and  who  was  in  life  the
embodiment  of  that  sound,  practical  sense  which
befits  the  great  law-giver  and  constructor  of  govern-
ments." The  labors  of  the  congress  came  to  naught,
owing  mainly  to  the  precipitancy  with  which  some
of  the  southern  states  passed  ordinances  of  seces-
sion. This  was  the  last  public  service  undertaken
by  Mr.  Baldwin  other  than  the  personal  assistance
which  every  patriotic  citizen  lent  to  his  country
during  the  early  years  of  civil  war.

BALDWIN,  Theoron,  clergyman,  b.  in  Goshen,
Conn.,  21  July,  1801 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  10  April,
1870.  After  graduation  at  Yale  in  1827,  he  studied
for  two  years  in  the  theological  school  of  that  col-
lege, and  was  ordained  as  a  home  missionary  in
1829.  Pie  was  settled  for  two  years  at  Vandalia,
111.,  as  a  Congregational  minister,  and  became
prominent  in  furthering  the  cause  of  education.
Largely  through  his  efforts  the  charter  of  Illinois
college  was  procured.  In  1831  he  was  appointed
agent  of  the  home  missionary  society  for  Illinois.
He  organized  in  1838,  and  for  five  years  conducted,
the  female  seminary  near  Alton,  111.,  at  the  same
time  serving  as  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church.
The  formation  of  the  ''  society  for  the  promotion  of
collegiate  and  theological  education  in  the  west,"
popularly  known  as  the  "  western  college  society,"
was  the  result  of  his  labors,  and  he  became  its  cor-
responding secretary,  performing  the  duties  of  the
office  until  shortly  before  his  death.  To  him,  per-
haps more  than  to  any  other  one  man,  are  due  the
higher  educational  facilities  attainable  in  every
part  of  the  west,

BALDWIN,  Thomas,  clergvman,  b.  in  Bozrah,
Conn.,  23  Dec,  1753;  d.  in  Waterville,  Me.,  29
Aug,,  1825.  He  removed  to  Canaan,  N.  H.,  which
town  he  represented  in  the  legislature,  united
with  the  Baptist  church  in  1780,  was  ordained  as
an  evangelist  in  June,  1783,  and  was  a  travelling
minister  among  the  scattered  settlements  of  New
Hampshire  until  November,  1790,  when  he  was  in-
stalled pastor  of  the  second  Baptist  church  in  Bos-
ton. In  1803  he  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Mas-
sachusetts Baptist  Missionary  Magazine,"  afterward
the  "American  Baptist  Missionary  Magazine,"
which  he  edited  until  his  death.  He  published
"  Open  Commimion  Examined  "  (1789),  and  other
writings  on  the  subject  of  communion  and  bap-
tism, the  chief  of  which  was  a  "  Series  of  Friendly
Letters  in  which  the  Distinguishing  Sentiments  of
the  Baptists  are  Explained  and  Vindicated  "  (Bos-
ton, 1810),  besides  numerous  sermons.

BALESTIER,  Wolcott,  author,  b.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y..  13  Dec,  1861,  His  maternal  grandfather
was  E,  Peshine  Smith,  jurist  and  writer.  His
school  life  was  passed  in  various  parts  of  the  coun-
try, with  one  year  at  Coraell,  His  first  production
was  a  novelette  entitled  "  A  Patent  Philter,"  pub-
lished serially  in  the  New  York  "  Tribune  "  in  1884,
The  same  year  "  A  Fair  Device,"  novelette,  and  a
"  Life  of  James  G,  Blaine,"  appeared  in  New  York,
and  in  1886  "  A  Victorious  Defeat,"  a  novel.

BALFOUR,  Nisbet,  soldier,  b.  in  Dunbo?:,
county  Fife.  Scotland,  in  1743;  d.  there  in  Oeto^
ber.  1823.  As  one  of  Cornwallis's  most  trusted
officers,  he  won  high  distinction  in  the  British  ser-
vice during  the  revolution. He  was  the  third  son


BALFOUR


BALLEVIAN


151


of  Lord  Bulfour  of  Burleigh,  was  a  lieutenant  in
the  4th  regiment  of  foot  at  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill,  and  was  severely  wounded  in  that  engage-
ment. He  also  participated  in  the  engagements
preceding  the  capture  and  occupation  of  New  York,
and  in  the  battles  of  Elizabethtown,  Brandywine,
and  Germantown,  and  was  made  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  23d  regiment  in  1778.  He  accompanied
Cornwallis  to  Charleston,  and  as  commandant  of
that  city  rendered  himself  very  obnoxious  to  the
inhabitants  by  the  severity  of  his  treatment.  He
was  promoted  major-general  in  1793,  served  in  the
war  with  France,  and  in  Flanders  in  1794,  and
when  he  died  was  sixth  in  the  list  of  major-gen-
erals in  the  British  army.

BALFOUR,  Walter,  clergyman,  b.  in  St.  Nini-
an's,  Scotland,  in  1776 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  3
Jan.,  1852.  In  early  youth  he  was  befriended  by
Robert  Haldane,  and  at  his  expense  was  educated
for  the  ministry  of  the  church  of  Scotland.  After
several  years  of  service  there  as  a  preacher  he
came  to"  the  United  States,  and  became  a  Bap-
tist about  1806.  He  remained  in  that  denomina-
tion until  1823,  when  he  went  over  to  the  Univer-
salists,  and  there  seems  to  have  found  a  congenial
sphere,  for  he  became  prominent  as  a  preacher  and
writer  in  that  sect.  His  best-known  book  is  enti-
tled "  Essays  on  the  Intermediate  State  of  the
Dead "  (Charlestown,  1828).  A  memoir  by  A.
Whittemore,  was  published  in  Boston  in  1830.

BALFOUR,  William,  British  soldier,  b.  in
1758;  d.  in  Fredericton,  N.  B.,  21  Dec,  1811.  He
was  a  captain  when  Col.  Carleton  assumed  the  gov-
ernment of  the  province  in  1784,  and  rose  to  be
major-general  and  commander-in-chief.  In  1811
he  was  appointed  administrator  of  New  Brunswick.

BALL,  Dyer,  physician,  b.  in  West  Boylston,
Mass.,  3  .June,  1796;  d.  in  Canton,  China,  27
March,  1866.  He  studied  at  Phillips  Andover
academy  and  at  Yale,  and  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1826.  He  studied  theology  at  Yale  and
Andover,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1828,  and  was
ordained  in  1831,  after  which  he  taught  school  at
St.  Augustine,  Fla.,  and  elsewhere  at  the  south
until  1837,  having  in  the  meantime  received  the
degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  medical  institution  at
Charleston.  He  sailed  for  Singapore  25  May,  1838,
thence  to  Macao  in  1841,  to  Hong  Kong  in  1843,
and  to  Canton  in  1845,  where  he  passed  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  in  missionary,  medical,  and
educational  labor,  his  medical  acquirements  add-
ing much  to  his  moral  influence  with  the  native
inliabitants.  He  published  a  Chinese  almanac  for
many  years.

BALL,  Epiiraiiii,  inventor,  b.  in  Greentown,
Ohio,  12  Aug.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Canton,  Ohio,  1  Jan.,
1872.  His  education  was  of  the  most  rudimentary
character,  and  from  his  fifteenth  year  he  supported
himself,  following  the  trade  of  carpentry.  In
1840  he  directed  his  energies  toward  the  establish-
ment of  a  foundery  for  making  plough-castings
and  a  shop  for  stocking  ploughs.  He  had  invented
a  plough,  which  later,  under  the  name  of  "  Ball's
Blue  Plough,"  met  with  a  large  sale.  But  his  first
invention  was  a  turn-top  stove,  which  he  himself
made  in  Greentown  and  sold  during  several  years.
In  1851,  having  become  associated  with  Cornelius
Aultman  and  Lewis  Miller,  the  little  shop  at  Green-
town was  abandoned,  and  the  great  firm  of  Ball,
Aultman  &  Co.  established  their  factories  at  Can-
ton. "  The  Ohio  Mower "  was  invented  by  Mr.
Ball  in  1854,  and  afterward  he  devised  the  "  World
Mower  and  Reaper,"  and  in  1858  the  "Buckeye
Machine  "  was  brought  out,  all  of  which  have  sold
extensively. Afterward  the  firm dissolved,  and


from  1858  Mr.  Ball  devoted  his  attention  princi-
pally to  the  manufaclui'e  of  his  "New  American
Harvester,"  which  attained  great  popularity.  In
1865  it  was  estimated  that  10,000  of  these  machines
were  produced  annually.  Dui-ing  the  later  years
of  his  life,  although  his  inventions  were  used  exten-
sively, Mr.  Ball  was  financially  embarrassed,  while
the  owners  of  his  patents  acquired  great  wealth.

BALL,  Thomas,  sculptor,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  3  June,  1819.  In  early  life  he  was  a  singer
of  basso  parts  in  oratorios,  and  a  portrait  painter
in  Boston.  About  1852  he  devoted  himself  to
modelling,  and  made  a  miniature  bust  of  Jenny
Lind,  another  of  Daniel  Webster,  and  a  life-size
statue  of  the  statesman.  He  studied  in  Europe
for  several  years,  executing  there  "  Truth,"  "  Pan-
dora," and  the  "Shipwrecked  Sailor-Boy,"  and
after  his  return  to  Boston  made  a  bust  of  Rufus
Choate,  statuettes  of  Webster  and  Clay,  and  an
equestrian  statue  of  Washington.  His  later  works
are  the  statue  of  Forrest  as  "  Coriolanus,"  of  he-
roic size ;  "  Eve  " ;  a  statuette  of  Lincoln ;  a  bust  of
Edward  Everett ;  statues  of  Gov.  Andrew  of  Massa-
chusetts, Webster,  Sumner,  Josiah  Quincy,  and  the
group  called  "  Emancipation,"  the  original  of  which
is  in  Washington,  and  a  replica  in  Boston.  His
statue  of  Webster,  in  the  Central  Park,  is  his  nob-
lest work.  It  was  placed  there  at  an  expense  of
about  160,000,  through  the  munificence  of  a  New
York  merchant.

BALLARl),  Bland,  pioneer,  b.  in  Fredericks-
burg, Va.,  16  Oct.,  1761 ;  d.  in  Shelby  co.,  Ky.,  5
Sept.,  1853.  Wnen  eighteen  years  old  he  joined  a
band  of  emigrants  to  Kentucky,  then  the  battle-
ground of  advancing  civilization,  and  was  promi-
nent in  the  Indian  warfare  of  the  time.  As  a  ma-
jor of  Kentucky  volunteers  he  led  an  expedition
against  the  British  and  Indians  at  the  river  Raisin,
in  Michigan,  in  1814,  where  he  was  wounded  and
taken  prisoner.  He  was  for  several  terms  a  mem-
ber of  the  Kentucky  legislature.  Ballard  co.,  Ky.,
and  Blandville,  its  capital,  commemorate  his  ser-
vices during  the  early  history  of  the  state.

BALLARD,  Harlan  Hoge,  educator,  b.  in
Athens,  Ohio,  26  May,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  college  in  1874,  and  became  principal  of
the  Lenox  (Mass.)  high  school.  In  1880  he  was
appointed  principal  of  the  Lenox  academy.  Dur-
ing 1875  he  organized,  in  connection  with  the  high
school,  where  he  was  then  teaching,  the  "  Agassiz
Association  "  for  the  observation  and  study  of  nat-
ural objects,  and  in  1880  a  general  invitation  was
issued  to  all  interested  to  unite  in  the  work  and  to
form  local  branches  of  the  association.  The  mem-
bership has  since  increased  to  more  than  10,000,
distributed  in  nearly  1,000  chapters,  located  in
nearly  every  state  and  territory,  as  well  as  in  Cana-
da, Great  Britain,  South  America,  and  Japan.

BALLARD,  Henry  E.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Maryland,  in  1785 ;  d.  in  Annapolis,  23  May,  1855.
He  was  the  son  of  Maj.  Ballard,  of  the  revolution-
ary array ;  was  appointed  midshipman  2  Nov.,  1804 ;
lieutenant,  26  April,  1810 ;  master,  27  April,  1816,
and  captain,  3  March,  1825.  He  was  a  lieutenant
on  board  the  U.  S.  frigate  "  Constitution  "  in  her
famous  action  with  the  British  cruisers  "  Cyane  "
and  "  Levant "  in  the  bay  of  Biscay,  20  Feb.,  1815.
After  the  capture  of  both  vessels  by  the  "  Constitu-
tion "  he  was  placed  with  a  prize  crew  on  board
the  "  Levant "  and  took  her  to  the  Cape  Verde  isl-
ands, but  was  captured  by  a  British  squadron  in
Porto  Praya,  in  defiance  of  the  neutral  nag,  whose
protection  he  claimed.

BALLEVIAN,  Adolfo  (bal-yav'-ve-an),  president
of  Bolivia ;  d.  in  Oruro,  14  Feb.,  1874. After  being


152


BALLOU


BALLOU


very  prominent  in  political  life  for  many  years,  he
succeeded  Gen.  Morales  on  his  death  in  1873.  Bal-
levian's  administration  began  in  April  of  that  year,
and  lasted  ten  months  only,  when  his  sudden  death
caused  profound  regret  and  great  alarm.

BALLOU,  Hosea,  clergyman,  b.  in  Richmond,
N.  H.,  80  April,  1771 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  7  June,
1852.  Maturin  Ballon,  father  of  Hosea,  was  a  Bap-
tist minister  with  a  large  family,  two  of  whom,  be-
sides the  subject  of  this  notice,  became  Universalist
ministers.  Mr.  Ballou,  Sr.,  received  no  salary  for
his  services  as  preacher,  and  was  so  poor  that  he
could  neither  send  his  children  to  school  nor  fur-
nish them  with  materials  wherewith  to  learn  to
write.  Hosea,  the  future  author  of  numerous
books,  learned  to  make  his  letters  with  a  bit  of
charcoal  on  a  piece  of  birch-bark.  He  united  with
his  father's  church  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  but
never  attended  school  until  he  was  twenty,  and  for
this  last  privilege  he  seems  to  have  been  indebted
to  an  accident  that  temporarily  incapacitated  him
for  physical  labor.  Hardly  had  he  become  a  Bap-
tist when  his  inquiring  mind  suggested  questions
and  doubts  to  which  no  satisfactory  answers  were
forthcoming,  and  he  became  a  Restorationist,  or,  as
is  usually  said,  a  Universalist,  a  sect  then  gaining
a  foothold  in  this  country.  He  began  to  preach  as
soon  as  he  came  of  age,  supporting  himself  by
teaching  school,  and  in  1794  became  pastor  of  a
congregation  in  Dana,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
until  1802,  when  he  removed  to  Barnard,  Vt.,  to
officiate  for  that  and  the  neighboring  towns  of
Woodstock,  Hartland,  and  Bethel.  Here  he  wrote
and  published  the  first  of  his  numerous  works  on
theological  topics,  "  Notes  on  the  Parables  "  (1804).
Other  works  on  kindred  topics  followed  at  short
intervals,  and  in  1807  he  became  pastor  of  the
Universalist  society  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.  Here
he  remained  until  1815,  when,  after  a  short  stay  in
Salem,  Mass.,  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the  second
Universalist  society  of  Boston,  and  the  period  of
his  greatest  activity  and  usefulness  began.  For
more  than  thirty -five  years,  beginning  17  Dec,
1817,  he  remained  pastor  of  this  church,  founding
the  "  Universalist  Magazine  "  (afterward  the  "  Trum-
pet "),  later  the  "  Universalist  Expositor,"  and  still
later  the  "  Universalist  Quarterly  Review."  In
these  undertakings  he  was  assisted  by  his  grand-
nephew,  Hosea  Ballou,  second  grandson  of  his  elder
brother  Benjamin.  He  was  strongly  impressed
with  the  necessity  of  providing  a  denominational
literature  to  meet  the  growing  demands  of  the  sect,
which  he  had  already  done  so  much  to  establish  in
America,  and  to  this  end  he  contributed  hymns,
essays,  and  controversial  papers  to  the  magazines
and  other  publications.  His  "  Examination  of  the
Doctrine  of  Future  Retribution  "  (1834)  was  among
the  most  noteworthy  of  his  books,  which,  counting
sermons,  lectures,  and  verses,  most  of  them  in-
cluded in  the  "  Universalist  Collection,"  number
many  volumes.  His  life  has  been  written  by  his
son,  M.  M.  Ballou,  and  by  the  Rev.  Thomas  Whit-
temore. — His  grand-nephew,  Hosea,  clergyman  (b.
in  Halifax,  Vt.,  18  Oct.,  1796;  d.  in  Somerville,
Mass.,  27  May,  1861),  was  educated  in  his  native
town,  prepared  for  the  Universalist  ministry,  and
was  settled  as  pastor  of  a  society  in  Stafford,  Conn.,
about  1815.  Thence,  in  1821,  he  removed  to  Rox-
bury,  where  he  remained  till  June,  1838,  as  pastor
of  a  church.  During  this  time  he  was  associated
with  his  uncle  in  the  editorship  of  the  "Universal-
ist Magazine"  and  other  denominational  publica-
tions. In  1829  he  published  "  The  Ancient  His-
tory of  Universalism  "  (republished  in  1842).  In
1833  he  edited  an  edition  of  Sismondi's  "  History


of  the  Crusades."  His  editorship  of  the  periodicals
referred  to  continued  during  most  of  his  active
life.  He  was  for  a  time  a  non-resident  professor
in  the  Unitarian  divinity  school,  Meadville,  Pa.
Removing  from  Roxbury  in  answer  to  an  invitation
from  Medford,  Mass.,  he  became  pastor  of  the  so-
ciety in  that  place,  and  in  1853  was  elected  first
president  of  Tufts  college,  which  he  was  largely
instrumental  in  founding.  After  a  visit  to  Europe
for  the  purpose  of  studying  foreign  collegiate
methods,  he  assumed  the  active  duties  of  his  office,
and  performed  them  acceptably  until  just  before
his  death.  In  1844  he  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Harvard. — His  son,  Maturin  Mur-
ray, journalist  (b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  14  April,  1820).
was  fitted  for  college  in  the  Boston  high  school.
and  passed  his  entrance  examination  at  Harvard,
but  did  not  join  his  class.  In  early  life  he  was
for  five  years  a  clerk  in  the  Boston  post-office,  and
subsequently  for  five  years  in  the  U.  S.  Treasury
department.  In  1838  he  became  connected  with
the  "Olive  Branch,"  a  weekly  publication,  and
was  remarkably  successful  in  this  and  other  liter-
ary undertakings.  He  was  editor  and  proprietor
of  "  Gleason's  Pictorial "  and  "  Ballou's  Monthly."
He  became  largely  engaged  in  building  operations
in  the  business  quarter  of  Boston.  These  under-
takings included  the  St.  James  hotel,  at  the  time
one  of  the  most  costly  structures  in  Boston,  and
several  of  the  finest  stores  on  Winter  street.  He
has  travelled  extensively  in  both  of  the  American
continents,  and  in  Africa,  China,  India,  Japan,  the
Pacific  Islands,  and  in  the  summer  of  1886  under-
took a  voyage  to  the  polar  regions.  In  the  inter-
vals of  travel  his  literary  and  journalistic  labors
have  been  unremitting.  He  became  in  1872  one
of  the  original  proprietors,  and  was  for  many  years
chief  editor,  of  the  "Boston  Daily  Globe."  He
edited  and  owned,  either  in  part  or  altogether,
"  Ballou's  Pictorial,"  "  The  Flag  of  our  Union,"
and  the  "Boston  Sunday  Budget."  His  connec-
tion with  the  Boston  press  has  lasted  more  than
forty  years.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Due  West,"
"  Due  South,"  "  The  History  of  Cuba "  (Boston,
1854);  "Biography  of  the  Rev.  Hosea  Ballou,"
and  "  Life  Story  of  Hosea  Ballou."  He  has  edited
and  compiled  "Pearls  of  Thought "  (Boston,  1881) ;
"Notable  Thoughts  about  Women";  and  "Edge
Tools  of  Speech"  (1886).— Moses,  clergyman,  grand-
son of  Hosea  the  elder,  b.  in  Monroe,  Mass.,  24
March,  1811;  d.  in  Atco,  N.  J.,  19  May.  1879.
Educated  at  the  Brattleboro  (Vt.)  academy,  he  was
ordained  to  the  Universalist  ministry  in  1835.  His
pastoral  engagements  were  in  Bath  and  Ports-
mouth, N.  H..  Hartford,  and  New  Haven,  Conn-
New  York  city,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  and  Atco,  N.  J.
In  1837  he  was  married  to  Almena  D.  Giddings.
He  wrote  "A  Memoir  of  the  Rev.  Merritt  San-
ford  "  (New  York,  1850),  and  "  The  Divine  Char-
acter Vindicated,"  a  review  of  Dr.  Edward  Beech-
er's  "  Conflict  of  Ages  "  (1854).

BALLOU,  Latimer  W.,  merchant,  b.  in  Cum-
berland, R.  I.,  1  March,  1812.  He  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  and  academies  in  the  neigh-
borhood; went  to  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1828,  and,
after  learning  printing  at  the  University  Press,  es-
tablished "  The  Cambridge  Press  "  in  1835,  continu-
ing in  the  business  until  1842,  when  he  engaged  in
mercantile  pursuits  in  Woonsocket,  R.  I.  In  1850
he  was  chosen  cashier  of  the  Woonsocket  Falls
bank,  and  for  twenty-five  years  was  treasurer  of
the  Woonsocket  institution  for  savings.  He  took
an  active  part  in  the  organization  of  the  republi-
can party,  was  president  of  the  Fremont  club  in
Woonsocket  in  1856,  presidential  elector  on  the


BALMACEDA


BALTIMORE


153


Lincoln  ticket  in  1860,  delegate  to  the  republican
convention  that  nominated  Grant  and  Wilson  in
1872,  and  was  a  representative  from  Rhode  Island
in  the  fortv-fourth  and  forty-fifth  congresses.

BALMACEDA,  Jose  Manuel  (bal-mah-thay'-
da),  Chilian  statesman,  b.  in  1840.  He  received  his
education  at  the  Seminario  Coneiliar  of  Santiago
de  Chile,  and  early  distinguished  himself  as  a  po-
litical orator,  his  speeches  favoring  radical  reforms
in  the  constitution  of  1833.  He  "has  been  deputy
in  five  consecutive  legislatures,  was  elected  senator
in  1885,  and  was  from  12  April,  1882,  minister  of
the  Interior,  appointed  by  President  Santa  Maria.
He  was  in  1868  one  of  the  founders,  together  with
the  brothers  Matta,  Isidore  Errazuriz,  and  other
liberal  Chilians,  of  the  reform  club,  and  in  1874
boldly  but  unsuccessfully  advocated  in  congress
the  separation  of  church  and  state.  As  premier,
in  1884,  Balmaceda  succeeded,  however,  in  intro-
ducing civil  marriage  and  other  liberal  laws.  As
Chilian  minister  at  Buenos  Ayres.  Balmaceda  ren-
dered his  country  a  great  service  by  gaining  the
good  will  of  the  Argentine  Republic  during  the
war  between  Chili  and  Peru.  He  was  nominated
at  the  convention  of  18  Jan.  in  Santiago,  and  sub-
sequently elected  president,  to  succeed  Santa  Maria
at  the  expiration  of  the  term,  18  Sept.,  1886.

BALMASEDA,  Francisco  J.  (bahl-mah-say'-
da),  Cuban  writer,  b.  in  Remedios,  Cuba,  in  1833.
In  1846  he  published,  at  Havana,  "  Rimas  Cuba-
nas " ;  in  1861,  "  Fabulas  Morales."  Some  years
later  he  printed  "  Misterios  de  una  Cabaiia,"  a
novel ;  a  work  on  political  economy,  and  another
on  agriculture.  In  1869  Balmaseda  was  banished
and  sent  to  Fernando  Po  with  many  other  revo-
lutionists, and  in  1871  he  published  a  narrative  un-
der the  title  of  "  Los  Conflnados  a  Fernando  Po."

BALMES,  Francisco  Javier  (bahl'-mess),
Spanish  surgeon.  In  1803  he  sailed  from  Coruila
and  visited  the  West  Indian  colonies,  in  order  to
extend  the  use  of  vaccination.  Afterward  he  went
to  the  Philippine  islands  and  China,  where  he
studied  the  indigenous  plants,  and  made  valuable
colored  drawings,  which  he  gave  to  the  library  of
the  Museum  of  natural  sciences  in  Madrid.

BALTA,  Jos6,  president  of  Peru,  d.  in  Lima,
Peru,  26  July,  1872.  At  the  beginning  of  his  pub-
lic career  he  took
part  in  the  mili-
tary operations
consequent  on
the  invasion  of
Peru  by  Presi-
dent Santo  Cruz,
of  Bolivia,  in
1836.  He  was  an
actor  in  the  va-
rious Peruvian
revolutions,  was
distinguished  in
the  defeat  of  the
Spaniards  on  2
May,  1866,  and  in
1867' led  a  revolt
against  the  dic-
tator -  president,
Prado,  and  drove
him  into  tempo-
raryexileinChili.
Col.  Balta  was
elected  president
for  four  years  by  a  large  majority  in  April,  1868,
and  maugurated  on  2  Aug.  His  administration
was  on  the  whole  prosperous  and  populai ;  but
he  burdened  the  country  with  immense  loans  for


the  purpose  of  building  railroads.  In  the  presi-
dential contest  of  1872  the  vote  was  so  close  that
the  election  was  thrown  into  the  congress,  and
when  it  became  evident  that  Dr.  Arenas,  the  ad-
ministration candidate,  would  be  defeated.  Balta
was  strongly  urged  by  Gen.  Gutierrez,  his  min-
ister of  war,  to  declare  himself  dictator.  But
the  president  refused  to  do  this,  and  made  public
his  intention  of  resigning  his  office,  on  the  ex-
piration of  his  term,  to  the  successor  appointed
by  congress.  This  did  not  suit  Gutierrez,  and  he
immediately  seized  and  imprisoned  Balta,  and
proclaimed  himself  supreme  chief  of  the  repub-
lic. This  usurpation  was  of  brief  duration.  The
new  dictator  had  few  sympathizers,  and  four  days
after  his  coup  d'etat  a  disturbance  took  place  in
which  Silvestre  Gutierrez,  his  brother  and  min-
ister of  war,  was  killed.  In  revenge,  the  usurper
gave  orders  to  kill  Balta,  and  the  latter  was  shot
in  his  prison  as  he  lay  ill,  July  22  (others  say  26),
1872.  That  night  the  populace  of  Lima  rose  in
insurrection.  Gutierrez,  after  a  vain  attempt  to
escape,  was  killed,  and  the  legal  president,  Pardo,
was  inaugurated  soon  afterward.

BALTES,  Peter  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ens-
heim,  Rhenish  Bavaria,  7  April,  1827 ;  d.  in  Alton,
111.,  15  Feb.,  1886.  He  studied  at  the  college  of
the  Holy  Cross,  Worcester,  Mass.,  at  St.  Ignatius
college,  Chicago,  and  at  Lavalle  university,  Mon-
treal, and  was  ordained  priest  in  1853,  and  conse-
crated bishop  of  Alton  in  1870.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Pastoral  Instruction "  (New  York,  1875  ;  3d
ed.,  enlarged,  1880).

BALTIMORE,  Lords,  proprietors  of  the  prov-
ince of  Maryland. — Sir  Oeorg-e  Calvert,  first
Baron  Baltimore,  b.  in  Kipling,  Yorkshire,  Eng-
land, about  1582 ;
d.  in  London,  15
April,  1632.  He
was  graduated  at
Oxford  in  1597,
andwas  then  sent
abroad  to  travel.
On  his  return  he
became  secretary
to  Robert  Cecil,
who  afterward
obtained  for  him
a  clerkship  of
the  privy  coun-
cil. In  1617  he
was  knighted  by
James  I.,  who  es-
teemed him  high-
ly, and  gave  him
a  pension  in  1620.
He  had  previous-
ly been  made  a
secretary  of  state,

but  resigned  the  office  in  1624,  having  become  a
Roman  Catholic.  He  did  not,  however,  lose  the
king's  favor,  but  continued  at  court  in  the  ca-
pacity of  privy  councillor,  and  from  this  fact,
in  connection  with  James's  hatred  of  apostasy,
some  have  concluded  that  he  was  always  a  Ro-
man Catholic,  but  there  are  many  evidences  that
he  was  actually  converted.  In  1625  the  king
made  him  a  peer  of  Ireland.  He  had  for  some
time  been  interested  in  the  colonization  of  the
New  World,  having  been  a  member  of  the  great
company  for  Virginia,  and  in  1621  obtained  from
the  king  a  patent  for  the  southern  promontory  of
Newfoundland,  which  he  named  Avalon.  Here
he  spent  money  lavishly  in  building  warehouses
and  a  splendid  mansion. Pie  visited  his  colony


154


BALUFFI


BANCROFT


after  the  death  of  James,  and  again  in  1629,  when
he  captured  some  French  ships  that  had  been  har-
assing the  colonists.  lie  was  much  disappointed,
however,  to  find  the  climate  so  severe,  and  wrote
to  Charles  I.,  desiring  another  grant  farther  south.
In  1628  he  visited  Virginia  and  explored  Chesa-
peake bay.  His  reception  in  Virginia  was  unfa-
vorable, on  account  of  his  religion,  for  church-of-
England  men  had  full  control  there.  Notwith-
standing this,  he  was  delighted  with  the  country,
and,  although  the  king  tried  to  dissuade  him  from
founding  another  colony,  he  was  persistent  in  his
entreaties.  Charles  finally  yielded,  and  in  1632  a
new  patent  was  drawn  up,  giving  Baltimore  that
part  of  the  country  now  included  in  the  states  of
Maryland  and  Delaware.  But  before  the  papers
were  completed  Lord  Baltimore  died,  leaving  his
son  to  reap  the  benefit  of  the  grant.  The  first
Lord  Baltimore  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  mucli
wisdom  and  moderation.  He  was  liked  by  all  par-
ties, and,  although  a  strong  supporter  of  royal  pre-
rogative in  England,  he  favored  popular  institu-
tions and  liberty  of  conscience  in  the  colonies.  It
is  supposed  that  many  of  the  provisions  of  the
Maryland  charter  were  due  to  him,  and  it  is  eA'en
thought  that  he  may  have  drawn  up  the  entire
paper.  His  design,  as  shown  by  the  charter,  was
to  found  a,  state  where  there  should  be,  on  the  one
hand,  a  hereditary  landed  aristocracy  and  many
features  of  the  feudal  system,  and,  on  the  other,
an  assembly  of  freemen  whose  consent  should  be
necessary  to  all  laws.  For  a  list  of  books  relating
to  George  Calvert,  see  "  Proceedings  of  the  Mary-
land Historical  Society,  1880."  See  also  Winsor's
"Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America"
(Boston,  1886).— Cecilius  (or  Cecil)  Calvert,  sec-
ond Lord  Baltimore,  b.  about  1605 ;  d.  in  London,
30  Nov.,  1675.  Little  is  known  of  his  early  life.
About  1623  he  married  Anne  Arundel,  whose  name
is  still  borne  by  one  of  the  counties  of  Maryland.
On  20  June,  1632,  the  charter  that  had  been  in-
tended for  his  father  was  issued  to  him.  It  grant-
ed to  him,  as  lord  proprietor,  many  of  the  rights  of
a  feudal  sovereign,  but  provided  for  popular  gov-
ernment, and  exempted  the  colonists  from  taxa-
tion. In  November,  1633,  Cecil  sent  an  expedition
under  his  brother  Leonard  (see  Calvert,  Leonard)
to  his  new  domain.  He  never  visited  it  himself,
but  governed  it  by  deputies  for  forty-three  years,
and  was  universally  commended  for  his  modera-
tion toward  both  colonists  and  natives. — Charles
Calvert,  third  Lord  Baltimore,  b.  in  London  in
1629 ;  d.  there,  24  Feb.,  1714.  His  father  sent  him
to  Maryland  as  governor  in  1662,  and  he  succeeded
to  the  proprietorship  in  1675.  He  left  Maryland  in
1684,  and  never  returned.  During  his  life  the
province  was  disturbed  by  insurrections,  caused
by  opposition  to  the  feudal  supremacy  of  the  pro-
prietor, and  by  the  influence  of  the  Anglican
church,  whose  adherents  wished  it  to  become  the
established  church  of  the  country.  By  steadfastly
resisting  their  demands.  Lord  Baltimore  was  of
service  to  the  cause  of  religious  freedom.  See  "  The
Foundation  of  Maryland,"  published  by  the  Mary-
land Historical  Society  (Baltimore,  1883).

BALUFFI,  Giietano,  Italian  ecclesiastic,  b.  in
Ancona,  29  March,  1798;  d.  in  Imola,  11  Nov.,
1866.  He  was  papal  nuncio  in  New  Granada,  and
discovered  inedited  documents  at  Bogota,  which
he  incorporated  in  a  "  Religious  History  of  Amer-
ica "  (Rome,  1848).  He  afterward  became  bishop
of  Imola,  a  cardinal,  and  in  1860  an  archbishop.

BANCROFT,  Aaron,  clergyman,  h.  in  Reading,
Mass.,  10  Nov.,  1755 ;  d.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  19  Aug.,
1839. While  pursuing  his  studies  during  the  revolu-


tionary struggle  he  frequently  served  as  a  minute-
man,  and  was  present  at  both  Lexington  and  Bunker
Hill.  In  1778  he  was  graduated  at  Harvard  col-
lege. He  taught  school,  studied  theology,  was  li-
censed to  preach,  and  spent  three  years  as  a  mis-
sionary at  Yarmouth,  Nova  Scotia.  In  1785  he
was  settled  in  Worcester  as  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church,  and  remained  in  the  same  post
until  his  death.  He  was  prominent  in  church  coun-
cils and  conventions.  In  middle  life  his  theologi-
cal views  underwent  a  change  in  the  direction  of
Arminianism.  By  his  effective  advocacy  of  liberal
tenets  he  was  a  conspicuous  leader  in  the  early
period  of  the  Unitarian  schism.  He  published  ser-
mons in  defence  of  religious  liberty ;  a  eulogy  of
Washington  (1800);  a  "Life  of  Washington"
(1807,  reprinted  in  England  in  1808) ;  and  a  vol-
ume of  sermons  directed  against  the  doctrine  of
election  (1822).  Although  he  was  president  of  the
American  Unitarian  association,  he  adhered  to  the
name  and  the  system  of  Congregationalism  to  the
close  of  his  life.

BANCROFT,  Edward,  author,  b.  in  Westfield,
Mass.,  9  Jan.,  1744;  d.  in  England,  8  Sept.,  1820.
He  had  but  little  schooling,  and  was  apprenticed
to  a  trade.  Running  away  while  in  debt  to  his
master,  he  went  to  sea,  but  on  his  return  paid  what
he  owed.  After  going  to  sea  again,  he  settled  in
Guiana,  and  practised  medicine  there  in  1763.  He
then  removed  to  England  and  published  a  "  Natu-
ral History  of  Guiana  "  (London,  1769),  containing
some  new  information,  particularly  about  the  ivoo-
rali,  or  vegetable  poison,  used  by  the  Indians  on
their  arrows.  He  afterward  wrote  a  novel  called
"Charles  Wentworth,"  vilifying  the  Christian  re-
ligion. He  became  intimate  with  Priestley  and
Benjamin  Franklin,  and  the  latter  obtained  for
him.  a  place  on  the  "  Monthly  Review,"  for  which
he  wrote  reviews  of  publications  relating  to  Ameri-
ca. In  1777,  suspected  of  complicity  in  an  attempt
to  burn  the  Portsmouth  dock-yard,  he  fled  to  Passy,
France,  and  then  went  to  Paris,  where  an  old
teacher  of  his,  Silas  Deane,  was  commissioner  of
the  continental  congress.  Deane  confided  to  him
an  account  of  the  intercourse  between  France  and
the  congress  in  relation  to  the  furnishing  of  sup-
plies, and  Bancroft  communicated  the  whole  to  the
British  ministry,  thus  enabling  the  British  ambas-
sador to  hinder  the  shipment.  It  is  impossible
to  tell  how  long  Bancroft  was  in  British  pay ;  he
had  previously  received  money  as  an  American  spy.
After  the  close  of  the  war  he  obtained  patents  in
France  and  England  giving  him  the  exclusive  right
to  import  yellow  oak-bark,  used  in  dyeing,  which
made  him  rich.  He  published  "Experimental  Re-
searches concerning  Permanent  Colors  "  (1794;  2d
ed.,  with  additional  volume,  1813).  This  work  was
translated  into  German.  Pie  also  wrote  articles  on
the  relations  between  France  and  America,  which
were  translated  into  French.  Bancroft  was  a  fel-
low of  the  royal  society  and  a  member  of  the  royal
college  of  physicians  in  London.

BANCROFT,  (reorge,  historian,  b.  in  Worces-
ter, Mass.,  3  Oct.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
17  Jan.,  1891.  He  was  prepared  for  college  at
Exeter,  N.  H.,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1817,  and
went  to  Germany.  At  Gottingen,  where  he  resided
for  two  years,  he  studied  German  literature  under
Benecke ;  French  and  Italian  literature  under  Ar-
taud  and  Bunsen ;  Arabic,  Hebrew,  and  Scripture  in-
terpretation under  Eichhorn  ;  history  under  Planck
and  Heeren ;  natural  history  under  Blumenbaeh ;
and  the  antiquities  and  literature  of  Greece  and
Rome  under  Dissen,  with  whom  he  took  a  course
of  Greek  philosophy. In  writing  from  Leipsic,  28


"'"^


Applet;-  &  Cc


BANCROFT

Aug.,  1819,  to  Mrs.  Prescott,  of  Boston,  Dr,  Joseph
G.  Cogswell  remarks :  "  It  was  sad  parting,  too,
from  little  Bancroft.  He  is  a  most  interesting
youth,  and  is  to  make  one  of  our  great  men."

In  1820  Bancroft  was  given  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
by  the  university  of  Gottingen.  At  this  time  he
selected  history  as  his  special  branch,  having  as  one
of  his  reasons  the  desire  to  see  if  the  observation  of
masses  of  men  in  action  would  not  lead  by  the  in-
ductive method  to  the  establishment  of  the  laws  of
morality  as  a  science.  Removing  to  Berlin,  he  became
intimate  with  Schleiermacher,  William  von  Hum-
boldt, Savigny,  Lappenberg,  and  Varnhagen  von
Ense,  and  at  Jena  he  made  the  acquaintance  of
Goethe.  He  studied  at  Heidelberg  with  the  his-
torian Schlosser.  In  1822  he  returned  to  the  United
States  and  accepted  for  one  year  the  office  of  tutor
of  Greek  in  Harvard.  He  delivered  several  ser-
mons, which  produced  a  favorable  impression ;  but
the  love  of  literature  proved  the  stronger  attach-
ment. His  first  publication  was  a  volume  of  poems
(Cambridge,  1828).  In  the  same  year,  in  conjunc-
tion with  Dr.  Joseph  G.  Cogswell,  he  opened  the
Round  Hill  school  at  Northampton,  Mass. ;  in  1824
published  a  translation  of  Heeren's  "  Politics  of
Ancient  Greece  "  (Boston),  and  in  1826  an  oration,
in  which  he  advocated  universal  suffrage  and  the
foundation  of  the  state  on  the  power  of  the  whole
people.  In  1830,  without  his  knowledge,  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  but  refused  to  take  his
I  seat,  and  the  next  year  he  declined  a  nomination,
I  though  certain  to  have  been  elected,  for  the  state
I  senate.  In  1834  he  published  the  first  volume  of
I  his  "  History  of  the  United  States  "  (Boston).  In
!  1835  he  drafted  an  address  to  the  people  of  Massa-
i  chusetts  at  the  request  of  the  young  men's  demo-
I  cratic  convention,  and  in  the  same  year  he  removed
to  Springfield,  Mass.,  where  he  resided  for  three
!  years,  and  completed  the  second  volume  of  his  his-
i  tory.  In  1838  he  was  appointed  by  President  Van
Buren  collector  of  the  port  of  Boston,  In  1844  he
{  was  nominated  by  the  democratic  party  for  gov-
-  ernor  of  Massachusetts,  and  received  a  very  large
vote,  though  not  sufficient  for  election.  After  the
accession  of  President  Polk,  Mr.  Bancroft  became
secretary  of  the  navy,  and  signalized  his  adminis-
tration by  the  establishment  of  the  naval  academy
at  Annapolis,  and  other  reforms  and  improvements.
This  institution  was  devised  and  completely  set  at
work  by  Mr.  Bancroft  alone,  who  received  for  the
purpose  all  the  appropriations  for  which  he  asked.
Congress  had  never  been  willing  to  establish  a  na-
val academy.  He  studied  the  law  to  ascertain  the
powers  of  the  secretary,  and  found  that  he  could
order  the  place  where  midshipmen  should  wait  for
orders ;  he  could  also  direct  the  instructors  to  give
lessons  to  them  at  sea,  and  by  law  had  power  to
follow  them  to  the  place  of  their  common  residence
on  shore.  With  a  close  economy,  the  appropria-
tion of  the  year  for  the  naval  service  would  meet
the  expense,  and  the  secretary  of  war  could  cede
an  abandoned  military  post  to  the  navy.  So  when
congress  came  together  they  found  the  midshipmen
that  were  not  at  sea  comfortably  housed  at  An-
napolis, protected  from  the  dangers  of  idleness  and
city  life,  and  busy  at  a  regular  course  of  study.
Seeing  what  had  been  done,  they  accepted  the
school,  which  was  in  full  operation,  and  granted
money  for  the  repairs  of  the  buildings.  Mr.  Ban-
croft was  also  influential  in  obtaining  additional
appropriations  for  the  Washington  observatory  and
in  introducing  some  new  professors  of  great  merit
into  the  corps  of  instructors,  and  he  suggested  a
method  by  which  promotion  should  depend,  not  on
age  alone,  but  also on  experience  and  capacity;


BANCROFT


155


but  this  scheme  was  never  fully  developed  or  ap-
plied. While  secretary  of  the  navy  Mr.  Bancroft
gave  the  order,  in  the  event  of  war  with  Mexico,  to
take  immediate  possession  of  California,  and  con-
stantly renewed  the  order,  sending  it  by  every  pos-
sible channel  to  the  commander  of  the  American
squadron  in  the  Pacific;  and  it  was  fully  carried
into  effect  before  he  left  the  navy  department.  No
order,  so  far  as  is  known,  was  issued  from  any
other  department  to  take  possession  of  California.
See  "Life  of  James  Buchanan,"  by  G.  T.  Curtis,
vol.  i.  During  his  term  of  office  he  also  acted  as
secretary  of  war  pro  tern,  for  a  month,  and  gave
the  order  to  march  into  Texas,  which  caused  the
first  occupation  of  Texas  by  the  United  States.
From  1846  to  1849  Mr.  Bancroft  was  minister  to
Great  Britain,  where  he  successfully  urged  upon
the  British  ministry  the  adoption  of  more  liberal
laws  of  navigation  and  allegiance.  In  May,  1867,
he  was  appointed  minister  to  Prussia;  in  1868  he
was  accredited  to  the  North  German  confedera-
tion, and  in  1871  to  the  German  empire,  from
which  he  was  recalled  at  his  own  request  in  1874.
While  still  minister  at  Berlin  he  rendered  impor-
tant services  in  the  settlement  with  Great  Britain
of  the  northwestern  boundary  of  the  United  States.
In  the  reference  to  the  king  of  Prussia,  which  was
proposed  by  Mr.  Bancroft,  the  argument  of  the
United  States,  and  the  reply  to  the  argument  of
Great  Britain,  were  written,  every  word  of  them,  by
Mr.  Bancroft.  Great  Britain  had  long  refused  to
concede  that  her  emigrants  to  the  United  States,
whether  from  Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  might
throw  off  allegiance  to  their  mother  country  and
become  citizens  of  the  United  States.  The  princi-
ple involved  in  this  question  Mr.  Bancroft  dis-
cussed with  the  government  of  Prussia,  and  in  a
treaty  obtained  the  formal  recognition  of  the  right
of  expatriation  at  the  will  of  the  individual  emi-
grant, and  negotiated  with  the  several  German
states  a  corresponding  treaty.  England  watched
the  course  of  negotiation,  resolving  to  conform
herself  to  the  principles  that  Bismarck  might  adopt
for  Prussia,  and  followed  him  in  abandoning  the
claims  to  perpetual  allegiance.  After  the  expira-
tion of  the  English  mission  in  1849,  Mr.  Bancroft
took  up  his  residence  in  the  city  of  New  York  and
continued  work  on  his  history.  The  third  volume
had  appeared  in  1840,  and  volumes  4  to  10  at  inter-
vals from  1852  to  1874.  In  1876  the  work  was  re-
vised and  issued  in  a  centenary  edition  (6  vols.,  12mo,
Boston).  Volumes  11  and  12  were  published  first
under  the  title  "  History  of  the  Formation  of  the
Constitution  of  the  United  States "  (New  York,
1882).  The  last  revised  edition  of  the  whole  work
appeared  in  six  volumes  (New  York,  1884-'85).

Mr.  Bancroft  has  been  correspondent  of  the  royal
academy  of  Berlin,  and  also  of  the  French  insti-
tute ;  was  made  D.  C.  L,  at  Oxford  in  1849,  and
Doctor  Juris  by  the  university  of  Bonn  in  1868,  and
in  September,  1870,  celebrated  at  Berlin  the  fiftieth
anniversary  of  receiving  his  first  degree  at  Gottin-
gen. His  minor  publications  include  "An  Ora-
tion delivered  on  the  4th  of  July,  1826,  at  North-
ampton, Mass."  (Northampton,  1826) :  "  History  of
the  Political  System  of  Europe,"  translated  from
Heeren  (1829) ;  "  An  Oration  delivered  before  the
Democracy  of  Springfield  and  Neighboring  Towns,
July  4,  1836"  (2d  ed.,  with  prefatory  remarks,
Springfield,  1836) ;  "  History  of  the  Colonization  of
the  United  States  "  (Boston',  1841,  12mo,  abridged) ;
"  An  Oration  delivered  at  the  Commemoration,  in
Washington,  of  the  Death  of  Andrew  Jackson,  June
27,  1845";  "The  Necessity,  the  Reality,  and  the
Promise  of  the  Progress  of  the  Human  Race  " ;  "  An


156


BANCROFT


BANDELIER


Oration  delivered  before  the  New  York  Historical
Society,  November  20,  1854 "  (New  York,  1854) ;
"  Proceedings  of  the  First  Assembly  of  Virginia,
1619 ;  Communicated,  with  an  Introductory  Note,
by  George  Bancroft " ;  "  Collections  of  the  New
York  Historical  Society,"  second  series,  vol.  iii.,
part  i.  (New  York,  1857) ;  "  Literary  and  Historical
Miscellanies  "  (New  York,  1855) ;  '"  Memorial  Ad-
dress on  the  Life  and  Character  of  Abraham  Lin-
coln, delivered  at  the  request  of  both  Houses  of
the  (IJongress  of  America,  before  them,  in  the  House
of  Representatives  at  Washington,  on  the  12th  of
February,  1866  "  (Washington,  1866) ;  and  "  A  Plea
for  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  of  Amer-
ica, Wounded  in  the  House  of  its  Guardians,"  by
George  Bancroft,  Veritati  Unice  Litarem  (New
York,  1886).  Among  his  other  speeches  and  ad-
dresses may  be  mentioned  a  lecture  on  "  The  Cul-
ture, the  Support,  and  the  Object  of  Art  in  a  Re-
public," in  the  course  of  the  New  York  historical
society  in  1852 ;  one  on  "  The  Office,  Appropriate
Culture,  and  Duty  of  the  Mechanic " ;  and  to  the
"  American  Cyclopa3dia  "  Mr.  Bancroft  contributed
a  biography  of  Jonathan  Edwards.  Among  those
the  least  satisfied  with  the  historian  have  been  some
of  the  descendants  of  eminent  patriots  (Greene,
Reed,  Rush,  and  others),  whose  merits  have  not,
in  the  opinions  of  his  censors,  been  duly  recog-
nized by  Mr,  Bancroft,  That  there  should  be  en-
tire agreement  as  regards  the  accuracy  and  candor
of  the  narrator  of  the  events  of  so  many  years,  and
those  years  full  of  the  excitement  of  party  faction,
is  not  to  be  expected.  The  merits  of  the  work  are
considered  at  length  in  a  biography  of  Mr.  Ban-
croft by  the  present  writer  (see  Allibone's  "  Dic-
tionary of  Authors  "),  where  the  following  opinions
of  eminent  critics  are  quoted :  Edward  Everett
says:  "A  history  of  the  United  States  by  an
American  writer  possesses  a  claim  upon  our  atten-
tion of  the  strongest  character.  It  would  do  so
under  any  circumstances ;  but  when  we  add  that
the  work  of  Mr,  Bancroft  is  one  of  the  ablest  of
that  class  which  has  for  years  appeared  in  the  Eng-
lish language;  that  it  compares  advantageously
with  the  standard  British  historians ;  that  as  far  as
it  goes  it  does  such  justice  to  its  noble  subject  as
to  supersede  the  necessity  of  any  future  work  of
the  same  kind,  and,  if  completed  as  commenced,
will  unquestionably  forever  be  regarded  both  as  an
American  and  as  an  English  classic,  our  readers
would  justly  think  us  unpardonable  if  we  failed  to
offer  our  humble  tribute  to  its  merit."  Prof.  Heeren
writes :  "  We  know  few  modern  historic  works  in
which  the  author  has  reached  so  high  an  elevation
at  once  as  an  historical  inquirer  and  an  historical
writer.  The  great  conscientiousness  with  which
he  refers  to  his  authorities,  and  his  careful  criti-
cism, give  the  most  decisive  proofs  of  his  compre-
hensive studies.  He  has  founded  his  narrative  on
contemporary  documents,  yet  without  neglecting
works  of  later  times  and  of  other  countries.  His
narrative  is  everywhere  worthy  of  the  subject.  The
reader  is  always  instructed,  often  more  deeply  in-
terested than  by  novels  or  romances.  The  love  of
country  is  the  muse  which  inspires  the  author,  but
this  inspiration  is  that  of  the  severe  historian,
which  springs  from  the  heart."  William  II.  Pres-
cott  says :  "  We  must  confess  our  satisfaction  that
the  favorable  notice  we  took  of  Mr.  Bancroft's  la-
bors on  his  first  appearance  has  been  fully  ratified
by  his  countrymen,  and  that  his  colonial  history
establishes  his  title  to  a  place  among  the  great  his-
torical writers  of  the  age.  The  reader  will  find  the
pages  of  the  present  volume  filled  with  matter  not
less  interesting  and  important  than  the  preceding.


He  will  meet  with  the  same  brilliant  and  daring
style,  the  same  picturesque  sketches  of  character
and  incident,  the  same  acute  reasoning  and  com-
pass of  erudition."  George  Ripley  writes :  "  Mr.
Bancroft  is  eminently  a  philosophical  historian!
He  brings  the  wealth  of  a  most  varied  learning  in
systems  of  thought  and  in  the  political  and  moral
history  of  mankind  to  illustrate  the  early  experi-
ences of  his  country.  He  catalogues  events  in  a
manner  which  shows  the  possession  of  ideas,  and
not  only  describes  popular  movements  picturesque-
ly, but  also  analyzes  them  and  reveals  their  spir-
itual signification."  Baron  Bunsen  says :  "  I  read
last  night  Bancroft  with  increasing  admiration.
What  a  glorious  and  interesting  history  has  he
given  to  his  nation  of  the  centuries  before  the  in-
dependence ! "  Von  Raumer  remarks  :  "  Bancroft,
Prescott,  and  Sparks  have  effected  so  much  in  his-
torical composition  that  no  living  European  histo-
rian can  take  precedence  of  them,  but  rather  might
be  proud  and  grateful  to  be  admitted  as  a  compan-
ion." Mr.  Bancroft's  last  address  was  given  at  the
opening  of  the  third  meeting  of  the  American
historical  association,  of  which  he  was  president,
at  Washington,  27  April,  1886.  It  was  printed  in
the  "  Magazine  of  American  History "  for  June.
In  a  letter  to  the  author  of  this  article,  dated
Washington,  D.  C,  30  May,  1882,  he  wrote:  "  1  was
trained  to  look  upon  life  here  as  a  season  for  labor.
Being  more  than  fourscore  years  old,  I  know  the
time  for  my  release  will  soon  come.  Conscious  of
being  near  the  shore  of  eternity,  I  await  without
impatience  and  without  dread  the  beckoning  of
the  hand  which  will  summon  me  to  rest."

BANCROFT,  Hubert  Howe,  historian,  b.  in
Granville,  Ohio,  5  May,  1832.  He  entered  the
book-store  of  his  brother-in-law,  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,
in  1848,  and  in  1852  was  sent  to  California  to  es-
tablish a  branch  of  the  business  there.  He  soon
began  to  collect  and  preserve  all  available  books
and  documents  relating  to  the  history  of  the  Paci-
fic states.  As  his  affairs  prospered,  Mr.  Bancroft's
library  increased,  and  in  1868,  resigning  to  his
brother,  A.  L.  Bancroft,  the  management  of  his
business,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  arrangement
and  publication  of  the  material  he  had  gathered.
This  consisted  of  books,  maps,  and  printed  and
manuscript  documents,  including  a  large  number
of  narratives  dictated  to  Mr.  Bancroft  or  his  as-
sistants by  pioneers,  settlers,  and  statesmen.  The
indexing  of  this  vast  collection  employed  six  per-
sons for  ten  years.  The  library  was  removed  in
1881  to  a  fire-proof  building,  and  now  numbers
about  45,000  volumes.  Mr.  Bancroft's  plan  is  to
publish  thirty-nine  volumes,  embracing  the  history
of  the  whole  Pacific  coast,  from  Central  America
to  Alaska,  and  about  one  third  of  these  have  already
appeared.  The  last  volume  published  is  the  fifth  of
the  history  of  California  (San  Francisco,  1886).  Mr.
Bancroft  employs  collaborators  for  the  preliminary
work,  revising  it  all,  and  writing  the  most  impor-
tant chapters  himself.  In  1886  the  publishing
establishment  of  A.  L.  Bancroft  &  Company  was
burned,  and  the  sheets  of  seven  volumes  of  the  his-  ^
torv  were  destroved.

BANDELIER,  Adolph  Francis  Alphoiise,
archteologist,  b.  in  Bern,  Switzerland,  6  Aug.,  1840.
His  early  education  was  very  slight,  and  he  never
attended  school  after  his  eighth  year.  After  set-
tling in  the  United  States,  he  became  interested  in
several  kinds  of  business,  but  without  much  suc-
cess. His  attention  was  then  turned  to  archcX-o-
logical  pursuits,  and  his  principal  work  has  been
performed  under  the  direction  of  the  Archjeologi-
cal  Institute  of  America. From  1880  to  1885  he


BANDINI


BANISTER


157


was  engaged  in  examining  the  ruins  of  the  ancient
Pueblos,  and  in  studying  the  sedentary  Indians  of
New  Mexico.  He  visited  Central  America  in  1881,
and  for  a  time  during  1883-'84  was  in  northern
Mexico  and  Arizona.  His  papers  and  reports  of
progress  have  been  published  in  the  "  Proceedings
of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement
of  Science,"  and  among  the  "  Papers  of  the  Archaeo-
logical Institute  of  America."  He  is  the  author  of
"  Art  of  War  and  Mode  of  Warfare "  (Boston,
1877) ;  "  Tenure  of  Lands,  and  Inheritances  of  An-
cient Mexicans  "  (1878) ;  "  Social  Organization  and
Government  of  Ancient  Mexicans  "  (1878) ;  and
"  An  Archaeological  Tour  into  Mexico  "  (1880).

BANDINI,  Juan,  politician,  b.  in  Lima,  Peru,
in  1800;  d.  in  Los  Angeles,  CaL,  in  1859.  In  1831
he  took  part  in  a  revolution  against  Gov.  Victoria.
In  1834  he  was  connected  with  a  famous  and  dis-
astrous Mexican  scheme  for  a  new  colony  in  Cali-
fornia, and  in  1830-'38  he  was  leader  of  the  south-
ern opposition  to  Alvarado.  These  latter  years  were
the  culmination  of  his  political  activity,  and  with
his  failure  in  the  conflict  with  Alvarado  he  retired
from,  party  leadership.  But  he  continued  to  hold
various  minor  offices,  and  early  espoused  the  cause
of  the  Americans  in  1846.

BANOS,  Francis  C,  actor,  b.  in  Virginia  in
October,  1837.  His  first  appearance  on  the  stage
was  in  November,  1852,  in  the  Old  National  thea-
tre, Washington,  D.  C.  He  played  in  ^Jew  York
for  the  first  time,  at  Laura  Keene's  theatre,  in  the
spring  of  1858,  at  Wallack's  in  December  of  that
year,  and  at  the  Winter  Garden  in  1860,  after
which  he  retired  from  the  stage  until  1865,  when
he  appeared  as  William  Tell  at  the  National  thea-
tre, Washington.  He  played  Old  Tom  in  "  After
Dark  "  at  Niblo's  Garden  in  November,  1868,  and
in  1869  appeared  as  the  Duke  of  Alva  in  "  Patrie  "
at  the  Grand  Opera-House.  He  took  part  in  the
Shakesperian  revival  at  Booth's  theatre  in  1875,
and  afterward  played  with  Charles  Thorne  in  the
"Corsican  Brothers."  In  1884  he  appeared  in  the
role  of  Willie  Denver  in  '*  The  Silver  King."

BANGrS,  Nathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stratford,
Conn.,  2  May,  1778 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  3  May,
1862.  He  received  a  limited  education,  taught
school,  and  in  1799  went  to  Canada,  where  he
spent  three  years  as  a  teacher  and  land-surveyor.
Uniting  with  the  Methodist  church,  he  labored"  for
six  years  as  an  itinerant  minister  in  the  Canadian
provinces,  and,  on  returning  to  New  York,  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  councils  of  the  denomina-
tion. In  1820  he  was  transferred  from  a  pastorate
in  New  York  to  the  head  of  the  Methodist  book
concern.  Under  his  management  debts  were  paid
off  and  the  business  much  extended.  He  was  also
editor  of  the  "  Methodist  Magazine."  In  1828  he
was  appointed  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Advocate."
When  the  "  Methodist  Quarterly  Review  "  replaced
the  "Methodist  Magazine"  in  1832,  the  general
conference  continued  Dr.  Bangs  in  the  editorship.
He  was  the  principal  founder  and  secretary  of  the
Methodist  missionary  society.  Besides  his  editorial
labors  he  exercised  the  censorship  over  all  the  pub-
lications of  the  book  concern.  When  appointed
secretary  of  the  missionary  society  in  1836.  he  de-
voted his  chief  energies  to  its  service,  until  ap-
pointed president  of  the  Wesleyan  university,  at
Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1841.  In  1842  he  resumed
pastoral  work  in  New  York,  and  in  1852  retired  and
employed  himself  during  his  remaining  years  chief-
ly in  literary  labors.  His  most  important  work  was
a  "History  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church
from  its  Origin  in  1776  to  the  General  Conference
of  1840  "  (4  vols..  New  York,  1839-'42). His  other


published  works  were  a  volume  directed  against
"  Christianism,"  a  new  sect  in  New  England  (1809) ;
"  Errors  of  Hopkinsianism  "  (1815) ;  '•  Predestina-
tion Examined"  (1817);  "Reformer  Reformed"
(1818) ;  "  Methodist  Episcopacy  "  (1820) ;  "  Life  of
the  Rev.  Freeborn  Garettson  "  (1832) ;  "  Authentic
History  of  the  Missions  Under  the  Care  of  the
Methodist  Episcopal  Church  "  (1832) ;  "  Letters  to
a  Young  Preacher  "  (1835) ;  "  The  Original  Church
of  Christ "  (1836) ; "  Essay  on  Emancipation  "  (1848) ;
"  State  and  Responsibilities  of  the  Methodist  Epis-
copal Church  "  (1850) ;  "  Letters  on  Sanctification  "
(1851) ;  "  Life  of  Arminius  " ;  "  Scriptural  Vindica-
tion of  the  Orders  and  Powers  of  the  Ministry  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  " ;  and  numerous
occasional  sermons.  See  "  Life  and  Times  of  Na-
than Bangs,  D.  D.,"  by  Abel  Stevens  (New  York,
1863).— His  son,  Francis  Neliemiah,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  23  Feb.,  1828 ;  d.  in  Oeala,  Florida,
30  Nov.,  1885.  He  was  educated  at  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, Middletown,  Conn.,  and  at  the  university
of  the  City  of  New  York,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1845.  He  then  studied  at  Yale,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  New  York  in  1850,  formed  a  partnership
with  John  Sedgwick,  and  soon  became  prominent
in  his  profession,  with  abundance  of  business  in
bankruptcy  cases.  On  his  elevation  to  the  b'mch  in
1871,  Judge  Sedgwick  retired  from  the  firm,  which
was  afterward  known  as  a  railroad  law  firm,  in
charge  of  several  important  international  cases.
Mr.  Bangs  was  active  in  the  Cesnola  suits,  the
Havermeyer  estate  suits,  and  various  phases  of  the
litigation  growing  out  of  the  failure  of  Grant  &
Ward.  He  displayed  great  activity  in  his  profes-
sional career  from  its  beginning  to  its  close,  and
it  is  believed  that  his  death  resulted  from  over-
work. He  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the
Bar  Association  of  New  York,  and  was  its  presi-
dent in  1882  and  1883.  He  was  active  in  the  pro-
ceedings instituted  by  the  bar  against  Judges  Bar-
nard and  Cardozo  in  1872,  and  was  a  witness  at
the  trial  of  Barnard,  who  was  convicted  on  every
charge  in  regard  to  which  Mr.  Bangs  testified.  In-
teresting anecdotes  are  related  of  his  courage  and
address  in  resisting  some  of  the  acts  of  Judge  Bar-
nard and  Judge  McCunn  during  the  period  of  ring
rule.  Mr.  Bangs  was  a  republican  in  politics,  and
was  one  of  the  originators  of  the  Union  League
Club  in  New  York  city.

BANISTER,  John,  botanist,  b.  in  England;  d.
in  Virginia  in  1692.  He  is  said  to  have  been  an
English  clergyman,  who,  after  spending  some  years
in  the  West  Indies,  emigrated  to  America,  and
settled  near  Jamestown,  Va.  Here  he  devoted
himself  almost  exclusively  to  botanical  pursuits,
and  w^rote  a  natural  history  of  Virginia.  He  was
killed  by  a  fall  while  on  a  botanical  expedition.
To  the  second  volume  of  Ray's  "  History  of  Plants  "
he  contributed  a  catalogue  of  plants  discovered  by
him  in  Virginia.  Among  his  other  publications
are  "  Observations  on  the  Natural  Productions  of
Jamaica";  "The  Insects  of  Virginia"  (1700);
"Curiosities  in  Virginia";  "Observations  on  the
Musca  lupus  " ;  "  On  Several  Sorts  of  Snails  " :  and
"  A  Description  of  the  Snakeroot,  P.istolochia  or
Serpentaria  Virginiania." — His  son,  John,  soldier,
b.  in  Virginia ;  d.  near  Hatcher's  Run,  Dinwiddle
CO.,  Va.,  in  1787,  received  a  classical  education  in
England,  studying  law  at  the  Temple.  After  his
return  to  America  he  was  prominent  in  the  patri-
otic movements  just  before  the  revolution,  and
during  the  war  a  colonel  in  the  Virginia  line.  He
was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly,  and  of  the
continental  congress  from  16  March,  1778,  to  24
Sept.,  1779. In  1781,  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  Vir-


158


BANKPIEAD


BANKS


ginia  cavalry,  he  took  an  active  part  in  repelling
the  British  from  his  state.  It  is  said  that  on  one
occasion  he  supplied  a  body  of  soldiers  with  blank-
ets at  his  own  expense.  Several  of  his  letters  are
preserved  in  the  Bland  papers  (Petersburg,  Va.,
1840),  and  in  Sparks's  *'  Revolutionary  Correspond-
ence." See  also  Campbell's  "  History  of  Virginia  "
(Philadelphia,  18G0).

BANKHEAD,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1783;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  11  Nov.,  1856.  He
was  a  son  of  James  Bankhead,  of  Port  Royal,  an
officer  in  the  revolutionary  army.  He  was  ap-
pointed captain  in  the  5th  infantry  on  18  June,
1808 :  was  brigade  major  to  Gen.  Smyth  in  1812 ;
became  assistant  adjutant-general,  5  March,  1818 ;
major  4th  infantry,  15  Aug.,  1813 :  adjutant-gen-
eral, 9  Sept.,  1813 ;  and  lieutenant-colonel.  3d  artil-
lery, 26  April,  1832.  On  7  July,  1838.  he  was  brevet-
tecl  colonel  for  meritorious  conduct  in  the  Florida
campaign,  and  on  16  Sept.  commanded  the  2d  ar-
tillery. Pie  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz,  and  in  return  for  his  services  on  that
occasion  was  brevelted  brigadier-general  on  29
March,  1847.  In  January,  1848,  he  was  command-
er of  the  department  of  Orizaba,  Mexico,  and  at
the  time  of  his  dccith  commanded  the  military  de-
partment of  the  east. — His  son,  John  Pine,  naval
officer,  b.  in  South  Carolina,  3  Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  near
Aden,  Arabia,  27  April,  1867.  He  entered  the
navy  as  a  midshipman  6  Aug.,  1838,  and  became
lieutenant  in  1852.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
on  duty  on  the  "  Susquehanna,"  and  at  the  capture
of  Port  Royal,  7  Nov.,  1861,  he  commanded  the
" Pembina,"  and  also  the  "Florida"  at  the  capture
of  Fernandina,  3  May,  1862.  In  the  same  year
was  made  commander,  and  commanded  the  famous
"  Monitor  "  when  she  foundered  off  Cape  Hatteras
on  the  morning  of  31  Dec,  1862,  on  which  occasion
he  displayed  much  courage.  The  vessel  was  filling
rapidly,  and  Bankhead  ordered  the  crew  to  leave
on  the  "  Rhode  Island's  "  boat,  which  was  approach-
ing. While  the  sea  was  breaking  over  the  '•  Moni-
tor's "  deck,  already  partially  submerged.  Bankhead
held  the  painter  until  the  boat  was  full  of  men,
and  did  not  leave  the  vessel  so  long  as  he  could  do
anything  for  the  safety  of  the  crew.  He  was  made
captain  in  1866,  and  after  the  war  commanded  the
"  Wyoming,"  of  the  East  India  squadron.  In
March,  1867,  ill-health  compelled  him  to  resign,
^  and  he  died  on  board  the  steamer  that  was  bring-
ing him  home.

BANKS,  David,  publisher,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
in  1786 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13  Oct.,  1871.  He
began  the  study  of  law  in  New  York  in  1806,  in
the  office  of  Charles  Brainard,  whose  partner  he
afterward  became.  In  1809  he  began  the  business
of  publishing  law  books  with  Stephen  Gould,  and
the  establishment  of  Banks  &  Gould  was  soon
known  as  the  most  extensive  of  the  kind  in  the
country.  The  business  is  still  continued  bv  sons
of  Mr.  Banks.  For  nearly  ten  years  he  held  the
offices  of  alderman  and  assistant  alderman,  being
president  of  the  board  of  alderman  part  of  that
time.  During  the  later 'years  of  his  life  he  was
president  of  the  East  river  bank.

BANKS,  Natlianiel  Prentiss,  statesman,  b.  in
Waltham,  Mass.,  30  Jan.,  1816.  After  receiving  a
common-school  training,  he  worked  in  a  cotton
factory,  of  which  his  father  was  superintendent,
and  learned  the  trade  of  a  machinist.  He  was  am-
bitious to  fit  himself  for  a  wider  field  of  work,  and
studied  diligently  during  his  leisure  hours,  secur-
ing engagements  to  lecture  before  meetings  and
assemblies  at  an  early  age.  He  became  editor  of
the  local  paper  at  Waltham,  studied  law,  was  ad-


C/h^S^^^^^


mitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1849  was  selected  to  rep-
resent his  native  town  in  the  legislature  of  Massa-
chusetts. At  this  time  the  ancient  power  of  the
whig  party  was  waning  in  New  England,  and  the
free-soil  party  was  making  its  influence  felt.  Mr.
Banks  advocated
a  coalition  be-
tween the  demo-
crats and  the  new
party,  and  was
elected  speaker
of  the  state  as-
sembly in  1851
and  re-elected  in
1852.  In  1853
he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  Mas-
sachusetts con-
stitutional con-
vention, and  was
selected  to  be  its
chairman.  On
the  tide  of  suc-
cess that  attend-
ed this  political
combination, he

was  in  1853  elect-  ^ '"^^

ed  to  congress  as

a  coalition-democrat.  During  this  term  of  service
he  withdrew  from  the  democratic  party  and  iden-
tified himself  with  the  American  or  "  Know  noth-
ing" party,  and  by  an  overwhelming  vote,  as
against  the  whig  and  democratic  candidates  in  his
district,  he  was  re-elected  to  congress.  In  the  pre-
ceding congress  he  had  demonstrated  his  ability,
and  he  was  now  nominated  for  speaker  of  the  house
of  representatives.  A  contest  lasting  more  than
two  months  followed,  and  he  was  elected  by  a  small
majority  on  the  133d  ballot,  when  the  dead-lock
had  been  broken  by  the  adoption  of  the  plurality
rule.  The  American  party  went  out  of  existence,
and  Mr,  Banks  was  elected  to  the  35th  congress  as
a  republican  by  a  larger  majority  than  before,  and
served  until  4  Dec,  1857,  when,  having  been  elected
governor  of  Massachusetts,  he  resigned  his  seat  in
congress.  He  was  re-elected  governor  in  1858  and
1859.  In  1860  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  the
Illinois  central  railroad,  succeeding  General  (then
Captain)  George  B.  McClellan  in  that  capacity,  but
gave  up  the  office  when  the  civil  war  began  in  the  fol-
lowing year,  and  was  commissioned  a  major-general
of  volunteers  and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the
5th  corps  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  For  this
duty  he  was  in  a  degree  qualified  by  experience  in
the  state  militia.  His  first  active  service  was  on
the  upper  Potomac  and  in  the  Shenandoah  valley,
where  a  part  of  his  corps  acquitted  itself  well  at
the  battle  of  Winchester,  23  March,  1862.  He  was
left  in  April  and  May  to  guard  the  Shenandoah
with  two  divisions.  The  exigencies  of  the  service
caused  the  withdrawal  of  one  of  these  (Shields's),
and  Gen.  Banks  was  left  with  about  8,000  men.
Upon  this  force  "  Stonewall "  Jackson  made  one  of
his  sudden  onslaughts  with  his  whole  corps,  and  the
command  only  escaped  capture  by  rapid  and  well-
ordered  marching  and  stubborn  fighting.  Through
good  generalship  the  bulk  of  the  army  crossed  the
Potomac  at  Front  Royal  on  26  May,  and  the  con-
federate leader  failed  to  realize  his  apparently  rea-
sonable expectation  of  capturing  the  entire  force.
Gen.  Pope  was  placed  in  command  of  the  array  of
V^irginia,  27  June,  1862;.  and  concentrated  his  forces
in  the  neighborhood  of  Culpepper  Court-House  early
in  August.  Gen.  Banks's  corps  was  ordered  to  the
front  on  9  Aug.,  and  late  in  the  afternoon  of  that


BANKS

day  a  severe  fight  took  place,  known  as  the  battle
of  Cedar  mountain,  which  lasted  well  into  the
nio-ht.  Banks's  corps  held  the  position  against  a
largely  superior  force,  was  strengthened  during
the  night,  and  before  the  morning  of  Aug.  11th
the  confederates  retreated  to  the  Rapidan.  After
participating  in  Gen.  Sigel's  campaigns  in  Septem-
ber, Gen.  Banks  was  placed  in  command  of  the
defences  of  Washington  while  preparations  were
secretly  made  to  despatch  a  strong  expedition  by
sea  to  New  Orleans.  He  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  this  expedition,  which  sailed  from  New
York  in  November  and  December,  and  on  reaching
New  Orleans  he  succeeded  Gen.  B.  F.  Butler  in
command  of  the  department.  Baton  Rouge  was  oc-
cupied with  a  strong  force,  and  during  the  winter
reconnoissances  were  made  toward  Port  Hudson
and  other  points  in  the  vicinity.  Early  in  April
of  1863  he  led  the  army  up  the  Teche  country,  en-
countering no  very  formidable  opposition,  as  far
as  the  Red  river.  Thence  he  crossed  the  Missis-
sippi and  invested  Port  Hudson  in  connection  with
the  fleet  under  Farragut.  Several  unsuccessful  at-
tempts were  made  to  storm  the  works,  involving
heavy  losses  to  the  assaulting  columns.  In  July
the  news  of  the  surrender  of  Vicksburg  was  re-
ceived, and  on  the  9th  of  that  month  the  garrison
of  Port  Hudson,  6,000  strong,  capitulated,  and  the
Mississippi  river  was  once  more  open  to  the  sea.
No  military  movements  of  great  importance  were
undertaken  in  the  department  until  the  succeeding
spring,  when  Gen.  Banks's  army,  supported  by  a
powerful  fleet,  was  sent  up  the  Red  river  with  the
intention  of  regaining  control  of  western  Louisi-
ana. At  the  same  time  Gen.  A.  J.  Smith  with  10,-
000  men  descended  the  Mississippi,  reaching  the
rendezvous  first,  and  was  joined  by  Gen.  Banks,
who  assumed  command  of  the  whole  force  at
Alexandria.  The  army  advanced  along  the  south
bank  of  Red  river  as  far  as  Sabine  Cross-roads,
when  it  suffered  a  defeat  by  the  confederates  im-
der  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  and  was  obliged  to  fall
back  to  Pleasant  Hill,  having  sustained  heavy
losses  in  men  and  material.  Here  on  the  following
day  the  confederates  renewed  the  attack,  but  were
repelled  with  great  loss,  and  the  national  army
retreated  without  further  serious  molestation  to
Alexandria,  where  a  new  complication  arose  in
consequence  of  the  subsidence  of  the  Red  river  af-
ter the  spring  freshets.  The  gun-boats  were  un-
able to  descend  the  river  owing  to  shoal  water,
and  were  only  saved  by  the  engineering  skill  of
Lieut.-Col.  Joseph  Bailey  (g.  v.).  The  whole  force
then  retreated  to  the  Mississippi.  Gen.  Banks  has
been  censured  for  the  failure  of  this  expedition,
but  it  was  undertaken  contrary  to  his  advice  and
in  spite  of  his  protest.  During  his  command  of
the  department  of  the  Gulf  he  endeavored  to  reor-
ganize the  civil  government  of  Louisiana,  but  did
not  accomplish  it  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the
inhabitants.  He  was  relieved  of  his  command  in
May,  1864,  resigned  his  commission,  and,  returning
to  Massachusetts,  was  elected  to  congress  from  his
old  district.  He  was  reelected  to  the  successive
congresses  until  1877,  failing  only  in  1872,  when  he
was  active  in  behalf  of  Horace  Greeley,  the  liberal-
democratic  candidate  for  president.  He  served  for
a  long  time  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on  for-
eign relations.  Since  his  retirement  from  congress
he  has  been  U.  S.  marshal  for  Massachusetts, — His
daughter,  Maud,  after  a  course  of  study  and  train-
ing at  the  New  York  school  of  acting,"  went  upon
the  stage  in  1886,  making  her  first  appearance  at
Portsmouth,  N.  IL,  in  the  character  of  Partheiiia
in  "  Ingomar."— His  brother,  Gardner,  soldier,  b.


BANVARD


159


in  Waltham,  Mass, ;  d.  there,  9  July,  1871.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  a  company  for
the  16th  Massachusetts  regiment,  in  which  he  rose
to  the  rank  of  colonel  in  1862,  He  was  with  his
regiment  at  Fair  Oaks,  Glendale,  Malvern  Hill,
Kettle  Run,  Chantilly,  and  Fredericksburg.  Lieut.
Hiram  B.  Banks,  his  brother,  was  killed  by  his  side
in  the  second  Bull  Run  battle.  Gen.  Hooker  said,
in  a  letter  to  Gov.  Andrew :  "  There  is  no  doubt
but  at  Glendale  the  16th  Massachusetts  saved  the
army."  From  constant  exposure  Col.  Banks  con-
tracted an  inflammatory  rheumatism,  wliich  com-
pletely disabled  him  for  active  service.  The  battle
of  Fredericksburg  was  the  last  he  shared  with  his
comrades  of  the  16th.  In  1864,  after  an  illness  of
several  months  at  Waltham,  he  went  as  a  planter
to  Louisiana,  where  he  remained  until  his  return
home  four  days  before  his  death.

BANNEKER,  Benjamin,  mathematician,  b.  at
Ellicott's  Mills,  Md.,  9  Nov.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,
in  October,  1806.  He  was  of  African  descent,  and
learned  to  read  from  his  grandmother,  a  white
woman  who  had  freed  and  married  one  of  her
slaves.  He  studied  mathematics  and  astronomy
while  working  in  the  field,  when  past  middle  life,
and  prepared  and  published  almanacs  for  Mary-
land and  the  adjoining  states  in  1792  and  subse-
quent years  until  his  death.  He  assisted  Ellicott
in  surveying  the  site  of  Washington  and  the  boun-
daries of  the  District  of  Columbia.  His  biography,
by  J.  H.  B.  Latrobe,  was  published  in  1845,  and
another  bv  J.  S.  Norris  in  1854.

BANNISTER,  E.  M.,  artist,  b.  in  St.  Andrews,
New  Brunswick,  in  1833.  He  studied  art  at  the
Lowell  institute,  Boston,  and  spent  the  greater
part  of  his  professional  life  there.  In  1871  he  re-
moved to  Providence,  R,  I,  He  has  contributed
regularly  to  the  Boston  art  club  exhibitions.  His
picture  '"  Under  the  Oaks "  was  awarded  a  first-
class  medal  at  the  centennial  exhibition  of  1876.

BANVARD,  John,  artist,  b.  in  New  York  about
1820.  He  was  educated  at  the  New  York  high
school,  and  at  an  early  age  showed  decided  talent
for  drawing  and  for  writing  verses.  When  he  was
fifteen  years  old  his  father  lost  a  large  sum  of
money.  John  then  went  to  Louisville,  Ky.,  and,
after  some  experience  as  clerk  in  a  drug-store,  led
a  life  of  adventure,  supporting  himself  by  paint-
ing pictures  and  exhibiting  them  at  New  "Orleans,
Natchez,  Cincinnati,  and  other  towns,  travelling
from  place  to  place  in  a  boat.  At  one  time  he  exe-
cuted a  panorama  of  Venice,  and  exhibited  it  with
success.  Finally  the  idea  occurred  to  him  to  paint
a  panorama  of  the  entire  Mississippi  river.  He  be-
gan this  task  in  1840,  travelling  thousands  of  miles
alone  in  an  open  skiff,  living  on  what  game  he  could
shoot,  and  earning  money  to  buy  drawing  materials
by  painting  and  exhibiting  pictures.  When  he  had
made  the  preliminary  drawings  they  were  trans-
ferred to  canvas  in  a  building  erected  for  the  pur-
pose in  Louisville,  Ky.  When  finished,  the  pano-
rama covered  about  naif  a  mile  of  canvas,  though
it  was  advertised  and  became  known  as  the  "  three-
mile  picture."  He  afterward  exhibited  it  in  this
country  and  abroad.  The  artistic  merits  of  the
painting  were  not  great,  but  it  was  a  faithful
picture  of  the  Mississippi,  and  as  such  attracted  a
great  deal  of  attention.  He  afterward  travelled  ex-
tensively in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  and  painted
many  pictures,  which  he  exhibited.  During  the
war  Mr.  Banvard  pointed  out  to  Gen.  Fremont
how  Island  No.  10  could  be  passed  by  a  canal  and
certain  bayous,  and  made  charts  showing  the
route.  These  suggestions  were  successfully  fol-
lowed out  by  Fremont's  successor, Mr.  Banvard


160


BARAGA


BARAGA


is  the  author  of  about  1,700  poems,  more  than
200  of  which  have  appeared  in  magazines  in  this
country  and  Great  Britain,  and  he  is  now  prepar-
ing to  publish  a  collection  of  them.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Description  of  the  Mississippi  River  "  (Lon-
don, 1849) ;  " Pilgrimage  to  the  Holy  Land"  (New
York,  1852) ;  "  Amasis,  or  the  Last  of  the  Pharaohs  "
(Boston,  1864) ;  "  The  Private  Life  of  a  King  "  (New
York,  1876) ;  and  "  The  Tradition  of  the  Temple,"
a  poem  (New  York,  1883).  He  has  also  written
several  dramas,  two  of  which  have  been  acted:
"  Amasis "  at  the  Boston  theatre  in  1864,  and
"  Carrinia "  at  the  Broadway  theatre,  New  York,
in  1875.  Mr.  Banvard  painted  the  picture  from
which  the  first  chromo  made  in  America  was  taken.
It  was  entitled  "  The  Orison  "  (New  York,  1861).—
His  brother,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  9  May,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  Newton
theological  institute  in  1835,  and  has  been  pastor
of  Baptist  churches  in  Salem,  Boston,  and  West
Cambridge,  Mass.,  New  York  city,  Pawtucket,  R.
I.,  Paterson,  N.  J.,  and  Independence,  Mo.  He
was  chosen  president  of  the  National  theological
institute  and  university  at  Washington,  D.  C,  but
resigned.  He  has  written  "  Priscilla,"  an  historical
tale  (New  York,  1854);  "Novelties  of  the  New
World  " ;  "  The  Romance  of  American  History  " ;
"  Tragic  Scenes  in  the  History  of  Maryland  "  (New
York,  1856) ;  "  The  American  Statesman,"  a  memoir
of  Daniel  Webster  (1853) ;  "  Wisdom.  Wit,  and
Whims  of  the  Old  Philosophers  "  (1854) ;  "  Plym-
outh and  the  Pilgrims  " ;  many  books  for  children
on  natural  history,  and  a  large  number  of  Sunday-
school  question-books.

BARAOA,  Frederick,  R.C.  bishop,  b.  in  TrefEen,
Carniola,  29  June,  1797;  d.  in  Marquette,  Mich.,  19
Jan.,  1868.  His  family,  a  younger  branch  of  the
house  of  Hapsburg,  was  the  most  distinguished  in
Illyria.  He  began  his  studies  in  the  college  of
Leibac,  the  capital  of  his  native  province,  where
he  learned  to  speak  French,  Italian,  and  German
fluently,  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  branches.  At
the  end  of  his  course  he  went  to  Vienna  to  study
law,  and  after  graduation,  in  1821,  determined  to
devote  himself  to  the  priesthood.  He  entered  the
ecclesiastical  seminary  of  Leibac,  and  was  ordained
in  1823.  He  exercised  his  ministry  for  the  next
seven  years  in  Carniola,  and,  in  the  interval  of  his
missionary  duties,  composed  works  of  devotion  in
the  Sclavonic  dialect  for  the  people.  The  present
iniproved  condition  of  this  language  is  chiefly  at-
tributed to  the  efforts  of  Father  Baraga.  Having
determined  on  spending  his  life  among  the  Indians
of  the  United  States,  he  transferred  his  estates  to
his  brothers,  reserving  to  himself  an  annuity  of
$300.  and  arrived  in  New  York  in  December,  1830.
He  spent  some  months  in  Ohio,  studying  English
and  the  Ottawa  dialect,  and  set  out  in  May  for
Arbre  Croche,  a  village  of  Ottawa  Indians  on  the
peninsula  of  Michigan.  The  inhabitants,  although
they  had  relapsed  into  barbarism,  retained  some
traditions  of  the  Jesuits  of  the  17th  century,  and
received  Father  Baraga  with  welcome,  and  under
his  guidance  the  community  entered  upon  the  pub-
lic practice  of  a  Christian  life.  In  a  little  more
than  a  year  he  built  a  church  and  two  schools,  and
had  an  Indian  congregation  of  more  than  700.  He
next  extended  his  labors  as  far  as  the  Castor  isl-
ands and  beyond  Lake  Michigan,  erecting  several
churches,  as  well  as  schools,  in  Green  Bay  and  St.
Joseph's.  In  1832  he  published  at  Detroit'a  prayer-
and  hymn-book  in  the  Ottawa  language,  the  first
of  a  remarkable  series  of  works  in  the  Indian  dia-
lects, which  have  been  found  very  useful  by  philolo-
gists. He  visited Grand river  in the  spring  of


1833,  and  baptized  more  than  100  of  the  natives  •
but  his  efforts  were  counteracted  by  the  white
liquor-dealers  and  the  Indians  whom  they  had  de-
moralized. His  enemies  petitioned  the  govern-
ment for  his  removal,  and,  although  he  was  sus-
tained by  the  governor  of  Michigan,  he  was  forced
to  seek  other  fields.  He  began  his  labors  among
the  Chippewas  at  Lapointe  in  1835,  and  continued
them  successfully  for  eighteen  years.  His  success
was  mainly  owing  to  the  assistance  he  received
from  the  Leopoldine  society  in  his  native  country.
He  next  visited  the  Indians  of  Fond  du  Lac,  seventy
miles  from  Lapointe,  and  the  Indians  of  Bad  river,
seventeen  miles  to  the  south,  both  of  whom  led  a  rov-
ing life.  During  the  winter  of  1836-'37  he  travelled
six  miles  every  day  to  instruct  them,  on  their  re-
turn to  their  wigwams,  until  he  had  them  all  ready
to  receive  baptism.  During  this  period  he  also
wrote  the  "  Ojibway  Prayer-  and  Hymn-Book  and
Catechism  " ;  the  "  Extracts  of  the  History  of  the
Old  and  New  Testaments,  with  the  Gospels  of  the
Year,"  in  the  same  dialect;  "The  History,  Char-
acter, Manners,  and  Customs  of  the  North  Ameri-
can Indians,"  in  German :  and  a  devotional  work
for  his  countrymen  in  Sclavonic.  He  went  to
Europe  in  1837  to  collect  money  for  his  mission,
and  was  so  successful  that  he  was  also  enabled  to
have  his  Indian  books  printed  in  Paris.  On  his
return  to  the  United  States  he  was  able,  with  the
means  in  hand,  to  conduct  his  operations  more
systematically.  In  1843,  as  the  missions  he  had
established  no  longer  needed  his  personal  super-
vision, he  resolved  to  make  the  "Ance" — an  old
trading-post  of  the  American  Fur  Company,  be-
tween Pointe  Abbaye  and  Keweenau  Point — the
centre  of  his  labors.  The  Indians  here  were  steeped
in  idolatry  and  intemperance.  But,  though  threats
were  made  against  his  life,  he  succeeded  in  convert-
ing some  of  their  medicine  men,  and  this  was  fol-
lowed by  the  conversion  of  many  others.  He  built
a  church  and  parsonage,  erected  thirty  houses  for
his  converts,  and  purchased  a  large  tract  of  land,
on  which  he  located  them.  In  1850  all  the  Indians
had  become  Christians,  and  so  prosperous  that
numerous  families  came  to  settle  on  the  Ance.
Here  he  wrote  his  grammar  and  dictionary  of  the
Otchipwe  (Chippeway) language (1851-53), perhafjs
the  most  important  contribution  to  Indian  phi-
lology made  hitherto.  The  demand  for  his  Indian
books  in  the  United  States  and  Canada  contributed
materially  to  his  resources,  and  enabled  him  to  in-
crease still  further  the  village  on  the  Ance.  The
discovery  of  the  copper  mines  on  the  upper  penin-
sula of  Michigan  in  1845  added  to  Father  Baraga's
difficulties.  A  large  mining  population  from  all
parts  of  the  world  was  scattered  among  his  Indian
villages,  and  he  found  it  necessary  to  obtain  more
priests.  For  this  purpose,  as  well  as  to  secure  the
publication  of  his  works,  he  went  to  Cincinnati  in
1853,  where  he  lectured  on  the  mining  resources  of
the  upper  peninsula,  and  on  the  harvest  that  was
open  for  missionary  zeal  there.  In  NoA'ember  of
the  same  year  he  was  made  vicar-apostolic  of  up-
per Michigan.  In  1854  he  went  to  Europe  to  pro-
cure missionaries,  and  returned  with  twelve  priests.
He  also  introduced  the  brothers  and  sisters  of  Saint
Francis,  and  intrusted  them  with  the  education  of
the  Indians.  In  1856  Saxit  St.  Mary  was  erected
into  an  episcopal  see,  and  Dr.  Baraga  was  appointed
its  bishop  in  the  following  year.  The  see  having
been  transferred  to  Marquette  in  1865,  he  was  cre-
ated bishop  of  Marquette  and  Saut  St.  Mary.  His
health  began  to  fail,  but  his  brethren  could  not
prevail  on  him  to  moderate  his  austerities  or
slacken  his  labors. He  slept  on  the  ground,  and


BARALT

often  walked  forty  miles  a  day  on  snow-shoes
when  visiting  his  Indians.  He  was  stricken  with
apoplexy  while  in  attendance  on  the  council  of
BaltimoVe  in  1806,  and  returned  to  his  diocese
broken  in  health,  but  continued  to  perform  his
ministerial  duties  till  a  few  days  before  his  death.
BARALT,  Rafael  Maria"  (bar-ahlf),  Spanish
American  poet,  b.  in  Maracaibo,  Venezuela,  2  July,
1810.  He  studied  in  Bogota  and  Caracas,  took
part  in  politics,  and  entered  the  Venezuelan  army,
in  which  he  served  with  distinction.  In  1843  he
went  to  Spain,  where  he  held  several  important
public  offices,  and  won  literary  fame.  His  most
important  works  are  "  Historia  antigua  y  moderna
de  Venezuela  " ;  "  Diccionario  de  Galicismos  " ;  and
several  masterly  poems,  specially  the  odes  to  Co-
lumbus and  to  Spain.

BARANDA,  Pedro  Sainz  de  (bah-ran'-dah),
Mexican  naval  officer,  b.  in  Campeche,  13  March,
1787;  d.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  16  Sept.,  1845.  He
studied  in  Ferrol,  Spain,  and  served  in  the  Spanish
navy  during  the  war  with  England,  being  present
at  Trafalgar  and  other  battles.  During  the  revo-
lutionary war  of  Mexico,  Baranda  left  the  service
of  Spain,  was  appointed  chief  of  the  Mexican  naval
forces,  and  besieged  the  castle  of  San  Juan  de
Ulua,  still  hela  by  the  Spaniards,  until  they  sur-
rendered to  the  military  chief  Barragtin.  After
that  Baranda  retired  from  the  naval  service  and
filled  several  important  civil  offices.

BARANOFF,  Alexander  Andrevitcli,  gov-
ernor of  Russian  America,  b.  in  1746;  d.  at  sea,
near  Java,  28  April,  1819.  In  early  life  he  was  a
merchant  in  Siberia,  but  in  August,  1790,  he  went
to  the  island  of  Kodiak  and  opened  trade  there
with  the  natives.  In  1790  he  established  a  trading-
post  at  Bering  strait.  In  1799  the  Russian  Com-
pany was  formed,  by  the  consolidation  of  all  the  com-
panies in  the  territory,  and  established  a  line  of  forts
and  trading-posts  on  the  coast.  With  its  assistance,
Baranoff,  overcoming  many  natural  obstacles,  took
possession  of  the  largest  of  the  Sitka  group  of
islands,  now  known  by  his  name,  and  the  Em-
peror Alexander  gave  him  a  title  of  nobility.
After  losing,  and  again  recovering,  in  October,
1804,  the  fortress  at  Sitka,  he  built  a  factory  there,
and  traded  with  Canton,  Manila,  the  Sandwich
islands,  New  York,  Boston,  and  California,  and
even  founded  a  colony  (of  which  no  traces  remain)
near  San  Francisco,  then  a  Spanish  mission.  As  his
life  of  hardship  began  to  affect  his  health,  he  ap-
plied to  the  government  for  leave  to  return  to  Rus-
sia ;  but  this  was  not  granted  him  until  1818,  and
-he  died  in  the  vessel  that  was  carrying  him  home.

BARB  A,  Pedro,  the  first  governor  of  Havana
when  Herucin  Cortes  undertook  the  conquest  of
Mexico  in  1519.  He  refused  to  arrest  Cortes,  not-
withstanding the  strict  orders  of  Diego  Velasquez ;
but  he  went  to  Mexico  to  help  Panfilo  Narvaez,
and  was  made  a  prisoner  by  an  officer  of  Cortes,
who  intrusted  Barba  with  the  command  of  a  com-
pany and  afterward  of  a  brigantine,  in  which  he
took  part  in  the  famous  fight  of  the  four  thousand
Indian  canoes.  He  died  of  a  wound  received  in
the  storming  of  the  city  of  Mexico.

BARBACENA,  Fesberto  Caldeira  Brant
(bar-bah-thay'-na),  marquis  of,  Brazilian  statesman,
b.  in  Sabora  in  1772 ;  d.  in  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil,  13
June,  1841.  He  was  already  distinguished  in  both
the  land  and  sea  service  of  Portugal,  when  Pedro,
the  prince-regent  of  Brazil,  on  becoming  emperor,
appointed  him  to  negotiate  with  the  mother  coun-
try for  the  independence  of  that  province.  His
success  gained  him  the  title  of  marquis.  When
Pedro  gave  up  the  crown  of  Portugal  to  his  infant
VOL.  I. — 11


BARBER


161


daughter,  Barbacena  accompanied  the  young  queen
to  Lisbon.  He  was  twice  Brazilian  minister  of
finance,  and  was  a  zealous  defender  of  the  interests
of  Dom  Pedro  II.  During  the  hitter's  minoritv,
Barbacena  promoted  many  improvements  in  Brazil,
and  introduced  into  the  country  the  printing-press,
steamboats,  and  steam-engines.*

BARBEE,  William  J.,  author,  b.  in  Win-
chester, Ky.,  in  1810.  He  removed,  at  an  early
age,  to  Paris,  Ky.,  where  he  lived  until  his  twenty-
first  year.  He  was  educated  at  Miami  university,
Oxford,  Ohio,  and  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Drake,
of  Cincinnati,  where  he  practised  from  1836  to
1846.  He  afterward  taught  school  in  Kentucky,
Tennessee,  and  Missouri,  and  also  became  a  preacher
of  the  Christian  or  Campbellite  denomination.
He  has  published  "  Physical  and  Moral  Aspects  of
Geology  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  The  Cotton  Ques-
tion "  (New  York,  1867) ;  "  The  Scriptural  Doctrine
of  Confirmation  " ;  "  Life  of  the  Apostle  Peter,"  etc.

BARBER,  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Princeton,
N.  J.,  in  1751;  d.  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,
1783.  He  was  of  Irish  parentage,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in
1767,  and  in  1769
became  princi-
pal of  the  acad-
emy in  Eliza-
bethtown,  where
he  had  among
his  pupils  Alex-
ander Hamil-
ton and  others
who  became  dis-
tinguished. In
February,  1776,
he  was  commis-
sioned a  major
in  the  3d  New
Jersey  artillery,
and  in  Novem-
ber of  that  yeara
lieutenant- colo-
nel. In  1777  he
became  assist-
ant inspector-
general  under
Baron  Steuben.

He  served  with  his  regiment  under  Gen.  Philip
Schuyler,  in  the  northern  army,  and  fought  in  the
battles  of  Trenton,  Princeton,  Brandywine,  and  Ger-
mantown,  and  was  wounded  severely  at  Monmouth.
During  his  recovery  he  performed  valuable  service
in  obtaining  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  movements,
the  importance  of  which  was  acknowledged  in  let-
ters of  Gen.  Washington  that  are  still  preserved.  He
accompanied  Sullivan's  Indian  expedition  in  1779
as  adjutant-general,  and  received  a  severe  wound
at  Newtown.  He  also  took  part  in  the  action  at
Springfield.  In  1780  Gen.  Washington  intrusted
to  him  the  task  of  enforcing  a  requisition  for
grain  and  cattle  in  Gloucester  co.,  N.  J.,  and  in
1781  selected  him  for  the  delicate  duty  of  quelling
the  mutiny  of  the  New  Jersey  and  Pennsylvania
troops.  In  Lafayette's  Virginia  campaign  of  1781
he  performed  effective  service  at  the  head  of  a
battalion  of  light  infantry.  He  was  present  at  the
})attle  of  Yorktown,  and  was  killed  at  the  close  of
the  war  by  a  falling  tree.

BARBER,  Jolin  Jay,  painter,  b.  in  Sandusky,
Ohio,  21  Sept.,  1840,  He  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1862,  joined  the  volunteer  army  in
1863,  returned  sick,  and  upon  recovery  determined
to  devote  himself  to  painting.  He  received  no  in-
struction in  art,  but  settled  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  in


162


BARBER


BARBOUR


1871,  and  opened  a  studio.  He  devoted  himself  at
first  to  landscapes,  delineating  scenes  in  the  Musk-
ingum valley.  Subsequently  he  executed  cattle
pieces,  and  after  1881  exhibited  in  the  National
Academy  in  New  York.  In  1881  he  painted  the
"  Elysium  of  the  Herd  "  ;  in  1883,  "  Pride  of  East-
wood Jerseys,"  and  "  A  Thirsty  Party  "  ;  in  1883,
"  The  Thirsty  Herd,"  and  "  Jersey  Herd  " ;  in  1884,
"  The  Passing  Shower,"  and  "  In  Pastures  Green" ;
in  1885,  "  The  Cool  Retreat."

BARBER,  John  Warner,  historian,  b.  in
Windsor,  Conn.,  2  Feb.,  1798 ;  d.  in  New  Haven  in
June,  1885.  He  published  "  Historical  Scenes  in
the  United  States"  (1827);  "History  and  Antiqui-
ties of  New  Haven  "  (1831) ;  "  Religious  Events  "
(1832) ;  "  Historical  Collections "  of  Connecticut
(1836)  and  of  Massachusetts  (Worcester,  1839) ;
"  History  and  Antiquities  of  New  England,  New
York,  and  New  Jersey  "  (1841) ;  "  Elements  of  Gen-
eral History"  (New "Haven,  1844):  "Incidents  in
American  History"  (New  York,  1847);  "Religious
Emblems  and  Allegories  "  (1848) ;  "  European  His-
torical Collections  "  (1855) ;  and  "  Our  Whole  Coun-
try, Historical  and  Descriptive"  (Cincinnati,  1861).
With  Henry  Howe,  of  New  Haven,  he  also  published
"Historical  Collections"  of  New  York  (1841),  New
Jersey  (1844),  Virginia  (1844),  and  Ohio  (1847),  and,
with  Elizabeth  G.  Barber,  "  Historical,  Poetical,
and  Pictorial  American  Scenes  "  (1850).  See  "  The
Picture  Preacher,"  by  Henry  Howe  (Philadelphia).

BARBER,  Mary  Augustine,  educator,  b.  in
Newtown,  Conn.,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  1860.
She  entered  the  Roman  Catholic  church  with  her
husband,  who  had  been  an  Episcopalian  clergyman,
and  in  1817,  shortly  afterward,  determined  to  be-
come a  nun,  while  her  husband  was  anxious  to  enter
the  society  of  Jesus.  They  had  five  children ;  but
Mr.  Barber  visited  Rome,  promised  to  make  suitable
provision  for  them,  and  so  succeeded  in  his  pur-
pose. Mrs.  Barber  entered  the  visitation  convent
of  Georgetown  in  1818  with  her  four  daughters.
She  was  a  woman  of  superior  education,  and  the
convent  and  school  progressed  rapidly  during  her
residence.  In  1836  she  founded  a  convent  of  the
visitation  in  Kaskaskia,  111.,  where  she  remained
until  1844.  She  was  peculiarly  successful  in  train-
ing the  younger  sisters  to  be  accomplished  teachers,
and  was  engaged  in  this  occupation  in  the  convent
of  St.  Louis  from  1844  till  1848,  and  in  Mobile  up
to  the  time  of  her  death.

BARBOUR,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Orange
CO.,  Va.,  10  June,  1775;  d.  there,  8  June,  1842.
He  was  a  son  of  Col.  Thomas  Barbour.  While
serving  as  a  deputy  sheriff  he  acquired  a  knowl-
edge of  the  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice
at  the  age  of  nineteen.  He  sat  in  the  Virginia
house  of  delegates  from  1796  until  1812,  when  he
was  elected  governor.  He  was  the  author  of  the
anti-duelling  act,  and  bore  a  prominent  part  in  all
important  legislation,  occupying  for  the  latter  part
of  the  period  the  speaker's  chair.  After  a  term  in
the  governorship  he  was  elected  in  1815  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  where  he  was  repeatedly  appointed
chairman  of  the  committee  on  foreign  relations.
In  1825  President  John  Q.  Adams  made  him  his
secretary  of  war.  In  1828  he  went  to  England  as
American  minister;  but  upon  the  accession  of
President  Jackson,  in  the  following  year,  he  was
recalled.  He  vigorously  opposed  the  democratic
party,  and  in  1839  presided  over  the  whig  conven-
tion at  Harrisburg,  which  nominated  Gen.  Harrison
for  president.— His  brother,  Philip  Pendleton,
jurist,  b.  in  Orange  co.,  Va.,  25  May,  1783;  d.  in
Washington.  D.  C,  24  Feb.,  1841.  He  attended
the  schools  of  his  native  county  until  sixteen  years


of  age,  when  he  read  law  at  home.  In  October
1800,  being  sent  by  his  father  to  Kentucky  on
business  connected  with  some  land-claims,  and
meeting  with  delays  and  difficulties,  he  was  cast
off  and  left  to  take  care  of  himself.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and,  after  practising  successfully
for  some  months,  he  borrowed  money  and  entered
William  and  Mary  college  as  a  law  student.  In
1802  he  practised  in  Orange  co.,  Va.,  and  soon  made
a  wide  reputation.  From  1812  till  1814  he  was  a
member  of  the  legislature,  where  he  was  the  leader
of  the  war  party.  He  was  elected  in  1814  to  con-
gress, where  in  1821  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.
In  February,  1825,  he  resigned  and  became  a  judge
of  the  Virginia  general  court.  At  the  foundation
of  the  university  of  Virginia  in  1824  he  was  offered
the  professorship  of  law,  but  declined  it.  He  was
sent  again  to  congress  in  1827,  and  in  1829  was
president  of  the  Virginia  constitutional  convention.
In  1830,  while  making  a  speech  in  congress,  he  was
attacked  by  a  haemorrhage  that  nearly  ended  his
life,  and  he  resigned  on  31  May  of  that  year.  He
was  appointed  by  Jackson  judge  of  the  U.  S.  cir-
cuit court  for  the  eastern  district  of  Virginia,  and
on  15  March,  1836,  was  made  associate  justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  where  he  remained  until
his  death.  In  1831  he  was  president  of  the  Phik"
delphia  free-trade  convention.  Judge  Barbour  was
noted  for  his  solidity  of  character  and  his  powers  of
analysis  and  argument.  In  congress  he  opposed
all  appropriations  for  public  improvements  and  all
import  duties,  and  strongly  took  the  southern  side
of  the  Missouri  question.  In  the  democratic  con-
vention at  Baltimore  in  1832  he  received  forty-six
votes  for  vice-president.

BARBOUR,  John  S.,  politician,  b.  in  Culpepper
CO.,  Va.,  8  Aug.,  1790 ;  d.  there,  12  Jan.,  1855.  He
was  the  son  of  Mordecai  Barbour,  a  revolutionary
officer.  He  was  at  William  and  Mary  college  in
1808  and  1809,  and  afterward  studied  law  with  his
relative.  Gov.  James  Barbour.  In  the  war  of  1813
he  enlisted  as  a  private,  but  was  soon  made  aide  to
Gen.  Madison.  He  afterward  became  a  member  of
the  state  legislature,  and,  as  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  courts  and  justice,  received  the  unusual
honor  of  a  vote  of  thanks.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress in  1823,  and  was  reelected  four  times,  serving
until  3  March,  1833.  Here,  as  in  the  legislature,
he  was  known  as  an  able  debater.  Although  a
strong  states-rights  man,  he  spoke  in  congress  in
defence  of  McDuffie's  proposition  that  the  presi-
dent should  be  voted  for  by  districts.  In  1829  and
1830  he  was  a  member  '  of  the  Virginia  constitu-
tional convention,  where  he  made  an  eloquent  de-
fence of  freehold  suffrage.  In  1833  and  1834  he
was  again  in  the  legislature.  His  last  appearance
was  in  the  democratic  convention  that  nominated
Mr.  Pierce  for  the  presidency.

BARBOUR,  Lucien,  jurist,  b.  in  Canton,  Conn.,
4  March,  1811.  He  was  graduated  in  1837  at  Am-
herst college,  then  went  to  Indiana,  studied  law,  was
licensed  to  practise,  and  began  his  professional
career  in  Indianapolis.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.
district  attorney  by  President  Polk  for  the  district
of  Indiana ;  was  commissioner  to  codify  the  laws  of
Indiana  in  1852 ;  acted  several  times  as  arbitrator
between  the  state  of  Indiana  and  private  corpora-
tions, and  was  elected  to  the  34th  congress  from
Indiana,  serving  from  1855  to  1857.

BARBOUR,  John  Merrett,  jurist,  b.  in  Cam-
bridge, Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  5  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.  m
New  York  city,  8  Dec,  1881.  He  studied  law  m
New  York  and  went  to  Michigan  when  a  very  young
man ;  was  first  elected  a  justice  of  the  peace,  then
was  made  commissioner  of  internal  improvements,


BARCA

and  after  the  expiration  of  his  term  was  elected
county  Judge,  in  which  capacity  he  served  eight
years.'  lie  subsequently  moved  to  Saratoga  Springs,
"N".  Y.,  and  then  to  Washington,  D.  C,  where  he
was  clerk  in  the  office  of  the  solicitor  of  the  treas-
ury. In  1850  he  removed  to  New  York,  where  he
advanced  slowly  to  the  front  rank  of  his  profes-
sion. In  1801  he  was  elected  judge  of  the  superior
court,  and  in  1867  was  reelected  by  a  heavy  ma-
jority. On  the  death  of  Chief  Justice  Robertson,
Judge  Barbour  was  unanimously  chosen  to  preside
in  his  place.  He  was  an  able  "and  well-read  law-
yer, oftener  excelling  in  the  more  quiet  branches
of  the  law  than  in  the  active  contests  that  come
before  a  jury. — His  brother,  Oliver  Lorenzo,  law-
yer, b.  in  Cambridge,  Washington  co,,  N.  Y.,  12  July,
1811 ;  d.  in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec,  1889.
In  1827  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1832.  Pie  was  reporter  of  the  New  York
court  of  chancery  from  1847  to  1849,  and  of  the
state  supreme  court  from  1848  to  1876.  Hamilton
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1859.  He
published  "  Equity  Digest "  (4  vols.,  Springfield,
Mass.,  1836-'41) ; " "  Treatise  on  Criminal  Law  "
(Albany  and  New  York,  1841;  3d  ed.,  2  vols.,
1883) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Set-Off  "  (Albany
and  New  York,  1841) ;  "  Treatise  on  the  Practice
of  the  Court  of  Chancery  "  (2  vols.,  1843 ;  2d  ed.,
3  vols.,  1874-'5) ;  '•  Reports  of  Cases  decided  in  the
Court  of  Chancery  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (3
vols.,  1847-'9) ;  "  Reports  of  Cases  decided  in  the
Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  New  York"  (67
vols.,  1848-'76,  Digest  in  3  vols.,  1880);  "A  Sum-
mary of  the  Law  of  Parties  to  Actions  at  Law "
(Albany,  1864;  2d  ed.,  1884),  and  "Digest  of  New
iYork  Reports"  (2  vols.,  1877).  He  also  edited,
I  with  notes,  "  Collyer  on  Partnership"  (Spring-
field, Mass.,  1838);  "Chitty  on  Bills "  (1839) ;  and
ICowen's  "  Civil  Jurisdiction  of  Justices  of  the
I  Peace  "  (2  vols.,  Albany,  1844).

BARCA,  Francisco,  Spanish  statesman,  b.  in
{Puerto  Real,  near  Cadiz,  in  1831 ;  d.  bv  his  own
hand  in  New  York,  29  July,  1883.  He  "had  filled
several  public  offices  when  elected  deputy  to  the
cortes,  in  1858.  He  took  high  rank  as  a  parliamen-
tary orator,  and  in  1868  was  appointed  director-
general  of  administration  under  Posada  Herrera's
government.  When  Alfonso  XII.  was  proclaimed
king,  Barca  took  the  office  of  sub-secretary  of  the
interior,  which  he  resigned  a  year  and  a  half  later
on  account  of  his  sympathies  with  the  liberal  oppo-
sition. He  accepted,  in  1881,  the  office  of  Spanish
minister  at  Washington.  His  published  works  in-
clude a  "  Diccionario  de  Politica  y  Administracion."

BARCENA,  Alfonso  de,  Spanish  grammarian,
b.  in  Cordoba,  Spain,  in  1666 ;  d.  in  1723.  He  was
3ent  as  a  Jesuit  missionary  to  Peru,  where  his  zeal
md  success  won  for  him  "the  title  of  "  The  Apostle
3f  Peru."  He  left  several  valuable  works,  among
thein  a  "  Lexicon,"  a  "  Doctrina  Cristiana,"  and  a
''  Libro  de  Oraciones  "  (prayer-book)  in  five  dialects,
tor  the  use  of  the  South  American  Indians.

BARCENA,  Mariano  de  la  (barth'-en-a),  Mexi-
:;au  engineer,  b.  in  Guadalajara,  Mexico,  26  Jidy,
1853.  From  early  youth  he  has  been  devoted
^o  study  and  research  in  natural  sciences.  Many
)f  his  works  have  been  translated  into  German  and
French.  Barcena  is  a  member  of  several  European
md  American  scientific  associations,  and  is  direc-
or  of  the  meteorological  observatory  of  Mexico,
le  has  discovered  and  classified  many  Mexican
)lants,  and  published  an  excellent  book  on  tlie
'  latural  products  of  tlie  state  of  Jalisco,  and  a  trea-
ise  on  geology.  Bjircona  represented  his  nation  at
.he  New  Orleans  exhibition  in  1885.


BARCO  CENTENERA


163


BARCIA,  Andres  Gronzdlez  de,  Spanish  his-
torian, d.  in  1743.  He  published  "  General  History
of  Florida"  (Madrid,  1723),  and  "First  Historians
of  the  West  Indies,"  issued  in  sections,  and  pub-
lished collectively  after  his  death  (3  vols.,  folio,
1749).  He  also  edited  works  by  Ilerrera,  de  la
Vega,  and  Torquenuida.

BARCLAY,  Robert,  governor  of  East  New
Jersey,  b.  in  Gordonstown,  Morayshire,  Scotland,  23
Dec, "1648 ;  d.  at  Ury,  3  Oct.,  1690.  He  was  one  of
the  twenty-four  original  proprietaries  of  East  New
Jersey,  and  in  1682  was  elected  governor  of  the
province  for  life,  with  permission  to  rule  by  deputy.
He  never  visited  America.  He  was  the  first  mem-
ber of  the  society  of  Friends  to  advocate  their  re-
ligious views  with  force  and  ability.  It  was  mainly
through  his  influence  that  large  numbers  of  Scot-
tish emigrants,  many  of  them  Quakers,  settled  in
the  province.  The  titles  of  his  works  and  the  con-
troversies concerning  them  occupy  several  pages
in  the  catalogue  of  the  British  museum.  "  Barclay
of  Ury,"  celebrated  in  Whittier's  poem,  was  Robert
Barclay's  father.  See  H.  Mill's  "  Life  and  Writ-
ings of  Robert  Barclay"  (1812);  also  his  life  by
W.  Armistead  (1850) ;  also  "  East  Jersey  under  the
Proprietary  Government,  by  George  Scott  of  Pit-
lochie"  (1685  ;  reprint,  Newark,  N.  J.,  1875).

BARCLAY,  Robert  H.,  British  naval  officer,  b.
in  Scotland ;  d.  in  Edinburgh,  8  May,  1837.  He
served  under  Nelson  at  Trafalgar,  where  he  lost  an
arm,  and  in  1813  had  charge  of  fitting  out  the  Brit-
ish armament  on  Lake  Erie,  a  task  which  he  ful-
filled with  energy.  But  the  fleet  of  which  he  took
command  was  poorly  manned,  mostly  with  Canadian
boatmen  and  soldiers,  and  to  this  fact  was  probably
due,  in  part,  his  defeat  by  the  American  fleet  under
Perry,  in  the  famous  battle  of  10  Sept.,  1813.  In
number  of  men  and  guns  Barclay  had  the  superi-
ority, and  though  Perry's  guns  were  heavier,  Bar-
clay's were  of  longer  range.  In  the  battle  Barclay
was  dangerously  wounded,  and  finally  surrendered
with  his  whole  force.  It  was  Barclay  who  gave  the
order  to  train  all  the  available  guns  on  the  small
boat  in  which  Perry  was  crossing  from  the  dis-
abled "  Lawrence  "  to  the  "  Niagara."  Barclay  was
afterward  tried  by  a  court-martial  for  surrendering,
but  was  honorably  acquitted.

BARCLAY,  Thomas,  adjutant-general  of  Nova
Scotia,  b.  in  New  York,  12  Oct.,  1753 ;  d.  there  in
April,  1830.  He  was  a  son  of  Henry  Barclay,  D.
D.,  rector  of  Trinity  church,  New  York,  was  a
graduate  of  King's  college,  and  studied  law  under
John  Jay.  At  the  beginning  of  the  American
revolution  he  joined  the  British  army  under  Sir
William  Howe,  with  the  rank  of  captain  in  the
loyal  American  regiment,  and  became  a  major  in
1777. He  continued in  active  service  until  the

?ieace,  when  he  fled  with  his  family  to  Nova  Scotia,
n  that  province  he  was  for  some  time  speaker  of
the  house  of  assembly,  and  adjutant-general  of
militia.  Successively  he  was  a  commissioner  un-
der Jay's  treaty,  consul-general  for  the  northern
and  eastern  states,  and  commissary  for  the  care
and  exchange  of  prisoners.  At  the  close  of  the
war  of  1812,  between  the  United  States  and  Grean;
Britain,  he  was  appointed  commissioner  under  the
4th  and  5th  articles  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent.

BARCO  CENTENERA,  Martin,  Spanish  poet,
b.  in  Extremadura,  lived  in  the  second  half  of  the
16th  century.  He  took  part  in  the  wars  for  the
conquest  of  South  America,  the  history  of  which
he  wrote  in  an  epic  entitled  "Argentina  y  Con-
quista  del  Rio  de  la  Plata,  Tucuman  v  otros  sucesos
del  Peru."  He  also  left  another  work  called  "  Des-
engafios  del  Mundo."


164


BARD


BARKER


BARD,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Burlington,  N,
J.,  1  Feb.,  1710 ;  d.  in  Hyde  Par-k,  N.  Y.,  80  March,
1799.  He  was  the  son  of  a  New  Jersey  niagistjate
of  Huguenot  origin,  and  after  attending  a  classical
school  was  api^renticed  to  a  surgeon  of  Philadelphia.
Establishing  himself  in  New  York  in  1740,  he  soon
took  rank  as  one  of  the  ablest  of  American  medical
men.  In  1759,  when  an  epidemic  of  malignant
fever  threatened  New  York,  having  been  commis-
sioned to  devise  means  to  check  the  spread  of  the
disease,  he  recommended  the  purchase  of  Bedlow's
island  for  the  isolation  of  cases  of  infectious  dis-
ease, and  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  hospital  that
was  built  in  accordance  with  his  suggestion.  He
was  the  first  president  of  the  New  York  medical
society.  He  left  a  paper  on  malignant  pleurisy,
and  several  treating  of  yellow  fever,  all  of  which
were  published  in  the  "  American  Medical  Regis-
ter."— His  son,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 1  April,  1742;  d.  iii  Hyde  Park,  N.  Y.,
24  May,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  King's  (now
Columbia)  college  in  1708,  and  studied  medicine  in
Edinburgh.  After  receiving  his  doctor's  degree  in
1705  he  travelled  in  Europe  extensively.  In  1707
he  began  practice  in  New  York  in  partnership  with
his  father.  Through  his  exertions  a  medical  school
in  connection  with  King's,  now  Columbia,  college
was  established  the  year  after  his  return.  In  1709
a  hospital  was  built,  but  its  loss  by  fire  caused  a
delay  in  its  establishment  until  1791.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  the  practice  of  medicine  in  the  medical
college,  and  subsequently  dean  of  the  faculty.
While  the  seat  of  government  remained  in  New
York  he  was  Gen.  Washington's  physician.  In  1798
he  retired  to  Hyde  Park,  where  he  occupied  himself
with  agricultural  and  scientific  pursuits  during  the
remainder  of  his  life,  returning,  however,  to  render
charitable  services  during  the  prevalence  of  yellow
fever,  on  which  occasion  he  contracted  the  disease.
When  the  Columbia  college  medical  school  was  or-
ganized as  a  separate  institution,  under  the  name
of  the  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  in  1813,
Dr.  Bard  became  its  first  president,  and  he  held
that  station  during  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  was  the
author  of  a  treatise,  "  De  Viribus  Opii  "  (1705) ;  one
on  "  Angina  Suffocativa,"  printed  in  the  "  Trans-
actions of  the  American  Philosophical  Society";
one  (m  "  The  Use  of  Cold  in  HcPmorrhage " ;  a
"  Manual  of  Midwifery  "  (1807) ;  and  "  The  Shep-
herd's Guide."  He  entered  into  the  speculation  of
raising  merino  sheep,  introduced  into  the  United
States  by  his  friends  Chancellor  Livingston  and  Col.
Humphrey,  and  in  the  last-mentioned  book  he  gave
the  fruits  of  his  knowledge  and  experience  regard-
ing the  prevention  of  the  infectious  diseases  to
which  they  were  subject.  A  biography  of  him  was
written  by  John  McVickar  (New  York,  1822). —
William,  son  of  Samuel,  b.  in  New  York  in  Octo-
ber, 1777 ;  d.  17  Oct.,  1853,  was  a  pioneer  in  life  in-
surance  in  the  United  States,  and  for  twelve  years
from  its  foundation  in  1880  the  president  of  the  New
York  life  insurance  and  trust  company.— Another
son,  John,  b.  in  Hyde  Park,  N.  Y.,  2  June,  1819,  was
the  founder  of  St.  Stephen's  college,  at  Aimandale,
N.  Y.,  a  diocesan  training-school  for  students  for
the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
preparatory  to  entrance  in  the  general  theological
seminary  in  New  York  city.  He  now  resides  in
England.  His  wife,  Margaret,  a  sister  of  John
Taylor  Johnston,  co-operated  zealously  with  him
in  his  religious  benefactions.  She  died  in  Rome,
Italy,  10  Ain-il,  1875.

BARKER,  Fordyce,  physician,  b.  in  Wilton,
Franklin  co.,  Me.,  2  May,  1819.  He  was  graduated
at Bowdoin, in  1887,  Jind subsequently studied


medicine  at  Harvard  and  in  Edinb\irgh  and  Paris
finishing  his  studies  in  the  latter  city  in  1844]
He  began  the  practice  of  his  profession  m  Nor-
wich in  1845,  and  at  the  same  time  was  ajipoint-
ed  professor  of  midwifery  in  the  medical  depart-
ment of  Bowdoin  College.  From  1850  till  1857
he  filled  a  similar  place  in  the  New  York  Medical
College,  and  from  1800  in  Bellevue  Hospital  Medi-
cal College.  In  1850  he  was  made  president  of  the
New  York  State  Medical  Society,  and  in  1882  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Medicine.  He
is  the  author  of  several  works,  including  a  series
of  clinical  lectures  "  On  Puerperal  Diseases  "  (New
York,  1872),  and  "  On  Sea-Sickness  "  (1870).

BARKER,  (xcorg-e  Frederic,  physicist,  b.  in
Chaiiestown,  Mass.,  14  July,  1835.  He  received  an
academical  education  and  was  apprenticed  to  a
manufacturer  of  philosophical  apparatus  in  Bos-
ton, with  whom  he  remained  until  he  became  of
age.  In  1850  he  entered  the  Yale,  now  Sheffield,
Scientific  School,  and  was  graduated  two  years
later.  While  in  his  final  year  he  was  made  assistant
in  chemistry  under  Prof.  Silliman,  and  during  the
winters  of  1858-'9  and  in  1800-'l  he  was  assist-
ant to  Dr.  John  Bacon,  professor  of  chemistr}'  in
Harvard  Medical  College.  In  1801  he  became  pro-
fessor of  natural  sciences  in  Wheaton  (111.)  College.
A  year  later  he  was  acting  professor  of  chemistry
in  Albany  Medical  College,  where  he  remained  for
several  years,  and  at  the  same  time  pursued  a
course  of  medical  studies,  being  graduated  in  1863.
He  was  then  called  to  the  chair  of  natural  sciences
in  the  Western  University  of  Pennsylvania  at  Pitts-
burg. In  1805  he  became  demonstrator  of  chemis-
try in  the  medical  department  of  Yale  College,  oc-
cupying Prof.  Silliman's  chair  during  his  absence
in  i800-'7,  and  in  1807  was  placed  in  charge  of
the  department  of  physiological  chemistry  and
toxicology  at  the  same  institution.  Since  1873  he
has  been  professor  of  physics  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia.  He  was  one  of  the
commissioners  of  the  United  States  to  the  Inter-
national Electrical  Exhibition  in  Paris  in  1881,  and
a  delegate  to  the  International  Congress  of  Electri-
cians held  at  that  time.  The  French  government
conferred  on  him  the  decorations  of  the  Legion  of
Honor,  with  the  rank  of  commander.  In  1884  he
was  appointed  by  the  president  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  Electrical  Commission.  Prof.  Barker  has  fre-
quently been  called  upon  to  testify  in  important
patent  cases,  and  he  was  requested  by  the  depart-
ment of  justice  to  act  as  one  of  the  government
experts  in  the  suit  against  the  American  Bell  Tele-
phone Company.  The  toxicological  and  chemical
evidence  given  by  him  in  the  Lydia  Sherman  poi-
soning case  in  1872  was  remarkable  for  its  clearness,
and  has  been  inserted  as  a  typical  case  in  Whar-
ton's and  Stille's  "  Medical  Jurisprudence."  Dur-
ing the  winter  of  1859  he  gave  a  series  of  public
lectures  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  his  *'  Lecture  on  the
Forces  of  Nature,"  delivered  in  1803  before  the
chemical  society  of  Union  College,  has  been  pub-
lished. In  December,  1871,  his  lecture  "On  the
Correlation  of  Vital  and  Physical  Forces,"  before
the  American  Institute  of  'New  York,  attracted
universal  attention,  and  it  was  afterward  repub-
lished in  France.  In  1859  Prof.  Barker  was  elected
a  member  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Ad-
vancement of  Science,  and  he  has  filled  the  offices
of  vice-president  (1872)  and  president  (1879).  In
1870  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
Academy  of  Sciences.  His  published  papers  have
appeared  principally  in  the  "  American  Journal  oi
Science  and  Arts,"  the  "  American  Chemist,"  and
more  recently  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Amen-


BARKER


BARLOW


165


can  Philosophical  Society."  Besides  the  lectures
mentioned,  his  two  presidential  addresses  before
the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science  are  valuable  contributions  to  scientific  lit-
erature. For  many  years  he  has  been  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
in  1874-'5  he  was  editor  of  the  "Journal  of  the
Franklin  Institute."  For  several  years  he  also  has
edited  the  annual  record  of  progress  in  physics
published  in  the  Smithsonian  reports.  Prof.
Barker  is  the  author  of  a  "  Text-Book  of  Element-
ary Chemistry"  (New  Haven,  1870),  which  has
passed  through  eight  editions,  and  has  been  trans-
lated into  French  and  Japanese.

BARKER,  Jacob,  financier,  b.  on  Swan  island,
Me.,  7  Dec,  1779;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  26  Dec,
1871.  He  was  of  Quaker  parentage.  He  began
his  business  career  in  the  employ  of  Isaac  Hicks,  a
commission  merchant  of  New  York,  and  before  he
was  twenty-one  years  of  age  he  possessed  five  trad-
ing-vessels and  controlled  a  large  credit.  In  1801
he  lost  his  fortune  by  a  succession  of  mishaps.
Obtaining  a  contract  for  supplying  the  govern-
ment with  oil,  he  made  large  gains,  and,  on  the
breaking  out  of  the  war  of  1812,  undertook  to  raise
a  loan  of  $5,000,000  for  the  government.  He  was
one  of  the  original  members  of  the  society  of  Tam-
many Hall,  and  was  elected  a  state  senator.  A
legal  opinion  in  an  insurance  case,  delivered  by
him  when  sitting  in  the  court  of  errors,  was  sus-
tained on  appeal,  though  opposed  to  that  of  Chan-
cellor Kent.  He  founded  the  "  Union  "  newspaper
for  the  purpose  of  supporting  the  candidacy  of
Gov.  Clinton.  In  1815  he  established  the  Exchange
bank  in  Wall  street,  and  entered  into  stock  specula-
tions. His  bank  failed  in  1819 ;  but  he  was  sus-
tained in  his  extensive  speculations  by  other  finan-
cial institutions  in  different  states.  His  finan-
cial methods  provoked  intense  ill  -  will  among
rival  operators.  When  the  life  and  fire  insur-
ance company  failed  he  was  indicted  with  other
directors  for  fraud,  and  conducted  his  own  defence
with  great  ability.  He  was  convicted,  but  a  new
trial  was  granted,  and  subsequently  the  indictment
was  quashed.  In  1834  he  established  himself  in
New  Orleans.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
took  a  prominent  part  in  business  and  political
affairs.  A  large  fortune  that  he  accumulated
there  was  mostly  swept  away  through  the  civil
war.  His  later  years  were  passed  with  his  son,
Wharton  Barker,  in  Philadelphia.  See  "  Incidents
in  the  Life  of  Jacob  Barker  from  the  year  1800  to
1855  "  (New  York,  1855).

BARKER,  James  Nelson,  author,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  17  June,  1784 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
9  March,  1858.  In  the  war  of  1812  he  rose  to  the
rank  of  major  in  the  army.  In  1814  he  was  severe-
ly wounded  in  a  duel.  From  1814  till  1817  he  was
assistant  adjutant-general  of  the  4th  military  dis-
trict. He  then  entered  civil  life,  Avas  chosen  alder-
man, and  in  1820  was  mayor  of  Philadelphia.  From
1829  till  1838  he  was  collector  of  customs  for  the
port,  and  from  1838  till  1858  comptroller  of  the
U.  S.  treasury.  During  his  active  life  he  con-
tributed largely  to  the  public  journals,  and  some
of  his  poems  attracted  general  attention,  notably
"The  Sisters"  and  "Little  Red  Riding  Hood."
His  dramatic  writings  include  "  Marmion,"  "  The
Indian  Princess,"  "  Superstition,"  a  tragedy,  and
"  Smiles  and  Tears,"  a  comedy.  He  also  published
"  A  Sketch  of  the  Primitive  Settlements  on  Dela-
ware River  "  (1827).

BARKER,  James  William,  merchant,  b.  in
White  Plains,  N.  Y.,  5  Dec.  1815;  d.  in  Rahway,
N.  J.,  26  June,  1869. He  began  his  business  career


in  1828  as  a  clerk  in  a  large  mercantile  house,  and
subsequently  entered  into  business  for  himself,
where  his  energy  and  good  management  soon  made
him  wealthy.  In  1859  he  established  an  extensive
house  in  Pittsburg,  and  transacted  annually  a  very
large  business.  Mr.  Barker  took  an  interest  in
politics  as  an  earnest  and  zealous  whig  until  the
disorganization  of  that  party.  In  1854  he  was  the
"  Knownothing "  candidate  for  mayor  of  New
York  city,  but  was  defeated  in  a  closely  contested
election  by  Fernando  Wood.  He  was  very  active
in  the  founding  of  the  "  Order  of  the  Star  Spangled
Banner,"  a  secret  organization,  having  for  its  ob-
ject the  prevention  of  the  political  ascendancy  of
the  foreign-born  inhabitants  of  the  United  States,
and  was  its  principal  officer  in  1853.  In  1860  he
united  with  the  supporters  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and
was  ever  after  a  member  of  the  republican  party.
From  1867  till  his  death  he  was  president  of  the
Eclectic  Life  Insurance  company.  New  York.

BARKER,  Josiah,  ship-builder,  b.  in  Marsh-
field,  Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1763 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  23  Sept.,  1843.  He  enlisted  in  the  revolu-
tionary army  when  only  thirteen  years  old,  and
served  at  intervals  until  1781.  In  1782-'3  he
served  nine  months  in  the  "  Dean  "  frigate  among
the  West  India  islands.  Mr.  Barker  learned  ship-
building on  the  North  river,  near  Pembroke,  Mass.,
where  his  father's  home  was,  and  built  his  first
ships  at  St.  Andrews  and  St.  Johns  in  1786-'7.
In  1795  he  opened  a  ship-yard  in  Charlestown,  on
the  site  of  the  present  U.  S.  navy-yard,  removed  it
in  1799,  and  again  a  few  years  afterward  to  the
foot  of  Washington  street,  where  he  built  many
fine  merchant  vessels.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.
naval  constructor  about  1810,  and  built  the  "  Vir-
ginia "  in  1818,  the  "  Warren  "  in  1826,  the  "  Cum-
berland "  in  1842,  and  other  men-of-war.  He  also
rebuilt  the  "  Constitution  "  in  1834,  and  furnished
the  plans  for  the  "  Portsmouth."  He  was  ordered
to  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1843,  and  retired  9  July,
1846.  A  "  Memorial  of  Josiah  Barker,"  by  Harry
H.  Edes,  was  printed  privately  in  Boston  in  1871.

BARKSDALE,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Ruther-
ford CO.,  Tenn.,  21  Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  at  Gettysburg,
Pa.,  2  July,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  Nashville
university,  studied  law  in  Columbus,  Miss.,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  before  he  was  of  age.  He
soon  became  a  successful  practitioner,  and  was
prominent  as  an  advocate  of  state  rights.  He  be-
came editor  of  the  Columbus  "Democrat,"  and
ably  set  forth  his  political  views  in  its  columns.
His  first  military  experience  was  as  a  member  of
the  non-commissioned  staff  of  the  2d  Mississippi
volunteers  in  the  Mexican  war.  In  1851  he  served
as  a  member  of  the  state  convention  held  to  con-
sider the  compromise  measures  then  before  the
country.  Two  years  afterward  he  was  elected  to
congress,  and  at  once  became  prominent  among
the  pro-slavery  democrats.  When  Preston  S.
Brooks  made  his  assault  upon  Charles  Sumner  in
the  senate  chamber,  Mr.  Barksdale  was  present,
and  prevented  the  interference  of  bystanders.
When  his  state  seceded  he  left  his  seat  in  congress
and  accepted  the  command  of  the  13th  regiment
of  Mississippi  volunteers,  participated  in  the  cam-
paigns of  Virginia,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  briga-
dier in  the  confederate  service.  He  commanded
the  3d  brigade  of  Early's  division,  during  the  sec-
ond day's  fight  at  Gettysburg,  and  fell  while  lead-
ing his  men  in  the  assault  on  the  national  left.

BARLOW,  Arthur,  navigator,  b.  about  1550 ;
d.  about  1620.  He  was  sent  out  by  Sir  Walter  Ra-
leigh in  1584  in  command  of  an  expedition  bound
upon  a  voyage  of  discovery  for  the  purpose  of  colo-


166


BARLOW


BARLOW


nization,  and  Queen  Elizabeth  gave  him  a  special
charter  constituting  him  a  lord  proprietary  with
almost  unlimited  powers.  The  intention  was  to
colonize  a  more  southerly  latitude  than  up  to  that
time  had  been  occupied  by  English  settlers.  Two
ships,  one  commanded  by  Barlow  and  the  other  by
Philip  Amidas,  set  sail  on  27  April.  They  took
the  southerly  course,  touching  at  the  Canaries  and
the  West  Indies,  and  made  their  way  northward
along  the  coast.  Early  in  July  they  neared  land,
and  perceived  a  fragrance  coming  off  the  coast  "  as
if  they  had  been  in  the  midst  of  some  delicate
garden,"  abounding  with  all  kinds  of  odoriferous
flowers.  On  13  July  they  entered  Ocracoke  inlet
and  landed  on  Wocoken,  the  southernmost  of  the
islands  forming  the  entrance  to  what  is  now  called
Pamlico  sound.  The  beauty  of  the  climate,  the
heavily  wooded  shores,  the  abundance  of  game,
and  the  friendliness  of  the  natives  so  captivated
Barlow  and  his  fellow-voyagers  that,  after  explor-
ing Pamlico  and  Albemarle  sounds,  they  returned
to  England  in  September  and  gave  such  glowing
accounts  of  their  discoveries  that  the  queen  named
the  territory  Virginia,  in  delicate  compliment  to
her  own  unmarried  state,  and  preparations  for  per-
manent settlement  were  at  once  begun.

BARLOW,  Francis  Clianiiin^,  soldier,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y,,  19  Oct.,  1834.  He  was  graduated
at  the  head  of  his  class  at  Harvard  in  1855,  studied
law  in  the  office  of  William  Curtis  Noyes,  New
York,  and  began  practice  in  that  city.  For  a  time
he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  "Tribune."
In  1861  he  enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  12th  regi-
ment New  York  state  national  guard,  and  went  to
the  front  on  the  first  call  for  troops  to  defend  the
capital.  At  the  end  of  the  three  months'  term  of
service  he  had  been  promoted  lieutenant.  He  at
once  reentered  the  service  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  61st  New  York  volunteers,  was  promoted
colonel  during  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  and  distin-
guished himself  at  the  battle  of  Pair  Oaks  or  Seven
Pines  (31  May  and  1  June,  1862),  for  which  he  was
afterward  (19  Sept.)  promoted  brigadier-general.
He  brought  his  regiment  in  good  form  through
the  trying  "  change  of  base  "  from  the  Chickahom-
iny  to  the  James  river.  At  Antietam  (17  Sept.)  his
command  captured  two  sets  of  confederate  colors
and  300  prisoners,  but  he  was  severely  wounded,
and  carried  apparently  dead  from  the  field.  At
Chancellorsville  (2  May,  1863)  he  commanded  a
brigade  in  the  11th  corps,  but  was  not  involved  in
the  discreditable  surprise  of  its  commanding  offi-
cer, having  been  detached  early  in  the  day  to  harass
"  Stonewall "  Jackson  in  his  flank  movement  on
the  national  right.  At  the  battle  of  Gettysburg
(1  July,  1863)  he  was  severely  wounded  and  taken
prisoner  during  the  first  day's  fight ;  but  he  was
exchanged,  and  recovered  in  time  to  take  the  field
again  the  following  spring.  At  Spottsylvania
Court-House,  12  May,  1864,  the  2d  corps  (Gen.  Han-
cock's) was  ordered  to  storm  the  confederate  works
at  dawn.  Gen.  Barlow  commanded  the  1st  divis-
ion, which,  with  the  3d,  formed  the  advance  line.
The  works  were  carried  with  a  rush,  and  3,000  pris-
oners captured,  comprising  almost  an  entire  divis-
ion, with  two  general  officers,  Ed.  Johnson  and
G.  ri.  Steuart.  This  opened  one  of  the  most  san-
guinary and  stubbornly  contested  engagements  of
the  civil  war,  and  was  the  first  substantial  suc-
cess won  during  the  campaign.  Gen.  Barlow  par-
ticipated in  the  final  campaigns  of  the  Potomac
army  under  Gen.  Grant,  was  present  at  the  assault
on  Petersburg,  and  at  the  surrender  of  the  con-
federate forces  in  April,  1865,  and  was  mustered
out  of  the  military  service  on  the  conclusion  of


r'\t^


peace.  He  was  elected  secretary  of  the  state  of
New  York  in  1865,  and  served  until  1868,  when
president  Grant  appointed  him  U.  S.  marshal  of
the  southern  district  of  the  state.  Pie  resigned  in
October,  1869.  In  November,  1871,  he  was  elected
attorney-general  of  the  state,  serving  through
1872-3.  Since  that  date  he  has  practised  law  in
New  York  city.  Gen.  Barlow  married  Miss  Ara-
bella Griffith,  who,  while  her  husband  was  in  the
field,  was  highly  efficient  in  the  hospitals  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commission.  She  died  27
July,  1864,  of  fever  contracted  in  the  hospitals  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  His  second  wife  is  a
daughter  of  Francis  G.  Shaw.

BARLOW,  Joel,  author,  b.  in  Redding,  Conn.,
24  March,  1754;  d.  near  Cracow,  Poland,  24  Dec!'
1812.  He  entered  Dartmouth  college  in  1774,  but
soon  removed  to  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1778,  delivering  the  commencement  poem,  "Pros-
pect of  Peace  "  (published  in  "  American  Poems,"
Litchfield,  Conn.,
1793).  In  1780  he
became  chaplain
of  Poor's  brigade
of  the  Massachu-
setts line,  having
previously  spent
his  vacations
with  the  army,
and  fought  at
White  Plains.
On  the  disband-
ment  of  the
army,  in  1783,
Barlow  settled  at
Hartford,  stud-
ied law,  and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1786.  He
founded  with
Elisha  Babcock
the  "  American
Mercury,"  a  polit-
ical and  literary

weekly,  and,  joining  the  Hartford  wits,  wrote  much
satirical  verse.  In  1785  he  edited  and  imposed  the
"  Book  of  Psalmody  "  then  in  use  in  the  Congrega-
tional churches  of  Connecticut,  contrilniting  gen-
eral versions  of  psalms  never  before  attempted.
Two  years  later  he  published  at  Hartford  his  epic
poem,  "  The  Vision  of  Columbus,"  which  made  him
famous.  As  a  result  he  was  offered  the  agency  of
the  Scioto  Land  Company,  which,  under  cover  of  the
Ohio  Land  Company,  had  purchased  the  right  of  re-
demption to  nearly  3,500,000  acres  of  government
land  in  Ohio,  which  it  now  desired  to  sell  abroad.
Barlow  accepted,  and  sailed  for  France  in  May,
1788.  Not  succeeding  in  his  agency,  he  turned  to
politics  and  letters.  As  a  Girondist  he  contributed
largely  to  the  political  literature  of  France  in  1789-
'91.  JBecoming  interested  in  English  politics,  he
crossed  over  to  England  in  1791,  and  resided  for
nearly  two  years  in  London,  one  of  a  circle  of  art-
ists, poets,  wits,  journalists,  and  pamphleteers  who
formed  the  Constitutional  society,  and  were  in-
tensely republican  in  tone.  West,  Copley,  Trum-
bull, Hayley,  Home  Tooke,  and  Priestley  were
among  his  associates.  In  London  he  published
several  political  works,  the  most  important  being
his  "Advice  to  the  Privileged  Orders,"  which
Burke  attacked  and  Fox  openly  eulogized  in  par-
liament, and  which  the  British  government  pro-
scribed. Taking  refuge  in  France,  Barlow  ii|
1792-3  accompanied  a'deputation  of  the  national
convention  into  Savoy  for  the  purpose  of  erectinc  u


BARLOW


into  the  84th  department  of  France,  and  was  there
nominated  for  deputy,  but  was  defeated.  In  Cham-
bery,  in  this  province,  he  wrote  his  "  Hasty  Pud-
ding," his  most  popular  poem.  Returning  to  Paris,
Barlow  forswore  politics  and  devoted  himself  to
advancing  his  private  fortunes,  and  by  mercantile

gursuits  and  speculations  soon  became  wealthy.
le  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul  at  Algiers  in  1795,
and  spent  a  year  and  a  half  at  the  capital  battling
with  the  plague  and  the  caprices  of  the  dey,  and
succeeded  in  effecting  the  object  of  his  mission,  the
liberation  of  American  captives  and  the  signing  of
a  treaty.  Returning  to  Paris,  he  lived  for  eight
years  the  life  of  a  man  of  letters,  writing  his  poem
'•  The  Columbiad,"  and  making  extensive  prepara-
tions for  a  history  of  the  American  revolution  and
one  work  on  the  French  revolution.  During  this
period,  too,  he  exerted  himself  to  heal  the  rupture
between  the  United  States  and  France  caused  by
the  mutual  jealousy  and  suspicion  of  the  federal
party  and  the  French  directory.  In  the  heated  po-
litical campaign  of  1799-1800,  in  America,  he  ad-
dressed to  his  countrymen  two  forcible  and  digni-
fied epistles  on  the  measures  of  the  party  in  power,
which  had  their  due  effect  in  determining  the  re-
sult. Returning  to  America  in  1805,  he  established
himself  at  Kalorama,  near  Washington,  and,  de-
clining all  political  honors,  devoted  himself  to  lit-
erary and  pastoral  pursuits  and  the  society  of  emi-
nent men.  In  1807  his  epic,  "  The  Columbiad  " —
the  "  Vision  of  Columbus  "  enlarged — was  issued  at
Philadelphia.  Of  this  book  an  impartial  critic  has
said:  "It  abounds  in  beautiful  passages,  but  is
overburdened  with  political  and  philosophical  dis-
quisitions, and  disfigured  by  singularities  of  ex-
pression." In  1811,  his  country  being  apparently
on  the  verge  of  war  with  France,  Barlow  was  pre-
vailed on  to  accept  the  post  of  minister  to  the
French  court  in  the  hope  of  preserving  peace,  and
went  there  in  the  U.  S.  frigate  "  Constitution,"
commanded  by  Capt.  Isaac  Hull,  accompanied  by
Mrs.  Barlow  and  her  sister.  Miss  Baldwin.  After
nine  months  of  diplomacy  he  was  invited  by  Napo-
leon, then  absent  on  his  Russian  campaign,  to  meet
him  at  Wilna,  Poland,  where  the  treaty,  whose
provisions  had  been  agreed  on,  would  be  signed.
Barlow  set  out,  but  on  reaching  Wilna  found  the
French  army  in  full  retreat  on  the  town  from
jMoscow.  Becoming  involved  in  the  retreat,  he  was
overcome  by  cold  and  privation,  and  died  at  Yar-
misica,  in  Poland.  See  "  Life  and  Letters  of  Joel
Barlow,"  by  Charles  Burr  Todd  (New  York,  1886).
BARLOW,  Samuel  Latham  Mitchell,  lawyer,
b.  in  Granville,  Mass.,  5  June,  1826 ;  d.  in  Glen  Cove,
N.  Y.,  10  July,  1890.  He  was  educated  in  New
York  city,  where  he  practised  law  for  forty  years.
He  gave  much  time  to  the  collection  of  rare  and
curious  books.  H  is  library  of  Americana  was  among
the  largest  in  the  country,  and  only  surpassed  by
the  Brinley,  Carter-Brown,  and  Lenox  collections.
In  connection  with  Henry  Harrisse  he  edited
"Notes  on  Columbus,"  an  invaluable  work  for  the
biography  and  bibliography  of  the  discoverer  of  the
new  world  (New  York,  privately  printed,  1866).

BARLOW,  Thomas  Harris,  inventor,  b.  in
Nicholas  co.,  Ky.,  5  Aug.,  1789 :  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  in  1865.  He  settled  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  in
1835,  and  in  1851  finished  his  first  planetarium
which  is  now  in  Transylvania  university  in  that
town.  This  ingenious  and  useful  piece  of  mechan-
ism is  now  in  use  at  West  Point,  the  Washington
observatory,  and  other  institutions.

BARNARD,  Charles,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Feb.,  1838.  He  attended  the  common
schools  until  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  devoting


BARNARD


167


his  leisure  hours  to  the  assistance  of  his  father,  the
Rev.  C.  F.  Barnard,  then  in  charge  of  the  Warren
street  mission  chapel,  Boston.  Then  turning  his
attention  to  business,  for  a  while  he  was  employed
as  a  clerk,  but,  this  occupation  being  uncongenial,
he  began  to  study  for  the  ministry,  when  ill-health
comj)elled  him  to  relinquish  this  intention,  and  he
became  a  florist.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he
undertook  by  private  studies  to  educate  himself,
and  has  since  devoted  his  attention  almost  exclu-
sively to  writing.  As  a  journalist,  he  has  filled
at  various  times  the  place  of  assistant  editor  of  the
Boston  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  editor  of  "  Vox
Humana,"  musical  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Post,"
editor  of  '*  World's  Work  Department "  in  the
"  Century  "  magazine,  and  its  only  contributor  for
nine  years.  His  short  stories  and  articles,  exceed-
ing one  hundred  and  fifty  in  number,  have  ap-
peared in  various  periodicals.  His  principal  books
are :  "  My  Ten-Rod  Farm,"  "  Farming  by  Inches,"
"  The  Strawberry  Garden,"  and  "  A  Simple  Flower
Garden  "  (Boston,  1869-'71) ;  "  The  Tone  Masters  "
(3  vols.,  1871);  "The  Soprano"  (1872);  "Legilda
Romanief  "  (1880) ;  "  Knights  of  To-day  "  (New
York,  1881) ;  "  Co-operation  as  a  Business  "  (1881) ;
and  "  A  Dead  Town  "  (London,  1884).  Mr.  Bar-
nard is  superintendent  of  instruction  to  the  Chau-
tauqua town  and  country  club,  a  branch  of  the
Chautauqua  university,  and  as  such  has  published
"  Talks  about  the  Weather  "  (1885),  "  Talks  about
the  Soil "  (1886),  and  "  Talks  about  Our  Useful
Plants  "  (1886),  all  issued  by  the  Chautauquan  Press,
Boston.  He  has  written  several  operas  and  dramas
for  amateurs,  among  which  are  "  The  Triple  Wed-
ding," "  Too  Soon,"  "  Eugenea,"  "  The  Dream-
Land  Tree,"  and  "  Katy  Neal "  (New  York,  1884-'5).
He  was  also  associated  in  the  authorship  of  the
play  "  We,  Us,  and  Co."

BARNARD,  Daniel  Dewey,  lawyer,  b.  in  Shef-
field, Mass.,  16  July,  1797;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  24
April,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  col-
lege in  1818,  studied  law,  and  in  1821  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  began  its  practice  in  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.  In  1826  he  was  elected  district  attorney
for  Monroe  co.,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1827  was  elected  rep-
resentative to  congress.  After  travelling  for  some
time  abroad,  he  settled  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  and
served  in  the  state  legislature.  He  was  again  in
congress  from  1839  to  1845,  when  he  was  chairman
of  the  judiciary  committee.  From  1850  to  1853  he
was  U.  S.  minister  to  Prussia.  He  was  the  author
of  numerous  reviews  and  speeches.

BARNARD,  Edward  Emerson,  astronomer,
b.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  16  Dec,  1857.  He  was
graduated  at  Vanderbilt  university  in  1886.  His
discoveries  in  astronomv  include  the  following:
Comet  (Barnard),  VI,  1881 ;  Comet  (Barnard),  III,
1882 ;  the  duijlicity  of  the  companion  to  fi  (Japri-
corni  (6  Nov.,  1883);  Comet  (Barnard),  11,1884;
Comet  (Barnard),  II,  1885 ;  Comet  (Barnard),  — ,
1886,  and  also  independently  Comet  V,  1885.  Up
to  June,  1886,  he  had  discovered  twenty-one  nebu-
la3.  Since  1883  he  has  had  charge  of  the  astro-
nomical observatory,  and  he  is  also  assistant  in
practical  astronomy  at  Vanderbilt  university.  His
publications  consist  of  astronomical  contributions
to  the  "  Sidereal  Messenger,"  "  Observatory,"  "  Sci-
ence Observer,"  "  Astronomische  Nachrichten,"  and
other  technical  journals.

BARNARD,  Frederick  An^nstus  Porter,
educator,  b.  in  Sheffield,  Mass.,  5  May,  1809;  d.  in
New  York,  27  April,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in.  1828,  in  1831  teacher  in  the  asylum  for  the
deaf  and  dumb  at  Hartford,  and  in  1832  in  that  of
New  York. From  1837  to  1848  he  was  professor  of


168


BARNARD


BARNARD


mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  uni-
versity of  Alabama,  and  afterward'  of  chemistry
till  1854  The  same  year  he  took  orders  in  the
Episcopal  church.  He  then  became  professor  of
mathematics  and  astronomy  in  the  university  of
Mississippi,  of  which  institution  he  was  elected

president  in
1856.  In  1861
Dr.  Barnard
left  Mississip-
pi, and  in  1864
hebecamepres-
ident  of  Co-
lumbia college,
New  York.  He
was  U.  S.  com-
missioner to
the  univer-
sal exposition
at  Paris  in
1867,  and  pub-
lished an  elab-
orate "  Report
on  Machinery
and  Industrial
Arts "  (New
York,  1869) ;
and  he  was  also
U.  S.  assistant
commissioner-
general  to  the
Paris  exposition  of  1878.  His  other  principal  works
are  :  "  Treatise  on  Arithmetic  "  (1830) ;  "  Analytic
Grammar  with  Symbolic  Illustration  "  (1836),  ori-
ginating a  system  still  used  in  the  principal  insti-
tutions for  the  deaf  and  dumb;  various  reports,
essays,  etc.,  on  collegiate  and  university  education,
including  a  volume  of  "  Letters  on  Collegiate  Gov-
ernment" (1855);  "History  of  the  United  States
Coast  Survey  "  (1857) ; "  Recent  Progress  of  Science  "
(1869) ;  "  The  Metric  System  "  (1871) ;  and  "  Imagi-
nary Metrological  System  of  the  Great  Pyramid  "
(1884).  In  1860  he  was  a  member  of  the  expedition
to  observe  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  in  Labrador ;  in  1862
was  engaged  in  reducing  observations  of  stars  in  the
southern  hemisphere ;  and  in  1863  had  charge  of  the
publication  of  charts  and  maps  of  the  U.  S.  coast  sur-
vey. In  1860  he  was  elected  president  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  in
1865  of  the  board  of  experts  of  the  American  bureau
of  mines,  and  in  1872  of  the  American  institute.  He
was  one  of  the  original  corporators  named  in  the
charter  of  the  national  academy  of  sciences,  and
from  1874  to  1880  was  foreign  secretary  of  that
body.  In  1855  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Jefferson  college,  Miss.,  and  in  1859  from
Yale ;  in  1861  that  of  D.  D.  from  the  university  of
Mississippi ;  and  in  1872  that  of  doctor  of  literature
from  the  regents  of  the  university  of  the  state  of
New  York.  He  contributed  to  the  "American
Journal  of  education  "  from  its  beginning,  and  to
"  Silliman's  Journal  "  since  1837.  The  engraving
gives  a  partial  view  of  the  old  and  the  new  build-
ings of  Cohimbia  college.

BARNARD,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  24  Jan.,  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1830,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  and  from
1837  to  1840  sat  in  the  Connecticut  legislature,
where  he  advocated  reforms  in  prisons,  insane  asy-
lums, and  the  common  schools.  He  effected  a  re-
organization of  the  public-school  system,  introduc-
ing school-houses  of  improved  construction,  high
schools,  teachers'  institutes,  a  normal  academv,  and
new  methods  of  instruction.  He  also  secured  the
adoption  of  similar  reforms  in  other  states. From


1838  to  1842  he  was  secretary  of  the  board  of
school  commissioners  in  Connecticut ;  from  1843
to  1849  school  commissioner  of  Rhode  Island ;
from  1850  to  1854  superintendent  of  the  Connecti-
cut state  schools :  from  1857  to  1859  president  of
the state university  of  Wisconsin ; in 1865  and

1866  of  St.  John's  college  in  Annapolis;  and  from

1867  till  1870  U.  S.  commissioner  of  education.
In  Rhode  Island,  where  the  right  of  taxation  for
school  purposes  had  been  denied  for  200  years,  he
revolutionized  public  opinion  so  completely  tliat
a  system  of  public  education  as  complete  as  in  any
of  the  original  New  England  states  was  adopted
by  the  vote  of  two-thirds  of  the  tax-payers  in  each
town.  While  secretary  of  the  school  board  he
established  the  "  Connecticut  Common  School
Journal,"  and  while  in  Rhode  Island  he  issued  the
"  Rhode  Island  School  Journal."  In  1855  he  began
the  publication  of  the  "  American  Journal  of  Edu-
cation." His  published  works  aie  "School  Archi-
tecture "  (1839 ;  10th  ed.,  Hartford,  1886) ;  "  Nation-
al Education"  (1840);  "Practical  Illustrations  of
School  Architecture,"  "  Report  on  Public  Schools
in  Rhode  Island"  (1845  and  1848);  "Documentary
History  of  Public  Schools  in  Providence  " ;  "  Edu-
cation and  Employment  of  Children  in  Factories  " ;
"  Normal  Schools  and  Teachers'  Institutes  "  (1850) ;
"  National  Education  in  Europe "  (New  York»
1854) ;  "  Normal  Schools  in  the  United  States  and
Europe '' ;  "  History  of  Education  in  Connecti-
cut from  1638  to  1854";  "Educational  Biogra-
phy" (1857);  "Papers  for  Teachers";  "Military
Schools  " ;  "  ^Technical  and  Scientific  Education  " ;
"American  Pedagogy";  "Discourses  on  the  Life
and  Character  of  T.  H.  Gallaudet";  "Tribute  to
Dr.  Gallaudet,  with  History  of  the  American
Asylum " ;  "  Hints  and  Methods  for  the  Use  of
Teachers  " ;  "  American  Teachers  " ;  "  Elementary
and  Secondary  Instruction  in  Switzerland,  France,
Belgium,"  etc. ;  "  English  Pedagogy  " ;  "  French
Teachers,  Schools,  and  Pedagogy " ;  "  German
Teachers  and  Educational  Reformers  " ;  "  Life  of
Ezekiel  Cheever,  and  Notes  on  the  Free  Schools  of
New  England  " ;  "  American  Journal  of  Educa-
tion" (1856-'86);  "Kindergarten  and  Child  Cul-
ture Papers";  " Object-Teachmg  jind  Oral  Lessons
on  Social  Science  and  Common  Things"  (New
York,  1861) ;  "  Pestalozzi  and  Pestalozzianism  "
(1861) ;  "  Primary  Schools  and  Elementary  Instruc-
tion " ;  "  School  Codes  " ;  "  Science  and  Art " ;
"  Superior  Instruction  in  Different  Countries."
From  1873  till  1886  Mr.  Barnard  devoted  himself
to  revising  his  special  treatises  and  completing
others  begun  and  developed  in  the  "Journal  of
Education."  In  1886  he  announced  a  collected
edition  of  his  publications,  under  the  title  "The
American  Library  of  Schools  and  Education,"  in
52  volumes,  comprising  over  800  individual  trea-
tises, each  of  which  is  also  published  separately,

BARNARD,  Isaac  D.,  senator,  b.  in  Aston,  Pa.,
18  July,  1791;  d.  in  Westchester,  Pa.,  28  Feb.,
1834.  Pie  began  to  study  law  in  Chester,  Pa.,
after  receiving  a  common-school  education;  but
the  war  of  1812  intervening  before  he  was  quali-
fied for  the  bar,  he  accepted  a  captaincy  in  the
14th  infantry,  12  March,  1812.  He  served  with
distinction  at  the  capture  of  Fort  George,  Canada
(27  May,  1813),  and  at  Lyon's  creek  (19  Oct.,  1814),
after  which  engagement  he  was  promoted  major.
In  1815  he  resumed  his  legal  studies,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1816,  and  appointed  deputy  attorney-
general  in  181 7.  Three  years  later  he  was  elected
to  the  state  senate.  In  1826  he  became  secretary
of  state  for  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1827  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator,  resigning  in  1831.


BARNARD


BARNARD


169


BARNARD,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
6  Nov.,  1G81 ;  d.  24  Jan.,  1770.  He  was  baptized
on  the  day  of  his  birth,  and  was  from  the  very  first
destined  for  the  pulpit  by  his  parents.  He  entered
the  class  of  1700  at  Harvard,  and  was  graduated  in
due  course.  His  biographers  guardedly  intimate
that  he  was  "  thoughtless  "  during  his  college  ca-
reer ;  but  he  was  converted  before  graduation,  and
began  at  once  to  study  theology.  He  preached
his  first  sermon  within  a  year  of  receiving  his
degree,  and  became  temporarily  the  assistant  of
Dr.  Coleman,  of  the  Brattle  street  Congregational
church,  Boston.  In  1707  he  was  appointed  by
Gov.  Dudley  chaplain  to  one  of  the  regiments  sent
to  reduce  the  forts  at  Port  Royal,  Nova  Scotia  (now
Annapolis),  then  held  by  the  French  in  defiance  of
the  British  crown.  A  warlike  expedition  precisely
suited  Barnard's  temperament,  and  his  personal
bravery  made  him  useful  aside  from  his  clerical
capacity.  He  visited  England  in  1709,  where  his
person  and  accomplishments  made  such  a  favora-
ble impression  in  court  circles  that  he  was  offered
an  official  chaplaincy  under  Lord  Wharton,  but  de-
clined, not  being  able  to  accept  the  39  articles.
Returning  to  America,  he  preached  as  a  candidate
in  many  pulpits ;  but  being,  in  a  sense,  under  the
patronage  of  the  very  unpopular  Gov.  Dudley,  he
encountered  public  disfavor,  and  could  not  find  a
congregation  that  would  accept  him  until  1716,
when  he  was  ordained  as  the  assistant  of  the  Rev.
Samuel  Cheever,  at  Marblehead.  There  he  re-
mained during  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  the  bitter
ecclesiastical  controversy  that  arose  throughout
New  England  about  1741,  mainly  in  consequence
of  Whitefield's  powerful  advocacy  of  Calvinistic
Methodism,  Mr.  Barnard  took  a  middle  course,
and  he  is  by  some  authorities  credited  with  being
the  first  of  the  Trinitarian  Congregationalists  to
deviate  from  Calvinism.  Pie  published  a  large
number  of  sermons ;  "  A  History  of  the  Strange
Adventures  of  Philip  Ashton  "  (1725) :  "  A  Version
of  the  Psalms  "  (1752) ;  and  an  edition  of  the  first
Dudleian  (Harvard)  lecture  ever  published  (1756).
He  is  described  in  the  funeral  discourse  as  a  man
of  extraordinarily  impressive  personality.  "His
presence,"  said  the  speaker,  "  restrained  every  im-
prudent sally  of  youth,  and  when  the  aged  saw  him
they  arose  and  stood  up."  By  all  accounts  he  was
a  fine  type  of  the  dignified  New  England  minister,
who  exacted  and  received  all  the  punctilious  re-
spect then  so  generally  accorded  to  the  clergy.

BARNARD,  John  Gross,  soldier,  b.  in  Shef-
field, Mass.,  19  May,  1815 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  14
May,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in
1838,  standing  second  in  a  class  of  forty-three
members,  was  ordered  to  duty  at  Newport,  R.  I.,  as
brevet  second-lieutenant  of  the  corps  of  engineers,
and  was  soon  sent  to  the  gulf  coast,  where,  as  as-
sistant and  principal  engineer,  he  was  engaged  on
the  fortifications  of  Pensacola  and  New  Orleans.
He  was  also  employed  on  various  harbor  improve-
ments, and  had  reached  the  grade  of  captain  of
engineers  when  the  war  with  Mexico  called  him  to
active  service.  He  superintended  the  construction
of  the  defences  of  Tampico,  and  surveyed  the  bat-
tle-fields about  the  city  of  Mexico.  For  these
services  he  was  bre vetted  major  30  May,  1848.  Two
years  afterward  he  was  appointed  by  the  president
chief  of  a  scientific  commission  to  survey  the  isth-
rnus  of  Tehuantepec,  with  a  view  to  the  construc-
tion of  a  railroad  from  ocean  to  ocean.  His  re-
port of  this  commission,  edited  by  J.  T.  Williams,
was  the  first  full  topographical  account  of  the
isthmus.  In  1852  he  was  engaged  in  surveying
the  mouths  of  the  Mississippi  river  with  a  view  to


their  permanent  improvement.  He  was  superin-
tendent of  the  U.  S.  military  academy  from  1855
to  1856,  and  was  then  placed  in  charge  of  the  forti-
fications of  New  York  harbor.  He  was  promoted
major  of  engineers  13  Dec,  1858,  The  foregoing
list  of  his  services  before  the  civil  war  includes
only  the  more  prominent ;  he  was  constantly  de-
tailed on  minor  works  of  importance — too  many  for
enumeration  here.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  Gen.
Barnard  served  as  chief  engineer  of  the  department
of  Washington  from  April  to  July,  1861,  and  then
as  chief  engineer  to  Gen.  McDowell  in  the  first  Bull
Run  campaign.  Next,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  he  acted  as  chief  engineer  to  the  Army  of
the  Potomac  in  the  Virginia  peninsular  campaign
of  1862.  When  the  confederate  army  advanced
into  eastern  Virginia,  he  was  appointed  chief
engineer  of  the  defences  of  Washington,  and
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers  31
March,  1863.  In  January,  1864,  he  was  appointed
chief  engineer,  and  was  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  (3^rant
in  the  Richmond  campaign.  At  the  end  of  the
war  he  was  made  brevet  major-general,  U.  S.  army,
■ "  for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in  the  field,"
and  was  promoted  colonel  of  the  corps  of  engineers
28  Dec,  1865.  The  president  nominated  him,  on
the  death  of  Gen.  Tot  ten,  to  succeed  the  latter  as
brigadier-general  and  chief  of  engineers  in  April,
1864;  but,  at  Gen.  Barnard's  request,  the  nomina-
tion was  withdrawn  before  it  came  up  for  con-
firmation by  the  senate.  He  was  made  a  member
of  the  joint  board  of  army  and  navy  officers  on
harbor  defences,  torpedoes,  etc.,  and  served  as  sen-
ior member  of  the  board  of  engineers  for  perma-
nent fortifications,  as  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  light-
house board,  and  on  other  important  duties
connected  with  the  engineering  branch  of  the
service,  until  shortly  before  his  death.  Gen.  Bar-
nard was  not  only  a  brave  soldier,  but,  like  his
brother,  the  president  of  Columbia  college,  an  ac-
complished mathematician  and  author.  The  uni-
versity of  Alabama  conferred  the  degree  of  A.  M.
in  1838,  and  in  1864  he  received  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Yale.  He  was  one  of  the  original  corporators
of  the  national  academy  of  sciences  appointed  by
act  of  congress,  3  March,  1863.  His  works  include
"Survey  of  the  Isthmus  of  Tehuantepec"  (1852);
"  Phenomena  of  the  Gyroscope  "  (1858) ;  "  Dangers
and  Defences  of  New  York"  (1859);  "Notes  on
Sea-coast  Defence"  (1861);  "The  Confederate
States  of  America  and  the  Battle  of  Bull  Run"
(1862) ;  "  Reports  of  the  Engineer  and  Artillery
Operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  "  (1863) ;
"Eulogy  on  General  Totten"  (1866);  and  many
scientific  and  military  memoirs  and  reports.

BARNARD,  William  Stebbins,  naturalist,  K
in  Canton,  111.,  28  Feb.,  1849.  He  studied  at  the
Canton  high  school,  university  of  Michigan,  Cor-
nell university  (B.  S.,  1871),  university  of  Leipsic,
and  at  the  university  of  Jena  (Ph.  D.,  1873).  In  187()
he  accompanied  the  scientific  exploring  expedition
to  Brazil  as  assistant  geologist.  On  his  return
from  Europe  he  lectured  in  1874  at  Cornell  uni-
versity, and  during  the  summer  at  the  school  on
Penikese  island.  Since  then  he  has  lectured  on
natural  history  at  Mississippi  agricultural  college
(1874-'5) ;  Illinois  teachers'  summer  school  (1875) ;
Wisconsin  state  normal  school  (1875);  Oskaloosa
college  (1876-'8);  Cornell  university  (1878-'80);
and  Drake  Christian  university  (1886).  During
1880-'5  he  was  entomologist  at  the  U.  S.  depart-
ment of  agriculture,  Washington.  Dr.  Barnard
has  made  investigations  in  his  specialties,  and
papers  by  him  have  appeared  in  scientific  journals.
His  reports  as  entomologist  have  been  published  by


170


BARNES


BARNES


^U/,..e.i4^0'a^^^\^


the  government,  and  he  has  contributed  to  the  pro-
ceedings and  transactions  of  the  scientific  societies
of  which  he  is  a  member.  He  has  made  inven-
tions of  harvesters,  both  for  corn  and  cotton,  and
also  of  means  and  appliances  for  the  destruction  of
injurious  insects.  Pie  also  devised  the  Harvard
book-rack,  improved  paper-file  holders,  and  similar
articles.  Dr.  Barnard  has  made  several  hundred
plates  and  figures,  some  on  stone,  for  the  illustra-
tion of  his  papers.

BARNES,  Albert,  theologian,  b.  in  Rome,  N.
Y.,  1  Dec,  1798;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  24  Dec,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Hamilton  college  in  1820,
studied  theology  at  Princeton  seminary,  was  li-
censed to  preach  in  1823,  and  became  pastor  of  the
first  Presbyterian  church  in  Philadelphia  in  1830,
where  he  remained  until  1867,  when  poor  health

and  partial  blind-
ness caused  him
to  resign.  His
annotations  on
various  parts  of
the  Scriptures,
originally  pre-
pared as  lectures
to  his  congrega-
tion, were  pub-
lished and  at-
tained a  wide  cir-
culation, being
adapted  for  the
use  of  Sunday-
schools.  He  was
tried  for  heresy
on  account  of
certain  passages
in  his  commen-
tary on  the  Epis-
tle to  the  Ro-
mans, and  was  acquitted ;  but  was  advised  to  alter
the  phraseology  of  his  notes,  which  was  accordingly
done.  He  was  a  leader  of  the  new-school  Presby-
terians, when,  soon  after  his  trial,  a  definitive  rup-
ture occurred  in  the  denomination.  Of  Barnes's
"  Notes  "  more  than  1,000,000  volumes  were  sold
before  the  last  revised  edition,  in  six  volumes,  was
issued  (New  York,  1872).  His  other  writings  were
"Scriptural  Views  of  Slavery"  (Philaderphia,
184G) ;  "  The  Way  of  Salvation  "  (1863) ;  "  Manual
of  Prayers";  "The  Atonement";  "Claims  of
Episcopacy  " ;  "  Church  Manual " ;  "  Practical  Ser-
mons for  Vacant  Congregations  and  Families " ;
"  Closet  Companion  "  (New  York,  1854) ;  "  How
shall  Man  be  Just  with  Godf"  (1855);  "The
Church  and  Slavery"  (1856);  "Miscellaneous  Es-
says and  Reviews  "  (1855) ;  "  Way  of  Salvation  H-
lustrated"  (1856);  "Inquiries  and  Suggestions  in
regard  to  the  Foundation  of  Faith  in  the  Word  of
God  " ;  "  Life  at  Three  Score  "  (1858) ;  "  The  Atone-
ment " ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Evidences  of  Christian-
ity in  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (1868) ;  and  "  Pray-
ers for  Family  Worship."  The  "  Defence  "  that  he
made  at  his  trial  on  charges  of  heresy  has  also  been
published  (New  York),  and  a  report  of  the  trial
(Philadelphia).  He  published  besides  several  vol-
umes of  sermons  and  a  series  of  question -books  for
Sunday-schools.  A  collection  of  his  "  Theological
Works  "  was  published  in  New  York  in  1875.

BARNES,  Daniel  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Ca-
naan, N.  Y.,  25  April,  1785 ;  d.  near  Troy,  N.  Y.,
27  Oct.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  with
high  honors  in  1809.  After  devoting  some  time  to
the  study  of  Hebrew  he  was  called  to  take  charge
of  the  academy  in  Poughkeepsie,  and  during  the
same  year  united  with the  Baptist  church. In


1813  he  was  licensed  to  preach,  and  in  the  following
year  became  principal  of  an  institution  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  which  was  expected  to  become  a  col-
lege. His  health  failed,  and  he  returned  to  Schenec-
tady and  took  charge  of  the  classical  school  con-
nected with  Union  college,  where  he  remained  for
more  than  three  years.  Among  his  pupils  were
President  Francis  Wayland,  Bishop  Alonzo  Pot-
ter, and  Dr.  Erskine  Mason.  For  a  time  he  was
professor  of  languages  in  the  Baptist  theological
seminary,  New  York,  and  then  he  opened  an  Eng-
lish and  classical  school  in  that  city,  with  which  he
was  eminently  successful.  In  1824  he  was  ap-
pointed associate  principal  of  the  New  York  high
school  for  boys.  He  was  chosen  president  of
Waterville  college,  Me.,  and  later  (in  1827)  of  Co-
lumbian college,  Washington,  D.  C,  both  of  which
he  declined.  In  addition  to  his  attainments  as  a
classical  scholar  and  philologist,  he  became  eminent
as  a  conchologist,  as  is  shown  by  his  papers  in  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts."  Of  these,
the  most  important  are  "  Geological  Section  of  the
Canaan  Mountain,"  "Memoir  on  the  Genera  Unio
and  Alasmodonta,"  "Five  Species  of  Chiton,"
"Memoir  on  Batrachian  Animals  and  Doubtful
Reptiles,"  "On  Magnetic  Polarity,"  and  "Recla-
mation of  Unios."  He  also  assisted  Dr.  Webster
in  the  preparation  of  his  dictionary.  His  death
was  the  result  of  an  accident.

BARNES,  Demas,  merchant,  b.  in  Canandaigua,
N.  Y.,  4  April,  1827;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1  May,
1888.  His  education  was  acquired  at  the  public
schools  until  he  was  fifteen,  when  he  became  a  clerk
in  a  country  store,  and  subsequently  began  busi-
ness for  himself.  In  1849  he  removed  to  New
York  city,  where  he  followed  the  wholesale  drug
business,  in  which  he  made  a  large  fortune.  Mr.
Barnes  crossed  the  United  States  in  a  wagon,  ex-
amining the  mineral  resources  of  Colorado,  Nevada,
and  California,  and  described  his  experiences  in  a
series  of  letters  to  the  newspapers.  Later  he  was
an  active  advocate  of  the  building  of  the  Union
Pacific  Railroad.  In  1866  he  was  elected  as  a
democrat  to  congress,  and  served  from  4  March,
1867,  till  3  March.  1869.  During  his  career  in
Washington  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee
on  banking  and  currency,  and  education  and  labor,
and  secured  legislation  for  the  construction  of  the
Brooklyn  bridge,  the  New  York  post-office,  and
similar  important  works.  In  1870  he  retired  from
mercantile  business.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Brooklyn  Board  of  Education,  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Brooklyn  bridge,  member  of  the  art  associa-
tion, and  director  in  various  institutions.  He  es-
tablished and  edited  the  Brooklyn  "Argus,"  a  jour-
nal devoted  to  the  interests  of  municipal  reform.
Besides  numerous  contributions  to  the  daily  press,
he  published  "From  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific"
(New  York,  1865).

BARNES,  James,  soldier,  b.  about  1809 ;  d.  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1869.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  West  Point  in  1829,  standing  fifth  in  his
class.  Among  his  classmates  were  Robert  E.  Lee,
Joseph  E.  Johnston,  0.  McKnight  Mitchell,  Thomas
Swords,  and  a  dozen  others  distinguished  in  after-
life. He  remained  in  the  army  seven  years,  ad-
vancing to  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant  of  the
4th  artillery,  when  he  resigned  and  became  a
railroad  engineer  and  superintendent  on  the  West-
ern railroad  of  Massachusetts  from  1836  to  1848,
and  chief  engineer  of  the  Seaboard  and  Roanoke
railroad  from  1848  to  1852.  He  also  constructed,
either  wholly  or  in  part,  the  Rome  and  Watertown,
the  Sackett's  Harbor  and  Ellisburg,  the  Buffalo,
Corning,  and  New  York,  the  Terre  Haute,  Alton,


BARNES


BARNEY


171


and  St.  Louis,  and  the  Potsdam  and  Watertown
railroads,  between  1848  and  1857.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  colonel  of  the  18th  Massachusetts  vol-
unteers from  26  July,  1861,  to  29  Nov..  1862,  par-
ticipating in  most  of  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  during  that  period.  He  was  promoted  to
be  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  29  Nov.,  1862,
and  was  at  Fredericksburg,  ChancellorsAdlle,  the
skirmishes  of  Aldie  and  Upperville,  and  the  battle
of  Gettysburg,  where  he  commanded  a  division
and  was  severely  wounded.  Subsequently  he  was
on  court-martial  duty  or  in  command  of  posts  un-
til the  close  of  the  war,  and  was  brevetted  major-
general  of  volunteers  13  March,  1865.  He  was
mustered  out  of  the  service  15  Jan.,  1866.  His
health  was  permanently  impaired  by  wounds  and
exposure,  and,  though  he  interested  himself  some-
what in  railroad  affairs,  he  was  never  able  to  en-
gage regularly  in  any  business.

BARNES,  Joseph  K.,  surgeon-general  U.  S.  A.,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  21  July,  1817 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  5  April,  1883.  After  preliminary  school-
ing at  Dr.  Cogswell's  "  Round  Hill "  school  at
Northampton,  Mass.,  he  entered  the  academical
department  at  Harvard,  but  was  obliged,  on  ac-
count of  his  health,  to  leave  college.  He  began
his  medical  studies  under  Surgeon-General  Harris,

U.  S.  N.,  and  was
graduated  in  the
medical  depart-
ment of  the  Uni-
versity of  Penn-
sylvania in  1838,
practising  for
two  years  in  his
native  city.  In
1840  he  was  ap-
pointed an  as-
sistant surgeon
in  the  army,  and
assigned  to  duty
at  West  Point.
At  the  close  of
the  year  he  was
transferred  to
y  //' /A  Florida, where

j^^'. *^' /y^^^tyi^v^L-C^O for  two  years  he
^  was with Gen.

Harney's  expedi-
tion against  the  Seminoles.  Thence,  in  1842,  he
went  to  Fort  Jessup,  La.,  where  he  served  four
years.  When  the  Mexican  war  began,  Surgeon
Barnes  was  appointed  chief  medical  officer  of  the
cavalry  brigade,  and  he  was  in  active  service
throughout  the  war.  He  was  assigned  to  duty
again  at  West  Point  in  1854,  and  remained  there
for  several  years.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  in  Oregon,  and  was  among  the  first
summoned  to  Washington.  In  1861  he  was  as-
signed to  duty  in  the  office  of  the  surgeon-general,
where  his  experience  in  field  and  hospital  service
was  of  great  value.  Two  years  later  he  was  ap-
pointed to  a  medical  inspectorship,  with  the  rank
of  colonel,  and  in  September,  1863,  he  was  pro-
moted at  the  request  of  the  secretary  of  war  to  fill
a  vacancy  in  the  surgeon-general's  department,
with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  In  1865  he
was  brevetted  major-general.  For  the  position  of
chief  medical  offi  -or  of  the  army  he  had  been  fitted
by  twenty  years  of  experience  vinder  all  the  condi-
tions afforded  by  our  military  service.  Under  his
care  the  medical  department,  then  organized  on  a
gigantic  scale,  attained  an  admirable  degree  of
efficiency  and  discipline.  It  was  at  his  suggestion
and  through  his  influence  that  the  army' medical


museum  and  the  library  of  the  surgeon-general's
office  were  established,  and  the  medical  and  sur-
gical history  of  the  war  was  compiled.  He  was
present  at  the  death-bed  of  Lincoln,  attended  Sec-
retary Seward  when  he  was  wounded  by  the  knife
of  a  confederate  assassin,  and  attended  Mr.  Gar-
field through  his  long  confinement.  He  was  a
trustee  of  Peabody  educational  fund,  a  commis-
sioner for  the  Soldiers'  Home,  and  the  custodian  of
other  important  public  trusts.  The  royal  medical
societies  of  London  and  Paris  and  Moscow  made
him  an  honorary  member,  as  did  also  many  of  the
other  important  European  schools.  He  was  buried
at  Oak-Hill  cemetery,  Georgetown,  D.  C,  with  the
military  honors  befitting  his  rank.  He  was  placed
on  the  retired  list  the  year  before  his  death.

BARNES,  Phinehas,  politician,  b.  in  Orland,
Me.,  11  Jan.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  21  Aug.,
1871.  He  studied  first  at  Phillips  Andover  Acade-
my and  then  at  Bowdoin,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1829.  For  some  time  after  leaving  college  he
was  employed  in  a  book-store,  and  then  he  edited
a  paper  in  Bangor ;  but  these  occupations  not
being  to  his  taste,  he  became,  in  1834,  professor  of
Greek  and  Latin  in  Waterville  (Me.)  College,  where
he  remained  for  five  years.  In  1839  he  took  up
the  study  of  law,  and,  after  his  admission  to  the
bar,  established  himself  in  Portland.  He  was  at
various  times  solicitor  for  the  Grand  Trunk  rail-
road, director  of  the  Portland  savings  bank,  trustee
of  the  Atlantic  and  St.  Lawrence  railroad  sinking
fund,  of  the  Maine  General  Hospital,  of  the  State
Agricultural  College,  and  a  member  of  the  board  of
overseers  of  Bowdoin  College.  For  six  years  he
edited  the  Portland  "  Advertiser,"  and  was  largely
interested  in  the  political  movements  of  the  day.
He  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  whig  party,  and
a  candidate  for  governor  of  the  state  on  the  Bell
and  Everett  (or  Constitutional-Union)  ticket  in
1860. — His  son,  Phineas,  engineer,  b.  in  Portland,
Me.,  10  Jan.,  1842.  He  studied  at  the  Lawrence
Scientific  School,  Cambridge,  Mass.  (1865),  and  at
the  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  Troy,  N.  Y.
(1866).  Mr.  Barnes  has  made  a  specialty  of  the
construction  of  iron  and  steel  works,  and  for  some
time  has  been  associated  with  the  American  Iron
and  Steel  Works  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.  He  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,
to  whose  transactions  he  has  frequently  contributed
papers  of  technical  value.

BARNES,  Thiirlow  Weed,  author,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  28  June,  1853.  He  w^as  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1876;  was  chairman  of  the  Albany
general  committee  in  1886 ;  travelled  in  Europe
in  1882;  and  made  the  tour  round  the  world  in
1884-'5.  He  is  a  grandson  of  Thurlow  Weed,  and
is  the  author  of  the  second  volume  of  the  "  Life
of  Thurlow  Weed  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1884),  and  of
"  Souvenir  of  Albany  Bicentennial "  (Albany,  1886).

BARNEY,  Joshua,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  6  July  1759;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  1
Dec,  1818.  He  left  his  father's  farm  while  yet  a
child  to  go  to  sea,  and  navigated  a  vessel  when
but  sixteen  years  old.  He  was  made  master's  mate
of  the  "  Hornet,"  one  of  the  first  cruisers  fitted  out
by  the  continental  congress,  and  took  part  in
Com.  Hopkins's  descent  upon  New  Providence
and  capture  of  British  stores,  in  February,  1776.
He  was  made  a  lieutenant  for  gallantry  in  the
action  between  the  schooner  "  Wasp "  and  the
British  brig  "  Tender  "  in  Delaware  bay,  and  was
assigned  to  the  sloop  "  Sachem,"  which  captured  a
British  privateer.  While  prize-master  on  board  a
captured  vessel  he  was  taken  prisoner,  but  was
soon  exchanged. In  the  spring  of  1777  he  took


172


BARNEY


BARNUM


part  on  board  the  "  Andrea  Doria "  in  the  defence
of  the  "  Delaware."  He  was  lieutenant  of  the
frigate  "Virginia,"  which,  before  she  got  to  sea,
ran  aground  in  Chesapeake  bay  and  was  captured
by  the  enemy  on  30  March,  1778. After  having

been  again  ex-
changed in  Au-
gust, 1778,  he
joined  a  pri-
vateer which
brought  into
Philadelphia  a
valuable  prize
in  1779.  He
was  again  cap-
tured and  ex-
changed in
1779,  and  after-
ward served  on
board  the  sloop-
of- war  "Sarato-
ga," and,  in  the
capture  of  the
ship  "  Charm-
ing Molly  "with
two  brigs,  he
led  the  board-
ing-party. The
day  after,  when
he  was  in  charge  of  one  of  the  prizes,  the  three
vessels  were  re-taken  by  the  "Intrepid,"  of  74
guns.  He  was  confined  in  Portsmouth  prison
until  May,  1781,  when  he  made  his  escape.  He
was  re-taken,  but  again  escaped,  and  reached  Phila-
delphia in  March,  1782.  He  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  "  Hyder  Ally,"  of  16  guns,  fitted  out
by  the  state  of  Pennsylvania,  for  the  purpose  of
clearing  the  Delaware  of  British  privateers.  On  8
April,  1782,  he  captured  a  British  sloop  of  war,  the
"  General  Monk,"  of  18  guns,  off  Cape  May,  after
a  severe  engagement.  For  this  exploit  Capt.  Bar-
ney was  voted  a  sword  by  the  Pennsylvania  legis-
lature. He  was  made  commander  of  the  captured
ship.  He  sailed  for  France  in  the  "General
Monk,"  in  November,  1782,  with  despatches  for
Dr.  Franklin,  and  returned  with  the  information
that  preliminaries  of  peace  had  been  signed,  and
bringing  a  large  sura  lent  by  the  French  govern-
ment. After  the  war  he  engaged  in  commerce
and  travelled  in  the  west.  In  1793  he  was  cap-
tured by  an  English  brig  and  imprisoned  as  a
pirate.  He  declined  the  command  of  one  of  the
frigates  built  to  resist  the  depredations  of  the  Al-
gerine  corsairs.  In  1794  he  accompanied  Monroe
to  France,  was  the  bearer  of  the  American  flag  to
the  national  convention,  and  entered  the  service
of  the  French  government,  which  gave  him  a
captain's  commission  and  made  him  commander
of  a  squadron.  In  1800  he  resigned  and  re-
turned to  America.  In  the  first  year  of  the  war
of  1812-'15  he  engaged  in  privateering.  On  24
April,  1814,  he  was  commissioned  a  captain  in
the  navy  and  appointed  to  the  command  of  the
flotilla  for  the  defence  of  Chesapeake  bay.  He  was
ordered  to  the  defence  of  Washington  in  Jiily,  and
severely  wounded  and  taken  prisoner  in  the  "battle
of  Bladensburg.  For  his  gallant  conduct  in  the
defence  of  the  capital  he  received  a  sword  from
the  city  of  Washington  and  a  vote  of  thanks  from
the  Georgia  legislature.  The  ball  in  his  thigh  was
never  extracted,  and  the  distress  from  the  wound
obliged  him  to  return  from  a  mission  to  Europe  in
October,  1815.  He  resided  on  his  farm  at  Elk-
ridge  until  1818,  when,  after  a  visit  to  the  west,
he  purchased  a  large  tract  in  Kentucky,  and  was


on  the  way  thither  when  he  was  taken  ill  at  Pitts-
burg and  died.  See  "  Memoirs  of  Commodore
Barney  "  by  Mary  Barney  (Boston,  1832).— His  son,
John,  member  of  congress  from  Baltimore  from'
1825  to  1829,  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  26  Jan.,
1856,  aged  seventy-two  years.  He  left  unfinished
a  record  of  "Personal  Recollections  of  Men  and
Things  "  in  America  and  Europe.

BARNS,  William,  clergyman,  b.  near  Cooks-
town,  county  Tyrone,  Ireland,  about  1795;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25  Nov.,  1865.  He  received  his
early  education  from  excellent  schools  in  his  native
country,  but  before  he  attained  his  majority  he
came  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in  I3alti-
more,  where  for  a  time  he  was  an  ornamental
painter.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  united  with
the  Methodist  church,  and,  believing  it  to  be  his
duty  to  preach,  studied  under  the  Rev.  George
Roszel,  presiding  elder  of  the  Baltimore  district,
and  in  1817  was  licensed  to  preach.  His  ministry
for  the  first  eight  years  was  in  the  bounds  of  the
Baltimore  conference ;  then  he  passed  to  the  Pitts-
burg conference,  whence  he  was  transferred  to  the
Philadelphia  conference,  in  which  he  spent  the  re-
mainder of  his  ministry,  closing  it  in  charge  of  the
church  in  Bristol,  Pa.  He  was  very  successful  in
his  preaching,  and  during  his  various  pastorates
large  accessions  were  made  to  the  churches  under
his  direction.  Among  these  charges  were  several  of
the  largest  in  Philadelphia  and  Harrisburg.

BARNUM,  Henry  A.,  soldier,  b.  in  Jamesville,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Sept.,  1833.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Syracuse,  and  in  1856  became  a  tutor  in
the  Syracuse  institute.  He  then  studied  law  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  12th  New  York  volunteers  in  April,  1861,
was  elected  captain  of  company  I,  and  went  to  the
front  with  his  regiment,  which  was  the  first  under
fire  at  Blackburn's  Ford  in  the  fighting  prelimi-
nary to  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  He  was  promoted
to  major  in  October,  1861,  and,  after  being  for  a
short  time  on  Gen.  Wadsworth's  staff,  rejoined  his.
regiment  and  served  through  the  peninsular  cam-
paign. When  on  Gen.  Butterfield's  staff  at  Mal-
vern Hill,  he  received  a  wound  from  which  he  has
never  fully  recovered,  and  was  left  for  dead  on  the
field.  A  body,  supposed  to  be  his  was  buried,  and
a  funeral  oration  was  delivered  at  his  home.  He
was  taken  to  Libby  prison,  where  he  remained  till
18  July,  1862.  He  was  on  leave  till  the  following
December,  when  he  was  commissioned  colonel,  and
led  his  regiment  at  Gettysburg  and  at  Lookout
Mountain,  where  he  was  wounded  again,  and  where
his  regiment  captured  eleven  battle-flags.  He  was
again  wounded  in  the  Atlanta  campaign,  'com-
manded a  brigade  on  Sherman's  marcli  to  the  sea,
and  was  the  first  officer  to  enter  Savannah.  He
was  brevetted  major-general  on  13  March,  1865.
On  9  Jan.,  1866,  he  resigned,  having  declined  a
colonelcy  in  the  regular  army,  and  became  inspector
of  prisons  in  New  York.  He  was  deputy  tax  com-
missioner from  1869  till  1872,  and  was  for  five
years  harbor-master  of  New  York.  In  1885  he  was
elected  as  a  republican  to  the  state  assembly.

BARNUM,  Pliineas  Taylor,  exhibitor,  b.  in
Bethel,  Conn..  5  July,  1810:  d.  in  Bridgeport,
Conn.,  7  April,  1891*  His  father  was  an  inn-
keeper, who  died  in  1825,  and  from  the  age  of
thirteen  to  eighteen  the  son  was  in  business  in  va-
rious places,  part  of  the  time  in  Brooklyn  and  New
York  city.  Having  accumulated  a  little  money,
he  returned  to  Bethel  and  opened  a  small  store.
Here  he  was  very  successful,  especially  after  tak-
ing the  agency  for  a  year  of  a  lottery  chartei-ed  by
the  state  for  building  the  Groton  Monument,  oppo-


BARNUM


BARNWELL


173


site  New  London.  "When  the  lottery  charter  ex-
pired, he  built  a  larger  store  in  Bethel,  but  through
bad  debts  the  enterprise  proved  a  failure.  After
his  marriage  in  1829  he  established  and  edited  a
weekly  newspaper  entitled  '"  The  Herald  of  Free-
dom," and  for  the  free  expression  of  his  opinions
he  was  imprisoned  sixty  days  for  libel.  In  1884
he  removed  to  New  York,  his  property  having  be-
come much  reduced.  He  soon  afterward  visited
Philadelphia,  and  saw  there  on  exhibition  a  colored
slave  woman  named  Joyce  Heth,  advertised  as  the
nurse  of  George  Washington,  one  hundred  and
sixty-one  years  old.  Her  owner  exhibited  an  an-
cient-looking, time-colored  bill  of  sale,  dated  1727.
Mr.  Barnum  bought  her  for  $1,000,  advertised  her
extensively,  and  his  receipts  soon  reached  $1,500  a
week.  Within  a  year  Joyce  Heth  died,  and  a
post-mortem  examination  proved  that  the  Virginia
planter  had  added  about  eighty  years  to  her  age.
Having  thus  acquired  a  taste  for  the  show  busi-
ness, Mr.  Barnum  travelled  through  the  south  with
small  shows,  which  were  generally  unsuccessful.
In  1841,  although  without  a  dollar  of  his  own,  he
purchased  Scudder's  American  Museum,  named  it
Barnum's  Museum,  and,  by  adding  novel  curiosities
and  advertising  freely,  he  was  able  to  pay  for  it
the  first  year,  and  in  1848  he  had  added  to  it  two
other  extensive  collections,  besides  several  minor
ones.  In  1842  he  first  heard  of  Charles  S.  Stratton,
of  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  then  less  than  two  feet  high
and  weighing  only  sixteen  pounds,  who  soon  be-
came known  to  the  world,  under  Mr.  Barnum's
direction,  as  Gen.  Tom  Thumb,  and  was  exhibited
in  the  United  States  and  Europe  with  great  suc-
cess. In  1849  Mr.  Barnum,  after  long  negotiations,
engaged  Jenny  Lind  to  sing  in  America  for  150
nights  at  $1,000  a  night,  and  a  concert  company  was
formed  to  support  her.  Only  ninety-five  concerts
were  given ;  but  the  gross  receipts  of  the  tour  in  nine
months  of  1850  and  1851  were  $712,161,  upon  which
Mr.  Barnum  made  a  large  profit.  In  1855,  after
being  connected  with  many  enterprises  besides
those  named,  he  retired  to  an  oriental  villa  in
Bridgeport,  which  he  had  built  in  1846,  He  ex-
pended large  sums  in  improving  that  city,  built
up  the  city  of  East  Bridgeport,  made  miles  of
streets,  and  therein  planted  thousands  of  trees.
He  encouraged  manufacturers  to  remove  to  his
new  city,  which  has  since  been  united  with  Bridge-
port. But  in  1856-7,  to  encourage  a  large  manu-
facturing company  to  remove  there,  he  became  so
impressed  with  confidence  in  their  wealth  and  cer-
tain success  that  he  endorsed  their  notes  for  near-
ly $1,000,000.  The  company  went  into  bankruptcy,
wiping  out  Mr.  Barnum's  property ;  but  he  had
settled  a  fortune  upon  his  wife.  He  went  to  Eng-
land again  with  Tom  Thumb,  and  lectured  with
success  in  London  and  other  English  cities,  re-
turning in  1857.  His  earnings  and  his  wife's  as-
sistance enabled  him  to  emerge  from  his  financial
misl'ort Lines,  and  he  once  more  took  charge  of  the
old  museum  on  the  corner  of  Broadway  and  Ann
street,  and  conducted  it  with  success  till  it  was
burned  on  13  July,  1865.  Another  museum  which
he  opened  was  also  burned.  He  then,  in  the  spring
of  1871,  established  a  great  travelling  museum  and
menagerie,  introducing  rare  equestrian  and  athletic
performances,  which,  after  the  addition  of  a  repre-
sentation of  the  ancient  Roman  hippodrome  races,
the  great  elephant  Jumbo,  and  other  novelties,  he
called  "  P.  T.  Barnum's  Greatest  Show  on  Earth."
Mr.  Barnum  has  been  four  times  a  member  of  the
Connecticut  legislature,  and  mayor  of  Bridgeport,
to  which  city  he  presented  a  public  park.  His
other  benefactions  have  been  large  and  numerous.


among  them  a  stone  museum  building  presented  to
Tufts  college  near  Boston,  IMass.,  filled  with  speci-
mens of  natural  history.  He  has  delivered  hundreds
of  lectures  on  temperance  and  the  practical  affairs
of  life.  He  has  published  his  autobiographv  (New
York,  1855;  enlarged  ed.,  Hartford,  1869"^,  with
yearly  appendices),  "  Humbugs  of  the  World  "  (New
York,  1805) :  and  "  Lion  Jack,"  a  story  (1876).

BARNUM,  William  H.,  senator,'b.  in  Boston
Corners,  N.  Y..  17  Sept.,  1818;  d.  in  Lime  Rock,
Conn.,  30  April,  1889.  He  was  educated  at  the
public  schools,  and  was  for  many  years  engaged  in
the  manufacture  of  car-wheels,  and  in  the  produc-
tion of  iron  from  the  ore.  He  was  elected  to  the
state  legislature  in  1852,  was  a  delegate  to  the
union  national  convention  at  Philadelphia  in  1866,
was  sent  to  congress  as  a  democrat  in  1866,  and  re-
tained his  seat  by  successive  re-elections  till  1876,
in  which  year  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S,  senate  to
fill  the  term  of  Orris  S.  Ferry,  deceased,  ending  4
March,  1879.

BARNUM,  Zenas,  capitalist,  b.  near  Wilkes-
barre.  Pa.,  9  Dec,  1810;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  5
April,  1865,  He  was  a  civil  engineer,  but  became
proprietor  of  Barnum's  Hotel  in  Baltimore,  in  the
management  of  which  he  acquired  a  large  fortune.
Later  he  became  president  of  the  Baltimore  central
railroad,  and  devoted  his  entire  energies  to  its  re-
organization, a  task  in  which  he  was  thoroughly
successful.  Mr.  Barnum  was  largely  interested  in
the  development  of  the  telegi'aph,  and  was  the  first
president  of  the  American  Telegraph  Company.
He  was  also  president  of  the  Magnetic  Telegraph
Company  at  the  time  of  his  death.

BARNWELL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1671 ;  d,  about  June,  1724,  in  Beaufort,  S.  C.  In
1712  a  formidable  conspiracy  was  formed  by  the
Tuscarora  Indians  in  North  Carolina  against  the
white  settlers  of  the  colony.  In  the  neighborhood
of  Roanoke  alone  137  whites  were  killed  in  one
night.  Col.  Barnwell  was  sent  by  Gov.  Craven,  of
South  Carolina,  with  a  regiment  of  600  Carolinians
and  several  hundred  friendly  Indians  to  punish
the  offenders.  He  marched  through  an  unbroken
wilderness  without  provision  trains  or  any  regular
source  of  supplies.  The  advance  was  conducted
with  great  expedition  and  skill.  Barnwell's  force
overtook  the  Tuscaroras  and  killed  300  in  the  first
engagement.  The  survivors  were  driven  into  their
fortified  town,  besieged,  and  finally  reduced  to
submission.  Nearly  1,000  of  them  were  killed  or
captured,  and  the  remnant  abandoned  their  heredi-
tary lands  and  joined  the  Five  Nations  of  New  York.
This  was  the  first  crushing  blow  dealt  against  the
Indians  by  the  white  settlers  in  the  Carolinas,  and
Barnwell  is  to  this  day  known  to  his  descendants
as  "Tuscarora  John."  In  1722  he  was  sent  to
England  as  agent  for  the  colony  of  South  Caro-
lina.—His  grandson,  Robert,  b.  in  Beaufort,  S.  C,
in  1762 ;  d.  in  1814  He  volunteered  for  the  revo-
lutionary war  when  sixteen  years  old,  and  was
dangerously  wounded  in  a  fight  at  Port  Royal
shortly  afterward.  He  was  taken  prisoner  and
confined  in  a  prison  ship  in  Cape  Fear  river,  N.  C,
but  with  his  fellow  prisoners  organized  a  revolt,
overpowered  the  guards,  captured  the  ship  and
made  their  escape.  Mr.  Barnwell  was  afterward  a
member  of  the  convention  in  South  Carolina  on
the  adoption  of  the  federal  constitution,  was  a
member  of  congress  from  1791  till  1792.  He  de-
clined reelection,  but  was  a  member  of  the  state
legislature  for  many  years  afterward.  He  was
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives  of  South
Carolina  in  1795,  and  president  of  the  senate  in
1805. — His  son,  Robert  Woodward,  statesman,


174


BARE


BARR^


b.  in  Beaufort,  S,  C,  10  Aug.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Columbia,
S.  C,  25  Nov.,  1882.  After  graduation  at  Harvard
in  1821,  he  studied  law,  and  practised  in  his  native
state.  He  was  a  representative  in  congress  from
1829  till  1833.  In  1835  he  was  elected  president
of  the  South  Carolina  college.  He  resigned,  on
account  of  his  health,  in  1841.  He  declined  re-
election, but  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  in  place
of  F.  H.  Elmore,  deceased,  and  in  this  capacity  he
served  in  1850-'51.  In  December,  1860,  after  the
passage  of  the  ordinance  of  secession  by  South
Carolina,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  commission-
ers to  go  to  Washington  to  treat  with  the  national
government  for  U.  S.  property  within  the  state.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  of  the  seced-
ing states  at  Montgomery,  Ala.,  and  his  was  the
casting  vote  that  made  Jefferson  Davis  president
of  the  southern  confederacy.  He  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  confederate  senate.

BARR,  Amelia  Edith,  author,  b.  in  Ulverton,
Lancashire,  England,  29  March,  1831.  She  was
the  daughter  of  the  Rev.  William  Huddleston,  and
was  educated  in  Glasgow  high  school.  In  1850  she
married  Robert  Barr,  son  of  the  Rev.  John  Barr,
of  the  Scottish  Free  Kirk.  She  came  to  the  United
States  in  1854,  and,  after  a  residence  of  several
years  in  Austin,  Texas,  removed  to  Galveston,
where  in  1867  her  husband  and  three  sons  died  of
yellow  fever.  She  came  to  New  York  in  1869  with
her  three  daughters,  and,  after  teaching  for  two
years,  began  to  write  for  publication,  producing
chiefly  sketches  and  miscellaneous  articles  for  the
magazines  and  newspapers.  Her  first  book  was
"  Romance  and  Reality "  (New  York,  1872) ;
"Young  People  of  Shakespeare's  Time"  (1882);
"  Cluny  McPherson  "  and  "  Scottish  Sketches  "
(1883) ;  "  The  Ilallam  Succession  "  (1884) ;  "  The
Lost  Silver  of  Briffault "  and  "  Jan  Vedder's  Wife  "
(1885) ;  "  A  Daughter  of  Fife,"  "  The  Last  of  the
McAllisters,"  and  "  A  Bow  of  Orange  Ribbon  "
(1886);  and  "Between  two  Loves"  (London,  1886).

BARR  AD  AS,  Isidro  (bar-rah'-das),  Spanish
soldier.  On  27  July,  1829,  he  landed  on  the  coast
of  Tamaulipas  with  3,500  men  and  invaded  that
section  of  Mexico  by  order  of  King  Ferdinand  VII.,
in  revenge  for  the  expulsion  of  Spaniards  by  Prest.
Guerrero.  Barradas  took  Tampico  and  other  places,
where  he  resisted  the  attacks  of  Mexican  troops  un-
til 9  Sept.,  1829,  when,  after  defending  themselves
bravely  for  twelve  hours  against  the  Mexican  army
commanded  by  Generals  Santa  Anna  and  Teran,  the
Spaniards  capitulated.  Barradas  departed  for  the
United  States  and  his  soldiers  were  sent  to  Havana,
This  was  the  end  of  the  Spanish  invasion.

BARRAGfAN,  Miguel  (bar-rah-gan'),  tenth
president  of  Mexico,  b.  in  the  state  of  San  Luis
Potosi  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Mexico,  1  March,  1835.  He
entered  the  army,  and  soon  won  several  promotions.
In  1821  he  was  under  the  command  of  Iturbide,
but  was  opposed  to  his  coronation.  Being  ap-
pointed commander  of  Vera  Cruz  in  1824,  he  held
the  Spaniards  entirely  isolated  in  the  San  Juan  de
Ulua  castle  until  famine  and  epidemics  forced  them
to  surrender.  Political  troubles  soon  compelled
Barragan  to  leave  the  country ;  but  afterward  he
was  recalled  by  Santa  Anna,  and  in  the  absence  of
this  general  he  was  intrusted  with  the  presidency
of  the  republic,  which  he  filled  with  remarkable
abilitv  until  his  death.

BARR  AS,  Charles  M.,  actor,  b.  in  1826;  d.
in  Cos  Cob,  Conn.,  31  March,  1873.  He  made  a
reputation  lay  his  various  impersonations  on  the
stage.  His  delineations  of  the  character  of  the
"  Hypochondriac,"  an  adaptation  from  Moliere,
being  especially  noteworthy. He  was  the  author


of  a  well-known  spectacular  play  called  "  The
Black  Crook,"  from  which  he  derived  a  large  in-
come. His  eccentric  character  and  unconscious
drollery  made  him  popular.

BARRAS,  Count  Louis  de,  French  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Provence,  France ;  d.  about  1800.  He
was  lieutenant-general  of  marine  at  the  time  of  his
retirement  from  active  service  in  1783,  a  grade
corresponding  to  that  of  admiral  in  modern  navies.
He  was  one  of  the  trusted  lieutenants  of  the  Mar-
quis de  Ternay,  who  was  sent  out  in  command  of
the  French  relief  squadron  in  1781,  and  of  the
Count  d'Estaing,  who  succeeded  to  the  command
after  Ternay's  death.  De  Barras  was  chosen  to
represent  the  navy  at  the  conference  between  Wash-
ington and  Rochambeau  at  Wethersfield,  Conn.,
23  May,  1781,  but  was  prevented  from  attending
by  the  appearance  of  the  British  squadron  off  Block
island.  He  participated  in  the  encounters  and  dis-
asters that  befell  the  two  fleets  during  a  terrible
gale  that  followed.  Later  in  the  season  he  was
left  in  command  at  Newport,  and  he  sailed  thence
in  September  to  effect  a  junction  with  De  Grasse
in  the  Chesapeake.  The  French  fleet,  thus  strength-
ened, lay  in  the  mouth  of  the  Chesapeake  during
the  siege  of  Yorktown  by  the  allied  forces  of  Wash-
ington and  Rochambeaii.  But  for  its  presence
there  the  British  fleet  would,  no  doubt,  have  come
to  the  rescue  of  Corn wal lis,  and  the  final  surrender
might  have  been  indefinitely  postponed.  De  Bar-
ras was  afterward  engaged  in  active  operations  in
the  West  Indies,  and  especially  distinguished  him-
self in  1782  by  capturing  the  island  of  Montserrat
from  the  British.

BARRAZA,  Jos6  L.  (bar-rah'-thah),  Mexican
Jesuit,  b,  in  Santiago  Papasquiaro,  Durango,  24
June,  1787;  d,  in  Durango  early  in  October,  1843.
He  was  a  profound  scholar  and  a  brilliant  orator,
and  obtained  a  professorship  of  theology  and  the
rectorship  of  the  seminary  of  Durango.  He  was
also  a  senator  in  the  general  congress  from  1824  till
1826,  and  a  representative  of  his  state  from  1836
till  1842.  His  great  influence  among  the  clergy,
and  also  among  the  leading  men  of  every  political
party,  enabled  him  to  render  many  important  ser-
vices to  his  country.

BARRE,  Antoine  Joseph  Lefevre  de  la  (d61-
la-bar),  naval  officer,  b.  about  1625 ;  d.  4  May,
1688.  Barre's  American  career  began  with  his  ap-
pointment as  governor  of  Guiana  in  1663.  In  1667
he  retook  Cayenne,  the  capital,  from  the  Dutch,
and  the  same  year  he  defeated  the  English  in  the
Antilles  and  compelled  them  to  raise  the  blockade
of  St.  Christopher.  In  1682  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  Canada,  succeeding  Frontenac,  and  led  a
strong  military  expedition  up  the  Ottawa  river,
nominally  to  treat  with  the  resident  tribes,  but
really  intended  to  intimidate  them  and  comi^el
them  to  trade  with  Montreal  rather  than  with  New
York,  His  troops,  however,  succumbed  to  the  ma-
larial effects  of  the  season  (August),  and  he  was
forced  to  land  near  the  point  where  the  Rideau
canal  now  has  its  outlet  and  sue  for  peace.  For
this  failure,  which  was  ascribed  to  his  incompe-
tence, he  was  recalled  to  France.  He  is  believed  to
have  acquired  large  wealth  by  corrupt  means.

BARRE,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,
in  1726 ;  d.  in  London,  20  July,  1802.  He  was
graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  in  1745,  and
Joined  the  army  as  an  ensign  the  following  year.
His  American  experience  began  witli  the  expedi-
tion against  Louisburg  in  1755,  and  he  attracted
the  attention  of  Gen.  Wolfe,  who  promoted  him
major  of  brigade  in  1758  and  adjutant-general  of
the  army  in  1759. He  was  at  Wolfe's  side  when


BARREDA


BARRETT


175


that  officer  fell  on  the  heights  of  Abraham,  and  his
figure  is  conspicuous  in  Benjamin  West's  famous

{)ainting  of  the  scene.  At  this  time  he  was  severe-
y  wounded  in  the  cheek.  He  received  further
promotion  under  Lord  Amherst  in  1760,  carried  to
England  the  news  of  the  capture  of  Montreal,  and
there  remained,  entering  parliament  and  becoming
the  terror  of  all  opponents  through  his  frightful
powers  of  invective.  In  1848  John  Britton  pub-
lished a  volume  to  prove  that  Barre  wrote  the
"  Letters  of  Junius,"  He,  however,  solemnly  de-
nied the  authorship  to  his  friend  Samuel  Bayard.

BAKREDA,  Oabino  (bar-ray '-dah),  Mexican
physician,  b.  in  Puebla  in  February,  1820 ;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico  in  March,  1881.  In  1843  he
became  a  medical  student,  and  won  special  honors
as  such,  and  during  the  war  with  the  United  States
he  entered  the  army  as  a  captain,  fighting  in  the
battles  and  acting  as  surgeon  afterward.  He  was
a  pupil  of  Auguste  Comte  in  Paris,  returned  to
Mexico  in  1851,  and  was  graduated  as  an  M,  D.
In  1854  he  won  in  competition  the  chair  of  medi-
cal philosophy,  as  assistant  professor,  and  then
that  of  natural  history  at  the  same  school.  He
was  elected  a  member  of  the  house  of  representa-
tives in  1801,  and  again  in  1867.  The  national
preparatory  school  being  established  to  unify  the
studies  necessary  to  enter  any  of  the  professional
schools,  Barreda  was  appointed  its  director.  He
also  filled  its  chair  of  natural  history,  and  that
of  logic.  This  was  the  first  time  that  positivist
philosophy  was  taught  in  Mexico.  The  govern-
ment also  appointed  him  professor  of  general  pa-
thology when  this  branch  was  for  the  first  time
taught  in  the  national  school  of  medicine.  For
ten  years  he  devoted  himself  to  introducing  his
new  philosophical  teachings  in  opposition  to  the
old  doctrines,  and  he  was  for  some  time  president
of  the  "  Sociedad  Metodofila."  In  1878  he  repre-
sented his  government  at  the  postal  union  confer-
ence in  France,  was  also  appointed  minister  to
Germany.  Most  of  his  writings  are  to  be  found  in
the  *'  Gaceta  de  Medicina  de  Mexico,"  to  whose  edi-
torial staff  he  belonged ;  in  the  "  Periodico  de  la
Sociedad  Humboldt " :  in  the  "  Periodico  de  la  So-
ciedad Metodofila  Gabino  Barreda,"  and  in  other
scientific  journals.  He  separately  published  his
"  Carta  al  Sr.  D.  Mariano  Riva  Palacio,"  in  which
are  treated  all  subjects  relating  to  public  instruc-
tion, and  a  method  for  scientific  education.

BARRETT,  Benjamin  Fisk,  clergyman,  b.  in
Dresden,  Me.,  24  Jiine,  1808.  He  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1832,  and  at  the  Cambridge  Unita-
rian seminary  in  1838.  Soon  afterward  he  adopted
the  Swedenborgian  doctrines.  From  1840  to  1848
he  officiated  as  pastor  of  the  new  church  society
in  New  York,  and  then  in  Cincinnati  until  1850,
when  he  retired  from  the  pulpit,  owing  to  poor
health.  He  pursued  a  mechanical  trade  in  Chicago,
and  in  four  years  regained  his  health  and  acquired
a  property.  He  then  took  charge  of  the  first  Swe-
denborgian church  in  Philadelphia,  at  the  same  time
editing  the  "New  Church  Monthly."  He  is  the
author  of  "  A  Life  of  Swedenborg  "  ;  ".Lectures  on
the  Doctrines  of  tlie  New  Jerusalem  Church  "  (New
York,  1842) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  New  Dispensation  " ;
"Letters  on  the  Divine  Trinity";  "The  Golden
Reed"  (New  York,  1855) ;  "Catholicity  of  the  New
Church";  "The  Visible  Church";  "Beauty  for
Ashes"  (1856);  " Episcopalianism "  (1871);  "On
Future  Life"  (Philadelphia.  1872);  "The  Golden
City"  ;  "  The  New  Church,  its  Nature  and  Where-
about"; "Swedenborg  and  Channing";  "A  New
View  of  Hell "  (1872) ;  "  Report  of  the  Inquiry  into
the  Allegations  against B. F. Barrett" (1867);


about  fifty  pamphlets  and  smaller  treatises,  and
numerous  magazine  articles.  His  collected  works
were  issued  in  Philadelphia  (1875).  He  has  edited
the  •'  Swedenborg  Library,"  in  twelve  volumes,  con-
taining the  substance  of  Swedenborg's  teachings  in
extracts  (Pliiladclphia,  1876,  et  seq.).

BARRETT,  Edward,  naval  ofiicer,b.in  Louisi-
ana in  1828;  d.  in  March,  1880.  When  thirteen
years  old  he  joined  the  sloop  "  Preble  "  as  a  mid-
shipman, and  served  on  foreign  stations  until  Feb-
ruary, 1846,  when  he  was  ordered  to  the  naval
academy  at  Annapolis  (established  in  1845),  and
was  graduated  in  August  of  the  same  year,  in  time
to  participate  in  the  war  with  Mexico  as  a  passed
midshipman.  He  was  present  at  the  operations
about  Vera  Cruz,  took  part  in  the  expedition  to
Laguna,  and  was  sent  as  master  with  a  valuable
prize  to  New  Orleans.  In  1848  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  sloop  "  Jamestown  "  and  sent  to
the  African  coast.  In  1854  he  acted  as  flag  lieu-
tenant to  Com.  Breeze,  was  promoted  lieutenant
14  Sept.,  1855,  and  after  further  service  on  the
African  coast  and  in  the  East  Indies  was  appointed
instructor  of  gunnery.  In  1862  he  was  tried  by
court-martial  for  disloyalty,  but  was  fully  exon-
erated alike  by  the  court  and  the  reviewing  au-
thority. In  July,  1862,  he  was  promoted  lieuten-
ant-commander, and  in  1863-'4  commanded  the
gun-boat  "  Massasoit."  In  1864-'5  he  commanded
the  monitor  "  Catskill,"  and  captured  the  "  Deer,"
the  only  blockade-runner  captured  by  a  monitor.
He  was  in  the  first  expedition  that  ascended  the
Yang-tse-Kiang  river  as  far  as  Hangkow,  and  took
the  first  man-of-war  through  the  Eads  jetties  at
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.

BARRETT,  Oeorgre  Hooker,  comedian,  b.  in
Exeter,  England,  9  June,  1794;  d.  in  New  York
city,  5  Sept.,  1860.  His  father,  Giles  Leonard  Bar-
rett, first  appeared  on  the  American  stage  at  the
Haymarket,  Boston,  28  Dec,  1796,  as  "  Ranger."
His  mother  was  an  actress.  In  1806  he  played
"  Young  Nerval "  in  the  Park  theatre.  New  York.
He  became  manager  in  1826,  jointly  with  E.  Gil-
fert,  of  the  Bowery  theatre.  New  York.  From
1830  to  1833  he  was  manager  of  the  Tremont  thea-
tre in  Boston,  and  in  1837  performed  at  the  Drury
Lane  theatre  in  London.  In  1847  he  opened  the
Broadway  theatre.  New  York,  which  had  then  re-
cently been  built,  and  for  a  time  was  stage  mana-
ger, during  1852-3,  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  In  1855
he  retired  from  the  stage.  His  forte  was  in  genteel
comedy,  though  he  succeeded  in  low  comedy  and
farce.  By  his  elegance  and  stateliness  he  became
known  as  "  Gentleman  George."  His  wife,  an  act-
ress, died  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Dec,  1853.

BARRETT,  Lawrence,  actor,  b.  in  Paterson,
N.  J.,  4  April,  1838;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20
March,  1891.  His  first  appearance  was  in  1853.
After  a  year's  experience  in  playing  minor  parts,
he  spent  a  short  season  in  Pittsburg.  He  then
acted  in  St.  Louis,  Chicago,  and  elsewhere,  until
December,  1856,  when  he  was  engaged  at  the  Cham-
bers Street  theatre.  New  York,  where  he  appeared
as  Sir  Thomas  Clifford  in  "  The  Hunchback."  He
was  engaged  by  Mr.  Burton  early  in  1857,  and
acted  under  his  management  for  nearly  two  years,
supporting  Charlotte  Cushman,  Edwin  Booth,  and
other  prominent  actors.  In  1858  he  was  engaged
for  leading  parts  at  the  Boston  museum,  and  later
at  the  Howard  athenreum  of  that  city,  where  he
played  with  Miss  Cushman,  Barry  Sullivan,  and  E.
L.  Davenport.  On  the  outbreak  "of  the  civil  war  in
1861,  Mr.  Barrett  accepted  a  captaincy  in  the  28th
Massachusetts  infantrv  and  served  with  distinction.
Afterward  he  acted  at  Philadelphia,  at  Washing-


176


BARRIGER


BARRIOS


ton,  and  then  at  the  Winter  Garden  in  New  York,
where  he  was  engaged  by  Mr.  Booth  to  play  Othello
to  his  lago.  The  elder  Wallack  considered  his  im-
personation of  this  character  the  most  striking  per-
formance he  had  seen  in  twenty  years.  Mr.  Bar-
rett then  bec&me  associated  in  the  management  of
the  Varieties  theatre  in  New  Orleans,  playing  lead-
ing parts,  and  for
the  first  time  act-
ing as  Richelieu,
Hamlet,  and  Shy-
lock.  About  this
time  he  met  Ed-
win Forrest,  and
was  led  to  make
a  careful  study  of
the  history  and
literature  of  the
stage,  a  circum-
stance which  af-
terward was  of
great  value  to
him.  In  1864  he
purchased  "Rose-
dale"  from  Les-
ter Wallack,  and,
after  acting  the
leading  character
in  it  at  New  Or-
leans, made  his
first  tour  as  a
star  actor.  In  1867  he  played  with  great  success
at  Maguire's  opera-house  in  San  Francisco,  where
he  remained  as  manager  of  the  California  theatre
until  1870,  when  he  again  appeared  in  New  York.
Late  in  1870  he  played  with  Mr.  Booth  in  opposite
characters  at  Booth's  theatre.  In  1871-'2  he  man-
aged the  New  Varieties  theatre  in  New  Orleans,
and  in  December,  1872.  he  played  Cassius  to  Booth's
Brutus  in  New  York.  During  1873-'4  he  made
successful  tours  through  the  United  States,  vis-
iting the  leading  cities.  The  season  of  1875  be-
gan with  a  magnificent  revival  of  "Julius  Ca3sar"
at  Booth's  theatre,  where  he  again  appeared  as  Cas-
sius and  later  as  King  Lear.  He  took  the  part  of
Daniel  Druce,  and  was  the  first  actor  to  appear  in
Mr.  Gilbert's  play  of  that  name  in  the  United
States.  Later  he  produced  "  Yorick's  Love  "  at  the
Park  theatre  in  New  York.  His  most  recent  suc-
cess has  been  in  Boker's  "Franeesca  di  Rimini,"
which  he  brought  out  in  1882  at  the  Chestnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia.  He  acted  the  Hunch-
back, Lanciotto,  with  great  intelligence  and  rare
power.  In  the  autumn  of  1883  this  play  ran  for
nine  weeks  at  the  Star  theatre.  New  York,  where  it
was  presented  on  a  very  complete  scale  and  at-
tracted much  enthusiasm.  In  1867,  1881,  1883,
and  1884,  Mr.  Barrett  visited  England,  and  during
his  last  visit  appeared  in  many  of  his  prominent
roles,  which  were  favorably  received.  He  is  the
author  of  a  life  of  Edwin  Forrest  (Boston,  1881).

BARRIGER,  John  Walker,  soldier,  b.  in  Shel-
by CO.,  Ky.,  9  July,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1856,  and  was  commissioned  second  lieu-
tenant of  artillery.  He  participated  in  the  Manas-
sas campaign  in  1861,  receiving  the  brevet  of  cap-
tain for  gallantry  at  Bull  Run,  and  subsequently
served  as  chief  of  commissariat  for  Indiana  and
for  West  Virginia,  and  from  17  Nov.,  1863,  to  15
Aug.,  1865,  as  chief  commissary  of  the  Army  of  the
Ohio,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  tlie
staff  of  the  volunteer  army.  On  13  March.  1865,
he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  faithful  and
meritorious  services.  From  1867  to  1873  he  served
as  chief  ot  commissariat  in  the  department  of  the


Platte,  and  subsequently  as  assistant  commissary-
general  in  Washington,  with  the  rank  of  major.
He  is  the  author  of  "Legislative  History  of  the
Subsistence  Department  of  the  United  States  Army
from  June  16,  1875,  to  August  15,  1876."

BARRINGER,  Daniel  Moreau,  diplomatist,
b.  in  Cabarras  co.,  N.  C,  in  1807 ;  d.  at  White  Sul-
phur Springs,  Va.,  1  Sept.,  1873.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  university  of  North  Carolina  in  1826,
and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829.  Tlie  same  year
he  was  elected  to  the  state  house  of  commons,  and
returned  for  several  successive  terms.  He  was  a
member  of  the  state  constitutional  convention  in
1835,  and  elected  for  three  successive  terms  to  con-
gress, 1843-'9.  He  received  the  appointment  of
minister  to  Spain  from  President  Taylor  in  1849.
and  served  until  4  Sept.,  1853,  when 'he  returned
home  and  was  reelected  to  the  state  legislature.
In  1855  he  declined  renomination  and  retired  to
private  life  until  chosen  to  represent  his  state  at
the  peace  congress  in  Washington  (1861).  After
the  war  he  was  sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  national
union  convention  in  Philadelphia.  August,  1866.

BARRIONUEVO,  Francisco  de  (bah-rio-noo-
ay'-vo),  Spanish  officer,  b,  in  Spain,  lived  in  the
16th  century.  He  went  to  Santo  Domingo  when
the  population  of  that  island  were  in  rebellion
in  1532.  With  only  thirty  Spaniards  and  the  same
number  of  faithful  Indians,  he  restored  order  and
entirely  subdued  the  rebels  in  a  few  days.

BARRIOS,  Gerardo  (bah'-re-os),  president  of
Salvador,  b.  in  that  country ;  executed  in  August,
1865.  His  administration  was  noted  for  its  liberal
and  progressive  character.  In  1859  President  Bar-
rios reestablished  the  government  in  the  city  of
San  Salvador,  which  had  been  abandoned  for  some
time  on  account  of  earthquakes ;  and  between  that
time  and  1861  the  new  civil,  criminal,  and  penai
codes  were  prepared  and  promulgated.  Education,
commerce,  and  public  works  had  the  special  atten-
tion of  Barrios,  and  the  foreign  debt  was  paid.  A
war  with  Guatemala  resulted  in  the  fall  of  Bar-
rios, who  was  replaced  by  Duenas.  While  trying
to  effect  a  revolution,  in  order  to  become  president
again,  he  was  captured  in  Nicaragua,  sent  to  Salva-
dor, tried  by  court-martial,  and  shot.

BARRIOS,  Jnsto  Rufino  Central  American
statesman,  b.  in  San  Lorenzo,  department  of  San
Marcos,  Guate-
mala, 17  July,
1835;  d.inChal-
chuapa,  2  April,
1885.  He  was
educated  for
the  bar,  being
graduated  in
1862;  but  dur-
ing the  revolu-
tionary move-
ments of  1867  he
gathered  a  band
of  mountaineers
at  Los  Altos,
near  Quezajte-
nango.  Begin-
ning in  a  small
way,  taking  one
town  and  an-
other, though
defeated  several
times  and  driv-
en across the

frontier  into  Mexico  or  forced  to  hide  in  his  na-
tive mountains,  he  always  came  back  with  re-
doubled energy. In  May,  1871,  Gen.  Miguel  Gar-


BARRIOS


BARRIOS


177


cia  Granados  joined  him  against  the  government
of  Vicente  Cerna,  and  on  8  July  tliey  issued  the
"  Plan  de  Patzicia."  After  the  encounters  in  Ta-
cana,  Retalhulen,  Chiche,  Tierra  Blanca,  Cochin,
and  San  Lucas,  in  which  he  showed  great  cour-
age and  military  ability.  Barrios  entered  the  capi-
tal and  put  an  end  to  the  regime  established  by
Carrera  in  1840,  called  "  the  thirty  years."  Gen.
Garcia  Granados  filled  the  presidential  office,  and
Barrios  remained  as  chief  of  the  army  at  Los
Altos.  But  a  revolution  against  the  new  gov-
ernment soon  broke  out,  and  Barrios  defeated
the  insurgents  in  the  battles  of  Cerro  Gordo  and
Santa  Rosa,  On  11  Dec,  1872,  began  another
revolution  headed  by  Gen.  Jose  Maria  Medina,
president  of  Honduras,  who  intended  to  reinstate
the  reactionary  party.  The  governments  of  Sal-
vador and  Guatemala  effected  a  union,  and  Gen.
Garcia  Granados  left  the  capital,  taking  command
of  the  army.  Barrios  was  left  in  charge  of  the
presidency,  and  at  once  decreed  the  freedom  of  the
press  (8  June)  and  the  suppression  of  religious  or-
ders, after  which  Garcia  Granados  resumed  his
functions  as  president  and  Barrios  continued  his
as  chief  of  the  army.  A  new  revolution  broke  out
in  the  east  and  was  quelled  by  Barrios,  who  cap-
tured Melgar,  Fuente,  and  other  leading  insur-
gents. On  8  May  of  that  year  the  constituent  as-
sembly, instituted  by  Garcia  Granados,  proclaimed
that  Barrios  was  elected  president  for  the  first
constitutional  term.  He  entered  office,  4  June,
1873,  and  a  month  later  there  was  another  insur-
rection headed  by  Enrique  Palacios,  accompanied
by  other  revolutionary  movements  in  the  moun-
tain region ;  but  in  four  weeks  peace  was  reestab-
lished, which  lasted  till  1876,  when  President  Gon-
zalez, of  Salvador,  and  President  Leiva,  of  Hon-
duras, cooperated  with  the  reactionary  party  of
Guatemala  against  Barrios.  Gonzalez  was  de-
posed, and  his  successor,  Andres  Valle,  in  a  con-
ference held  at  Chingo,  agreed  to  leave  the  ques-
tions at  issue  to  be  arranged  by  Dr.  Marco  Aurelio
Soto  with  the  aid  of  Salvador  and  Guatemala.
Owing  to  the  influence  of  Gonzalez  the  agreement
was  not  fulfilled.  Barrios  went  in  person  to  at-
tack Salvador,  and  after  the  battles  of  Platanar,
Chalchuapa,  Apanica,  and  Pasaquina,  the  Salva-
dorians,  having  resisted  for  two  months  without
success,  capitulated.  In  1876  the  national  assem-
bly approved  the  acts  of  Barrios.  An  attempt  was
made  to  assassinate  him  in  1877  while  he  was  visit-
ing at  San  Pedro  Jacopilas,  near  the  Mexican  fron-
tier. The  conspirators  called  themselves  the  "  so-
ciety of  death,"  and  their  purpose  was  to  kill  Bar-
rios and  several  of  his  ministers,  and  even  women
and  children ;  but  the  whole  plot  was  discovered,
1  Nov.,  1877,  and  the  chief  instigators  were  shot.
Another  assembly  met  in  Guatemala  in  1879  and
decreed  (11  Dec.)  the  first  constitution  of  the  re-
public, a  very  liberal  one,  which  was  put  in  opera-
tion 1  March,  1880,  and  Gen.  Barrios  was  reelected
for  six  years ;  but  he  declined,  saying  that  power
should  not  be  too  long  in  the  hands  of  one  man,
that  Guatemala  needed  new  rulers  not  so  tired  as
he  was  of  public  life  and  who  could  completely  es-
tablish republican  principles.  The  assembly,  how-
ever, would  not  accept  his  refusal,  and  he  was  in-
augurated. The  boundary  question  with  Mexico
was  again  brought  forward,  and  Barrios  proposed
the  intervention  of  the  United  States  in  1881.  On
seeing  that  Gonzalez,  president  of  Mexico,  insisted
upon  agitating  the  subject,  Mr.  Romero,  Mexican
minister  at  Washington,  agreed  to  that  proposal,
leaving  the  final  determination  of  limits  between
Mexico  and  Guatemala  to  the  president  of  the
VOL. I. — 12


United  States.  The  negotiations  were  far  ad-
vanced, conducted  by  Secretary  Prelinghuysen  and
Ministers  Romero  and  Montiifar,  when  Gen.  Bar-
rios came  specially  authorized  by  the  assembly  of
Guatemala  to  settle  the  question  at  issue;  but
some  misunderstanding,  chiefly  between  Barrios
and  Montufar,  brought  the  negotiations  to  an  end
here,  and  the  question  was  arranged  in  accordance
with  the  original  conditions,  by  which  Guatemala
ceded  the  Chiapas  and  Soconusco  districts  to  Mexi-
co. After  travelling  through  the  United  States
and  in  Europe,  Barrios  returned  to  Guatemala,  and
on  13  April,  1884,  there  was  another  attempt  to
kill  him,  a  bomb  being  exploded  near  him.  On  28
Feb.,  1885,  with  the  assent  of  the  national  assem-
bly, his  ministers,  President  Zaldivar,  of  Salvador,
and  President  Bogran,  of  Honduras,  Gen.  Barrios
published  his  proclamation  intended  to  effect  the
union  of  all  the  Central  American  nations  in  one
republic,  and  on  6  March  issued  a  decree  with  di-
rections as  to  the  way  of  effecting  said  union.  The
people  and  the  army 'congratulated  Gen.  Barrios
and  offered  him  their  support,  and  the  proclama-
tion of  the  union  produced  universal  joy.  One
week  afterward  confusion  began,  and  troops  were
sent  against  Salvador ;  Barrios  himself  went  to  the
front,  but  for  several  days  no  hostilities  occurred.
Salvador  and  Honduras  had  agreed  to  the  union
months  before,  while  Costa  Rica  and  Nicaragua
held  back  from  dread  of  Barrios.  But  Zaldivar,
president  of  Salvador,  now  receded  from  his  prom-
ises and  revealed  himself  as  the  foe  of  Barrios  and
the  union.  Barrios  did  not  begin  the  war  until
Zaldivar,  made  bold  by  the  help  he  fancied  Mex-
ico would  give  him,  ordered  his  troops  to  cross
the  frontier  and  attack  the  Guatemalan  forces.
Zaldivar  was  deceived  as  to  assistance  from  the
Mexicans.  They  protested  against  Barrios's  ty-
rannical action  in  attempting  to  annex  the  other
Central  American  states  to  Guatemala,  but  did
nothing.  When  Barrios  heard  that  Gen.  Diaz
was  opposed  to  a  Central  American  union  he
said:  "I  want  for  my  country  the  union  that
gives  strength  and  leads  to  progress  and  pros-
perity. I  made  a  revolution  in  1871  to  deliver
my  country  from  misery,  oppression,  and  igno-
rance, and  wish  now  to  consummate  the  work
of  the  immortal  Morazan.  I  did  not  expect  Diaz,
who  imbrued  with  blood  the  Mexican  soil,  to  find
fault  with  me  as  a  revolutionist  when  I  try  to
effect,  peacefully  if  possible,  the  union  of  these
small  countries."  The  Salvador  troops  were  speedi-
ly repelled,  and  Barrios  entered  the  enemy's  coun-
try and  proceeded  to  attack  Santa  Ana,  by  that
time  garrisoned  by  about  7,000  men  and  defended
by  earthworks.  The  actual  fighting  began  on  30
March,  the  day  when  the  Salvador  troops  crossed
the  frontier;  but  by  2  April  Barrios  had  taken
the  fortress,  and  all  Zaldivar's  troops  had  fled  into
the  interior.  There  was  nothing  now  to  prevent  the
Guatemalan  troops  from  overrunning  the  whole  of
Salvador,  and  Honduras  was  already  despatching
a  force  to  join  them.  As  they  approached  the  vil-
lage a  timid  officer  was  afraid  to  lead  his  regiment
in  first,  dreading  an  ambuscade.  Barrios  accord-
ingly put  himself  at  their  head  and  was  the  first
to  enter  the  streets.  The  main  body  of  the  garri-
son had  fled,  but  some  sharp-shooters  were  left  in
the  church-tower  and  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses.
A  bullet  from  one  of  these  struck  Barrios  down,
and  at  the  same  moment  his  son  was  killed  by  his
side.  This  happened  at  Chalchuapa  between  nine
and  ten  in  the  morning.  When  the  foremost  Gua-
teiiialan  troops  saw  Barrios  fall  they  were  seized
with  panic  and  fled,  meeting  the  rest  of  the  ad  vane-


178


BARRIOS


BARRON


ing'  army  and  throwing  them  too  into  confusion ;
and  though  the  officers  fired  among  them  to  com-
pel them  to  turn  and  advance  again,  the  panic
spread,  and  soon  the  whole  army  was  in  disordered
flight  and  the  greater  part  of  it  scattered.  The
day  his  body  was  brought  into  Guatemala  all  the
road  for  miles  out  was  lined  with  people,  mostly  of
the  lower  classes,  weeping  and  sorrowful.  His
widow  left  Guatemala  directly  after  the  funeral
for  New  York,  where  Barrios  owned  a  fine  house
in  Fifth  avenue,  lie  had  been  for  some  time  put-
ting his  money  into  American  securities  and
mortgaging  all  his  property  in  the  country.  His
son,  by  a  special  act  of  congress,  is  a  cadet  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy.  No  doubt  some  of
Barrios's  measures  were  harsh  and  at  times  even
cruel,  but  they  attained  their  end  as  no  other
measures  could.  His  cruelties  have  been  enor-
mously exaggerated  and  the  wildest  tales  have
been  invented  about  him ;  and  in  those  cases  where
cruelty  can  be  clearly  proved  it  can  generally  be
traced  rather  to  his  lieutenants  than  directly  to
himself.  Still,  he  probably  did  not  care  to  exam-
ine too  closely  into  the  manner  in  which  his  orders
were  carried  out  by  his  subordinates  so  long  as  his
end  was  gained.  He  took  the  keenest  interest  in
all  that  concerned  his  army,  and  his  troops  were
better  dressed,  better  equipped,  and  better  disci-
plined than  is  usually  the  case  in  Spanish-Ameri-
can states.  There  were  many  barracks  in  the  "capi-
tal, most  of  them  in  the  immediate  neighborhood
of  his  palace,  and  there  were  usually  from  three  to
four  thousand  troops  in  the  city.  He  organized  a
system  of  militia  throughout  the  country,  so  that
every  man  was  drilled  except  the  pure  Indians,
and  these  local  militia  were  called  out  once  or
twice  a  month  for  exercise  and  drill  on  Sunday
mornings.  By  this  means  he  had  a  force  of  from
20,000  to  80,000  men  ready.  He  made  the  city  of
Guatemala  one  of  the  cleanest,  pleasantest,  and
most  habitable  cities  in  Spanish  America,  and  fur-
nished it  with  a  good  and  efficient  police,  bringing
an  inspector  from  New  York  to  organize  it.  He
sent  men  to  the  United  States  to  study  post-office
and  telegraph  management,  and  reorganized  those
services  thoroughly  with  the  experience  thus
gained.  Before  Barrios's  time  there  was  no  tele-
graph in  Guatemala.  He  built  the  first  railway  in
the  country,  and  also  began  the  northern  railroad
to  establish  communication  with  the  Atlantic  coast.
In  order  to  make  this  enterprise  national  he  de-
creed that  every  Guatemalan  earning  over  |8  a
month  must  be  a  stockholder.  He  built  safe
bridges,  made  and  improved  many  of  the  chief
roads,  and  did  innumerable  things  of  the  kind.
He  spoke  no  language  but  Spanish,  but  he  fully
appreciated  the  value  of  various  kinds  of  knowledge
in  others.  He  took  great  interest  in  the  colleges
and  schools,  and  did  much  for  education  all  over
the  country.  One  of  his  latest  decrees  was  to  the
effect  that  no  one  should  be  admitted  to  practise
as  a  lawyer  or  a  doctor  who  had  not  passed  a  suffi-
cient examination  in  English  and  French.  He
owned  estates  all  over  the  country,  cattle  haciendas,
coffee  plantations,  houses,  and  every  sort  of  property
worth  having,  and  was  proud  of  their  condition,
trying  to  set  an  example  of  proper  cultivation  and
management  to  other  people.  He  established  the
institutes  of  Quezaltenango  and  Chiquimula  and  a
normal  school  department  in  that  of  the  capital,
foimded  the  industrial  and  agriculture  schools,
built  street  railways  in  the  city  of  Guatemala,  a
penitentiary  in  the  capital  and  another  in  Quezal-
tenango according  to  the  modern  system,  and  made
many  improvements  in  the  national  theatre  and


other  public  buildings.  Personally,  he  was  a  man
of  simple  tastes  and  habits,  rising  early,  dining
simply,  and  living  in  most  respects  like  a  soldier.
His  extravagances  were  in  horses  and  estates.  Fie
was  of  mixed  Spanish  and  Indian  blood,  and  the
Indian  rather  predominated  in  his  countenance.
He  was  short,  with  dark  complexion.

BARRITT,  Frances  Fuller,  poet,  b.  in  Rome,
N.  Y.,  in  1826.  Under  her  maiden  name,  Frances
Fuller,  she  early  won  repute  as  a  writer.  She  lived
with  her  parents,  moving  westward  from  her  birth-
place successively  to  western  Pennsylvania,  Ohio,
and^Michigan.  In  the  latter  state  she  married.  In
1855  she  went  farther  west  with  her  husband,  but
subsequently  returned  to  New  York  city.  When
only  fourteen  years  old,  she  began  writing  for  pub-
lication, and  at  twenty-two  was  a  favorite  contrib-
utor of  the  "  Home  Journal,"  under  the  manage-
ment of  N.  P.  Willis.  "Azlea,"  a  tragedy,  was
written  about  this  time,  and  published  in  1851  in
a  volume  entitled  "  Poems  of  Imagination  and
Sentiment,"  by  herself  and  her  sister  Metta  (Mrs.
Victor),  edited  by  Rufus  W.  Griswold.

BARROETA  Y  ANGEL,  Pedro  Antonio
(bar-ro-ay'-tah),  Spanish  prelate,  b,  in  Ezcaray,  Lo-
grono,  about  1700;  d.  in  Grenada,  Spain,  22"jVIay,
1775.  He  studied  theology  at  Cuenca,  and  soon
became  noted  for  his  learning.  After  filling  sev-
eral high  offices  at  Coria  and  Malaga  he  was  ap-
pointed archbishop  of  Lima,  and  consecrated  25
June,  1751.  He  at  once  began  to  promote  reforms
among  the  clergy  and  in  the  church  administra-
tion, devoting  himself  entirely  to  that  purpose  and
to  charity.  Barroeta  distributed  all  his  revenues
among  the  needy,  and  when  transferred  to  the  see
of  Grenada,  in  1758,  he  was  so  poor  that  his  broth-
er had  to  pay  the  expenses  of  the  voyage.

BARRON,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1769;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  21  April,  1851.  Com.
Barron  is  chiefly  known  to  the  present  generation
from  his  encounter  when  in  command  of  the
"  Chesapeake  "  with  the  British  frigate  "  Leopard  "
in  time  of  peace,  and  the  duel  in  which  he  killed
Com,  Decatur,  He  was  a  seaman  from  early  boy-
hood, entered  the  navy  in  1798  as  a  lieutenant,  was
promoted  captain  in  1799,  and  was  commodore
when  placed  in  command  of  the  "  Chesapeake  "  (38
guns)  in  June,  1807.  War  with  France  was  immi-
nent, and  the  frigate  had  been  undergoing  hasty
repairs  at  the  Washington  navy-yard.  Her  men
and  stores  were  hurried  on  board,  and  she  sailed
on  22  June,  the  intention  being  to  clear  the  decks
and  drill  the  crew  during  the  voyage  across  the  At-
lantic. As  soon  as  she  was  fairly  at  sea  the  British
frigate  "  Leopard  "  (50  guns),  which  had  been  wait-
ing for  her,  ranged  alongside,  with  her  crew  at
quarters,  and  her  captain  demanded  certain  alleged
British  deserters  said  to  be  among  the  "  Chesa-
peake's "  crew.  Com,  Barron  declined  to  surren-
der the  men,  whereupon  the  "Leopard"  opened
fire.  By  great  exertion,  a  single  American  gun
was  fired  by  Lieut.  Allen,  with  a  live  coal  brought
from  the  galley  fire :  but  in  the  meantime  the  shot
of  the  "  Leopard "  had  killed  three  and  wounded
eighteen  of  the  "  Chesapeake's  "  crew.  As  the  one
shot  was  discharged  the  American  ensign  was
hauled  down,  and  after  some  further  parley  the
alleged  deserters  were  carried  off.  The  action  of
the  British  captain  was  repudiated  by  his  govern-
ment, the  "  deserters "  were  formally  restored  on
board  the  "  Chesapeake,"  and  a  money  indemnity
was  paid.  Popular  indignation  ran  very  high.
Com.  Barron  was  tried  by  court-martial,  and  sus-
pended from  rank  and  pay  for  five  years,  though,
in  point  of  fact,  the  blame  belonged  to  the  navy


BARRON


BARRUNDIA


179


department  rather  than  to  him.  On  his  return  to
duty  he  was  refused  an  active  command,  and  in
1820,  Com,  Decatur  having  been  instrumental  in
keeping  him  on  shore,  he  challenged  that  officer  to
fight  a  duel,  killed  him,  and  was  at  the  same  time
himself  severely  wounded.  The  remainder  of  his
life  he  passed  on  shore  duty  and  waiting  orders.
He  became  senior  officer  of  the  navy  in  1839.

BARRON,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Hamp-
ton, Va.,  about  1763;  d.  there,  29  Oct.,  1810.  In
1798  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  brig  "  Au-
gusta," which  was  equipped  by  the  people  of  Nor-
folk, Va.,  to  resist  French  aggressions.  In  1805  he
was  in  command  of  the  squadron  of  ten  vessels
operating  against  Tripoli.  He  sent  three  small
vessels  to  aid  Hamet,  the  deposed  bashaw ;  but,
after  the  capture  of  Derne  by  Gen.  Eaton  and
Capt.  Hull,  27  April,  1805,  he  refused  further
direct  aid,  for  fear  that  the  usurping  bashaw
would  retaliate  with  the  massacre  of  Capt.  Bain-
bridge  and  his  men,  then  held  in  captivity.  He
soon  afterward  returned  to  the  United  States,  ow-
ing to  declining  health,  being  succeeded  in  the
command  of  the  fleet  by  Com.  Rodgers.  He  was
appointed  to  the  command  of  the  navy-yard  at
Gosport,  Va.,  but  died  immediately  afterward.

BARRON,  Samuel,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1802.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman
in  1812,  attained  the  rank  of  lieutenant  3  March,
1827,  of  commander  15  July,  1847,  and  of  captain
in  1855.  He  was  appointed  chief  of  the  bureau  of
detail  in  the  navy  department  when  the  southern
states  seceded,  but  had  already  accepted  a  commis-
sion as  commodore  in  the  confederate  navy.  He
superintended  the  defences  of  North  Carolina  and
Virginia.  Being  present  at  the  attack  upon  Forts
Clark  and  Hatteras,  28  Aug.,  1861,  he  assumed
direction  of  the  defence  by  request  of  the  officers
of  the  forts,  and,  after  the  surrender,  was  a  pris-
oner of  war  in  New  Yoi'k  until  exchanged  in  1862.
He  then  went  to  England,  where  he  engaged  in
fitting  out  blockade-runners  and  privateers.  After
the  war  he  became  a  farmer  in  Virginia.

BARROW,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  near  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  in  1801 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  29  Dec,

1840.  He  entered  West  Point  in  1816,  but  was  not
graduated ;  studied  law  at  Nashville,  and,  after  be-
ing admitted  to  the  bar,  removed  to  Louisiana.
Here  he  practised  a  few  years  and  then  became  a
planter.  Pie  served  for  several  years  in  the  legisla-
ture, and  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  whig,
serving  from  31  Mav,  1841,  till  his  death.

BARROW,  Frances  Elizabeth,  author,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  23  Feb.,  1822 ;  widely  known  by
her  pen-name  "  Aunt  Fanny."  She  was  the  daugh-
ter of  Charles  Benton  Mease,  of  Charleston,  and
Sarah  Matilda  Graham,  of  Boston.  She  was  edu-
cated in  New  York  city,  where  the  greater  part  of
her  life  has  been  passed. She  married,  7  Dec,

1841,  James  Barrow,  jr.,  of  New  York.  In  1855
she  began  to  write  and  publish  books,  and  during
the  next  fifteen  years  something  like  twenty-five
volumes  bearing  her  name  were  brought  out  by
different  publishers.  The  most  popular  of  these
are  "Aunt  Fanny's  Story  Book";  "Six  Night-
caps"; "Six  Mittens";  "Six  Popguns";  "Four
good  little  Hearts";  "Life  among  the  Chil-
dren " ;  "  Take  Heed  " ;  and  a  novel,  "  The  Wife's
Stratagem."  The  juveniles  had  a  phenomenal  suc-
cess among  English  readers,  and  some  of  them,
notably  "Six  Nightcaps,"  were  translated  into
French,  German,  and  Swedish.  Her  miscellaneous
literary  productions  have  appeared  in  numerous
periodicals.  Her  work  is  characterized  by  a  pecu-
liarly bright  and captivating  way  of  presenting


homely,  every-day  scenes  and  sayings.  Perhaps
her  most  famous  story  is  "  The  Letter  G,"  pub-
lished in  a  leading  magazine  in  1864.  The  story
was  very  clever  in  itself,  but  gained  a  world-wide
reputation  through  the  manufacturers  of  a  certain
sewing-machine,  then  recently  placed  on  the  mar-
ket and  known  by  a  trade-mark  identical  with  the
title  of  the  story.  These  enterprising  dealers  took
advantage  of  the  gratuitous  advertisement,  and
scattered  the  story  broadcast  over  the  world.

BARROW,  Washington,  congressman,  b.  in
Davidson  co.,  Tenn.,  5  Oct.,  1817;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  19  Oct.,  1866.  He  received  a  classical  educa-
tion, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  was  American  charge  d'affaires  in  Portugal
from  16  Aug.,  1841,  to  24  Feb.,  1844,  and  was
elected  to  congress  from  Tennessee  as  a  whig,  serv-
ing from  1847  to  1849.  He  edited  the  Nashville
"  Banner,"  was  a  state  senator  in  1860-'l,  and
was  a  member  of  the  commission  that  on  4  May,

1861,  negotiated  a  military  league  with  the  south-
ern  confederacy. Pie was  arrested, 28 March,

1862,  by  order  of  Andrew  Johnson,  governor  of
Tennessee,  on  the  charge  of  disloyalty,  and  was
imprisoned  in  the  penitentiary  at  Nashville,  but
was  released  in  the  following  week,  by  the  order
of  President  Lincoln.

BARROWS,  Elijah  Porter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Mansfield,  Conn.,  5  Jan.,  1817.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1826,  and,  after  teaching  school  for  five
years  at  Hartford,  was  ordained,  and  in  1835  be-
came pastor  of  the  first  free  Presbyterian  church
in  New  York  city.  Here  he  remained  until  1835,
when  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  sacred  litera-
ture in  Western  Reserve  college  (1837-'52).  In
1853  he  was  appointed  professor  of  Hebrew  lan-
guage and  literature  in  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, retaining  the  office  until  1866.  In  1872  he
accepted  a  like  appointment  in  Oberlin,  Ohio,  theo-
logical seminary.  Besides  twenty-five  articles  in
the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra,"  he  has  published  "  A  Me-
moir of  Evertin  Judson  "  (1852) ;  "  Companion  to
the  Bible"  (1869)  ;  and  "Sacred  Geography  and
Antiquities  "  (1872).  He  has  also  been  one  of  the
editors  of  the  American  Tract  Society's  "Bible
with  Notes."

BARROWS,  Willard,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Monson,  Mass.,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  Davenport,  Iowa,  3
Jan.,  1868.  His  early  youth  was  spent  in  New
England,  after  which  he  became  a  teacher  in  Eliza-
beth, N.  J.,  but  this  occupation  he  soon  relin-
quished for  the  profession  of  civil  engineering.
He  accomplished  the  government  survey  of  the
Choctaw  purchase,  in  Mississippi,  finishing  that
work  in  1835.  Later  he  explored  Cedar  river,
which  at  that  time  was  scarcely  known,  and  in
1837  was  engaged  on  the  first  surveys  of  Iowa.
In  1840  he  surveyed  the  islands  in  Mississippi
river  between  Rock  Island  and  Quincy.  During
the  suspension  of  the  surveys  he  settled  in  Rock-
ingham ;  but  in  1843,  when  the  surveys  were  re-
sumed, he  w^as  sent  into  the  Kickapoo  country.
From  1845  till  1850  he  was  engaged  in  government
work  and  on  county  surveys  in  Iowa.  During  the
latter  year  he  made  a  journey  to  the  Rocky  moun-
tains, and  afterward  was  connected  with  a  banking
firm  in  Davenport.  He  published  several  accounts
of  his  experiences,  including  "  Barrows's  New  Map
of  Iowa,  with  Notes  "  (1854),  and  "  Historical  Sketch
of  Scott  County  "  (1859).

B4RRUNDIA,  Jos6  Francisco  (bar-roon'-
de-a).  Central  American  statesman,  b.  in  Guatema-
la about  1780;  d.  in  New  York,  4  Aug.,  1854.
Many  members  of  his  family  were  eminent  in  the
service  of  Spain,  but  he  early  opposed  the  mother


180


BARRY


BARRY


country,  and  in  1813  was  sentenced  to  death  for
treason.  He  and  his  fellow-conspirators  hid  them-
selves in  the  mountains  for  six  years,  when  Bar-
rundia  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  revolu-
tionary party  of  Guatemala.  He  was  conspicuous
in  the  struggle  for  independence,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  first  republican  constituent  assembly.
On  10  April,  1824,  he  introduced  and  carried  a  de-
cree for  the  immediate  abolition  of  slavery  through-
out the  republic,  and  he  subsequently  procured  the
adoption  of  a  code  modelled  after  that  of  Living-
ston for  the  state  of  Louisiana,  which  he  had
translated  into  Spanish.  In  1825  he  declined  the
office  of  vice-president,  but  in  1829  accepted  that
of  president,  and  devoted  himself  to  educational
and  other  reforms.  When  in  1852  three  of  the
five  states  that  had  composed  the  old  republic
again  united,  he  was  unanimously  chosen  presi-
dent ;  but,  as  two  of  the  states  seceded,  he  resigned,
and  employed  himself  in  preparing  a  narrative  of
Central  American  events.  In  the  hope  of  regain-
ing his  ascendancy  in  Guatemala  through  Ameri-
can influence,  he  set  out  in  1854  for  Washington  as
minister  of  Honduras,  with  the  alleged  design  of
negotiating  for  its  annexation  to  the  United
States,  but  died  of  apoplexy.

^  BARRY,  Henry  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  7  June,  1875.  He
was  self-educated  in  the  city  of  his  birth,  and
so  improved  his  opportunities  that  in  early  man-
hood he  became  principal  of  the  Locust  Grove
academy,  Kentucky.  He  then  studied  law  and
was  graduated  at  the  Columbian  law  college,  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  He  entered  the  union  army  as  a
private  early  in  the  civil  war,  and  organized  the
first  regiment  of  colored  troops  raised  in  Kentucky.
He  commanded  a  brigade,  and  for  a  time  a  divi-
sion, and  was  brevetted  major-general  of  vokm-
teers.  As  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional
convention  of  Mississippi  in  1867,  he  was  active
during  the  reconstruction  period  and  was  chosen
state  senator  in  1868,  and  elected  to  congress  the
same  year.  Reelected  for  successive  terms  by  the
votes  of  the  colored  republicans  of  Mississippi,  he
retained  his  seat  in  congress  until  his  death.  Dur-
ing his  last  term  he  was  chairman  of  the  committee

on  postal  ex-
penditures.

BARRY,
John,  naval
officer,  b.  in
Tacumshane,
county  Wex-
ford, Ireland,
in  1745;  d.
in  Philadel-
phia, 13  Sept.,
1803.  He  fol-
lowed the  sea
from  child-
hood, and,
making  his
home  in  Phil-
adelphia at
the  age  of
fifteen,  ac-
quired wealth
as  the  master
of  a  vessel.
He  offered  his
services  to  congress  at  the  opening  of  the  revolu-
tionary war,  "  abandoning  the  finest  ship  and  the
first  employ  in  America  "  (his  own  words),  and,  in
February,  1776,  was  given  the  command  of  the
"  Lexington,"  in  which  he  made  the  first  capture  of  a


British  war  vessel  accomplished  by  an  American
cruiser,  that  of  the  tender  "  Edward."  He  was
then  transferred  to  the  frigate  "Effingham."
During  the  winter  of  1776-'7,  while  navigation
was  closed,  he  commanded  a  company  of  volun-
teers and  assisted  in  the  operations  at  Trenton
with  some  heavy  artillery.  In  1777,  with  four
boats,  he  captured  a  British  war-schooner  in  the
Delaware  without  losing  a  man.  For  some  time
he  acted  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Cadwalader.
When  the  British  occupied  Philadelphia  in  the
latter  part  of  1777,  he  took  the  "Effingham"  up
the  Delaware  to  save  her  from  capture.  The  ene-
my offered  him  a  heavy  bribe  to  deliver  up  the
ship,  and  finally  succeeded  in  destroying  her  by
fire.  In  1778  he  was  assigned  to  the  command  of
the  "  Raleigh,"  which  was  pursued  and  driven  on
shore  by  a  British  squadron,  after  making  a  gal-
lant resistance.  In  February,  1781,  in  the  "Alli-
ance "  he  conveyed  Col.  Laurens  on  a  special  mis-
sion to  France,  and  cruised  with  success  until  he
put  in  for  repairs  in  October.  In  a  desperate  com-
bat he  captured  the  "Atalanta"  and  the  "Tre-
passy,"  and  was  severely  wounded.  After  carry-
ing Lafayette  and  Noailles  to  France,  he  cruised
in  the  West  Indies,  and  in  the  early  part  of  1782
fought  a  sharp  battle  with  an  English  ship,  until
the  appearance  of  a  superior  force  compelled  him
to  desist,  to  avoid  capture.  On  the  establishment
of  the  new  navy  in  1794,  he  was  named  tlie  senior
officer,  with  the  rank  of  commodore.  He  com-
manded the  frigate  "  United  States,"  the  building
of  which  he  had  superintended.

BARRY,  John,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  the  county
Wexford,  Ireland,  in  1799 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  21
Nov.,  1859.  While  yet  an  ecclesiastical  student  he
emigrated  to  America  and  finished  his  studies  in
the  theological  seminary  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  under
Bishop  England.  He  was  ordained  in  1825,  and
appointed  pastor  of  the  church  of  the  Holy  Trinity
in  Augusta.  Ga.  During  the  cholera  epidemic  of
1832  he  turned  his  house  into  a  hospital,  and  after-
ward into  an  asylum  for  the  orphans  made  by  the
pestilence.  Bishop  England  made  him  his  vicar
in  Georgia  in  1839,  and  he  was  promoted  to  the
vicar-generalship  of  the  diocese  of  Charleston,  and
appointed  superior  of  the  theological  seminary  in
1844.  He  was  the  first  to  establish  a  Catholic  day-
school  in  Georgia.  He  was  present  at  the  council
of  Baltimore  as  theologian  in  1846,  and  was  ap-
pointed vicar-general  of  the  diocese  cf  Savannah
in  1853,  where  he  volunteered  to  nurse  the  victims
of  the  yellow  fever.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  Gart-
land  from  the  epidemic,  he  was  appointed  admin-
istrator of  the  see,  and  in  1857  was  created  bishop.
He  had  never  fully  recovered  from  the  exhaustion
brought  on  by  his  labors  in  the  epidemics  of  1853
and  1855,  and  he  visited  Europe  for  the  benefit  of
his  health  in  1859.

BARRY,  John  S.,  governor  of  Michigan,  b.  in
Vermont  in  1802;  d.  in  Constantine,  Mich.,  14
Jan.,  1870.  He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of  his
native  state,  and,  when  a  young  man,  went  to  At-
lanta, Ga.,  where  he  lived  until  1832,  and  then  re-
moved to  Michigan.  He  had  studied  law,  but  be-
came a  merchant  at  Constantine,  Mich.,  and  was
active  in  politics  there.  On  the  admission  of  Michi-
gan into  the  union,  in  1836,  he  was  a  member  of
the  constitutional  convention,  and  was  also  chosen
a  state  senator,  an  office  which  he  again  held  in
1840.  In  the  latter  year  he  became  interested  in
the  cultivation  of  the  svigar-beet,  and  went  to  Eu-
rope to  study  the  best  methods  of  preparing  the
sugar.  He  was  elected  governor  in  1841,  and  was
twice  reelected,  serving  from  1842  to  1846  and


BARRY


BARRY


181


from  1850  to  1852.  He  was  again  a  candidate  in
1860,  but  was  defeated.  In  his  successful  cam-
paigns he  sustained  the  "  Wilmot  Proviso,"  in-
tended to  prohibit  slavery  in  the  territories.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  in  sympathy  with  the  ultra
wing  of  the  democratic  party,  and  was  a  member
of  the  Chicago  convention  of  August,  1864,  which
nominated  Gen.  McClellan  to  the  presidency.

BARRY,  Patrick,  horticulturist,  b.  near  Bel-
fast, Ireland,  in  May,  1816.  He  was  employed  as  a
teacher  in  one  of  the  national  schools  in  Ireland,
and  on  his  arrival  in  America  in  1836  became  a
clerk  for  Prince  &  Co.,  nurserymen,  of  Flushing,
L.  I.  In  1840  he  entered  into  the  nursery  business
in  partnership  with  George  EUwanger,  at  Roches-
ter, N.  Y.  The  firm  took  the  lead  in  the  importa-
tion of  the  dwarf  varieties  of  pears,  grafted  on
quince  roots,  from  France,  and  extended  their
business  until  their  nurseries  were  the  largest  in
the  country.  Through  their  enterprise,  various
wild  species  of  shade-trees  have  been  introduced
into  cultivation,  hardy  exotics  acclimatized,  and
improved  varieties  of  fruits  and  flowering  plants
developed  by  culture  or  introduced  from  abroad.
Mr.  Barry  edited  the  "  Genesee  Farmer"  from  1844
to  1852,  and  from  1852  to  1854  the  "  Horticul-
turalist."  He  has  published  a  "Treatise  on  the
Fruit  Garden  "  (New  York,  1851 ;  new  ed.,  1872),
and  has  written  extensively  on  subjects  connected
with  pomology  and  flower-gardening.  He  also
prepared  the  complete  and  valuable  "  Catalogue  of
the  American  Pomological  Society."

BARRY,  William,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
10  Jan.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  17  Jan.,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1822  and  studied  law,
but  entered  Cambridge  divinity  school  in  1826,  and
after  two  years  there  spent  two  more  in  study  in
Gottingen  and  Paris.  He  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  South  Congregational  church,  Lowell,  Mass.,  in
1830,  and  in  1835  took  charge  of  the  1st  church  at
Framingham.  Failing  health  forced  him  to  give
up  his  charge  in  1844,  and  he  travelled  in  Europe
and  Asia  till  1847,  when  he  returned  and  took
charge  of  another  church  in  Lowell.  In  1853  his
health  compelled  him  to  cease  work  again,  and  he
removed  to  Chicago.  Here  he  organized  the  Chi-
cago historical  society  in  1856,  and  was  its  secre-
tary and  librarian  till  1868.  Mr.  Barry  was  one  of
the  most  accomplished  scholars  and  ablest  writers
in  the  west.  It  was  in  his  office  that  President
Lincoln  obtained  the  data  for  his  memorable  ad-
dress in  Cooper  institute,  New  York.  Among  his
publications  are  "  Rights  and  Duties  of  Neighbor-
ing Churches " ;  '*  Thoughts  on  Christian  Doc-
trine "  (Lowell,  Mass.,  1845) ;  "  History  of  Fram-
ingham "  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  Antiquities  of  Wiscon-
sin "  (in  Wisconsin  Historical  Collections,  vol.  iii.) ;
and  "  Letters  from  the  East." — His  brother,  Jolin
Stetson,  author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  26  March,
1819,  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  11  Dec,  1872,  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  city,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of
the  Universalist  church  in  West  Amesbury,  Mass.,
in  1838.  He  preached  at  Weymouth,  Mass.,  from
1839  to  1841,  at  West  Scituate,  Mass.,  from  1841  to
1844,  and  subsequently,  for  a  brief  period,  until  the
failure  of  his  health,  at  Pawtucket,  R.  I.  He  pub-
lished "  Stetson  Genealogy  "  (Boston,  1847) ;  "  His-
tory of  Hanover,  Mass."  (1853) ;  and  "  Historv  of
Massachusetts  "  (3  vols.,  1855-'7).  From  1858  till
1860  he  was  pastor  of  the  church  at  Needham,
Mass.,  and  editor  of  "  The  Universalist,"  in  Boston.

BARRY,  William  FarquFiar,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  Aug.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Fort  McIIenry,  Bal-
timore, Md.,  18  July,  1879.  He  was  graduated
at  West  Point  in  1838,  and  in  that  year  assisted


Maj.  Ringgold  to  organize  the  first  battery  of  light
artillery  formed  in  the  U.  S.  array.  After  doing
garrison  duty  at  different  stations,  he  went  with
the  army  to  Mexico,  remaining  there  from  1846  to
1848.  He  was  in  the  battle  of  Tampico,  and  served
in  Gen.  Patterson's  division,  and  also  as  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Worth.  From  1849  to  1851  he  was
stationed  at  Fort  McHenry,  and  was  made  a  cap-
tain in  the  2d  artillery  on  1  July,  1852.  He  served
in  the  war  against  the  Seminoles  in  Florida  in
1852-3,  and  during  the  Kansas  disturbances  of
1857-'8  was  stationed  at  Fort  Leavenworth.  Dur-
ing 1858  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  to  revise
the  system  of  light  artillery  practice,  and  the  revis-
ion was  adopted  on  6  March,  1860.  On  the  break-
ing out  of  the  civil  war,  he  went  into  active  service,
assisting  in  the  defence  of  Fort  Pickens,  Fla.,  as
major  of  the  5th  artillery.  He  was  chief  of  artillery
in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  27  July,  1861,  to
27  Aug.,  1862,  and  organized  its  artillery.  On  20
Aug.,  1861,  he  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  took  a  leading  part  in  the  Virginia
peninsular  campaign  until  August,  1862,  being  in'
the  siege  of  Yorktown,  at  the  battle  of  Gaines's
Mill,  the  skirmish  of  Mechanics ville,  the  battle  of
Charles  City  Cross-Roads,  the  Malvern  Hill  con-
test, and  at  Harrison's  Landing.  From  the  end  of
that  campaign  until  1864  he  was  chief  of  artillery
of  the  defences  of  Washington,  D.  C,  having  been
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  1st  artillery  on
1  Aug.,  1863.  He  was  assigned  to  the  command  at
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  against  a
threatened  cavalry  raid  in  May,  1863,  and  was
next  appointed  chief  of  artillery  on  Gen.  Sherman's
staff,  commanding  the  military  division  of  the  Mis-
sissippi from  March,  1864,  to  June,  1866.  From
May  to  September,  1864,  he  was  with  the  army  in
Georgia,  and  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Atlanta,  and
also  in  the  northern  Georgia,  Alabama,  and  Caro-
lina campaigns.  On  1  Sept.,  1864,  he  was  made
brevet  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  colonel
by  brevet  for  gallant  conduct  at  Rocky-Faced
Ridge.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  made  brevet
brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  for  his  services  in
the  campaign  ending  with  the  surrender  of  the
army  under  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston,  and  on  the  same
day  was  made  brevet  major-general  for  gallant
conduct  in  the  field.  On  11  Dec,  1865,  he  was
appointed  colonel  in  the  2d  artillery,  and  was  in
command  of  the  northern  frontier  pending  the
Fenian  raids  of  1866.  On  15  Jan.  of  that  year  he
was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.  He
served  on  the  northern  frontier  to  September,  1867,
and  then  commanded  the  artillery  school  of  prac-
tice at  Fortress  Monroe  to  5  March,  1877,  when  he
was  appointed-  to  the  command  at  Fort  McHenry.
During  the  labor  riots  of  1877  he  rendered  valua-
ble service  at  Camden  Station.  He  was  the  author,
in  conjunction  with  Gen.  Barnard,  of  "  Reports  of
the  Engineer  and  Artillery  Operations  of  the  Army
of  the  Potomac  from  its  Organization  to  the  Close
of  the  Peninsular  Campaign  "  (New  York,  1863).

BARRY,  William  Taylor,  statesman,  b.  in
Lunenburg,  Va.,  5  Feb.,  1785;  d.  in  Liverpool,
England,  30  Aug.,  1835.  He  went  to  Kentucky  in
1796,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  college
in  1807,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  at  Lexington,  Ky.,  where  his  eloquence
soon  brought  him  into  notice.  He  served  in  both
branches  of  the  Kentucky  legislature,  and,  in  De-
cember, 1810,  was  elected  to  congress  to  fill  a  va-
cancy, serving  until  3  March,  1811.  In  the  war  of
1812  he  was  aide  to  Gov,  Shelby,  and  was  present
at  the  battle  of  the  Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813.  He  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  in  February,  1815,  to


182


BARRY


BARTIIOLDI


fill  a  vacancy,  and  resigned,  in  1816,  to  become  a
judge  of  the  Kentucky  supreme  court.  lie  was
afterward  lieutenant-governor,  state  secretary,  and
chief  justice  of  the
state.  On  9  March,
1829,  he  was  appoint-
ed postmaster  -  gen-
eral. The  incumbent
of  this  office  was  not
then  a  cabinetl  minis-
ter. President  Jack-
son elevated  him  to
that  rank  in  order  to
gratify  his  friend  Maj.
Barry.  Much  dissatis-
faction was  expressed
with  his  management
of  the  department,
and  he  was  severely
denounced  on  the
floor  of  the  house  by
William  Cost  John-
son, of  Maryland,  and
othei-s.  A  son  of  Maj.
Barry,  then  a  lieuten-
ant in  the  army,  challenged  Johnson,  but  the  chal-
lenge was  withdrawn  after  its  acceptance.  On  10
April,  1835,  he  resigned,  to  accept  the  office  of  min-
ister to  Spain,  and  died  on  his  way  to  that  country.
Plis  remains  were  brought  home  by  order  of  the
Kentucky  legislature,  and  buried  at  Frankfort,  8
Nov.,  1854.

BARRY,  William  Taylor  Sullivan,  lawyer,
b.  in  Columbus,  Miss.,  10  Dec,  1831 ;  d.  there,  29
Jan.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1841,
then  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Columbus  for  a
few  years.  From  1849  to  1851  he  was  a  member
of  the  legislature.  He  owned  plantations  in  Ok-
tibbeha and  Sunflower  counties,  and  in  1853  i^e-
moved  to  the  latter  place.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  democrat,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1853,  to
3  March,  1855.  On  18  Dec,  1854,  he  made  an  ef-
fective speech  against  the  "  Know-Nothing  "  party.
After  the  expiration  of  his  term  he  devoted  him-
self to  his  law  practice  in  Columbus,  and  was  again
sent  to  the  legislature,  being  speaker  of  the  house
in  1855.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Charleston  demo-
cratic national  convention  in  April,  1860,  and  was
one  of  those  that  withdrew  because  the  conven-
tion did  not  expressly  deny  in  its  platform  the
power  of  the  federal  government  to  legislate
against  slavery.  In  1861  he  presided  over  the
Mississippi  secession  convention,  and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  provisional  confederate  congress  until
1862,  when  he  resigned  to  enter  the  army.  In  the
spring  of  that  year  he  raised  the  35th  Mississippi
regiment,  which  he  led  until  captured  at  Mobile,
9  April,  1865.  Col.  Barry's  regiment  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  the  defence  of  Vicksburg,  where  it
was  surrendered,  and  afterward  in  the  Georgia
campaign.  After  the  war  he  practised  law  in  Co-
lumbus until  his  death.  See  Lvnch's  "  Bench  and
Bar  of  Mississippi "  (New  York,'  1881).

BARRYMORE,  William,  actor,  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1847.  His  first  appearance  was  at  Drury
Lane  theatre,  London,  19  Nov.,  1827.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1836,  and  was  stage  manager
of  the  Bowery  theatre.  His  first  appearance  here
as  an  actor  "was  28  Jan.,  1832,  at  the  Walnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  in  the  pantomime  of
"Mother  Goose." — His  wife,  whose  maiden  name
was  Adams,  made  her  dehut  in  America,  29  Aug.,
1831,  as  the  Dumb  Savoyard  and  Miss  Jane  Tran-
sit, at  the  Park  theatre,'  New  York.  She  died  in
England,  30  Dec,  1862.


BARSTOW,  William  A.,  governor  of  Wis-
consin, b.  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Leavenworth,  Kansas,  14
Dec,  1865.  He  was  governor  of  Wisconsin  from
January,  1854,  to  January,  1856.  When  the  civil
war  began  he  called  upon  Gen.  Fremont,  then  com-
mander of  the  western  department,  and  ofl:ered  to
raise  a  cavalry  regiment  in  Wisconsin.  After
raising  it  he  was  made  colonel,  and  the  regiment
served  with  credit  in  the  southwest ;  but,  owing  to
the  failing  health  of  Col.  Barstow,  during  most  of
his  military  term  he  was  sitting  on  courts-martial
at  St.  Louis,  where  he  rendered  valuable  service.
On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.

BARSTOW,  Wilson,  soldier,  b.  in  1830 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  16  March,  1869.  During  the  early
part  of  the  civil  war  he  was  successively  on  the
staffs  of  Gens.  Dix  and  Hooker,  and  subsequently
chief  commissary  of  musters  of  the  department  of
the  east.  He  served  from  the  first  year  of  the  war
until  its  close  with  zeal  and  ability,  entering  the
service  as  a  lieutenant,  and,  passing  through  the
successive  grades,  attained  the  brevet  rank  of
brigadier-general  on  13  March,  1865.  When  mus-
tered out  he  was  appointed  assistant  appraiser  of
the  port  of  New  York  under  Mr.  McElrath.

BARSTOW,  Zedekiali  Smith,  educator,  b.  in
Canterbury,  Conn.,  4  Oct.,  1790;  d.  in  Keene,  N.  IL,
1  March,  1873.  His  father  was  in  Gates's  army
and  a  witness  of  Burgoyne's  surrender.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1813,  studied  theology  under
President  D  wight,  and  was  principal  of  Hopkins
grammar  school  in  New  Haven  from  1813  to  1816.
He  was  then  chosen  tutor  and  college  chaplain  of
Hamilton  college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  where  he  re-
mained two  years,  and  was  offered  a  professor-
sliip,  but  declined  it.  In  July,  1818,  he  became
pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Keene,  N.  H.
He  continued  to  teach  the  classics  after  his  set-
tlement at  Keene,  and  the  late  Chief-Justice  Chase
was  one  of  his  pupils.  He  was  from  1834  to
1871  a  trustee  of  Dartmouth  college,  secretary  for
many  years  of  the  general  association  of  New
Hampshire,  a  corporate  member  of  the  American
board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions,  and
prominent  in  many  of  the  educational  and  religious
movements  of  the  day.  In  1868  and  1869  he  was  a
member  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  and
chaplain  of  that  body.  He  published  many  ser-
mons, dissertations,  and  essays,  and  was  a  f I'equent
contributor  to  religious  periodicals.  Dartmouth
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849.

BARTHOLDI,  Frederic  Auguste,  French
sculptor,  b.  in  Colmar,  Alsace,  2  April,  1834.  He
studied  painting  with  Ary  Scheffer  in  Paris,  but
afterward  turned  his  attention  to  sculpture,  which
has  since  exclusively  occupied  him.  Among  his
works  are  "  Francesca  da  Rimini "  (1852) ;  "  Monu-
ment to  Martin  Schongauer  "  (1863) ;  "Le  Vigne-
ron"  (1870):  and  "  Vercingetorix "  (1872).  His
statue  of  "Lafayette  arriving  in  America"  was
executed  in  1872,  and  in  1876  was  placed  in  Union
square.  New  York.  He  was  one  of  the  French
commissioners  in  1876  to  the  Philadelphia  centen-
nial exhibition,  and  there  exhibited  bronze  statues
of  "  The  Young  Vine-Grower  " ;  "  Genie  Funebre  " ;
"  Peace  " ;  and  "  Genius  in  the  Grasp  of  Misery,"
for  which  he  received  a  bronze  medal.  "  Liberty
enlightening  the  World,"  the  colossal  statue  on
Bedlow's  island,  in  New  York  harbor,  is  his  work.
Soon  after  the  establishment  of  the  present  form
of  government  in  France,  the  project  of  building
some  suitable  memorial  to  show  the  fraternal  feeling
existing  between  the  two  great  republics  was  sug-
gested, and  in  1874  the  "  French-American  Union  "


BARTPIOLOMEW


BARTLETT


183


was  established.  Among  its  members  were  Labou-
laye,  De  Remusat,  Waddington,  Henri  Martin,  De
Less'eps,  De  Rochambeau,  Lafayette,  and  Barthol-
di.  The  plan  of  Bartholdi  having  been  approved,
more  than  1,000,000  francs  were  raised  by  sub-
scription throughout  France  for  the  building  of
the  statue.  On  4  July,  1880,  it  was  formally  de-
livered to  the  American  minister  in  Paris,  the
event  being  celebrated  by  a  great  banquet.  Mean-
while the  United  States  had  set  apart  Bedlow's
island  as  a  site  for  the  monument,  and  funds  were
collected  throughout  this  country  for  the  build-
ing of  the  pedestal,
about  1300,000  be-
ing raised.  In  Oc-
tober, 1886,  the
structure  was  pre-
sented to  the  na-
tion as  the  joint
gift  of  the  French
and  American  peo-
ple. This  statue
is  151  feet  and  1
inch  high,  and  the
top  of  the  torch
will  be  at  an  ele-
vation of  305  feet
11  inches  from
mean  low-water
mark.  It  is  the
largest  work  of  its
kind  that  has  ever
been  completed.
The  famous  "  Co-
lossus of  Rhodes,"
according  to  the
proportions  which
the  legends  attribute  to  it,  was  but  a  miniature  in
comparison.  The  "Lion  of  Belfort,"  a  colossal
statue,  erected  in  commemoration  of  the  siege  sus-
tained by  that  city  during  the  Franco-Prussian
war  of  l870-'l,  was  made  by  Bartholdi  and  ex-
hibited in  plaster  at  the  salon  of  1878.  His
"Gribeauval,"  exhibited  in  the  same  year,  is  the
property  of  the  French  nation,  from  whom  he  has
received  the  cross  of  the  legion  of  honor.  See  "  Bar-
tholdi and  the  Great  Statue  "  (New  York,  1886).

BARTHOLOMEW,  Edward  Sheffield,  sculp-
tor, b.  in  Colchester,  Conn,,  in  1822  ;  d.  in  Naples,
Italy,  2  May,  1858.  As  a  child  he  evinced  a  taste
for  art,  but  qualified  himself  to  be  a  dentist  and
began  to  practise  that  profession  in  Hartford.  He
soon  abandoned  it,  however,  first  for  painting  and
afterward  for  sculpture,  in  which  latter  branch  he
attained  eminence.  He  had  charge  of  the  Wads-
worth  gallery,  Hartford,  from  1845  till  1848.
After  studying  for  a  year  in  the  national  acade-
my of  design,  New  York,  he  went  to  Italy,  and
after  1850  made  Rome  his  home.  Among  his  best-
known  works  are  "  Blind  Homer  led  by  his  Daugh-
ter"; "Eve";  "Campagna  Shepherd  Boy";  "Ge-
nius of  Painting  " ;  "  Youth  and  Old  Age  " ;  "  Even-
ing Star";  "Eve  Repentant";  " Washington  and
Flora  ";  "  A  Monument  to  Charles  Carroll ";  "  Beli-
sarius  at  the  Porta  Pincinia"  and  "Ganymede."
The  Wadsworth  gallery,  Hartford,  Conn.,  contains
a  large  number  of  his  works.

BARTHOLOW,  Roberts,  physician,  b.  in
Howard  co,,  Md,,  18  Nov.,  1831.  He  was  graduat-
ed at  Calvert  College  in  1850,  and  received  his
medical  degree  from  the  University  of  Maryland
in  1852.  Shortly  after  graduation  he  entered  the
regular  army,  where  he  remained  until  1864.  He
served  at  the  different  army  stations  in  the  west,
and  during  the  civil  war  was  in  charge  of  general


hospitals  in  Baltimore,  Washington,  and  elsewhere.
After  his  resignation  he  settled  in  Cincinnati,
where  he  practised,  and  also  filled  various  chairs
in  the  medical  college  of  Ohio  from  1864  to  1878.
In  1878  he  became  professor  of  materia  medica
and  therapeutics  in  Jefferson  medical  college,
Philadelphia.  He  is  a  member  of  various  medical
societies,  among  which  are  the  American  medical
association,  the  Ohio  state  medical  society,  and
the  Cincinnati  academy  of  medicine.  Dr.  Bar-
tholow's  medical  works  include  the  following:
"  Materia  Medica  and  Therapeutics  "  (New  York,
1874) ;  "  Practice  of  Medicine  "  (1879) ;  "  Hypoder-
matic Medication  "  (1882) ;  "  Medical  Electricity  "
(1881) ;  and  "  Antagonism  between  Medicines  and
between  Remedies  and  Diseases  "  (1881).

BARTLETT,  Elisha,  physician,  b.  in  Smith-
field,  R.  I.,  in  1805 ;  d.  there,  18  July,  1855.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  Brown  in  1826,
and  practised  in  Lowell,  Mass.  He  lectured  on
pathological  anatomy  at  the  Berkshire  medical
institute  in  Pittsfield,  and  in  1839  at  Dartmouth
college.  He  was  professor  in  Transylvania  college,
Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1841,  and  then  successively  in
the  university  of  Maryland,  at  Lexington  again,
in  Louisville,  and  in  the  university  of  New  York,
and  after  1851  in  the  college  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York,  where  he  filled  the
chairs  of  materia  medica  and  medical  jurispru-
dence. He  also  lectured  in  the  Vermont  medical
college  from  1843  to  1852.  He  was  the  author  of  an
"  Essay  on  the  Philosophy  of  Medical  Science "
(Philadelphia,  1844) ;  "  Inquiry  into  the  Degree  of
Certainty  in  Medicine  "  (1848) ;  "  A  Discourse  on
the  Life  and  Labors  of  Dr.  Wells,  the  Discoverer  of
the  Philosophy  of  Dew  "  (1849) ;  "  The  Fevers  of
the  United  States "  (1850) ;  "  Discourse  on  the
Times,  Character,  and  Works  of  Hippocrates"
(1852) ;  and  a  volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Simple
Settings  in  Verse  for  Portraits  and  Pictures  in
Mr.  Dickens's  Gallery  "  (1855).  He  was  editor  of  the
"Monthly  Journal  of  Medical  Literature,"  pub-
lished at  Lowell.

BARTLETT,  Ichabod,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salisburv.
N.  H.,  24  July,  1786 ;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  19
Oct.,  1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  col-
lege in  1808,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1811.  He
practised  for  a  few  years  at  Durham,  N.  H.,  but  in
1816  removed  to  Portsmo^uth,  where  he  soon  at-
tained a  high  rank  in  his  profession,  although  hav-
ing for  his  competitors  such  men  as  Webster  and
Mason.  He  was  an  officer  of  the  state  militia,  and
in  thirty-two  years  was  seven  times  elected  to  the
legislature,  of  which  he  was  speaker  in  1821.  He
was  clerk  of  the  state  senate  in  1817-'8,  and  solicitor
of  Rockingham  county  from  1819  till  1821.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  an  anti-democrat  in  1823,
and  twice  re-elected,  serving  until  3  March,  1829,
and  being  a  member  of  the  committee  on  naval
affairs.  On  the  establishment  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire court  of  common  pleas,  in  1825,  he  was  ap-
pointed its  chief  justice,  but  declined,  preferring
to  remain  in  congress.  He  was  nominated  for
governor  by  the  whigs  in  1832,  but  defeated,  and
in  1850  a  member  of  the  convention  that  adopted
a  new  state  constitution.

BARTLETT,  John,  editor,  b,  in  Plymouth,
Mass,,  14  June,  1820.  He  was  educated  in  his  na-
tive town,  and  began  business  life  as  a  publisher  in
Cambridge,  Mass,,  in  1836,  succeeding  to  the  man-
agement of  the  business  there  in  1849,  and  con-
ducting it  for  ten  years.  He  was  appointed  vol-
unteer paymaster  in  the  U.  S.  navy  in  November,
1862,  and  served  until  July,  1863,  A  business
connection  was  formed  with  the  Boston  publishing-


184


BARTLETT


BARTLETT


house  of  Little,  Brown  &  Co.  in  1865,  and  he  became
senior  partner  in  1878.  He  received  the  degree  of
A.  M.  from  Harvard  in  1871.  His  best  known  and
most  valuable  literary  work  is  "  Familiar  Quota-
tions" (Boston,  1854;  8th  ed.,  1888).  This  has
been  enlarged  in  each  successive  edition,  and  is
one  of  the  most  valuable  of  reference-books.  His
"  New  Method  of  Chess  Notation  "  was  published
in  Cambridge  in  1857,  appearing  in  connection
with  the  annals  of  the  chess  tournament  in  New
York  city.  His  other  works  are  "  The  Shakespeare
Phrase-Book"  (Boston,  1882);  and  a  "Catalogue
of  Books  on  Angling,  including  Ichthyology,  Pis-
ciculture," etc.  (1882) ;  with  a  supplement  to  the
latter  (188G).

BARTLETT,  John  Russell,  author,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  23  Oct.,  1805  ;  d.  there,  28  May,  1886.
He  was  educated  for  a  mercantile  career,  entered
the  banking  business  at  an  early  age,  and  was  for
six  years  cashier  of  the  Globe  bank  in  Providence.
His  natural  bent  appears  to  have  been  in  the  direc-
tion of  science  and  belles-lettres,  for  he  was  promi-
nent in  founding  the  Providence  athenjeum,  and

an  active  mem-
ber of  the  Frank-
lin society.  In
1837  he  engaged
in  business  with  a
New  York  house,
but  was  not  suc-
cessful, and  en-
tered the  book-
importing  trade
under  the  style  of
Bartlett  &  Wel-
ford.  He  became
a  member,  and
was  for  several
years  correspond-
ing secretary,  of
the  New  York  his-
torical  society,
and  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Amer-
ican ethnographi-
cal society.  In
1850  President  Taylor  appointed  him  one  of  the
commissioners  to  fix  the  boundary  between  the
United  States  and  Mexico,  under "  the  treaty  of
Guadaloupe  Hidalgo.  This  service  occupied  him
until  1853,  when  he  was  obliged  to  leave  the  work
incomplete,  owing  to  the  failure  of  the  appro-
priation. He  became  secretary  of  state  for  Rhode
Island  in  May,  1855,  and  held  the  office  until
1872.  The  titles  of  his  published  works  are:
"  The  Progress  of  Ethnology  "  (New  York,  1847) ;
"  A  Dictionary  of  Americanisms  "  (Boston,  1850  ;
revised  ed.,  1859  and  1877);  "Records  of  the
Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  the  Providence  Plan-
tations "  (10  vols.,  Providence,  1856-'65) ;  "  Bibliog-
raphy of  Rhode  Island"  (1864);  "Index  to  the
Acts,  etc.,  of  the  General  Assembly  of  Rhode  Isl-
and," 1758-1862  (1863);  "Literature  of  the  Rebel-
lion "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Rhode  Island
Officers  in  the  War  of  the  Rebellion  "  (1867) ;  "  Pri-
meval Man  "  (1868) ;  "  History  of  the  Wanton  Fam-
ily of  Newport,  R.  I."  (1878) ;  and  "  Genealogy  of
the  Russell  Family  "  (1879).  He  had  charge  of  the
John  Carter  Brown  Library  in  Providence  for  sev-
eral years,  and  prepared  a  four-volume  catalogue
of  it,  of  which  one  hundred  copies  were  printed  in
the  highest  style  of  the  art. — Plis  son,  John  Rus-
sell, b.  26  Sept.,  1843,  was  appointed  to  the  naval
academy  from  Rhode  Island  in  1859,  and  in  1861
was  attached  to  the  steam  sloop  "  Mississippi,"  in


which  he  served  at  the  passage  of  Forts  Jackson
and  St.  Philip,  the  capture  of  New  Orleans,  and
the  attack  on  Vicksburg  in  June,  1862.  He  became
ensign  8  Sept.,  1863,  and  lieutenant  22  Feb.,  1804.
While  attached  to  the  steam  sloop  "  Susquehanna  "
he  took  part  in  both  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  was  one
of  the  assaulting  party  of  15  Jan.,  1865,  and  was
specially  mentioned  in  the  reports  of  Com.  Godon
and  Lieut.-Commander  Blake.  He  was  commis-
sioned as  lieut.-commander  25  July,  1866,  and
spent  two  more  years  at  the  naval  academy,  from
1867  to  1869.  He  became  commander  on  25  April,
1877,  and  was  afterward  attached  as  hydrographer
to  the  biireau  of  navigation  in  Washington,  D.  C.

BARTLETT,  John  Sherren,  journalist,  b.  in
Dorsetshire,  England,  in  1790 ;  d.  in  New  Jersey,
24  Aug.,  1863.  He  received  a  medical  education  in
London,  and  was  appointed  surgeon  in  the  British
navy  in  1812.  During  his  passage  to  the  West  In-
dies in  the  "  Swallow  "  he  was  captured  by  the  IT.
S.  frigates  "President"  and  "Congress"  under
Com.  Rodgers,  and  was  taken  as  prisoner  to  Bos-
ton, where  he  was  under  surveillance  until  his  dis-
charge in  1813.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  mar-
ried a  lady  of  Boston,  and  began  the  practice  of
his  profession  in  that  city.  He  subsequently  re-
moved to  New  York,  and,  on  22  June,  1822,  estab-
lished "  The  Albion,"  widely  known  as  an  organ  of
English  conservative  politics.  After  conducting
this  journal  with  great  ability,  he  relinquished  the
editorship  in  1848,  and  in  1855  established  a  pa-
per of  similar  character  in  Boston,  "  The  Anglo-
Saxon,"  which  continued  about  two  years.  He
subsequently  published  at  Liverpool  "  The  Euro-
pean," designed  to  furnish  a  weekly  summary  of
foreign  news  for  American  circulation.  In  1857
he  became  British  consul  in  Baltimore.

BARTLETT,  Joseph,  adventurer,  b.  in  Plvm-
outh,  Mass.,  10  June,  1762 ;  d.  in  Boston,  20  ()ct.,
1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1782,  and
took  the  master's  degree  four  years  later.  After
studying  law  in  Salem,  Mass.,  he  went  to  England.
It  is  related  that,  while  attending  one  of  Gen.  Bur-
goyne's  plays,  in  which  the  former  occupations  of
some  American  officers  are  Ridiculed,  Bartlett,  ris-
ing from  his  seat,  cried  out,  "  Hurrah !  Great
Britain  beaten  by  barbers,  tailors,  and  tinkers ! "
This  was  taken  in  good  part,  and  obtained  him
the  acquaintance  of  many  of  the  young  bloods  of
the  day.  Bartlett  now  gambled  and  spent  his
money  until  he  brought  up  in  a  debtor's  prison.
He  made  money  enough  for  his  release  by  writing
a  play,  and  afterward,  taking  the  name  of  Mait-
land,  went  upon  the  stage  at  Edinburgh.  After
this  he  embarked  for  the  United  States  with  a
quantity  of  goods  which  he  had  bought  on  credit,
and  was  shipwrecked  on  Cape  Cod.  In  Boston  he
became  a  merchant,  but  failed,  and  then  figured
for  a  while  as  captain  of  volunteers  in  Shays's  re-
bellion without  seeing  any  active  service.  He  then
opened  a  law  office  in  Woburn,  Mass.,  where,  as
an  advertisement,  he  painted  his  house  black  and
called  it  "  The  Coffin."  After  this  he  removed  to
Cambridge,  where  in  1799  he  delivered  before  the
Harvard  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  a  satirical  poem
entitled  "  Physiognomy,"  in  which  he  is  said  to
have  portrayed  well-known  men  of  the  day,  though
no  names  are  mentioned.  This  poem,  accompanied
by  a  number  of  aphorisms,  was  published  in  Bos-
ton in  1823  and  dedicated  to  John  Quincv  Adams.
In  1823  Bartlett  delivered  a  fourth-of-July  oration
at  Boston,  and  recited  a  poem  entitled  "  The  New
Vicar  of  Bray,"  which  became  celebrated.  He
next  went  to  Maine,  where  he  was  sent  to  the  legis-
lature, and  was  nearly  elected  to  congress. In


BARTLETT


BARTLETT


185


1805  he  edited  the  "  Freeman's  Friend  "  at  Saco,
Me.,  and  on  4  July  of  that  year  delivered  an  ora-
tion at  Biddeford.'  He  afterward  practised  law  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  and  finally  returned  to  Boston,
where  for  a  few  years  before  his  death  he  was  sup-
ported by  his  friends.

BARTLETT,  Joseph  J.,  soldier,  b.  about  1820.
He  was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
4  Oct.,  18G3,  was  brevetted  major-general  1  Aug.,
18G4,  and  was  mustered  out  15  Jan.,  1866.  From
1867  till  1869  he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Sweden  and
Norway.  He  is  now  employed  in  the  pension-office
at  Washington,  D.  C.

BARTLETT,  Josiali,  signer  of  the  declaration  of
independence,  b.  in  Amesbury,  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1729  ;
d.  in  New  Hampshire,  19  May,  1795.  He  received
the  rudiments  of  a  classical  education,  and  when
only  sixteen  began  the  study  of  medicine  with  his
relative,  Dr.  Ordway,  of  Amesbury.  Young  Bart-
lett  worked  so  earnestly  that  he  soon  exhausted
the  scanty  library  of  his  instructor,  and  was  obliged
to  have  recourse  to  that  of  a  neighboring  clergy-
man. In  1750  he  began  to  practise  at  Kingston,
N.  H.  When  prostrated  by  a  fever  in  1752  he  was
cured  by  treatment  of  his'  own,  when  that  of  the
local  physicians  had  failed,  and,  learning  from  this
experience  the  value  of  freedom  from  dogmatical
rules  in  practice,  he  soon  became  eminent  in  his  pro-
fession. During
the  prevalence
of  an  alarming
throat  disease
in  1754  he  used
Peruvian  bark
with  great  suc-
cess, although
this  course  was
opposed  to

usage.  Dr.Bart-
lett  began  po-
litical life  in
1765  as  a  dele-
gate to  the  leg-
islature, an  of-
fice which  he
filled  annually
until  the  revo-
lution. Here  he
frequently  op-
posed the  royal
policy,  and  Gov.
Wentworth,  hoping  to  gain  his  support,  appointed
him  a  magistrate,  and  later,  in  1770,  to  the  com-
mand of  a  militia  regiment.  He  continued  a  zeal-
ous whig,  however,  and  in  February,  1775,  was  de-
prived for  this  reason  of  both  offices.  In  1774  the
loss  of  his  house  by  fire  compelled  him  to  decline
an  election  to  the  proposed  general  congress. In

1775,  Gov.  Wentworth  having  left  the  province.
Dr.  Bartlett  became  a  member  of  the  committee  of
safety,  upon  which  for  some  time  the  government
practically  devolved,  and  in  September  of  that
year  he  accepted  a  commission  as  colonel  of  the
7th  regiment.  He  was  chosen  to  the  continental
congress  on  23  Aug.,  1775,  and  again  on  23  Jan.,

1776.  He  was  the  first  to  give  his  vote  for  the
declaration  of  independence,  and  was  the  sec-
ond to  sign  it.  In  June,  1776,  he  was  appointed
general  naval  agent,  and  resigned  from  congress
soon  afterward.  In  1777  he  was  with  Stark  at
Bennington,  engaged  as  agent  of  the  state  in  pro-
viding the  New  Hampshire  troops  with  medical
supplies.  In  March,  1778,  Dr.  Bartlett  was  again
elected  to  congress,  and  still  again  in  the  following
August. In  October  he  obtained  leave  of  absence


to  attend  to  his  private  business,  and  from  that
time  was  prominent  in  state  rather  than  national
affairs.  He  became  chief  justice  of  the  court  of
common  pleas  in  1779,  muster  master  of  troops  in
1780,  justice  of  the  superior  court  in  1782,  and
chief  justice  in  1788.  In  the  last-named  year  he
was  an  active  member  of  the  state  convention  that
adopted  the  federal  constitution.  In  1789  the
death  of  his  wife  greatly  depressed  his  spirits,  and
he  declined  an  election  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  plead-
ing his  advanced  age.  He  was,  however,  chosen
president  of  the  state  by  the  legislature  in  1790
and  in  1791  and  1792  by  popular  election.  In
1793  he  became  the  first  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire under  the  new  state  constitution,  which  of-
fice he  held  till  1794.

BARTLETT,  Samuel  Coleord,  educator,  b.  in
Salisbury,  N,  II.,  25  Nov.,  1817.  His  early  life  was
spent  on  the  farm,  where  he  worked  hard  and
studied  faithfully.  He  was  graduated  in  1836  at
Dartmouth,  where  he  was  a  tutor  in  1838-9,  and
then  studied  at  Andover  theological  seminary,
graduating  in  1842.  He  was  ordained  on  2  Aug.,
1843,  and  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church,
Monson,  Mass.,  until  1846,  when  he  became  pro-
fessor of  intellectual  philosophy  and  rhetoric  in
Western  Reserve  college.  From  1852  till  1857  he
was  in  charge  of  the  Franklin  street  church,  Man-
chester, N.  H.,  and  from  1857  to  1859  pastor  of  the
New  England  church  in  Chicago.  Meanwhile,  in
1858,  he  had  become  professor  of  biblical  literature
in  Chicago  theological  seminary,  where  he  continued
until  1877,  when  he  was  elected  president  of  Dart-
mouth college.  He  crossed  the  desert  of  El  Tih  to
Palestine  in  1874,  with  a  view  to  comparing  in  de-
tail all  the  circumstances  and  conditions  of  the
region  with  the  narrative  of  the  journey  of  the
children  of  Israel.  Besides  numerous  articles  in
periodicals,  orations  at  the  centennial  of  the  battle
of  Bennington,  the  quarter  millennial  celebration
of  Newburyport,  the  dedication  of  the  Webster
statue  at  Concord,  and  at  literary  anniversaries,  he
has  published  "  Life  and  Death  "Eternal,  a  Refuta-
tion of  the  Doctrine  of  Annihilation "  (Boston,
1866 ;  2  ed.,  1878) ;  "  Sketches  of  the  Missions  of
the  A.  B.  C.  F.  M."  (1872);  "Future  Punishment"
(1875) ;  "  From  Egypt  to  Palestine,  Observations
of  a  Journey "  (New  York,  1879) ;  and  •'  Sources
of  History  in  the  Pentateuch"  (1883). — His  son,
Edwin  Julius,  b.  in  Hudson,  Ohio,  16  Feb.,  1851,
was  graduated  at  Lake  Forest  academy  in  1868,
and  at  Dartmouth  in  1872,  after  which  he  studied
at  Rush  medical  college,  receiving  his  degree  in
1879.  From  1879  till  1883  he  was  associate  pro-
fessor of  chemistry  in  Dartmouth  college,  and  in
1883  he  became  full  professor.

BARTLETT,  Washington  Allen,  Californian
official,  b.  about  1820;  d.  in  1871.  He  was  the
first  alcalde  at  San  Francisco  after  the  American
conquest  in  1846.  He  had  been  lieutenant  on
board  one  of  the  vessels  of  the  American  fleet,
and  was  selected  for  his  new  office  because  of  his
knowledge  of  Spanish.  His  position  was  extreme-
ly difficult,  but  he  succeeded  in  giving  general  sat-
isfaction. During  a  revolt  of  the  native  Californi-
ans  in  the  early  months  of  1847,  he  was  captured
by  an  irregular  party  and  held  for  some  time  as
prisoner.  After  his  release  he  served  once  more
for  some  years  in  the  navy,  and  after  1855  lived
in  New  York  city.  His  daughter  married  Signor
Oviedo,  a  rich  Cuban,  in  1859,  and  the  ceremony
was  celebrated  with  such  magnificence  that  it  was
popularly  known  as  the  "  Diamond  Wedding."
Under  this  title  a  poem  descriptive  and  satirical
was  written  by  Edmund  C.  Stedman,  which  had  a


186


BARTLETT


BARTLETT


great  run,  and  nearly  involved  its  author  in  a  duel
with  the  enraged  father  of  the  bride.

BARTLETT,  William,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  31  Jan.,  1748;  d.  there,  8
Feb.,  1841.  He  had  little  education  in  youth,  but
his  deficiencies  in  this  respect  were  su[)plied  by
shrewdness  and  caution.  Entering  on  a  mercan-
tile career,  before  the  revolution,  he  succeeded,
with  economy,  in  amassing  a  fortune,  which  he
largely  spent  in  charity,  and  for  the  advancement
of  religion  and  morals.  At  the  foundation  of  An-
dover  theological  seminary,  in  1807,  he  gave  it
$30,000,  endowed  a  professorship,  and  built  a  house
for  the  use  of  the  incumbent.  He  afterward  built
another  professor's  house,  a  hall,  and  a  chapel,  and
paid  the  president's  salary  for  five  or  six  years.
His  gifts  to  this  institution  reached  $250,000,  and
he  also  gave  largely  toward  temperance  work,  mis-
sions, and  the  education  of  ministers.

BARTLETT,  William  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  G  Jan.,  1840;  d.  in  Pittsfield,
Mass.,  17  Dec,  1876.  Mr.  Bartlett  was  a  student
at  Harvard  when  the  first  call  of  the  president
came  for  troops  in  1861.  He  at  once  left  college,
enlisted  in  the  4th  battalion  of  Massachusetts  vol-
unteers, and  learned  his  manual  of  arms  and  com-
pany drill  in  Fort  Independence,  Boston  harbor.
Returning  to  college  for  a  brief  period,  he  was
offered  a  captaincy  in  the  20th  Massachusetts  vol-
unteers. In  September  the  regiment  was  in  camp
in  front  of  Washington,  and  on  21  Oct.  the  young
captain  was  for  the  first  time  under  fire  at  Ball's
Bluff.  His  aptitude  for  military  service  was  so
evident  that  he  was  soon  an  acting  field  officer.
In  the  spring  of  1862  he  was  severely  wounded  at
Yorktown,  and  suffered  amputation  of  his  leg.  He"
recovered  sufficiently  to  be  present  with  his  class
when  it  graduated,  and  received  a  degree  In  Sept.,
1862,  he  accepted  the  duty  of  organizing  the  49th
Massachusetts  volunteers  recruiting  at  Pittsfield,
and  was soon  made its  colonel  in spite of  his

Ehysical  disability.  The  regiment  was  ordered  to
louisiana  with.  Gen.  Banks's  expedition.  Col.
Bartlett  was  obliged,  owing  to  the  loss  of  his  leg,
to  remain  mounted  whenever  his  regiment  needed
his  presence,  and  exposed  himself  on  all  occasions
with  the  most  reckless  daring.  It  is  even  said  that
the  confederate  officers,  in  admiration  of  his  bra-
very, endeavored  to  prevent  their  men  from  aiming
at  him.  He  was,  nevertheless,  twice  wounded  in
the  assault  on  Port  Hudson,  27  May.  Returning
to  the  north,  he  organized  the  57th  Massachusetts
volunteers  in  time  to  lead  it  in  the  Wilderness
campaign,  where  he  was  again  wounded.  He  was
promoted  brigadier-general,  and  was  in  the  field
again  as  soon  as  he  could  sit  his  horse,  but,  ex-
posing himself  with  his  usual  recklessness,  was
taken  prisoner  after  the  explosion  of  the  mine  be-
fore Petersburg,  30  July,  1864.  After  several  weeks
of  suffering  in  Libby  prison  and  elsewhere,  he  was
exchanged  in  September,  placed  in  command  of
the  1st  division  of  the  9th  corps,  and  in  1865  was
brevetted  major-general.  His  military  career  is
among  the  most  brilliant  on  record.  His  frequent
wounds  testified  to  his  bravery,  and  the  success
with  which  he  managed  his  men  so  long  as  he  re-
mained unhurt  marked  him  as  a  born  leader.
After  the  war  he  engaged  for  a  time  in  business
with  the  Tredegar  Iron  Works  at  Richmond,  Va.,
but  eventually  returned  to  the  north,  and  married
a  lady  whose  acquaintance  he  had  formed  while
recruiting  his  regiment  at  Pittsfield,  Mass.  In
that  city  he  engaged  in  business,  and  made  his
residence.  In  1875  he  won  a  sudden  and  deserved
reputation  as  an  orator  by  an  address  delivered  at


the  battle-field  of  Lexington,  on  the  centennial  an-
niversary of  the  fight. See  "  Memoir  of  William
Francis  Bartlett,"  by  F.  W.  Palfrev  (Boston,  1878)
BARTLETT, William Holms Chambers,

mathematician,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  in  1809.  He
removed  with  his  family  to  Missouri  while  yet  an
infant,  and  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  that  state.  During  the  last  two
years  of  his  cadetship  he  served  as  acting  professor
of  mathematics.  He  was  graduated  in  1826  at  the
head  of  his  class,  and  was  one  of  the  few  who  have
passed  through  the  rigid  course  at  West  Point  with-
out any  demerit  marks.  He  was  at  once  commis-
sioned second  lieutenant  of  engineers.  For  two
years,  1827-'9,  he  was  assistant  professor  of  engin-
eering at  West  Point.  From  1829  till  1834  he  was  on
engineering  duty,  constructing  the  principal  coast-
wise fortifications.  His  permanent  appointment
as  professor  of  natural  and  experimental  philoso-
phy at  the  military  academy  was  made  20  April,
1836.  He  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Princeton  in  1837,  and  of  LL.  D.  from  Ge-
neva, N.  Y.  (now  Hobart),  college  in  1847.  He  is
the  author  of  many  contributions  to  "  Silliman's
Journal,"  and  of  an  elaborate  paper  on  rified  guns,
published  in  the  memoirs  of  the  national  academy
of  sciences,  of  which  association  he  was  one  of  the
original  incorporators.  In  1840  he  was  sent  abroad
to  procure  instruments  for  the  astronomical  observ-
atory at  West  Point,  and  visited  the  principal  ob-
servatories of  the  world.  He  was  retired  from
military  service  at  his  own  request  in  1871,  with
the  rank  of  colonel,  and  shortly  afterward  ac-
cepted the  place  of  actuary  for  the  Mutual  Life
Insurance  Co.  of  N'ew  York.  He  prepared  several
text-books  for  the  use  of  the  cadets,  which  have
been  adopted  in  many  of  the  best  colleges.  Their
titles  are  as  follows :  "  Treatise  on  Optics "  (New
York,  1839) ;  "  Synthetical  Mechanics  "  (1850),  con-
taining some  of  his  original  theorems,  notably  that
of  the  conservation  of  work,  applicable  to  all
branches  of  scientific  study ;  "  Analytical  Mechan-
ics "  (1853) ;  and  "  Spherical  Astronomy  "  (1855).

BARTLETT,  William  Lehman  Ashmead
Burdett-Coutts,  b.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in
1851.  He  is  the  son  of  Ellis  Bartlett,  an  American
merchant.  In  1861,  shortly  after  his  father's  death,
he  removed  to  England,  where  he  was  educated.
He  studied  first  at  Uppingham  school,  and  then
entered  Keble  college,  Oxford,  in  1870,  Avliere  he
held  a  scholarship,  subsequently  graduating  at
Christ  church,  after  which  he  studied  law.  Dur-
ing his  college  life  he  became  acquainted  with  the
Baroness  Burdett-Coutts,  to  whom  he  afterward
became  private  secretary,  and  during  the  Turko-
Russian  war  of  1877-'8  he  acted  as  her  almoner
in  connection  with  the  "  Turkish  Compassionate
Fund."  He  has  also  had  some  journalistic  expe-
rience, and  at  one  time  was  connected  with  a
weekly  paper  called  "  England."  On  his  return
from  the  east  he  published  a  book  on  the  Turko-
Russian  war.  Later  he  assisted  the  Baroness
Coutts  in  the  distributing  of  her  charities  in  Ire-
land, and  on  12  Feb.,  1881,  he  married  her.  This
event  caused  much  comment,  not  only  from  the
fact  that  the  bride  was  thirty-seven  years  older
than  the  groom,  but  by  her  act  it  was  understood
that  she  relinquished  a  large  portion  of  the  wealth
she  had  inherited  until  she  should  marry  or  die.
Subsequent  to  the  marriage  he  became  a  member
of  parliament,  and  in  1886  was  reelected  as  a  con-
servative by  an  increased  majority,  and  by  royal
license  assumed  the  name  of  Burdett-Coutts. — His
brother,  Ellis  Ashmead,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  was
educated  at  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  where  he  dis-


BARTLETT


BARTON


187


tinguished  himself  as  a  scholar.  lie  also  became
known  as  a  famous  athlete,  and  represented  his
college  in  the  contests  against  Cambridge.  Later
he  became  a  member  of  parliament  from  Eye,  and
in  1880  was  re-elected  to  parliament  as  a  conserva-
tive, and  appointed  to  office  in  the  admiralty  under
the  Salisbury  government.

BARTLETT,  William  Pitt  Greenwood,
mathematician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  Oct.,  1837;
d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  13  Jan.,  1865,  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1858,  and  was  one  of  the
proctors  of  the  college  from  1859  till  1862.  He
became  one  of  the  corps  of  computers  for  the
"Nautical  Almanac,"  and  the  character  of  his
work  is  shown  by  the  fact  that,  owing  to  the  con-
dition in  which  it  was  left  at  his  death,  another
computer  was  able  to  take  it  up  without  the  loss
of  any  of  Mr.  Bartlett's  labor.  He  published  sev-
eral papers  on  the  elements  of  quaternions  in  the
"  Mathematical  Monthly,"  and  on  interpolation  in
the  "  Memoirs  of  the  American  Academy."

BARTLEY,  Ellas  Hudson,  chemist,  b.  in
Bartleyville,  N.  J.,  6  Dec,  1849.  His  early  life
was  spent  on  a  farm  in  Illinois,  and  after  attend-
ing the  high  school  in  Princeton,  111.,  he  was
graduated  at  Cornell  in  1873.  During  1874-'5  he
was  instructor  at  that  university,  and  from  1875
till  1878  professor  of  chemistry  at  Swarthmore
college.  In  the  winter  of  1877-8  he  lectured  be-
fore the  Franklin  institute,  Philadelphia,  and  in

1879  he  removed  to  Brooklyn.  He  was  graduated
at  Long  Island  college  hospital  in  1879,  and  from

1880  till  1885  was  lecturer  on  physiological  and
practical  chemistry  in  that  college,  when  he  be-
came professor  of  chemistry  and  toxicology.  In
1882  he  was  appointed  chief  chemist  to  the  health
department,  Brooklyn.  He  is  also  consulting  sani-
tarian to  the  hospital  for  nervous  diseases,  and
visiting  physician  to  the  sheltering  arms  nursery.
Dr.  Bartley  is  a  member  of  numerous  medical  and
other  scientific  societies,  and  president  of  the
American  Society  of  Public  Analysts.  He  has
contributed  several  articles  to  Wood's  "  Household
Practice  of  Medicine"  (New  York,  1885),  and  is
the  author  of  "  A  Text-Book  of  Medical  Chemis-
try"  (Philadelphia,  1885).

BARTLEY,  Mordecai,  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  in
Fayette  co..  Pa.,  16  Dec,  1783 ;  d.  in  Mansfield,
Ohio,  10  Oct.,  1870.  He  attended  school,  and
worked  on  his  father's  farm  until  1809,  when  he
moved  to  Ohio.  In  the  war  of  1812  he  served  in
the  northwest,  under  Gen.  Harrison,  as  captain
and  adjutant.  He  settled  in  Richland  co,  in  1814,
and  remained  there  till  1834,  when  he  removed  to
Mansfield  and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  Mr,
Bartley  was  elected  to  the  Ohio  senate  in  1817,  and
in  1818  was  chosen,  by  the  legislature,  registrar  of
the  land-office  of  Virginia  military  district  school
lands.  He  resigned  his  registrarship  in  1823,  hav-
ing been  elected  member  of  congress,  where  he  re-
mained until  3  March,  1831.  In  1844  he  was
elected  governor  of  Ohio  on  the  whig  ticket.  Dur-
ing the  Mexican  war,  when  the  president  issued
his  call  for  troops.  Gov,  Bartley,  though  opposed
to  the  war,  promptly  responded,  superintending
their  organization  in  person.  In  1846  he  retired
to  private  life,  declining  a  renomination.  He  re-
mained a  whig  until  the  disruption  of  that  party,
and  subsequently  acted  with  the  republicans.

BARTOL,  Cyrus  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in
Freeport,  Me.,  30  April,  1813,  He  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1832,  and  at  Cambridge  divinity
school  in  1835,  In  1837  he  was  settled  as  col-
league pastor  with  the  Rev,  Charles  Lowell,  D,  D,,
of  the  West  church  (Unitarian)  in  Boston, He


became  sole  pastor  in  1861,  and  has  been  active
in  philanthropic  movements,  Dr,  Bartol  has  pub-
lished "  Discourses  on  the  Christian  Spirit  and
Life"  (Boston,  1850;  2d  ed,,  revised,  1854);  "Dis-
courses on  Christian  Body  and  Form"  (1854);
"  Pictures  of  Europe  Framed  in  Ideas  "  (1855),  a
work  combining  graphic  sketches  with  philosophi-
cal reflections ;  "  History  of  the  West  (Jhurch  and
its  Ministers  "  (1858) ;  "  Church  and  Congregation  "
(1858) :  "  Word  of  the  Spirit  to  the  Church  "  (1859) :
"  Radical  Problems  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Rising  Faith  "
(1874);  and  "Principles  and  Portraits"  (1880).
He  has  also  published  many  occasional  essays,  and
some  poetry.  Dr.  Bartol's  writings  are  full  of
rich  and  quaint  imagery,  and  deeply  religious,  but
more  ethical  and  social  than  theological,

BARTOLACHE,  Jos6  Ignacio  (bar-to-lah-
chay),  Mexican  mathematician,  b.  in  Gruanajuato,
Mexico,  30  March,  1739 ;  d,  9  June,  1790,  Among
his  works  are :  "  Lecciones  de  Matematicas  " ;  "  Ob-
servaciones  astronomicas  del  Paso  de  Venus  por  el
Disco  del  Sol "  (written  by  Bartolache  and  Alzate) ;
and  "  Instruccion  para  la  Cura  de  las  Viruelas,"

BARTON,  Clara,  philanthropist,  b,  in  Oxford,
Mass,,  about  1830,  She  is  the  daughter  of  Capt.
Stephen  Barton,  and  was  educated  in  Clinton,
N,  Y,  Early  in  life  she  became  a  teacher,  and
founded  a  free  school  in  Bordentown,  N,  J,  When
this  was  opened  it  was  attended  by  only  six  pupils ;
but  when  Miss  Barton  left  it  the  attendance  num-
bered more  than
600,  She  entered
the  patent  office
as  a  clerk  in  1854,
and  remained
there  until  the
war  began,  when
she  determined
to  devote  herself
to  the  care  of
wounded  soldiers
on  the  battle-
field. In  1864
she  was  appoint-
ed by  Gen,  Butler
"  lady  in  charge  "
of  the  hospitals
at  the  front  of
the  Army  of  the
James, In  1865

she  went  to  Andersonville,  Ga,,  to  identify  and  mark
the  graves  of  the  union  prisoners  buried  there,  and
in  the  same  year  was  placed  by  President  Lincoln
in  charge  of  the  search  for  the  missing  men  of  the
union  armies.  She  lectured  during  the  years  1866
and  1867  on  her  war  experiences,  and  afterward
went  to  Switzerland  for  her  health.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  Franco-German  war,  in  1870,  she
assisted  the  grand  duchess  of  Baden  in  the  prepa-
ration of  military  hospitals,  and  gave  the  red
cross  society  much  aid  during  the  war.  At  the
joint  request  of  the  German  authorities  and  the
Strasburg  "  Comite  de  Secours,"  she  superintended
the  supplying  of  work  to  the  poor  of  that  city  in
1871,  after  the  siege,  and  in  1872  had  charge  of  the
public  distribution  of  supplies  to  the  destitute
people  of  Paris,  At  the  close  of  the  war  she  was
decorated  with  the  golden  cross  of  Baden  and  the
iron  cross  of  Germany,  In  1881,  on  the  organiza-
tion of  the  American  red  cross  society,  she  became
its  president.  The  treaty  granting  protection  to
red  cross  agents  was  signed  16  March,  1882.  The
American  society  is  modelled  after  its  European
namesake,  and  its  object  is  stated  by  the  constitu-
tion to  be  "  to  organize  a  system  of  national  relief,


'/3cz/r/^-


188


BARTON


BARTON"


and  apply  the  same  in  mitigating  suffering  caused
by  war,  pestilence,  famine,  and  other  calamities."
In  1884,  as  official  head  of  the  society.  Miss  Barton
had  charge  of  the  expedition  for  the  relief  of  the
sufferers  from  the  flood  in  the  Ohio  and  Missis-
sippi rivers,  and  in  the  same  year  she  was  the  rep-
resentative of  the  government  at  the  red  cross
conference  In  Geneva,  Switzerland.  In  1883  Gov.
Butler  appointed  her  superintendent,  treasurer,  and
steward  of  the  reformatory  prison  for  women  at
Sherborn,  Mass.  Miss  Barton  was  also  delegate  to
the  international  peace  convention  at  Geneva  in
1884,  and  was  special  commissioner  for  foreign  ex-
hibits at  the  New  Orleans  exhibition.  In  1883,  by
request  of  the  senate  committee  on  foreign  rela-
"  tions,  she  prepared  a  "  History  of  the  Red  Cross,"
which  was  published  at  the  government  printing-
office,  Washington.

BAETON,  David,  senator,  b.  about  1785;  d.
near  Booneville,  Mo.,  28  Sept.,  1887.  Of  his  early
age  nothing  is  known,  except  that  he  went  from
Waco  CO.,  Ky.,  and  was  one  of  the  earliest  emi-
grants to  the  territory  of  Missouri.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  convention  that  met  19  July,  1820,  to
frame  the  state  constitution  of  Missouri.  He  was
U.  S.  senator  from  Missouri  in  1821-31,  serving  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  public  lands.

BARTON,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  county
Monaghan,  Ireland,  in  1730 ;  d.  in  New  York,  25
May,  1780.  His  family  was  of  English  descent,
who,  having  obtained  extensive  grants  of  land  in
Ireland,  settled  there  during  the  commonwealth,
Mr.  Barton  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Dublin,  and  in  1751  settled  in  Philadelphia  and
became  tutor  in  the  academy,  afterward  the  College
of  Philadelphia,  now  University  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1754  he  went  to  England,  and  was  there  or-
dained in  the  Established  church.  He  returned  to
America  the  next  year,  and  was  for  nearly  twenty
years  rector  of  St.  James  church,  Lancaster,  Pa.
His  death  occurred  in  New  York,  where  he  had
returned  on  accoupt  of  his  unwillingness  to  take
the  oath  of  allegiance,  and  he  was  interred  in  the
chancel  of  St.  George's  chapel  in  that  city.  He
married  the  sister  of  the  celebrated  mathematician
and  astronomer,  David  Rittenhouse. — His  son,
Benjamin  Smitli,  phvsician,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,
10  Feb.,  1766 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  Dec,
1815.  After  a  course  of  general  studies  under  Dr.
Andrews,  at  York,  Pa.,  he  followed  the  instruction
given  at  the  Philadelphia  college,  now  University
of  Pennsylvania.  Then  during  1786-'8  he  studied
medicine  and  the  natural  sciences  in  Edinburgh
and  London,  and  received  his  medical  degree  from
the  University  of  Gottingen,  Germany.  On  his
return  he  settled  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  soon
acquired  an  extensive  and  lucrative  practice.  In
1789  he  was  appointed  professor  of  natural  history
and  botany,  and  in  1795  of  materia  medica  in  the
College  of  Philadelphia.  In  1813  he  succeeded  Dr.
Benjamin  Rush  as  professor  of  the  theory  and
practice  of  medicine  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. He  was  elected  president  of  the  Philadel-
phia Medical  Society  in  1809,  and  was  some  time
vice-president  of  the  American  Philosophical  So-
ciety, and  also  a  member  of  many  other  American
and  European  societies.  He  contributed  numer-
ous papers  to  the  ""  Transactions  of  the  American
Philosophical  Society,"  and  to  the  "  Medical  and
Physical  Journal,"  which  was  published  by  him.
His  most  important  works  are :  "  Observations  on
Some  Parts  of  Natural  History"  (London,  1787):
'•  New  Views  on  the  Origin  of  the  Tribes  of  Amer-
ica" (1797);  "Elements  of  Botany"  (Philadelphia,
1803 ;  2d  ed.,  2  vols.,  1812-'4) ;  an  edition  of  Cul-


len's  "  Materia  Medica,"  "  Eulogy  on  Dr.  Priestley,"
"  Discourse  on  the  Principal  Desiderata  of  Natural
History"  (Philadelphia,  1807);  and  "Collections
toward  a  Materia  Medica  of  the  United  States"
(3d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1810).  See  "  Bi6graphy  of
Benjamin  S.  Barton,"  by  his  nephew,  W.  P.  C.
Barton  (Philadelphia,  1815).— Tliomas  Pennant,'
son  of  Benjamin  Smith,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1803;
d.  there,  5  April,  1869.  He  married  in  1833  Cora,
daughter  of  Edward  Livingston,  and  in  June  of
that  year  was  appointed  secretary  of  legation  at
Paris.  He  was  a  man  of  cultivated  literary  taste,
and  gathered  a  Shakespearean  library  of  great
value,  comprising  2,000  of  the  rarest  editions,  and
forming,  with  about  10,000  miscellaneous  books,
one  of  the  most  important  private  collections  in
America.  He  provided  by  will  that  this  should  be
sold  after  his  death  to  some  institution  that  could
prevent  its  dispersion.  His  widow  carried  out  his
wishes  in  a  liberal  spirit,  and  the  collection  was
acquired  by  the  public  library  of  Boston,  which  set
apart  a  special  room  for  its  accommodation.  A  cata-
logue of  the  Shakespeareana  has  been  issued,  and
one  is  in  preparation  of  the  whole  collection,  pref-
aced by  a  memoir  of  Mr.  Barton. — William  Paul
Crillon,  nephew  of  Thomas  Pennant,  botanist,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Nov.,  1786 ;  d.  there,  29  Feb.,
1856.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1805.
While  there  each  member  of  his  class  assumed  the
name  of  some  celebrated  man :  that  which  he  took
was  Count  Paul  Crillon,  and  the  initials  P.  C.  were
retained  by  him  through  life.  He  studied  medicine
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  under  the  direc-
tion of  his  uncle.  Dr.  Benjamin  Smith  Barton,  and
received  his  degree  in  1808.  His  thesis  was  on
"  Nitrous  Oxide  Gas  "  ;  it  was  considered  worthy
of  publication,  and  for  many  years  was  accepted
as  the  standard  treatise  on  that  subject.  After
practising  medicine  in  Philadelphia,  he  became
surgeon  to  the  Pennsylvania  hospital,  and  soon
afterward  he  was  appointed  surgeon  in  the  navy.
The  U.  S.  naval  bureau  of  medicine  and  surgery
was  organized  by  him,  and  he  was  the  first  chief
clerk  of  that  bureau.  He  was  stationed  at  vari-
ous places  on  shore,  several  times  at  the  Philadel-
phia navy-yard,  and  he  also  saw  a  great  deal  of  sea
duty.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  senior  sur-
geon of  the  navy.  On  the  death  of  his  uncle.  Dr.
B.  S.  Barton,  he  became  professor  of  botany  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  for  several
years  professor  of  materia  medica  and  botany  at
Jeft'erson  Medical  College.  Dr.  Barton  was  a  fel-
low of  the  college  of  physicians  in  Philadelphia,
president  of  the  Linnaean  society,  and  a  member
of  the  American  philosophical  society,  and  other
scientific  societies.  His  published  works  include
"  The  Influence  of  a  Change  in  Climate  in  curing
Disease,"  translated  from  the  Latin  of  Prof.  Greg-
ory by  Dr.  Barton  (Philadelphia,  1815);  "Florae
Philadelphiae  Prodromus  "  (1815) ;  "  Vegetable  Ma-
teria Medica  of  the  United  States"  (2  vols.,  1817-
'25);  "Plans  for  Marine  Hospitals  in  the  United
States"  (1817);  "Compendium  Flora?  Philadel-
phia" (2  vols.,  1818);  "Flora  of  North  America "
(1821-3) ;  " Outlines  of  Lectures  on  Materia  Medi-
ca and  Botany"  (2  vols.,  1823);  "Letter  to  the
Trustees  of  the  University  of  Pennsytvania  rela-
tive to  introducing  the  Professorship  of  Botany
into  the  Medical  Faculty  "  (1825) ;  "  Hints  to  Naval
Officers  cruising  in  the  West  Indies  "  (1830) ;  and
"  Medical  Botany  "  (2  vols.).

BARTON,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Warren,
Bristol  CO.,  R.  I.,  26  May,  1748 ;  d.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  22  Oct.,  1831.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  when the  war  began  was  work-


BARTRxVM


BASCOM


189


ing  at  his  trade,  that  of  a  hatter.  On  hearing  of
the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  he  shouldered  a  musket
and  joined  the  ormy.  In  1777  he  conceived  the
exploit  that  made  him  famous,  that  of  capturing
the  British  general,  Robert  Preseott,  who  had  made
himself  offensive  to  the  Rhode  Island  whigs  by  his
overbearing  conduct.  On  the  nigiit  of  10  July,
with  thirty-eight  men  in  four  whale-boats.  Barton
crossed  Njxrnigansett  bay,  passed  unobserved  three
British  frigates,  and,  landing  about  half  way  be-
tween Newport  and  Bristol  ferry,  went  to  the
farm-house,  represented  in  the  engraving,  where
Preseott  had  his  headquarters. The  guards  were


surprised,  the  door  of  Prescott's  room  was  broken
in  by  a  negro  in  the  party,  who  used  his  head  as  a
battering-ram,  and  the  general  was  hurried  away
half  dressed  and  taken  to  Warwick  point,  and
afterward  to  Washington's  headquarters  in  New
Jersey.  For  this  exploit  congress  gave  Barton  a
sword,  and  he  was  brevetted  colonel.  He  was  very
proud  of  his  deed,  and  it  is  said  that  at  the  retreat
of  the  British  from  Warren,  in  1778,  he  called  after
one  of  the  enemy's  officers,  challenging  him  to
single  combat,  and  announcing  himself  as  "'  the
man  who  took  Preseott."  During  this  same  re-
treat Barton  was  wounded  and  disabled  for  some
time.  He  was  afterward  a  member  of  the  state
convention  that  adopted  the  federal  constitution.
Some  time  later  Barton's  right  to  a  piece  of  land
in  Vermont  was  contested,  and,  as  he  refused  to
pay  a  judgment,  he  was  detained  in  Danville,  Vt.,
for  fourteen  years.  Lafayette,  on  liis  visit  in  1825,
paid  the  claim  without  Barton's  knowledge,  and
set  him  free.  It  is  said  by  some  writers  that  the
land  in  question  was  granted  to  Barton  by  con-
gress :  but  Mrs.  Catharine  R.  Williams,  in  her  life
of  Barton  ("  Biographies  of  Revolutionary  Heroes,"
Providence,  1839),  says  that  he  purchased  it.

BARTRAM,  John,  botanist,  b.  near  Darby,  Pa.,
23  March,  1699 :  d.  in  Kingsessing,  Pa.,  22  Sept.,
1777.  He  acquired  a  knowledge  of  medicine  and
surgery,  became  interested  in  the  study  of  plants,
and  was  finally  cited  by  Linnaeus  as  the  great-
est natural  botanist  in  the  world.  In  1728  he
founded  the  first  botanical  garden  in  the  United
States,  at  Kingsessing,  on  the  banks  of  the  Schuyl-
kill, not  far  from  Philadelphia.  His  enthusiasm
for  collecting  led  him  to  make  numerous  excur-
sions through  the  then  little  explored  regions  of
North  America.  In  1743  he  visited  the  shores
of  Lake  Ontario,  and  wrote  "  Observations  on  the
Inhabitants,  Climate,  Soil,  Rivers,  Productions,
Animals,  and  other  Matters  Worthy  of  Notice,
made  by  Mr.  John  Bartram  in  his  Travels  from
Pennsylvania  to  Onondaga,  Oswego,  and  the  Lake
Ontario,  in  Canada"  (London,  1751).  During  the
winter  of  1765-6  he  visited  East  Florida,  and  an
account  of  this  trip  was  published  with  his  journal
(London,  1766).  (  He  made  extensive  collections,

!


and  sent  specimens  of  new  and  curious  American
plants  to  foreign  botanists,  who  in  return  supplied
him  with  books  and  apparatus.  He  secured  the
appointment  of  American  botanist  to  George  III.,
and  was  a  member  of  several  foreign  scientific  socie-
ties, as  well  as  a  contributor  of  papers  to  the  "  Philo-
sophical Transactions,"  London.  See  "  Memoirs  of
John  Bartram,"  by  William  Bartram.  See  "  Memo-
rials of  John  Bartram  and  Humphrey  Marshall,"
by  William  Darlington  (Philadelphia,  1849).— His
son,  William,  botanist,  b.  in  Kingsessing,  Pa.,  9
Feb.,  1739 ;  d.  there,  22  July,  1823.  He  removed  to
North  Carolina  and  there  became  engaged  in  busi-
ness. This  he  abandoned  before  reaching  the  age  of
thirty,  and,  accompanying  his  father  to  Florida,  set-
tled on  the  banks  of  St.  John's  river,  where  for  sev-
eral years  he  cultivated  indigo.  In  1771  he  returned
to  the  botanical  gardens,  and  subsequently  devoted
his  attention  almost  entirely  to  botany.  From  1773
till  1778  he  travelled  extensively  through  the  south-
ern states,  in  order  to  examine  the  natural  products
of  the  country.  An  account  of  his  experiences,  un-
der the  title  of  "  Travels  through  North  and  South
Carolina,  Georgia,  East  and  West  Florida,  the
Cherokee  Country,  the  extensive  Territories  of  the
Muscogules  or  Creek  Confederacy,  and  the  Country
of  the  Choctaws,"  was  published  (Philadelphia,  1791,
and  London,  1792-'4).  In  1782  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor of  botany  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
but  declined  the  place  on  account  of  his  health.
In  1786  he  became  al!  member  of  the  American  philo-
sophical society,  and  he  was  also  connected  with  oth-
er scientific  bodies.  Mr.  Bartram  was  the  author
of  "  Anecdotes  of  a  Crow,"  "  Description  of  Cer-
thia,"  and  "  Memoirs  of  John  Bartram."  In  1789  he
wrote  "  Observations  on  the  Creek  and  Cherokee
Indians,"  which  was  published  in  1851  ("  Transac-
tions American  Ethnological  Society,"  vol.  iii.).  He
drew  the  illustrations  in  Barton's  "  Elements  of
Botany,"  and  many  of  the  most  curious  and  beau-
tiful plants  of  North  America  were  illustrated  and
first  made  known  by  him. He  also  published  the


most  complete  list  of  American  birds  previous  to
Alexander  Wilson,  whom  he  greatly  assisted  at
the  outset  of  his  career.  The  engraving  shows  the
Bartram  homestead,  on  the  Schuylkill.

BASCOM,  Henry  Bidleman,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Hancock,  Delaware  co.,  N.  Y..  27  May,  1796;  d.
in  Louisville,  Ky.,  8  Sept.,  1850.  He  was  descend-
ed from  a  Huguenot  family.  He  had  but  little  edu-
cation, but  before  the  age  of  eighteen  he  was  licensed
to  preach,  and  admitted  to  the  Ohio  conference,
where  he  did  hard  work  on  the  frontier,  preaching
in  one  year  400  times,  and  receiving  a  salary  of
112.10.  His  style  being  too  florid  to  suit  the  taste
of  those  to  whom  he  preached,  he  was  transferred,
in  1816,  to  Tennessee ;  but,  after  filling  appoint-
ments there  and  in  Kentucky,  he  returned  to
Ohio  in  1822,  and  in  1823  Henry  Clay  obtained


190


BASCOM


BASSETT


for  him  the  appointment  of  chaplain  to  congress.
At  the  close  of  the  session  of  that  body  he  visited
Baltimore,  where  his  fervid  oratory  made  a  great
sensation.  He  was  first  president  of  Madison  col-
lege, Uniontown,  Pa.,  in  1827-'8,  and  from  1829
till  1831  was  agent  of  the  colonization  society.
From  that  time  until  1841  he  was  professor  of
moral  science  and  belles-lettres  at  Augusta  college,
Ky.  He  became  president  of  Transylvania  uni-
versity, Kentucky,  in  1842,  having  previously  de-
clined the  presidency  of  two  other  colleges.  Dr.
Bascom  was  a  member  of  the  general  conference
of  1844,  which  suspended  Bishop  Andrew  because
he  refused  to  manumit  his  slaves;  and  the  pro-
test of  the  southern  members  against  the  action  of
the  majority  was  drawn  up  by  him.  In  1845  he
was  a  member  of  the  Louisville  convention,  which
organized  the  Methodist  Church  South,  and  was
the  author  of  its  report ;  and  he  was  chairman  of
the  commission  appointed  to  settle  the  differences
between  the  two  branches  of  the  church.  In  1846
he  became  editor  of  the  "  Southern  Methodist
Quarterly  Review,"  and  in  1849  he  was  chosen
bishop,  being  ordained  in  May,  1850,  only  a  few
months  before  his  death.  Dr.  Bascom  was  a  pow-
erful speaker,  but  was  fond  of  strong  epithets  and
rather  extravagant  metaphors.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Sermons  from  the  Pulpit,"  "  Lectures  on  In-
fidelity," "  Lectures  on  Moral  and  Mental  Science,"
and  "Methodism  and  Slavery."  A  posthumous
edition  of  his  works  was  edited  by  Rev.  T.  N.  Ral-
ston (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1850  and  1856).  See  "  Life
of  Bishop  Bascom,"  by  Rev.  Dr.  M.  M.  Henkle
(Nashville,  1854).

BASCOM,  John,  educator,  b.  in  Genoa,  N.  Y.,
1  May,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in
1849,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in
1855.  He  was  a  tutor  in  Williams  college  from
1852  to  1853,  and  from  1855  to  1874  held  the  pro-
fessorship of  rhetoric  there,  also  acting  as  pastor
of  the  church  at  North  Pownal,  Vt.,  from  1856  to
1864.  In  1874  he  became  president  of  the  uni-
versity of  Wisconsin,  holding  also  the  professor-
ship of  mental  and  moral  philosophy,  and  on  23
June,  1886,  handed  in  his  resignation,  to  take  effect
at  the  end  of  the  college  year  in  1887.  Dr.  Bascom
has  contributed  much  to  periodical  literature,  and
is  also  a  powerful  pulpit  orator.  He  has  pub-
lished the  following  works  :  "  Political  Economy  "
(New  York,  1859) ;  "  Esthetics  "  (1862) ;  "  Philoso-
phy of  Rhetoric  "  (1865) ;  "  Principles  of  Psychol-
ogy "  (1869) ;  "  Science,  Philosophy,  and  Religion  "
(1871)  ;  "  Philosophy  and  English  Literature  "
(1874) ;  "  A  Philosophy  of  Religion  "  (1876) ;  "  Com-
parative Psvchology"  (1878);  "Ethics"  (1879);
"Natural  Theology"  (1880);  "Science  of  Mind"
(1881)  r  "  The  Words  of  Christ "  (1884) ;  "  Prob-
lems in  Philosophy  "  (1885).

BASHFORD,  Coles,  governor  of  Wisconsin,  b.
near  Cold  Spring,  Putnam  co.,  N.  Y.,  24  Jan.,
1816 ;  d.  25  April,  1878.  He  was  educated  at  the
Wesleyan  seminary  (now  Genesee  college),  Lima,
N.  Y.,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1841.  He  was  elected  district  attorney  for  Wayne
CO.  in  1847,  and  in  1850  resigned  and  removed  to
Algonia,  now  a  part  of  Oshkosh,  Wis.  He  was  a
member  of  the  whig  state  convention  in  1851,  and
in  1852  was  chosen  for  the  state  senate,  from  which
he  resigned  in  1855.  He  was  the  first  republican
governor  of  the  state,  serving  from  1855  to  1857,
and  declining  a  renomination.  He  practised  law
in  Oshkosh  till  1863,  when  he  removed  to  Tucson,
Arizona.  He  was  attornev-general  of  the  territory
from  1864  till  1867,  was  president  of  the  first  ter-
ritorial convention,  and  in  1866  was  elected  dele-


gate to  congress,  serving  from  March,  1867,  to
March,  1869.  He  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
territory  in  1869,  and  served  till  1876,  when  he  re-
signed, and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.

BASS,  Edward,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1726 ;  d.  in  Newburyport,  10  Sept.,
1803.  Pie  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1744,  for
some  years  was  engaged  in  teaching,  and  received
a  license  to  preach  among  the  Congregationalists,
but  in  1752  applied  for  orders  in  the  Episcopal
church.  He  went  to  England,  and  was  ordained
both  deacon  and  priest  by  Dr.  Sherlock,  bishop  of
London.  This  was  in  May,  1752,  and,  on  his  re-
turn home,  he  became  rector  of  St.  Paul's  church,
Newburyport,  which  place  he  retained  during  his
life.  When  the  revolution  began,  Mr.  Bass  yielded
to  the  current  patriotic  sentiment,  gave  up  pray-
ing for  the  royal  family,  and  in  consequence  lost
the  stipend  heretofore  received  from  the  society
for  propagating  the  gospel  in  foreign  parts.  With
such  help  as  he  could  obtain,  he  continued  the
services  of  the  church  until  the  war  was  over ;  but,
when  he  applied  for  arrearages  of  stipend  to  the
society,  his  application  was  refused.  This  led  to
his  publishing  a  pamphlet  in  self-defence  (London,
1786).  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon
him  by  the  university  of  Pennsylvania  in  1789.
The  Episcopal  church  having  been  organized  in
Massachusetts,  a  convention  of  clerical  and  lay
deputies  was  held  in  Boston  in  1796,  and  Dr.  Bass
was  unanimously  chosen  to  become  bishop.  He
was  consecrated  in  Philadelphia,  7  May,  1797.  His
jurisdiction  was,  by  request,  extended  over  the
churches  in  Rhode  Island  and  New  Hampshire,
and  he  continued,  in  connection  with  his  labors  as
a  bishop,  to  perform  the  duties  of  a  parish  priest

BASSETT,  Ebenezer  Bon  Carlos,  diplomatist,
b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  in  1833.  He  was  educated
at  the  Connecticut  normal  school,  and  served  for
fourteen  years  as  a  teacher  in  Philadelphia.  He
was  U.  S.  minister  to  Hayti  in  1869-77,  and  since
1879  has  been  Haytian  consul  in  New  York  city.

BASSETT,  James,  missionary,  b.  near  Hamil-
ton, Canada,  31  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Wabash  in  1856,  and  at  Lane  theological  seminary
in  1859.  He  served  as  chaplain  in  the  U.  S.  vol-
unteer army  in  1862-'3.  From  1863  until  1871
he  held  pastorates  in  the  Presbyterian  churches  of
Newark  and  Englewood,  N.  J.,  and  in  1871  be-
came a  missionary  for  the  Presbyterian  board.  He
travelled  extensively  in  Europe,  passed  many  years
in  Turkey  and  Persia,  and  was  the  first  American
to  settle  in  Teheran,  and  the  first  known  to  have
travelled  as  far  east  as  the  alleged  tomb  of  Ilaroun-
al-Raschid  at  Mashhad.  As  a  pioneer  of  missionary
work,  he  gained  a  wide  acquaintance  with  the
manners  and  customs  of  central  and  eastern  Per-
sia. He  is  the  author  of  "Hymns  in  Persian"
(Teheran,  1875  and  1884) ;  "  A  Grammatical  Note
on  the  Simnuni  Dialects  of  the  Persian,"  from  the
"Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society "  (London,
1884) ;  "  Among  the  Turcomans  "  ("  Leisure  Hour,"
London,  1879-'80) ; "  Persia  the  Land  of  the  Imams  "
(New  York,  1886) ;  and  a  translation  of  the  gospel
according  to  Matthew  into  Gaghatti  Tartar  (Lon-
don, 1880).

BASSETT,  Richard,  governor  of  Delaware,  b.
in  Delaware;  d,  in  September,  1815.  He  was  a
lawyer,  and  a  member  of  congress  under  the  old
confederation  in  1787,  and  was  also  a  member
of  the  convention  that  framed  the  federal  consti-
tution. From  1789  to  1793  he  was  a  U.  S.  sena-
tor, and  was  the  first  member  that  cast  his  vote  in
favor  of  locating  the  capital  on  the  Potomac.
Chosen  presidential  elector  in  1797,  he  voted  for


BASSINl


BATEMAN


191


John  Adams ;  from  1798  till  1801  he  was  governor
of  his  state.  In  1801  and  1802  he  was  a  tJ.  S.  cir-
cuit judge.  His  daughter  became  the  wife  of
James  A.  Bayard,  signer  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent.

BASSINl,  Carlo,  musician,  b.  in  Cuneo,  Pied-
mont, Italy,  in  1812;  d.  in  Irvington,  N.  J.,  26
Nov.,  1870.  His  parents  being  musicians,  he  was
placed  at  an  early  age  under  the  best  masters  in
training  for  a  violinist,  and  in  his  twentieth  year
had  already  attained  to  some  distinction  as  an  in-
strumentalist. Soon  afterward  he  went  with  a
Genoese  operatic  company  to  South  America,  and
was  elected  director  of  the  troupe  shortly  after
their  arrival  abroad.  With  the  money  earned  in
South  America  he  came  to  New  York  city  and
undertook  to  give  a  concert,  which  proved  a  failure
and  exhausted  his  resources.  In  this  dilemma  he
set  about  giving  lessons  in  vocal  music,  thereby
relinquishing  his  prospects  as  a  brilliant  orchestral
leader.  For  years  he  worked  untiringly,  often  be-
ginning at  seven  in  the  morning  and  working  un-
til ten  at  night.  He  had  not  a  rich  voice,  but  was
an  admirable  trainer.  Among  his  works  are :  "  Art
of  Singing"  (Boston,  1857);  "Melodic  Exercises"
(1865) ;  "  Method  for  the  Tenor  "  (1866) ;  "  Method
for  the  Baritone"  (1868);  and  "New  Method"
(1869).  Some  of  the  best  of  his  compositions  are
"  A  te  Accanto,"  a  love  song,  dedicated  to  his  wife
shortly  before  his  marriage ;  "  0  Salutaris,"  a
prayer  for  a  soprano  voice,  and  "  There  is  Light  in
the  Sky,"  composed  shortly  before  his  death.

BASTIDAS,  Rodrig-uez  de,  explorer,  b.  about
1460 ;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo.  Shortly  after  the  dis-
covery of  America  he  associated  with  Juan  de  la
Casa  in  the  prosecution  of  new  explorations.  Be-
ing ordered  by  the  king  of  Spain  to  receive  twenty
missionaries  on  board  his  ship,  he  sailed  along  the
coast  of  Central  America  and  New  Grenada  in
search  of  a  fit  situation  for  a  colony,  and  finally
selected  the  district  in  New  Grenada  that  after-
?/ard  bore  the  name  of  St.  Martha,  and  there  he
founded  the  city  of  St.  Martha.  Its  prosperity  was
so  great  that  in  less  than  two  years  it  was  erected
into  a  bishopric,  and  Bastidas  was  appointed  gov-
ernor. Endeavoring  to  check  the  cupidity  and
cruelty  of  his  soldiers  in  their  dealings  with  the
natives,  he  was  wounded  in  a  sedition,  and  obliged
to  fly  to  Santo  Domingo,  where  he  was  arrested  by
the  governor,  Bovadilla,  who  charged  him  with
naaking  a  treaty  with  the  Indians  without  author-
ity. He  was  honorably  acquitted,  but  died  of  his
wounds  soon  afterward,

BASTIDE,  John  Henry,  British  soldier,  b.
about  1710.  He  was  employed  as  chief  engineer
in  Nova  Scotia  and  Newfoundland  in  1742,  and  in
April,  1745,  Massachusetts  granted  him  £140  for
services  in  the  repair  and  construction  of  the  forts
in  that  province,  particularly  Castle  William  and
Governor's  island  in  Boston  harbor,  Marblehead,
Cape  Ann,  and  Falmouth  (now  Portland,  Me.).
His  services  were  of  great  value  in  preparing  the
plans  and  the  means  for  the  capture  of  Louisburg
m  1745,  and  were  acknowledged  by  Gov.  Shirley,
of  Massachusetts,  in  a  message  to  the  house  of
representatives.  He  was  afterward  employed  in
the  reduction  of  Canada  from  1756  to  1760,  and  in
1761-2  fortified  the  harbor  of  Halifax  and  im-
proved its  dockyard.  He  became  lieutenant-gen-
eral in  the  British  army,  3  April,  1770.

BATCHELDER,  John  Putnam,  phvsician,  b.
in  Wilton,  N.  H.,  6  Aug.,  1784;  d.  in  New  York
city,  8  April,  1868.  He  was  a  great-nephew  of
Gen.  Israel  Putnam.  After  an  academical  educa-
tion, he  began  the  study  of  medicine,  and  in  1807
was  licensed  to  practise. He  did  not  receive  the


degree  of  M.  D.,  however,  until.  1815,  after  attend-
ance on  the  lectures  of  Harvard  medical  school.
He  began  practice  in  Charlestown,  N.  H.,  removed
thence  to  Pittsfield,  Mass. ;  afterward  to  Utica,  N.
Y.,  and  in  1843  to  New  York  city.  He  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  anatomy  in  Castleton  college,
Vt.,  in  1817,  and  soon  afterward  professor  of  sur-
gical anatomy  in  the  Berkshire  medical  institution
at  Pittsfield.  He  was  a  successful  surgeon,  and
performed  many  operations  of  great  importance,
and  requiring  extraordinary  skill  and  daring.  For
many  years  he  made  the  treatment  of  diseases  of
the  eye  a  specialty.  He  was  president  of  the  Acad-
emy of  Medicine,  and  of  the  New  York  medical
association  in  1858.  He  published  "  Thoughts  on
the  Connection  of  Life,  Mind,  and  Matter"  (Utica,
N.  Y.,  1845),  besides  essays  and  medical  treatises.

BATCHELDER,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Jaf-
frey,  N.  H.,  8  June,  1784;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
5  Feb.,  1879.  His  early  life  was  spent  in  New  Ips-
wich, whither  his  parents  had  removed,  and  in  1808
he  became  interested  in  a  cotton  factory  at  this
place,  which  was  the  second  that  was  erected  m
New  Hampshire.  In  1825  he  removed  to  Lowell,
where  he  superintended  the  erection  of  the  Hamil-
ton Company's  mills.  In  1831  he  was  called  on  to
undertake  the  erection  of  a  cotton-mill  for  the
York  Manufacturing  Company  in  Saco,  Me.,  and
to  superintend  its  operations.  The  mills  under  his
management  were  very  successful,  and  the  plant
and  capital  were  greatly  enlarged.  In  1846  he  re-
moved to  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  continued  to
reside,  and,  although  a  representative  in  the  Massa-
chusetts state  legislature,  he  yet  for  many  years
continued  his  relations  with  the  mills,  being  presi-
dent of  the  Hamilton  Manufacturing  Company,
the  Appleton  Company,  the  Essex  Company,  the
Everett  Mills,  the  York  Manufacturing  Company,
and  the  Exeter  Manufacturing  Company — having
an  aggregate  capital  of  about  |5.000,000.  About
1832  he  devised  the  first  stop-motion  to  the  draw-
ing-frame, which  has  since  been  used  in  this  coun-
try and  England.  In  1832  he  patented  the  steam-
cylinders  and  connections  now  universally  used  in
dressing-frames  for  drying  yarns.  His  greatest  in-
vention was  the  dynamometer  used  for  ascertaining
the  power  for  driving  machinery.  It  was  first  used
in  the  York  mills  in  1837,  and  was  considered
preferable  to  any  known  apparatus  for  determin-
ing the  power  actually  used  in  driving  machinery.
In  early  life  he  contributed  to  the  "  Boston  Month-
ly Anthology"  and  to  the  "Port  Folio,"  and  he
was  the  author  of  the  "Responsibilities  of  the
North  in  Relation  to  Slavery  "  (Cambridge,  1856),
and  "  Introduction  and  Early  Progress  of  the  Cot-
ton Manufacture  in  the  United  States"  (Boston,
1863).  A  sketch  of  his  life  was  published  in  pam-
phlet form  (Lowell,  1885).

BATEMAN,  Ephraim,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in
Cedarville,  Cumberland  co.,  N.  J.,  in  1770 ;  d.  there,
29  Jan.,  1829.  After  receiving  a  public-school  edu-
cation he  became  a  mechanic's  apprentice,  but,
leaving  his  employment,  studied  medicine,  and
afterward  was  noted  in  his  profession.  He  was
for  many  years  a  member  of  the  state  legislature,
and  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat.  He
was  thrice  re-elected,  serving  altogether  from  4
Dec,  1815,  to  3  March,  1823,  and  was  a  member  of
the  committees  on  post-offices  and  accounts.  In
1826,  as  president  of  the  council  of  the  state  legis-
lature, he  gave  the  casting  vote  that  elected  him
to  the  U,  S.  senate  over  Theodore  Frelinghuysen.
A  committee  of  the  senate  afterward  reported  that
this  action  was  perfectly  legal,  and  he  remained  in
the  senate  until  he  resigned  in  January,  1829.


192


BATEMAN


BATES


BATEMAN,  Kate  Josephine,  actress,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  7  Oct.,  1842.  Her  father,  H.  L.
Bateinan,  was  a  well-known  theatrical  manager,
and  her  mother,  Frances,  an  actress,  manager,  and
the  author  of  several  dramas.  Kate  and  her  sister
Ellen  (Mrs.  Greppo)  were  educated  for  the  stage
from  childhood.  The  two  girls  made  their  first
appearance,  when  Kate  was  only  three  years  old,
at  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  "  The  Babes  in  the  Wood,"
and  for  ten  years  played  together  as  "  1'he  Bate-
man  Children."  Miss  Bateman  retired  from  the
sta^e  in  1856,  but  reappeared  on  19  March,  1860,
as  Evangeline  in  her  mother's  drama  of  that  name
at  Winter  Garden,  New  York.  In  December,  1862,
she  appeared  in  Boston  as  Leah,  a  part  in  which
she  has  made  her  reputation,  and  which  she  played
in  all  the  large  cities  of  the  United  States.  Her
first  appearance  abroad  was  made  on  1  Oct.,  1863,
at  the  Adelphi  theatre,  London,  where  "  Leah "
had  a  run  of  211  nights.  After  a  provincial  tour
and  a  reappearance  at  the  Adelphi  as  Julia  in  the
"Hunchback,"  Miss  Bateman  took  a  farewell  of
the  English  public  at  her  Majesty's  theatre,  in  the
cliaracter  of  Juliet,  22  Dec,  1865.  In  October,
1866,  she  married  George  Crowe,  formerly  editor  of
the  "  London  News."  She  returned  to  the  stage  in
1868,  and  in  1872  made  a  success  in  "  Medea."  In
March,  1875,  Miss  Bateman's  father,  who  had  been
for  some  years  manager  of  the  Lyceum  theatre;
died,  and  her  mother  continued  the  management,
opening  the  season  with  a  revival  of  "  Macbeth,"
in  which  Miss  Bateman  and  Henry  Irving  took  the
principal  parts.  In  April,  1876,  she  took  the  title
role  in  Tennyson's  "  Queen  Mary,"  which,  though
an  artistic  success,  proved  a  failure  financially.
Some  time  after  this  Miss  Bateman  became  lessee
of  the  Sadler's  Wells  theatre.  Her  sisters,  Isabel
and  Virginia  Frances,  are  also  actresses. — Isabel,
who  was  born  near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28  Dec,  1854,
was  educated  in  England,  appeared  on  the  stage
in  Liverpool  when  fifteen  years  of  age,  and  has
played  Juliet,  Lady  Teazle,  Portia,  and  Pauline.

BATEMAN,  Newton,  educator,  b.  in  Fairfield,
N.  J.,  27  July,  1822.  His  parents  removed  to  Illi-
nois in  1833,  and  he  was  graduated  at  Illinois  col-
lege, Jacksonville,  in  1843.  After  studying  for  a
time  in  Lane  theological  seminary,  he  travelled  ex-
tensively in  the  United  States  and  then  became
principal  of  a  St.  Louis  school.  He  was  professor
of  mathematics  at  St.  Charles  college,  Missouri,
from  1847  to  1851,  and  then  became  the  head  of
the  Jacksonville,  111.,  public  free  school,  acting  at
the  same  time  as  superintendent  of  the  city  schools
and  commissioner  for  the  county.  In  1858  he  was
principal  of  the  Jacksonville  female  academy,  and
in  the  same  year  was  chosen  state  superintendent
of  public  instruction.  Here  he  served  altogether
ten  years,  publishing  five  valuable  reports  and  be-
ing active  in  establishing  the  state  normal  univer-
sity. He  had  charge  of  the  correspondence  of  the
state  provost-marshal  general  from  1862  to  1864,
and  afterward  resumed  his  place  as  state  superin-
tendent. In  1875  he  became  president  of  Knox
college,  Galesburg,  Illinois.  He  has  been  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  board  of  health  since  1877,  and  has
served  three  terms  as  its  president.

BATES,  Arlo,  author,  b.  in  East  Machias,  Me.,
16  Dec,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1876,  after  which  he  removed  to  Boston  and  en-
gaged in  literary  work.  In  January,  1878,  he  be-
came secretary  of  the  young  men's  republican  com-
mittee, of  Massachusetts,  and  editor  of  the  "  Broad-
side," a  paper  devoted  to  civil-service  reform.  In
August,  1880,  he  became  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Sun-
day Courier." Besides  numerous  magazine  articles


he  has  published  "Patty's  Perversities"  (Boston,
1881);  "F.  Sevmour  Ilayden  and  Engraving"  (a
pamphlet,  1882) ;  "Mr.  Jacobs"  (1883);  "The  Pa-
gans "  (New  York,  1884) ;  "A  Wheel  of  Fire  "  (1885) ;
"  Old  Salem,"  edited  (Boston,  1886) ;  and  "  Ber-
ries of  the  Brier,"  poems  (1886).

BATES,  Barnabas,  postal  reformer,  b.  in  Ed-
monton, England,  in"  1785;  d.  in  Boston,  11  Oct.,
1853.  While  yet  a  child  he  came  to  the  United
States,  and  became  a  Baptist  preacher  in  Rhode
Island,  where  he  was  also  for  some  time  collector
of  the  port  of  Bristol  under  President  Adams.  He
became  a  Unitarian,  and  established  in  New  York
in  1825  a  weekly  paper  called  the  "Christian  In-
quirer." During  the  administration  of  President
Jackson  he  received  an  appointment  in  the  New
York  post-office,  and  was  for  some  time  acting
postmaster.  Here  he  became  interested  in  the
cheapening  of  letter  postage,  and  advocated  it  in
every  way  for  many  years,  first  investigating  the
subject  thoroughly  and  then  writing  and  speaking
on  it  continually.  He  finally  succeeded  in  re-
ducing the  rate  of  land  postage,  and  at  the  tiine  of
his  death  was  laboring  for  a  corresponding  reduc-
tion in  ocean  postage.

BATES,  Ch.arlotte  Fiske,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  30  Nov.,  1838.  Her  father,  Hervey
Bates,  died  in  her  infancy,  and  since  1847  she  has
lived  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  Miss  Bates  was  edu-
cated in  the  public  schools  of  that  city,  began  to
write  poetry  early  in  life,  contributing  to  "Our
Young  Folks  "  and  other  magazines,  and  has  pub-
lished a  volume  of  her  collected  verses,  entitled
"  Risk,  and  other  Poems  "  (Boston,  1879).  She  has
edited  the  "  Longfellow  Birthday-Book  "  and  "  The
Seven  Voices  of  Sympathy  "  (1881),  compilations  of
Longfellow's  prose  and  poetry,  and  the  "  Cam-
bridge Book  of  Poetry  and  Song  "  (1882),  a  volume
of  poetical  selections  from  English  and  American
authors.  She  has  also  written  some  prose,  which
has  not  yet  been  published  in  a  collected  form.
Miss  Bates  assisted  Longfellow  in  compiling  his
"  Poems  of  Places,"  making  ten  translations  ex-
pressly for  the  work.

BATES,  Dayid,  author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
about  1810 ;  d.  there,  25  Jan.,  1870.  He  was  the
author  of  numerous  meritorious  poems,  many  of
which  were  published  in  book  form  under  the  title
"The  Eolian"  (Philadelphia,  1848).  He  was  the
author  of  the  well-known  poem  "  Speak  Gently,"
about  which,  shortly  after  its  publication,  there
was  a  notable  controversy  and  counter-claims  as  to
its  authorship.  "Childhood"  is  another  of  his
best-known  pieces.  A  complete  edition  of  his
poems  was  edited  by  his  son  (Philadelphia,  1870).

BATES,  David  Stanhope,  engineer,  b.  near
Morristown,  N.  J.,  10  June,  1777;  d.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1839.  He  was  the  son  of  a  revolu-
tionary officer,  and  was  trained  under  the  tuition
of  Dr.  Witherspoon,  being  intended  for  the  minis-
try. He  preferred  a  business  career,  became  a
clerk,  then  agent  for  the  Scotchman  George  Scriba,  i
proprietor  of  the  settlement  at  Rotterdam,  in  I
Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  afterward  superintendent  of  the  |
iron-mills  established  there  by  eastern  capitalists,  |
judge  of  common  pleas  of  Oneida  co.,  and  in  1818-  I
'24  was  assistant  engineer  on  the  middle  division  I
of  the  Erie  canal.  The  first  aqueduct  at  Roches-  1
ter,  N.  Y.,  was  designed  and  superintended  by  him,
though  the  red  sandstone  of  which  it  was  built  was
adopted  contrary  to  the  advice  of  all  the  engineers,
who  recommended  limestone,  the  material  of  the
present  structure,  w^hich  was  erected  after  the  first
aqueduct  had  been  carried  away.  He  was  after-
ward employed  by  the  state  of  Ohio  to  survey  a


BATES


BATES


193


route  for  a  canal  from  Lake  Erie  to  the  Ohio  river,
and  was  made  principal  engineer  of  the  canal  sys-
tem of  Ohio,  holding  that  office  from  1825  till  1829.
At  the  same  time  he  served  as  chief  engineer  of
the  Louisville  and  Portland  canal.  In  1829  he  was
appointed  chief  engineer  of  the  surveys  and  loca-
tion of  the  Chenango  canal  from  Utica  to  Bing-
hamton,  and  in  1880  was  commissioned  to  survey
the  route  of  the  Genesee  Valley  canal.  The  line  of
the  Auburn  and  Rochester  railroad,  afterward  a
part  of  the  New  York  Central,  was  surveyed  by
him  in  1830.  For  the  next  four  years  he  was  en-
gaged in  surveys  with  reference  tb  utilizing  the
water-power  of  Niagara  river,  and  in  1834  was  en-
gaged to  make  surve\s  for  the  Erie  and  Kalamazoo
railroad  in  Michigan,  but  in  1835  returned  to  his
home  in  Rochester  with  broken  health.

BATES,  Dewey,  painter,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in
1851.  At  an  early  age  he  went  abroad  to  study
art,  first  entering  the  schools  of  the  royal  academy
of  Antwerp,  and  subsequently  spending  several
years  as  a  student  in  the  Ecole  des  beaux  arts  in
Paris  and  as  a  pupil  of  Gerome.  His  residence
and  studio  are  in  Philadelphia,  and  his  pictures
are  to  be  seen  in  all  the  principal  exhibitions.

BATES,  Edward,  statesman,  b.  in  Belmont.
Goochland  co.,  Ya.,  4  Sept.,  1793 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  25  March,  1869.  He  was  of  Quaker  descent,
and  received  most  of  his  education  at  Charlotte
Hall,  Maryland,  finishing  under  the  care  of  a  pri-
vate tutor.  In  1812  he  received  a  midshipman's
warrant,  and  was  only  prevented  from  going  to  sea
by  his  mother's  in-
fluence. From  Feb-
ruary till October,

1813,  he  served  in
the  Virginia  militia
at  Norfolk.  His  elder
brother,  Frederick
Bates,  having  been
appointed  secretary
of  the  new  territory
of  Missouri,  Edward
emigrated  thither  in

1814,  and  soon  en-
tered upon  the  prac-
tice of  law.  As  early
as  1816  he  was  ap-
pointed prosecuting
attorney  for  the  St.
Louis  circuit,  and  in
1820 was elected a

delegate  to  the  state  constitutional  convention.
Toward  the  close  of  the  same  year  he  was  appoint-
ed attorney-general  of  the  new  state  of  Missouri,
which  office  he  held  for  two  years.  He  was  elected
to  the  legislature  in  1822f  ancl  in  1824  became  state
attorney  for  the  Missouri  district.  About  this  time
he  became  the  political  friend  of  Henry  Clay.  In
1826,  while  yet  quite  a  young  man,  he  was  elected
a  representative  in  congress  as  an  anti-democrat,
serving  but  one  term.  For  the  next  twenty-five
years  he  devoted  himself  to  his  profession,  but
served  in  the  legisla»ture  again  in  1830  and  1834.
In  1847  Mr.  Bates  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention
for  internal  improvement,  held  in  Chicago,  and
here  made  a  favorable  impression  upon  the  coun-
try at  large.  In  1850  President  Fillmore  offered
him  the  portfolio  of  secretary  of  war,  which  he  de-
clined. Three  years  later  he  accepted  the  office  of
judge  of  the  St.  Louis  land  court.  In  1856  he  pre-
sided over  the  whig  convention  held  in  Baltimore.
When  the  question  of  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri
compromise  was  agitated,  he  earnestly  opposed  it,
and  thus  became  identified  with  the '"  free-labor  "

VOL.  I.— 13


party  in  Missouri,  opposing  with  them  the  admis-
sion of  Kansas  under  the  Lecompton  constitution.
Mr.  Bates  became  more  and  more  prominent  as  an
anti-slavery  man,  until  in  1859  he  was  mentioned
as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency.  He  was  warmly
supported  by  his  own  state,  and  for  a  time  it  seem
that  the  opposition  to  Gov.  Seward  might  concen-
trate upon  him.  In  the  National  republican  con-
vention of  1860  he  received  48  votes  on  the  1st  bal-
lot ;  but  when  it  became  apparent  that  Mr.  Lincoln
was  the  favorite,  his  name  was  withdrawn.  When
Mr.  Lincoln,  after  his  election,  decided  upon  select-
ing for  his  cabinet  the  leading  men  of  the  republi-
can party,  including  those  who  had  been  his  prin-
cipal competitors,  Mr.  Bates  was  appointed  attor-
ney-general. In  the  cabinet  he  played  a  dignified,
safe,  and  faithful,  but  not  conspicuous,  part.  In
1864  he  resigned  his  office  and  returned  to  his
home  in  St.  Louis.  From  this  time  he  never  again
entered  into  active  politics. — His  brother,  Freder-
ick, was  appointed  by  President  Jefferson,-  in  1805,
first  U.  S.  judge  for  the  territory  of  Michigan,  was
afterward  secretary  of  the  territory  of  Missouri,
and  was  governor  of  the  state  from  1824  to  1826.

BATES,  Henry  Walter,  English  naturalist,  b.
in  Leicester,  England,  8  Feb.,  1825.  He  was  edu-
cated for  a  commercial  career  at  private  schools  in
Leicestershire,  and  in  May,  1848.  undertook,  in  com-
pany with  Alfred  R,  Wallace,  a  natural  history  ex-
ploration of  the  valley  of  the  Amazons.  Mr.  Wal-
lace left  in  1852,  but  Mr.  Bates  remained  and  ex-
plored the  upper  Amazons  until  June,  1859.  In  a
paper  read  to  the  Linnsean  society  on  21  Nov.,
1861,  he  described  the  phenomena  of  "  mimetic  re-
semblances "  in  animals,  and  suggested  an«explana-
tion.  This  was  printed  in  the  transactions  of  the
society  (vol.  xxiii.,  p.  495).  He  has  been  assistant
secretary  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  Lon-
don, since  April,  1864,  and  has  edited  the  "journal
and  proceedings  of  the  society  during  that  period.
He  was  made  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  in  1881.
Mr,  Bates  has  published  "The" Naturalist  on  the
River  Amazons"  (London,  1868);  "Illustrated
Travels  "  (6  vols.,  London,  1866-'72) ;  "  The  Ger-
man Arctic  Expedition  of  1869-'70"  (English  trans-
lation, London,  1874) ;  "  Central  America,  West
Indies,  and  South  America "  (1878) ;  and  other
works  oh  natural  history  and  geography.

BATES,  Isaac  Chapman,  statesman,  b.  in
Granville,  Mass.,  14  May,  1780;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  16  March,  1845.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1802,  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Northampton,
Mass.  While  here  he  was  a  member  at  different
times  of  the  executive  council  of  the  state,  and  of
both  branches  of  the  legislature.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  as  an  anti-Jackson  man,  and  was  reelected
three  times,  serving  altogether  from  3  Dec,  1827,
till  3  March,  1835.  In  1836  and  1840  he  was  a
presidential  elector,  and  in  January,  1841,  he  was
elected  to  the  senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by
the  resignation  of  Gov.  John  Davis,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death,  filling  the  place  of  chair-
man of  the  committee  of  pensions.  A  few  days
before  his  death  he  made  an  able  speech,  opposing
the  admission  of  Texas  to  the  union.  Throughout
his  public  life  he  was  a  champion  of  the  protective
system,  and  in  February,  1844,  made  a  defence  of
it  in  the  senate.  He  published  several  addresses
and  speeches. — His  son,  Isaac  Chapman,  b.  22
Oct.,  1817 ;  d.  24  Sept.,  1875,  was  a  prominent  Bos-
ton merchant,  and  secretary  of  the  board  of  trade.

BATES,  Joshua,  educator,  b.  in  Cohasset,  Mass.,
20  March,  1776 ;  d.  in  Dudley,  Mass  ,  14  Jan.,  1854.
His  father  was  a  farmer  and  storekeeper,  and
Bates's  early  life  was  spent  on  the  farm  and  as


194


BATES


BATLLE


clerk  in  the  store.  He  had  little  regular  schooling,
but,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Congregational  min-
ister in  his  native  town,  prepared  himself  for  Har-
vard, entering  as  a  sophomore  in  1797.  At  college,
although  he  had  to  support  himself  by  teaching,
he  took  a  high  stand  and  was  graduated  with
hanor  in  1800.  He  then  became  a  teacher  in  Phil-
lips Andover  academy,  studying  theology  mean-
while with  the  Rev.  Jonathan  French.  On  16
March,  1803,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  church
at  Dedham,  Mass.  Early  in  his  ministry  here  he
brought  himself  into  notice  by  his  able  defence  of
his  friend,  the  Rev.  Jolin  Codman,  who  had  be-
come involved  in  difficulty  for  refusing  to  exchange
pulpits  with  clergymen  of  liberal  views.  In  March,
1818,  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Middlebury
college,  Vt.,  and  in  the  same  year  he  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Yale.  He  resigned  on  ac-
count of  age  in  1839.  He  then  visited  his  daugh-
ters in  the  south,  and  when  in  Washington,  on  his
way  thither,  was  chosen  chaplain  to  congress,  and
officiated  until  the  close  of  the  session.  After  sup-
plying pulpits,  first  in  Portland,  Me.,  and  then  at
Northborough,  Mass.,  he  was  installed,  22  March,
1843,  as  minister  at  Dudley,  Mass.,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  lie  published  a  large  num-
ber of  discourses  and  other  writings,  among  which
are  two  sermons  on  intemperance  (1813) ;  "  Inau-
gural Oration  at  Middlebury  "  (1818) ;  "  Lectures  on
Christian  Character  "  (1846) ;  "  A  Discourse  on  John
Quincy  Adams"  (1848);  and  "Reminiscences  of
Dr.  Codman"  (1853).

BATES,  Joshua,  financier,  b.  in  Weymouth,
Mass.,  in  1788 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  24  Sept.,
1864.  He  came  of  an  old  Massachusetts  family,
and  his  father  was  a  colonel  in  the  revolutionaiy
army.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  entered  the  count-
ing-house of  VVilliam  Gray  &  Son,  of  Boston,
where  he  displayed  so  much  aptitude  for  business
that  in  a  few  years  both  father  and  son  trusted
him  with  their  most  complicated  affaii's.  When
twenty-one  years  of  age  he  entered  into  partner-
ship with  a  Mr.  Beckford,  but,  on  account  of  the
war  of  1812,  he  was  unsuccessful,  and  returned  to
the  Grays,  who  sent  him  to  Europe  as  their  agent.
Here  he  was  thrown  into  intimate  relations  with  the
Hopes  and  Barings  and  other  great  commercial
houses,  and,  as  he  continued  to  have  the  control  of
Mr.  Gray's  affairs  throughout  Europe  for  several
years  after  the  peace,  these  houses  became  impressed
with  his  business  abilities.  In  1826  he  formed  a
partnership  in  London  with  John  Baring,  and  two
years  later  they  both  were  received  into  the  firm  of
Baring  Brothers  &  Co.,  of  which  Mr.  Bates  in  due
time  became  senior  partner.  In  1854,  when  a  joint
commission  was  appointed  to  make  a  final  settle-
ment of  claims  between  citizens  of  Great  Britain
and  the  United  States,  arising  from  the  war  of
1812,  Mr.  Bates  was  appointed  umpire  between  the
British  and  American  commissioners  in  all  cases
where  they  could  not  agree.  The  justice  of  his
numerous  decisions  has  never  been  called  in  ques-
tion in  either  country,  and  some  of  them  contain
full  discussions  of  important  questions  in  interna-
tional law.  Mr.  Bates,  in  his  youth,  had  felt  the
necessity  for  a  good  public  library,  and,  though  he
succeeded  in  obtaining  the  books  that  he  needed,  he
never  forgot  the  difficulties  encountered  for  want
of  them.  Hence,  when  he  learned,  in  1852,  that
the  city  of  Boston  was  about  taking  measures  for
the  establishment  of  a  free  public  library,  he  im-
mediately offered  $50,000  toward  such  a  library,
on  the  sole  condition  that  the  interest  of  the  money
should  be  spent  in  the  purchase  of  books  of  perma-
nent value  and  authority,  and  that  the  city  should


always  provide  comfortable  accommodations  for
its  use  day  and  night  by  at  least  one  hundred
readers.  He  afterward  gave  to  the  library  about
30,000  volumes,  raising  the  value  of  the  entire  gift
to  fully  twice  the  original  amount.  After  his
death  the  large  hall  of  the  library  was  called,  in
his  honor.  Bates  Hall.  His  interest  in  his  native
country  continued  to  the  close  of  his  life,  and
during  the  civil  war  his  sympathies  with  the  gov-
ernment were  freely  manifested.  See  "  Memorial
of  Joshua  Bates"  (Boston,  18G5).

BATES,  Joshua  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts about  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1837  and  served  as  a  lieutenant  of  artil-
lery in  the  Florida  war,  in  removing  the  Cherokees
to  the  west  in  1838,  and  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  during
the  Canada  border  disturbances  of  1839-41.  He
resigned  his  commission,  20  July,  1842,  and  became
a  lawyer  in  Cincinnati.  In  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  on  27  April,  1861,  and  organized  the
Ohio  volunteers  in  Camps  Harrison  and  Dennison,
until  mustered  out  of  the  service  on  27  Aug.,  liB6l.
He  was  a  member  of  the  sanitary  commission,  and
when  Cincinnati  was  threatened  by  the  confeder-
ates in  1863,  he  commanded  a  division.  After  his
discharge  from  the  army  he  practised  law  in  Cin-
cinnati, and  in  1864  was  elected  a  member  of  the
Ohio  state  senate.

BATES,  Martin,  senator,  b.  in  Salisbury,
Litchfield  co..  Conn.,  24  Feb.,  1787 ;  d.  in  Dover,
Del.,  1  Jan.,  1869.  He  was  educated  for  a  physi-
cian, and  taught  school  for  a  time,  but  afterward
studied  law  and  removed  to  Delaware,  where  he
practised  in  Dover.  He  served  several  terms  in
the  legislature,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state  con-
stitutional convention  of  1850.  After  the  death
of  John  M.  Clayton  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  a  democrat,  and  served  from  6  Dec,  1858,
until  3  March,  1859,  acting  as  a  member  of  the
committee  on  pensions.

BATES,  Samuel  Penniman,  educator,  b.  in
Mendon,  Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1827.  He
taught  school  in  Milford,  Mass.,  when  only  sixteen
years  of  age,  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1851,  and,
after  acting  for  a  time  as  tutor  in  a  private  family,
became,  in  1852,  principal  of  the  Meadville,  Pa.,
academy.  Here  he  organized,  in  1853,  a  class  of
teachers,  to  whom  he  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
on  the  theory  and  practice  of  teaching,  which  was
continued  until  1857,  and  gave  the  first  impulse
toward  establishing  normal  schools  in  that  part  of
the  state.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  chosen  super-
intendent of  schools  in  Crawford  co.,  Pa.,  and  in
1860  became  deputy  state  superintendent.  While
he  held  this  office,  he  was  given  the  delicate  task  of
visiting  the  colleges  of  the  state  and  reporting  on
their  condition.  His  reports  appeared  in  the  jour-
nals of  the  day,  but  have  not  been  published  in
book  form.  In  1866  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.
Curtin  state  historian  of  Pennsylvania.  His  pub-
lications include  "  Lectures  on  Moral  and  Mental
Culture  "  (New  York,  1859) ;  "  Liberal  Education,"
an  address  before  the  National  Teachers'  Associa-
tion (1864)  ;  "  Historvof  Pennsylvania  Volunteers"
(5  vols.,  1866-'73)';  "Lives  of  the  Governors  of
Pennsvlvania"  (1873);  "Battle  of  Gettysburg"
(1878);  "  Life  of  Gen.  0.  B.  Knowles"  (1878);  and
"  Battle  of  Chancellors  ville  "  (1882).

BATLLE,  Lorenzo  (baht'-lyay),  president  of
Uruguay,  b.  in  1812.  He  was  minister  of  war  un-
der Gen.  Flores,  provisional  president  of  Urugua>
in  1866-8,  and  was  elected  president  of  that  repub-
lic after  the  assassination  of  Flores,  28  Feb.,  1808.
BatUe belonged to  the liberal party  and  main-


BATTELLE


BAUTISTA


195


tained  a  long  struggle  against  the  conservatives,
until  an  arrangement  was  effected,  in  January,
1872,  by  which  he  left  the  executive  power  in  the
hands  of  the  president  of  the  Uruguayan  senate.

BATTELLE,  Gordon,  clergyman,  b.  in  New-
port, Ohio,  14  Nov.,  1814 ;  d.  in  camp,  7  Jan.,  1802.
He  was  graduated  at  Alleghany  college  in  1840,
and  licensed  as  a  Methodist  preacher  in  1842.
From  1843  to  1851  he  was  principal  of  the  academy
at  Clarksburg,  Va.  During  this  time  he  was,  in
1847,  ordained  deacon,  and  in  1849  elder,  in  the
Methodist  church.  As  preacher  and  presiding
elder  he  occupied  most  of  his  time  from  1851  to
1860,  and  was  a  member  of  the  general  conference
of  1856  and  1860.  His  influence  in  western  Vir-
ginia was  very  great,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  in  1861  he  was  appointed  an  official  visitor
to  the  military  camps.  The  needs  of  the  time  de-
manding attention  to  the  political  situation,  he
became  a  member  of  the  convention  that  met  24
Nov.,  1861,  and  framed  the  constitution  of  the
new  state  of  West  Virginia.  To  him,  more  largely
probably  than  to  any  other  man,  was  due  the  aboli-
tion of  slavery  in  that  region.  In  Nov.,  1861,  he
was  chosen  chaplain  of  the  1st  Virginia  regiment,
and  so  continued  till  his  death  of  typhoid  fever
after  a  service  of  but  a  few  weeks.

BATTERSHALL,  Jesse  Park,  chemist,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  26  May,  1851.  His  chemical  studies
were  begun  in  1867  at  the  School  of  Mines,  Colum-
bia College,  and  continued  in  Germany,  where  for
a  year  he  worked  in  the  chemical  laboratory  in
Gottingen  under  Wohler,  then  in  1870-'l  under
Kolbe  at  Leipsic.  Two  years  later  he  received  the
degree  of  doctor  of  natural  sciences  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Tubingen,  and  subsequently  he  attended
the  chemical  course  of  lectures  by  Marignac  at
Geneva.  On  his  return  to  this  country  he  was
engaged  for  some  time  as  analytical  and  consult-
ing chemist  to  various  firms  in  New  York.  In  1879
he  entered  the  government  service,  and  since  that
time  has  had  charge  of  the  analytical  department  of
the  U.  S.  laboratory  at  New  York.  Dr.  Battershall
is  a  fellow  of  the  London  chemical  society,  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  chemical  society,  and  of  other
scientific  bodies.  He  has  contributed  papers  to
chemical  journals,  and  is  the  translator  of  Naquet's
"Legal  Chemistry"  (New  York,  1876),  and  the  au-
thor of  "  Adulteration  of  Food  and  Drink  "  (New
York,  1886).

BATTEY,  Robert,  physician,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  26  Nov..  1828.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips
Andover  academy,  and  studied  in  Booth's  labora-
tory, Philadelphia,  and  in  the  Philadelphia  college
of  pharmacy,  graduating  in  1856  at  the  university
of  Pennsylvania  and  at'the  JefTerson  medical  col-
lege, from  which  he  received  his  medical  degree  in
1857.  He  entered  upon  the  practice  of  medicine
at  Rome,  Ga.,  where  he  has  resided  almost  con-
tinually ever  since.  During  the  civil  war  he  served
as  a  surgeon  in  the  confederate  army,  at  first  in
the  field,  and  later  in  charge  of  various  hospitals.
In  August,  1872,  he  originated  and  successfully
performed  what  is  known  as  Battey's  operation
for  the  removal  of  the  ovaries,  with  a  view  to
effect  the  change  of  life  in  women,  thereby  reme-
dying certain  otherwise  incurable  maladies.  He
has  been  successful  in  the  execution  of  a  number
of  difficult  surgical  operations  on  the  urinary  or-
gans of  both  sexes.  Of  the  methods  used,  several
were  original  with  himself.  From  1873  to  1875  he
was  professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  Atlanta  medical
college,  and  from  1873  to  1876  he  edited  the  "  At-
lanta Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."  He  is  a
member  of  the  Georgia  medical  association,  and


was  its  president  in  1876 ;  also  a  member  of  the  At-
lanta academy  of  medicine,  the  American  gynae-
cological society,  and  the  American  medical  asso-
ciation. He  has  written  numerous  papers  and  re-
ports of  cases,  which  have  been  contributed  to  the
medical  press  both  in  this  country  and  England.

BATTLE,  William  Horn,  jurist,  b.  in  Edge-
combe CO.,  N.  C,  17  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  at  Chapel  Hill,  N.
C,  17  March,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  the  uni-
versity of  North  Carolina  in  1820,  with  high  honors,
studied  law  under  Chief-Justice  Henderson,  and
after  admission  to  the  bar  opened  an  office  in
Louisburg.  He  represented  Franklin  co.  in  the
house  of  commons  in  1833-'4.  In  1835  he  was  as-
sociated with  Gov.  Iredell  and  Judge  Nash  in  pre-
paring a  revision  of  the  statutes  of  North  Caro-
lina, and  personally  superintended  the  printing  of
the  work  in  Boston.  In  1839  he  was  a  delegate  to
the  convention  that  nominated  William  Henry  Har-
rison for  the  presidency.  He  received  the  appoint-
ment of  associate  judge  of  the  superior  court,  was
elected  to  the  professorship  of  law  in  the  state  uni-
versity in  1845,  and  held  the  chair  until  the  failure
of  the  institution  in  1871.  In  1852  he  became  as-
sociate judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  his  state,  and
so  remained  until  18(>8.  In  1872-'3  he  made  a
second  revision  of  the  statutes,  but  did  it  alone,  and
it  failed  to  attain  to  the  rank  of  the  previous  one.

BAUGHER,  Henry  L.,  educator,  b.  in  Abbotts-
town,  Pa.,  about  1805;  d.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  14
April,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Dickinson  col-
lege, Carlisle,  in  1825  ;  studied  theology  at  Prince-
ton and  Gettysburg ;  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
Maryland  Lutheran  synod;  was  chosen  pastor  at
Boonesboro,  Md.,  in  1829,  and  took  charge  of  a
classical  school  in  Gettysburg  in  1830.  The  school
expanded  into  a  college  in  1832,  and  Mr.  Baugher
became  professor  of  the  Greek  language  and  belles-
lettres,  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  the  college
in  1850,  and  continued  in  that  office  until  his  death.
He  was  an  able  executive,  a  strict  disciplinarian,  an
eloquent  preacher,  and  a  graceful  writer.  He  con-
tributed to  the  "  Evangelical  Review  "  and  Luth-
eran papers,  and  published  addresses  and  essays.

BAUM,  Friedrich,  soldier,  d.  of  wounds  in
Bonnington,  Vt..  18  Aug.,  1777.  He  arrived  in  Cana-
da in  1776,  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Bruns-
wick dragoons  in  Burgoyne's  expedition,  and  was
sent  out  with  800  men  and  two  pieces  of  artillery  to
procure  cattle  and  horses  to  mount  Riedesel's  dra-
goons, and  complete  his  corps  of  loyalists.  Ap-
proaching Bennington,  Vt.,  he  cast  up  intrench-
ments,  but  was  attacked  by  Col.  Stark,  command-
ing the  New  Hampshire  militia.  In  the  engage-
ment that  followed,  Baum  attempted  to  cut
through  the  encircling  lines  of  the  Americans,
when  his  command  was  defeated  and  he  mortally
wounded..  He  died  two^davs  later.

BAUSA,  or  BAUZA,  JFelipe  (bah-oo-sah'),
Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  Spain  about  1760;  d.  in
England  in  1833.  He  began  his  naval  career  in
1789,  went  to  Peru  with  the  expedition  of  the  cor-
vettes "Atrevida"  and  "  Descubierta "  in  1790,
made  many  charts  and  plans,  and  corrected  others.
His  charts  of  the  South  American  seas  and  coasts
were  recognized  as  the  best  in  existence,  and  official-
ly adopted  by  several  European  nations.  Bausa
was  director  of  the  hydrographic  depot  of  Madrid,
but  had  to  emigrate  to  England  for  political  rea-
sons, and  died  there.

BAUTISTA,  Jos6  (bow-tees'-tah),  Mexican
monk,  lived  in  the  latter  half  of  the  16th  cen-
tiiry.  He  belonged  to  the  Franciscan  order,  was
superior  of  the  convent  of  Texcoco,  and  taught  the-
ology. He  wrote  the  following  works :  "  Informa-


196


BAUTISTA


BAYARD


tiones  Confessariorum  in  India  vel  America,"  "  De
Miseria  et  Brevitate  Vitae,"  and  "  Platicas  Morales
de  los  Indios."

BAUTISTA,  Juan,  Mexican  linguist,  b.  in  the
city  of  Mexico  in  1555;  d.  about  1612.  He  en-
tered the  Franciscan  order,  soon  mastered  philoso-
phy and  theology,  and  became  superior  of  the  con-
vents of  Texcoco  and  Tlaltelolco.  Bautista,  being
of  Spanish  parentage,  did  not  know  the  Mexican
language ;  but  he  undertook  its  study,  and,  hav-
ing become  thoroughly  acquainted  with  it,  wrote
many  books  in  Mexican,  and  translated  others  from
the  Spanish.  His  writings  make  a  great  number
of  volumes,  all  intended  to  enlighten  the  Indians
and  teach  them  religion  and  moral  philosophy.
Bautista  is  considered  as  having  no  equal  as  a
writer  in  Mexican  for  elegance  and  purity  of  style.

BAXTER,  Elisha,  governor  of  Arkansas,  b.  in
Rutherford  co.,  N.  C,  1  Sept.,  1827.  He  was  edu-
cated in  the  common  schools  of  his  native  county,
and  moved  to  Arkansas,  where  he  was  mayor  of
Batesville  in  1853.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1854  and  1858,  and  in  1863  served  as
colonel  of  the  4th  Arkansas  mounted  infantry  in
the  national  army.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
in  1864,  but  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat,  on  the
ground  that  the  state  had  not  been  legally  recon-
structed. From  1868  till  1872  he  was  judge  of  the
third  judicial  district  court  of  Arkansas.  In  the
spring  of  1872  Mr.  Baxter  was  nominated  for  gov-
ernor by  the  wing  of  the  republican  party  tliat  ap-
proved President  Grant's  administration,  the  lib-
eral, or  Greeley  wing,  nominating  Joseph  Brooks.
The  democrats  made  no  nomination,  but  favored
Brooks.  On  6  Jan.,  1873,  the  vote  was  canvassed
by  the  general  assembly,  and  Baxter  was  declared
elected.  Meanwhile  Brooks  had  alleged  fraud  at
the  polls,  and  after  unsuccessfully  applying  to  the
XT.  S.  circuit  court,  the  legislature,  and  the  state
supreme  court,  brought  suit  against  Baxter  in  a
state  circuit  court,  and  on  15  April,  1874,  Baxter's
counsel  being  absent,  obtained  judgment  in  his
favor,  and  proceeded  at  once  forcibly  to  eject
Baxter  from  office.  It  was  claimed  by  Baxter  that
the  taking  up  of  the  case  in  the  absence  of  his
counsel  was  in  violation  of  an  express  agreement.
Both  Brooks  and  Baxter  now  issued  proclamations
and  each  had  armed  adherents.  There  was  some
bloodshed,  and  more  was  prevented  only  by  the
presence  of  federal  troops.  Both  parties  appealed
to  the  president,  but  he  refused  to  interfere  until
15  May,  when,  acting  on  an  elaborate  opinion  of
Attorney-General  Williams,  he  recognized  Baxter
as  governor,  and  Brooks  immediately  disbanded
his  forces.  In  a  message  to  congress  on  8  Feb.,
1875,  however.  President  Grant  expressed  the
opinion  that  Brooks  had  been  legally  elected.
Baxter  continued  to  hold  the  governorship  until
the  adoption  of  a  new  state  constitution  in  the
autumn  of  1874.  By  this  the  term  of  office  was
reduced  from  four  to  two  years,  and  the  re-
publicans condemned  Baxter  for  giving  up  his
office  before  the  expiration  of  the  term  for  which
he  had  been  elected. — His  brother,  John,  judge  of
the  U.  S.  circuit  court  for  the  sixth  judicial  circuit,
died  in  Hot  Springs,  Ark.,  2  March,  1866.

BAXTER,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Sidney  Plains,
Delaware  co.,  K  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Jonesville,
Hillsdale  co.,  Mich.,  30  Dec,  1873.  He  received
an  academic  education,  and  in  1849  went  to  Cali-
fornia with  a  company  of  thirty  men,  with  ox-
teams,  and  was  chosen  as  their  captain.  He  vol-
unteered as  a  private  early  in  1861,  and  was  active
in  raising  a  company,  of  which  he  was  elected  cap-
tain, and  which  was  mustered  into  the  7th  Michi-


gan infantry  in  August.  He  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  22  "May,  1862,  and  while  in  command  of
his  regiment,  at  Fredericksburg,  volunteered  to
cross  the  river  and  dislodge  a  company  of  confeder-
ate sharp-shooters.  Col.  Baxter  was  shot  through
the  lung  in  the  attempt  to  cross,  but  the  movement
was  successful,  and  he  was  promoted  to  brigadier-
general  on  12  March,  1863.  He  participated  in
most  of  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,
and  was  wounded  at  Antietam,  and  again  m  the
Wilderness,  where  two  horses  were  killed  under
him.  For  gallantry  at  the  Wilderness,  Dabney's
Mills,  and  Five  Forks,  he  was  brevetted  major-
general  1  April,  1865.  From  1866  till  1869  Gen.
Baxter  was  IT.  S.  minister  to  Honduras.

BAXTER,  Lydia,  poet,  b.  in  Petersburg,  Rens-
selaer CO.,  N.  Y..  2  Sept.,  1809 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  23  Jan.,  1874.  She  was  the  author  of  many
popular  Sunday  -  school  hymns,  and  published  a
collection  of  religious  and  domestic  verses  called
"  Gems  by  the  Wayside  "  (New  York,  1855).  She
wrote  the  well-known  hymn  "  The  Gates  Ajar."

BAXTER,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Leeds,
England,  about  1823.  He  came  to  the  United
States  with  his  parents  in  1828,  was  graduated  at
Bethany  college  in  1845,  entered  the  Christian
(Disciple)  church  and  preached  in  various  places
in  Mississippi  and  Arkansas,  until  he  became
president  of  Arkansas  college,  in  Fayette ville.
During  the  civil  war  the  college  was  destroyed.
In  1863  he  removed  to  Cincinnati  and  devoted
himself  to  preaching  and  literary  work.  He
published  a  volume  of  poems  in  1852,  contrib-
uted largely  to  periodical  literature,  and  has
also  aided  in  the  preparation  of  several  books,
one  of  the  most  important  being  a  large  volume,
"  The  Loyal  West  in  the  Times  of  the  Rebellion."
Of  his  "Pea  Ridge  and  Prairie  Grove,  or  Scenes
and  Incidents  of  the  War  in  Arkansas,"  several
editions  were  issued.  His  "  War  Lyrics,"  appear-
ing originally  in  "  Harper's  Weekly,"  became  wide-
ly known  and  were  recited  at  mass  meetings  by
Murdoch  and  other  popular  elocutionists.  His
hymn  *'  Let  Me  Go "  appeared  in  many  hymn-
books  and  collections  of  sacred  music.

BAYARD,  Oeorg-e  Dashiell,  soldier,  b.  in
Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  18  Dec,  1835 ;  d.  14  Dec,  1862.
Plis  parents  removed  to  Iowa  in  his  early  youth,
and  he  attended  a  military  school  kept  by  Maj.
Dorn.  He  learned  fencing  from  Col.  Korponay,
an  exiled  Hungarian  soldier,  and  from  him  ac-
quired the  military  spirit  that  led  him  to  seek  an
appointment  as  a  cadet.  After  graduation  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856  he  was  assigned  to
the  1st  cavalry.  Four  years  were  passed  in  frontier
and  garrison  duty.  He  was  severely  wounded  in  a
fight  with  the  Kiowa  Indians.  In  1861  he  was
cavalry  instructor  at  West  Point,  and  on  16  March
of  that  year  was  promoted  to  first  lieutenant  in  the
3d  cavalry ;  captain  4th  cavalry,  20  Aug.,  and  was
granted  leave  of  absence,  to  become  colonel  of  the
1st  Pennsylvania  cavalry  volunteers,  14  Sept.,  1861.
He  became  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  28  April,
1862,  and  served  in  the  arduous  campaigns  of  the
Shenandoah,  northern  Virginia,  and  on  the  Rappa-
hannock, distinguishing  himself  by  the  dash  and
bravery  of  his  reconnoissances.  He  was  mortally
wounded  at  Fredericksburg,  13  Dec,  1862,  and
died  the  following  day.  He  was  buried  with  mil-
itary honors  at  Princeton,  N.  J.  A  memorial
volume  by  his  father,  Samuel  J.  Bayard,  was  pub-
lished in  New  York  in  1874.

BAYARD,  James  Asheton,  statesman,  b.  m
Philadelphia,  28  Julv,  1767;  d.  in  Wilmington,
Del.,  6  Aug.,  1815. He  was  the  son  of  Dr.  James


BAYARD


BAYARD


197


Asheton  Bayard,  and  nephew  of  Col.  John  Bayard,
into  whose  family  he  was  adopted  after  his
father's  death,  which  occurred  on  8  June,  1770.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1784,  studied
law  under  Gen.  Joseph  Reed  and  Jared  Ingersoll,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1787,  and  settled  in
Wilmington,  Del.,  where  he  acquired  a  high  repu-
tation. In  1796  he  was  elected  a  representative  in
congress  as  a  federalist.  lie  was  distinguished  as  an
orator  and  consti-
tutional lawyer  and
became  a  leader  of
the  party  in  the
house.  In  1797  he
distinguished  him-
self by  his  man-
agement of  the
impeachment  of
William  Blount,
of  North  Carolina,
who  was  expelled
from  the  senate
for  instigating  the
Creeks  and  Chero-
kees  to  assist  the
English  in  their
aim  of  conquering
the  Spanish  pos-
sessions in  Louisi-
ana. In  1801,  when
the  choice  between
Burrand  Jeffer;on  in  the  undecided  presidential  elec-
tion of  1800  devolved  upon  the  house  of  representa-
tives. Bayard  stood  at  the  head  of  the  federalists,
and  his  influence,  combined  with  that  of  Alexan-
der Hamilton,  contributed  chiefly  to  bring  about
the  election  of  Jefferson.  President  Adams  ap-
pointed him  minister  to  France  before  the  acces-
sion of  the  new  administration  in  1801,  and  the
senate  confirmed  the  nomination,  but  the  appoint-
ment was  declined.  In  the  8th  congress,  which
met  7  Dec,  1801,  he  opposed,  with  great  force,  on
constitutional  grounds,  the  repeal  of  the  judiciary
bill,  enacted  by  federalist  votes  in  the  preceding
session.  He  served  in  the  house  of  representatives
from  15  May,  1797,  till  3  March,  1808.  In  1804
he  was  chosen  the  successor  of  William  Hill  Wells
when  the  latter  resigned  his  seat  as  representative
of  Delaware  in  the  U.  S.  senate.  He  sat  in  the
senate  from  15  Jan.,  1805,  to  3  March,  1813,  and
opposed  the  declaration  of  war  against  Great  Brit-
ain in  1812.  In  1813  he  was  selected  by  President
Madison  joint  commissioner  with  Albert  Gallatin
(who  was  afterward  rejected  by  the  senate),  and
John  Quincy  Adams,  to  conclude  a  peace  with
Great  Britain,  through  the  mediation  of  Russia.
He  left  Philadelphia  8  May,  1813,  and  met  his
fellow-commissioner,  Mr.  Adams,  at  that  time  en-
voy to  Russia,  at  St.  Petersburg  in  July  of  that
year.  After  the  refusal  of  Great  Britain  to  treat
at  St.  Petersburg,  he  was  included  in  the  new
commission,  constituted  18  Jan.,  consisting,  be-
sides himself  and  John  Q.  Adams,  of  Henry  Clay
and  Jonathan  Russell,  Albert  Gallatin  being  added
in  the  following  month.  Going  to  Holland,  he
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  negotiations  that
resulted  in  the  treaty  of  peace  signed  at  Ghent,
24  Dec,  1814.  He  received  the  appointment  of
minister  to  the  court  of  St.  Petersburg,  but  de-
clined the  mission,  declaring  that  he  had  no  desire
to  serve  the  administration  except  where  his  servi-
ces were  necessary  for  the  good  of  the  country.
When  about  to  proceed  to  London  to  continue  the
work  of  the  commission  which  included  the  nego-
tiation of  a  treaty  of  commerce,  he  was  taken


alarmingly  ill  and  returned  home,  only  to  die  im-
mediately after  his  arrival.  His  wife,  daughter  of
Gov.  Richard  Bassett,  of  Delaware,  died  10  Dec,
1854,  aged  seventy-six.  Senator  Bayard's  speech
on  the  foreign  intercourse  bill  was 'published  in
1798,  and  another  on  the  repeal  of  the  judiciary
bill  in  a  volume  of  the  speeches  of  1802.

BAYARD,  James  Asheton,  statesman,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Del.,  15  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  there,  13  June,
1880.  He  was  a  son  of  the  preceding,  and  the
younger  brother  of  Richard  Henry  Bayard.  He
received  a  classical  education,  studied  law,  and
practised  in  Wilmington,  taking  a  high,  rank  in
his  profession.  During  the  administration  of  Presi-
dent Van  Buren  was  U.  S.  attorney  for  Delaware.
In  1851  he  was  elected  by  the  democrats  a  U.  S.
senator  to  succeed  John  Wales,  a  whig,  and  was
re-elected  in  1857,  and  again  in  1862.  In  1863,  on
taking  his  seat  in  the  senate,  when  required  to
take  the  "  iron-clad "  oath,  he  resented  it  as  an
indignity  and  an  invasion  of  the  sovereign  rights
of  the  states ;  but,  after  uttering  a  protest  against
its  constitutionality,  he  took  the  oath,  and  imme-
diately resigned  his  seat.  George  R.  Riddle,  who
was  elected  in  his  place,  died  soon  afterward,  and
Mr.  Bayard  consented  to  serve  through  his  own
unexpired  term,  from  1  April,  1867,  to  3  March,
1869.  In  1869  his  son,  Thomas  F.  Bayard,  suc-
ceeded him  as  senator  from  Delaware.  After  his
retirement  from  public  life  he  resided  in  Wilming-
ton. Mr.  Bayard  was  for  a  long  time  chairman  of
the  committee  on  the  judiciary  in  the  senate.  He
was  eminent  as  a  constitutional  lawyer,  and  was
highly  esteemed  for  hie  refined  sense  of  public
honor,  which  was  manifested  in  a  noted  instance
upon  his  receiving  an  offer  of  stock  of  the  Credit
Mobilier  in  1868,  in  reply  to  which  he  wrote :  "  I
take  it  for  granted  that  the  corporation  has  no  ap-
plication to  make  to  congress  on  which  I  should
be  called  upon  to  act  officially,  as  I  could  not,  con-
sistently with  my  views  of  duty,  vote  upon  a  ques-
tion in  which  I  had  a  pecuniary  interest."

BAYARD,  John,  patriot,  b.  at  Bohemia  Manor,
Cecil  CO.,  Md.,  11  Aug.,  1738;  d.  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1807.  He  was  the  great  great-
grandson  of  Samuel  Bayard,  a  rich  merchant  of
Amsterdam,  of  French  Huguenot  extraction,  who
married  a  sister  of  Peter  Stuyvesant,  the  last  gov-
ernor of  New  Amsterdam.  The  widow  of  Samuel,
with  her  three  sons  and  a  daughter,  accompanied
Stuyvesant,  who  was  himself  married  to  Judith
Bayard,  a  sister  of  Samuel,  to  the  new  world  in
1647.  His  grandson  Samuel,  son  of  Peter,  one  of
the  three  brothers  who  came  to  New  York  with
their  imcle  Stuyvesant,  lived  in  New  York  and
alienated  his  relatives  by  joining  the  sect  of  the
Labadists,  removed  in  1698  to  Bohemia  Manor,
Md.  His  grandson,  John,  was  christened  John
Bubenheim,  but  afterward  dropped  the  middle
name.  James  Asheton,  twin  brother  of  the  latter,
became  a  physician  and  died  8  Jan.,  1770,  leaving
James  Asheton  negotiator  of  the  treaty  of  Ghent,
and  three  other  children.who  were  adopted  and  edu-
cated by  their  uncle.  John  Bayard  went  with  his
brother  to  Philadelphia  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  en-
tered the  counting-house  of  John  Rhea,  a  merchant,
and,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  became  one  of
the  leading  merchants  in  the  city.  He  was  among
the  signers  of  the  non-importation  agreement  of
25  Oct.,  1765,  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  con-
gress held  in  July,  1774,  and  in  January,  1775,  of
the  convention  of  the  province,  which  had  for  its
object  the  care  of  the  conduct  of  the  assembly.
He  early  joined  the  Sons  of  Liberty,  organized  in
1766,  and  was  a  leader  of  the  movement  for  in-


198


BAYARD


BAYARD


dependence  in  Philadelphia.  His  firm,  Hodge  &
Bayard,  was  engaged  in  furnishing  arms  to  con-
gress, and  the  privateer  that  took  one  of  the  first
valuable  prizes  was  fitted  out  by  him  and  a  friend.
In  September,  1776,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of
the  council  of  safety  by  the  constitutional  conven-
tion, and  was  continued  in  that  place  by  the  assem-
bly the  following  year.  When  three  regiments  of
infantry  were  raised  in  PJiiladelphia  in  1775,  he
was  chosen  colonel  of  the  second.  In  the  winter
of  1776-7  he  was  in  the  field.  He  was  present
at  the  battles  of  Brandywine,  Germantown,  and
Princeton,  and  for  his  gallantry  in  the  last  action
was  personally  complimented  by  Gen.  Washington.
On  13  March,  1777,  Col.  Bayard  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  state  board  of  war,  and  on  17  March
was  elected  speaker  of  the  house  of  assembly,  to
which  office  he  was  re-elected  the  year  following.
Pie  removed  his  family  for  safety  to  a  farm  at
Plymouth,  on  the  Schuylkill,  before  the  capture  of
Philadelphia  by  the  British  in  September,  1777.
When  Princeton  college  was  broken  up,  his  son,
James  Asheton  (b.  5  May,  1760 ;  d.  at  sea  in  June,
1788),  was  arrested  while  returning  home  and
committed  to  prison  in  Philadelphia,  but  was  re-
leased as  being  a  non-combatant.  When  a  British
detachment  passed  over  the  Schuylkill  at  Swede's
Ford,  they  plundered  Bayard's  house  at  Plymouth.
In  1780  Col.  Bayard  was  appointed  on  a  commit-
tee to  inquire  into  the  causes  of  the  falling  off  in
the  revenue  of  the  state.  In  1781  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  supreme  executive  council,  and  in  1785
he  was  elected  to  the  continental  congress,  then
holding  its  sessions  in  New  York.  In  1780  he  lost
his  wife,  Margaret  Hodge,  and  in  1781  married
the  widow  of  John  Hodgson,  of  South  Carolina.
His  second  wife  died  suddenly  in  1785,  and  two
years  later  he  married  Johannah  White,  sister  of
Gen.  Anthony  W.  White,  of  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.
In  1788,  having  retired  from  active  business  in
Philadelphia,  and  having  been  compelled  to  part
with  his  estate  in  Cecil  co.,  Md.,  in  cons^-juence  of
his  patriotic  sacrifices  during  the  war,  he  removed
to  New  Brunswick,  and  built  there  a  handsome
house,  in  which  he  entertained  many  distinguished
guests.  In  1790  the  citizens  elected  him  mayor  of
New  Brunswick.  A  few  years  later  he  was  ap-
pointed presiding  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas  of  Somerset  co.  He  was  interested  with  his
friend  Alexander  Hamilton,  Judge  Patterson,  his
brother-in-law,  and  others,  in  a  company  organized
in  1791  to  manufacture  cotton  in  Paterson,  but  it
was  dissolved  in  1795.  Col.  Bayard  was  a  firm
federalist,  with  strong  aristocratic  predilections.
Bancroft  says  that  he  was  "  a  patriot  of  singular
purity  of  chaKacter."  See  "  Col.  John  Bayard  and
the  Bayard  Family  of  America,"  by  Gen.  Jas.
Grant  Wilson  (New  York,  1885).

BAYARD,  Nicholas,  colonial  official,  b.  in
Alphen,  Holland,  about  1644;  d.  in  New  York  city
in  1707.  He  accompanied  his  widowed  mother,
sister  of  Gov.  Stuyvesant,  to  America,  landing  in
New  Amsterdam  on  11  May,  1647.  His  father,
Samuel  Bayard,  of  Amsterdam,  who  died  a  wealthy
merchant  in  that  city,  was  the  grandson  of  a
Huguenot  clergyman,  Nicholas  Bayard,  who  signed
the  art^icles  of  the  Walloon  synod  in  1580,  and  fled
from  France  to  escape  religious  persecution.  Mrs.
Bayard,  who  was  highly  accomplished,  practi-
cal, and  energetic,  instructed  her  three  sons  in
the  useful  branches  of  education.  The  old  Bayard
mansion  stood  on  the  west  side  of  the  Bowery,  and,
with  the  surrounding  premises,  was,  in  1798,  con-
verted by  a  Frenchman  named  Delacroix  into  a
popular  resort,  known  as  "  Vauxhall  Garden." The


Astor  Library  is  built  on  a  part  of  the  estate,  origi-
nally consisting  of  some  two  hundred  acres.  The
only  other  residences  within  sight  in  pre-revolution-
ary  days  were  the  DeLancey  home,  on  the  west  side
of  the  Bowery,  and  the  residences  of  the  Stuyve-
sants,  to  the  north.  Not  far  distant  rose  "  Bayard's
Mount,"  or,  as  it  was  called  after  1776,  "  Bunker's
Hill,"  from  the  fortifications  on  its  sunimit.  It
was  the  highest  elevation  near  the  city,  and  afford-
ed an  extensive  prospect.  In  its  neighborhood
were  also  groves,  the  relics  of  what  in  Madame  Bay-
ard's time  were  known  as  Bayard's  woods.  The
Dutch  family  Bible,  a  massive  folio  with  clasp  and
corner-pieces  brought  from  Holland,  is  in  the  pos-
session of  her  descendent,  Mrs.  Jas.  Grant  Wil-
son, of  New  York.  In  1664  Nicholas  was  appoint-
ed to  the  clerkship  of  the  common  council,  and
soon  afterward  he  became  private  secretary  to
Gov.  Stuyvesant,  and  received  the  additional  ap-
pointment of  surveyor  of  the  province.  On  28  May,
1666,  he  married  Judith  Verlet,  who  in  1662  had
suffered  imprisonment  as  a  witch  at  the  hands  of
the  Puritans  of  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  whose  brother
was  married  to  his  mother,  widow  of  Samuel  Bay-
ard. After  the  re-conquest  of  New  York  by  the
Dutch  in  1673,  Nicholas  Bayard  became  secretary
of  the  province.  Under  the  second  English  regime,
in  1685,  when  Dongan  was  governor,  Bayard  was
mayor  of  New  York  and  a  member  of  the  gover-
nor's council,  and  drew  up  the  Dongan  charter
that  was  granted  in  that  year.  In  1688  he  received,
at  the  head  of  the  regiment  of  militia  of  which  he
was  colonel,  the  restored  Gov.  Andros.  As  one  of
the  three  resident  members  of  the  governor's  coun-
cil, and  commander-in-chief  of  the  militia  of  the
province,  he  was  the  object  of  Leisler's  hatred,  and
when  the  insurrection  headed  by  the  latter  was  in
progress  he  fled  to  Albany  to  escape  assassination.
Returning  to  attend  an  only  son  on  his  sick-bed,
he  was  arrested  and  thrown  into  prison.  He  was
nominated,  with  Nicolls.a  councillor  of  Gov.Slough-
ter,  appointed  by  William  HI.,  and  both  were  re-
leased upon  the  arrival  of  the  new  governor.  When
Lord  Bellomont,  who  became  governor  in  1698,  and
several  of  the  prominent  men  of  the  colony,  were
suspected  of  complicity  in  the  piracies  of  Capt.
Kidd,  Col.  Bayard  went  to  England  to  clear  him-
self of  the  imputation.  Accused  by  the  Leisler
faction  of  a  scheme  to  introduce  popery  and
slavery  into  New  York,  as  well  as  of  piracy,  he
was  tried  for  high  treason  before  Chief-Justice
Atwood  and  sentenced  to  death;  but  after  the
death  of  King  William  and  the  flight  of  the  vin-
dictive judge  who  had  sentenced  him,  the  pro-
ceedings were  annulled  by  an  order  in  council,  and
he  was  reinstated  in  his  property  and  honors.  A
rare  brochure,  of  which  but  two  copies  are  known
— one  in  the  British  Museum,  the  other  included
in  the  valuable  Americana  of  Mrs.  John  Carter
Brown,  of  Providence — was  published  in  London
in  1693.  It  is  a  "Journal  of  the  Late  Actions  of
the  French  at  Canada,"  Col.  Bayard  and  his  friend
Lieut.-Col.  Charles  Lodowick  being  the  joint  au-
thors. The  work  was  reprinted  in  New  York  in  1806.
BAYARD,  Richard  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in
Wilmington,  Del.,  in  1796  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Ph.,
4  March,  1868.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  James
A.  Bayard,  the  federalist  leader,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1814,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  practised  in  his  native  city.  On  20
June,  1836,  he  entered  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  whig,
having  been  elected  to  supply  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  resignation  of  Arnold  Naudam.  He  served
till  September,  1839,  when  he  resigned  to  accept
the  office  of chief  justice  of  Delaware,  but  was


BAYARD


BAYLES


199


again  elected  a  senator,  took  his  seat  2  Dec,  1839,
and  served  till  the  end  of  his  term,  3  March,  1845.
He  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  at  Brussels,  10
Dec,  1850,  and  represented  the  United  States  there
until  12  Sept.,  1858.  His  widow,  a  grand-daughter
of  Charles  Carroll,  of  Carrol Iton,  who  was  celebrated
for  her  beauty,  died  in  1885.

BAYARD,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  11  Jan.,  1767;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  12  May,
1840.  He  was  the  fourth  son  of  Col.  John  Bayard,
and  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1784,  delivering
the  valedictory  oration.  He  studied  law  with  Will-
iam Bradford,  whose  law-partner  he  became,  and
practised  for  seven  years  in  Philadelphia.  In  1791
he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.
After  the  ratification  of  Jay's  treaty  with  Great
Britain,  signed  19  Nov.,  1794,  he  was  appointed  by
Washington  agent  of  the  United  States  to  prose-
cute American  claims  before  the  British  admiralty
courts,  and  in  that  capacity  he  lived  in  London
four  years.  After  his  return  he  resided  several
years  at  New  liochelle,  N.  Y.,  and  while  there  was
appointed  by  Gov.  Jay  presiding  Judge  of  West-
chester CO.  In  1803  he  removed  to  New  York
city,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law.  He  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  historical  society,
organized  in  1804.  In  1806  he  purchased  an  estate
at  Princeton,  N.  J.  For  several  years  he  was  a
member  of  the  New  Jersey  legislature,  and  for  a
long  period  presiding  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  of  Somerset  co.  He  was  interested  in
religious  enterprises,  was  one  of  the  founders  of
Princeton  theological  seminary,  and  joined  with
Elias  Boudinot  in  establishing  Ihe  American  Bible
society  and  the  New  Jersey  Bible  society.  In  1814
he  was  nominated  by  the  federalists  for  congress,
but  was  defeated.  He  published  a  funeral  oration
on  Gen.  Washington  (New  Brunswick,  1800) ;  "  A
Digest  of  American  Cases  on  the  Law  of  Evidence,
intended  as  Notes  to  Peake's  Compendium  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1810) ;  "  An  Abstract  of  the  Laws  of  the
United  States  which  relate  to  the  Duties  and  Au-
thority of  Judges  of  Inferior  State  Courts  and  Jus-
tices of  the  Peace  "  (New  York,  1834) ;  and  "  Let-
ters on  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper "
(Philadelphia,  1825;  2d  ed.,  1840).  See  "Samuel
Bayard  and  his  London  Diary,  1791-4,"  by  Gen.
Jas.  Grant  Wilson  (Newark,  1885).

BAYARD,  Thomas  Francis,  statesman,  son
of  James  A.  Bayard,  b.  in  Wilmington,  Del.,  29

Oct.,  1828.  He
was  educated
chiefly  in  the
Flushing  school
established  by
the  Rev.  Dr.  F.
L.  Hawks,  and.
being  intended
for  mercantile
life,  was  placed
in  a  business
house  in  New
York  city.  Af-
ter the  death  of
his  elder  brother
in  1848,  he  re-
turned to  Wil-
mington, stud-
ied law,  and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  1851.  He
was  appointed
U.  S.  district  at-
torney for  Delaware,  but  resigned  in  the  following
year. In  1855  he  removed  to  Philadelphia,  where


^;>^yi^'^C-^


he  became  the  partner  of  William  Shippen  and
practised  for  two  years,  but  then  returned  to  Wil-
mington and  continued  in  the  practice  of  the  law
until  he  was  elected  in  1868  to  succeed  his  father
in  the  U.  S.  senate.  In  1861,  at  a  public  meeting
in  Dover,  he  delivered  a  memorable  speech  in  favor
of  peace  with  the  south.  He  took  his  seat  4  March,
1869,  and,  being  re-elected  for  a  second  term  in
January,  1875,  and  again  in  1881,  served  continu-
ously until  he  became  secretary  of  state,  4  March,
1885.  On  the  day  on  which  he  was  elected  to  the
senate  for  a  full  term  his  father  was  also  re-elected
a  senator  from  Delaware  to  serve  for  the  unexpired
part  of  his  original  term.  This  is  the  only  case  of
a  father  and  son  being  voted  for  by  the  same  legis-
lature to  fill  the  senatorial  office.  In  the  senate  he
served  on  the  committees  on  finance,  judiciary,
private  land  claims,  library,  and  revision  of  laws.
In  October,  1881,  he  was  elected  president  yro  tem-
pore of  the  senate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  elec-
toral commission  of  1876-'7,  and  a  conspicuous
upholder  in  congress  of  democratic  doctrines  and
state  rights,  and  was  voted  for  in  national  conven-
tion as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  in  1880  and
again  in  1884.  In  appointing  his  cabinet  in  March,
1885,  Mr.  Cleveland  selected  Mr.  Bayard  for  the
post  of  secretary  of  state.  Including  his  great-
grandfather. Gov.  Bassett,  he  is  the  fifth  member
of  his  family  who  have  occupied  seats  in  the  U.  S.
senate.  See  "  Public  Life  and  Services  of  Thomas
F.  Bayard,"  by  Edward  Spencer  (New  York,  1880).

BAYARD,  William,  merchant,  b.  in  New  York,
1  June,  1729 ;  d.  in  Southampton,  England,  in
1804.  He  joined  the  Sons  of  Liberty,  but  his  prin-
ciples would  not  permit  him  to  aid  the  movement
for  independence,  and  he  sailed  for  England,  re-
siding near  Southampton.  At  the  period  of  his
departure  Col.  Bayard  was  among  the  most  promi-
nent and  opulent  merchants  of  New  York.  His
ancestral  country-seat  at  Castle  Point  included
nearly  all  the  land  on  which  the  present  city  of
Hoboken  is  built.  The  estate  was  confiscated  and
sold,  but  by  marriage  has  again  passed  into  the
possession  of  a  Bayard,  Two  of  his  four  sons  en-
tered the  British  army — Lieut.-Col.  John  Bayard,
and  Maj.  Samuel  Vetch  Bayard.  His  third  son,
William,  was  the  head  of  the  leading  mercantile
house  of  New  York  in  the  early  part  of  the  present
century,  the  firm  being  Bavard,  Lerov  &  McEvers,

BAYFIELD,  Henry  tVolsey,  English  naval
officer,  d.  in  England  in  1885,  He  entered  the
British  navy  in  1806.  and  during  the  war  of  1812
had  command  of  an  English  gun-boat  on  the  lakes.
In  1815  he  made  a  survey  of  Lake  Ontario,  and
from  1817  till  1823  was  engaged  similarly  on  Lakes
Erie  and  Huron,  In  1827  he  surveyed  the  river
and  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence ;  and  his  charts  are  of
great  value.  In  1834  he  was  made  captain,  in  1863
advanced  to  the  grade  of  rear-admiral,  and  in  1867
became  admiral  on  the  retired  list.

BAYLES,  James  C,  journalist,  b.  in  New  York
city,  3  July,  1845.  He  pursued  a  course  of  tech-
nical studies  until  1862,  when,  shortly  after  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  he  entered  the  U.  S.
service  as  a  lieutenant  of  artillery.  His  health
having  been  impaired  by  exposure  and  injuries,  he
resigned  in  1864  and  turned  his  attention  to  jour-
nalism. He  was  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Citizen  "
in  1865-'7,  of  the  New  York  "  Commercial  Bulle-
tin" in  1868-'9.  In  1870  he  became  editor  of
"The  Iron  Age,"  and  in  1874  established  "The
Metal  Worker,"  of  which  he  also  became  editor.
Mr.  Bayles  has  devoted  much  time  and  careful
study  to  the  special  topics  of  which  his  journals
treat,  and  has  made  numerous  varied  and  success-


300


BAYLEY


BAYLEY


ful  experiments  in  electro-metallurgy,  and  also  in
the  microscopic  analysis  of  metals,  the  results  of
which  haA'e  appeared  in  different  technical  jour-
nals, notably  in  a  paper  on  "  Microscopic  Analysis,"
which  was  published  in  the  "  Transactions  oj  the
American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers."  He
was  among  the  first  to  examine  health  problems
from  an  American  standpoint,  and  his  study  of
sanitary  conditions  in  New  Jersey,  where  he  re-
sides, made  him  prominent  as  an  authority  on  such
subjects.  He  has  delivered  lectures  on  sanitary
topics  in  New  York,  and  in  all  of  the  prominent
cities  of  the  union,  and  is  the  author  of  t^e  first
standard  American  work  on  the  mechanics  of  hy-
giene, "  House  Drainage  and  Water  Service  "  (New
York,  1876),  of  which  seven  editions  have  been  is-
sued. In  1888  he  was  elected  president  of  the  New
Jersey  State  Sanitary  Association,  and  was  appoint-
ed a  commissioner  to  devise  a  system  of  sewers  and
sanitary  improvements  for  the  city  of  Trenton.  He
is  an  active  member  of  the  American  Institute  of
Mining  Engineers,  and,  besides  other  offices,  has
twice  filled  that  of  president  (1884  and  1885).  His
addresses  before  this  body  have  been  well-consid-
ered and  thoughtful  essays  on  "  The  Study  of  Iron
and  Steel "  (1884) ;  "  Causes  of  Industrial  Depres-
sion "  (1884) ;  "  Industrial  Competition  "  (188&) ;
'*  Iron  Manufacture  in  the  Southern  States  "  (1885) ;
"  The  Engineer  and  the  Wage-Earner "  (1885) ;
"  Professional  Ethics  "  (1886).  He  was  also  active
in  the  founding  of  the  American  Institute  of  Me-
chanical Engineers,  and  was  one  of  its  original
members.  In  1886  he  became  a  non-resident  lec-
turer at  the  Sibley  School  of  Engineering  in  Cor-
nell, and  has  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  on  "  The
Labor  Problem  "  before  that  institution.  In  con-
nection with  that  subject  he  has  published  "  The
Shop  Council"  (New  York,  1886),  in  which  he
strives  to  reconcile  the  views  of  the  employer  and
the  wage-earner.

BAYLEY,  James  Roosevelt,  R.  C.  archbish-
op, b.  in  New  York  city,  23  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  in  New-
ark, N.  J.,  3  Oct.,  1877.  He  received  his  early  edu-
cation in  Mount  Pleasant  school  near  Amherst,
and  then  entered  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  where
he  graduated  in  1835.  As  his  father  and  grand-
father had  been  eminent  members  of  the  medical
profession,  he  determined  to  follow  in  their  foot-
steps. But  after  studying  medicine  for  a  year,  he
abandoned  it  for  theology,  with  the  intention  of
entering  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  His  theological  studies  were  pursued
under  the  direction  of  the  Rev.  Samuel  P.  Jarvis
at  Middletown,  Conn.,  and  on  their  conclusion  he
was  appointed  rector  of  the  Episcopal  church  in
Harlem,  where  he  remained  during  1840-'l.  At
this  time  the  cholera  was  ravaging  the  city,  and
Mr.  Bayley's  devotion  to  its  victims  excited  much
admiration.  He  had  become  dissatisfied  with  some
of  the  doctrines  of  the  Episcopal  church,  and  tow-
ard the  end  of  1841  resigned  his  charge  and  visited
Europe.  He  was  received  into  the  Catholic  church
at  Rome  in  1842,  and  entered  the  seminary  of  St.
Sulpice,  Paris,  the  same  year,  to  prepare  himself
for  the  priesthood.  He  was  recalled  by  Bishop
Hughes  and  ordained  in  1844,  and  then  sent  to
St.  John's  college,  Fordham,  and  became  vice-
president  of  that  institution  until  1845,  and  acting
president  in  1846.  He  was  next  appointed  pastor
of  a  church  on  Staten  Island,  near  the  lower  quar-
antine, and  also  chaplain  to  the  ship-fever  hos-
pital. Bishop  Hughes  made  him  his  private  secre-
tary in  December,  1846,  and  he  did  much  to  secure
the  success  of  the  bishop's  plans  for  the  progress
of  the  Catholic  church  in  New  York. He  also  col-


lected a  mass  of  valuable  information  in  regard  to
the  early  history  of  the  Catholic  church  in  New
York,  much  of  which  would  have  perished  but  for
his  researches.  In  1853,  on  the  recommendation
of  Archbishop  Hughes  and  his  suffragans,  he  was
created  the  first  bishop  of  Newark.  He  took  pos-
session of  his  diocese  on  1  Nov.  of  the  same  year,
and  found  it  was  a  poorly  cultivated  missionary
district,  with  few  priests  and  no  Catholic  institu-
tions ;  but  he  soon  made  it  one  of  the  most  pros-
perous dioceses  in  the  United  States.  One  of  liis
first  efforts  was  to  establish  Seton  Hall  college  at
South  Orange,  in  1856.  A  theological  seminary
was  next  attached  to  the  college,  from  which  a
large  number  of  gj-aduates  have  entered  the  minis-
try. He  brought  a  colony  of  nuns  from  Europe,
by  whose  aid  he  founded  the  convent  at  Madison,
N.  J.,  for  the  instruction  of  young  girls.  He  in-
troduced throughout  the  diocese  the  religious
orders  of  Passionists,  Dominicans,  Augustinians,
and  others.  He  was  an  extensive  traveller,  and
made  several  journeys  to  Europe  and  the  Holy
Land ;  visited  Rome  officially  in  1862  for  the  can-
onization of  the  Japanese  martyrs,  and  in  1867  for
the  centenary  of  the  apostles.  In  1869  he  took
part  in  the  deliberations  of  the  oecumenical  coun-
cil. His  observations  during  his  travels  took  the
form  of  lectures  delivered  in  his  diocese  and  else-
where. By  a  papal  brief  he  was  translated  to  the
see  of  Baltimore  in  1872,  which  is  the  highest  in
rank  in  the  LTnited  States.  His  health  steadily
declined ;  but  he  worked  as  earnestly  as  ever,  and
through  his  exertions  the  cathedral  of  Baltimore
was  freed  from  debt,  and  he  was  thus  enabled  to
consecrate  it  after  his  installation.  He  was  created
apostolic  delegate  in  1875,  and  in  this  capacity  im-
posed the  beretta  on  Cardinal  McCloskey.  He
went  to  Europe  in  April,  1877,  hoping  to  derive
benefit  from  the  Vichy  waters ;  but  grew  worse,  and
returned  to  America  to  die.  He  published  a
"  Sketch  of  the  History  of  the  Catholic  Church  on
the  Island  of  New  York"  (New  York,  1853;  re-
vised ed.,  1869) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Simon  Gabriel
Brute,  First  Bishop  of  Vincennes "  (1860);  and
"  Pastorals  for  the  People."

BAYLEY,  Richard,  physician,  b.  in  Faii-field,
Conn.,  in  1745 ;  d.  on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,
1801.  He  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Charlton,  and
afterward  in  the  hospitals  of  London.  In  1772  he
returned  to  New  York  and  began  to  practise.  At
this  period  he  devoted  special  attention  to  the  pa-
thology of  croup,  and  suggested  a  new  method  for
its  treatment.  His  views  became  universally  ac-
cepted, and  he  published  "  A  View  of  the  Croup  "
(1781).  In  1775  he  revisited  England,  where  he
studied  and  practised  under  Dr.  Hunter,  and  in
the  spring  of  1776  returned  to  this  country  as  sur-
geon in  the  English  army  under  Gen.  Howe.  This
office  he  resigned  in  the  following  year,  but  re-
mained in  New  York  and  continued  in  the  practice
of  his  profession  until  his  death.  In  1787  he  began
the  delivery  of  lectures  on  surgery,  and  in  1788  his
collection  of  specimens  illustrating  morbid  anat-
omy were  totally  destroyed  by  the  "  doctor's
mob."  He  was  elected  the  first  professor  of  anat-
omy in  Columbia  college  (1792),  a  chair  which  he
afterward  (1793)  exchanged  for  that  of  surgery.
For  some  time  he  was  health  officer  of  the  port  of
New  York,  and  in  that  capacity  he  strenuously
exerted  himself  to  obtain  the  passage  of  proper
quarantine  laws,  in  wliich  he  was  finally  success-
ful. The  causes  of  yellow  fever  were  very  care-
fully studied  by  him,  and  in  1797  he  published  a
work  in  which  he  contended  that  its  origin  was
due  entirely  to  local  causes,  and  therefore  that  it


BAYLIES


BAYNE


201


was  not  contagious.  His  death  was  the  result  of
ship  fever  contracted  while  visiting  an  emigrant
ship  that  was  crowded  with  passengers  who  had
slept  there  during  the  night  without  ventilation.

BAYLIES,  NichoLas,  jurist,  b.  in  Uxbridge,
Mass.,  in  1773 ;  d.  in  Lyndon,  Vt.,  17  Aug.,  1847.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1794,  studied
law,  and  practised  in  Woodstock  and  Montpelier.
From  1881  to  1834  he  was  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Vermont.  He  published  "A  Digested
Index  to  the  Modern  Reports  of  the  Courts  of
Common  Law  in  England  and  the  United  States  "
(3  vols.,  1814),  and  an  "  Essav  on  Free  Agency."

BAYLIES,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Ux-
bridge, Mass.,  5  Dec,  1743 ;  d.  in  Dighton,  Mass.,
17  June,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1760,  studied  medicine,  and  settled  in  Dighton,
where  he  practised  with  success.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  provincial  congress  of  Massachusetts  in
1775,  and  also  a  member  of  the  state  convention
that  adopted  the  federal  constitution.  In  1783  he
was  a  state  senator,  and  in  1801  was  a  member  of
the  electoral  college.  From  1805  till  1809  he
served  as  a  representative  from  Massachusetts  in
congress.  Dr.  Baylies  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  Massachusetts  Medical  Society  and  a  member
of  the  Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  and  of  the
State  Historical  Society.  His  two  sons,  William
and  Francis  Baylies,  were  distinguished  lawyers. —
Francis,  b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1783 ;  d.
there,  28  Oct.,  1852,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his
brother,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  From  1812
till  1820  he  was  register  of  probate  in  Bristol  co.,
Mass.,  and  from  1827  till  1832,  and  again  in  1835,
he  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  state  legis-
lature. He  was  elected  to  congress  and  served
continuously  for  three  terms,  from  1821  till  1827.
In  1832  he  was  appointed  charge  d'affaires  to  the
Argentine  Republic,  but  soon  returned  home.  He
was  the  author  of  a  valuable  "  Historical  Memoir
of  the  Colony  of  New  Plymouth  "  (2  vols.,  Boston,
1830),  which  has  been  republished,  with  notes  and
additions,  by  S.  Gr.  Drake  (Boston,  1866).

BAYLOR,  Frances  Courtenay,  author,  b.  in
Fayetteville,  Ark.,  20  Jan.,  1848.  Her  home  has
been  in  the  south,  with  the  exception  of  a  resi-
dence in  England  during  the  years  1865-'7  and
1873-'4. Her  writings  have  been  principally  for

Periodicals,  in  which  two  of  her  short  stories — "  The
'erfect  Treasure  "  and  "  On  This  Side  "—attracted
wide  attention,  and  were  published  in  book  form
as  one  narrative,  "  On  Both  Sides  "  (Philadelphia,
1888;  republished  in  Edinburgh).  Miss  Baylor
has  travelled  extensively  both  at  home  and  abroad.
BAYLOR,  (xeorge,  soldier,  b.  in  Newmarket,
Va.,  12  Jan.,  1752;  d.  in  Bridgetown,  Barbadoes,
W.  I.,  in  March,  1784.  He  served  continuously
throughout  the  revolutionary  war,  beginning  with
his  appointment,  15  Aug.,  1775,  as  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  Washington.  He  participated  in  the  sur-
prise of  the  Hessians  at  Trenton,  carried  the  news
of  the  victory  to  congress,  and  was  presented  by
that  body  with  a  horse,  and  advanced  to  the  rank
of  colonel  in  the  dragoons,  8  Jan.,  1777.  During
the  following  year  (17  Sept.,  1778)  his  command
was  surprised  near  Tappan  at  midnight  by  a  Brit-
ish force  under  Gen.  Grey,  who  killed  sixty-seven
of  his  men  and  captured  the  remainder,  including
Col.  Baylor.  Later  he  rejoined  the  colonial  forces,
and  served  with  them  until  the  end  of  the  war,
after  which  he  continued  for  some  time  in  com-
mand of  the  Virginian  cavalry.  The  winter  of
1783-4  he  spent  in  the  West  Indies  on  account  of
his  health,  being  a  great  sufferer  from  a  bayonet-
wound  through  the  lungs,  received  at  Tappan.


BAYLOR,  Robert  Emmett  Bledsoe,  jurist,  b.
in  Lincoln  co.,  Ky.,  10  May,  1793;  d.  at  Gay  Hill,
Texas,  6  Jan.,  1874.  He  was  the  son  of  Walker
Baylor,  who  commanded  Washington's  life  guards
at  the  battle  of  Germantown,  and  was  a  nephew  of
Col.  George  Baylor.  He  studied  law  with  his  ma-
ternal uncle,  the  Hon.  Jesse  Bledsoe.  He  served
in  the  war  of  1812  under  Col.  Boswell,  and  was  in
the  fight  near  Fort  Meigs.  When  peace  was  re-
stored he  returned  to  Kentucky,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  soon  acquired  a  large  practice.  In
1819  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature,  but
during  the  following  year  removed  to  Alabama,
where  he  became  prominent  in  the  legal  profession.
He  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature  in  1824,  and
in  1829  was  sent  as  a  representative  from  Alabama
to  the  21st  congress,  serving  till  3  March,  1831.
During  the  Creek  war  he  commanded  a  regiment
of  Alabama  volunteers,  and  rendered  efficient  ser-
vice in  terminating  the  war  on  the  borders  of  that
state.  Subsequent  to  his  career  in  congress  he
emigrated  to  the  republic  of  Texas,  where  he  was
immediately  elected  a  judge  of  the  district  and  of
the  supreme  court.  Judge  Baylor,  being  a  warm
friend  of  annexation,  after  the  change  of  govern-
ment was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention
that  formed  the  present  state  constitution.  Later
he  was  again  appointed  one  of  the  district  judges,
and  held  the  office  for  twenty-five  years.  He  was
a  devoted  Baptist,  and  at  one  time  a  licensed
preacher  of  that  denomination.  In  1845  a  charter
for  a  Baptist  college,  to  be  located  at  Independence,
was  granted  by  the  congress  of  Texas,  and  it  re-
ceived the  name  of  Baylor  university,  an  honor
warranted  by  the  gifts  of  land  and  money  made  by
Judge  Baylor.  One  of  the  counties  of  Texas  was
also  named  for  him.

BAYNAM,  William,  surgeon,  b.  in  Caroline
CO.,  Va.,  in  December,  1749;  d.  in  Essex,  Va.,  8
Dec  ,  1814.  He  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Walk-
er, and  in  1769  went  to  London,  where  he  became
very  proficient  in  anatomy  and  surgery.  For  sev-
eral years  he  was  assistant  demonstrator  in  St.
Thomas's  hospital,  London.  After  sixteen  years'
residence  in  England  he  returned  in  1785  to  the
United  States  and  settled  in  Essex.  He  was  very
successful  as  a  surgeon,  and  as  an  anatomist  he  had
no  superior.  The  best  preparations  in  the  muse-
ums of  Cline  and  Cooper,  in  London,  were  made
by  him. He  contributed  to  the  medical  journals.

BAYNE,  Herbert  Andrew,  educator,  b.  in
Londonderry,  Nova  Scotia,  16  Aug.,  1846;  d.  in
Pictou,  16  Sept.,  1886.  He  was  principal  of  Pictou
academy  from  1865  till  1867,  and  from  1869  till
1873.  Meanwhile  he  was  graduated  at  Dalhousie
college  in  1869.  He  studied  from  1873  till  1875  at
the  imiversity  in  Leipsic,  and  at  Heidelberg  in
1875-'6,  where  he  received  the  degree  of  doctor  of
philosophy.  During  1876-'7  he  studied  at  Berlin
and  Paris.  On  his  return  to  Nova  Scotia  he  be-
came professor  of  mathematics  at  the  Halifax  high
school,  and  at  the  same  time  professor  of  organic
chemistry  at  Dalhousie  college.  In  1880  he  was
appointed  professor  of  physics  and  chemistry  in
the  Royal  military  college  of  Canada,  in  Kingston.
He  was  appointed,  in  1885,  a  member  of  the  car-
tridge commission  appointed  by  the  Dominion
government,  and  has  performed  much  chemical
work  in  connection  with  the  investigations  of  that
board.  Dr.  Bayne  is  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  Society
of  Canada,  of  the  American  Association  for  the
Advancement  of  Science,  and  other  scientific  so-
cieties.

BAYNE,  John,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Greenock,  Scotland,  16  Nov.,  1806 ;  d."  in  Gait,  On-


202


BAYNES


BEACH


tario,  3  Nov.,  1859.  He  entered  the  university  of
Glasgow  in  November,  1819,  and  completed  his
theological  studies  at  Edinburgh  university.  He
removed  to  Canada  about  1835,  and  was  pastor  of
the  Gait  Presbyterian  church  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  disruption
from  the  church  of  Scotland  in  1843,  and  in  the
formation  of  the  free  church  of  Canada.  In  July,
1846,  he  was  appointed  moderator  of  the  synod  that
met  at  Hamilton.  As  a  preacher  he  was  singu-
larly eloquent  and  effective.  He  was  the  author
of  a  little  book  entitled  "  Was  the  Recent  Disrup-
tion of  the  Synod  of  Canada  in  Connection  with
the  Church  of  Scotland  called  for  ?  "  and  also  of  an
essav  entitled  "  Is  Man  Responsible  for  his  Belief  ?  "
BAYNES,  Edward,  British  soldier,  d.  in  Sid-
mouth,  England,  2  Feb.,  1829.  He  was  made  en-
sign of  the  82d  regiment  on  13  May,  1783,  was
aide-de-camp  to  Sir  James  Craig  from  1794  till
1806,  became  adjutant-general  of  the  forces  in
North  America,  20  Aug.,  1807,  and  was  conspicu-
ous in  the  campaign  on  the  Niagara  frontier  in  the
war  of  1812.  He  had  served  in  the  West  Indies,
at  the  capture  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  in  1795,
at  the  capture  of  a  Dutch  force  in  Saldanha  bay
in  September,  1796,  in  the  East  Indies,  in  Malta,
and  in  Sicily.

BAZAINE,  Francois  Acliille,  French  soldier,
b.  in  Versailles,  13  Feb.,  1811.  He  enlisted  as  a
private  at  the  age  of  twenty,  became  lieutenant  in
Algeria  in  1835,  captain  after  two  years'  service
with  the  foreign  legion  against  the  Carlists  in
Spain,  lieutenant-colonel  in  1848  after  nine  years'
service  in  Algeria  and  Morocco,  colonel  of  the  for-
eign legion  in  1850,  and  general  of  brigade  in  the
Crimean  war,  acting  as  commander  of  Sebastopol
after  its  capture.  Pie  became  general  of  division
in  1855,  and  participated  in  the  capture  of  Kin-
burn.  Subsequently  he  was  military  inspector  in
France.  In  the  Italian  campaign  he  was  wound-
ed, 8  June,  1859,  while  commanding  a  division  in
the  attack  upon  Melegnano,  and  lie  took  a  con-
spicuous part  in  the  battle  of  Solferino.  In  1862
he  commanded  in  Mexico  the  first  division  of  the
French  army,  and  by  defeating  Comonfort  com-
pelled the  surrender  of  Puebla,  18  May,  1863,
shortly  after  which  the  French  entered  the  capi-
tal. On  1  Oct.,  1863,  he  succeeded  Forey  as  com-
mander-in-chief, acting  as  civil  administrator  of
the  occupied  districts;  and  the  rank  of  marshal
was  conferred  on  him  in  1864.  In  February,  1865,
he  captured  the  town  of  Oaxaca,  together  with  a
Mexican  army  of  7,000  men  under  Diaz.  Though
he  persuaded  Maximilian  to  issue  the  most  rigor-
ous decrees  against  the  Juarists,  and  himself  re-
lentlessly executed  them,  he  was  generally  be-
lieved to  be  engaged  in  secret  plottings  with  the
enemies  of  the  emperor,  in  pursuance  of  ambitious
personal  schemes.  He  married  a  rich  Mexican
lady,  whose  family  espoused  the  cause  of  Juarez.
In  February,  1867,  he  withdrew  with  his  forces
from  the  capital,  declaring  Maximilian's  position
to  be  untenable,  and  soon  afterward  embarked  at
Vera  Cruz.  On  his  arrival  in  France,  though  ex-
posed to  violent  public  denunciations,  he  took  his
seat  in*the  senate,  and  was  appointed  commander
of  the  3d  army  corps ;  and  in  October,  1869,  after
the  death  of  St.  Jean  d'Angely,  he  became  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  imperial  guard  at  Paris.
At  the  beginning  of  the  Franco-German  war  in
1870  he  was  placed  in  command,  near  Metz,  of  the
3d  corps.  After  the  defeats  of  Worth  and  Forbach
he  assumed,  on  8  Aug.,  command  of  the  mam  French
armies,  in  place  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and  be-
gan his  retreat  from  Metz,  14  Aug.,  hoping  to  eif ect


a  junction  with  the  army  near  Chalons  and  with
the  new  forces  gathering  under  MacMahon.  But-*
he  was  attacked  on  the  same  day,  while  still  in
front  of  the  fortress,  and  after  the  bloody  battles
of  Mars-la-Tour  (16  Aug.)  and  Gravelotte  (18  Aug.)
was  forced  to  retire  within  the  fortifications,  and
was  soon  shut  in  by  Prince  Frederick  Charles.  He
made  several  futile  attempts  to  break  through  the
investing  army,  that  of  31  Aug.  to  1  Sept.  proving
very  disastrous.  After  the  capitulation  of  Sedan
he  renewed  these  attempts  (7,  8  Oct.)  to  escape
from  Metz,  and  then  tried  to  negotiate  with  the
Germans  at  Versailles  through  his  adjutant.  Gen.
Boyer,  and  in  the  interest,  it  was  thought,  of  the
deposed  dynasty;  but  he  was  compelled,  on  27
Oct.,  to  surrender  to  Prince  Frederick  Charles  his
entire  force  of  173,000  men,  who  by  the  terms  of
the  capitulation  all  became  prisoners  of  war,  Ba-
zaine  himself  being  permitted  to  join  the  ex-em-
peror at  Cassel.  After  the  preliminary  treaty  of
peace  he  removed  to  Geneva,  in  March,  1871.
Having  been  charged  with  treason  by  Gambetta,
he  defended  himself  in  his  "  Rapport  sommaire  sur
les  operations  de  I'armee  du  Rhin  du  13  Aout  au
29  Octobre." He  was  placed  under  arrest  14  May,

1872,  and  at  the  conclusion  of  his  trial,  10  Dec.,

1873,  the  judges  declared  him  guilty  and  unani-
mously sentenced  him  to  degradation  and  death.
But  all  the  members  of  the  court,  presided  over
by  the  Duke  d'Aumale,  signed  an  appeal  for  mercy,
which  the  duke  presented  in  person  to  President
MacMahon,  who  commuted  the  sentence  to  twenty
years  seclusion.  He  was  sent  to  a  fortress  in  the
island  of  Ste.  Marguerite ;  but,  through  the  efforts
of  his  wife,  he  effected  his  escape  at  midnight,  9
Aug.,  1874.  He  took  refuge  in  Spain,  where  he
has  since  resided,  in  very  reduced  circumstances.

BAZIN,  John  A.,  bishop,  b.  in  France  in  1796;
d.  in  Vincennes  in  1847.  He  was  educated  and
ordained  in  France,  and  came  to  America  about
1830.  He  was  shortly  afterward  stationed  at  Mo-
bile, Ala.,  where  he  gained  the  affection  of  all
classes  and  creeds.  He  was  appointed  vicar-g6n-
eral  of  Mobile,  and  gave  most  of  his  time  to  the
creation  of  charitable  institutions,  one  of  which,  a
Catholic  orphan  asylum  society,  was  especially  suc-
cessful. He  visited  France  in  1846  for  the  purpose
of  obtaining  a  body  of  Jesuits  to  take  charge  of  the
college  at  Spring  Hill,  and  also  securing  the  ser-
vices of  the  brothers  of  the  Christian  schools  for  a
male  orphan  asylum,  in  both  of  which  he  succeed-
ed. In  1847  the  council  of  Baltimore  recommend-
ed his  appointment  to  the  see  of  Vincennes,  but  he
died  a  few  days  after  his  consecration.

BEACH,  Abraham,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cheshire,
Conn.,  9  Sept.,  1740;  d.  near  New  Brunswick,  N.
J.,  14  Sept.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1757  with  the  honors  of  the  valedictory,  became  a
convert  to  the  Episcopal  faith,  and  studied  theolo-
gy under  Dr.  Samuel  Johnson  and  his  relative,
John  Beach.  In  1767  he  went  to  England,  and
there  received  ordination  to  the  priesthood.  He
was  appointed  missionary  to  New  Brunswick,  and
entered  upon  his  work  in  September,  1767.  Dur-
ing the  revolutionary  war  his  position  between  the
two  armies  was  exceedingly  embarrassing.  In  con-
sequence his  church  was  closed,  and  he  did  not
officiate  until  December,  1781,  when,  in  accordance
with  the  suggestions  of  the  archbishop  of  Canter-
bury, it  became  permissible  to  conduct  public  wor-
ship with  the  omission  of  the  prayers  for  the  king
and  parliament.  In  1784  he  became  the  assistant
minister  of  Trinity  church  in  New  York,  and  con-
tinued an  active  worker  in  the  diocese  of  New  York
until  1813. He  was  on  many  occasions  a  delegate i


BEACH


BEAL


203


to  the  general  conventions,  and  in  1801,  1804,  and
1810  was  president  of  the  house  of  lay  and  clerical
delegates.  Of  Rutgers  college,  established  in  1770
at  New  Brunswick,  he  was  an  early  trustee.  In
1786  he  was  elected  a  regent  of  the  university  of
the  state  of  New  York,  and  in  1787  a  trustee  of
Columbia  college,  from  which  institution  he  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1789.  He
was  likewise  actively  associated  with  many  of  the
benevolent  institutions  of  New  York,  Subsequent
to  his  resignation  from  Trinity  parish  he  retired
to  his  farm  on  Raritan  river,  near  New  Brunswick,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  His  only  publi-
cations were  sermons.

BEACH,  Henry  Harris  Aubrey,  physician,  b.
in  Middletown,  Conn.,  18  Dec,  1848.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Cambridge,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard
medical  school  in  July,  1858,  settling  in  Boston
soon  afterward.  He  is  a  member  of  many  medical
associations,  and  in  1873  was  president  of  the
Boylston  medical  society.  He  became  assistant
demonstrator  of  anatomy  in  Harvard  medical
school  in  18G8,  and  surgeon  in  the  Massachusetts
general  hospital  in  1872.  He  has  contributed
many  papers  to  medical  periodicals,  and  was  at
one  time  assistant  editor  of  the  "  Boston  Medical
and  Surgical  Journal."

BEACH,  Moses  Yale,  inventor,  b.  in  Walling-
ford,  Conn.,  7  Jan.,  1800 :  d.  there,  19  July,  1868.
In  early  life  he  displayed  mechanical  ability,  and
at  the  age  of  fourteen  was  apprenticed  to  a  cabi-
net-maker in  Hartford,  and  by  his  industry  he  suc-
ceeded in  purchasing  his  freedom  before  the  ex-
piration of  his  time.  He  then  established  himself
in  the  cabinet  business  in  Northampton,  but  was
unsuccessful,  and  removed  to  Springfield.  There
he  endeavored  to  manufacture  a  gunpowder  engine
for  propelling  balloons;  but  this  enterprise  was
also  a  failure.  He  next  attempted  to  open  steam
navigation  on  Connecticut  river  between  Hart-
ford and  Springfield,  and  would  have  succeeded  if
financial  difficulties  had  not  obliged  him  to  cease
operations  before  his  steamer  was  completed.  Mr.
Beach  then  invented  a  rag-cutting  machine,  which
has  since  been  generally  used  in  paper-mills,  but
from  which  he  received  no  pecuniary  benefit  on
account  of  his  delay  in  procuring  a  patent.  He
then  settled  in  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  where  he  became
interested  in  an  extensive  paper-mill,  and  was  at
first  successful,  but  after  seven  years  was  compelled
to  abandon  it.  About  1835  he  removed  to  New
York,  where  he  acquired  an  interest  in  the  •'  Sun,"
the  pioneer  of  the  penny  press,  of  which  he  soon
made  himself  sole  proprietor.  During  the  Mexi-
can war,  President  Folk  sent  him  to  Mexico  to  ar-
range a  treaty  of  peace ;  but  the  negotiations  were
broken  off  by  a  false  report  announcing  the  defeat
of  Gen.  Taylor  by  Santa  Anna.  In  1857  he  with-
drew from  active  business,  and  until  his  death
continued  to  reside  in  his  native  town,  where  he
liberally  aided  every  plan  for  the  improvement  of
the  place,  and  was  interested  in  all  efforts  tending
toward  its  intellectual  and  moral  advancement.

BEACH,  William  Augustus,  lawyer,  b.  in
Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  13  Dec,  1809 ;  d.  in  Tarry-
town,  28  June,  1884.  He  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  began  practice  in  his  native  town,  and  in
1840  was  elected  district  attorney  of  Saratoga  co.
In  1855  he  removed  to  Troy,  and  continued  active
in  his  profession  until  18*70,  when  he  settled  in
New  York.  Here  he  established  the  law  firm  of
Beach  «&  Brown,  and  attained  a  high  reputation,
becoming  one  of  the  most  prominent  advocates  of
his  time.  He  was  engaged  in  many  notable  cases,
was  counsel  for  Col.  North  in  his  trial  by  court-


martial  during  the  civil  war,  and  later  was  counsel
for  Theodore  Tilton  in  his  celebrated  suit  against
Henry  Ward  Beecher.  He  defended  Judge  Bar-
nard during  his  trial  for  impeachment,  and  was  as-
sociated in  the  trial  of  E.  S.  Stokes  for  the  murder
of  James  Fisk,  Jr.,  and  in  the  Vanderbilt  will  case.

BEADLE,  William  Henry  Harrison,  educa-
tor, b.  in  Liberty,  Ind.,  1  Jan.,  1838.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1861,
entered  the  army  as  first  lieutenant  in  the  31st  In-
diana infantry,  served  continuously  during  the
civil  war,  and  in  1864  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general.  He  was  graduated  at  the  law  department
of  the  University  of  Michigan  in  1867,  practised
for  two  years  in  Wisconsin,  and  in  1869  was  ap-
pointed surveyor-general  of  Dakota.  Since  then
he  has  devoted  his  attention  to  the  development  of
the  resources  of  that  territory.  From  1879  to  1885
he  was  superintendent  of  public  instruction  of
Dakota,  and  under  his  direction  the  entire  school
system  was  organized.

BEAKMAN,  Daniel  Frederick,  b.  in  New
Jersey  about  1760:  d.  in  Sandusky,  N.  Y.,  5
April,  1869.  He  was  the  last  surviving  soldier  of
the  revolution  on  the  pension  list.  His  early  life
was  spent  in  the  Mohawk  valley,  whither  his'  par-
ents had  removed  shortly  after  his  birth.  In  1778
he  was  enrolled  in  the  militia,  and  then  served  in
the  war.  About  1845  he  removed  to  Cattaraugus
CO.,  where  the  remainder  of  his  life  was  spent.  His
married  life  extended  over  eighty-five  years,  and
his  wife  reached  the  age  of  one  hundred  and  five.
In  1867  congress  passed  a  special  act  giving  him  a
pension  of  $500  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.
He  was  an  active  member  of  the  Lutheran  church.

BEAL,  Abraham,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Chat-
ham, England,  about  1803 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,
25  Feb.,  1872.  Early  in  life  he  became  interested
in  the  condition  of  the  unfortunate,  and  while  in
London  noticed  the  great  injury  caused  by  intem-
perance among  workingmen.  For  a  time  he  de-
voted himself  to  the  cause  of  total  abstinence,  but
encountered  much  opposition  and  persecution.  He
frequently  appeared  in  court  as  the  advocate  of
those  who,  by  intemperance,  had  become  criminals,
and  in  this  manner  became  known  as  "  the  prison-
er's friend."  In  1848  he  emigrated  to  the  United
States,  and  for  some  years  engaged  in  business;
but  his  interest  continued  with  the  unfortunate
prisoners.  He  became  very  familiar  with  the  crimi-
nal laws  of  New  York  and  other  states,  and  in  1863
assumed  the  general  agency  of  the  New  York  Prison
Association.  He  was  for  many  years  an  efficient
officer  of  the  New  York  Port  Society.

BEAL,  Foster  Ellenborough  Lascelles,  natu-
ralist, b.  in  South  Groton  (now  Ayer),  Mass.,  9  Jan.,
1840.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Massachusetts  In-
stitute of  Technology  in  1871.  During  1874-'5  he
was  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.
S.  Naval  Academy  at  Annapolis,  Md.,  and  from
1876  till  1882  professor  of  civil  engineering  in
Iowa  Agricultural  College,  where  from  1879  tfll
1882  he  was  also  acting  professor  of  zoology  and
comparative  anatomy,  and  in  1883  professor  of
geology.  His  writings,  principally  on  topics  of
natural  history,  include  the  articles  "  Birds  of  Iowa  "
(1881-'2) ;  "  Value  of  the  Seed-eating  Birds  "  (1882),
and  similar  contributions  to  the  "  Iowa  Homestead  "
and  the  "  American  Naturalist."

BEAL,  George  Lafayette,  soldier,  b.  in  Nor-
way, Me.,  21  May,  1825.  He  left  Portland,  on  6
Oct.,  1861,  as  colonel  of  the  10th  Maine  regiment.
He  was  appointed  by  the  president  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  30  Nov.,  1864.  and  was  mustered
out  of  the  service  on  15  Jan.,  1866.


204


BEAL


BE  ALL


BEAL,  William  James,  botanist,  b.  in  Adrian,
Mich.,  11  March,  1838.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Michigan  in  1859,  and  at  Law-
rence scientific  school  in  1865  with  the  degree  of
B.  S.  From  1860  till  1868  he  taught  in  the  Friends'
academy  and  in  the  Howland  school  in  Union
Springs.  During  1869-70  he  was  professor  of
natural  sciences  in  Chicago  university,  and  in  1870
he  became  professor  of  botany  in  the  State  agricul-
tural college  of  Michigan  and  lectured  on  forestry
and  horticulture.  Prof.  Beal  is  a  member  of  nu-
merous societies,  and  was  vice-president  of  the  sec-
tion on  biology  of  the  American  association  for  the
advancement  of  science  in  1888 ;  he  was  also  presi-
dent of  the  Michigan  state  teachers'  association  in
1881,  and  of  the  Society  for  the  promotion  of  agri-
cultural science  in  1880  and  1881.  He  has  con-
tributed numerous  original  papers  to  the  "  Ameri-
can Naturalist,"  "  American  Journal  of  Sciences,"
and  to  the  reports  of  the  State  board  of  agricul-
ture. State  horticultural  society,  and  American  po-
mological  society.  He  is  the  author  of  "The
New  Botany"  (Philadelphia,  1881),  and  "The
Grasses  of  North  America"  (Lansing,  1886  et  seq.).

BEALE,  Edward  Fitzgerald,  soldier,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  4  Feb.,  1822.  His  father  and
grandfather  were  officers  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  and
both  of  them  received  medals  of  honor  from  con-
gress. His  education  was  begun  in  Georgetown
.college,  where  he  remained  until  he  was  appointed
a  cadet  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,  and  was
graduated  in  1842.  During  the  war  with  Mexico
he  distinguished  himself  by  conspicuous  gallant-
ry, and  was  presented  with  a  sword  by  his  brother
officers,  in  recognition  of  his  services  as  a  bearer
of  despatches  through  the  enemy's  lines.  For  the
same  act  he  was  officially  complimented  by  Com.
Stockton.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  war  with
Mexico  he  resigned  his  commission  and  was  ap-
pointed superintendent  of  Indian  affairs  for  Cali-
fornia and  New  Mexico.  At  the  request  of  Maj.-
Gen.  Wool,  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-general
and  deputed  to  terminate  an  Lidian  war  in  Cali-
fornia. During  the  decade  preceding  the  civil
war  he  conducted  many  important  explorations  in
the  far  west,  and  in  1861  was  appointed  surveyor-
general  of  California  by  President  Lincoln,  but  of-
fered his  services  in  a  military  capacity  as  soon  as
the  war  of  secession  began.  In  1876  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  minister  to  Austria  by  President
Grant.  In  1877  he  resigned,  and  he  has  since  then
personally  superintended  his  large  sheep  and  cattle
ranch  in  southern  California.

BEALE,  Richard  L.  T.,  soldier,  b.  in  Hickory
Hill,  Westmoreland  co..  Va.,  22  May,  1819.  He
was  educated  at  Northumberland  academy  and
Dickinson  college,  was  graduated  at  the  law  school
of  the  university  of  Virginia,  and  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1889.  Pie  served  in  congress  as  a  democrat
from  6  Dec,  1847.  till  March,  1849,  but  declined  a
re-election.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  state  reform
convention  of  1850,  and  in  1857  a  member  of  the
state  senate.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
he  entered  the  confederate  army,  and  in  1863  was
colonel  of  the  9th  Virginia  cavalry.  In  February,
1865,  he  commanded  a  brigade  in  Lee's  cavalry
division.  Army  of  northern  Virginia.

BEALL,  Benjamin  Lloyd,  soldier,  b.  in  the
District  of  Columbia,  about  1800;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  16  Aug.,  1868.  He  was  a  son  of  Maj.  Beall
of  Maryland,  and  appointed  a  cadet  at  West  Point
in  1814,  but  did  not  graduate.  He  was  made  cap-
tain of  the  Washington  city  volunteers  in  June,
1886,  in  a  regiment  raised  for  the  Florida  Indian
war ;  captain  of  2d  U.  S.  dragoons  8  June,  1836 ;


brevetted  major  15  March,  1837,  for  gallantry
in  the  Florida  campaign;  and  appointed  major
1st  U.  S.  dragoons  16  Feb.,  1847.  He  took  part
in  the  Mexican  war,  and  on  16  March,  1848,  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  bravery  at  the
battle  of  Santa  Cruz  de  Royales.  He  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  1st  U.  S.  dragoons  3  March,
1855,  and  served  for  several  years  on  the  western
frontier.  He  was  in  command  as  general  in  Cali-
fornia after  its  annexation  to  the  United  States,
and  while  so  serving  built  all  the  forts  from  the
western  frontier  of  Texas  to  the  Pacific.  He  also
served  for  two  years  at  Vancouver's  island.  When
the  civil  war  began  he  was  ordered  to  Baltimore  as
a  mustering  officer,  was  commissioned  colonel  1st
U.  S.  dragoons  in  May,  1861,  and  was  placed  on  the
retired  list  15  Feb..  1862,  because  of  his  long  and
arduous  service.  He  had  two  sons  in  the  national
army  and  one  in  the  confederate.

BEALL,  John  Young-,  guerilla,  b.  in  Virginia,
1  Jan.,  1885 ;  d.  on  Governor's  island.  New  York
harbor,  24  Feb.,  1865.  He  was  of  good  family  and
received  a  classical  education.  Joining  the  navy
of  the  confederate  states,  he  was  appointed  acting
master,  3  March,  1863.  On  16  Dec,  1864,  he  was
arrested  in  the  railroad  station  at  Suspension
Bridge,  N.  Y.  Charges  and  specifications  were
drawn  up,  reciting  in  substance  that  he  was  act-
ing in  the  twofold  capacity  of  a  spy  and  guerilla,
carrying  on  irregular  warfare  against  the  United
States,  A  military  commission,  with  Brig.-Gen.
Fitz  Henry  Warren  as  president  and  Maj.  John  A.
Bolles  as  judge-advocate,  was  convened  at  Fort
Lafayette  for  his  trial.  James  T.  Brady  acted  as
counsel  for  the  accused.  It  appeared  from  the
testimony  that  Beall,  in  company  with  other  men
in  the  dress  of  civilians,  boarded  the  Lake  Erie
steamer  "  Philo  Parsons"  on  19  Sept.,  1864,  in  the
character  of  passengers ;  that  at  a  signal  they  pro-
duced arms,  and,  acting  under  the  orders  of  the
accused  and  others,  they  seized  the  boat,  driving
all  hands  below  as  prisoners.  They  then  captured
and  subsequently  sank  another  boat,  the  "  Island
Queen."  it  also  appeared  that  Beall  was  engaged
with  others  in  an  attempt  to  wreck  a  railway
train  near  Buffalo  on  the  night  of  his  arrest.  The
defence  was  based  on  the  declaration  of  the  ac-
cused that  he  was  engaged  in  legitimate  warfare
under  specific  instructions  from  the  confederate
government,  and  he  was  permitted  to  correspond
with  the  authorities  at  Richmond  to  procure  evi-
dence to  this  effect.  A  proclanuition  was  issued
by  Jefferson  Davis  under  date  of  24  Dec,  1864,  cer-
tifying that  the  confederate  government  assumed
"  tiie  responsibility  of  answering  for  the  acts  and
conduct  of  any  of  its  officers  engaged  in  said  expe-
dition," namely,  that  in  which  Beall  was  con-
cerned. It  was  proved  that  he  had  perpetrated
acts  of  war  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United
States,  wearing  at  the  time  no  visible  badge  of
military  service.  Among  civilized  nations  the
penalty  for  such  acts  is  death,  and  Beall  was  hanged
in  accordance  with  the  finding  of  the  court.

BEALL,  Reazin,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania
10  Aug.,  1770:  d.  in  Wooster,  Ohio,  20  Feb.,  184;i
He  was  appointed  ensign  in  the  U.  S.  army  7
March,  1792,  and  battalion-adjutant  and  quarter-
master in  1793,  and  was  an  officer  under  Gen.  An-
thony Wayne  in  his  campaign  against  the  Indians.
In  September,  1812,  he  was  made  brigadier-general
of  Ohio  volunteers.  He  also  filled  many  important
civil  offices,  and  from  1818  till  1815  was  representa-
tive from  Ohio  in  congress.

BEALL,  Samnel  Wootton,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery, Md.,  26  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Helena,  Monta-


BEALL


BEARD


205


na,  26  Sept.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in' 1827,  and  studied  law  at  Litchfield.  During
the  same  year  he  married  Miss  Elizabeth  Feni-
more  Cooper,  and,  through  the  influence  of  Chief-
Justice  Taney,  a  personal  friend  of  the  family,  was
appointed,  in  1827,  receiver  for  the  sale  of  public
lands  in  the  northwest,  having  his  office  in  Green
Bay,  Wis.  He  returned  to  Cooperstown  in  18.34,
and  lived  for  some  yeai's  in  a  beautiful  residence
called  •'  Woodside,"  gathering  around  him  a  brill-
iant circle  of  cultured  and  refined  society,  promi-
nent among  whom  were  J.  Fenimore  Cooper,  Wash-
ington Irving,  James  Watson  Webb,  and  the  Eng-
lish ballad-singer  Henry  Russell.  Later  he  returned
to  Wisconsin,  and  was  engaged  in  agriculture,  be-
ino"  the  first  to  introduce  blooded  cattle  into  the
noi'thwest.  About  this  time  his  mother  died  in
Maryland,  leaving  him  over  thirty  slaves  and  some
slight  property.  Southerner  though  he  was,  and
straitened  in  circumstances  in  comparison  with  his
earlier  life,  the  spirit  of  the  free  west  led  him  to
liberate  his  slaves.  He  further  devoted  the  entire
proceeds  obtained  from  the  sale  of  the  property  to
the  support  of  these  slaves  as  long  as  the  means
lasted,  or  until  they  were  able  to  earn  a  living  for
themselves.  In  1846  he  was  elected  to  the  constitu-
tional convention  from  the  county  of  Marquette,
and  was  prominent  in  the  organization  of  the  state
government.  Again,  in  1847-'8,  he  served  similar-
ly in  the  convention  then  assembled,  and  in  1850
became  lieutenant-governor  of  the  state,  serving
for  two  years.  He  then  became  Indian  agent,  and
was  among  the  first  to  take  chiefs  of  tribes  under
his  care  to  Washington.  Among  these  were  the
sachems  of  Munsees  and  Stockbridge  tribes.  One
chief  of  the  latter  tribe,  John  Quincey,  created
much  interest  and  wonder  by  the  delivery  of  an
eloquent  speech,  now  recorded  in  history  as  a  sam-
ple of  remarkable  power  and  pathos.  This  speech
was  written  by  Mr.  Beall,  and  taught  word  by  word
to  the  chief,  even  to  the  questions,  who  proved  an
apt  scholar  to  so  able  a  teacher.  The  original
manuscript  is  still  carefully  preserved  among  the
family  possessions.  In  1859  he  led  a  party  to
Pike's  Peak,  and  while  on  this  expedition  with
others  located  the  city  of  Denver.  This  place  im-
mediately started  into  rapid  growth,  and  during
the  following  winter  Mr,  Beall  was  sent  to  Wash-
ington to  obtain  a  charter  for  the  city.  He  resid-
ed in  Denver  until  1861,  when  he  returned  to  Wis-
consin. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was
appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  18th  Wisconsin
regiment,  and  he  was  in  the  various  engagements
from  Shiloh  to  Vicksburg.  Having  been  severely
wounded,  he  was  then  transferred  to  the  invalid
corps.  Shortly  after  the  war  he  settled  at  Helena,
where  he  was  shot  during  an  altercation.

BEALL,  WilHaiii  Dent,  soldier,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1755;  d.  in  Prince  George  co.,  Md.,  24
Sept.,  1829.  He  was  a  major  in  the  revolutionary
army,  and  was  distinguished  for  his  services  both
at  Long  Island  and  at  Camden,  S.  C.  On  8  Jan.,
1799,  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  9th  infantry,
and  in  the  following  year  deputy-adjutant-general
and  deputy-inspector-general.  He  was  made  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  5th  infantry  12  Dec,  1808,
and  on  80  Nov.,  1810,  colonel  of  the  3d  infantry,
from  which  ho  was  transferred  in  April,  1812,  back
to  the  5th.  He  resigned  15  Aug.,  1812,  but  com-
manded a  regiment  of  militia  at  the  battle  of  Bla-
densburg  in  1814.  He  was  afterward  sheriff  of
Prince  George  county.

BEAN,  WilHam,  the  first  white  settler  west  of
the  Alleghanies.  He  was  a  companion  of  Daniel
Boone  in  his  visit  to  Kentucky  in  1760,  and  re-


turned in 1768  and  settled  with his  family  on
Boone's  creek,  a  small  tributary  of  the  Watauga.

BEARD,  George  Miller,  phvsician,  b.  at  Mont-
ville.  Conn.,  8  May,  1839 ;  d.  in  New  York,  23  Jan.,
1883.  His  father  was  a  clergyman.  The  son  stud-
ied at  Phillips  Andover  academy,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1862.  He  studied  a  year  in  the
medical  department  of  Yale,  and  in  18'6()  obtained
his  medical  degree  at  the  College  of  Physicians
and  Surgeons,  New  York.  For  eighteen  months,  in
1863-'4,  he  was  assistant  surgeon  on  the  gun-boat
"  New  London,"  in  the  western  gulf  blockading
squadron.  In  1865  he  settled  in  New  York  ana
made  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  his  specialty.
He  introduced  several  new  methods  of  electriza-
tion, and  was  the  first  to  point  out  and  exemplify
the  tonic  effects  of  electricity.  With  Dr.  Rock-
well he  published  a  work  on  "  General  Electriza-
tion "  (1867).  He  also  published  an  essay  on  "  The
Longevity  of  Brain-Workers"  (1867).  In  1868  he
translated  from  the  German  and  edited  Tobold's
"  Chronic  Diseases  of  the  Larynx,"  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  published  "  Our  Home  Physician."  In
1871  he  published  with  Dr.  Rockwell  "  Medical  and
Surgical  Uses  of  Electricity,"  which  was  translated
into  German  by  Vater,  of  Prague ;  also  two  popular
treatises,  entitled  "  Stimulants  and  Narcotics  "  and
"  Eating  and  Drinking,"  based  on  a  study  of  the
customs  of  all  ages  and  races.  At  this  tijne  he  in-
troduced the  method  of  central  galvanization,  and
published  the  results  of  experiments  in  the  electri-
cal treatment  of  diseases  of  the  skin.  In  1873  he
published  with  Dr.  Rockwell  "Clinical  Researches
in  Electro-Surgery,"  and  a  paper  on  "  Atmospheric
Electricity  and  Ozone,  their  Relation  to  Health
and  Disease."  He  was  the  author  of  an  impor-
tant monograph  on  "  Legal  Responsibility  in  Old
Age "  (1874),  based  on  physiological  researches
into  the  relation  of  age  to  work.  He  founded
the  "Archives  of  Electrology  and  Neurology,"  a
semi-annual  journal,  which  was  continued  two
years  (1874-'6).  In  1874  he  entered  on  a  system-
atic study  of  animal  magnetism,  spiritualism,  clair-
voyance, and  mind-reading,  in  their  relation  to
the  nervous  system.  He  explained  the  perform-
ances of  the  famous  Eddy  brothers,  and  also  of
Brown  the  "  mind-reader,"  maintaining  that  what
was  called  mind-re'ading  was  nothing  more  than
the  unconscious  action  of  mind  on  body.  In  1876
he  published  a  work  on  "  Hay  Fever,"  advancing
the  nerve  theory  of  that  disease,  and  in  1877  papers
on  "  The  Scientific  Basis  of  Delusions,"  on  "  Mental
Therapeutics,"  and  on  the  "  Physiology  of  Mind-
Reading  " ;  in  1878-9  monographs  on  " The  Sci-
entific Study  of  Human  Testimony  and  Experi-
ments with  Living  Human  Beings,"  and  "  The
Psychology  of  Spiritism."  In  1879  he  gave  the  re-
sults of  a  long  study  of  writer's  cramp,  and  in  1880
a  monograph  on  the  "  Problems  of  Insanity,"  and
a  systematic  treatise  on  "  Nervous  Exhaustion
(Neurasthenia) " ;  also  a  work  on  "  Seasickness,  its
Nature  and  Treatment."  Dr.  Beard  gave  much
attention  to  the  functional  nervous  disease  known
as  inebriety,  and  published  papers  making  clear
the  distinction  between  the  vice  of  drinking  and
the  disease,  and  indicating  the  treatment  by  seda-
tives and  tonics.  He  lectured  on  nervous  diseases
in  the  university  of  New  York  in  1868,  and  in  1879
was  a  delegate  to  the  British  medical  association
at  Cork,  where  he  presented  a  paper  on  "  Inebriety
and  allied  Nervous  Diseases  of  America."  He  was
a  frequent  contributor  to  periodical  literature  on
topics  relating  to  psychology  and  the  nervous  sys-
tem, and  also  delivered  popular  lectures  on  psycho-
logical and  neurological  subjects.


206


BEARD


BEARDSLEY


BEARD,  James  Henry,  painter,  b.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  in  1814.  On  his  father's  side  he  is  descended
from  Sir  James  Beard,  of  Enghind,  and  on  his
mother's  side  from  Sir  Lochlain  Maclean,  of  Scot-
land. His  family  removed  when  he  was  a  child
to  Ohio,  and  he  eventually  settled  in  Cincinnati,
where  he  devoted  himself  for  many  years  to  portrait
painting:,  Henry  Clay,  John  Quincy  Adams,  and
other  distinguished  persons  being  among  his  sit-
ters. He  went  to  New  York  in  184G  and  exhibit-
ed his  "  Carolina  Emigrants  "  at  the  national  acad-
emy, of  which  he  became  an  honorary  member
in  1848.  In  1870  he  settled  permanently  in  New
York,  and  in  1872  was  elected  a  full  memlaer  of  the
academy.  Of  late  years  he  has  devoted  himself
chiefly  to  animal  painting,  in  which  branch  of  art
he  has  achieved  success.  Among  his  best-known
works  are  "Peep  at  Growing  Danger"  (1871);
"The  Widow"  (1872);  "Mutual  Friend,"  "Par-
son's Pets  "  (1875) ;  "  Attorney  and  Clients,"  "  Out
all  Night,"  "  There's  many  a  Slip  "  (1876) ;  "  Con-
sultation," "  Blood  will  Tell  "  (1877) ;  "  Don  Quix-
ote and  Sancho  Panza  "  (1878) :  "  Don't  you  know
Mel"  (1879);  "Heirs  at  Law"  (1880) ;""  Which
has  Preemption?"  (1831);  "You  can't  have  this
Pup "(1882);  "My  Easter's  all  Spoilt,"  "I  don't
believe  one  Word  of  It "  (1883) ;  "  Detected  Poach-
er "  (1884) ;  "  Don't  you  come  Here."  "  The  Missis-
sippi Flood  "  (1885) ;  "  Barn  Yard,"  and  "  '11  ver
■^imme  some?  Say!"  (1886).— His  brother,  Will-
iam Holbrook,  painter,  b.  in  Painesville,  Ohio,  18
April,  1825,  began  his  professional  career  about
1846  as  a  portrait  painter,  and  after  travelling  five
years  settled  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.  In  1856  he  visited
Europe,  studied  one  summer  in  Diisseldorf,  and

painted  in  Italy,
Switzerland,  and
France.  On  his
return  home  he
worked  for  a
time  in  Buffalo,
and  there  mar-
ried Miss  John-
son, who  died
within  a  year.  He
settled  in  1860  in
New  York  city,
and  was  elected
a  member  of  the
Academy  in  1862.
Several  years  af-
terward he  mar-
ried the  daughter

^  of Thomas Le

9r^yS^.^>^,-.^ Clear, the por-
'^ '  '  trait-pamter. Pie

has  painted  some
genre  and  allegorical  pictures,  but  of  late  years
has  devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  the
painting  of  animals,  whose  habits  he  humanizes
in  a  pleasing,  satirical  manner  with  much  suc-
cess. He  has  made  many  studies  for  decorative
architecture,  evincing  great  originality  of  concep-
tion. Among  his  best  and  most  characteristic
works  are  :  "  Kittens  and  Guinea  Pig,"  "  Power  of
Death  "  (1859) ;  "  Susanna  and  the  Elders,"  "  Swan
and  Owls"  (1860);  "Bears  on  a  Bender"  (1862);
"  Bear-Dance  "  (1865) ;  "  March  of  Silenus  "  (1866) ;
"Flaw  in  the  Title,"  "Fallen  Landmark"  (1867);
"The  Good  Shepherd  and  the  Delectable  Moun-
tains," biblical  (1869) ;  "  Diana  and  her  Nymphs  " —
deer ;  "  Darwin  expounding  his  Theories  " — mon-
keys ;  "  Morning  and  Evening  " — cranes ;  "  Rain-
ing Cats  and  Dogs";  "^Dickens  and  his  Char-
acters "—portrait  (1871) ;  '"  Lost  Balloon,"  "  Deer


in  Wood,"  "Runaway  Match"  (1876);  "Divorce
Court "  (1877) ;  "Bulls  and  Bears  in  Wall  Street"
(1879) ;  "  Voices  of  the  Night "  (1880) ;  "  Spreading
the  Alarm  "  (1881) :  "  In  the  Glen  "  (1882) ;  "  Cattle
upon  a  Thousand  Hills  "  (1883) ;  "  Eavesdroppers  "
"  Wine  Tasters,"  "  Who's  Afraid  ?  "  (1884) ;  "  His
Majesty  receives,"  and  "Office-Seekers"  (1880).
He  published  "Humor  in  Animals,"  a  collection
of  his  sketches  (New  York,  1885). — James  Henry
has  four  sons,  all  of  them  artists :  James  Carter,
a  lawyer  by  profession,  has  made  spirited  drawings
of  birds  and  animals,  which  are  to  be  found  in  the
best  illustrated  books  and  periodicals  of  the  day. —
Henry,  the  second  son,  b.  in  Ohio  in  1841,  d.  in
New  York  city,  19  Nov.,  1889,  was  a  captain  in  the
30th  Missouri  volunteers  at  twenty-one  years  of  age.
He  painted  genre  subjects  in  oils  and  water-colors,
and  made  the  designs  for  many  of  Prang's  pub-
lications.— Frank,  the  third  son,  was  a  special
artist  for  Harper  &  Brothers  during  the  civil  war.
He  devotes  himself  particularly  to  character-
sketches,  in  the  production  of  which  he  has  at-
tained remarkable  facility.  He  lectures  on  various
topics,  accompanying  himself  with  crayon  sketches
on  the  blackboard.  He  was  for  a  time  professor  of
the  fine  arts  in  Syracuse  university.  He  has  pub-
lished "The  Blackboard  and  the  Sunday  School"
(New  York,  1880). — Daniel,  the  fourth  son,  was
educated  for  a  civil  engineer,  but,  like  the  rest  of
the  family,  became  an  artist.  He  has  an  extraor-
dinary talent  for  allegory  as  applied  to  decoration,
and  introduces  animals  and  natural  objects  in
singularly  quaint  and  suggestive  combinations.
He  has  published  "The  American  Boys'  Handy
Book  "  (New  York,  1882).

BEARD,  Richard,  educator,  b.  in  Sumner  cc,
Tenn.,  27  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Lebanon,  Tenn.,  2  Dec.,
1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Cumberland  univer-
sity, Tennessee,  in  1832,  was  professor  of  languages
in  the  college  from  1832  to  1838,  when  he  went  to
Sharon  college.  Miss.,  as  professor  of  languages,
but  returned  to  Cumberland  and  became  president
of  the  university  in  1843.  On  the  founding  of  the
theological  school  of  the  university  in  1853,  he  re-
signed the  presidency  of  the  university  and  took
the  chair  of  systematic  theology,  being  in  reality
for  the  next  twenty-five  years  both  principal  and
professor.  He  was  a  leader  in  the  Cumberland
Presbyterian  organization,  and  published  "  Syste-
matic Theology,"  also  "  Biographical  Sketches,"
and  "  Why  I  am  a  Cumberland  Presbyterian."

BEARDSLEY,  Arthur,  engineer,' b.  inEsopus,
Ulster  CO.,  N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1843.  Early  in  life  he
learned  the  bookbinder's  trade  at  Poughkeepsie,
and  also  began  his  studies  at  the  Dutchess  county
academy  in  the  same  town.  After  a  year's  study
at  Bowdoin  college  (1862-*3)  he  entered  the  Rens-
selaer polytechnic  institute,  and  was  graduated  in
1867  with*  the  degree  of  C.  E.  During  1867-8  he
was  assistant  engineer  at  the  Hoosac  tunnel,
Mass.,  and  from  1863  till  1872  professor  of  civil
engineering  and  industrial  mechanics  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Minnesota.  In  1872  he  became  profes-
sor of  civil  and  mechanical  engineering  in  Swarth-
more  college,  where  he  organized  a  manual  training
department,  of  which  he  is  director.

BEARDSLEY,  Eben  Edwards,  clergyman,  b.
in  Stepney,  Conn.,  in  1808.  His  father  was  a
farmer  and  large  landholder.  The  son  was  gradu-
ated at  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  taking  the  high-
est honors  in  his  class.  He  studied  theology,  was
ordained  10  Aug.,  1835,  and  took  charge  of  St-
Peter's  church,  Cheshire,  Conn.  On  the  death  of
the  rector  and  principal  of  the  Cheshire  Episcopal
academy,  Mr.  Beardsley  accepted  a  temporary  ap-


BEARDSLEY


BEASLEY


207


pointment,  which  continued,  however,  for  several
years.  During  this  time  a  new  church  edifice  was
erected,  and  after  its  completion  he  retired  from
the  rectorship  of  the  parish  and  confined  himself
exclusively  to  the  academy  until  1844,  when  he  re-
sio"ned  and  resumed  the  rectorship  of  the  church.
He  was  made  rector  of  St.  Thomas's  church.  New
Haven,  in  1848.  During  his  ministry  there  the
congregation  grew  from  a  small  number  gathered
in  a  rented  room  to  one  occupying  one  of  the  finest
stone  churches  in  the  state.  In  1854  the  degree  of
D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Trinity  college,
and  in  1874  Columbia  gave  him  that  of  LL.  D.
Dr.  Beardsley  has  devoted  much  time  to  historical
research,  especially  in  Episcopal  church  matters  in
Connecticut.  He  has  published  "The  History  of
the  Episcopal  Church  in  Connecticut  from  the
Settlement  of  the  Colony  to  the  Death  of  Bishop
Brownell  in  1865"  (2  vols..  New  York,  1865);
"Memoir  of  Rev.  John  Eaton  Smith"  (1871);
"Life  and  Correspondence  of  Samuel  Johnson,
D.  D.,  Missionary  of  the  Church  of  England  in
Connecticut,  and  First  President  of  King's  Col-
lege, New  York  "  (1874) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Will-
iam Samuel  Johnson,  LL.  D,,  First  Senator  in
Congress  from  Connecticut,  and  President  of  Co-
lumbia College,  New  York "  (Boston,  1876) ;  and
"  Life  and  Correspondence  of  the  Rt.  Rev.  Samuel
Seabury,  D.  D.,  First  Bishop  of  Connecticut,  and
of  the  Episcopal  Church  in  the  United  States  of
America  "  (1881).

BEARDSLEY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  1730;  d.
in  Kingston,  New  Brunswick,  in  1810.  During  the
revolutionary  war  he  was  chaplain  of  Col.  Beverley
Robinson's  regiment  of  New  York  loyalists.  He
emigrated  with  the  loyalists  to  New  Brunswick,  re-
ceived a  lot  in  Parr  Town,  now  St.  John's,  became
rector  of  Maugerville  in  1784,  and  resided  in
Kingston  after  1802,  receiving  a  pension  from  the
British  government. — His  grand-nephew,  Levi,
lawyer,  b.  in  Hoosic,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  13  Nov.,
1785 ;  d.  in  New  York,  19  March,  1857.  He  re-
ceived a  common-school  education,  studied  law,
and  in  1812  was  admitted  to  practice.  In  1825
he  was  elected  to  the  state  assembly  that  passed  the
first  railroad  charter  in  the  United  States.  He  was
elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1829,  reelected  in  1834,
and  was  president  of  the  senate  in  1838,  and  for
many  years  judge  of  the  court  of  errors  of  New
York.  He  removed  to  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  in  1839,  to
Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1842,  and  returned  to  New
York  in  1846.  Mr.  Beardsley's  influence  was  al-
ways on  the  side  of  liberal  legislation.  Besides
his  legal  opinions,  he  published  an  autobiographi-
cal volume  entitled  "  Reminiscences  "  (New  York,
1852).— Samuel,  jurist,  brother  of  Levi,  b.  in
Hoosic,  Rensselaer  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  Feb.,  1790 ;  d.  in
Utica,  6  May,  1860.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  began  to  study  medicine,  but  soon
relinquished  it  and  studied  law.  In  1813  he  joined
the  militia  that  went  to  the  defence  of  Sackett's
Harbor.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1815,
made  judge-advocate  of  the  militia,  and  began
the  practice  of  law  in  Watertown,  but  at  the  end
of  a  year  returned  to  Rome.  In  February,  1821,
he  was  appointed  district  attorney  of  Oneida  co.
At  the  first  election  held  under  the  constitution
of  1822  he  was  chosen  senator  from  the  fifth  dis-
trict, but  in  the  arrangement  of  classes  by  lot  his
term  of  service  was  limited  to  the  single  year  of
1823.  During  this  year  he  transferred  his  resi-
dence to  Utica.  President  Jackson  appointed  him
U.  S.  attorney  for  the  northern  district  of  New
York,  which  office  he  held  till  1830,  when  he  was
elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,  and  reelected


in  1832  and  1834,  and  again  elected  in  1842.  In
April,  1834,  during  the  United  States  Bank  ex-
citement, he  delivered  a  speech  on  the  currency
question  which  by  its  vehemence  attracted  atten-
tion throughout  the  country.  About  the  same
time  he  opposed  successfully  a  measure  to  restrain
the  freedom  of  the  reporters  of  congress.  A  va-
cancy occurring  in  the  judgeship  of  the  fifth  New
York  circuit,  Mr.  Beardsley  was  nominated  by
Gov.  Mar^y,  and  signified  his  intention  of  resign-
ing his  seal  in  congress  and  accepting  the  place ;
but,  as  President  Jackson  sent  for  him,  and  in  the
presence  of  his  cabinet  and  various  eminent  mem-
bers of  both  houses  urged  him  to  decline,  he  de-
cided to  remain  in  congress.  In  1836,  on  the  ex-
piration of  his  congressional  term,  he  accepted  the
office  of  attorney-general  of  the  state  of  New  York,
his  term  closing  with  the  year  1838,  when  he  re-
sumed his  legal  practice.  He  was  again  elected  to
congress  in  1842,  but  withdrew  in  February,  1844,
to  become  an  associate  judge  of  the  supreme  court
of  New  York,  and  in  June,  1847,  was  appointed
chief  justice  on  the  retirement  of  Judge  Bronson.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  in  1849
by  Hamilton  college.  Returning  to  private  life
he  devoted  himself  to  his  profession,  but  still  re-
mained a  political  power  and  carried  the  delega-
tion that,  in  the  Cincinnati  convention  of  1856,
controlled  the  choice  of  that  body  and  made  James
Buchanan  the  candidate. — Samiiel  Raymond,
lawyer,  eldest  son  of  Levi,  b.  in  Cherry  Valley,
Otsego  CO.,  N,  Y.,  31  Dec,  1814 ;  d.  in  Stevens-
burg,  Va.,  28  Dec,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1836,  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Al-
bany and  in  Oswego,  N.  Y.  He  afterward  engaged
in  milling,  owning  the  Premium  Mills  in  Oswego.
He  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  48th
N.  Y.  militia  in  1851,  and  colonel  in  1854.  Pie  was
elected  mayor  of  Oswego  in  1852 ;  appointed  post-
master in  1853,  and  was  defeated  as  a  candidate
for  the  assembly  in  1858.  He  was  commissioned
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  24th  New  York  volun-
teers in  1861,  was  wounded  at  Chancellorsville,
and  was  promoted  to  the  colonelcy  in  1863.  When
the  regiment  was  mustered  out  in  1863,  he  was
appointed  adjutant-general  on  Gen.  Meade's  staif.
He  died  of  disease  contracted  in  the  service.

BEASLEY,  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  near
Edenton,  N.  C,  in  1777 ;  d.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,
2  Nov.,  1845.  His  father  was  a  planter,  and  sent
the  son  to  Nassau  Hall,  afterward  Princeton,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1797.  For  three  years  he
was  tutor  in  the  college,  and  at  the  same  time
studied  theology.  He  was  ordained  in  the  Episco-
pal church  in  1801,  and  became  pastor  of  St.  John's
church,  Elizabethtown,  in  1803,  rector  of  St.  Peter's,
Albany,  in  1804,  and  co-rector  in  St.  Paul's,  Bal-
timore, in  1809.  From  1813  till  1828  he  was  pro-
vost of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  also
professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy,  and  be-
came favorably  known  by  his  metaphysical  work  in
defence  of  the  philosophy  of  Locke.  In  1815  the
degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  both  Co-
lumbia college  and  the  university  of  Pennsylvania.
He  retired  from  the  college  in  1829,  and  took
charge  of  a  church  in  Trenton,  where  he  remained
until  1836.  His  health  failing,  he  removed  to
Elizabethtown  and  passed  the  remainder  of  his
days  in  retirement,  pursuing  literary  and  theologi-
cal studies.  His  principal  published  writings  are :
" American  Dialogues  of  the  Dead "  (1815);  "An
Examination  of  the  Oxford  Divinity,"  published
during  the  Tractarian  controversy ;  "  A  Search
of  Truth  in  the  Science  of  the  Human  Mind"
(vol.  i.,  1822 ;  vol.  ii.  left  complete  in  MS.) ;  "  Yin-


208


BEASELEY


BEATTY


dication  of  the  Argument  a  priori  in  Proof  of
the  Being  and  Attributes  of  God,  from  the  Ob-
jection of  Dr.  Waterland  "  (1825) ;  "  Review  of
Brown's  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind  "  (1825) ;
"A  Vindication  of  the  Fundamental  Principles
of  Truth  and  Order  in  the  Church  of  Christ,"  a
reply  to  the  views  of  Dr.  Manning  (1830) ;  "  An
Examination  of  No.  90  of  the  Tracts  for  the
Times  "  (1841).  He  also  contributed  to  periodical
literature  on  moral  and  metaphysical  sciences.

BEASELEY,  Nathaniel,  pioneer,  b.  in  1751 ;
d.  in  Knox  co.,  Ohio,  27  March,  1835.  He  was  a
large  and  powerful  man,  a  noted  Indian  fighter,
and  performed  valuable  services  in  the  St.  Clair
and  Wayne  campaigns.  He  afterward  settled  in
Chillicothe,  Ohio,  was  a  member  of  the  general  as-
sembly in  1819-'20  from  Adams  co.,  and  senator
from  Brown  in  1820-'2.  He  was  also  canal  com-
missioner and  major-general  of  militia.

BEATTY,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  county
Antrim,  Ireland,  about  1715  ;  d.  inBridgeton,  Bar-
badoes,  13  Aug.,  1772.  While  very  young  he  sailed
for  America,  and,  with  other  passengers,  was  land-
ed on  Cape  Cod  in  a  nearly  famished  condition,
the  ship  having  run  short  of  provisions.  Making
his  way  to  the  neighborhood  of  Philadelphia,  he
began  peddling  in  the  vicinity.  On  one  of  his  ex-
cursions he  stopped  at  the  "  Log  College  "  near
Neshaminy,  and  fell  into  conversation  with  its
founder,  the  Rev.  William  Tennent,  who,  discover-
ing that  the  young  peddler  had  a  classical  educa-
tion, and  possessed  the  true  missionary  spirit,  per-
suaded him  to  study  for  the  ministry,  and  he  was
ordained  on  13  Oct.,  1742.  He  became  pastor  of
the  Presbyterian  church  at  the  Forks  of  Nesha-
miny, Pa.,  26  May,  1743.  The  Presbyterians
were  at  that  time  divided  into  two  factions,  the
"  Strict "  or  "  Old  Side  "  and  the  "  New  Side,"  and
JNlr.  Beatty  joined  the  former.  He  was  associated
with  David  Brainerd  in  some  of  his  missionary
labors  among  the  Indians,  and  accompanied  Frank-
lin as  chaplain  on  a  military  expedition  to  estab-
lish frontier  posts  in  the  northwest,  in  1755.
Franklin  relates,  in  his  account  of  the  expedition,
that,  noting  the  punctual  attendance  of  the  soldiers
when  the  daily  allowance  of  grog  was  served  out,
and  contrasting  it  with  their  dilatory  attendance
at  the  regular  religious  services,  he  suggested  to
the  chaplain  the  expediency  of  serving  this  popu-
lar ration  immediately  after  prayers.  The  chap-
lain thought  the  idea  good,  accepted  the  task,  and,
adds  Franklin,  "  never  were  prayers  more  generally
and  punctually  attended,  so  that  I  think  this  meth-
od preferable  to  punishment  inflicted  by  severe
military  laws  for  non-attendance  on  divine  ser-
vices." In  1766  Mr.  Beatty  made  a  prolonged  mis-
sionary tour  through  the  frontier  settlements  of
Pennsylvania.  Some  of  his  sermons  were  printed,
and  he  published  the  "  Journal  of  a  Two  Months'
Tour  among  the  Frontier  Inhabitants  of  Pennsyl-
vania "  (London,  1768),  also  a  letter  to  the  Rev.
John  Erskine,  advocating  the  theory  that  the  Amer-
ican Indians  are  the  descendants  of  the  lost  Hebrew
tribes.  He  was  much  interested  in  raising  money
for  the  struggling  college  of  New  Jersey  (Prince-
ton), and  died  of  yellow  fever  while  on  a  visit  to
Barbadoes  with  this  object  in  view.

BEATTY,  or  BEATTIE,  Erkuiies,  soldier,  b.
9  Oct.,  1759 ;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  23  Feb.,  1823.
He  was  the  son  of  Charles  Beatty,  chaplain,  to
whom  he  owed  his  singular  name,  compounded  from
the  Greek  (E  and  ku^iios  "  from  the  Lord ").  He
was  apprenticed  to  a  resident  of  Elizabethtown,
N.  J.,  when  the  war  for  independence  began,  and
enlisted  at  once. He  served  at  the  battle  of  Lone:


Island  under  Lord  Stirling,  was  acting  sergeant  at
White  Plains,  and  ensign  in  the  4th  regiment  of
the  Pennsylvania  line,  3  Jan.,  1777.  He  was  pro-
moted 1st  lieutenant  2  May,  and  was  in  the  battles
of  Brandywine,  Germantown  ^where  he  was  wound-
ed), Monmouth,  and  Newtown,  besides  participat-
ing in  the  hardships  of  Valley  Forge  and  the
campaigns  of  Van  Schaick  and  ^Sullivan.  When
the  Pennsylvania  line  was  reorganized  after  the
mutiny  in  1781,  he  went  south  with  Gen.  Wayne,
joined  Lafayette  on  the  Rappahannock,  fought  at
Jamestown  (6  July,  1781),  and  was  present  at  York-
town  and  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis.  Until  3
Nov.,  1783,  he  was  on  duty  guarding  prisoners  at
Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  was  then  mustered  out  of  ser-
vice. After  serving  for  a  time  as  clerk  in  the  war
department,  he  was  appointed  1st  lieutenant  in
the  regular  army,  24  July,  1784.  From  1786  until
1788  he  was  acting  paymaster  of  the  western  army,
and  during  the  two  years  succeeding  was  in  com-
mand at  Fort  St.  Vincent  (now  Vincennes,  Ind.).
He  was  a  major  under  Gen.  St.  Clair,  but  escaped
the  defeat  of  that  officer  4  Nov.,  1791,  having  been
sent  to  Fort  Jefferson  with  a  detachment.  He
resigned  from  the  army  during  Wayne's  western
campaign  in  1793,  and  went  to  Princeton,  N.  J.
His  journal  as  paymaster  of  the  western  army  was
published  in  the  "  Magazine  of  American  History,"
vol.  i.,  from  the  original  manuscript  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  New  York  Historical  Society.  Maj.
Beatty  had  three  brothers,  all  of  whom  were  offi-
cers in  the  revolutionary  army. — His  son,  Charles
Clinton  Beatty,  D.  D.,  was  the  founder  of  the  Steu-
benville,  Ohio,  female  seminary,  and  president  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Western  Theological
Seminary  at  Allegheny,  Pa.

BEATTY,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Bucks  co.,
Pa.,  19  Dec,  1749  ;  d.  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  30  April,
1826.  He  was  a  son  of  Charles  Beatty,  was  grad-
uated at  Princeton  in  1769,  studied  medicine  with
the  celebrated  Dr.  Rush,  of  Philadelphia,  joined
the  army  early  in  the  war  for  independence,  and  in
September,  1776,  held  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  the  Pennsylvania  contingent.  He  was  taken
prisoner  by  the  British  at  the  capture  of  Fort
Washington,  N.  Y.,  17  Nov.,  1776,  and  during  his
confinement-  suffered  greatly  in  health,  owing  to
harsh  treatment.  Having  been  exchanged  early
in  1778,  he  was  appointed,  28  May,  commissary-
general  of  prisoners,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,
On  31  March,  1780,  he  resigned  and  settled  as  a
physician  at  Princeton,  N.  J.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  continental  congress  m  1783-'5,  served  m
both  branches  of  the  state  legislature,  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  constitiitional  convention,  and  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1793-'5.  From  1795  till  1805
he  was  secretary  of  state  for  New  Jersey,  and  he
was  president  of  the  Trenton  bank  in  1815-'26.

BEATTY,  John,  soldier,  b.  near  Sandusky,
Ohio,  16  Sept.,  1828.  He  received  a  common-school
education  and  entered  on  a  business  career  in  a
banking-house  at  an  early  age.  He  took  an  active
part  in  public  affairs,  and  was  identified  with  the
free-soil  party  until  it  was  merged  in  the  republi-
can. In  1860  he  was  a  republican  presidential
elector.  In  1861  he  enlisted  as  a  private  !n  the  3d
Ohio  infantry,  and  was  appointed  successively  cap-
tain and  lieiitenant-colonel.  He  took  part  in  the
early  ^p^estern  Virginia  campaigns,  became  colonel
in  1862,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  three
davs'  fight  at  Stone  river,  31  Dec,  1862,  to  2  Jan.,
1863.  In  1863  he  was  commissioned  brigadic-r-
general  and  served  through  the  Tennessee  and
Chattanooga  campaigns.  He  was  elected  to  the
fortieth  congress  for  the  unexpired  term  of  a  de-


BEATTY


BEAUMARCHAIS


209


ceased  member,  and  was  twice  re-elected.  In  1884
he  was  republican  presidential  elector  at  large.  In
1885-'6  he  was  a  member  of  the  board  of  state
charities.  He  has  written  '•  The  Citizen  Soldier  "
(Cincinnati,  1876)  and  "The  Belle  o'  Becket's
Lane  "  (Philadelphia,  1882).

BEATTY,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Mifflin  co..  Pa.,
16  Dec,  1820 ;  d.  in  Jackson,  Stark  co.,  Ohio,  26
May.  1885.  He  removed  with  his  father,  a  native
of  Ireland,  to  Jackson,  Ohio,  in  1827,  received  a
limited  education  in  the  common  schools,  and  be-
came a  farmer.  He  served  nearly  two  years  in  the
Mexican  war  as  1st  lieutenant  in  the  3d  Ohio  vol-
unteers, was  elected  sheriff  of  his  county  in  1857,
re-elected  in  1859,  and  on  16  Nov.,  1861,  became
colonel  of  the  19th  Ohio  volunteers.  He  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,
commanded  a  division  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,
and  was  brevetted  major-general  on  13  March,
1865.  In  1866  he  returned  to  his  farm  in  Jackson,
where  he  spent  the  rest  of  his  life.

BEAUCHAMP,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in
Kent  CO.,  Del.,  26  April,  1772 ;  d.  in  Paoli,  Ind.,  7
Oct.,  1824.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Methodist  circuit-
rider,  his  boyhood  was  passed  in  the  western  part
of  Virginia,  and  he  united  with  his  father's  church
at  an  early  age.  He  taught  school  at  the  age  of
eighteen,  began  preaching  at  nineteen,  and  at
twenty-one  was  travelling  under  the  direction  of
the  presiding  elder.  Impressed  with  the  impor-
tance of  reading  and  study  for  a  minister  of  the
gospel,  he  devoted  all  possible  time  to  intellectual
improvement,  often  studying  by  torchlight,  and
became  an  accomplished  classical  and  Hebrew
scholar.  In  1794  he  joined  the  itinerants,  his  cir-
cuit lying  between  the  south  branches  of  the  Poto-
mac. In  1796  he  was  ordained  deacon,  the  next
year  elder,  and  stationed  in  New  York,  and  from
this  time  he  had  the  varied  experiences  of  a  Meth-
odist preacher,  being  stationed  in  Boston,  Ohio,
Nantucket,  Virginia,  Illinois,  Indiana,  and  else-
where. In  1801  he  married  Mrs.  Frances  Russell
of  Nantucket,  a  widow,  who  thereafter  became  an
important  help  to  him  in  his  ministerial  work.
Everywhere  he  preached  with  great  success,  and,
being  a  man  of  wonderful  versatility,  he  turned
his  hand  to  every  useful  work  that  could  bring
him  into  contact  with  and  give  him  influence  with
the  people.  In  1815  he  took  editorial  charge  of
the  "  Western  Christian  Monitor,"  then  the  only
Methodist  Episcopal  publication  issued  in  the
country;  and  in  this,  as  in  everything  that  he  un-
dertook, he  achieved  a  decided  success.  In  1817  he
began  to  build  up  the  town  of  Mount  Carmel,  111.,
and  during  its  early  days  acted  as  pastor,  teacher,
civil  engineer,  lawyer,  and  master  mechanic.  In
1828  he  was  appointed  presiding  elder  of  the  Indi-
ana district,  then  embracing  nearly  the  whole
state.  He  exerted  a  marked  influence  wherever
he  went,  and  always  proved  himself  a  natural
leader  of  men.  In  1811  he  published  "  Essays  on
the  Truth  of  the  Christian  Religion,"  and  a  series
of  "  Letters  on  the  Itinerancy,"  with  an  introduc-
tion by  Bishop  Soule.  appeared  after  his  death.

BEAUCrRAND,  Honor6,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  in  Lanoraie,  county  Berthier,  province  Quebec,
24  March,  1848.  He  was  educated  at  Joliette  col-
lege, and  at  the  military  school,  entering  the  latter
in  1865,  joined  the  French  force  under  Gen.  Ba-
zaine  in  Mexico,  and,  after  the  unfortunate  termi-
nation of  the  attempt  to  install  Maximilian  as
emperor  of  that  country,  returned  with  the  French
troops  to  their  own  country.  After  remaining
nine  months  in  France  he  went  to  New  Orleans
in  1868  and  became  a  journalist.  Subsequently
VOL. I. — 14


he  was  connected  with  the  press  in  St.  Louis,  Bos-
ton, Chicago,  Lowell,  and  Fall  River.  In  1878  he
returned  to  Canada  and  founded  "LaPatrie"in
Montreal,  in  place  of  "  Lo  National,"  which  had
recently  been  discontinued.  He  is  well  known  as
a  magazine  and  political  writer,  has  been  decorated
by  the  academy  of  France,  and  in  1885  received
the  cross  of  the  legion  of  honor  from  President
Grrevy  of  the  French  republic.  M.  Beaugrand  has
been  mayor  of  Montreal  for  several  years,  and  be-
came conspicuous  by  his  prohibition  of  the  Orange
procession  in  that  citv  in  1878.

BEAUHARNAIS;  Alexandre  de  (bo-har  -nay),
soldier,  b.  in  Martinique  in  1760 ;  d.  in  Paris,  23
July,  1794.  This  officer,  a  viscount  of  France,
held  a  major's  commission  under  Rochambeau  in
the  French  contingent  during  the  revolutionary
war.  Returning  to  France,  he  married  Josephine
de  la  Pagerie,  was  chosen  deputy  to  the  states-gen-
eral from  the  city  of  Blois,  joined  the  tiers-etat,
became  president  of  the  national  assembly,  general
of  division  in  the  army  of  the  Rhine  in  1792,  and
minister  of  war  in  1793.  During  the  reign  of  ter-
ror he  fell  under  the  suspicion  of  the  revolutionary
tribunal,  was  falsely  accused  of  having  treacherous-
ly promoted  the  surrender  of  Mentz,  and  "  guillo-
tined." His  widow  became  the  first  wife  of  Napo-
leon Bonaparte,  then  a  general  in  the  French  army,
and  with  him  ascended  the  throne  of  France.

BEAUHARNAIS,  Charles  de  la  Boische
de,  soldier,  b.  about  1670;  d.  12  June,  1749.  He
entered  the  navy  as  a  boy,  and  was  rapidly  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  commodore.  He  was'  made
a  marquis  of  France,  governor  and  lieutenant-
general  of  New  France,  11  Jan.,  1726 ;  com-
mander of  the  order  of  St.  Louis,  21  April,  1732;
chevalier,  lieutenant-general  des  armies  navales,
1  Jan.,  1748,  at  which  time  he  was  also  governor
of  Quebec.  He  was  thus  for  more  than  twenty
years  military  commander  of  the  French  posses-
sions in  America.  When  war  was  declared  against
Great  Britain  by  Louis  XV.  in  1744,  he  took  effi-
cient measures  to  fortify  the  approaches  to  Cana-
I  da,  and  ordered  the  construction  of  the  fort,  after-
I  ward  famous,  at  Crown  Point.
j  BEAUJEU,  Hyacinthe  Marie  L.  de  (bo-
zhuh),  soldier,  b.  in  Montreal,  9  Aug.,  1711 ;  killed
in  action,  9  July,  1755.  His  first  military  experi-
ence was  in  the  French  navy,  where  he  attained
the  rank  of  captain  and  was  awarded  the  cross  of
St.  Louis  for  distinguished  services.  He  obtained
the  seigniory  of  La  Colle  on  Chambly  river,  Cana-
da, in  1733,  succeeded  Contrecour  in  command  at
Fort  Duquesne  in  1755,  and  planned  the  ambus-
cade that  resulted  in  Braddock's  defeat,  9  July.
Beaujeu  was  in  command  of  the  French  and  In-
dians, and  was  killed  by  the  first  fire  of  the  British.
See  "  Relations  diverse  sur  la  battaille  de  Monon-
gahela,"  collected  by  J.  M.  Shea  (New  York,  1860).

BEAUJOUR,  Louis  F^lix  de  (deb-o-zhoor),
author,  diplomatist,  b.  in  Provence  in  1765 ;  d.  in
July,  1836.  After  serving  as  secretary  of  legation
for  France,  at  Munich  and  Dresden,  and  as  consul-
general  in  Sweden  and  Greece,  he  was  appointed
consul-general  and  charge  d'affaires  in  the  United
States  in  1804.  During  his  residence  in  America
he  prepared  "  A  Sketch  of  the  United  States  at  the
Commencement  of  the  Nineteenth  Century,"  which,
with  an  admirable  map,  was  published  in  1814,  and
is  still  consulted  as  one  of  the  more  trustworthy
of  the  early  foreign  books  about  America.

BEAUMARCHAIS,  Pierre  Au^ustin  Caron
de,  French  author,  b.  in  Paris,  24  Jan.,  1732 ;  d.  18
May,  1799.  He  was  the  son  of  a  watchmaker
named  Caron,  and  his  inventive  and  musical  tal-


210


BEAUMONT


BEAUREGARD


ents  gained  him  admission  to  the  court.  Through
business  associations  with  the  financier  Duverney
he  acquired  a  fortune,  which  he  augmented  by  a
wealthy  marriage.  His  eloquent  pleadings  in  a
suit,  brought  against  him  by  the  heir  of  his  part-
ner Duverney,  rendered  him  conspicuous  as  a
victim  of  injustice  and  a  champion  of  liberty.  In
1775  he  memorialized  the  king  in  advocacy  of  aid-
ing the  American  colonies  in  their  struggle  with
the  British  crown.  He  held  negotiations  with
Arthur  Lee,  agent  of  the  colonists,  and  finally  per-
suaded the  prime  minister,  Maurepas,  to  sanction  a
loan  of  1,000,000  livres  and  to  secure  the  advance
of  an  equal  sum  from  the  Spanish  government.
Arms  and  ammunition  for  the  Americans  were  de-
livered from  the  public  arsenals  to  Beaumarchais,
operating  under  the  firm  name  of  Roderique  Hor-
talez  &  Co.,  on  his  entering  into  an  obligation  to
replace  them.  In  the  early  part  of  1777  he  shipped,
in  three  of  his  own  vessels,  200  guns,  25,000
muskets,  and  200,000  pounds  of  gunpowder,  and
sent  over  on  the  "Amphritrite  "  50  European  offi-
cers, among  the  number  La  Rouerie,  Pulaski,  and
Baron  Steuben.  The  shipments  were  continued,
but,  owing  to  an  erroneous  impression  that  the
supplies  were  a  gift  from  the  French  government,
congress  failed  to  make  remittances,  and  the
French  government  advanced  another  million
francs  to  relieve  Beaumarchais  from  his  embar-
rassments, and  he  persevered  in  forwarding  sup-
plies until  1779.  The  United  States  were  indebted
to  Beaumarchais  at  the  end  of  the  transactions  in
the  sum  of  4,000,000  francs,  an  obligation  which
the  American  government  was  unable  to  meet,  and
which  was  finally  compromised  in  1835,  by  the
payment  of  800,000  francs  to  his  heirs.  He  en-
gaged in  a  variety  of  financial  speculations,  such
as  establishing  a  national  bank  of  discount,  supply-
ing Paris  with  water,  publishing  the  collected
works  of  Voltaire,  etc.,  which  were  generally
successful.  His  writings  are  remarkable  for  their
literary  qualities,  and  some  of  them  for  their  in-
fluence on  events.  The  drama  "  Eugenie  "  (1768)
was  founded  on  experiences  that  befell  his  sister ;
"  Le  Barbier  de  Seville  "  (1775)  was  very  success-
ful; "Le  Mariage  de  Figaro"  (1784)  brilliantly
satirized  the  aristocracy.  During  the  French  revo-
lution he  fell  under  the  suspicions  of  the  Monta-
gnards  and  fled  to  England,  whence  he  issued  a
memoir,  entitled  "  Mes  six  epoques,"  vindicating
his  attachment  to  the  cause  of  liberty.  He  re-
turned and  died  suddenly  during  the  directory.
See  "  Beaumarchais  and  his  Times,"  by  M.  de  Lo-
menie,  Paris,  1856;  "Notice  sur  la  vie  de  Beau-
marchais," by  Saint-Marc  Girardin  ;  "  Vie  de  P.  A.
Caron  de  Beaumarchais,"  by  Cousin  d'Avalon
(1802) ;  and  "  Essai  sur  la  vie  et  les  ouvrages  de
Beaumarchais,"  by  E.  Berger.  His  collected  works
were  published  by  Gudin  dfe  la  Brenellerie  (7  vols.,
Paris,  1809 ;  new  ed.,  1821-'7).

BEAUMONT,  John  G.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania,  27  Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  2  Aug.,  1882.  He
entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  March,  1838,
and  obtained  promotion  as  master,  30  Aug.,  1851 ;
lieutenant,  29  Aug.,  1855 ;  commander,  July,  1862 ;
captain,  1872.  He  participated  as  commander  of
the  steamer  "Aroostook,"  of  the  North  Atlantic
blockading  squadron,  in  the  severe  engagement
with,  the  confederate  batteries  at  Fort  Darling,
was  attached  to  the  South  Atlantic  blockading
squadron  in  1862-'3,  was  engaged  as  commander
of  a  monitor  in  attacks  on  the  fortifications  in
Charleston  harbor,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in
the  capture  of  Fort  Wagner.  He  commanded  the
steamer  "  Mackinaw,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  block-


ading squadron,  in  the  two  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,
when  his  vessel  was  badly  injured  by  the  shot  and
shell  from  the  enemy's  batteries.

BEAUMONT,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Leba-
non, Conn.,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  25  Aprils
1853.  He  was  a  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and
when  stationed  at  Mackinac,  Mich.,  in  1822,  had
occasion  to  treat  a  young  man  named  Alexis  St.
Martin,  who  had  received  the  discharge  of  a  shot-
gun in  his  left  side.  By  good  care  the  wound  was
healed,  but  an  opening  remained,  about  two  and
a  half  inches  in  diameter,  penetrating  into  the
stomach.  Through  this  aperture  Dr.  Beaumont
was  able  to  watch  the  process  of  digestion  and  to
make  experiments,  extending  over  a  series  of  years,
regarding  the  digestibility  of  the  different  kinds  of
food  and  the  effect  upon  the  stomach  of  aleoliol
and  various  drugs ;  and  he  was  the  first  to  obtain
the  gastric  juice  and  study  its  properties.  The  re-
sults of  these  physiological  experiments  were  pub-
lished in  1833,  and  attracted  much  attention  in
America  and  Europe.  After  resigning  from  the
army.  Dr.  Beaumont  practised  medicine  in  St.
Louis,  and  he  continued  the  experiments  upon  St.
Martin  until  his  own  death.

BEAUMONT  DE  LA  BONNIERE,  Gustave
Auguste  de,  French  author,  grandson  of  La-
fayette, b.  at  Beaumont-la-Chatre,  department  of
Sarthe,  6  Feb.,  1802;  d.  in  Paris,  22  Feb.,  1866.
He  was  commissioned,  with  M.  de  Tocqueville,  to
investigate  the  penal  institutions  of  the  United
States,  came  to  this  country  for  that  purpose  in
1831,  and  published  a  report  on  "  The  Penitentiary-
System  of  the  United  States  and  its  Application  in
France  "  (1832).  He  married  his  cousin,  the  grand-
daughter of  Lafayette,  in  1836.  He  was  elected  to
the  chamber  in  1840,  was  a  member  of  the  constit-
uent assembly  of  1848,  and  was  sent  by  Cavaignae
as  ambassador  to  England.  In  1851  he  was  im-
prisoned for  opposing  the  coup  d'etat  of  2  Dec.
His  principal^ other  published  writings  are  "L'Es-
clavage  aux  ]6tats-Unis  "  (1835),  of  which  a  trans-
lation has  appeared  in  the  United  States,  and
"  L'Irlande,  sociale,  politique,  et  religieuse  "  (1839).

BEAUREGARD,  Pierre  Gustave  Toutant,
soldier,  b.  near  New  Orleans,  La.,  28  May,  1818»
He  was  gradu-
ated second  in
class  rank  at
West  Point  in
1838.  Among
his  classmates
were  the  future
confederate  gen-
erals Hardee  and
Sibley  and  the
federal  generals
Barry,  Nichols,
Granger, and  Mc-
Dowell. He  was
assigned  first  to
the  artillery  and
then  to  the  en-
gineers, and  in
1838-'9  was  as-
sistant in  the  con-
struction of  Fort
Adams,  New-
port. He  was  on
engineering  duty

at  Barataria  bay,  .. ..

La.,  in  1840-'l,  at  the  passes  of  the  Mississippi  in  l«4i
-'4,  and  at  Fort  McHenrv,  Md.,  in  1844-'5.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexico,  he  was  engaged
in  the  construction  of  defences  at  Tampico  (1840-  7),


^^


BEAUREGARD


siege  operations  at  Vera  Cruz  (9  to  29  March,  1847),
Cerro  Gordo  (April  17, 18),  Contreras  (Aug.  19,  20),
Chapultepec  (Sept.  13),  and  city  of  Mexico  (Sept.
13,  14),  where  he  was  twice  wounded.  Shortly
afterward  he  was  brevetted  major.  He  attained
the  full  rank  of  captain  of  engineers,  3  March,
1853,  for  fourteen  years  of  continuous  service  as
lieutenant.  Returning  to  the  United  States,  he  was
assigned  to  duty  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Orleans,
superintending  the  construction  and  repair  of
fortifications  in  Mobile  harbor  and  on  the  Missis-
sippi river,  also  of  liarbor  construction  in  Lake
Pontchartrain,  and  as  constructing  engineer  of  the
custom-house  in  New  Orleans.  His  supervisory
duties  extended  over  the  gulf  coast  from  Florida
to  the  Rio  Grande.  On  23  Jan.,  1861,  he  was  de-
tailed as  superintendent  of  the  military  academy
at  West  Point,  but  held  the  place  only  a  few  days,
resigning  his  commission  20  Feb.,  1861.  This  ends
his  record  as  a  military  officer  of  the  United  States.
He  at  once  offered  his  services  to  the  southern
confederacy,  then  organizing  to  resist  the  author-
ity of  the  federal  government,  and  was  placed  in
command  of  the  defences  of  Charleston,  S.  C.  On
the  refusal  of  Maj,  Robert  Anderson  to  evacuate
Fort  Sumter,  he  opened  fire  soon  after  daylight  on
the  morning  of  12  April,  1861.  After  a  cannonade
of  several  hours,  during  which,  according  to  the
official  reports,  not  a  single  life  was  lost  on  either
side.  Fort  Sumter,  with  ammunition  and  provisions
nearly  exhausted,  capitulated  to  Gen.  Beauregard,
and  the  garrison  marched  out  with  the  honors  of
war.  Beauregard  was  almost  immediately  ordered
to  Virginia,  where  he  was  practically  in  command
at  the  battle  of  Bull  Run  (July  21),  though  super-
seded at  the  last  moment  by  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston.
Here  he  was  again  victorious.  In  the  spring  of
1862  he  was  ordered  to  Tennessee,  as  second  in
i  command  to  Gen.  A.  S,  Johnston,  and  when  that
j  officer  was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  April  6,
!  Beauregard  took  command  and  nearly  succeeded
i  in  routing  the  northern  army.  The  next  day,
however,  the  federals  having  been  re-enforced,  he
was  compelled  to  retreat  by  Gen.  Grant,  falling
back  in  good  order  to  Corinth,  Miss.,  where  he
made  a  successful  defence  until  29  May,  when  he
evacuated  the  place,  destroying  all  his  stores,  and
retreating  southward  along  the  Mobile  and  Ohio
railroad.  Gen.  Beauregard's  health  failed  after
this  campaign,  and  he  was  on  leave  of  absence  un-
til August,  when,  with  the  full  rank  of  general,  he
was  again  placed  in  command  at  Charleston,  which
for  a  year  and  a  half  (Sept.,  1862,  till  April,  1864)
he  defended  against  the  formidable  siege  operations
under  Gen.  Gillmore  and  Admirals  Dupont  and
Dahlgren.  In  May,  1864,  when  Gen.  Grant  was
closing  in  upon  the  approaches  to  Richmond,
Beauregard  re-enforced  Lee,  defeated  Butler  at
Drury's  Bluff,  and  held  Petersburg  against  the
federal  advance.  In  October  he  was  appointed
commander  of  the  military  division  of  the  west,
and  sent  to  Georgia  to  resist  the  march  of  the
federals  under  Sherman.  The  attempt  proved  fu-
tile, and,  joining  forces  with  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  in
North  Carolina,  he  surrendered  with  that  officer  to
Gen.  Sherman  in  April,  1865.  After  the  war  he
became  president  of  the  New  Orleans,  Jackson,  and
Mississippi  railroad,  adjutant-general  of  the  state,
and  manager  of  the  Louisiana  state  lottery.  See
"  Military  Operations  of  Gen.  Beauregard  in  the  War
between  the  States,  1861-'5,"  by  Col.  Alfred  Roman
(New  York,  1884).  Gen.  Beauregard  is  the  author
of  "Principles  and  Maxims  of  the  Art  of  War"
(Charleston,  1863),  and  "  Report  of  the  Defence  of
Charleston  "  (Richmond,  1864).


BEAVER


211


BEAUREPAIRE-ROHAN,  Henry  de  (bo-re-
pair-ro-on),  Brazilian  traveller,  b.  in  Picardy,
France,  about  1818.  He  explored  Paraguay  in
1845-6,  visited  Bonpland  at  Borja,  and  published
"  Descrip^ao  de  uma  viagem  de  Cuyaba  ao  Rio  de
Janeiro"  (Rio,  1846).  He  was  promoted  in'  1850
to  the  rank  of  major  of  engineers,  and  charged  by
the  government  with  the  exploration  of  central
Brazil,  and  has  since  published  several  works  on
the  geography  and  history  of  parts  of  that  empire.

BEAVER,  James  Addams,  soldier,  b.  in  Millers-
town,  Perry  co.,  Pa.,  21  Oct.,  1837.  The  founders
of  the  family  came  from  Alsace  in  1740 — Hugue-
nots seeking  religious  liberty  in  America.  They
settled  in  Chester  co..  Pa.,  and  became  leaders  in
the  affairs  of  the  infant  commonwealth.  They
have  furnished  soldiers  for  every  American  war
since  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  and  in  times
of  peace  have  been  among  the  most  highly  re-
spected and  influential  families  of  the  state.
James  was  educated  by  his  mother  (his  father
having  died  in  1840)  until  1846,  when  the  fam-
ily removed  to  Belleville,  Mifflin  co.,  and  he  was
sent  to  school.  In  1852  he  entered  Pine  Grove
academy,  and  in  1854  joined  the  junior  class  in
Jefferson  college,  Cannonsburg,  Pa.  After  gradua-
tion in  1856  he  read  law  in  the  office  of  II.  N.
McAllister,  at  Bellefonte,  Pa.,  and  was  taken  into
partnership  by  him  almost  as  soon  as  he  was  of
age.  During  this  period  of  his  life  he  joined  a
local  military  company — the  "Bellefonte  Fenci-
bles,"  under  Capt.  Andrew  G.  Curtin,  afterward
war  governor,  of  Pennsylvania.  He  made  a  thor-
ough study  of  tactics,  and,  when  the  president  called
for  volunteers  to  suppress  the  rebellion  in  1861,
he  was  second  lieutenant  of  the  company,  which
promptly  marched  for  the  defence  of  the  national
capital.  On  the  organization  of  the  4oth  Pennsyl-
vania volunteers,  he  became  its  lieutenant-colonel,
and  first  saw  active  service  in  the  neighborhood  of
Hilton  Head  and  Port  Royal,  S.  C.  A  new  call  for
volunteers  was  issued  in  1862,  and  Lieut-Col.
Beaver  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  148th
Pennsylvania  volunteers,  recruited  in  the  vicinity
of  his  home.  He  had  by  this  time  developed  high
qualities  as  a  disciplinarian,  and  his  men  made  it
their  boast  that  they  were  often  mistaken  for  regu-
lars. The  regiment  joined  the  army  of  the  Poto-
mac just  after  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  was
assigned  to  Hancock's  corps,  and  first  met  the  ene-
my at  the  battle  of  Chancellorsville  (2  and  3  May,
1863),  where  it  held  an  advanced  position,  and  lost
very  heavily.  Col.  Beaver  being  among  the  wounded.
He  had  not  recovered  when  the  third  call  for  troops
was  issued ;  but,  at  his  own  request,  he  was  placed
on  recruiting  service,  in  command  of  Camp  Curtin.
He  was  able  to  rejoin  his  regiment  just  before  the
battle  of  Gettysburg,  but,  still  weak  from  his
wound,  was  not  permitted  to  take  command  dur-
ing the  fight.  He  led  his  regiment  throughout  the
Wilderness  campaign  in  JVIay,  1864,  and  took  part
in  the  successful  assault  upon  the  confederate
works  at  Spottsylvania  Court-House,  his  regiment
being  among  the  first  to  scale  the  earthworks.  At
the  battle  of.  Cold  Harbor  (3  June,  1864)  he  was
left  in  command  of  the  brigade,  Gen.  Brooke  being
wounded,  and  later  he  was  himself  slightly  wound-
ed, but  not  disabled,  and  remained  at  his  post  dur-
ing the  rest  of  the  day,  holding  an  advanced  posi-
tion close  to  the  enemy's  works,  and  constantly
under  fire.  On  16  June,'l864,  he  was  again  wound-
ed while  leading  his  brigade  in  the  first  assault
upon  the  works  at  Petersburg.  Returning  to  duty
before  his  wound  was  fairly  healed,  he  rode  to  the
battle-field  of  Ream's  Station  in  an  ambulance,  and


212


BfiBIAN


BECK


had  scarcely  reached  the  front  and  assumed  com-
mand at  the  advanced  line  when  his  right  leg  was
shattered  by  a  rifle-ball.  Amputation  followed,
and,  although  his  life  was  saved,  he  was  no  longer
capable  of  active  military  service.  He  was  brevet-
ted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  10  Nov.,  1864,
and  mustered  out  of  service  at  his  own  request  on
22  Dec.  of  that  year,  refusing  to  remain  in  the
army  on  light  duty  as  he  was  urged  to  do.  He  re-
peatedly declined  promotion  that  would  have  taken
him  away  from  his  own  regiment,  feeling  bound  to
remain  with  the  men  whom  he  had  enlisted.  In
civil  life  Gen.  Beaver  has  attended  closely  to  his
practice  at  the  bar.  He  was  elected  a  member  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  the  Pennsylvania  State
College,  in  1873,  and  has  been  very  influential
iij  increasing  its  usefulness  and  prosperity.  He
has  taken  active  part  as  a  speaker  in  the  cam-
paigns of  the  republican  party,  and  at  the  state
convention  of  June,  1883,  was  nominated  as  its
candidate  for  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  and  again
nominated  for  the  same  ofiice  in  1886.  He  is  a
prominent  member  of  the  Grand  army  of  the  re-
public. See  "  Life  of  James  A.  Beaver,"  by  Frank
A.  Burr  (Philadelphia,  1882).

BEBIAN,  Roch  Ambroise  Aiiguste,  educa-
tor, b.  on  the  island  of  Guadeloupe  in  1789;  d.
there  in  1834.  He  was  the  son  of  a  merchant,  and
was  encouraged  to  devote  himself  to  the  instruction
of  the  deaf  and  dumb  by  his  godfather,  the  Abbe
Sicard,  under  whose  direction  he  qualified  himself
for  the  task.  He  published  "  Essai  sur  les  sourd-
muets  et  sur  le  langage  naturel"  (1817),  and
afterward  became  a  professor  in  the  royal  institu-
tion for  deaf-mutes.  His  zeal  for  reform  excited
much  jealousy,  and,  in  1825,  he  was  compelled  to
resign  his  professorship  and  return  to  his  native
island.  His  other  publications  were  "Mimogra-
phie,  ou  Essai  d'ecriture  mimique  "  (Paris,  1822) ;
"  Manuel  d'enseignement  pratique "  (1827) ;  and
"  Eloge  historique  de  I'abbe  de  I'Epee."

BECERRA,  Diego,  Spanish  navigator,  d.  in
1533.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  army  of  Cortes,
conqueror  of  Mexico.  When  the  ship  "Concep-
cion  "  was  built  at  Tehuantepec  by  order  of  Cortes,
Becerra  was  given  command  of  her,  and  went,  30
Nov.,  1533,  to  explore  the  coasts  of  the  southern
sea.  A  short  time  after  he  had  begun  the  work  his
pilot  treacherously  assassinated  him.

BECERRA,  Francisco  (be-ther'-rah),  Spanish
architect,  lived  in  the  latter  part  of  the  16th  cen-
tury. He  established  himself  in  Puebla  de  los  An-
geles, Mexico,  and  built  there  the  cathedral  and  sev-
eral convents.  The  famous  cathedral  of  Lima,  the
church  of  Cuzco,  and  several  bridges,  are  also
numbered  among  his  works,  which  rank  with  the
best  specimen  of  architecture  in  Spanish  America.

BECHLER,  Joliu  Cliristian,  Moravian  bishop,
b.  on  the  island  of  Oesel,  7  Jan.,  1784;  d.  in  Herrn-
hut,  Saxony,  18  April,  1857.  He  was  educated  at
the  Moravian  college  and  theological  seminary  in
Germany,  came  to  the  United  States  in  1806.  and
entered  the  boarding-school  of  Nazareth  Hall,  at
Nazareth,  Pa.,  as  a  tutor.  In  the  following  year
the  American  Moravian  theological  seminary  was
founded,  and  he  was  appointed  one  of  its  first  pro-
fessors. Afterward  he  accepted  the  principalship
of  Nazareth  Hall,  and  subsequently  had  charge  of
various  churches  in  Pennsylvania  and  on  Staten
Island.  He  was  consecrated  to  the  episcopacy  at
Lititz,  Pa.,*  17  May,  1835,  and  presided  over  the
southern  district.  In  the  following  year  he  went
to  Europe  as  a  member  of  the  general  synod,  and
did  not  return,  but  proceeded  to  Russia,  where  he
stood  at  the  head  of  the  Moravian  establishment


at  Sarepta,  and  subsequently  was  the  principal  of
a  similar  establishment  at  Zeist,  in  Holland.  Bishop
Bechler  was  endowed  with  rare  musical  talent,  and
composed  various  anthems  and  tunes,  some  of
which  are  still  in  use.

BECK,  Cliarles,  educator,  b.  in  Heidelberg,
Germany,  19  Aug.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.|
19  March,  1866.  After  completing  his  theological
studies  at  Berlin  and  Tiibingen.  he  was  employed
for  some  time  as  tutor  at  the  university  of  Basle,
Switzerland;  but  his  republican  sentiments  en-
dangered his  liberty,  and  he  took  refuge  in  the
United  States,  arriving  in  New  York  in  December,
1824.  Soon  afterward  he  became  connected,  as
teacher,  with  the  Round  Hill  school  at  Northamp-
ton, Mass.,  until,  in  1830,  he,  in  connection  with
two  other  teachers,  established  a  school  at  Phillips-
town,  on  the  Hudson,  opposite  West  Point.  In
1832  Prof.  Beck  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  Latin
language  and  literature  at  Cambridge,  and,  on  his
retirement  from  that  professorship  in  1850,  he  de-
voted himself  to  literary  pursuits  and  classical
studies.  In  1863  he  published  "  The  Manuscripts
of  the  Satyricon  of  Petronius  Arbiter,  described
and  collated."  He  was  for  two  years  a  representa-
tive of  Cambridge  in  the  state  legislature.  He  was
specially  interested  in  the  soldiers'  fund,  the  sani-
tary commission,  and  the  agencies  for  the  care  and
education  of  the  freedmen.

BECK,  George,  poet,  b.  in  England  in  1749;
d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  24  Dec,  1812.  He  was  in-
structor in  mathematics  at  Woolwich  from  1776,
but  was  afterward  dismissed.  He  emigrated  to
the  United  States  in  1795,  and  was  employed  in
painting  pictures.  He  wrote  short  poems,  made
poetic  translations  from  Anacreon,  Homer,  Virgil,
and  Horace,  and  in  1812  published  "  Observations
on  the  Comet."  In  1795  he  served  as  a  scout  in
Wayne's  campaign  against  the  Indians.  With  his
wife,  who  was  also  an  artist,  he  conducted  for  many
years  a  female  seminary  in  Lexington,  Ky.

BECK,  James  Biirnie,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in  Dum-
friesshire, Scotland,  13  Feb.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  3  May,  1890.  He  received  an  academic
education  in  his  native  country,  and,  with  his  par-
ents, settled  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  and  was  graduated
at  the  law  school  of  Transylvania  university  in  that
place  in  1846.  He  then  practised  law  in  Lexington,
and  in  1866  was  elected  to  congress,  serving  four
successive  terms,  from  1867  till  1875.  In  May,  1876,
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  commission  to
define  the  Virginia  and  Maryland  boundary,  and  in
the  same  year  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  He
took  his  seat  on  4  March,  1877,  was  re-elected  in
1882  for  the  term  ending  in  March,  1889,  and  was
re-elected  for  a  third  term.  During  his  congres-
sional career  Mr.  Beck  served  on  important  com-
mittees, and  was  prominent  in  important  debates.
He  was  specially  interested  in  questions  relating  to
the  tariff  and  the  currency.

BECK,  Paul,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Philadelphia
about  1760;  d.  there,  22  Dec,  1844.  His  father
emigrated  from  Nuremberg  in  1752.  The  son
acquired  a  large  fortune  in  the  wine-trade,  and  for
several  years  filled  the  office  of  port  warden  of
Philadelphia.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Philadelphia  academy  of  fine  arts,  a  benefactor
of  the  deaf  and  dumb  institution  of  that^  city,
president  of  the  American  Sunday-school  Union,
and  a  contributor  to  various  other  charitable  and
religious  undertakings.

BECK,  Tlieodoric  Romeyn,  physician,  b.  in
Schenectadv,  N.  Y.,  11  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,
19  Nov.,  1855.  He  was  a  son  of  Caleb  Beck,  and  of
English  descent. He  was  graduated  at  Union  in


BECK


BECKFORD


213


1807,  and,  after  graduation  at  the  College  of  phy-
sicians and  surgeons  in  New  York,  began  to  prac-
tise in  Albany  in  1811.  In  1813  he  presented  to
the  Albany  society  of  arts  a  comprehensive  paper

on the mineral
^^^^.^  resources  of the

United  States.  In
1815  he  was  ap-
pointed professor
of  the  institutes
of  medicine,  and
lecturer  on  medi-
cal jurisprudence
in  the  College  of
physicians  and
surgeons  of  west-
ern New  York,
at  Fairfield.  In
1817  he  became
principal  of  the
Albany  academy,
which  he  direct-
ed until  1848.  He
was  also  profes-
sor of  medical
jurisprudence  in
Fairfield  medical
college  from  1826  till  1836,  and  professor  of  materia
medica  in  that  institution  from  1836  till  1840,  and
in  Albany  medical  college  from  1840  till  1854.
He  was  chosen  president  of  the  New  York  state
medical  society  in  1829,  and  became  a  manager  of
the  state  lunatic  asylum,  and  in  1854  president  of
the  board  of  managers.  He  collected  statistics  on
deaf-mutes,  which  influenced  the  legislature  to
pass  laws  for  the  education  of  that  class.  From
1849  to  1853  he  edited  the  "  American  Journal  of
Insanity."  His  principal  work  was  "  Elements  of
Medical  Jurisprudence,"  in  which  he  was  aided  by
his  brother,  John  Brodhead.  The  first  edition
was  printed  in  1823 ;  a  seventh  edition,  with  notes
by  Dunlap  and  Darwell,  was  issued  in  London  in
1842,  and  a  tenth  in  Albany  in  1850.  Dr.  Beck
also  contributed  to  scientific  journals. — His  broth-
er, John  Brodhead,  physician,  b.  in  Schenec-
tady, N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1794 ;  d.  in  Rhinebeck,  N.
Y.,  9  April,  1851.  He  was  a  nephew  of  the  Rev.
John  B.  Romeyn,  in  whose  house  he  was  edu-
cated. He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1813,  and
began  the  practice  of  medicine  in  1817.  From
1822  till  1829  he  edited  the  "  New  York  Medi-
cal and  Physical  Journal."  He  became  professor
of  materia  medica  and  of  botany  in  the  college
of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1826,  but  exchanged
the  chair  of  botany  subsequently  for  that  of
medical  jurisprudence.  He  assisted  T.  Romeyn
Beck  in  the  preparation  of  his  great  work  on
medical  jurisprudence  (1823),  and  published  "  Medi-
cal Essays  "  (1843),  "  Infant  Therapeutics  "  (1849),
and  "Historical  Sketch  of  the  State  of  Medi-
cine in  the  Colonies"  (1850). — Another  brother,
Lewis  Caleb,  scientist,  b.  in  Schenectady,  N.  Y.,
4  Oct.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  20  April,  1853.
He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1817,  studied  medi-
cine, and  began  practice  in  Schenectady  in  1818.
During  1820-1  he  resided  in  St.  Louis,  but  soon
returned  and  settled  in  Albany.  He  was  suc-
cessively professor  of  botany  iii  the  Rensselaer
Polytechnic  Institute  (1824-*'9)  professor  of  bot-
any and  chemistry  in  the  Vermont  Academy  of
Medicine  (1826-32),  professor  of  chemistry  and
natural  history  at  Rutgers  College  (1830-7  and
1838-'53),  and  professor  of  chemistry  and  phar-
macy at  Albany  Medical  College  (1841-'53).  He
also  delivered  a  course  of  chemical  lectures  at  Mid-


dlebury  in  1827,  and  was  appointed  mineralogist
to  the  geological  survey  of  New  York  in  1837.  His
published  works  include  "  A  Gazetteer  of  Illinois
and  Missouri "  (1823) ;  "  An  Account  of  the  Salt  *
Springs  at  Salina  "  (1826) ;  "  A  Manual  of  Chemis-
try "  (1831) ;  "  Mineralogy  of  New  York "  (1842),
probably  his  most  important  contribution  to  sci-
entific literature  ;  "  On  Adulterations  "  (New
York,  1846) :  and  "  Botany  of  the  United  States
North  of  Virginia"  (1848).  Gross's  "American
Medical  Biography."

BECKER,  George  Ferdinand,  geologist,  b.
in  New  York  city,  5  Jan.,  1847.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1868,  studied  at  Heidelberg,  receiv-
ing the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  1869,  and,  two  years
later,  passed  the  final  examination  of  the  Royal
School  of  Mines  in  Berlin.  From  1875  till  1879  he
was  instructor  of  mining  and  metallurgy  in  the
University  of  California,  and  in  1879  he  became
connected  with  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,  and
later  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  California  divi-
sion of  geology.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  special
agent  of  the  10th  census,  and  in  1882  was  further
appointed  special  agent  in  charge  of  the  investiga-
tion of  the  precious-metal  industries.  His  most
important  writings  are  "Geometrical  Form  of
Volcanic  Cones  "  (1885) ;  "  Notes  on  the  Stratig-
raphy of  California"  (1885);  "Cretaceous  Meta-
morphic  Rocks  of  California  "  (1886) ;  "  A  Theo-
rem of  Maximum  Dissipativity "  (1886),  which  is
a  new  fundamental  law  of  mechanics,  and  one  of
its  consequences  is  "  A  New  Law  of  Thermo-Cherh-
istry  "  (1886),  which  embraces  the  previously  known
laws  of  this  science  and  makes  an  important  addi-
tion to  them.  He  has  also  written  "  Atomic-
Weight  Determinations ;  A  Digest  of  the  Investi-
gations published  since  1814  "  (Washington,  1880) ;
"  Geology  of  the  Comstock  Lode  "  (1882) ;  "  Sta-
tistics and  Technology  of  the  Precious  Metals,"
with  S.  F.  Emmons  (1885) ;  and  "  Geology  of  the
Quicksilver  Deposits  of  the  Pacific  Slope"  (1886).

BECKER,  Thomas  A.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  in  1832.  His  parents  were  German
Protestants.  He  studied  at  the  Propaganda,  Rome,
and  was  ordained  in  1859.  On  his  return  he  was
assigned  to  Richmond,  Va.,  and  was  afterward  sent
to  Martin  sburg  and  Berkeley  Springs.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  returned  to  Baltimore,  and  was
for  some  time  on  duty  at  St.  Peter's  church.  He
was  afterward  appointed  professor  of  theology,
ecclesiastical  history,  and  sacred  scriptures  in  St.
Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  and  was  one  of  the
chief  secretaries  of  the  plenary  council  assembled
at  Baltimore.  He  was  then  stationed  at  the  ca-
thedral of  Richmond,  where  he  remained  until
created  bishop  of  the  new  diocese  of  Wilmington,
Del.,  23  Aug.,  1868.  Pie  was  transferred  to  the
see  of  Savannah  in  May,  1886.  Dr.  Becker  has
contributed  largely  to  reviews  and  periodicals,  and
his  series  of  articles  in  the  "American  Catholic
Quarterly,"  on  the  idea  of  a  true  university,  at-
tracted wide  attention.

BECKFORD,  William,  West  Indian  planter,
b.  in  Jamaica  in  December,  1709 ;  d.  in  London,  21
June,  1770.  After  receiving  his  education  in  Eng-
land, he  fell  heir  to  large  plantations  in  the  West
Indies,  and,  entering  public  life,  became  a  member
of  parliament  and  alderman  of  London,  and  in
1762,  and  again  in  1768,  was  elected  lord  mayor  of
London.  With  John  Wilkes,  he  led  the  popular
opposition,  and  on  23  May,  1770,  delivered  a  mem-
orable remonstrance  to  the  king,  complaining  of
the  falsification  of  election  returns.  He  left  estates
worth  £100,000  a  year,  and  a  million  of  money.
His  son  was  the  author  of  "  Vathek."


214


BECKWITH


BEDEL


BECKWITH,  Amos,  soldier,  b.  in  Vermont
about  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in
1850,  and  served  in  the  Seminole  war.  During  the
•  civil  war  he  was  chief  depot-commissary  in  Wash-
ington, chief  of  commissariat  of  the  military  divi-
sion of  the  Mississippi,  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Sherman
in  the  Atlanta  campaign,  and,  after  the  war,  chief
commissary  of  the  department  of  the  gulf.  He
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  in  the  U.  S.  army
on  13  March,  1865,  and  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel  on  the  general  staff,  23  June,  1874.

BECKWITH,  Edward  Griffin,  soldier,  b.  in
Cazenovia,  N.  Y,,  25  June,  1818 ;  d.  in  Clifton,  X.
Y.,  22  June,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1842,  served  in  the  war  with  Mexico  at
Tampico  and  Vera  Cruz,  and  was  employed  in  Pa-
cific railroad  reconnoissances  in  1853-'4,  the  rec-
ords of  which  survey  were  published  by  congress.
In  the  civil  war  he  served  as  chief  of  commissariat
of  the  5th  army  corps,  and  of  the  army  of  Vir-
ginia, and  in  fitting  out  Gen.  Banks's  Louisiana
expedition.  He  was  provost-marshal-general  of
the  department  of  the  gulf  in  1863,  in  command
of  the  defences  of  New  Orleans  from  25  Aug.,
1863,  till  12  Jan.,  1864,  also  for  a  time  chief  com-
missary of  the  department,  was  made  major  on  8
Feb.,  1864,  and  received  the  brevet  rank  of  briga-
dier-general, U.  S.  army,  on  13  March,  1865,  for
faithful  and  meritorious  sefvices  during  the  war.
After  the  war  he  was  employed  in  the  subsist-
ence department.

BECKWITH,  Sir  George,  English  soldier,  b.
in  1753  ;  d.  in  London,  20  March,  1823.  He  came
to  America  in  1771  as  ensign,  and  rose  to  the  rank
of  major  in  1781.  He  commanded  the  British
forces  at  the  taking  of  Elizabethtown  and  New
Brunswick,  and  bore  a  distinguished  part  in  other
engagements.  From  1787  till  1791,  the  period
when  there  was  no  British  minister  to  the  United
States,  he  was  entrusted  with  an  important  confiden-
tial mission.  In  1797  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Bermuda,  in  1804  of  St.  Vincent,  and  in  1808
of  Barbadoes.  In  1809  he  conquered  the  French
possession  of  Martinique,  and  in  the  following
year  he  drove  the  French  out  of  Guadeloupe.  In
1814  he  returned  to  England,  and  in  1816  took
command  of  the  military  forces  in  Ireland.

BECKWITH,  George  C,  clergyman,  b.  in
1800 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  May,  1870.  He  was
a  Congregational  minister,  who  devoted  himself
to  the  service  of  the  American  peace  society,  of
which  he  was  for  thirty-three  years  corresponding
secretary.  He  also  edited  its  magazine,  "  The  Ad-
vocate of  Peace,"  and  wrote  the  appeals  issued  in
its  name,  in  favor  of  peace  congresses  and  the  ar-
bitration of  international  disputes.

BECKWITH,  James  Carroll,  painter,  b.  in
Hannibal,  Mo.,  23  Sept.,  1852.  He  is  a  son  of  N,
M.  Beckwith,  who  was  U.  S.  commissioner-general
at  the  international  exhibition  of  Paris  in  1867.
He  studied  art  for  two  years  in  the  national  acad-
emy, New  York,  and  for  five  years  in  the  atelier  of
Carolus  Duran,  and  in  the  Paris  school  of  arts,
under  Yvon.  His  w^orks  include  "Judith,"  por-
traits, exhibited  at  the  New  York  academy  of  de-
sign, and  "  The  Falconer,"  sent  to  the  Paris  expo-
sition of  1878.

BECKWITH,  John  Watriis,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Raleigh,  N.  C,  9  Feb.,  1831 :  d.  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  24
Nov.,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,
Hartford,  in  1852,  ordained  deacon  24  May,  1854,
and  priest  in  May,  1855.  He  entered  upon  work
in  Wadesboro,  N.  C,  but  soon  removed  to  Anne
Arundel  co.,  Md.  In  1861  he  removed  to  Mississippi
and  thence  to  xYlabama,  where  he  became  rector  of


/


Trinity  church  in  Demopolis.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  became  rector  of  Trinity  church,  New
Orleans,  and
while  there  was
elected  bish-
op of  Georgia.
He  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.
D.  from  Trini-
ty in  1867.  He
was  consecrat-
ed bishop  in  St.
John's  church,
Savannah,  2
April,  1868.  It
is  largely  due
to  his  untir-
ing labors  that
the  Episcopal
church  in  Geor-
gia has  stead-
ily gained  in
influence  and
strength.  He
was  a  most  elo-
quent and  pow-
erful preacher,  and  in  this  respect  had  no  superior
in  the  church  of  which  he  was  a  member.  He  pub-
lished several  sermons  and  addresses.

BECKWOURTH,  James  P.,  pioneer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia about  1800 ;  d.  in  1867.  He  was  a  mulatto.
About  1850  he  discovered  the  pass  through  the
Sierra  Nevada  mountains  that  bears  his  name.
During  his  adventurous  life  he  was  at  one  time
chief  among  the  Crow  Indians,  and  he  figures  in
many  books  of  western  travel.  In  1845  he  was
among  the  Americans  that  took  part  in  the  revo-
lution against  Gov.  Micheltorena  in  California.

BEDARD,  Pierre,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Que-
bec in  1763;  d.  in  1827.  He  was  one  of  the  first
native  Canadians  to  be  admitted  to  the  bar.
During  the  administration  of  Gov.  Craig  he. led
the  opposition  in  the  assembly,  founded  "  Le  Ca-
nadien  "  newspaper,  and  suffered  a  term  of  impris-
onment for  assailing  the  executive  in  that  jour-
nal. In  later  life  he  was  a  district  judge.

BEDEL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  the  Indian  Stream
territory,  northern  New  Hampshire,  8  July,  1822 ;
d.  in  Bath,  N.  H.,  26  Feb.,  1875.  His  father  was
Gen.  Moody  Bedel.  The  son  enlisted  as  a  private
in  the  Mexican  war  in  1847,  and  became  captain
in  1849.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1850,  and
practised  in  Bath  until  1853,  when  he  entered  the
treasury  department  at  Washington,  and  remained
there  tmtil  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He
was  then  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  3d
New  Hampshire  volunteers,  27  June,  1862,  was
wounded,  10  July,  1863,  and  captured  at  Fort
Wagner,  18  July,  1863,  He  was  promoted  colonel
of  that  regiment,  while  a  prisoner  of  war,  6  April,
1864,  and  paroled  on  9  Dec.  He  was  made  a
brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volunteers,  by  brevet,
dating  from  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  and  meri-
torious services,  and  was  mustered  out  of  service
20  July,  1865.  He  represented  the  town  of  Bath
in  the  legislature,  and  was  several  times  the  un-
successful democratic  candidate  for  governor.

BEDEL,  Timothy,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  H.,
about  1740;  d.  in  Haverhill,  N.  II.,  in  February,
1787.  He  served  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  French
war.  On  6  July,  1775,  he  was  appointed  captain
of  rangers,  and  on  13  Jan.,  1776,  colonel  of  the  1st
New  Hampshire  regiment,  joining  the  northern
army  under  Schuyler.  He  was  with  Montgomery
at  tlie  taking  of  St.  John's,  on  the  Sorel,  and  was


BEDELL


BEDINGER


215


in  command  of  the  force  at  the  Cedars,  near  Mont-
real, which  was  attacked  by  Brant's  Indians  and
surrendered  without  resistance  by  order  of  Capt.
Butterflcld,  the  subordinate  officer  in  command
during  the  absence  of  Col.  Bedel,  who  lay  ill  at
Lachine,  Gen.  Arnold  threw  the  blame  on  Bedel,
who  was  deprived  of  his  command,  but  was  sub-
sequently reinstated.  He  was  afterward  major-
general  of  New  Hampshire  militia.

BEDELL,  Gregory  Thurston,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  1817.  His  father
was  an  eminent  clergyman  in  Philadelphia,  and  an
author  of  much  reputation.  At  the  age  of  nine
years  the  son  entered  Rev.  Dr.  Muhlenberg's  school
at  Flushing,  L.  I.,  remaining  until  he  was  seven-
teen under  the  guidance  of  that  instructor.  He
was  graduated  at  Bristol  college,  Pennsylvania,  in
1836,  and  at  the  Virginia  theological  seminary
in  1840.  He  was  ordained  deacon,  19  July,  1840,
and  priest  in  August,  1841.  He  became  rector  of
Trinity  church,  West  Chester,  Pa.,  in  1841,  and  in
1843  was  called  to  the  rectorship  of  the  Church  of
the  Ascension,  New  York  city.  While  there  he
was  elected  assistant  bishop  of  Ohio,  and  was  con-
secrated 13  Oct.,  1859,  in  St.  Paul's  church,  Rich-
mond, Va.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  Mcllvaine,  in
1873,  he  became  bishop  of  the  diocese.  The  year
following  he  gave  his  consent  to  the  division  of
his  extensive  jurisdiction,  and  the  diocese  of  south-
em  Ohio  was  formed  and  a  bishop  chosen  for  it  in
1875.  His  ecclesiastical  position  is  that  of  the
American  evangelicals,  Mcllvaine,  Tyng,  Eastburn,
and  others.  Bishop  Bedell  has  published  numer-
ous sermons  and  addresses,  and  also  "  Renuncia-
tion "  (a  work  of  his  father's,  with  additions) ;  "  The
Pastor,"  a  manual  on  pastoral  theology  (1880) ;  a
"Memorial  of  Rev.  Dr.  Stephen  H.  Tyng"  (New
York,  1806) ;  and  "  Centenary  of  the  American
Episcopate  "  (London,  1884).

BEDELL,  Greg-ory  Townsend,  clergyman,  b.
on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.,  28  Oct.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  30  Aug.,  1834.  His  early  education
was  obtained  chiefly  at  the  Episcopal  academy,
Cheshire,  Conn.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia
college  in  1811,  studied  for  the  ministry  of  the
Episcopal  church,  and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Ho-
bart,  4  Nov.,  1814.  His  first  charge  was  at  Hud-
son, N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  three  years.  In
1818  he  accepted  a  call  to  Fayetteville,  N.  C,  but,
as  his  health  was  delicate  and  the  climate  did
not  suit  him,  he  rem'oved  to  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
in  May,  1823.  St.  Andrew's  church  was  estab-
lished through  his  labors,  and  he  acquired  great
popularity  as  a  preacher.  In  a  few  years,  how-
ever, his  health  failed,  and  the  end  came  to  him  in
Baltimore,  while  on  his  return  home  from  Bedford
Springs,  Pa.  Dr.  Bedell  published  and  was  the
author  of  sacred  poems  and  musical  compositions.
Among  his  works  are,  "  Bible  Studies "  (2  vols.,
1829) ;  "  Ezekiel's  Vision  " ;  "  Onward,  or  Christian
Progression  " ;  "  Waymarks  " ;  "  Is  it  well  1 "  and
"  It  is  well."  The  Rev.  Stephen  H.  Tyng,  D.  D.,
published  his  sermons,  with  a  memoir,  in  1836.

BEDFORD,  Gunning,  patriot,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia about  1730 ;  d.  in  Newcastle,  Del.,  30  Sept.,
1797.  He  was  a  lieutenant  in  the  French  war,
and  entered  the  revolutionary  army  as  major,  20
March,  1775.  As  lieutenant-colonel  of  Haslet's
regiment  he  was  wounded  at  White  Plains.  On
18  June,  1776,  he  was  appointed  muster-master-
general.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Delaware  to  the
old  congress,  1783-'5,  and  in  1796  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  Delaware. — His  cousin.  Gunning',  Jr.,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1747,  d.  in  Wilmington,
Del.,  30  March,  1812,  was  graduated  at  the  College


of  New  Jersey  in  1771,  delivering  the  valedictory
oration.  After  graduation  he  studied  in  the  law-
office  of  Joseph  Reed,  of  Philadelphia,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar,  and  practised  law  at  Dover  and
afterward  at  Wilmington,  Del.  During  the  revo-
lutionary war  he  acted  for  a  short  time  as  aide-de-
camp to  Gen;  Washington.  Resuming  his  prac-
tice after  the  close  of  the  war,  he  was  in  the
course  of  a  few  years  elected  to  the  Delaware
houses  of  representatives.  He  represented  Dela-
ware in  the  continental  congress  from  1783  till
1786,  and  was  also  a  member  of  the  constitutional
convention,  in  which  he  took  an  active  part,  and
by  his  eloquence  influenced  the  decision  of  the
convention  to  give  the  same  representation  in
the  senate  to  large  and  small  states.  He  was  a
presidential  elector  in  1789  and  in  1793.  He  be-
came attorney-general  of  the  state,  and  remained
in  that  office  until  the  organization  of  the  gov-
ernment in  1789,  when  President  Washington  ap-
pointed him  U.  S.  judge  for  the  district  of  Dela-
ware, which  place  he  held  until  his  last  illness. — A
grand-nephew  of  the  latter,  Gunning'  S.,  physician,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
5  Sept.,  1870,  was  graduated  at  Mount  St.  Mary's
college,  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  in  1825,  with  the  high-
est honors-  of  his  class.  He  received  his  medical
diploma  from  Rutgers  medical  college  in  1829,  and
soon  afterward  visited  Europe,  where  for  two  years
he  continued  his  medical  studies.  On  his  return,
in  1833,  he  waS  appointed  professor  in  the  medical
college  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  and  subsequently  was
called  to  a  professorship  in  the  new  medical  college
founded  by  Dr.  Alden  March,  in  Albany,  N.  Y.
He  removed  to  New  York  about  1836,  and  soon
commanded  a  large  practice  in  obstetrics.  In  con-
cert with  the  late  Dr.  Valentine  Mott,  his  former
preceptor,  and  for  many  years  his  colleague,  Dr.
Bedford  projected  the  university  medical  college
in  1840,  and  took  the  chair  of  obstetrics,  which,  he
retained  until  1862.  Dr.  Bedford  first  introduced
into  the  United  States  obstetrical  clinics  for  the
gratuitous  treatment  of  poor  women.  He  was  the
author  of  two  standard  treatises  on  his  special  de-
partment of  medicine.  His  "  Diseases  of  Women
and  Children  "  passed  through  ten  editions  in  this
country,  and  his  "  Principles  and  Practice  of  Ob-
stetrics "  five  editions ;  and  both  have  been  repub-
lished in  England,  and  translated  into  French  and
German. — His  son.  Dr.  Henry  Moore,  d.  at  Rich-
field Springs,  20  Aug.,  1880,  was  his  assistant  in
the  obstetrical  clinic,  the  establishment  of  which
was  accomplished  against  strong  opposition.

BEDINGER,  Georg-e  Michael,  soldier,  b.  in
Virginia  about  1750 ;  d.  at  Lower  Blue  Licks,  Ky.,
about  1830.  He  was  one  of  the  early  emigrants  to
Kentucky,  and  served  as  adjutant  in  the  expedi-
tion of  1779  against  Chillicothe,  as  major  at  the
battle  of  Blue  Licks  in  1782,  and  did  valuable  ser-
vice as  an  Indian  spy  throughout  the  war.  He
commanded  the  Winchester  battalion  of  sharp-
shooters in  St.  Clair's  expedition  of  1791,  and  was
•a  major  of  U.  S.  infantry  in  1792-'3.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Kentucky  legislature  in  1792,  and
represented  that  state  in  congress  from  1803  till
1807. — His  son,  Henry  (diplomatist),  was  born  near
Shepherdstown,  Va.,  in  1810,  and  died  there  26
Nov.,  1858.  He  practised  law  in  Shepherdstown,
and  afterward  in  Charlestown,  in  1845  succeeded
his  partner  and  brother-in-law.  Gen.  George  Rust,
as  member  of  congress,  and  was  re-elected  for  the
following  term.  From  1853  till  1858  he  was  U.  S.
minister  to  Denmark,  and  while  at  Copenhagen  he
negotiated  a  treaty  that  settled  the  question  of
the  Sound  dues.


216


BEDLE


BEECHER


BEDLE,  Joseph  D.,  jurist,  b.  in  Monmouth  co.,
N.  J,,  3  Jan.,  1881.  He  practised  law  in  Matte-
awan,  and  subsequently  in  Freehold,  N.  J.,  and  in
1865  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  superior  court,
and  again  in  1872.  In  1874  he  was  elected  gov-
ernor of  the  state  of  New  Jersey.

BEDON,  Peter,  South  American  clergyman,  b.
in  Quito,  Ecuador ;  d.  there  in  1561.  He  entered
the  novitiate  of  the  Dominican  order  at  the  age  of
fourteen,  completed  his  studies  in  Lima,  and  was
then  appointed  professor  of  philosophy  in  the  col-
lege of  that  city.  In  early  life  he  had  cultivated
painting,  and  when  afterward  he  had  recovered
from  a  dangerous  malady,  he  resolved  to  devote
his  leisure  to  painting  pictures  of  the  Blessed  Vir-
gin. Several  of  his  works  are  in  the  convents  of
Quito  and  Santa  Fe,  and  are  said  to  justify  the
title  his  countrymen  gave  him  of  the  Fra  Angelico
of  Ecuador.  He  founded  the  convent  of  La  Peha
in  Quito,  and  then  went  to  Rio-Bomba,  where  he
founded  another  convent,  but  returned  to  Quito
on  learning  that  he  had  been  elected  prior  of  La
Pena.  In  1619  he  was  chosen  provincial  of  his
order,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.

BEE,  Bernard  E.,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,  S.
C,  about  1828 ;  killed  in  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,
21  July,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point
in  1845,  and  served  as  a  lieutenant  in  the  military
occupation  of  Texas  and  in  the  war  with  Mexico,
being  wounded  at  Cerro  Gordo,  and  receiving  the
brevet  of  captain  for  gallantry  at"  Chapultepec.
He  served  as  captain  on  frontier  duty  in  Minne-
sota, on  the  Utah  expedition,  and  in  Dakota  until
3  March,  1861,  when  he  resigned  and  entered  the
confederate  service.  He  held  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  and  commanded  a  brigade  of  South  Caro-
lina troops  at  Bull  Run.

BEE,  Henry  Jubilee,  pioneer,  b.  about  1810.
He  was  an  English  sailor,  and  a  prominent  mem-
ber of  the  Graham  company  of  foreigners  in  Cali-
fornia which,  in  1836-40,  first  assisted  the  revo-
lutionary governor,  Alvarado,  and  afterward  had
serious  troubles  with  him.  Bee  was  among  the  for-
eigners arrested  in  1840  with  Graham  and  confined
at  Monterey  on  charges  of  plotting  against  the
native  authorities.  He  took  part  later  during  the
conquest  of  1846,  and  was  bearer  of  despatches
from  Com.  Sloat  to  Capt.  John  C.  Fremont.

BEE,  Thomas,  patriot,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in
1729.  He  practised  law  in  his  native  province,
and  became  a  member  of  the  assembly  and  of  the
privy  council.  'He  was  active  in  the  popular  cause
at  the  outbreak  of  the  revolution,  was  a  member  of
the  council  of  safety,  and  a  large  part  of  his  prop-
erty was  lost  through  the  war.  He  became  lieu-
tenant-governor of  South  Carolina,  and  was  a
member  of  the  continental  congress  in  1780-2,
and  afterward  judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  for  the  dis-
trict of  South  Carolina.  He  published  "  Reports
of  the  District  Courts  of  South  Carolina  "  (1810).

BEE  BE,  Bezaleel,  soldier,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  28  April,  1741 ;  d.  there,  29  May,  1824.  In
1758,  having  joined  the  army,  he  was  stationed  for
some  time  at  Fort  St.  George.  Afterward,  as  one
of  Rogers's  celebrated  rangers,  he  was  engaged  in
the  bloody  fight  where  Putnam  was  captured,  and
he  was  also  at  the  capture  of  Montreal  in  1760.
At  the  close  of  the  French  war  he  retired  to  his
farm,  but  in  1775  was  commissioned  lieutenant,
and  sent  to  Boston  soon  after  the  battle  of  Lexing-
ton. In  July,  1775,  he  accompanied  an  expedition
to  man  the  forts  on  Lake  Champlain.  He  was
made  captain  in  1776,  attached  to  Ilinman's  regi-
ment, and  saw  active  service  in  New  York  and
New  Jersey. He  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  capture


of  Fort  Washington,  and  was  confined  in  New
York  nearly  a  year,  during  which  time,  when  on
parole,  he  often  met  and  consulted  with  his  fellow-
prisoner,  Ethan  Allen.  After  being  exchanged,
he  was  made  major  13  Aug.,  1777,  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel in  1780,  colonel  early  in  1781,  and
soon  afterward  was  appointed  to  the  command  of
all  the  Connecticut  troops  raised  for  sea-coast  de-
fence, with  the  duties  and  pay  of  a  brigadier-gen-
eral. After  the  war  he  was  frequently  a  member
of  the  legislature.  His  son,  Ebenezer  (major  U.
S.  army),  died  in  service  during  the  war  of  1812.

BEECHER,  Lyman,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.,  2  Oct.,  1775 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10
Jan.,  1863.  His  ancestor  in  the  fifth  ascent  emi-
grated to  New  England,  and  settled  at  New  Haven
in  1688.  His  father,  David  Beecher,  was  a  black-
smith. His  mother  died  shortly  after  his  birth,  and
he  was  committed  to  the  care  of  his  uncle  Lot  Ben-
ton, by  whom  he  was  adopted  as  a  son,  and  with
whom  his  early  life  was  spent  between  blacksmith-
ing  and  farming.  But  it  was  soon  found  that  he
preferred  study.  He  was  fitted  for  college  by  the
Rev.  Thomas  W.  Bray,  and  at  the  age  of  eighteen
entered  Yale,  where,  besides  the  usual  classical
course,  he  studied  theology  under  President  Dwight
and  was  graduated  in  1797.  After  this  he  con-
tinued his  studies  until  September,  1798,  when  he
was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  New  Haven  West
Association,  entered  upon  his  clerical  duties  by
supplying  the  pulpit  in  the  Presbyterian  church  at
East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  and  was  ordained  in
1799.  Here  he  married  his  first  wife,  Roxana  Foote.
His  salary  was  $300  a  year,  after  five  years  increased
to  $400,  with  a  dilapidated  parsonage.  To  eke  out
his  scanty  income,  his  wife  opened  a  private  school,
in  which  the  husband  also  gave  instruction.  Mr.
Beecher  soon  became  one  of  the  foremost  preachers
of  his  day.  A  sermon  that  he  delivered  in  1804,  on
the  death  of  Alexander  Hamilton,  excited  great  at-
tention. Finding  his  salary  wholly  inadequate  to
support  his  increasing  family,  he  resigned  the
charge,  and  in  1810  was  installed  pastor  of  the  Con-
gregational church  in  Litchfield,  Conn.  Here  he
remained  for  sixteen  years,  during  which  he  took
rank  as  the  foremost  clergyman  of  his  denomina-
tion. In  his  autobiography  he  says  this  pastorate
was  "  the  most  laborious  part  of  his  life."  The  vice
of  intemperance  had  become  common  in  New  Eng-
land, even  the  formal  meetings  of  the  clergy  being
not  unfrequently  accompanied  by  gross  excesses,
and  Mr.  Beecher  resolved  to  take  a  stand  against
it.  About  1814  he  delivered  and  published  six  ser-
mons on  intemperance,  which  contain  eloquent  pas-
sages hardly  exceeded  by  anything  in  the  English
language.  They  were  sent  broadcast  through  the
United  States,  ran  rapidly  through  many  editions  in
England,  and  were  translated  into  several  languages
on  the  continent,  and  have  had  a  large  sale  even
after  the  lapse  of  fifty  years.  His  eloquence,  zeal,
and  courage  as  a  preacher,  and  his  leading  the  way
in  the  organization  of  the  Bible,  missionary,  and
educational  societies,  gave  him  a  high  reputation
throughout  New  England.  During  his  residence
in  Litchfield  arose  the  L^nitarian  controversy,  in
which  he  took  a  prominent  part.  Litchfield  was
at  this  time  the  seat  of  a  famous  law  school  and
several  other  institutions  of  learning,  and  Mr.
Beecher  (now  a  doctor  of  divinity)  and  his  wife  un-
dertook to  supervise  the  training  of  several  young
women,  who  were  received  into  their  family.  But
here  too  he  found  his  salary  ($800  a  year)  inade-
quate. The  rapid  and  extensive  defection  of  the
Congregational  churches  in  Boston  and  vicinity,
under  the  lead  of  Dr.  Channing  and  others  in  sym-


BEECHER


BEECHER


217


pathy  with  him,  had  excited  much  anxiety  through-
out New  England ;  and  in  1826  Mr.  Beecher  received
a  call  to  become  pastor  of  the  Hanover  street  church
in  Boston.  At  the  urgent  request  of  his  clerical
bretin-en,  he  took  the  charge  for  the  purpose  of  up-
holding the  doctrines  of  Puritanism,  and  remained
in  this'church  six  years  and  a  half.  His  sermons
at  this  time  were  "largely  controversial ;  he  flung
himself  into  the  thickest  of  the  fray,  and  was  sus-
tained by  an  immense  following.  About  this  time
the  religious  public  had  become  impressed  with  the
growing  importance  of  the  great  west ;  a  theologi-
cal seminary  had  been  founded  at  Walnut  Hills,
near  Cincinnati,  0.,  and  named  Lane  Seminary,  after
one  of  its  principal  benefactors,  and  a  large  amount
of  money  was  pledged  to  the  institution  on  condi-
tion that  Dr.  Beecher  accept  the  presidency,  which
he  did  in  1832.  He  retained  the  place  for  twenty
years,  and  his  name  was  continued  in  the  seminary
catalogue,  as  president,  until  his  death.  He  was
also,  during  the  first  ten  years  of  his  presidency,
pastor  of  the  Second  Presbyterian  church  in  Cin-
cinnati. Soon  after  his  removal  thither  he  startled
the  religious  public  in  the  east  by  a  tract  call-
ing attention  to  the  danger  of  Roman  Catholic  su-
premacy in  the  west.  The  French  revolution  of
1830,  the  agitation  in  England  for  reform  and
against  colonial  slavery,  and  the  punishment  by
American  courts  of  citizens  who  had  dared  to  at-
tack the  slave-trade  carried  on  under  the  American
flag,  had  begun  to  direct  the  attention  of  American
philanthropists  to  the  evils  of  American  slavery,
and  an  abolition  convention  met  in  Philadelphia  in
1833.  Its  president,  Arthur  Tappan,  through  whose
liberal  donations  Dr.  Beecher  had  been  secured  to
Lane  seminary,  forwarded  to  the  students  a  copy
of  the  address  issued  by  the  convention,  and  the
whole  subject  was  soon  under  discussion.  Many
of  the  students  were  from  the  south ;  an  effort  was
made  to  stop  the  discussions  and  the  meetings ;
slaveholders  went  over  from  Kentucky  and  incited
mob  violence ;  and  for  several  weeks  Dr.  Beecher
lived  in  a  turmoil,  not  knowing  how  soon  the  rab-
ble might  destroy  the  seminary  and  the  houses  of
the  professors.  The  board  of  trustees  interfered
during  the  absence  of  Dr.  Beecher,  and  allayed  the
excitement  of  the  mob  by  forbidding  all  further
discussion  of  slavery  in  the  seminary,  whereupon
the  students  withdrew  en  masse, A  very  few  were

f)ersuaded  to  return  and  remain,  while  the  seceders
aid  the  foundation  of  Oberlin  College.  For  seven-
teen years  after  this,  Dr.  Beecher  and  his  able  co-
worker. Prof.  Stowe,  remained  and  tried  to  revive
the  prosperity  of  the  seminary,  but  at  last  aban-
doned it.  The  great  project  of  their  lives  was  de-
feated, and  they  returned  to  the  eastern  states.  In
1835  Dr.  Beecher,  who  had  been  called  "  a  moder-
ate Calvinist,"  was  arraigned  on  charges  of  hy-
pocrisy and  heresy  by  some  of  the  stronger  Calvin-
ists.  The  trial  took  place  in  his  own  church  ;  and
he  defended  himself,  while  burdened  with  the
cares  of  his  seminary,  his  church,  and  his  wife  at
home  on  her  death-bed.  The  trial  resulted  in  acquit-
tal, and,  on  an  appeal  to  the  general  synod,  he  was
again  acquitted ;  but  the  controversy  engendered
by  the  action  went  on  until  the  Presbyterian  church
was  rent  in  twain.  In  the  theological  controversies
that  led  to  the  excision  of  a  portion  of  the  general
assembly  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  1837-'8,
Dr.  Beecher  took  an  active  part,  adhering  to  the
new  school  branch.  In  1852  he  resigned  the  presi-
dency of  Lane  Seminary,  and  returned  to  Boston,
purposing  to  devote  himself  mainly  to  the  revisal
and  publication  of  his  works.  But  his  intellectual
powers  began  to  decline,  while  his  physical  strength


was  unabated.  About  his  eightieth  year  he  suffered
a  stroke  of  paralysis,  and  thenceforth  his  mental
powers  only  gleamed  out  occasionally  with  some
indications  of  their  former  splendor.  The  last  ten
years  of  his  life  were  passed  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
the  home  of  his  son,  Henry  Ward  Beecher.  Dr.
Beecher  was  a  man  of  great  intellectual  power,
though  not  a  profound  scholar.  His  sermons  were
usually  extemporaneous,  as  far  as  form  was  con-
cerned, but  were  carefully  thought  out,  often  while
he  was  engaged  in  active  physical  exercise  ;  but  his
writings  were  elaborated  with  the  utmost  care.  He
stood  unequalled  among  living  divines  for  dialectic
keenness,  pungent  appeal,  lambent  wit,  vigor  of
thought,  and  concentrated  power  of  expression.
He  possessed  intense  personal  magnetism,  and  an
indomitable  will,  and  was  thoroughly  devoted  to
his  chosen  work.  The  sincerity  and  spirituality  of
his  preaching  were  generally  acknowledged,  and
were  attended  by  tangible  results.  He  was  bold  to
the  point  of  audacity,  and  it  was  this  feature  of  his
character,  probably  more  than  any  positive  errors,
that  made  him  a  subject  of  anxiety  to  the  more
conservative  class  of  the  theologians  of  his  own  de-
nomination. His  great  boldness  in  denouncing
laxity  in  regard  to  the  standard  of  the  Christian
orthodoxy  made  a  deep  impress  on  the  public
mind.  The  degree  of  A.  M.  was  conferred  on  him
by  Yale  in  1809,  and  that  of  D.  D.  by  Middlebury
College  in  1818.  When  he  became  president  of  Lane
Seminary,  he  took  also  the  chair  of  sacred  theology.
He  was  "the  author  of  a  great  number  of  printed
sermons  and  addresses.  His  published  works  are :
"  Remedy  for  Duelling  "  (New  York,  1809) ;  "  Plea
for  the  West,"  "  Six  Sermons  on  Temperance,"
"  Sermons  on  Various  Occasions,"  (1842),  "  Views  in
Theology,"  "  Skepticism,"  "  Lectures  on  Various
Occasions,"  "  Political  Atheism."  He  made  a  col-
lection of  those  of  his  works  which  he  deemed  the
most  valuable  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1852).  He  was  three
times  married— in  1799,  1817,  and  1836— and  had
thirteen  children.  Most  of  his  children  have  at-
tained literary  or  theological  distinction.  All  his
.  sons  became  Congregational  clergymen,  viz.,  Will-
iam Henry,  Edward,  George,  Henry  Ward,  Charles,
Thomas  Kinnicut,  and  James  Chaplin.  The  daugh-
ters are  Catherine  Esther,  Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,
Mary  Beecher  Perkins,  and  Isabella  Beecher  Hook-
er. He  was  proverbially  absent-minded,  and  after
having  been  wrought  up  by  the  excitement  of
preaching  was  accustomed  to  relax  his  mind  by
playing  "  Auld  Lang  Syne "  on  the  violin,  or
dancing  the  "  double  shuffle  "  in  his  parlor.  His
autobiography  and  correspondence  was  edited  by
the  Rev.  Charles  Beecher  (New  York,  1863).  See
also  "Life  and  Services  of  Lyman  Beecher,"  by
the  Rev.  D.  H.  Allen  (Cincinnati,  1863).— His
eldest  child,  Catherine  Esther,  educator,  b.  in
East  Hampton,  Long  Island,  6  Sept.,  1800 ;  d.  in
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1878.  The  death  of  her
mother  when  Catherine  was  about  sixteen  years  of
age  brought  upon  her  domestic  responsibilities
that  lasted  until  her  father's  second  marriage,  two
years  later.  Her  education  was  received  in  the
seminary  at  Litchfield.  She  was  betrothed  to
Prof.  Fisher,  of  Yale,  who  was  lost  with  the  "  Al-
bion "  off  the  coast  of  Ireland,  while  on  a  voyage
to  Europe,  and  she  never  married.  Her  brother,
Henry  Ward  Beecher,  says  the  shock  was  so  great
that  "it  nearly  destroyed  her  religious  faith,  and
her  only  consolation  was  in  a  life  of  earnest  ac-
tivity. 'In  1823  she  opened  a  school  for  young
ladies  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  with  such  success  that,
under  her  supervision,  with  the  assistance  of  her
sister, Harriet (afterward Mrs,  Stowe), it num-


218


BEECHER


BEECHER


bered  160  pupils.  It  was  maintained  for  ten  years.
Comprehending  the  deficiencies  of  existing  text-
books, she  prepared,  primarily  for  use  in  her  own
school,  some  elementary  books  in  arithmetic,  a
work  on  theology,  and  a  third  on  mental  and
moral  philosophy."  The  last  was  never  published,
although  printed  and  used  as  a  college  text-book.
The  gist  of  her  theories  on  the  subject  of  teaching
was  that  the  physical  and  moral  training  of  her
pupils  was  quite  as  important  as  the  development
of  their  intellectual  powers.  She  also  claimed  that
a  housekeeper  is  responsible  for  the  health  of  all
the  inmates  of  her  family,  especially  of  children
and  servants  who  have  not  the  needful  knowledge
and  discretion.  She  was  constantly  making  ex-
periments, and  practising"  them  upon  the  girls,
weighing  all  their  food  before  they  ate  it,  holding
that  Graham  flour  and  the  Graham  diet  were  bet-
ter for  them  than  richer  food.  Ten  of  her  pupils
invited  her  to  dine  with  them  at  a  restaurant.  She
accepted  the  invitation,  and  the  excellent  dinner
changed  her  views.  Thereafter  they  were  served
with  more  palatable  food.  In  1833  Miss  Beecher
went  to  Cincinnati  with  her  father,  who  had  ac-
cepted the  presidency  of  Lane  Theological  Semi-
nary, and  in  that  city  she  opened  a  female  semi-
nary, which,  on  account  of  failing  health,  was
discontinued  after  two  years.  She  then  devoted
herself  to  the  development  of  an  extended  plan
for  the  physical,  social,  intellectual,  and  moral
education  of  women,  to  be  promoted  through  a
national  board;  and  for  nearly  forty  years  she
labored  perseveringly  in  this  work,  organizing  so-
cieties for  training  teachers ;  establishing  plans
for  supplying  the  territories  with  good  educators ;
writing,  pleadmg,  and  travelling  with,  persistent
energy  and  earnestness.  Her  object,  as  described
by  herself,  was,  "  to  unite  American  women  in  an
effort  to  provide  a  Christian  education  for  2,000,000
children  in  our  country  "  who  were  destitute  of
schools.  She  made  her  field  of  labor  especially  in
the  west  and  south,  and  sought  the  aid  of  educated
women  throughout  the  land.  She  was  for  many
years  engaged  with  ex-Governor  Slade,  of  Vermont,
in  a  scheme  for  introducing  woman  teachers  into
the  west.  The  name  given  to  the  organization
was  "  The  National  Board  of  Popular  Education  " ;
and  it  was  claimed  that  hundreds  of  the  best  teach-
ers the  west  received  went  there  under  the  patron-
age of  this  system.  To  a  certain  extent  the  plans
succeeded,  and  were  found  beneficial ;  but  the  ca-
reers of  the  teachers  were  mostly  short,  for  they
soon  married.  She  had  a  mind  full  of  original  vigor,
but  without  much  imagination  ;  it  was  perhaps  the
want  of  this  that  made  some  of  her  schemes  im-
practicable. She  had  a  great  deal  of  racy  humor
and  mother-wit,  with  patience,  magnanimity,  and
unbounded  good-nature.  Her  conversation  was
full  of  fresh  comments  on  persons  and  things,
without  the  least  bitterness  or  malice.  It  was  her
rule  to  make  her  own  common  sense  the  standard
of  judgment,  and  she  doubted  the  value  of  any-
thing not  commended  by  that.  She  continued  in
her  old  age  the  accomplishments  of  her  youth,
singing,  and  playing  the  piano  and  the  guitar ;  but
her  performances  were  those  of  a  past  generation,
as  she  had  no  belief  in  modern  or  classic  music.
She  believed  that  what  she  could  not  comprehend
could  not  exist.  It  was  so  also  in  art.  The  work
of  the  masters  and  mediaeval  art  had  no  meaning
for  her.  She  spoke  of  a  house  where  rare  speci-
mens of  art  were  collected  as  "  full  of  Virgins  and
Son,"  with  "  a  picture  of  Christ  all  rubbed  out,"
"a  Psyche  with  the  top  of  her  head  knocked
in,"  and  "  Venus  without  arms." She  occasionally


wrote  verses,  and  was  sometimes  an  attendant  at
women's  conventions  and  congresses.  For  many
years  she  suffered  from  lameness  and  weakness  of
nerve  and  body,  and  all  her  work  was  carried  on
under  great  bodily  difficulties.  In  early  life  she
was  Calvinistic  in  belief,  but  in  her  later  years  be-
came a  communicant  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church.  Miss  Beecher's  published  works  include
"  Letters  on  the  Difficulties  of  Religion "  (Hart-
ford, 1886) ;  "  The  Moral  Instructor  "  (Cincinnati,
1838) ;  "  Treatise  on  Domestic  Economy  "  (Boston,
1842) ;  "  Housekeeper's  Receipt-Book  "  (New  York,
1845) ;  "  Duty  of  American  Women  to  their  Coun-
try" (1845);  "True  Remedy  for  the  Wrongs  of
Women,  with  a  History  of.  an  Enterprise  having
that  for  its  Object "  (Boston,  1851) :  "  Letters  to
the  People  on  Health  and  Happiness  "  (New  York,
1855)  ;  "  Physiology  and  Calisthenics "  (1856) ;
"  Common  Sense  applied  to  Religion "  (1857),  a
book  containing  many  striking  departures  from
the  Calvinistic  theology ;  "  An  Appeal  to  the  Peo-
pb,  as  the  Authorized  Interpreters  of  the  Bible "
(I860) ;  "  Religious  Training  of  Children  in  the
School,  the  Family,  and  the  Church "  (1864) ;
"Woman's  Profession  as  Mother  and  Educator,
with  Views  in  Opposition  to  Woman  Suffrage"
(Philadelphia,  1871);  "Housekeeper  and  Health-
keeper  "  (New  York,  1873) :  and  with  her  sister,  Mrs.
Harriet  Beecher  Stowe,  "The  American  Woman's
Home  "  (New  York,  1869) ;  "  Principles  of  Domestic
Science  as  applied  to  the  Duties  and  Pleasures  of
Home "  (1870) ;  and  also  a  "  Domestic  Receipt-
Book,"  of  which  numerous  editions  have  been  sold.
Apart  from  the  books  relating  to  her  special  edu-
cational purpose,  she  wrote  memoirs  of  her  brother,
George  Beecher  (1844) ;  and  "  Truth  Stranger  than
Fiction"  (Boston,  1850),  an  account  of  an  infelici-
tous domestic  affair  in  which  some  of  her  friends
were  involved.  She  left  several  unpublished  mailu-
scripts  and  an  autobiography  nearly  completed. —
His  eldest  son,  William  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
East  Hampton,  L.  I.,  15  Jan.,  1802.  His  education
was  obtained  principally  at  home,  and  then  he
studied  theology  under  his  father  and  at  Andover.
In  1833  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Yale.  For  many  years  he  was  a  home  mis-
sionary on  the  Western  Reserve,  and  since  has  held
charges  in  Putnam,  Toledo,  and  Chillicothe,  Ohio,
and  in  Reading,  and  North  Brookfield,  Mass. — An-
other son,  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in  East  Hamp-
ton, L.  I.,  27  Aug.,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1822,  studied  theology  at  Andover  and  New
Haven,  became  tutor  in  Yale  in  1825,  and  then  re-
moved to  Boston  to  take  charge  of  the  Park  street
congregation.  Here  he  remained  from  1826  till
1830,  when  he  was  elected  president  of  Illinois  Col-
lege, Jacksonville.  In  1844  he  returned  to  Boston,
as  pastor  of  Salem  street  church,  and  in  1855  he
became  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church  at
Galesburg,  III,  where  he  remained  until  1870.  For
some  years  he  was  professor  of  exegesis  in  the  Chi-
cago Theological  Seminary.  In  1872  he  retired
from  the  ministry  and  removed  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
The  title  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  on  him  by  Mari-
etta College  in  1841.  He  has  been  a  constant  con-
tributor to  periodicals,  was  senior  editor  of  "  The
Congregationalist "  for  the  first  six  years  of  its
existence,  and  after  1870  was  a  regular  contribu-
tor to  the  "  Christian  Union."  His  two  works  on
the  "  Ages  "  gave  rise  to  much  discussion,  and  have
modified  doctrinal  statements  as  to  the  origin  of
human  depravity.  The  central  idea  presented  is,
that  man's  present  life  upon  earth  is  the  outgrowth
of  a  former  life  as  well  as  the  prelude  to  a  future
I  one ; that during  the  ages  a  conflict  has  been


BEECHER


BEECHER


219


going  on  between  good  and  evil,  which  will  not  be
terminated  in  this  life,  but  that  sooner  or  later
all  the  long  strifes  of  ages  will  become  harmonized
into  an  everlasting  concord.  He  has  published
"Address  on  the  Kingdom  of  God"  (Boston,  1827);
"Six  Sermons  on  the  Nature,  Importance,  and
Means  of  Eminent  Holiness  throughout  the
Church"  (New  York,  1835);  "History  of  Alton
Riots  "  (Cincinnati,  1837) ;  "  Statement  of  Anti-
Slavery  Principles  and  Address  to  People  of  Illi-
nois "  (1837) ;  "  Baptism,  its  Import  and  Modes  "
(New  York,  1850);  "Conflict  of  Ages"  (Boston,
1853) ;  "  Papal  Conspiracy  exposed  "  (New  York,
1855) ;  "  Concord  of  Ages  "  (1860) ;  "  History  of
Opinions  on  the  Scriptural  Doctrine  of  Future
Retribution"  (1878).— Another  son,  George,  clergy-
man, b.  in  East  Hampton,  L.  I.,  6  May,  1809 ;  d.
in  Chillicothe,  Ohio,  1  July,  1843,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1828,  after  which  he  studied  theology.
Subsequent  to  his  ordination  in  the  Presbyterian
church  he  filled  pulpits  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and
afterward  at  Chillicothe,  Ohio.  His  death  was
caused  by  an  accidental  discharge  of  a  gun  while
shooting  birds  in  his  own  garden.  See  the  "  Mem-
oirs of  George  Beecher,"  by  his  sister  Catherine
(New  York,  1844).— Another  son,  Henry  Ward,
clergyman,  b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  24  June,  1813  ;
d.  in  "Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  8  March,  1887.  At  an  early
age  he  had  a  strong  desire  for  a  seafaring  life,  which
he  renounced  in  consequence  of  a  deep  religious  im-
pression experienced  during  a  revival.  He  studied
at  the  Boston  Latin-school,  in  Mount  Pleasant  in-
stitute, was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1834,  and  then
studied  theology  at  Lane  seminary,  under  the  tui-
tion of  his  father,  who  was  president  of  flie  institu-
tion. He  first  settled  as  a  Presbyterian  minister
in  Lawrenceburgh,  Indiana,  in  1837,  and  married
Eunice  White,  daughter  of  Dr.  Artemas  Bullard  ;
then  removed  to  Indianapolis  in  1839,  where  he
preached  until  1847.  In  that  year  he  received
a  call  from  Plymouth  church,  a  new  Congrega-
tional society  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  and  almost  from
the  outset  he  began  to  acquire  that  reputation  as  a
pulpit  orator  which  he  maintained  for  more  than
a  third  of  a  century.  The  church  and  congrega-
tion under  his  charge  were  among  the  largest  in
America.  The  edifice  has  a  seating  capacity  of
nearly  3,000.  Mr.  Beecher  discarded  many  of  the
conventionalities  of  the  clerical  profession.  In  his
view,  humor  had  a  place  in  a  sermon,  as  well  as
argument  and  exhortation,  and  he  did  not  hesitate
sometimes  to  venture  so  near  the  comic  that
laughter  was  hardly  to  be  restrained.  He  was
fond  of  illustration,  drawing  his  material  from
every  sphere  of  human  life  and  thought,  and  his
manner  was  highly  dramatic.  Though  his  keen
sense  of  humor  continually  manifested  itself,  the
prevailing  impression  given  by  his  discourses  Was
one  of  intense  earnestness.  The  cardinal  idea  of
his  creed  was  that  Christianity  is  not  a  series  of
dogmas,  philosophical  or  metaphysical,  but  a  rule
of  life  in  every  phase.  He  never  hesitated  to
discuss  from  the  pulpit  the  great  social  and  politi-
cal crimes  of  the  day,  such  as  slavery,  intemper-
ance, avarice,  and  political  abuses.  ''In  1878  he
announced  that  he  did  not  believe  in  the  eternity
of  punishment.  He  now  held  that  all  punishment
is  cautionary  and  remedial,  and  that  no  greater
cruelty  could  be  imagined  than  the  continuance  of
suffering  eternally,  after  all  hope  of  reformation
was  gone ;  and  in  1882  he  and  his  congregation  for-
mally withdrew  from  the  association  of  Congrega-
tional churches,  since  their  theology  had  gradually
changed  from  the  strictest  Calvinism  to  a  com"-
plete  disbelief  in  the  eternity  of  future  punishment.


His  sermons,  reported  by  stenographers,  for  sev-
eral years  formed  a  weekly  publication  called  the
"  Plymouth  Pulpit."  He  early  became  prominent  as
a  platform  orator  and  lecturer,  and  as  such  had  a
long  and  success-
ful career.  His
lectures  came  to
be  in  such  de-
mand, even  at
the  rate  of  $500
a  night,  that  he
was  obliged  to
decline  further
engagements,  as
they  interfered
with  his  minis-
terial duties,  and
for  a  long  time
he  refused  all
applications  for
public  addresses
except  for  some
special  occasion.
In  January,  1859,
he  delivered  an
oration at the

celebration  of  the  centennial  anniversary  of  the
birthday  of  Robert  Burns,  which  is  considered
one  of  his  most  eloquent  efforts.  He  became  a
member  of  the  Republican  party  on  its  forma-
tion, and  delivered  many  political  sermons  from
his  pulpit,  also  addressing  political  meetings,  es-
pecially in  1856,  when  he  took  an  active  part  in
the  canvass,  not  only  with  his  pen  but  by  speak-
ing at  meetings  thoughout  the  northern  states.
During  the  presidential  canvass  of  1884,  Mr.
Beecher  supported  the  Democratic  candidate,  and
by  his  action  estranged  many  of  his  political  ad-
mirers. In  the  long  conflict  with  slavery  he  was
an  early  and  an  earnest  worker.  In  1863  he  visited
Europe,  and  addressed  large  audiences  in  the  prin-
cipal cities  of  Great  Britain  on  the  questions  in-
volved in  the  civil  war  then  raging  in  the  United
States,  with  a  special  view  to  disabuse  the  British
public  in  regard  to  the  issues  of  the  great  struggle.
His  speeches  exerted  a  wide  influence  in  changing
popular  sentiment,  which  previously  had  been
strongly  in  favor  of  the  southern  Confederacy,
and  were  published  in  London  as  "Speeches  on
the  American  Rebellion "  (1864).  In  April,  1865,
at  the  request  of  the  government,  he  delivered  an
oration  at  Fort  Sumter  on  the  anniversary  of  its
fall.  In  1878  he  was  elected  chaplain  of  the  13th
regiment,  N.  G.  S.  N.  Y.,  and  appeared  on  parade
in  the  customary  uniform.  In  1871  one  of  his
parishioners,  Henry  W.  Sage,  founded  a  lecture-
ship of  preaching,  called  "  The  Lyman  Beecher
Lectureship,"  in  Yale  college  divinity  school,  and
the  first  three  annual  courses  were  delivered  by
Mr.  Beecher.  In  the  summer  of  1874,  Theodore
Tilton,  formerly  Mr.  Beecher's  associate,  after-
ward his  successor,  in  the  editorship  of  the  "  In-
dependent," charged  him  with  criminality  with
Mrs.  Tilton.  A  committee  of  Plymouth  congre-
gation reported  the  charges  to  be  without  foun-
dation ;  but  meanwhile  Mr.  Tilton  instituted
a  civil  suit  against  Mr.  Beecher,  laying  his
damages  at  $100,000.  The  trial  lasted  six  months,
and  at  its  close  the  jury,  after  being  locked  up  for
more  than  a  week,  failed  to  agree  on  a  verdict.
They  stood  three  for  the  plaintiff  and  nine  for  the
defendant.  Mr.  Beecher  was  of  stout  build,  florid,
and  of  strong  physical  constitution.  He  was  fond
of  domestic  and  rural  life  ;  a  student  of  nature  ;  a
lover  of  animals,  flowers,  and  gems  ;  an  enthusiast


220


BEECHER


BEECHER


in  music,  and  a  judge  and  patron  of  art.  He  owned
a  handsome  residence  at  Peekskill  on  the  Hudson,
which  he  occupied  during  a  part  of  every  summer.
In  1886  he  made  a  lecturing  tour  in  England,  his
first  visit  to  that  country  after  the  war.  Dur-
ing his  theological  course  in  1836,  for  nearly  a
year  Mr.  Beecher  edited  the  "  Cincinnati  Jour-
nal," a  religious  weekly.  While  pastor  at  In-
dianapolis he  edited  an  agricultural  journal,  "  The
Farmer  and  Gardener,"  his  contributions  to  which
were  afterward  published  under  the  title  "  Plain
and  Pleasant  Talk  about  Fruits,  Flowers,  and
Farming "  (New  York,  1859).  Pie  was  one  of
the  founders  and  for  nearly  twenty  years  an  edi-
torial contributor  of  the  New  York  "Independ-
ent," and  from  1861  till  1863  was  its  editor.  His
contributions  to  this  were  signed  with  an  asterisk,
and  many  of  them  were  afterward  collected  and
published  as  "  Star  Papers ;  or.  Experiences  of
Art  and  Nature  "  (New  York,  1855),  and  as  "  New
Star  Papers ;  or.  Views  and  Experiences  of  Re-
ligious Subjects  "  (1858).  The  latter  has  been  re-
published in  England  under  the  title  of  "Sum-
mer in  the  Soul."  On  the  establishment  of  the
"  Christian  Union  "  in  1870,  he  became  its  editor-
in-chief.  To  a  series  of  papers  in  the  "  New  York
Ledger"  he  gave  the  title  "Thoughts  as  they
Occur,"  by  "  One  who  keeps  his  eyes  and  ears
open,"  and  they  were  afterward  published  under
the  title  of  "Eyes  and  Ears  "  (Boston,  1864).  In
addition  to  the  foregoing,  Mr.  Beecher  published
"  Lectures  to  Young  Men  on  Various  Important
Subjects"  (Indianapolis,  1844,  revised  ed..  New
York,  1850) ;  "  Freedom  and  War :  Discourses
suggested  by  the  Times "  (Boston,  1863) ;  "  Aids
to  Prayer  "  (New  York,  1864) ;  "  Norwood ;  or.  Vil-
lage Life  in  New  England  "  (1867) ;  "  Overture  of
Angels  "  (1869),  being  an  introductory  installment
of  "  Life  of  Jesus  the  Christ ;  Earlier  Scenes "
(1871) ;  "  Lecture-Room  Talks :  A  Series  of  Famil-
iar Discourses  on  Themes  of  Christian  Experience  "
(1870) ;  "  Yale  Lectures  on  Preaching "  (3  vols.,
1872-4) ;  "  A  Summer  Parish :  Sermons  and  Morn-
ing Services  of  Prayer  "  (1874) ;  "  Evolution  and
Religion"  (1885).  Also,  numerous  addresses  and
separate  sermons,  such  as  "  Army  of  the  Republic  "
(1878);  "The  Strike  and  its  Lessons"  (1878);
"  Doctrinal  Beliefs  and  Unbeliefs  "  (1882) ;  "  Com-
rtiemorative  Discourse  on  Wendell  Phillips  "  (1884) ;
"  A  Circuit  of  the  Continent,"  being  an  account  of
his  trip  through  the  west  and  south  (1884) ;  and
"Letter  to  the  Soldiers  and  Sailors"  (1866,  re-
printed with  introduction,  1884).  He  edited
"Plymouth  Collection  of  Hvmns  and  Tunes"
(New  York,  1855),  and  "  Revival  Hymns  "  (Boston,
1858).  Numerous  compilations  of  his  utterances
have  been  prepared,  among  which  are :  "  Life
Thoughts  "  (New  York,  1859),  by  Edna  Dean  Proc-
tor; "Notes  from  Plymouth  Pulpit"  (1859),  by
Augusta  Moore ;  both  of  the  foregoing  have  been  re-
printed in  England ;  "  Pulpit  Pungencies  "  (1866) ;
"  Royal  Truths  "  (Boston,  1866),  reprinted  from  a
series  of  extracts  prepared  in  England  without  his
knowledge  ;  "  Prayers  from  Plymouth  Pulpit "
(New  York,  1867);  "Sermons  by  Henry  Ward
Beecher :  Selected  from  Published  and  Unpub-
lished Discourses,"  edited  by  Lyman  Abbott  (2
vols.,  1868);  "Morning  and  Evening  Devotional
Exercises,"  edited  by  Lyman  Abbott  (1870);  "Com-
forting Thoughts  "  (1884),  by  Irene  Ovington.  JMr.
Beecher  had  completed  the  second  and  concluding
volume  of  his  "  Life  of  Christ,"  which  is  to  be
published  this  year  (1887),  with  a  re-publication  of
the  first  volume.  His  biography  has  been  written
by  Lyman  Abbott  (New  York,  1883). A  new  life,


to  be  written  by  his  son,  William  C.  Beecher,  will
include  an  unfinished  autobiography.  Mr.  Beecher
was  buried  in  Greenwood  cemetery,  and  a  move-
ment was  immediately  begun  for  a  monument,
to  be  paid  for  by  popular  subscription. — Eunice
White,  wife  of  Henry  Ward,  b.  in  West  Sutton,
Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  26  Aug.,  1812,  was  educated
at  Hadley,  Mass.  When  Mr.  Beecher  settled  in  his
pastorate  in  Lawrenceburgh,  Ind,,  he  returned  to
the  east  to  claim  his  bride,  after  an  engagement
extending  over  seven  years.  Mrs.  Beecher  has
been  a  contributor,  chiefly  on  domestic  subjects,  to
various  periodicals,  and  some  of  her  articles  have
been  published  in  book  form.  During  a  long  and
tedious  illness  in  her  earlier  married  life,  she  wrote
a  series  of  reminiscences  of  her  first  years  as  a
minister's  wife,  afterward  published  with  the  title
"From  Dawn  to  Daylight:  A  Simple  Story  of
a  Western  Home  "  (1859),  under  the  pen-name  of
"A  Minister's  Wife."  She  has  also  published
"Motherly  Talks  with  Young  Housekeepers"
(New  York,  1875);  "Letters  from  Florida"  (1878);
"  All  Around  the  House ;  or,  How  to  Make  Homes
Happy"  (1878);  and  "Home"  (1883).— Another
son  of  Lyman,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  7  Oct.,  1815,  studied  at  the  Boston
Latin  School  and  Lawrence  Academy  in  Groton,
Mass.,  and  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1834.  After
a  theological  course  in  Lane  Seminary,  Ohio,  he
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Second  Presbyterian
church  in  Fort  Wayne  in  1844.  He  was  dismissed
in  1851,  and  became  pastor  of  the  First  Congrega-
tional church  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  where  he  remained
three  years.  In  1857  he  took  charge  of  the  First
Congregational  church  in  Georgetown,  Mass.  From
1870  till  1877  he  resided  in  Florida,  where  for  two
years  he  was  state  superintendent  of  public  in-
struction, and  later,  acting  pastor  at  Wysox,  Pa.
Mr.  Beecher  is  an  excellent  musician,  and  he  se-
lected the  music  for  the  "  Plymouth  Collection."
He  has  published  "The  Incarnation,  or  Pictures
of  the  Virgin  and  her  Son"  (New  York,  1849);
"  David  and  his  Throne  "  (1855) ;  "  Pen  Pictures  of
the  Bible"  (1855);  "Autobiography  and  Corre-
spondence of  Lyman  Beecher  "  (1863) ;  "  Redeemer
and  Redeemed  "  (Boston,  1864) ;  "  Spiritual  Mani-
festations "  (1879) ;  and  "  Eden  Tableau  "  (1880).—
Another  son,  Thomas  Kiniiicut,  clergyman,  b.
in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  10  Feb.,  1824,  was  gradu-
ated in  1843  at  Illinois  college,  of  which  his  broth-
er Edward  was  then  president,  was  principal  of
the  Northeast  grammar-school  in  Philadelphia  in
1846-8,  and  then  became  principal  of  the  Hart-
ford (Conn.)  High  School.  Removing  to  Williams-
burg, now  a  part  of  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1852,  he
gathered  and  became  pastor  of  the  New  England
Congregational  church,  and  in  1854  he  removed  to
Elmira,  N.  Y.,  to  take  charge  of  the  Independent
Congregational  church,  afterward  the  Park  church.
He  is  known  as  an  influential  speaker  and  wiiter,
and  is  distinguished  for  philanthropy.  He  wholly
ignores  sectarian  feeling,  and  seeks  to  promote  a
fraternal  spirit  among  the  various  Christian  de-
nominations. Since  his  residence  in  Elmira  he  has
devoted  himself  wholly  to  the  duties  of  a  teacher
of  righteousness  and  religion  in  that  city  and
immediate  vicinity.  For  many  years  he  edited  a
weekly  "Miscellany,"  first  in  the  Elmira  "Ad-
vertiser," and  afterward  in  the  "  Gazette,"  discuss-
ing as  they  came  up  all  the  current  questions  of
the  day.  Among  these,  in  1874,  were  a  series  of
papers  in  which  he  took  the  ground  that  the  peo-
ple of  the  United  States  never  had  been,  and  were
not  at  the  time,  in  favor  of  universal  suffrage.
He has  lectured in the  principal  cities  of the


BEECHEY


BEEKMAN


221


United  States,  and  against  his  wishes  and  counsel
he  has  been  nominated  for  political  oflRce  by  the
greenback,  the  democratic,  the  prohibition,  and
the  republican  parties,  but  has  never  been  elected
to  any  office.  He  was  chosen  chaplain  of  the  141st
New  York  volunteers  in  1868,  and  served  with  the
army  of  the  Potomac  four  months.  He  has  pro-
nounced mechanical  and  scientific  tastes,  and  is
a  lover  of  art  as  well  as  a  keen  critic.  He  made  a
tour  of  England  and  France  in  1853,  visited  South
America  in  1864-'5,  England  again  in  1873,  and
California  in  1884.  He  has  published  in  book
form,  "Our  Seven  Churches"  (New  York,  1870),
a  series  of  lectures,  one  of  which  has  been  widely
circulated  as  a  tract,  with  the  title  "  A  Weil-Con-
sidered Estimate  of  the  Episcopal  Church."  Tlie
other  prints  but  rarely  published  are  sermons  and
lectures  for  the  use  of  the  Park  Church  Bible
School. — Another  son,  James  Chaplin,  clergyman,
b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  Jan.,  1828;  d.  in  Elmira,
N.  Y.,  25  Aug.,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1848,  studied  theology  at  Andover,  and
on  10  May,  1856,  was  ordained  a  Congregational
clergyman.  Until  1861  he  was  chaplain  of  the  Sea-
men's Bethel  in  Canton  and  Hong  Kong,  China.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  chaplain  of  the  1st
New  York  infantrv  (1861-'2) ;  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  141st  (1862-'3) ;  colonel  of  the  35th  U.  S.
colored  troops  (1863-6),  and  was  mustered  out  of
service  in  1866  as  brevet  brigadier-general.  Later,
he  held  pastorates  in  Owego,  N.  Y.  (1867-70);
Poughkeepsie  (1871-'3);  and  Brooklyn  (1881-'2).
After  three  years  of  acute  suffering  because  of  in-
curable hallucinations,  the  shadows  of  which  had
been  hovering  about  him  since  1864,  he  died  by
his  own  hand  at  the  Water  Cure  in  Elmira, —
Charles's  son,  Frederick  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  22  June,  1841 ;  d.  on  the  upper
Republican  river,  Kansas,  17  Sept.,  1868.  He  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1862,  immediately  en-
tered the  military  service,  and  became  successively
sergeant,  second  and  first  lieutenant.  He  was  in
the  battles  of  the  army  of  the  Potomac  from
Fredericksburg  to  Gettysburg ;  was  twice  severely
wounded,  but  could  not  be  persuaded  to  remain
away  from  his  command.  The  severe  nature  of
his  wounds  necessitated  his  transfer  to  the  2d  bat-
talion veteran  reserve  corps,  where  he  served  as
lieutenant  and  acted  as  adjutant-general  under
Gen.  E.  Whittlesey  of  the  Freedmen's  Bureau,
until  commissioned  in  the  regular  army  in  1864.
He  was  transferred  to  the  3d  U.  S.  infantry  in
November,  1864,  and.  made  first  lieutenant  in  July,
1866.  He  served  with  distinction  on  the  western
borders,  and  was  killed  by  the  Indians  while  on  a
scouting  partv  some  distance  from  Fort  Wallace.

BEECHEY,  Frederick  William,  English
geographer,  b.  in  London,  17  Feb.,  1796;  d.  there,
29  Nov.,  1856,  Pie  was  the  son  of  Sir  William
Beechey,  the  artist.  Entering  the  navy  in  1806,
he  saw  some  service  in  the  Channel,  on  the  coast
of  Portugal,  and  in  the  East  Indies,  and  in  1814  was
appointed  to  the  "  Tonnant,"  Sir  Alexander  Coch-
rane's  flag-ship.  He  took  part  in  the  battle  of
New  Orleans,  8  Jan,,  1815,  and  on  10  March  was
made  a  lieutenant  for  his  services  on  that  occa-
sion. On  14  Jan.,  1818,  he  was  appointed  to
the  "  Trent,"  commanded  by  Lieut,  (afterward  Sir
John)  Franklin,  and  acted  as  artist  to  the  Arctic
expedition  of  that  year,  which  he  afterward  de-
scribed in  his  "  Voyage  of  Discovery  toward  the
North  Pole"  (London.  1843).  Beechey  was  em-
ployed on  the  survey  of  the  north  coast  of  Africa
in  1821-'2,  and  published  in  connection  with  his
brother,  Henry  W.  Beechey,  "  Proceedings  of  the


Expedition  to  explore  the  Northern  Coast  of
Africa"  (London,  1828).  He  was  made  com-
mander on  25  Jan.,  182^  in  January,  1825,  was
assigned  to  the  "  Blossom,"  and  for  four  years  was
engaged  in  the  Pacific  and  in  attempting  to  co-
operate with  the  polar  expeditions  from  the  east.
In  August,  1826,  he  went,  in  boats,  as  far  as  lat.
71°  23'  31"  N.,  long.  156°  21'  30"  W„  a  point  only
146  miles  from  Franklin's  extreme  northern  point
reached  about  the  same  time ;  but  as  neither  ex-
plorer knew  of  the  other's  position,  the  opportu-
nity to  cooperate  was  lost.  In  1827  he  was  made
post-captain,  and  discovered  the  harbors  of  Port
Clarence  and  Grantley,  near  Bering  strait,  A
narrative  of  his  vovages  in  the  years  1825-8  was
published  by  him  (London,  1831),  From  1835  till
1847  he  was  chiefly  engaged  in  surveys  on  the  coast
of  South  America  and  Ireland,  and  after  this  he
lived  in  London  until  his  death.  In  1854  he  be-
came rear-admiral  of  the  blue.  In  1855  he  was
elected  president  of  the  geographical  society.

BEEKMAN,  Gerardus,  colonial  governor  of
New  York,  d,  in  New  York  city  about  1728,  He
was  a  physician  and  a  wealthy  land-holder  in  New
York  city,  a  major  under  Jacob  Leisler,  and  a
member  of  his  council  at  the  time  of  the  revolution
of  1688,  After  the  arrival  of  Gov,  Sloughter,  when
Leisler  was  condemned  and  executed  for  treason-
able conduct  in  refusing  to  give  up  the  fort  at  New
York,  Beekman  was  one  of  eight  that  were  con-
demned with  him,  but  recommended  to  the  gov-
ernor's mercy.  He  wrote  several  petitions  for  re-
lease both  to  the  governor  and  the  queen,  saying
in  one  of  them  that  he  wished  to  visit  some  patients
on  Long  Island  who  were  "  very  dangerous."  He
was  at  length  set  at  liberty,  and  in  1700  became  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  a  militia  regiment  under  Gov.
Bellomont.  He  was  a  commissioner  in  the  case  of
the  claim  of  the  Mohecan  Indians  to  land  in  Con-
necticut, and  afterward  a  member  of  Gov.  Corn-
bury's  council.  After  the  removal  of  Gov,  In-
goldsby,  Beekman  was  president  of  tlie  council,
and  acting  governor  until  the  arrival  of  Gov.  Hunt-
er, from  10  April  till  14  June,  1710.  While  hold-
ing this  place  he  granted,  on  his  own  responsibility,
permission  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Freeman  to  officiate  in
the  churches  of  "  Flatbush  and  Brookland,"  jointly
with  the  pastor.  Rev.  Vincentius  Antonides.  The
latter,  and  most  of  his  flock,  objected,  and,  as  Gov.
Beekman  refused  to  withdraw  the  obnoxious  per-
mission, the  council  broke  up.  Soon  after,  Beek-
man had  a  quarrel  on  this  same  subject  with  one
Squire  Filkins,  who,  in  a  letter  dated  June,  1710,
says  that  as  they  were  drinking  wine  together  in
the  ferry-house,  having  just  crossed  the  ferry,  Beek-
man "  gave  me  affronting  words,  calling  me  pitti-
full  fellow,  dog,  rogue,  rascal,  &c,,  which  caused
me,  being  overcome  with  passion,  to  tell  him  that
I  had  a  good  mind  to  knock  him  off  his  horse."
Beekman  was  afterward  a  member  of  Hunter's
council,  holding  that  office  till  his  death,

BEEKMAN,  James  William,  b.  in  New  York
city,  22  Nov.,  1815;  d,  there,  15  June,  1877,  He
was  descended  from  William  Beekman,  who  sailed
with  Peter  Stuyvesant  to  New  Netherlands,  and
was  an  officer  of  the  West  India  company,  and
afterward  an  alderman,  under  English  rule.  After
studying  under  a  private  tutor,  Mr,  Beekman
was  graduated  at  Colunibia  college  in  1834,
and  studied  law  with  John  L,  Mason,  but  never
became  a  member  of  the  bar.  His  father's  death
in  1833  left  him  a  fortune,  and  the  death  of  his
uncle,  James  Beekman,  added  to  this  the  family  es-
tate on  the  East  river  near  Fifty-second  street,  in-
cluding the  old  Beekman  mansion,  a  place  of  his-


222


BEERS


toric  interest  from  its  prominence  in  revolutionary
times.  Tlius  made  independent,  Mr.  Beekman
travelled  extensively,  making  a  careful  study  of  the
workings  of  different  European  governments.  He
was  chosen  state  senator  in  1850,  and  served  two
terms. In 18(51 he,  with  Erastus  Corning  and

Thurlow  Weed,
was  appointed
by  a  meeting
of  conservative
men  in  New
York  to  go
to  Washington
and  urge  Presi-
dent Buchanan
to  relieve  Fort
Sumter.  Mr.
Beekman  was
vice  -  president
of  the  New
York  hospital,
president  of  the
woman's  hospi-
/) ^^  tal,  and a di-

-OL*^ /^/oW^^x.-.^ rector of the
^- ^  New  York  dis-

pensary. He
was  also  one  of  the  early  members  of  the  New  York
historical  society,  before  which  he  delivered  a  cen-
tennial discourse  in  1871  and  read  papers  at  differ-
ent times.  On  4  Dec,  1869,  he  delivered  an  ad-
dress before  the  St.  Nicholas  society  on  "The
Pounders  of  New  York,"  which  was  afterward  pub-
lished (New  York,  1870).  See  "  Memoir  of  James
William  Beekman,"  by  Edward  F.  De  Lancey  (New
York,  1877).  In  February,  1876,  he  published  a
report  on  a  village  of  hospitals.

BEERS,  Ethel  Lynn,  author,  b.  in  Goshen,
Orange  co.,  N.  Y..  13  Jan.,  1827 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,
10  Oct.,  1879.  Her  maiden  name  was  Ethelinda
Eliot,  and  she  was  a  descendant  of  John  Eliot,  the
apostle  to  the  Indians.  Her  earliest  writings  bore
the  pen-name  of  "  Ethel  Lynn,"  and  after  her  mar-
riage with  William  H.  Beers  she  wrote  her  name  as
it  is  now  known.  Her  most  noted  poem  is  "  All
Quiet  along  the  Potomac,"  suggested  by  an  oft-
repeated  despatch  during  the  first  year  of  the  civil
war.  Its  authorship  was  warmly  disputed ;  but,  as
is  usual  in  such  cases,  only  one  of  the  claimants  had
written  other  verses  of  equal  merit.  That  was  Mrs.
Beers,  and  there  is  now  no  further  doubt  as  to  the
genuineness  of  her  title.  The  lines  originally  ap-
peared in  "  Harper's  Weekly  "  for  30  Nov.,  1861,  with
the  caption  "  The  Picket  Guard."  Mrs.  Beers  says
in  a  private  letter  :  "  The  poor  '  Picket '  has  had  so
many  authentic  claimants  and  willing  sponsors,
that  I  sometimes  question  myself  whether  I  did
really  write  it  that  cool  September  morning,  after
reading  the  stereotyped  announcement  '  All  Quiet,'
etc.,  to  which  was  added  in  small  type  '  A  Picket
Shot.'  "  The  most  popular  of  her  other  pieces  are
"  Weighing  the  Baby,"  "  Which  shall  it  be  %  "  and
"  Baby  looking  out  for  Me."  She  had  long  had  a
premonition  that  she  would  not  survive  the  print-
ing of  her  collected  poems,  and  she  died  the  same
day  the  volume  was  issued,  "  All  Quiet  along  the
Potomac,  and  other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1879).

BEERS,  Henry  Aug-nstin,  author,  b.  in  Buf-
falo, N.  Y.,  2  July,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1869,  was  'tutor  there  from  1871  till  1875,
and  was  chosen  assistant  professor  of  English  in
1875.  Pie  spent  five  months  in  study  abroad,
mainly  at  Heidelberg,  and  was  made  full  professor
in  1880.  He  has  published  "  Odds  and  Ends,"  a
collection  of  verses  (Boston,  1878) ;  "  A  Century  of


BEISSEL

American  Literature  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  "  Life  of
N.  P.  Willis"  (Boston,  1885);  "Selections  from
Willis's  Prose  Writings  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  "  The
Thankless  Muse,"  a  collection  of  verses  (Boston,
1885) ;  "  Introduction  to  Readings  from  Buskin ''
(1885) ;  and  "  An  Outline  Sketch  of  English  Litera-
ture "  (New  York,  1886).

BEEST,  Albert  van,  artist,  b.  in  Rotterdam,
Holland,  11  June,  1820;  d.  in  New  York  city,  8
Oct.,  1860.  When  quite  young  he  accompanied
Prince  Henry  of  the  Netherlands  on  a  three  years'
journey  to  the  east.  In  1845  he  came  to  the  IJnited
States,  where  he  made  a  reputation  as  a  marine
painter  and  teacher,  living  mainly  in  Boston  and
New  York.  As  an  artist  he  was  self-taught.
Among  his  pupils  were  William  Bradford  and  R.
Swain  Gifford.

BEHAIM,  or  BEHEM,  Martin,  German  geog-
rapher, b.  in  Nuremberg  about  1459 ;  d.  in  liisbon,
29  July,  1506.  When  a  boy  he  was  much  inter-
ested in  astronomy  and  mathematics.  He  engaged
in  the  manufacture  of  cloth  in  Flanders  in  1477,
and  in  1480  the  commercial  relations  between  that
country  and  Portugal,  as  well  as  his  interest  in  the
maritime  discoveries  of  the  Portuguese,  led  him  to
visit  Lisbon.  Here  he  became  a  pupil  of  Johann
Miiller  (Regiomontanus),  and  a  friend  of  Christo-
pher Columbus,  whose  views  in  regard  to  a  west-
ern passage  to  India  he  supported.  He  was  one  of
a  committee  appointed  in  1483  to  construct  an
astrolabe  and  tables  of  declension,  and  for  his
services  was  made  a  knight  in  1484.  He  was  cos-
mographer  on  the  expedition  of  Diego  Cam,  which
sailed  along  the  west  coast  of  Africa  to  the  mouth
of  the  Congo.  He  established  a  Flemish  colony  at
Fayal  in  1486,  married  the  governor's  daughter,
and  remained  there  until  1490  when,  returning  to
Nuremberg,  he  made  a  large  terrestrial  globe,  on
which  historical  notices  were  written.  This  globe
is  a  valuable  record  of  the  geographical  knowledge
of  his  time.  It  is  made  of  papier-mache,  covered
with  gypsum,  and  over  this  a  parchment  surface
receives  the  drawing.  The  Behaim  family  caused
it  to  be  repaired  in  1825,  and  it  is  now  in  the  city
hall  at  Nuremberg.  Behaim  placed  on  his  globe
an  island  far  to  the  west  of  Fayal,  and  this  is
thought  by  some  to  have  been  on  the  Brazilian
coast,  which  would  make  Behaim,  instead  of  Co-
lumbus, the  discoverer  of  America.  It  is  probable,
however,  that  he  simply  represented  the  general
impression  that  some  such  island  existed.  In  1493
Behaim  returned  to  Portugal,  and,  being  sent  on
a  diplomatic  mission  to  the  Low  Countries,  was
captured  by  English  cruisers,  and  carried  to  Eng-
land, but  afterward  escaped  to  the  continent.  See
Von  Murr's  "  Diplomatische  Geschichte  des  Ritters
M.  Behaim"  (1778),  and  Ghillany's  "Geschichte
des  Seefahrers  Ritter  Martin  Behaim  "  (1853).

BEHRENS,  James,  naturalist,  b.  in  Lubeck,
Germany,  30  June,  1824.  He  was  graduated  at  the
gymnasium  of  Lubeck  in  1841,  and  in  1853  came  1
to  the  United  States.  He  settled  in  California,  j
where  he  has  since  remained,  and  has  become  a
recognized  authority  on  entomology.  Mr.  Behrens
has  contributed  papers  to  scientific  journals,  and
is  a  member  of  many  scientific  societies  in  the
United  States  and  Europe.

BEISSEL,  Johann  Conrad,  German  religion-
ist, b.  in  Eberbach,  in  the  Palatinate,  in  1690 ;  d.
in  Ephrata,  Lancaster  co..  Pa.,  in  1768.  After
studying  theology  at  Halle,  he  became  a  Dunker,
was  forced  to  leave  his  native  country,  and  settled
in  Pennsylvania  about  1720.  While  a  member  of
the  Dunker  society  at  Miihlbach  (Mill  Creek),  Pa.,
he  published  (1725)  a  tract  to  prove  that  the  sev-


BELANGER


BELCHER


223


enth  day  was  the  only  true  sabbath.  This  caused
some  division  in  the  society,  and  Beissel  retired  to
a  hermitage  on  the  banks  of  the  Cocalico.  His
friends  soon  joined  hini,  and  in  1728  they  founded
the  first  community  of  Seventh-day  Dunkers,  or
German  Seventh-day  Baptists.  In  1783  Beissel
established,  at  what  is  now  the  village  of  Ephrata,
a  monastic  society,  which  at  one  time  numbered
nearly  300.  The^  habit  of  the  Capuchins  was
adopted  by  both  sexes,  and  celibacy  was  considered
a  virtue,  though  not  made  obligatory.  Each  mem-
ber adopted  a  new  name,  and  Beissel  was  called
Friedsam,  to  which  the  community  afterward
added  the  title  of  Gottrecht.  He  seems  to  have
been  sincerely  devout,  though  whimsical,  was  an
excellent  musician,  and  composed  and  set  to  music
several  volumes  of  hymns  in  German  and  Latin
(1 766-' 73).  He  also  published  a  mystical  disserta-
tion on  the  fall  of  man,  and  a  volume  of  letters.
He  left  several  curiously  decorated  manuscript  vol-
umes. Soon  after  the  death  of  its  founder,  the
society  at  Ephrata  began  to  decline,  and  few  of  the
original  features  are  now  to  be  found  there.  The
principal  settlement  of  the  sect  founded  by  Beissel
IS  at  Snowhill,  Franklin  co..  Pa.

BELANGEE,  Solomon,  Canadian  voyager,  d.
in  the  parish  of  St.  Jacques  de  I'Archigan,  Quebec,
in  April,  1863.  He  was  one  of  the  French  Cana-
dians that  accompanied  Sir  John  Franklin  in  his
first  expedition  toward  the  north  pole,  and  on  one
occasion  (14  Sept.,  1821)  saved  the  explorer's  life.
A  canoe  in  which  tliey  were  crossing  a  rapid  stream
overset,  and  Belanger  held  it  while  Franklin  and
a  companion  took  their  positions  again.  Owing  to
the  violence  of  the  current,  Belanger  was  obliged
to  remain  in  the  water  and  was  rescued  with  great
difliculty.  On  another  occasion  he  was  accused  by
Franklin  of  attempting  to  persuade  one  of  his
hunters  to  leave  him,  before  which  he  had  been
esteemed  highly  by  the  explorer.  See  Franklin's
"  Jcmrney  to  the  Shores  of  the  Polar  Sea  in  1819-
'22  "  (London,  1823).

BELCHER,  Jonatlian,  governor  of  Massachu-
setts and  New  Jersey,  b.  8  Jan.,  1681 ;  d.  in  Eliza-
bethtown,  N.  J.,  31  Aug.,  1757.  He  was  the  son
of  Andrew  Belcher,  one  of  the  provincial  council,
and  a  gentleman  of  large  estate. Jonathan  was

graduated  at  Harvard  in  1699,  spent  six  years  in
urope,  where  he  visited  the  court  of  Hanover
twice,  and  by  making  the  acquaintance  of  the
Princess  Sophia  and  her  son,  afterward  George  L
of  England,  prepared  the  way  for  his  future  ad-
vancement. Having  returned  to  Boston  and  be-
come a  merchant  there,  in  1729  he  was  sent  to
England  as  the  agent  of  the  colony,  and  on  Gov.
Burnet's  death  in  1730  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Massachusetts  and  New  Hampshire,  which  office
he  held  for  eleven  years,  distinguishing  himself  by
his  hospitality  and  style  of  living.  He  wished  the
assembly  to  vote  him  a  fixed  salary  of  $5,000  a
year,  and  dissolved  it  when  if  refused  to  do  so ;
but,  although  he  tried  to  gain  over  members  of  in-
fluence by  the  distribution  of  offices,  he  was  finally
obliged  to  accept  a  grant  for  one  year  only.  This
contest,  together  with  some  unnecessary  assump-
tion of  authority  and  freedom  in  censure,  gained
him  many  enemies,  and  in  consequence  of  popular
clamor  he  was  removed  in  1741.  It  is  also  claimed
that  his  enemies  resorted  to  unfair  means.  How-
ever this  may  be,  he  easily  succeeded  in  vindicat-
ing himself  at  court,  whither  he  went  immediate-
ly, was  promised  the  first  vacancy  in  America,  and
in  1747  was  appointed  governor  of  New  Jersey.
Here  his  government  was  successful,  for,  though
he  found  the  province  in  confusion  and  the  two


branches  of  the 'legislature  at  odds,  by  prudence
and  firmness  he  secured  comparative  quiet.  He
enlarged  the  charter  of  the  college  of  New  Jersey,
and  was  its  chief  patron  and  benefactor,  giving  it,
among  other  presents,  his  valuable  library.  See
Hutchinson's  "History  of  Massachusetts  Bay"
(Boston,  1764) ;  Smith's  "  History  of  the  Colonv  of
New  Jersey  "  (Burlington,  1705);  Belknap's  "His-
tory of  New  Hampshire  "  (Philadelphia,  1784) ;  and
Belcher's  letters,  1731-40,  in  the  " New  England
Historical  and  Genealogical  Register"  (1865).—
His  son,  Jonathan,  Jurist,  b.  in  Boston,  28  July,
1710;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  29  March,  1776.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1728,  and  then  went
to  London,  where  he  studied  law  in  the  Temple
and  attained  eminence  at  the  English  bar.  He
was  one  of  the  first  settlers  at  Chibucto  (afterward
called  Halifax),  and  in  1760,  being  senior  coun-
cillor, was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  on  the
death  of  Gov.  Lawrence.  He  held  this  office  until
1763,  and  in  1761  was  also  appointed  chief  justice
of  the  province.  In  the  same  year,  as  commander-
in-chief,  he  made  a  treaty  with  the  Indians, — An-
drew, son  of  the  second  Jonathan,  was  a  prominent
citizen  of  Halifax,  and  a  member  of  the  council  in
1801.— Sir  Edward,  son  of  Andrew,  British  explor-
er, b.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,  in  1799 ;  d.  18  March,  1877.
He  entered  the  royal  British  navy  as  a  midshipman
at  the  age  of  thirteen,  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Al-
giers, and  served  afterw;ard  on  the  African  station,
whence  he  returned  home  invalided  in  1820.  Hav-
ing next  served  on  the  North  American  station  for
three  years,  he  was  selected  in  1825  as  assistant
surveyor  to  Capt.  F.  W.  Beechev,  then  about  to
sail  for  Behring  strait  in  the  "  Blossom  "  on  his
voyage  of  discovery.  Belcher  was  made  a  com-
mander in  1829,  was  engaged  in  1830  upon  a  sur-
vey of  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  from  1836  till  1842
on  a  survey  of  the  Pacific  in  H.  M.  S.  "  Sulphur."
During  this  voyage  he  circumnavigated  the  globe
and  did  important  work  in  taking  soundings  of
the  Canton  river.  He  was  rewarded  with  a  com-
mission as  post-captain  and  the  companionship  of
the  order  of  the  bath  in  1841,  and  was  knighted  in
1843.  He  was  engaged  chiefly  on  the  East  Indian
station  from  1842  till  1849,  and  was  severely
wounded  while  assisting  to  subdue  the  pirates  of
Borneo.  In  1852  he  was  appointed  to  command
an  expedition  to  the  Arctic  ocean  in  search  of  Sir
John  Franklin.  This  was  an  unfortunate  appoint-
ment, tor  Belcher,  though  an  able  officer,  was  per-
sonally unpopular,  and  the  expedition  did  not
succeed  in  its  object,  though  it  brought  back  Mc-
Clure's  party,  who  had  been  ice-bound  for  three
years.  Four  of  Belcher's  ships  were  abandoned  in
th^  ice  with  what  has  been  thought  unnecessary
haste.  One  of  these,  the  "  Resolute,"  was  after-
ward found  floating  in  open  water  by  Capt.  Bud-
dington,  of  New  London,  Conn.,  and  was  pur-
chased by  congress,  refitted,  and  presented  to  the
British  government.  On  his  return  Belcher  was
tried  by  court-martial  and  acquitted ;  but  he  was
never  employed  again,  though  he  rose,  in  course  cf
seniority,  to  the  rank  of  admiral  in  1872.  He  was
also  made  a  K.  C.  B.  in  1867.  He  published  a
"  Treatise  on  Nautical  Surveying,"  which  was  long
a  standard  work  (1835) ;  "  Narrative  of  a  Voyage
round  the  World  "  (1843) ;  "  Narrative  of  the  Voy-
age of  H.  M.  S.  Samarang"  (1848);  "The  Last
of  the  Arctic  Voyages"  (1855);  and  "Horatio
Howard  Brenton,  a  Naval  Novel "  (1856).  He  also
edited  Smyth's  "Naval  Word-Book"  (1867).

BELCHER,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Birmingham,
England,  5  April,  1794 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  10  July,
1859. He  was  a  Baptist  clergyman,  and  came  to


234


BELDEN


BELKNAP


the  United  States  in  1844.  He  is  said  to  have
published  more  religious  volumes  than  any  other
author  of  the  present  century,  his  works  number-
ing nearly  200.  He  wrote  lives  of  Whitefield  and
Kobert  Hall ;  "  The  Baptist  Pulpit  of  the  United
States  "  (New  York,  1850) ;  "  The  Clergy  of  Amer-
ica "  (1855) ;  a  "  History  of  lieligious  Denomina-
tions in  the  United  States "  (Indianapolis,  Ind.,
1856);  "Sketches  from  Life";  and  "Poetical
Sketches  of  Biblical  Subjects."  His  last  book  was
"  Hymns  and  their  Authors  "  (Philadelphia,  1859).

BELDEN,  Josiah,  pioneer,  b.  in  Connecticut
in  1815.  He  went  with  one  of  the  earliest  over-
land emigrant  parties,  that  of  1841.  He  was  the
first  mayor  of  San  Jose  in  1850,  was  noted  as  mer-
chant and  politician,  and  took  part  in  the  raising
of  the  American  flag  at  the  time  of  Com.  Jones's
attempted  seizure  of  California  in  1842.

BELEHETZI,  or  BELEJETZI  (bel-e-het'-tee),
king  of  Quiche,  killed  by  order  of  Alvarado  in
1524,  after  the  Spaniards  had  conquered  from  the
Indians  that  part  of  Central  America.  Belehetzi
was  implicated  in  a  great  conspiracy  against  Al-
varado, whom  the  Indians  had  called  to  Utatlan,
under  false  promises  of  peace  and  friendship,  really
intending  a  massacre  of  the  invaders.

BELORANO,  Manuel  (bel-grah'-no),  South
American  patriot,  b.  in  Buenos  Ayres  ;  d.  in  1820.
His  parents  had  emigrated  from  Italy,  and  were
wealthy.  After  completing  his  education  in  the
university  of  Salamanca,  Spain,  young  Belgrano
was  appointed  to  office  in  his  native  city.  There
he  joined  the  revolutionists,  and  was  a  member
of  their  provisional  committee,  elected  25  May,

1810.  He  was  given  the  command  of  an  army  in

1811,  and  was  defeated  by  Spanish  troops  at  Cerro
Porteiio,  near  Paraguari,  in  Paraguay.  The  revo-
lutionary authorities  raised  him  to  the  rank  of
general  in  1812,  and  he  again  undertook  an  unsuc-
cessful expedition  to  annex  Paraguay  to  Buenos
Ayres  ;  but  on  4  Sept.  of  the  same  year  he  gained
a  victory  over  the  royalists  commanded  by  Gen.
Tristan  at  Tueuman, '  and  on  13  Feb.,  1813,  he
again  defeated  that  general  at  Salta.  But  Gen.
Pezuela  attacked  and  routed  the  revolutionary
troops  under  Belgrano,  at  Villapucio,  1  Oct.,  1813,
and  again  at  Ayoma  in  the  same  year.  Belgrano
was  superseded  by  Gen.  San  Martin.

BELKNAP,  George  Eugene,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Newport,  N.  H.,  22  Jan.,  1832.  He  was  ap-
pointed midshipman  from  New  Hampshire,  7  Oct.,
1847 ;  became  passed  midshipman,  10  June,  1853,
master  in  1855;  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  16
Sept.,  1855  ;  lieutenant-commander,  15  July,  1862  ;
and  commander,  25  July,  1866.  As  lieutenant  he
commanded  a  launch  at  the  capture  of  the  Barrier
forts  at  the  mouth  of  the  Canton  river,  China,  in
November,  1856,  and  assisted  in  undermining  and
blowing  up  the  four  forts.  He  commanded  the
boats  of  the  "  St.  Louis  "  at  the  reenforcement  of
Fort  Pickens  in  April,  1861,  and  was  commanding
officer  of  the  iron-clad  "New  Ironsides"  in  her
various  engagements  with  the  fortifications  in
Charleston  harbor  from  1862  till  1864.  He  was
highly  praised  by  Admirals  Dupont  and  Dahlgren
for  ability  in  making  the  attacks  and  managing
his  vessel  under  fire.  In  1864  he  commanded  the
gun-boat  "Seneca"  of  the  North  Atlantic  block-
ading squadron,  and  afterward  the  iron-clad  "  Ca-
nonicus  "  in  the  two  actions  with  Howlett  House
battery  in  December,  1864,  and  in  the  attacks  on
Fort  Fisher  in  that  and  the  following  month.  Aft-
er the  capture  of  the  fort  he  went  to  Charleston,
and  was  present  at  the  evacuation.  He  com-
manded the  same  vessel  in  Admiral  Godon's  expe-


dition to  Havana  in  search  of  the  confederate  iron-
clad "  Stonewall."  His  name  was  associated  with
those  of  Commanders  Parrott  and  Calhoun  and
Lieut.  Weaver  in  a  commendatory  letter  of  Ad-
miral Porter  declaring  that  these  officers  had
given  a  world-wide  reputation  to  the  monitors  by
their  efficient  handling  of  the  new  type  of  vessel.
In  1867-'8  Commander  Belknap  commanded  the
flag-ship  "  Hartford  "  of  the  Asiatic  squadron  ;  in
1869  he  was  on  navigation  duty  at  the  Boston
navy-yard ;  in  1874  he  was  engaged  in  command
of  the  steamer  "Tuscarora"  in  taking  deep-sea
soundings  in  the  North  Pacific  ocean,  with  the  ob-
ject of  finding  a  route  for  a  submarine  cable  be-
tween the  United  States  and  Japan.  He  was  made
commodore,  2  March,  1885,  and  appointed  superin-
tendent of  the  naval  observatory.

BELKNAP,  Jeremy,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  4  June,  1744:  d.  there,  20  June,  1798.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1762,  and,  after
teaching  school  and  studying  theology,  was  or-
dained 18  Feb.,  1767,  pastor  of  the  Congregational
church  in  Dover,  N.  H.  On  4  April,  1787,  he  took
charge  of  the  Federal  street  church,  Boston,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  From  his  fifteenth
year  he  kept  notes  of  his  reading,  and  also  a  diary,
in  a  series  of  curious  interleaved  almanacs.  Soon
after  going  to  Dover  he  began  his  "History  of
New  Hampshire"  (1st  vol.,  Philadelphia,  1784;  2d
and  3d  vols.,  Boston,  1791-2),  which  takes  high
rank  for  accuracy,  thoughtfulness,  and  agreeable
style,  though  the  part  relating  to  the  natural  his-
tory of  the  state  is  worth  little,  owing  to  the  au-
thor's deficient  knowledge.  The  progress  of  the
work  was  somewhat  delayed  by  the  revolution,
during  which  Mr.  Belknap  was  an  ardent  patriot.
The  work  did  not  pay  expenses,  and  the  author
was  granted  the  sum  of  £50  in  its  aid  by  the  legis-
lature of  New  Hampshire.  In  1792  he  was  given
the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  by  Harvard,  and  made  an
overseer  of  the  college.  On  23  Oct.  of  that  year
he  delivered  before  the  Massachusetts  historical
society,  which  he  had  founded  two  years  before,  a
tercentennial  discourse  on  the  discovery  of  Amer-
ica. He  published  a  life  of  Watts  (1793) ;  two  vol-
umes of  "American  Biographies"  (1794,  1798);
and  a  collection  of  psalms  and  hymns  (1795),  of
which  several  were  written  by  himself.  In  1796
he  published  "  The  Foresters,  an  American  Tale,"
a  humorous  apologue,  which  had  originally  ap-
peared in  the  "  Columbian  Magazine,"  and  was  in-
tended to  portray  the  history  of  the  country,  with
special  reference  to  the  formation  of  the  constitu-
tion. He  was  also  the  author  of  many  miscellaneous
pieces,  among  them  several  essays  on  the  African
slave-trade,  to  which  he  was  strongly  opposed.  A
life  of  Dr.  Belknap,  with  selected  letters,  was  pub-
lished by  his  granddaughter  (New  York,  1847).

BELKNAP,  WilHam  Goldsmith,  soldier,  b.
in  Newburgh,  N.  Y.,  7  Sept.,  1794:  d.  near  Fort
Washita,  Tex.,  10  Nov.,  1851.  He  was  a  lieuten-
ant in  the  war  of  1812;  was  wounded  in  the
sortie  from  Fort  Erie  on  17  Sept.,  1814;  became
captain,  1  Feb.,  1822 ;  brevet  major,  1  Feb.,  1832 ;
major,  81  Jan.,  1842 ;  and  was  brevetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 15  March,  1842,  for  his  services  in  the
Florida  war.  In  1828  Capt.  Belknap  established
Fort  Leavenworth  in  Kansas.  For  gallantry  in
Gen.  Taylor's  Rio  Grande  campaign  he  received
the  brevet  of  colonel.  He  acted  as  inspector-gen-
eral at  the  capture  of  Monterey,  became  lieutenant-
colonel  26  Sept.,  1847,  and  was  brevetted  brigadiei-
general  for  services  at  Buena  Vista,  23  Feb.,  1847.
He  was  commandant  at  Fort  Gibson  from  Decem-
ber,  1848,  till May, 1851.— His son, William


BELL


BELL


225


Worth,  lawyer,  b.  in  Newburgh,  N.  Y.,  22  Sept.,
1829;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  12  Oct.,  1890.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton,  studied  law  at  Keokuk,
Iowa,  where  he  settled,  and  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature as  a  democrat  in  1857.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  joined  the  army  as  major  of  the  loth
Iowa  volunteers.  He  was  engaged  at  Shiloh,  Corinth,
and  Vicksburg,  became  prominent  in  Sherman's  At-
lanta campaign,  receiving  promotion  as  brigadier-
general  on  30  July,  1804,  and  was  brevetted  major-
general  on  18  March,  1865.  After  the  war  he  was
collector  of  internal  revenue  in  Iowa  from  1865  till
13  Oct.,  1809,  when  he  was  appointed  secretary  of
war.  This  otlfice  he  retained  during  Gen.  Grant's
second  administration  until  7  March,  1876,  when,
in  consequence  of  charges  of  official  corruption,  he
resigned.  He  was  impeached  and  tried  before  the
senate  for  receiving  bribes  for  the  appointment  of
post-traders,  and  was  acquitted  on  the  technical
ground  of  want  of  jurisdiction.

BELL,  Alexander  Graham,  physicist,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  3  March,  1847.  He  is  a
son  of  Alexander  Melville  Bell,  mentioned  below,
and  was  educated  at  the  Edinburgh  high  school
and  Edinburgh  university,  receiving  special  train-
ing in  his  father's  system  for  removing  impedi-
ments in  speech.  He  removed  to  London  in  1867,
and  entered  the  university  there,  but  left  on  ac-
count of  his  health,  and  went  to  Canada  with  his
father  in  1870.  In  1872  he  took  up  his  residence
in  the  United  States,  introducing  with  success  his
father's  system  of  deaf-mute  instruction,  and  be-
came professor  of  vocal  physiology  in  Boston  uni-
versity. He  had  been  interested  for  many  years  in
the  transmission  of  sound  by  electricity^  and  had
devised  many  forms  of  apparatus  for  the  purpose,
but  the  first  public  exhibition  of  his  invention  was
at  Philadelphia  in  1876.  Its  complete  success  has
made  him  wealthy.  His  invention  of  the  "  pho-
tophone,"  in  which  a  vibratory  beam  of  light  is
substituted  for  a  wire  in  conveying  speech,  has
also  attracted  much  attention,  but  has  never  been
practically  used.  It  was  first  described  by  him
before  the  American  association  for  the  advance-
ment of  science  in  Boston,  27  Aug.,  1880.  After
the  shooting  of  President  Garfield,  Prof.  Bell,  to-
gether with  Sumner  Tainter,  experimented  with
an  improved  form  of  Hughes's  induction  balance,
and  endeavored  to  find  the  exact  location  of  the
ball,  but  failed.  Prof.  Bell  has  put  forth  the  the-
ory that  the  present  system  of  educating  deaf-
mutes  is  wrong,  as  it  tends  to  restrict  them  to  one
another's  society,  so  that  marriages  between  the
deaf  are  common,  and  therefore  the  number  of
deaf-mute  children  born  is  on  the  increase.  His
latest  experiments  relate  to  the  recording  of  speech
by  means  of  photographing  the  vibrations  of  a  jet
of  water.  He  is  a  member  of  various  learned  so-
cieties, and  has  published  many  scientific  papers.
He  has  lived  for  some  time  in  Washington,  D.  C.

BELL,  Alexander  Melville,  educator,  b.  in
Edinburgh,  Scotland,  1  March,  1819.  He  was  edu-
cated under  the  care  of  his  father.  Alexander  Bell,
the  inventor  of  a  method  for  removing  impedi-
ments of  speech.  From  1843  till  1865  he  lectured
in  Edinburgh  at  the  university  and  at  New  college,
and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed  lecturer  at
university  college,  London.  He  removed  to  Can-
ada in  1870,  and  became  instructor  at  Queen's
college,  Kingston.  He  is  the  inventor  of  "  Visible
Speech,"  a  method  of  instruction  in  orthoepy,
which  has  also  been  successfully  used  in  teaching
deaf-mutes  to  speak.  He  has  published  "  Princi-
ples of  Speech  and  Elocution  "  (Edinburgh,  1849) ;
"  Popular  Stenography,"  and  other  books  on  short-

VOL..  I. — 15


hand;  "Visible  Speech  and  Universal  Alphabet-
ics " ;  "  Line  Writing  on  the  Basis  of  Visible
Speech";  "Faults  of  Speakers"  (Salem,  Mass.);
"The  Standard  Elocutionist";  and  other  works.
In  1881  he  removed  to  Washington,  D.  C.  He  now
(1886)  has  in  press,  to  be  published  in  New  York,
"  Essays  and  Postscripts  on  Elocution  " ;  "  Lec-
tures on  Phonetics  " ;  and  "  English  Line  Writing."

BELL,  Charles  H.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York,  15  Aug.,  1798:  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,
19  Feb.,  1875.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  navy  as  mid-
shipman, 12  June,  1812,  and  sei-ved  with  Com.
Decatur  in  1813  and  in  Com.  Chauncey's  squadron
on  Lake  Erie  in  1814.  In  the  war  with  Algiers  he
was  again  with  Decatur  on  board  the  "Macedo-
nian." He  became  a  lieutenant  in  1820,  and  in
1824  commanded  the  schooner  "  Ferret,"  which
capsized  at  sea.  After  remaining  twenty-one
hours  on  the  wreck,  he  was  saved,  with  other  sur-
vivors, by  Com.  McKeever.  He  was  attached  to
the  "  Erie,"  in  the  West  Indies,  in  1829,  and  com-
manded one  of  the  boats  that  cut  out  the  piratical
schooner  "  Federal "  from  under  the  guns  of  the
forts  at  Guadeloupe.  In  1839  he  commanded  the
brig  "  Dolphin,"  which  ascended  an  African  river
and  compelled  a  chief  to  pay  for  goods  taken  from
an  American  vessel.  He  was  promoted  com-
mander on  20  Sept.,  1840,  and  in  1844-'6  com-
manded the  sloop  "Yorktown,"  on  the  coast  of
Africa,  and  captured  three  slavers,  one  of  them
with  903  slaves  on  board.  He  was  commissioned
captain  in  1854.  He  commanded  at  Norfolk  navy-
yard  in  1859,  in  1860  was  assigned  to  the  Mediter-
ranean squadron,  and  was  ordered  home  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  After  the  capture  of
the  British  mail-steamer  "Trent,"  in  November,
1861,  he  was  sent  to  Panama  to  take  command  of
the  Pacific  squadron,  in  anticipation  of  difficulties
with  England,  and  there  he  remained  for  nearly
three  years.  The  rank  of  commodore  was  given
him  16  July,  1862.  He  returned  shortly  before
the  close  of  the  war,  and  was  assigned  to  special
duty  on  the  James  river.  He  took  command  of
the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  in  May,  1865,  and  held
it  three  years.  He  was  commissioned  rear-admiral,
25  July,  1866,  and  placed  on  the  retired  list  after
sixty-two  years  and  eight  months'  service.

BELL,  Charles  Henry,  governor  of  New
Hampshire,  b.  in  Chester,  N.  H.,  18  Nov.,  1823.
His  father,  John  Bell — b.  in  Londonderry,  N.  H.,
about  1765;  d.  in  Chester,  N.  H.,  22  March,  1836—
was  a  brother  of  Gov.  Samuel  Bell,  and  was  him-
self governor  of  New  Hampshire  in  1829-'30.
Charles  Henry  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1844  and  studied  law.  He  has  presided  over  both
branches  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature,  and
from  March  till  June,  1879,  by  the  governor's  ap-
pointment, filled  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
From  1881  till  1883  he  was  governor  of  New
Hampshire,  elected  on  the  republican  ticket.  He
has  practised  law  twenty  years,  during  ten  of
which  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  for  Rocking-
ham CO.,  and  has  been  president  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire historical  society  since  1867.  He  has  pub-
lished "  Men  and  Things  of  Exeter,  N.  H."  (Exeter,
1871);  "Exeter  in  1776"  (1876);  "John  Wheel-
wright "  (published  by  the  Prince  society,  Boston,
1876) ;  "  Phillips  Exeter  Academy  "  (Exeter,  1883);
"  Memorial  of  John  T.  Gilman,  M.  D."  (1885) ;  and
various  addresses.

BELL,  Clark,  lawyer,  b.  in  Rodman,  Jefferson
CO.,  N.  Y.,  12  March,  1832.  He  was  fitted  for  col-
lege at  Franklin  Academy,  Prattsburg,  but  ill
health  prevented  the  completion  of  his  studies.
Subsequently  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to


226


BELL


BELL


the  bar  in  1853,  after  which  he  practised  for  some
time  in  Hammondsport,  and  was  postmaster  there
during  Lincoln's  administration.  Later  he  moved
to  Bath,  N.  Y.,  where  he  followed  his  profession
with  great  success.  In  18(>4  he  removed  to  New
York,  where  he  has  since  resided.  About  this  time
he  became  the  attorney  and  counsel  of  the  Union
Pacific  railway,  and  assisted  in  preparing  the  act
of  congress  under  which  the  road  was  constructed.
He  has  been  employed  in  several  important  suits  in
New  York,  and  as  attorney  for  numerous  corpora-
tions and  organizations.  Mr.  Bell  was  the  originator
and  president  of  the  "  Saturday  Night  Club."  Since
1870  he  has  devoted  special  attention  to  m.edical
jurisprudence,  having  in  that  year  joined  the  Medi-
co-legal Society  of  New  York.  For  six  years  he  was
its  president,  and  its  success  is  largely  due  to  his
energy.  In  1883  he  founded  the  "  Medico-Legal
Journal,"  and  is  still  its  editor.  His  writings  on
medical  jurisprudence  include  the  inaugural  and
retiring  addresses  during  the  years  he  was  president
of  the  medico-legal  society,  and  also  the  following-
named  pamphlets :  "  The  Coroner  System  and  its
Needed  Reforms  "  (1881) ;  "  Suicide  and  Legisla-
tion" (1882);  "The  Rights  of  the  Insane"  (1883);
"  Madness  and  Crime  "  (1884) ;  "  Shall  we  hang  the
Insane  who  commit  Homicide  1 "  (1885) ;  and  "  Clas-
sification of  Mental  Diseases  as  a  Basis  of  Insan-
ity" (1886).  He  has  also  contributed  largely  to
the  daily  press.

BELL,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland,  about
1832.  He  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1853.
During  the  civil  war  he  served  as  assistant  in  the
organization  of  the  subsistence  department  for  the
Manassas  campaign,  as  principal  assistant  com-
missary to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  in  charge
of  subsistence  depots,  and  as  chief  of  commissariat
of  the  departments  of  Washington  and  the  Poto-
mac. On  9  April,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  briga-
dier-general for  services  during  the  war.

BELL,  Henry  Haywood,  naval  officer,  b.  in
North  Carolina,  about  1808 ;  drowned  at  the  mouth
of  Osaka  river,  Japan,  11  Jan.,  1868.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  midshipman  from  North  Carolina  in
August,  1823,  and  during  more  than  forty-five
years  of  service  saw  much  severe  fighting.  He
was  on  board  of  the  •*  Grampus  "  when  she  was  en-
gaged in  clearing  the  coast  of  Cuba  of  pirates.  He
was  connected  with  the  East  India  squadron  for
many  years,  and  commanded  one  of  the  vessels  of
the  squadron  which,  in  November,  1856,  captured
and  destroyed  the  four  barrier  forts  near  Canton,
China.  Early  in  the  civil  war  he  was  appointed
fleet-captain  of  tlie  Western  Gulf  squadron.  At
the  capture  of  New  Orleans  he  commanded  one  of
the  three  divisions  of  the  fleet,  and  was  sent  to  take
formal  possession  of  the  city  by  raising  the  U.  S.
flag  over  the  custom-house  and  city  hall.  For  a
time  in  1863-'4,  after  the  recapture  of  Galveston
by  the  Confederates,  he  was  in  command  of  the
Western  Gulf  blockading  squadron.  In  July,  1865,
he  was  ordered  to  the  command  of  the  East  India
squadron,  his  rank  being  then  that  of  commodore.
In  July,  1866,  he  was  promoted  to  be  rear-admiral,
and  in  1867  he  was  retired  ;  but  Rear- Admiral  S.
C  Rowan,  who  was  to  have  relieved  him,  had  not
arrived  when  he  was  drowned  in  attempting  to  en-
ter the  Osaka  river  in  a  boat  from  the  "  Hartford,"
his  flag-ship His  widow  died  in  1886.

BELL,  Hiram  Parks,  lawyer,  b.  in  Jackson  co.,
Ga.,  27  Jan.,  1827.  He  received  an  academic  edu-
cation, taught  school  for  two  years,  read  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1849,  and  has  since  prac-
tised at  Gumming,  Ga.  He  was  a  candidate  for
presidential  elector  on  the  Bell  ticket  in  186C,  and


opposed  the  secession  ordinance  in  the  convention
of  1861.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate  in
1861,  and  resigned  to  enter  the  confederate  army,
being  commissioned  captain  in  March,  1862.  lie
became  colonel  of  the  43d  Georgia  regiment,  was
dangerously  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Chickasaw
Bayou,  Miss.,  29  Dec,  1862,  and  resigned  soon  af-
terward. He  was  a  member  of  the  Confederate
congress  in  1864  and  1865,  and  served  in  the  U.S.
House  of  Representatives  from  1873  till  1875,  and
again  from  1877  till  1879.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  St.  Louis  convention  of  1876,  which  nominated
Mr.  Tilden  for  the  presidency.  In  congress  Mr.
Bell  favored  using  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of  pub-
lic lands  for  educational  purposes.

BELL,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1796;
d.  in  1872.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in
1810,  was  graduated  at  the  university  of  Pennsyl-
vania in  1817,  was  for  several  years  a  lecturer  on
the  institutes  of  medicine  in  the  Philadelphia  med-
ical institute,  and  afterward  professor  of  the  theory
and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  medical  college  of
Ohio.  He  was  widely  known  as  a  lecturer  and
popular  medical  writer.  His  principal  works  are
"  Baths  and  Mineral  Waters  "  (Philadelphia,  1831);
"  Health  and  Beauty  "  (1838) ;  "  Regimen  and  Lon-
gevity "  (1842) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Practice  of  Phys-
ic "  (4th  ed.,  1848) ;  "  Baths  and  the  Water  Regi-
men "  (1849) ;  and  "  Mineral  and  Thermal  Springs
of  the  United  States  and  Canada  "  (1855).  Dr.  Bell
was  editor  of  several  medical  journals.

BELL,  John,  statesman,  b.  near  Nashville,
Tenn.,  15  Feb.,  1797;  d.  at  Cumberland  Iron
Works,  Tenn.,  10  Sept.,  1869.  His  father  was  a
farmer  in  fair  circumstances.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Cumber-
land college  (now
the  university
of  Nashville)  in
1814,  studied  law,
settled  at  Frank-
lin, Tenn.,  and
was  elected  to
the  state  senate
in  1817.  Declin-
ing a  re-election,
he  adhered  to  his
profession  until
1827,  when,  after
an  excited  can-
vass, he  was  elect-
ed to  congress
over  Felix  Grun-
dy, by  a  thou-
sand majority,
although  Grundy

had  the  support  of  Gen.  Jackson,  then  a  presi-
dential candidate.  Bell  was  re-elected  six  times,
serving  in  the  house  of  representatives  until  1841,
and  for  ten  years  he  was  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  Indian  affairs.  He  was  at  first  a  free-
trader, but  changed  his  views  and  became  an
earnest  protectionist.  He  was  opposed  to  nullifi-
cation, and,  although  voting  against  the  bill  to
charter  the  United  States  bank  in  1832,  he  pro-
tested against  the  removal  of  the  deposits,  and
this  course  led  to  a  breach  between  him  and  Presi-
dent Jackson.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the
whig  party.  This  change  was  marked  by  his  elec-
tion in  1834  to  the  speakership  of  the  house,  m  op-
position to  James  K.  Polk,  whom  the  democrats
supported.  He  joined  with  Judge  White  in  the
anti-Van  Buren  movement  in  Tennessee,  which
completed  his  sins  in  the  estimation  of  President
Jackson,  who  could  not,  however,  prevent  his  re-


BELL


BELL


227


turn  to  congress,  as  his  popularity  in  his  district
remained  unshaken.  When  petitions  for  the  abo-
lition of  slavery  in  the  District  of  Columbia  were
S resented  in  the  house  of  representatives  in  1886,
Ir.  Bell  voted  to  receive  them,  and  he  also  opposed
the"Atherton  gag"  in  1838.  In  this  course  he
was  supported  by  his  constituents,  though  assailed
in  his  position.  President  Harrison  made  him
secretary  of  war  in  1841,  but  he  resigned  with  the
rest  of  the  cabinet  (Mr.  Webster  only  excepted)
when  President Tyler  separated  from  the  whig

Earty.  Declining  the  U.  S.  senatorship,  offered
im  by  the  Tennessee  legislature,  he  remained  in
'retirement  until  1847,  when  he  was  chosen  to  the
state  senate  and  immediately  afterward  to  the  na-
tional senate,  where  he  rernained  until  3  March,
1859. Hfe  was  prominent  in  his  opposition  to  the

Eolicy  of  annexation.  When  the  Kansas-Nebraska
ill  was  brought  forward,  in  1854,  Mr.  Belf  opposed
its  passage  with  all  his  power,  not  only  as  violating
the  Missouri  compact,  to  which  the  honor  of  the
south  was  pledged,  but  as  unsettling  the  compro-
mise of  1850,  to  which  both  the  great  parties  had
solemnly  subscribed.  Four  years  later  he  was
equally  earnest  in  his  opposition  to  the  Lecompton
constitution  that  had  been  framed  for  Kansas.  In
1860  Mr.  Bell  was  nominated  for  the  presidency
by  the  "  constitutional  union "  party,  Edward
Everett  receiving  the  nomination  for  the  vice-
presidency.  This  ticket  had  no  chance  of  success,
but  it  was  well  supported,  receiving  the  electoral
votes  of  Virginia,  Kentucky,  and  Tennessee.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  Mr.  Bell  was  one  of
those  who  condemned  secession,  but  were  also  op-
posed to  all  "coercion."  On  18  April,  1861,  with
seven  other  citizens  of  Tennessee,  he  issued  an  ad-
dress recommending  his  state  to  preserve  an  armed
neutrality,  and  on  23  April,  in  a  speech  at  Nash-
ville, he  favored  standing  by  the  southern  states.
.  BELL,  Robert,  Canadian  geologist,  b.  in  To-
ronto, Canada,  3  June,  1841.  He  was  educated  at
the  university  of  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  and  at  Mc-
Gill  university,  Montreal,  where  he  received  the  de-
gree of  C.  E.  in  1861,  M.  D.  in  1878,  and  B,  A.  Sc.
in  1884.  Queen's  university  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1883.  He  has  been  connected  with
the  geological  survey  of  Canada  since  1856,  and
was  appointed  assistant  director  of  the  survey
about  1877.  He  has  been  longer  in  the  service
than  any  other  member  of  the  staff.  From  1 863  till
1868  he  was  professor  of  chemistry  and  the  natu-
ral sciences  in  Queen's  university.  He  has  travelled
extensively  through  Canada  in  connection  with  the
geological  survey.  He  strongly  advocated  the
building  of  the  Canada  Pacific  railway  in  1869,
since  1877  has  favored  the  opening  of  the  Hud-
son bay  route,  and  has  surveyed  the  principal
water-ways  between  Hudson  bay  and  the  great
lakes,  part  of  both  shores  of-  Hudson  bay,  and
various  rivers  in  the  province  of  Quebec.  In  1884
he  accompanied  the  Hudson  bay  expedition  in
the  "  Neptune "  as  scientist  and  medical  officer,
and  made  a  valuable  collection  of  geological  and
other  specimens.  Dr.  Bell  has  taken  much  inter-
est in  Canadian  university  affairs.  He  was  the
graduates'  representative  fellow  in  McGill  univer-
sity, from  1880  till  1886,  and  was  one  of  the  eighty
original  fellows  of  the  Canadian  royal  society.
He  has  been  a  life  fellow  of  the  geological  society
of  London,  England,  since  1865,  and  is  a  member  of
several  other  learned  societies.  He  published  re-
ports on  geology  and  natural  history  in  the  prog-
ress reports  of  the  geological  survev,  nearly  everv
year,  from  1857  till  1885 ;  numerous  articles  in
American,  Canadian,  and  English  journals,  on  ge-


ology, mining,  geography,  natural  history,  medi-
cine, and  forestry,  from  1859  till  1886 ;  and  wrote
the  chapter  on  the  progress  of  science  in  ('anada,
in  the  "Dominion  Annual  Register,"  from  1878
till  1884,  inclusive.

BELL,  Samuel,  governor  of  New  Hampshire,
b.  in  Londonderry,  N.  H.,  9  Feb.,  1770;  d.  in  Ches-
ter, N.  H.,  23  Dec,  1850.  His  family  emigrated
from  Scotland  to  Ireland,  whence  his  grandfather,
John  Bell,  came  to  New  Hampshire  in  1722.  Sam-
uel worked  on  his  father's  farm  when  a  boy,  and
then  went  to  Dartmouth  college,  graduating  in
1793.  He  studied  law,  and  in  1796  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  where  he  attained  distinction.  He  was
sent  to  the  legislature  in  1804,  was  twice  re-elected,
serving  till  1808,  and  during  his  last  two  terms  he
was  speaker.  In  1807  he  declined  the  office  of  at-
torney-general, and  sat  in  the  state  senate  for  a
year.  He  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council
in  1809,  and  from  1816  till  1819  judge  of  the  state
supreme  court.  He  then  served  five  successive
terms  as  governor,  from  1819  till  1823,  and  from
4  March,  1823,  till  3  March,  1835,  was  a  member
of  the  U.  S.  senate.  In  1835  he  retired  from
public  life  to  his  farm  in  Chester,  N.  H.  Gov.
Bell  had  five  sons  that  became  eminent. — His
son,  Samuel  Dana,  jurist,  b.  in  Francestown,
N.  H.,  9  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  31
July,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1816,  read  law  with  George  Sullivan,  of  Exeter,
and  began  practice  in  Meredith.  He  removed  to
Chester,  N.  H.,  in  1820,  ten  years  later  to  Concord,
and  in  1839  to  Manchester,  where  he  lived  until
his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
about  1825,  and  for  several  years  clerk  of  that
body,  was  solicitor  for  Rockingham  co.  from  1823
till  1828,  and  in  1830,  1842,  and  1867  was  one  of
the  commissioners  appointed  to  revise  the  state
statutes.  He  was  appointed  justice  of  the  supe-
rior court,  and  in  1855,  on  the  reorganization  of
the  court,  chosen  justice  of  the  supreme  court.  In
1859  he  was  appointed  chief  Justice  of  the  same
court,  which  office  he  resigned  1  Aug.,  1864.  In
1861  he  was  the  unsuccessful  democratic  candidate
for  congress,  in  the  2d  New  Hampshire  district.
He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Dartmouth
college  in  1854.  He  was  one  of  the  early  members
of  the  New  Hampshire  historical  society,  and  the
establishment  of  the  Manchester  public  library
was  due,  in  a  large  measure,  to  his  personal  efforts.
— Another  son,  John,  a  physician  of  great  prom-
ise, was  b.  5  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  La  Fouche,  La..  29
Nov.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1819,
studied  medicine  in  Boston  and  Paris,  and  received
his  diploma  from  Bowdoin  in  1822.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  anatomy  at  the  university  of  Vermont,
and  editor  of  the  "  New  York  Medical  and  Surgical
Journal." — Another  son,  James,  senator,  was  b.  in
Francestown,  N.  IL,  13  Nov.,  1804;  d.  in  Laconia,
N.  H„  26  May,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1822,  and  studied  law  with  his  brother,  Samuel
Dana  Bell,  and  afterward  at  the  Litchfield,  Conn.,
law  school.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1825,
and  began  to  practise  at  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  in  1831
he  removed  to  Exeter,  N.  H.,  and  in  1846  repre-
sented that  town  in  the  legislature.  In  that  same
year  he  removed  to  Gilford,  where  he  took  charge
of  the  enterprise  of  damming  the  outlets  of  Lake
Winnipiseogee  and  other  lakes,  so  that  the  large
mills  on  the  Merrimac  might  not  suffer  from  a  di-
minished water-supply  during  the  dry  season.  By
prudent  management  he  gained  over  those  prop-
erty-owners whose  interests  seemed  to  be  threat-
ened, and  the  scheme  was  successful.  He  was  a
member  of  the  state  constitutional  convention  in


328


BELL


BELLEROSE


1850,  and  in  1854  and  1855  the  unsuccessful  whig
candidate  for  governor.  In  1855  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  served  until  his
death. — Another  son,  Luther  Vose,  physician,  b.
in  Chester,  N.  H.,  20  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  camp  near
Budd's  Ferry,  Md.,  11  Feb.,  1802,  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1823,  and,  after  studying  medi-
cine with  his  elder  brother  John  in  New  York
city,  received  his  diploma  from  Dartmouth  in
1826,  He  began  to  practise  in  New  York,  but  re-
turned to  New  Hampshire  after  his  brother's  death
in  1830.  He  became  noted  as  a  practitioner  and
writer,  taking  two  Cambridge  Boylston  prizes  by
his  essays  before  he  was  thirty  years  of  age.  One
of  his  earlier  operations,  the  amputation  of  the
femur,  was  successfully  performed,  in  default  of
any  other  accessible  instruments,  with  the  patient's
razor,  a  tenon-saw,  and  a  darning-needle  for  a
tenaculum.  Dr.  Bell  early  became  interested  in
the  establishment  of  hospitals  for  the  insane,  and
was  elected  twice  to  the  legislature  for  the  defence
of  his  favorite  plan.  Although  he  was  not  suc-
cessful, he  brought  himself  into  public  notice,  and
in  1837  was  chosen  superintendent  of  the  McLean
insane  asylum  at  Charlestown,  Mass.  In  1845,  at
the  request  of  the  trustees  of  the  Butler  hospital
for  the  insane,  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  he  visited  Eu-
rope for  the  purpose  of  studying  recent  improve-
ments in  lunatic  asylums,  and,  after  three  months'
absence,  completed  the  plan  of  their  present  build-
ing. While  at  Charlestown,  he  brought  to  notice
a  form  of  disease  peculiar  to  the  insane,  which  is
now  known  as  "  Bell's  disease,"  and  was  also  called
upon  frequently  to  testify  in  the  courts  as  an  ex-
pert. In  1850  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  coun-
cil, and  in  1853  of  the  convention  for  revising  the
state  constitution.  In  1852  he  was  nominated  by
the  whigs  for  congress,  and  in  1856  for  governor  of
the  state,  but  was  defeated  both  times.  In  1856
he  resigned  his  place  in  Charlestown,  and  when
the  civil  war  began  he  entered  the  army  as  sur-
geon of  the  11th  Massachusetts  volunteers.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  medical  director  of
Hooker's  division.  Dr.  Bell  published  "An  At-
tempt to  investigate  some  Obscure  Doctrines  in
Relation  to  Small-Pox  "  (1830),  and  "  External  Ex-

Eloration  of  Diseases"  (1836),  and  also  described
is  investigations  of  alleged  spiritual  manifesta-
tions.— Another  son,  Loiiis,  soldier,  was  b.  in
Chester,  N.  H.,  in  1836 ;  d.  near  Fort  Fisher,  N.  C,  16
Jan., 1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1853,  and
began  the  practice  of  law  at  Farmington,  N.  H.
In  1860  he  was  appointed  solicitor  for  Stratford  co.
In  April,  1861,  he  was  offered  the  captaincy  of  a
company  of  the  1st  New  Hampshire  regiment  of
three  months'  men,  and  served  his  term  of  enlist-
ment. Returning  home,  he  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  4th  New  Hampshire  volun-
teers, and  became  colonel  in  March,  1862.  Col.
Bell  was  for  some  time  a  member  of  Gen.  Thomas
W.  Sherman's  staff,  and  was  inspector-general  of
the  department  of  the  south  from  November,
1861,  till  March,  1862.  Prior  to  the  Wilmington
expedition  he  had  been  several  times  temporarily
a  brigade  commander,  and  had  participated  in  the
engagements  at  Pocotaligo  (21  Oct.,  1862)  and  Fort
Wagner  (July,  1863).  In  the  attack  on  Fort  Fish-
er (15  Jan.,  18135),  he  commanded  a  brigade  of  Gen.
Ames's  division,  and  was  mortally  wounded  while
leading  his  men  in  an  assault  upon  one  of  the
traverses  of  that  work.  He  died  on  the  day  fol-
lowing the  engagement. — Samuel  Dana's  son,  Sam-
uel Newell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chester,  N.  H.,  25  March,
1829,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1847,  was  a
member  of  the  42d  and  44th  congresses,  and  in


1874  was  appointed  by  the  governor  and  council
chief  justice  of  the  superior  court,  but  declined.
He  retired  from  practice  in  1876.

BELLAMY,  Emily  Whitfield,  author,  b.  in
Quincy,  Gadsden  co.,  Fla.,  17  April,  1839.  Her
maiden  name  was  Croom.  She  was  educated  at
Spingler  institute.  New  York  city,  taught  in  a  semi-
nary for  girls  in  Eutaw,  Ala.,  contributed  to  peri-
odicals short  prose  articles  and  poems,  and  has  pub-
lished, under  the  pen-name  of  "  Kampa  Thorpe,"
two  novels,  "  Four  Oaks "  (New  York,  1867),  and
"  Little  Joanna  "  (1876).

BELLAMY,  John,  publisher.  He  was  a  Lon-
don bookseller,  who  issued  Mourt's  "Journal  of  the
Plymouth  Colony  "  (1622),  and  from  that  time  was
for  twenty-five  years  the  principal  publisher  of
books  relating  to  New  England.

BELI4AMY,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Cheshire,
Conn.,  in  1719 ;  d,  in  Bethlehem,  Conn.,  6  March,
1790.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1735,  and
when  only  eighteen  years  old  licensed  to  preach
by  the  association  of  JS^ew  Plaven  co.  He  supplied
for  some  time  the  pulpit  of  the  church  at  Bethle-
hem, Conn,,  was  ordained  its  pastor  in  1740,  and
remained  there  until  his  death.  During  the  re-
vival of  1742  he  preached  as  an  itinerant  in  Con-
necticut and  the  neighboring  colonies,  and  after
the  excitement  was  over  he  returned  to  his  parish
and  established  a  divinity  school,  which  soon  be-
came noted.  Many  of  the  most  eminent  clergy-
men in  New  England  were  trained  by  him.  His
system  of  divinity  resembled  that  of  Jonathan  Ed-
wards, with  whom  he  was  very  intimate.  His
method  of  instruction  was  peculiar.  He  first  gave
out  questions,  indicating  at  the  same  time  a  course
of  reading  that  would  enable  his  pupils  to  answer
them,  and  then,  after  examining  and  assisting  the
students  constantly  in  their  work,  he  required
them  to  write  essays  on  the  points  that  had  occupied
their  attention.  He  also  encouraged  them  to  read
the  works  of  the  most  acute  and  learned  opponents
of  Christianity.  In  1768  he  received  the  degree  of
D.  D.  from  the  university  of  Aberdeen,  Scotland.
Dr.  Bellamy  was  a  man  of  commanding  presence
and  possessed  much  natural  humor.  Plis  works
are :  ^'  True  Religion  Delineated  "  (1750) ;  "  Theron,
Paulinus,  and  Aspasia,"  a  collection  of  letters  and
dialogues  (1759);  "A  Letter  to  Scripturista "
(1760) ;  "  The  Nature  and  Glory  of  the  Gospel "
(1762) ;  "  The  Law  our  Schoolmaster  "  (1762) ;  "  The
Half- Way  Covenant"  (1769);  "Four  Dialogues
between  a  Minister  and  his  Parishioner"  (1769);
and  a  large  number  of  sermons.  An  edition  of
his  entire  works  appeared  after  his  death  (3  vols.,
New  York,  1811),  and  another,  with  a  memoir  by
Dr.  T.  Edwards,  was  published  by  the  doctrinal
tract  society  (2  vols.,  1850).

BELLEROSE,  Joseph  Hyacinthe,  Canadian
senator,  b.  in  Three  Rivers  in  1820.  He  has  been
long  and  prominently  connected  with  the  volun-
teer militia  in  Lower  Canada,  being  the  first  to
organize  companies  in  the  rural  districts  after  the
passing  of  the  militia  act  of  1854.  and  later  became
lieutenant-colonel,  commanding  Laval  reserve  mili-
tia. In  1858  he  accepted  a  captaincy  in  the  100th
regiment  of  the  British  army,  but  soon  resigned.
He  was  elected  for  Laval  as  a  conservative,  and
represented  it  in  the  Canada  assembly  from  1803
till  1867,  and  from  that  date  until  1873  (when  he
was  elected  to  the  senate)  represented  the  same
constituency  in  the  house  of  commons.  He  also
represented  Laval  in  the  Quebec  assembly  froni
the  union  (1867)  until  the  general  election  in  1875,
when  he  retired.  During  the  whole  of  that  time
he  had  been  chairman  of  the  contingent  commit-


BELLINGHAM


BELLOMONT


229


tee,  and  as  such  effected  great  reductions  in  the
expenses  of  the  house.  On  two  occasions  he  de-
clined important  appointments  under  government,
and  after  the  death  of  Sir  George  E.  Cartier  re-
fused a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  principally  on  account
of  the  Pacific  railway  changes  then  pending.

BELLINGHAM,  Richard,  colonial  governor
of  Massachusetts,  b.  in  England  in  1592  ;  d.  7  Dec,
1672.  He  was  a  lawyer,  and  one  of  the  original
patentees  of  the  colony.  He  came  to  Boston  in
1634,  was  one  of  a  committee  of  seven  to  divide
the  town-lands,  and  in  1635  made  deputy-gov-
ernor. In  1641  he  was  elected  governor,  in  op-
position to  Winthrop,  by  a  majority  of  only  six
votes.  He  was  chosen  again  in  1654,  and  again  in
May,  1665,  after  the  death  of  Gov.  Endicott,  con-
tinuing in  office  for  the  remainder  of  his  life.  He
served  altogether  thirteen  years  as  deputy-gov-
ernor and  ten  years  as  governor.  In  1664  he  was
chosen  major-general,  and  in  the  same  year  the
four  commissioners  sent  by  Charles  II.  to  inquire
into  the  state  of  the  colony  ordered  him,  with
others  who  were  obnoxious  to  the  duke  of  York,
to  go  to  England  and  account  for  his  conduct.
By  authority  of  the  general  court,  however,  he  re-
fused compliance  with  this  command,  and  the
king  was  pacified  by  the  present  of  a  ship-load  of
masts.  After  the  death  of  his  wife,  in  1641,  Bel-
lingham  married  again,  performing  the  ceremony
himself.  For  this  reason,  and  because  the  banns
were  not  properly  published,  he  was  prosecuted  for
violating  the  law,  but  escaped  by  refusing  to  leave
the  bench,  and  thus  officiating  at  his  own  trial.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the  only  surviving
patentee  of  the  colony.  His  will  provided  that,
after  the  decease  of  his  wife,  of  his  son  by  a  former
wife,  and  of  his  granddaughter,  the  bulk  of  his
property  should  be  spent  for  the  maintenance  "  of
godly  ministers  and  preachers"  attached  to  the
principles  of  Congregationalism ;  but  this  will  was
&et  aside  by  the  general  court  as  interfering  with
the  rights  of  his  family.  Bellingham  was  very  ob-
stinate, but  a  man  of  integrity,  and,  although  con-
tinually in  conflict  with  his  fellow-officials,  they
respected  his  motives.  He  was  opposed  to  innova-
I  tions  in  religion,  and  especially  severe  toward  the
Quakers.  At  times  he  suffered  from  aberration
of  mind.  His  sister,  widow  of  William  Hibbens,  an
assistant,  was  executed  as  a  witch  in  June,  1656.

BELLMARE,  Raphael,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Yamachiche,  Quebec,  22  Feb.,  1821.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  college  of  Nicolet,  in  which  institution
he  was  professor  of  belles-lettres  in  1845-7.  After
leaving  college  he  edited  "  La  Minerve  "  newspaper
from  1847  till  1855,  and,  while  acting  in  this  ca-
pacity, ably  supported  the  cause  of  religious  in-
struction in  the  schools,  in  opposition  to  those  who
desired  their  secularization.  At  the  confederation
of  the  provinces  he  was  appointed  inspector  of  in-
land revenue,  district  of  Montreal.  Mr.  Bellmare
assisted  in  organizing  the  Canadian  zouaves,  which
corps  distinguished  itself  in  the  papal  service  dur-
ing the  troubles  in  Italy.  He  is  a  corresponding
member  of  la  societe  des  antiquaires  de  Norman-
die,  is  one  of  the  founders  of  the  societe  histo-
rique  de  Montreal,  is  an  indefatigable  worker  in
the  field  of  historical  research,  and  possesses  a
valuable  collection  of  rare  books.

BELLO,  Andres  (bayl'-yo),  Spanish-American
poet,  b,  in  Caracas,  Venezuela,  30  Nov.,  1780;  d.
in  October,  1865.  When  the  Venezuelian  revolu-
tion began  in  1810  Bello  was  an  official  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  Spanish  captain-general ;  but  he  soon
joined  the  revolutionary  party  and  went  to  Eng-
land with  Bolivar  and  Lopez  Mendez


to  negotiate


for  British  co-operation.  Bello  remained  in  Lon-
don, married  an  English  lady,  and  lived  there  for
nineteen  years.  After  returning  to  South  Amer-
ica, he  established  himself  in  Santiago,  Chili,  where
he  filled  many  high  offices,  among  them  that  of
rector  of  the  university  daring  the  rest  of  his  life.
His  works  include  "  Teoria  del  Entendimiento,"
"  Principios  de  Derecho  internacional,"  and  a  fa-
mous Spanish  grammar.  The  poem  entitled  "  La
Agricultura  de  la  Zona  Torrida  "  is  one  of  his  best.
BELLOMONT,  or  BELLAMONT,  Richard
Coote,  earl  of,  colonial  governor  of  New  York
and  Massachusetts,  b.  in  1636 ;  d.  in  New  York,  5
March,  I'^Ol.  His  father  was  raised  to  the  Irish
peerage,  as  Baron  Coote,  for  services  at  the  restora-
tion of  Charles  II.  Richard,  the  eldest  son,  was  a
member  of  parliament  in  1688,  and  one  of  the  first
adherents  of  the  prince  of  Orange.  In  1689  he
was  attainted  by  the  parliament  held  by  James  II.
in  Dublin,  but  in  the  same  year  made  earl  of  Bel-
lomont  by  William  III.,  and  appointed  treasurer
and  receiver-general  to  Queen  Mary.  He  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  New  York  in  May,  1695,  and,
shortly  afterward,  of  Massachusetts.  Piracy  and
unlawful  trade  had  been  on  the  increase,  and  New
York  was  "  remarkably  infected  with  those  two
dangerous  diseases,"  so  that  a  man  of  strong  will
and  great  honesty  was  required  for  the  place.  In
notifying  Bellomont  of  his  appointment,  the  king
said  that  *'  he  thought  him  a  man  of  resolution  and
integrity,  and  with  those  qualifications  more  likely
than  any  other  he  could  think  of  to  put  a  stop  to
that  illegal  trade  and  to  .the  growth  of  piracy ;  for
which  reason  he  made  choice  of  him  for  that  gov-
ernment, and  for  the  same  reason  intended  to  put
the  government  of  New  England  into  his  hands."
The  new  governor  did  not  reach  this  country  until
May,  1698.  Party  disputes  detained  him  for  a
year  in  the  province  of  New  York,  after  which  he
went  to  Boston,  where  he  arrived  on  26  May,  1699,
and  was  received  with  great  enthusiasm.  As  Bel-
lomont had  been  specially  appointed  to  suppress
piracy,  and  as  none  of  the  king's  ships  could  then  be
placed  at  his  disposal,  the  governor,  before  leaving
England,  had  determined  to  accomplish  the  mat-
ter by  private  enterprise,  and,  with  the  king's  sanc-
tion, formed  a  company  and  sent  out  a  sloop  under
the  command  of  William  Kidd.  an  adventurer.
Bellomont  had  not  been  long  in  this  country  when
the  news  came  that  Kidd  had  himself  turned  pirate,
and  the  governor  was  even  accused  of  complicity
j  with  him.  Kidd  was  finally  captured,  sent  to  Eng-
land for  trial,  and  executed  there  in  1701.  Soon
after  the  May  session  of  the  general  court  in  1700,
Bellomont  returned  to  New  York,  where  he  attacked
the  illegal  traders  with  such  vigor  that  a  petition
against  him  was  sent  to  England.  The  annoyance
thus  caused  hastened  his  death.  He  was  buried  at
the  Battery,  and  now  lies  in  St.  Paul's  church-yard,
New  York.  Macaulay  says  he  was  a  man  "  of  emi-
nently fair  character,  upright,  courageous,  and  in-
dependent." Though  his  fearless  course  in  New
York  made  him  enemies  there,  in  Massachusetts
he  was  very  popular.  His  stay  there  lasted  but
fourteen  months,  yet  he  was  granted  a  larger  sum
than  had  been  given  to  any  previous  governor,  re-
ceiving altogether  £1,875.  He  seems  to  have  done
all  in  his  power  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the  peo-
ple of  Boston.  Though  a  churchman,  he  attended
the  weekly  lecture  regularly  with  the  general  court,
and  professed  great  regard  for  the  preachers,  and,
on  this  account,  he  has  been  charged  by  Hutchin-
son with  hvpocrisv.  See  "  The  Life  and  Adminis-
tration of  Richard.  Earl  of  Bellomont,"  by  Frederic
De  Peyster  (New  York,  1879).


230


BELLOT


BELLOWS


BELLOT,  Joseph  Ren^,  explorer,  b.  in  Paris,
France,  in  March,  1826 ;  lost  on  an  ice-floe  18
Aug.,  1853.  He  was  a  midshipman  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz  in  1838,  and  rose  to  be  a  lieutenant  in
1851.  In  1853  he  joined  Belcher's  English  expe-
dition to  search  for  Franklin.  While  carrying
despatches  over  the  ice  he  was  overtaken  by  a
storm,  and  the  ice  on  which  he  stood  was  severed
from  the  land.  Leaving  his  two  companions,  he
crossed  a  hummock  to  reconnoitre,  and  was  never
seen  more.  His  diary,  narrating  his  arctic  adven-
tures, was  published  in  1855.

BELLOWS,  Albert  F.,  painter,  b.  in  Milford,
Mass.,  29  Nov.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Auburndale^  Mass.,  24
Nov.,  1883.  He  was  taken  as  a  child  to  Salem,
and,  when  sixteen  years  old,  entered  an  architect's
office  in  Boston,  where  he  remained  three  years.
He  then  went  into  partnership  with  an  archi-
tect of  established  reputation,  but,  in  1840,  decid-
ed to  give  his  entire  attention  to  painting.  He
accepted  in  that  year  the  principalship  of  the
New  England  school  of  design,  and  held  it  until
1846,  when  he  went  abroad  and  studied  for  many
years  in  Europe,  especially  in  Paris  and  Antwerp.
His  early  works,  mostly  ge7ire  pictures  in  oil,  in-
clude "The  First  Pair  of  Boots,"  "The  Sorrows
of  Boyhood,"  and  "The  Ijost  Child."  In  1865
he  turned  his  attention  to  water-color  painting,
studying  chiefly  in  England,  and  he  has  excelled
in  this  branch  of  the  art,  especially  in  his  land-
scapes. Among  his  later  water-colors  are  "The
Notch  at  Lancaster  "  (1867) ;  "  Afternoon  in  Sur-
rey" (1868);  "The  Thames  at  Windsor";  "The
Reaper's  Child  "  ;  "  New  England  Homestead  " ;
and  "A  Devonshire  Cottage."  His  "Sunday  in
Devonshire  "  (in  oils)  and  his  "  Study  of  a  Head,"
"  Autumn  Woods,"  and  "  Sunday  Afternoon  in
New  England  "  (in  water-colors),  were  sent  to  the
exhibition  at  Philadelphia  in  1876.  To  the  Paris
exhibition  of  1878  he  sent  "  A  New  England  Vil-
lage School "  (in  oil)  and  "  A  New  England  Home-
stead "  (in  water-colors).  Other  pictu"  s  by  his
hand  are  "  The  Willow  Wagon,"  "  The  Nook,"
"  Salem  Turnpike,"  "  The  Christening  Party,"  and
"  Coasting  in  New  England."  About  a  dozen  of
his  pictures  have  been  engraved.-  Most  of  his
work  in  this  country  was  done  in  New  York  and
Boston.  He  was  elected  associate  of  the  national
academy  in  1859,  academician  in  1861,  and  in
1868  honorary  member  of  the  royal  Belgian  soci-
ety of  water-colorists — an  honor  rarely  bestowed
upon  foreigners.  He  was  also  one  of  the  early
members  of  the  American  society  of  painters  in
water-colors.  Mr.  Bellows  frequently  painted  in
oils  with  the  spatula,  without  using  a  brush — a
method  that  gives  great  purity  to  the  tints,  but  is
only  productive  of  good  results  in  the  hands  of  a
skilful  artist.  In  water-color  painting  he  followed
almost  entirely  the  old  school,  which,  for  the  high
lights  of  the  picture,  depends  on  the  color  of  the
paper  on  which  it  is  painted.

BELLOWS,  Benjamin,  b.  in  Walpole,  N.  H.,
6  Oct.,  1740;  d.  there  in  June,  1802.  He  was
chosen  town  clerk  when  only  nineteen  years  old,
and  held  the  office  till  1776.  He  was  a  member  of
the  colonial  and  afterward  of  the  state  legislature,
and  was  appointed  a  delegate  to  the  continental
congress  in  1781,  but  his  business  forced  him  to  de-
cline. He  was  a  member  of  the  state  convention
that  ratified  the  federal  constitution  in  1788. He

f)resided  over  the  New  Hampshire  electoral  col-
ege  that  voted  for  Washington  in  1788,  and  was  a
member  of  the  one  that  voted  for  John  Adams  in
1796.  He  was  active  in  the  colonial  and  state  mi-
litia, rising  from  the  rank  of  corporal  to  that  of


brigadier-general,  and  served  during  the  revolu-
tionary war  as  a  colonel.

BELLOWS,  Henry  Adams,  jurist,  b.  in  Wal-
pole, N.  H.,  in  October,  1803 ;  d.  in  Concord,  N.
H.,  11  March,  1873.  His  father's  death  in  1819  left
him  to  support  his  mother  and  a  younger  brother
and  sister.  The  family  owned  a  house  in  West-
minster, Vt.,  a  small  village  on  the  western  bank
of  Connecticut  river,  and,  living  there,  young  Bel-
lows taught  in  one  of  the  public  schools  of  Wal-
pole, crossing  the  river  daily.  An  opportunity
offered  for  him  to  study  law  in  the  office  of  Will-
iam C.  Bradley,  a  leading  man  of  his  day,  and  al-
though the  time  that  must  necessarily  be  devoted
to  study  seriously  curtailed  the  family  income,  the
struggle  was  bravely  maintained,  until,  in  1826,  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and,  in  1828,  opened  an
office  in  Littleton,  N.  H.  Throughout  these  years
of  hardship  his  mother  nobly  seconded  his  efforts.
For  many  years  the  young  lawyer's  life  was  a  con-
tinual struggle  with  poverty ;  but  his  unswerving
rectitude  and  professional  devotion  to  the  interests
of  others  at  last  won  recognition.  He  removed  to
Concord  in  1850,  a  favorable  opportunity  offering
through  the  appointment  of  Ira  Perley  to  the  su-
preme bench,  and  there  he  soon  acquired  a  large
practice.  He  could  never  bring  himself  to  the  ex-
tortionate methods  so  common  in  the  profession,
and  such  was  his  generosity  that  his  actual  receipts
were  largely  consumed  for  the  benefit  of  others.
He  was  esj  ecially  liberal  in  sustaining  the  Unita-
rian church  society  of  Concord,  and  gave  more
than  a  tenth  of  his  income  to  its  support.  He  was
appointed  associate  judge  of  the  supreme  court  in
1859,  and  after  ten  years  of  service  in  that  capaci-
ty, became  chief  justice  on  the  death  of  Judge
Perley.  An  unusual  fairness  of  mind  marked  all
his  decisions.  He  never,  either  as  a  practising  law-
yer or  on  the  bench  of  the  supreme  court,  would
lend  his  influence  to  defend  an  unjust  cause  or
shield  a  criminal.  Without  extraordinary  mental
brilliance,  he  had,  by  nature,  a  rare  thoroughness
of  method  and  soundness  of  judgment.

BELLOWS,  Henry  Whitney,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  11  June,  1814;  d.  in  New  York
city,  30  Jan.,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1832,  and  at  Cambridge  divinity  school  in  1837,
was  ordained  pastor  of  tlie  first  Congregational
church  in  New
York,  2  Jan.,  1839,
and  attained  a
reputation  as  a
ready  and  elo-
quent pulpit  ora-
tor and  also  as
a  lecturer  on  so-
cial questions.
The  name  of
the  church  was
changed,  upon
its  removal  from
Chambers  street
to  Broadway,  to
the  church  of
the  Divine  Unity,
and  after  its  sec-
ond removal  to
All  -  Souls.  In
1846  he  founded
the "  Christian

Inquirer,"  a  weekly  Unitarian  paper,  of  which  he
was  the  principal  writer  till  1850.  He  was  also  as-
sociated in  the  editorship  of  the  "  Christian  Ex-
aminer "  and  the  "  Liberal  Christian."  In  1853  he
delivered  a  notable  "Phi  Beta  Kappa  Oration,'


^.  9]^/?cJ^^^


BELL-SMITH


BEMAN


231


afterward  published.  In  1854  Harvard  university-
conferred  the  degree  of  D.  D.  upon  him.  In  1857
he  delivered  before  the  Lowell  Institute  in  Boston
a  course  of  lectures  on  "  The  Treatment  of  Social
Diseases,"  and  the  same  year  he  made  before  the
dramatic  fund  society  in  New  York  an  address  in
defence  of  the  drama,  entitled  "  The  Relation  of
Public  Amusements  to  Public  Morality,  especially
of  the  Theatre  to  the  Highest  Interests  of  Hu-
manity," both  of  which  were  issued  in  New  York.
In  1860  he  published  "  Hestatements  of  Christian
Doctrine,  in  Twenty-five  Sermons,"  and  in  1868,  a
book  of  travels  entitled  "  The  Old  World  in  its
New  Face."  During  the  war  he  was  the  chief  pro-
moter and  the  president  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  com-
mission, in  which  capacity  he  showed  distinguished
administrative  ability  in  directing  the  distribution
of  $15,000,000  in  supplies  and  the  disbursement  of
$5,000,000  in  money.  He  held  the  place  from  1861
till  1878.  In  June,  1886,  a  bronze  tablet,  executed
by  Augustus  St.  Gaudens,  was  erected  to  the  mem-
ory of  Dr.  Bellows  in  All-Souls  church,  where  he
was  pastor  forty-three  years.  It  represents  a  full-
length  front  view  of  the  preacher  in  bas-relief.

BELL-SMITH,  Frederick  Marlett,  Canadian
artist,  b.  in  London,  England,  26  Sept.,  1846.  He
studied  drawing  at  South  Kensington,  and  went
to  Canada  in  18()6.  He  is  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  Royal  Canadian  academy,  the  On-
tario society  of  artists,  and  the  old  society  of  Ca-
nadian artists,  which  latter  was  organized  in  Mont-
real in  1867,  with  Mr.  Bell-Smith,  Sr.,  as  first
president.  Mr.  Bell-Smith  has  directed  the  art
department  at  Alma  college,  St.  Thomas,  Ontario,
for  several  years,  and  is  well  known  as  an  elocu-
tionist and  cartoon  artist.

BELMONT,  August,  financier,  b.  in  Alzey,
Hesse-Darmstadt,  in  1816;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24
Nov.,  1889.  He  was  educated  in  Frankfort,  and
for  several  years  was  in  the  employ  of  the  Roths-
childs in  their  banking-house  in  that  city,  and- also
in  Naples.  In  1887  he  settled  in  NewYork  and
became  the  agent  of  his  former  employers.  A
quarrel  concerning  a  lady  led  to  a  duel,  in  which
he  was  shot  and  lamed  for  life.  From  1844  till
1850  he  was  consul-general  at  New  York  for  the
Austrian  government,  but,  owing  to  his  disap-
proval of  the  treatment  received  by  Hungary  from
Austria,  he  resigned  his  office.  In  1858  he  was
appointed  United  States  charge  d'affaires  at  the
Hague,  and  in  1854  became  minister  resident.  He
resigned  in  1858,  having  first  negotiated  a  highly
important  consular  convention,  for  which,  with
other  diplomatic  services,  he  received  the  special
thanks  of  the  department  at  Washington.  For
many  years  he  resided  in  New  York,  where  he
was  engaged  in  banking.  He  was  well  known  as
a  patron  of  arts,  and  his  collection  of  paintings
was  one  of  the  finest  in  the  city.  Mr.  Belmont
showed  much  interest  in  politics :  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  democratic  convention  of  1860,  and
from  that  year  until  1872  was  the  chairman  of
the  national  democratic  committee.  For  twenty
years  he  was  president  of  the  American  jockey
club,  and  a  most  prominent  member  of  the  union
and  other  clubs  of  New  York.  He  married  a
daughter  of  Com.  Matthew  C.  Perry,  and  was  in-
strumental in  erecting  a  bronze  statue  of  him  at
Newport,  R.  I.— His  son.  Perry,  b.  in  New  York
city,  28  Dec,  1851,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1872,  and  at  Columbia  college  law  school  in  1876.
After  being  admitted  to  the  bar,  he  practised  in
New  York  until  1881,  when  he  was  elected  as  a
democrat  to  congress,  serving  from  5  Dec,  1881,
till  4  March,  1887, During  his  first  term  in  con-


gress he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  on  foreign
affairs,  and  in  that  capacity  came  into  notice  by
his  cross-examination  of  James  G.  Blaine,  then
late  secretary  of  state,  concerning  his  relations
with  a  syndicate  of  American  capitalists  interested
in  the  development  of  certain  guano  deposits  in
Peru.  An  attempt  was  made  to  show  that  Mr.
Blaine's  efforts  toward  mediation  between  Chili
and  Peru  were  from  interested  motives.  Mr.  Bel-
mont was  appointed  chairman  of  the  committee  on
foreign  affairs  in  1885.

BELMONT,  Francis  Vachon  de,  French  mis-
sionary, d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1782.  He  was
of  noble  birth  and  highly  accomplished,  but  era-
braced  the'life  of  a  missionary  in  the  Canadian
wilds,  and  in  1680  took  charge  of  a  school  connect-
ed with  the  Iroquois  mission  in  Montreal.  The  fol-
lowing year  he  built  for  himself  a  church.  After
1701  he  was  superior  of  the  seminary  in  Montreal.
He  wrote  a  "  Histoire  du  Canada,"  printed  in  the
collections  of  the  Quebec  historical  society.

BELTON,  Francis  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland
about  1790 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  10  Sept.,  1861.
He  was  appointed  2d  lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  army,
27  March,  1812,  and  became  1st  lieutenant  in  1813,
regimental  paymaster,  20  June,  1818,  and  sub-
sequently aide  to  Gen.  Gaines,  distinguishing
himself  in  the  defence  of  Fort  Erie.  He  was
appointed  assistant  adjutant-general  in  1814,  and
assistant  inspector-general  in  May,  1816 ;  became  a
captain  in  July,  1817 ;  major,  16  Sept.,  1838,  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel, 13  Oct.,  1845.  In  the  war  with  Mex-
ico he  commanded  a  regiment  and  distinguished
himself  at  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.
For  gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco  he  was
brevetted  colonel.  He  was  commissioned  colonel
in  June,  1857,  and  retired  in  September,  1861.

BELTRAMI,  Giacomo  Constantino,  Italian
explorer,  b.  in  Bergamo,  Italy,  in  1779 ;  d.  there  in
February,  1855.  He  held  a  judicial  office  under
the  government,  but  was  exiled  in  1821,  and  came
to  the  United  States.  He  ascended  the  Mississippi
river,  and  discovered  one  of  its  principal  sources.
He  published  an  account  of  Ms  discoveries,  re-
printed at  Philadelphia  in  1824,  and,  on  his  return,
published  this  and  other  works  in  London.

BELTRAN  DE  SANTA  ROSA,  Fray  Pedro
(bel-tran'),  Mexican  author,  b.  in  Yucatan  early  in
the  18th  century.  He  belonged  to  the  Franciscan
order,  filled  many  important  offices,  and  was  pro-
fessor of  philosophy,  theology,  and  the  Maya  lan-
guage. His  most  important  works  are  "Arte  y
Semilexicon  Yucateco  "  (1746),  "  Declaracion  de  la
Doctrina  Cristiana,"  and  "  Cateeismo,"  all  written
in  the  Indian  language  of  Yucatan,  or  Maya.

BEMAN,  Nathaniel  Sydney  Smith,'  clergy-
man, b.  in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  26  Nov.,  1785 ;  d.
in  Carbondale,  111.,  8  Aug.,  1871.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Middlebury  in  1807,  studied  theology,  and
about  1810  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  Congregation-
al church  in  Portland,  Me.  A  few  years  later  he
went  as  a  missionary  to  Georgia,  where  he  devoted
liimself  to  the  work  of  establishing  educational  in-
stitutions. He  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1822,  and  continued  as
such  for  upward  of  forty  years.  He  was  actively
interested  in  the  temperance,  moral  reform,  revival,
and  anti-slavery  movements  of  his  time.  In  1831
he  was  moderator  of  the  general  assembly  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  and  during  the  discussions
that,  in  1837,  led  to  the  division  in  that  church,  he
was  the  leader  of  the  new-school  branch.  Resign-
ing his  pastorate  in  1863,  he  passed  the  remainder
of  his  life  in  retirement  in  Troy  and  in  Carbondale.
Besides  sermons,  essays,  and  addresses,  which  have


232


BEMISS


BENEDICT


been  separately  published,  he  was  the  author  of  a
volume  entitled  "  Four  Sermons  on  the  Atone-
ment." He  was  also  one  of  the  compilers  of  the
hymn-book  adopted  by  the  new-school  branch  of
the  Presbyterian  church.

BEMISS,  Samuel  Merrifleld,  physician,  b,  in
Nelson  co.,  Ky.,  15  Oct.,  1821.  He  received  his
early  education  from  his  father.  Dr.  John  Bemiss,
and  from  private  tutors,  and  was  graduated  at  the
medical  department  of  the  University  of  New  York
in  1846.  He  practised  in  Bloomfield,  Ky.,  until
1853,  when  he  removed  to  Louisville,  and  in  1858
became  connected  with  the  medical  department  of
the  University  of  Louisville,  filling  various  chairs,
and  at  times  was  its  secretary  and  vice-president.
From  1862  till  1865  he  was  a  surgeon  in  the  con-
federate army.  After  the  war  he  settled  in  New
Orleans,  and  in  1866  he  became  professor  of  the
theory  and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  University
of  Louisiana.  He  is  a  member  of  the  state  board
of  health  and  of  the  American  medical  association,
being  its  vice-president  in  1868,  and  of  other  medi-
cal societies.  Dr.  Bemiss  has  contributed  papers
to  the  literature  of  his  profession,  among  which
are  "  Essay  on  Croup  "  and  "  Report  on  Consan-
guineous Marriages."  He  is  the  editor  of  the
'•  New  Orleans  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal."

BENADE,  Andrew,  Moraivian  bishop,  b.  in
Kleinwelke,  Saxony,  20  Feb.,  1769 ;  d.  in  Bethlehem,
Pa.,  31  Oct.,  1859.  He  was  educated  at  the  Ger-
man Moravian  college  and  theological  seminary,
and  in  1795  came  to  the  United  States  and  entered
the  boarding-school  at  Nazareth  Hall,  Nazareth,
Pa.,  as  a  tutor.  Four  years  later  he  was  appointed
principal  of  the  young  ladies'  seminary  at  Bethle-
hem, and  subsequently  senior  pastor  of  the  church
at  Lititz.  In  1882  he  was  made  president  of  the
southern  district  of  the  Moravian  church,  was
consecrated  on  15  Sept.,  and  established  himself  at
Salem,  N.  C.  In  1886  he  became  the  presiding
bishop  of  the  northern  district,  and  removed  to
Bethlehem.  At  the  age  of  seventy-nine  years  he
resigned  this  office  and  spent  the  evening  of  his
life  in  retirement.  Bishop  Benade  was  endowed
with  remarkable  executive  ability.  As  a  preacher
he  ranked  high,  speaking  English  and  German
with  equal  facility.

BENALCAZAR,  or  BELALCAZAR,  Sebas-
tian de  (bay-nal-cah'-thar),  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in
Benalcazar  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th  century:
d.  in  Popayan,  Colombia,  in  1550.  He  left  Spain
in  1514  and  joined  Pedraria's  expedition,  but  re-
fused to  give  his  real  family  name,  Moyano,  and
for  this  reason  his  companions  called  him  after  his
native  town.  When  he  reached  America  he  soon
became  noted  for  his  gallantry,  and  formed  a
friendship  with  Pizarro.  He  took  the  city  of
Quito  in  1533,  and  then  made  an  expedition  to  the
Territories  now  belonging  to  Colombia,  where  he
met,  at  Cundinamarca,  three  other  Spanish  lead-
ers, who  had  gone  to  that  place  from  different
points.  After  conquering  Popayan,  he  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  that  part  of  the  country  in
1538.  Some  years  later  he  was  compelled  to  re-
sign, and  then  became  involved  in  legal  proceed-
ings and  other  troubles,  which  caused  his  death  be-
fore he  could  return  to  Spain.

BENAVENTE  BENAVIDES,  Bartolom6
(bay-nah-ven'-te),  Spanish  prelate,  b.  in  Madrid  late
in  the  16th  century ;  d.  in  1652.  He  was  professor
of  theology  in  the  university  of  Lima,  Peru,  and
canon,  dean,  and  inspector  or  visitor  of  that  arch-
bishopric. In  1639  he  was  consecrated  bishop  of
Oaxaca,  Mexico.  Pie  rebuilt  the  convent,  and  re-
organized  the  collegiate seminary  of that city.


Benavente  was  the  first  prelate  invested  by  the
pope  with  the  special  faculties  that  under  the
name  of  "  solitas  "  are  now  conferred  upon  all  the
bishops  of  America.

BENAVIDES,  Alfonso,  or  Alonso  de  (bay-
nah-vee'-des),  Franciscan  friar,  b.  in  Spain.  lie
lived  in  the  first  half  of  the  17th  century,  and  was
noted  for  his  great  learning  in  theology  and  his-
tory. He  was  the  author  of  "  Relacion  de  los
Tesoros  descubiertos  en  Mejico,"  a  memoir  ad-
dressed to  the  king  of  Spain,  which  Benavides
was  ordered  by  the  viceroy  of  Mexico,  in  1627,  to
prepare  for  the  information  of  the  court  as  to  the
real  condition,  material  and  moral,  of  that  part  of
America.  The  work  was  published  in  Madrid  in
1630,  nine  years  after  its  author  had  been  elected
"  custodian  "  of  his  chapter  of  New  Mexico.

BENAVIDES  Y  DE  LA  CUEVA,  Diego  (bay-
nah-vee-des),  count  of  Santisteban  del  Puerto,
Spanish  soldier,  b.  about  1600 ;  d.  in  Lima,  Peru,
17  March,  1666.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Alfonso
VII.  of  Castile.  He  studied  at  Salamanca,  and
entered  the  army,  distinguishing  himself  in  the
Italian  war  in  1637;  was  afterward  governor  of
Galicia,  viceroy  of  Navarre,  member  of  the  war
council,  and  one  of  the  plenipotentiaries  that
signed  the  treaty  of  peace  between  Spain  and
France,  and  arranged  the  marriage  of  the  Spanish
infanta  IMaria  Teresa  to  Louis  XIV.  of  France,  for
which  Philip  IV.  gave  him  the  title  of  marquis  of
Solera.  He  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru,  entered
Lima,  31  July,  1661,  re-established  order  at  La  Paz
in  December  of  that  year,  sent  an  expedition  to
Chili  under  Gov.  Angel  Pereda,  appointed  a  special
board  to  regulate  Indian  labor,  which  prevented
many  abuses  and  afforded  great  benefits  to  the  In-
dians, and  endowed  a  chair  of  mathematics  in  the
university  of  Lima.

BENDIX,  John  E.,  soldier,  b.  28  Aug.,  1818;
d.  in  New  York  city,  8  Oct.,  1877.  The  birthplace
of  Gen.  Bendix  lies  between  the  United  States  and
Canada,  as  he  was  born  on  board  the  "  Sarah,"  one
of  the  first  steamers  that  navigated  St.  Lawrence
river.  He  learned  the  trade  of  a  machinist  in
New  York,  joined  the  9th  regiment  New  York  state
militia  in  1847,  and  when  the  civil  war  began,  in
1861,  he  organized  the  7th  regiment  of  New  York
volunteer  infantry.  He  participated  in  the  battles
of  Antietam  (16-i7  Sept.,  1862),  Fredericksburg  (13
Dec,  1862),  and  the  Wilderness  (5-6  May.  1864),
besides  the  engagements  of  the  intervening  cam-
paigns.  He  was  promoted  brigadier-general  in  1865.

BENEDICT,  Abner  R.,  soldier,  b.  about  1830;
d.  15  May,  1867.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war'he  volunteered  as  a  private  in  the  12th  regi-
ment. New  York  state  militia,  which  was  one  of
the  three  that  first  started  from  New  Y^ork  for  the
seat  of  war.  In  August,  1861,  he  was  commis-
sioned second  lieutenant  in  the  4th  regular  infant-
ry. In  March,  1862,  he  embarked  for  the  penin-
sula, and  through  the  battles  of  the  Potomac  army
was  conspicuous  for  gallantry.  At  Fredericksburg
he  commanded  forty  men  of  the  strong  picket-
line  that,  during  the  night  of  13  Dec,  1862,  was  I
pushed  up  to  the  enemy's  position,  while  the  de-  [
feated  federals  were  retreating  across  the  river.  |
The  orders  were  to  hold  the  position  until  relieved,  |
and  the  intention  was  to  withdraw  the  picket-line
before  daylight  should  reveal  it  to  the  enemy.  By
some  mistake  the  line  was  not  withdrawn  as  di-
rected, and  at  daylight  the  enemy  opened  fire  at
short  range.  While  encouraging  his  men  by
voice  and  example,  Major  Benedict  fell,  shot
through  the  lungs,  but  was  carried  off  the  field  by
his  soldiers. The  wound  was  considered  mortal.


BENEDICT


BENEDICT


233


but,  before  the  sear  was  fairly  healed,  in  three
months,  he  reported  for  duty  at  Washington.  He
joined  his  regiment  at  Chancellorsville  while  the
battle  was  in  progress.  At  Gettysburg  his  supe-
riors were  all  killed  or  wounded,  leaving  him  in
command,  and  he  handled  the  regiment  during
that  battle  with  great  credit  to  himself.  Shortly
after  Gettysburg  his  health  began  to  fail,  as  a  re-
sult of  his  wound ;  but  in  spite  of  this  he  refused
to  give  up  active  service,  and  for  some  time  com-
manded the  4th  infantry,  as  Gen.  Grant's  head-
quarters guard  during  the  Petersburg  campaign.
After  the  war  he  remained  on  the  active  list  in
spite  of  his  disability  from  his  wound,  and  in  the
depth  of  winter,  shortly  before  his  death,  was  on
duty  at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  one  of  the  coldest  of  the
eastern  army  posts.  He  secured  a  change  of  sta-
tion in  the  hope  of  benefit  from  a  warmer  climate,
but  died  from  the  effects  of  the  wound  received
five  years  before.

BENEDICT,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
walk,  Conn.,  10  Oct.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Pawtucket,  R.  I.,
5  Dec,  1874.  Early  in  life  he  learned  the  shoe-
maker's trade ;  but,  after  becoming  interested  in
religion,  he  prepared  for  college,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1806.  While  a  student,  he  had
preached  at  Pawtucket ;  and,  on  the  completion  of
his  course,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  first  Bap-
tist church  at  that  place,  where  he  remained  for
twenty-five  years.  Although  he  was  not  attached
to  any  regular  pastorate,  he  afterward  preached
until  near  the  close  of  his  life,  and  a  sermon  deliv-
ered on  his  ninety-second  birthday  is  said  to  have
been  remarkable  for  its  ability  and  clearness,  and
for  the  vigor  with  which  it  was  delivered.  Much
of  his  time  was  devoted  to  historical  research,  and
he  is  the  author  of  several  valuable  works,  among
which  are  "  History  of  the  Baptists  "  (1813) ;  abridg-
ment of  Robinson's  "  History  of  Baptism  "  (1827) ;
abridgment  of  his  "  Historv  of  the  Baptists  "  (1820) ;
"History  of  all  Religions"  (1824);  " History  of  the
Baptist  Denominations  in  America  and  all  Parts
of  the  World "  (1848) ;  "  Fifty  Years  among  the
Baptists  "  (1860) ;  and  "  A  Compendium  of  Ecclesi-
astical History  "  and  "  History  of  the  Donatists,"
which  were  ready  for  the  press  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  likewise  the  author  of  several
poems,  including  "  The  Watery  War,"  and  com-
piled a  "  Conference  Hymn-Book,"  which  has  had
a  large  circulation.

BENEDICT,  Erastus  Cornelius,  lawyer,  b.  in
Branford,  Conn.,  19  March,  1800 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  22  Oct.,  1880.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Joel
T.  Benedict,  who,  a  few  years  after  the  birth  of
Erastus,  settled  in  New  York,  having  charge  suc-
cessively of  churches  in  New  Windsor,  Franklin,
and  Chatham.  Early  in  life,  young  Benedict  be-
3ame  a  teacher  in  a  district  school,  and  at  the  age
of  eighteen  he  entered  the  sophomore  class  at
Williams,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1821.  He
was  principal  of  an  academv  in  Jamestown,  N.  Y.,
and  later  in  Newburg,  N.  Y. ;  after  which  he  was
tutor  at  Williams.  Meanwhile  he  had  studied
law,  and  in  1824  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  Dur-
ing the  same  year  he  became  a  deputy  clerk  under
the  U.  S.  district  judge  of  southern  New  York.
Here  his  attention  was  directed  to  admiralty  law,
and  for  half  a  century  he  was  considered  a  leader
in  admiralty  cases.  In  1840  he  was  elected  assist-
ant alderman  from  the  15th  ward  in  New  York
city.  Ten  years  later  he  became  a  member  of  the
board  of  education,  and  was  its  president  continu-
ously until  his  resignation  in  1863.  He  was  a
member  of  the  assembly  in  1848  and  in  1864,  and
a  state  senator  in  1872. He  was  chosen  a  trustee


of  Williams  in  1855,  and  in  the  same  year  became
a  regent  of  the  University  of  the  State  of  New
York,  succeeding  to  the  chancellorship  of  that
body  in  1878.  He  was  actively  interested  in  vari-
ous charitable  organizations  of  New  York,  and  a
governor  of  the  New  York  State  Woman's  Hospi-
tal from  its  incorporation,  and  was  also  for  many
years  a  prominent  member  of  the  New  York  His-
torical Society.  Of  his  writings,  besides  numerous
addresses  before  historical  and  scientific  societies,
the  most  important  are  "American  Admiralty"
(New  York,  1850);  "A  Run  through  Europe"
(1860);  and  "The  Hymn  of  Hildebert  and  other
Mediaeval  Hymns  "  (1861).

BENEDliDT,  George  Grenville,  soldier,  b.  in
Burlington,  Vt.,  10  Dec,  1826.  He  was  graduated
at  the  university  of  Vermont  in  1847,  and  in  1853
became  editor  of  the  Burlington  "  Free  Press,"  for
many  years  the  leading  republican  journal  of  the
state.  He  was  postmaster  at  Burlington  in  1860,
but  enlisted  in  the  12th  Vermont  regiment  at  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  was  commissioned
lieutenant.  In  1863  he  was  appointed  aide  on  a
brigade  staff  in  the  1st  corps.  On  the  third  day
of  the  battle  of  Gettysburg  he  participated  in  the
repulse  of  the  desperate  charge  delivered  by  the
confederates  under  Longstreet.  Gen.  Hancock
was  severely  wounded  in  the  moment  of  victory,
and  Lieut.  Benedict,  with  another  officer,  caught
him  as  he  fell  from  his  horse.  After  the  civil  war
he  served  on  the  governor's  staff",  was  in  the  state
senate  from  1869  till  1871,  postmaster  of  Burling-
ton from  1871  till  1874,  secretary  of  the  state  uni-
versity from  1865,  and  president  of  the  Vermont
press  association  in  1886,  being  senior  editor  of  the
state  at  that  time.  He  has  published  "  Vermont
at  Gettysburg  "  (Albany,  1866 ;  new  ed„  1870) ;  and
"  Vermont  in  the  Civil  War  "  (Albany,  1866 ;  2d
vol.  forthcoming).

BENEDICT,  George  Wyllys,  educator,  b.  in
North  Stamford,  Conn.,  11  Jan.,  1796 ;  d.  in  Bur-
lington, Vt.,  23  Sept.,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at
Williams  in  1818.  and  became  principal  of  an
academy  in  Westfield,  Mass.  From  1819  till  1822
he  was  tutor  at  Williams,  and  then  became  prin-
cipal of  the  academy  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.  He  was
professor  at  the  University  of  Vermont  from  1825
till  1847;  but  failing  health  forced  his  resigna-
tion, and  he  became  associated  with  Ezra  Cornell
in  the  construction  of  the  Troy  and  Canada  junc-
tion telegraph  line,  becoming  the  first  superin-
tendent of  that  company.  He  subsequently  en-
gaged independently  in  telegraph-building,  and
contracted  for  the  erection  of  several  lines.  He
purchased  the  Burlington  "  Free  Press  "  in  1853,
and  remained  its  editor  and  publisher  until  1866.
During  1854  and  1855  he  was  a  member  of  the
Vermont  senate,  serving  as  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  education.  He  was  a  member  of  the
State  Historical  Society,  and  also  of  the  Editors'
and  Publishers'  Association.

BENEDICT,  Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,  N.
Y.,  2  Sept.,  1817;  d.  at  Pleasant  Hill,  La.,  9  April,
1864.  After  graduation  at  Williams,  in  1837,  he
studied  law  in  Albany  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1841.  In  1845-'6  he  was  city  attorney  at
Albany;  in  1847  judge  advocate ;  from  1848  untd
1852  surrogate  of  Albany.  In  1860  he  was  elected
a  member  of  the  state  assembly,  but  entered  the
military  service  for  the  civil  war  in  June,  1861,  as
lieutenant-colonel  of  the  73d  New  York  volun-
teers. He  served  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
and  was  taken  prisoner  at  Williamsburg,  Va.
After  several  months'  confinement  in  Libby  and
Salisbury  prisons,  he  was  exchanged,  and,  as  colo-


234


BENET


BENJAMIN


nel  of  the  162d  New  York  volunteers,  accompanied
Banks's  expedition to Louisiana  in September,

1862.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  gal-
lantry in  the  assault  on  Port  Hudson,  14  June,

1863.  In  the  Red  river  campaign  of  1864  he  par-
ticipated in  the  various  engagements,  and  was
mortally  wounded  while  in  command  of  a  brigade
at  the  battle  of  Pleasant  Hill.  His  death  was  made
the  subject  of  a  poem  by  Alfred  B.  Street.  See
'•  Memorial  of  Brevet  Brigadier-General  Lewis
Benedict,  Colonel  of  the  162d  N.  Y.  V.  1."  (Albany,

1864.  printed  privately).

BENET,  Stephen  Vincent,  soldier,  b.  in  St.
Augustine,  Fla.,  22  Jan.,  1827.  He  studied  at
Hallowell's  school  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  then  at  the
University  of  Georgia,  and  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1849,  stand-
ing third  in  his  class.  He  was  appointed  to  the
ordnance  corps,  and  served  at  the  Watervliet  arse-
nal, at  Washington,  at  Frankford  arsenal,  again  at
Washington,  and  then  at  the  St.  Louis  arsenal,  In
1859  he  became  assistant  professor  of  geography,
history,  and  ethics  at  West  Point,  and  from  1861
till  1864  was  instructor  of  ordnance  and  the  sci-
ence of  gunnery,  after  which,  until  1869,  he  was  in
command  of  Frankford  arsenal.  In  1869  he  was
made  assistant  to  the  chief  of  ordnance,  and  in
1874,  on  the  death  of  the  chief  of  the  department,
he  succeeded  to  the  place,  with  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general. He  translated  Jomini's  "  Political
and  Military  History  of  the  Campaign  of  Water-
loo "  (New  York,  1853),  and  he  is  the  author  of  a
treatise  on  "Military  Law  and  the  Practice  of
Courts-Martial"  (1862), and  "Electro-Ballistic  Ma-
chines and  the  Schultze  Chronoscope  "  (1866).

BENEZET,  Anthony,  philanthropist,  b.  in  St.
Quentin,  France,  31  Jan.,  1713;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  3  May,  1784.  He  was  descended  from  wealthy
and  noble  French  parents,  who  fled  from  France
to  Holland  in  1685,  after  the  revocation  of  the
edict  of  Nantes,  and  thence  to  England  in  1715.
In  London  his  relatives  became  Quakers,  and  in
1731  they  settled  in  Philadelphia.  He  a[)prenticed
himself  to  a  cooper,  but  m  1742  became  instructor
in  the  Friends'  English  school,  and  continued  to
teach  until  near  the  end  of  his  life.  He  devoted
much  attention  to  the  abolition  of  the  slave-trade,
and  advocated  the  emancipation  and  education  of
the  colored  population,  opening  for  that  purpose
an  evening  school.  During  the  revolutionary  war
and  the  occupation  of  Philadelphia  by  the  British
army,  he  was  active  in  alleviating  thesufl'erings  of
the  prisoners.  He  published  tracts,  which  were
gratuitously  distributed  throughout  the  country,
the  most  important  being  "  A  Caution  to  Great
Britain  and  her  Colonies,  in  a  Short  Representa-
tion of  the  Calamitous  State  of  the  Enslaved  Ne-
groes in  the  British  Dominion"  (Philadelphia,
1767);  "Some  Historical  Account  of  Guinea,  with
an  Inquiry  into  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  the  Slave-
Trade"  (1772);  "  Observations  on  the  Indian  Na-
tives of  this  Continent"  (1784);  "A  Short  Ac-
count of  the  Society  of  Friends"  (1780);  and
"Dissertation  on  the  Christian  Religion"  (1782).
See  "Memoir  of  Anthony  Benezet."  by  Roberts
Vaux  (New  York,  1817).

BENHAM,  Henry  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  Connecti-
cut in  1817 ;  d.  in  New  York,  1  June,  1884.  He
was  graduated  at  West  Point,  at  the  head  of  his
class,  in  1837,  assigned  to  the  corps  of  engineers,
and  for  a  year  assistant  in  charge  of  improve-
ments in  Savannah  river.  In  July,  1838,  he  was
promoted  first  lieutenant,  and  from  1839  till  1844
was  superintending  engineer  of  the  repairs  of
Fort  Marion  and  of  the  sea-wall  at  St.  Augustine,


Fla.  During  the  three  years  succeeding  he  was
engaged  upon  government  works  in  Pennsylva-
nia. Maryland,  and  elsewhere.  He  was  with  the
army  in  Mexico  in  1847-'8,  and  brevetted  cap-
tain for  gallant  and  meritorious  services  in  the
battle  of  Buena  Vista,  23  Feb.,  1847.  After  the
Mexican  war  he  was  engaged  for  a  time  on  engi-
neering duty  in  New  York  harbor,  and  promoted
to  the  rank  of  captain  in  May,  1848.  He  was  also
in  charge  of  several  other  works  of  importance  at
Boston,  Washington,  and  Buffalo,  from  1848  to
1853.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  assistant  in
charge  of  the  coast  survey  office  at  Washington,
and  sent  to  Europe  on  duty  connected  therewith!
During  the  following  seven  years  he  was  occupied
in  professional  work  for  the  government  at  Bos-
ton, Newport,  and  Sandy  Hook,  and  on  the  Poto-
mac aqueduct.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
in  1861,  Capt.  Benham  entered  upon  active  ser-
vice; was  on  Gen.  Morris's  staff  as  engineer  of
the  department  of  the  Ohio ;  was  brevetted  colo-
nel for  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Carrick's  Ford,
Va.,  13  July,  1861 ;  in  August  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  and  was  engaged  in  the
Virginia  campaigns,  including  the  actions  at  New
Creek  (16  Aug.)  and  Carnifex  Ferry  (10  Sept.).  In
1862  he  was  present  at  the  capture  of  Fort  Pu-
laski (10-11  April)  and  James  Island  (16  June).
Later  in  the  year  he  superintended  fortifications  in
Boston  and  Portsmouth  harbors,  and  was  in  com-
mand of  the  northern  district  of  the  department  of
the  south.  He  proved  very  efficient  in  throwing
pontoon-bridges  across  the  Rappahannock,  the
Potomac,  and  the  James  rivers,  and  was  in  com-
mand of  the  pontoon  department  at  Washington
in  1864,  In  the  mean  time  he  had,  through  the
regular  stages  of  promotion,  attained  the  full  rank
of  lieutenant-colonel  of  engineers,  and  in  March,
1865,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  and  major-
general  U.  S.  army,  and  major-general  U.  S.  volun-
teers, for  gallant  services  during  the  rebellion  and
in  the  campaign  that  terminated  with  the  surren-
der of  Lee's  army.  In  1868  (7  March)  he  was  pro-
moted colonel  of  engineers,  and  during  that  year
was  engaged  in  government  works  on  the  coast  of
]New  England,  and  from  October,  1869,  till  July,
1877,  was  similarly  occupied  in  the  works  on  Long
Island  Head.  Subsequent  to  this  he  was  in  charge
of  the  defences  of  New  York.  He  was  placed  on
the  retired  list,  30  June,  1882.  He  invented  the
picket-shovel  used  by  troops  in  the  field,  and  was
an  expert  in  pontoon-bridges,  in  the  management
of  which  he  devised  important  improvements.

BENITO,  Fray  Marcos  (bay-nee'-to),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Valencia,  Spain,  in  the  17tli  cen-
tury. He  was  a  Dominican  monk,  and  went  as  a
missionary  to  the  Spanish  -  American  countries.
His  best  known  works  are  the  "  Arte  de  la  Lengua
Mije,"  and  "  Devocionario  en  Dialecto  Mije."

BENJAMIN,  George,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  England  in  1799;  d,  in  Belleville,  Ontario,
6  July,  1864.  He  resided  for  a  time  in  Liverpool,
was  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits,  and  travelled
extensively.  In  his  early  manhood  he  went  to  New
Orleans,  and  in  1830  removed  to  Canada,  and  set-
tled in  Belleville,  where  he  remained  lantil  his
death.  For  a  number  of  years  he  conducted  the
Belleville  "  Intelligencer."  He  became  warden  of
Hastings  on  the  introduction  of  municipal  insti-
tutions by  Lord  Sydenham,  and  so  continued  for
many  years,  and  was  also  for  several  years  registrar
of  the  county.  In  1856  he  was  elected  member  for
North  Hastings,  and  represented  that  constituency
in  that  and  the  succeeding  parliament,  until  he
retired  in  1861. He  was  elected  grand  master  of


BENJAMIN


BENJAMIN


235


the  Orangemen  of  British  North  America  in  1848,
and  retained  that  office  for  several  years.  When
the  project  of  annexing  Canada  to  the  United
States  was  mooted,  Mr.  Benjamin  issued  a  mani-
festo, in  which  he  urged  Orangemen  to  oppose  it.

BENJAMIN,  John  Forbes,  soldier,  b.  in
Cicero.  N.  Y.,  23  Jan.,  1817;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  8  March,  1877.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and,  after  three  years  spent  in
Texas,  went  to  Missouri,  where  he  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  at
Shelbyville  in  1848.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature in  1850  and  1852,  and  presidential  elector
on  the  democratic  ticket  in  1856.  He  entered  the
national  army  as  a  private  in  the  Missouri  cav-
alry in  1861,  was  made  captain  in  January,  1862,
major  in  May,  and  lieutenant-colonel  in  Septem-
ber. He  resigned  to  become  provost-marshal  of
the  8th  district  of  Missouri  in  1863.  In  1864  he
was  elected  to  congress,  where  he  served  three  suc-
cessive terms,  from  4  Dec,  1865,  till  3  March,  1871.
After  this  he  practised  law  and  was  a  banker  in
Washington  until  his  death.

BENJAMIN,  Judah  Philip,  lawyer,  b.  in  St.
Croix,  W.  I.,  11  Aug.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Paris,  8  May,
1884.  His  parents  were  English  Jews,  who  in
1811  sailed  from  England  to  settle  in  New  Or-
leans. The  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  being  block-
aded by  the  British  fleet,  they  landed  at  St.  Croix,
where  Mr.  Benjamin  was  born.  His  boyhood  was
passed  in  Wilmington,  N.  C,  and  in  1825  he  en-
tered Yale,  but  left  college  three  years  later,  with-
out receiving  a  degree. He  then  studied  law  in

New  Orleans  in
a  notary's  of-
fice, and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  11  Dec,
1832.  For  some
time  he  was  en-
gaged in  teach-
ing school,  and
in  compiling  a
digest  of  cases
decided  in  the  lo-
cal courts.  This,
at  first  only  in-
tended for  his
personal  use,
was  subsequent-
ly enlarged  and
Siblishedas  "A
igest  of  Re-
ported Decis-
ions of  the  Su-
preme Court  of  the  late  Territory  of  Orleans  and  of
the  Supreme  Court  of  Louisiana  "  (1834).  He  soon
rose  to  the  head  of  his  profession,  and  in  1840
became  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Slidell,  Benja-
min &  Conrad,  having  an  extensive  practice  in
planters'  and  cotton  merchants'  cases.  He  was  a
whig,  and  in  1845  a  member  of  the  convention
held  to  revise  the  constitution  of  the  state,  in
which  body  he  advocated  the  addition  of  an  article
requiring  the  governor  to  be  a  citizen  born  in  the
United  States.  In  1847  a  U.  S.  commissioner  was
appomted  to  investigate  the  Spanish  land-titles,
under  which  the  early  settlers  in  California
claimed  their  property,  and  Benjamin  was  re-
tained as  counsel.  On  his  return  he  was  admitted
to  practice  in  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  for  a
time  much  of  his  business  was  with  that  body  at
Washington.  In  1848  he  became  one  of  the  presi-
dential electors  at  large  from  Louisiana,  and  was
elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1852,  and  again  in


1857,  but  on  the  secession  of  Louisiana  he  with-
drew from  the  senate,  with  his  colleague,  John
Slidell,  4  Feb.,  1861.  During  his  senatorial  career
he  had  attained  pre-eminence  in  the  southern  wing
of  the  democratic  party.  A  sharp  personal  contro-
versy between  himself  and  Jefferson  Davis  seemed
likely  to  cause  a  duel,  when  the  latter  apologized
on  the  floor  of  the  senate  for  the  harsh  language
he  had  used.  He  advocated  the  Kansas-Nebraska
bill  of  Mr.  Douglas  in  1854,  but  afterward  insisted
that  the  principle  of  popular  sovereignty  had  been
definitely  set  aside  by  the  declaration  of  the  su-
preme'court  in  the  Dred-Scott  case,  which,  he  con-
tended, should  be  accepted  as  conclusive.  His  firm
advocacy  of  the  legal  claims  of  slavery  brought
from  Senator  Wade,  of  Ohio,  the  remark  that  Mr.
Benjamin  was  "  a  Hebrew  with  Egyptian  princi-
ples." On  the  formation  of  the  provisional  gov-
ernment of  the  confederate  states,  he  was  ap-
pointed attorney-general,  and  in  August,  1861,  was
transferred  to  the  war  department,  succeeding  L.
P.  Walker.  Having  been  accused  of  incompetence
and  neglect  of  duty  by  a  committee  of  the  con-
federate congress,  he  resigned  his  office,  but  im-
mediately became  secretary  of  state,  which  place
he  held  until  the  final  overthrow  of  the  confederate
government.  He  had  the  reputation  of  being  "  the
brains  ci  the  confederacy,"  and  it  is  said  that  Mr.
Davis  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  to  him  all  work
that  did  not  obviously  belong  to  the  department
of  some  other  minister.  It  was  his  habit  to  begin
work  at  8  a.  m.,  and  he  was  often  occupied  at  his
desk  until  2  o'clock  next  morning.  On  the  fall  of
the  confederacy  he  fled  from  Richmond  with  other
members  of  the  cabinet,  and,  on  becoming  separated
from  the  party,  escaped  from  the  coast  of  Florida
to  the  Bahamas  in  an  open  boat,  thence  going  to
Nassau,  and  in  September,  1865,  reached  Liverpool.
He  at  once  began  the  study  of  English  law,  and
was  entered  as  a  student  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  13  Jan.,
1866.  In  the  following  summer  he  was  called  to
the  English  bar,  at  the  age  of  fifty-five.  At  first
his  success  was  slight,  and  he  was  compelled  to  re-
sort to  journalism  for  a  livelihood.  In  1868  he  pub-
lished "  A  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Sale  of  Personal
Property,"  which  is  now  the  authority  on  this  sub-
ject in  English  law  (3d  ed.,  London,  1883).  His
practice  then  grew  rapidly,  and  in  June,  1872,  he
was  made  queen's  counsel,  after  which  his  busi-
ness soon  became  as  large  and  remunerative  as
that  of  any  lawyer  in  the  land.  Among  his  many
arguments,  the  one  most  generally  known  is  that
which  he  delivered  before  the  court  for  crown
cases  reserved,  on  behalf  of  the  captain  of  the
"  Franconia."  His  last  great  nisi  prius  case  was
that  of  Anson  and  others  against  the  London  and
northwestern  railway.  After  this  he  accepted
only  briefs  upon  appeal,  and  appeared  solely  before
the  house  of  lords  and  the  privy  council.  Early  in
1883  he  was  compelled  by  failing  health  to  retire
from  practice,  and  a  famous  farewell  banquet  was
given  him  in  the  hall  of  the  Inner  Temple,  London,
30  June,  1883.  He  then  withdrew  to  Paris,  where
his  wife  and  daughter  resided,  and  where  his  health
rapidly  failed  until  his  death.

BENJAMIN,  Nathan,  missionary,  b.  in  Cats-
kill,  N.  Y.,  14  Dec,  1811 ;  d.  in  Constantinople,
Turkey,  27  Jan.,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams, in  1832,  and  at  Andover  theological  seminary
in  1835,  was  appointed  as  missionary  to  Greece
and  Turkey  by  the  American  board,  and  went  to
Argos  in  1836.  He  removed  to  Athens  in  1838,
and  there  labored  for  six  years,  chiefly  in  con-
nection with  the  press.  From  1843  till  1845  he
was  acting  U.  S.  consul  at Athens,  and he  then


286


BENJAMIN


BENNER


entered  upon  the  Armenian  mission  at  Trebizond,
but  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1845.  Subse-
quently he  was  summoned  to  a  new  mission,  and
arrived  at  Smyrna,  7  Dec,  1847,  where  he  devoted
his  attention  to  the  printing  of  the  Bible  and
tracts  in  the  Armenian  language.  In  1852  this
work  was  transferred  to  Constantinople,  where  he
also  preached  steadily  in  the  Greek  and  English
languages.  He  translated  numerous  works  into
Greek  and  Armenian,  including  "  Pilgrim's  Prog-
ress "  and  Daubigny's  "  Reformation,"  and  also
established  the  first  newspaper  ever  published  in
the  Armenian  tongue,  "  The  Morning  Star,"  which
is  still  issued. — His  wife,  Mary  Gladding:  Wheel-
er, b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  1  March,  1814;  d.  in
Medford,  Mass.,  8  March,  1871,  translated  several
small  works  into  Greek,  and  contributed  poems  to
periodicals.  Sne  also  published  '*  The  Missionary
Sisters"  (New  York,  1859).— Their  son,  Samuel
Greene  Wheeler,  author,  b.  in  Argos,  Greece,  13
Feb.,  1837,  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1859.
Shortly  afterward  he  became  the  assistant  libra-
rian in  the  state  library,  Albany,  N.  Y.,  where  he
remained  from  1861  till  1864.  In  February,  1888,
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  at  the  court  of
Persia,  and  established  the  legation  at  Teheran.
He  resigned  in  July,  1885.  Mr.  Benjamin's  con-
tributions to  periodical  literature  have  been  very
numerous.  For  some  time  he  was  the  art  editor
of  the  New  York  "  Evening  Mail  "  and  the  '■  Maga-
zine of  Art."  Among  his  books  are  "  Constanti-
nople, Isle  of  Pearls,  and  other  Poems "  (Boston,
1860) ;  "  Ode  on  the  Death  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "
(1865) ;  "  The  Turk  and  the  Greek  "  (1867) ;  "  Tom
Roper"  (Philadelphia,  1868);  "Muretus's  Advice
to  his  Son,"  a  metrical  translation  from  the  Latin
(Albany,  1870);  "The  Choice  of  Paris;  a  Romance
of  the  Troad  "  (Boston,  1870) ;  "  What  is  Art  ?  "
(1875) ;  "  Contemporary  Art  in  Europe "  (New
York,  1877) ;  "  The  Atlantic  Islands  "  (1869) ;  "  Art
in  America"  (1879);  "The  Multitudinous  Seas"
(1879) ;  "  Our  American  Artists  "  (Boston,  1st  series,
1879 ;  2d  series,  1881) ;  "  The  World's  Paradises  "
(New  York,  1880) ;  "  Troy,  its  Legend,  Literature,
and  Topography"  (1880);  "A  Group  of  Etchers"
(1882) ;  "  Cruise  of  the  Alice  May  "  (1883) ;  "  The
Story  of  Persia  "  (1886) ;  and  "  Persia  and  the  Per-
sians "  (Boston,  1886).  He  has  drawn  many  illus-
trations for  magazines,  an  illustrated  edition  of
Longfellow's  poems,  and  other  books.  His  paint-
ings include  "Home  of  the  Sea  Birds"  (1875);
"  Porta  da  Cruz,  Madeira  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Corbiere,
or  Sailor's  Dread  "  (1876) ;  "  The  Wide,  Wide  Sea  "
(1877);  "Yachts  Struck  by  a  Squall"  (1879);
"  Among  the  Breakers  "  (1879) ;  and  "  In  the  Roar-
ing Forties  "  (1882).

BENJAMIN,  Park,  journalist,  b.  in  Demerara,
British  Guiana,  13  Aug.,  1809;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  Sept.,  1864.  His  father  was  born  in  Con-
necticut, but  removed  to  Demerara,  and  there  car-
ried on  business.  At  an  early  age  Park  was  sent
to  New  England  for  medical  advice  and  to  be
educated.  He  studied  for  two  years  at  Harvard,
and  then  at  Trinity,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1829,  after  which  he  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Boston  in  1832.  His  tastes  inclined
more  toward  literature  than  to  law,  and  he  became
one  of  the  original  editors  of  the  "  New  England
Magazine."  In  1837  he  removed  to  New  York  and
edited,  in  connection  with  Charles  Fenno  Hoffman,
the  "  American  Monthly  Magazine."  Ijater  he  was
associated  with  Plorace'  Greeley  as  editor  of  the
"  New-Yorker,"  and  for  a  short  time  had  charge  of
the  "  Brother  Jonathan,"  a  literary  weekly  paper.
In  1840  he  established  the  "  New  World,"  and  edit-


ed it  nearly  five  years,  in  connection  with  Epes
Sargent  and  Rufus  W.  Griswold.  He  afterward
edited  and  published,  for  a  short  time  only,  "  The
Western  Continent "  and  "  The  American  Mail"-
but  these  periodicals  were  not  altogether  success-
ful, and  he  withdrew  from  all  publication.  The
remainder  of  his  life  was  spent  in  New  York,  de-
voted to  literary  pursuits.  He  contributed,  both
in  prose  and  verse,  to  various  periodicals,  and  de-
livered lectures  and  read  poems  in  public.  "  The
Meditation  of  Nature  "  (1832),  "  Poetry,  a  Satire  "
(1832),  and  "Infatuation"  (1844),  are  the  best
known  of  his  longer  poems,  and  "  The  Tired  Hunt-
er," "The  Nautilus,"  "To  One  Beloved,"  "The
Departed,"  and  "  The  Old  Sexton,"  are  the  most
successful  of  his  shorter  poems.  No  collected  edi-
tion of  his  writings  has  been  published.  Mr.  Ben-
jamin was  in  person  a  man  of  full  chest  and  pow-
erful arms,  but  was  completely  lame  below  the
hips. — His  son.  Park,  patent  expert,  b.  in  New
York  city,  11  May,  1849,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  naval  acadeuiy  in  1867.  He  was  ordered
to  the  "  Franklin,"  Admiral  Farragut's  flag-ship,
and  with  it  spent  two  years  in  Europe.  In  18(59
he  was  advanced  to  the  grade  of  ensign,  but  he
soon  resigned,  and  studied  law  at  tlie  Albany  Law
School,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1870.  From
1872  till  1878  he  was  associate  editor  of  the  "  Sci-
entific American,"  and  since  that  time  has  been
occupied  as  scientific  expert  or  expert  counsel  in
patent  cases.  Among  his  short  stories  are  "The
End  of  New  York  "  and  "  The  Story  of  the  Tele-
gust."  His  books  include  "  Shakings — Etchings
lor  the  Naval  Academy"  (Boston,  1867);  "  Wrin-
kles and  Receipts  "  (New  York,  1875) ;  "  Appletons'
Cyclopa?dia  of  Applied  Mechanics,"  edited  (1880);
and  "The  Age  of  Electricity"  (1886).

BENJAMIN,  Samuel  Nicoll,  soldier,  b.  in
New  York  city,  13  Jan.,  1839 ;  d.  on  Governor's
island.  New  York  harbor,  15  May,  1886.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1861,
and  became  a  2d  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery.  He
served  continuously  throughout  the  civil  war,  was
at  Bull  Run,  Malvern  Hill,  and  Fredericksburg,  in
command  of  a  battery  at  Covington,  in  command
of  the  reserve  artillery  of  the  9th  army  corps,  14
Aug.  till  24  Oct.,  1863,  and  was  chief  of  artillery,
9th  army  corps,  in  the  East  Tennessee  and  Rich-
mond campaigns ;  was  at  the  battle  of  the  Wil-
derness and  also  at  Spottsylvania,  where  he  was
severely  wounded.  He  was  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel  13  May,  1865,  and  major  3  March,  1875.
On  recovery  from  his  wounds  he  became  assistant
professor  of  mathematics  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy,  and  from  1869  till  1875  he  was  at  the
artillery  school  for  practice.  Fort  Monroe,  Va.
Then,  having  been  transferred  to  the  staff,  he  was
made  assistant  adjutant-general,  and  was  on  duty
first  at  Washington,  and  later  became  adjutant-
general  of  the  department  of  Arizona.  In  June,
1885,  he  was  made  assistant  adjutant-general  of
the  division  of  the  Atlantic,  and  assigned  to  army
headquarters  on  Governor's  island.  Col.  Benjamin
was  one  of  the  very  few  officers  that  hekl  the  con-
gressional medal  for  conspicuous  bravery  in  the
field. He  married  a  daughter  of  Hamilton  Fish.

BENNER,  Philip,  iron-maker,  b.  in  Chester
CO.,  Pa.,  19  May,  1762;  d.  in  Centre  co..  Pa.,  27
July,  1832.  He  served  in  the  revolutionary  war,
and  it  is  said  that  his  mother  quilted  money  into
the  back  of  his  vest,  for  use  in  case  he  was  cap-
tured. After  the  war  he  engaged  in  the  iron
business  in  Coventry,  and  in  1792  he  purchased
the  "Rock  Forge  lands,"  where  he  established
works. In  1794  he  erected  a  forge,  the  first  in  that


BENNET


BENNETT


237


vicinity,  and  manufactured  iron  during  the  year.
At  the  beginning  of  the  century  he  had  increased
his  plant  by  the  erection  of  a  grist-mill,  and  had
begun  the  "building  of  a  larger  forge,  afterward
adding  a  nail-mill,  furnaces,  and  other  improve-
ments. The  development  of  the  iron  industry  in
the  western  part  of  Pennsylvania  is  largely  due  to
his  enterprise.  The  output  from  his  works  was
packed  on  horses  and  sent  to  Pittsburg,  where  for
many  years  he  enjoyed,  without  competition,  the
trade  in  what  he  called  "Juniata  iron."  The  bor-
ough of  Bellefonte  was  greatly  indebted  to  his  en-
terprise and  liberality.  He  acquired  a  large  prop-
erty, and  built  some  of  the  finest  residences  in  the
town.  He  also  contributed  largely  for  the  building
of  the  water-works.  In  politics  he  was  a  democrat
and  was  twice  a  presidential  elector,  notably  on  the
Jackson-Calhoun  ticket  of  1824.  In  1827  he  estab-
lished the  "  Centre  Democrat "  at  Bellefonte,  in  the
interest  of  Gen.  Jackson.  He  was  major-general  of
the  Pennsylvania  militia,  and  left  a  valuable  estate.
BENNET,  OrLaiido,  wrecker,  b.  in  Ithaca,  N.
Y.,  4  Oct.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Bellport,  Long  Island,  N.  Y.,
10  July,  1880.  He  was  associated  with  his  father,
Phineas  Bennet,  and  William  D.  Andrews,  in  a
company  engaged  in  the  recovery  of  indestructible
goods  from  wrecks.  In  this  work  he  succeeded  in
raising  two  steamers  which  had  been  sunk  in  sixty
feet  of  water  in  the  North  river,  and  recovered  a
cargo  of  quicksilver  from  a  wreck  covered  by
many  feet  of  sand.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
j  employed  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  clear  the
j  harbors  of  Charleston  and  Savannah  from  monitors,
I  torpedoes,  and  other  obstructions.  By  this  means
I  a  sea-way  was  opened  to  supply  Gen.  William  T.
j  Sherman's  army  after  its  march  to  the  sea.
I  BENNET,  or  BENNETT,  Richard,  colonial
governor  of  Virginia  in  the  17th  century.  He  was
j  a  Virginia  planter  who,  with  William  Clayborne,
was  appointed  by  the  "  Long  parliament "  in  1651
I  to  act  with  English  commissioners  in  reconciling
the  colony  to  the  administration  of  Oliver  Crom-
well in  England.  Many  of  the  colonists  favored
the  Stuarts,  and  the  parliament  wisely  sought  to
conciliate  rather  than  coerce  them.  Bennet  was
a  Roundhead,  as  was  also  his  fellow-commissioner.
All  opposition  did  not  disappear,  however,  until
the  British  frigate  '"Guinea"  arrived,  in  March,
1G53,  with  orders  to  carry  out  the  instructions  of
the  commissioners,  and  if  necessary  to  enforce  the
authority  of  parliament.  Virtual  independence
was,  in  fact,  guaranteed  to  Virginia,  and  it  was
agreed  that  the  people  should  have  all  the  liberties
of  free-born  Englishmen,  should  enact  their  own
laws,  should  remain  unquestioned  as  to  their  past
loyalty,  and  should  have  "  as  free  trade  as  the  peo-
ple of  England."  So  much  was  granted  by  parlia-
ment, but  an  article  confirming  her  ancient  bounds,
prohibiting  taxation  without  representation,  and
agreeing  that  no  forts  should  be  erected  without
the  consent  of  the  colony,  was  never  approved.
Until  the  restoration,  Virginia  was  nominally  in-
dependent, although  actually  under  the  rule  of  the
commissioners.  The  executive  officer  became  elec-
tive, and  Bennet  was  chosen  governor.  Members  of
the  house  of  burgesses  were  required  to  take  oath
that  they  would  especially  provide  for  the  "  gen-
eral good  and  prosperity  "  of  Virginia  and  its  inhab-
itants. Gov.  Bennet  had  been  treated  oppressively
by  the  late  royalist  governor,  Sir  William  Berke-
ley, but  nobly  refrained  from  taking  the  revenge
that  was  made  easy  by  his  official  position.  Under
Bennet's  administration  the  house  of  burgesses
claimed  the  right  to  define  the  powers  of  the  gov-
ernor and  council,  and  declared  "  that  the  right  of


electing  all  the  officers  of  this  colony  should  apper-
tain to  the  burgesses  as  the  representatives  of  the
people."  Maryland  was  not  so  easily  pacified,  being
more  aggressively  loyal,  and  Bennet  with  Clay-
borne  went  over  in  the  "  Guinea  "  frigate  with  the
English  commissioners,  and  enforced  submission.
In  1654  the  Maryland  royalists  or  proprietaries,
under  the  instigation  of  Lord  Baltimore,  again
revolted,  and  overthrew  the  parliamentarians,  and
intercolonial  hostilities  followed  by  land  and  sea,
resulting  in  victory  for  the  Virginians  under  Gov.
Bennet.  The  decisive  action  took  place  on  25
March,  1655,  and  many  prisoners,  including  the
royalist  Gov.  Stone,  were  taken  captive.  At  least
four  of  these  were  executed.  During  the  same
year  Gov.  Bennet  retired  from  public  life.

BENNETT,  Charles  Wesley,  educator,  b.  in
East  Bethany,  N.  Y.,  18  July,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesleyan  university  in  1852,  and,  after
teaching  for  several  years,  became  a  Methodist
minister  in  1862.  In  1864  he  resumed  teaching  as
principal  of  the  Genesee  Weslevan  seminary  at
Lima,  N.  Y.  From  1866  till  1869"he  studied  in  the
university  of  Berlin,  Germany,  and,  after  preach-
ing two  years,  became,  in  1871,  professor  of  history
and  logic  in  Syracuse  university.  From  1872  till
1876  he  was  art  editor  of  the  "  Ladies'  Repository,"
and  after  that  of  the  "  National  Repository."  He
has  published,  besides  reports,  lectures,  and  numer-
ous contributions  to  reviews  and  encyclopaedias,
"  A  Digest  of  the  Laws  and  Resolutions  of  Con-
gress relative  to  Pensions,  Bounty-Lands,  Pay  of
the  Army,  etc.,  with  Complete  Forms  of  Appli-
cation ''  (Washington,  1854),  and  "  National  Edu-
cation in  Italy,  France,  Germany,  England,  and
Wales,  popularly  considered ''  (Svracuse,  1879).

BENNETT,  De  Robigne  Mortimer,  freethink-
er, b.  in  Springfield,  N.  Y.,  23  Dec,  1818;  d.  in
New  York  city,  6  Dec,  1882.  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education  at  Cooperstown,  N.  Y.,  and
in  September,  1833,  became  a  Shaker  and  settled
in  New  Lebanon,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  for
thirteen  years,  studying  and  practising  medicine.
In  1846  he,  with  several  others,  decided  to  leave
the  community,  and  subsequently  was  engaged
in  business  pursuits.  Later  he  became  an  out-
spoken freethinker,  and  in  1873  established  "The
Truth-Seeker,"  in  which  he  combated  with  vigor
what  he  considered  the  errors  of  orthodox  theology.
From  1877  until  his  death  he  was  persecuted  for
his  radical  opinions.  He  was  arrested  three  times,
and  for  a  year  was  confined  in  the  Albany  peni-
tentiary, having  been  convicted  of  selling  an  ob-
scene book.  A  petition  bearing  200,000  names,  and
asking  for  his  release,  was  sent  to  President  Hayes,
who  failed  to  act  on  it.  The  freethinkers  of  the
United  States  erected  a  fine  monument  to  his
memory  in  Greenwood  cemetery.  He  published
numerous  works,  among  which  were  "  The  World's
Sages,  Thinkers,  and  Reformers"  (New  York,
1876) ;  "  Champions  of  the  Church  "  (1880) ;  "  The
Gods  and  Religions  of  Ancient  and  Modern
Times "  (1881) ;  "From  Behind  the  Bars"  (1881)
— the  last  two  were  written  in  prison  ;  "  An  Infi-
del Abroad  "  (1881) ;  and  "  A  Truth-Seeker  Around
the  World  "  (4  vols.,  1882).

BENNETT,  Emerson,  author,  b.  in  Monson,
Hampden  co.,  Mass.,  16  March,  1822.  His  father
died  in  1835,  and  after  remaining  three  years
longer  on  the  homestead  farm  young  Bennett  pre-
pared for  college,  but  at  the  age  of  seventeen  went
to  New  York  city,  where  he  published  a  poem
called  "The  Brigand,"  in  an  Odd-Fellows' journal.
After  visiting  Philadelphia  and  Baltimore,  he
went  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  first  became  travel-


238


BENNETT


BENNETT


ling  agent  for  a  magazine,  and  then  wrote  stories
for  the  "  Daily  Commercial."  He  also  founded  a
magazine  called  "  The  Casket,"  but  it  lived  only
nine  months.  In  1850  Mr.  Bennett  moved  to
Philadelphia.  His  writings  include  about  forty
romances  and  many  hundred  sketches  of  American
frontier  life,  which  have  appeared  in  the  New
York  "  Ledger,"  the  Philadelphia  "  Evening  Post,"
and  other  papers.  In  1860  he  established  the
'•Dollar  Monthly,"  which  was  a  failure.  Among
his  novels  are-  "  Viola "  and  "  Waldo  Warren  "
(Philadelphia,  1852);  "Clara  Moreland"  (1858);
and  "  The  Artist's  Bride  "  (New  York,  1857).  His
most  popular  books  have  been  "  Prairie  Flower  "
and  "  Leni  Leoti,"  which  have  had  a  circulation  of
100,000  copies.  A  uniform  edition  of  his  novels
was  recently  begun,  but  only  three  volumes  have
been  published,  "  The  Outlaw's  Daughter "  and
"  Villetta  Lindon  "  (Philadelphia,  1873),  and  "  The
Phantom  of  the  Forest "  (1874).

BENNETT,  James  Gordon,  journalist,  b.  in
New  Mill,  near  Keith,  Scotland,  1  Sept.,  1795;
d.  in  New  York  city,  1  June,  1872.  His  parents
were  Roman  Catholics  of  French  descent,  and
when  he  was  fourteen  years  old  he  was  sent
to  Aberdeen  to  study  for  the  priesthood ;  but,
convinced  that  he  had  mistaken  his  vocation,  he
determined  to  emigrate,  and  in  April,  1819,  he
landed  at  Halifax,  N.  S.,  where  he  attempted  to
earn  a  living  by  teaching  book-keeping.  Failing
in  that,  he  made  his  way  to  Boston,  where  he
found  employment  as  a  proof-reader.  About  1822
he  went  to  New  York,  and  contributed  to  the
newspapers,  then  became  assistant  in  the  office  of
the  Charleston  "Courier,"  and  in  1824  returned  to
New  York  and  attempted  to  establish  a  commercial
school,  and  then  to  lecture  on  political  economy,
but  was  unsuccessful,  and  again  turned  to  the
newspapers,  becoming  a  reporter,  paragraphist,
and  contributor  of  poetry  and  all  kinds  of  articles.
J.n  1825  he  bought  on  credit  the  "  Sunday  Courier,"
but  soon  gave  it  up.  The  next  year  he  became  con-
nected with  the  "National  Advocate,"  but  left  it
because  of  its  advocacy  of  the  election  of  John  Q.
Adams,  and  became  associate  editor  on  Noah's
"  Enquirer."  About  this  time  he  joined  the  Tam-
many society.  In  1828  he  went  to  Washington  as
correspondent  for  the  "  Enquirer,"  and  sent  a  series
of  lively  personal  letters  that  were  widely  copied.
At  his  suggestion  the  "  Enquirer ''  was  consolidated
with  another  paper,  becoming  the  "  Courier  and
Enquirer,"  which,  with  James  Watson  Webb  for
editor  and  Bennett  as  his  assistant,  became  the
leading  American  newspaper.  When  it  deserted
Jackson  for  Nicholas  Biddle,  Bennett  left  it,  and
started  a  cheap  party  paper  that  existed  only
thirty  days,  and  then  a  Jackson  organ  in  Phila-
delphia called  the  "  f  p  insylvanian."  He  appealed
to  the  party  to  sustain  this  paper,  and,  being
refused,  returned  to  New  York,  and,  determined
to  trust  no  more  to  politicians,  on  6  May,  1835,
issued  the  first  number  ot  the  "  Herald,"  a  small
four-page  sheet,  sold  for  a  cent  a  copy.  Two  young
printers,  Anderson  and  Smith,  agreed  to  print  it,
and  share  the  profits  and  losses  with  the  editor.
Bennett  wrote  the  entire  newspaper,  making  up
for  the  lack  of  news  by  sensational  opinions,  fic-
titious intelligence,  and  reckless  personal  attacks.
The  paper  became  popular,  although  it  offended
all  parties  and  all  creeds.  On  13  June,  1835,  he
introduced  a  money-article,  then  a  novel  feature  in
American,  journalism.  The  next  month  the  print-
ing-office was  burned,  and  Smith  and  Anderson
abandoned  the  enterprise ;  but  on  31  Aug.  Bennett
revived  the  paper,  of  which  he  was  thenceforth


sole  proprietor.  The  great  fire  of  16  Dec,  1835
was  reported  with  the  fulness  of  incident  and
detail  that  has  since  become  characteristic  of
American  newspaper  reports.  .  In  1838  he  engaged
European  journalists  as  regular  correspondents,
and  extended  the  system  to  the  principal  Ameri-
can cities.  He  systematically  employed  newsboys
to  distribute  his  paper.  The  personal  encounters
in  which  he  became  involved  through  his  lampoons
were  described  in  the  same  lively  and  picturesque
style.  In  1841  the  income  of  the  paper  was  at  least
$100,000.  In  1846  a  long  speech  by  Clay  was  tele-
graphed to  the  "  Herald."  During  the  civil  war
its  circulation  more  than  doubled.  It  employed
sixty-three  war  correspondents.  Its  expenditures
for  correspondence  and  news  were  disproportionate
to  its  payment  for  editorial  and  critical  matter.
It  was  as  a  collector  of  news  that  Mr.  Bennett
mainly  excelled.  He  had  an  unerring  judgment  of
its  pecuniary  value.  He  knew  how  to  select  the
subject  that  engrossed  the  interest  of  the  people,
and  to  give  them  all  the  details  they  could
desire.  He  had  also  a  method  of  impressing  the
importance  of  news  upon  others  in  his  employ.  No
exchange  editor  was  so  close  a  reader  as  he  of  the
great  papers  of  the  country.  He  clipped  passages
for  insertion  or  for  texts  "for  editorials  or  special
articles,  and  when  he  visited  the  office  it  was  to
unpack  his  mind  of  the  suggestions  stored  there  by
reading  the  exchanges.  He  seldom  gave  an  edi-
torial writer  more  than  the  suggestions  for  an
article,  and  he  required  his  co-laborers  to  meet
him  daily  for  consultation  and  the  distribution  of
topics.  When  another  person  presided,  the  several
editors  made  suggestions;  when  Bennett  himself
was  present,  the  editors  became  mere  listeners,
and  wrote,  as  it  were,  at  his  dictation.  The  "  Me-
moirs of  J.  Gr.  Bennett  and  his  Times  "  was  pub-
lished in  New  York  in  1855.  See  Hudson's  "Jour-
nalism in  the  United  States"  (New  York,  1872).
On  6  June,  1840,  Mr.  Bennett  married  Miss  Henri-
etta Agnes  Crean,a  poor,  but  accomplished,  music-
teacher  in  New  York.  She  died  in  Italy,  31  March,
1873.— James  Gordon,  Jr.,  b.  in  New  York  city,
10  May,  1841,  the  only  son  of  the  founder  of
the  "  Herald,"  became  the  proprietor  of  the  news-
paper upon  the  death  of  his  father.  He  resides
mostly  in  Paris,  and  gives  his  attention  chiefly
to  superintending  the  collection  of  foreign  news.
He  added  to  the  fame  of  his  paper  by  publishing
in  England  storm-warnings  transmitted  from  the
United  States,  by  fitting  out  the  "  Jeaiiette  "  polar
expedition,  by  sending  Henry  M.  Stanley  in  search
of  Livingstone,  and  by  other  similar  enterprises.
In  1883  he  associated  himself  with  John  W.  Mac-
kay  in  forming  the  commercial  cable  company  and
laying  a  new  cable  between  America  and  Europe,
to  compete  with  the  combined  English  and  French
lines.  He  has  taken  much  interest  in  sports,  es-
pecially in  yachting,  and  in  1866  he  took  part  in  a
memorable  race  from  Sandy  Hook  to  the  Needles,
Isle  of  Wight,  which  was  won  by  his  schooner,  the
"  Henrietta,"  in  13  days  21  hours  and  55  minutes,
against  two  competing  yachts.  In  1870  he  sailed
another  race  across  the  Atlantic  from  Queenstown
to  New  York  in  his  yacht,  the  "  Dauntless,"  but
was  beaten  by  the  English  "  Cambria,"  which  ar-
rived onlv  two  hours  in  advance.

BENNETT,  Milo  Lyman,  jurist,  b.  in  Sharon,
Conn.,  in  1790 ;  d.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  7  July,  1868.
He  attended  at  V/illiams  and  also  Yale,  where  he
was  graduated  in  1811.  He  studied  law  at  the
Litchfield  law  school,  and  entered  upon  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  in  Burlington,  Vt.,  where  he
resided  until his  death. He  became  in  1839  an


BENNETT


BENTON


239


associate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  state,
and  retained  that  office  for  twenty  years.  He  was
'the  author  of  several  legal  text-books,  the  last  of
which  was  "  The  Vermont  Justice."

BENNETT,  Thomas  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  Union
CO.,  Ind.,  16  Feb.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  the
law  school  of  Indiana  Asbury  university  in  1854,
and  began  practice.  He  was  elected  to  the  state
senate  in  1858,  and  resigned  in  1861  to  enter  the
national  service.  He  was  captain  in  the  15th
Indiana  volunteers  in  April,  1861,  major  of  the
3Gth  regiment  in  September,  colonel  of  the  69th
in  August,  1862,  and  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral on  5  March,  1865.  He  was  agam  chosen  to
the  state  senate  in  October,  1864,  and  served  till
March,  1867.  He  was  mayor  of  Richmond,  Ind.,
from  May,  1869,  till  1871,  and  in  September  of  the
latter  year  appointed  governor  of  Idaho  territory.
He  resigned  this  office  4  Dec,  1875,  supposing  that
he  had  been  elected  delegate  to  congress  as  a  re-
publican :  but  the  house  gave  the  seat  to  his  demo-
cratic opponent.

BENNETT,  William  Zebina,  chemist,  b.  in
Montpelier,  Vt.,  25  Feb.,  1856.  He  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1878,  and  became  assistant  in  chem-
istry at  that  university  in  September  of  the  same
year.  He  continued  as  such  until  January,  1880,
when  he  became  master  of  sciences  and  mathe-
matics at  De  Veany  College.  During  1879  and
1880  he  was  assistant  teacher  in  the  summer  school
of  chemistry.  In  1880  he  became  assistant  pro-
fessor of  chemistry,  and  in  1883  succeeded  to  the
chair  of  natural  sciences  in  the  University  of
Wooster.  Besides  numerous  contributions  to  sci-
entific periodicals,  he  has  published  "A  Plant
Analysis  "  (Wooster,  1885).

BENSEL,  James  Berry,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  2  Aug.,  1856;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1886.
When  about  eight  years  old  he  removed  with  his
parents  to  Lynn,  Mass.,  and  most  of  his  life  was
passed  in  that  city.  His  literary  tastes  developed
early,  and  his  first  poems  appeared  in  print  when
he  was  but  seventeen.  A  novel  by  him,  called
"  King  Cophetua's  Wife,"  was  published  as  a  serial
in  the  "  Overland  Monthly  "  in  1883,  and  a  small
volume  of  his  poems  was  issued  in  January,  1886,
with  the  title  "  In  the  King's  Garden."  A  second
and  enlarged  edition  of  this  appeared  in  the  sum-
mer of  1886.  His  life  was  full  of  hardships  and
sorrows  more  than  most  men  are  called  to  en-
dure, and  this  circumstance  imparted  a  tinge  of
melancholy  to  many  of  his  poems.  His  verse  is
always  musical,  often  highly  finished,  and  is  not
lacking  in  either  strength  of  thought  or  delicacy
of  expression.  Long  and  seemingly  hopeless  strug-
gles against  adversity  and  ill  health  atfected  his
spirits  and  prevented,  him  from  realizing  the  full
extent  of  his  powers.  His  death,  in  his  thirtieth
year,  removed  from  the  world  one  of  the  most
promising  of  the  younger  American  poets.

BENSON,  Egbert,  jurist,  b.  in  New  York  city,
21  June,  1746 ;  d.  in  Jamaica,  Long  Island,  24  Aug.,
1833.  He  was  graduated  at  King's  college  in
1765,  and  became  distinguished  for  eloquence  as  a
pleader,  and  for  legal  learning.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  revolutionary  committee  of  safety,  was
appointed  in  1777  the  first  attorney-general  of  the
state,  and  was  elected  the  same  year  to  the  first
state  legislature.  In  1783  he  was  one  of  the  three
commissioners  appointed  to  direct  the  embarkation
of  loyalists  for  Nova  Scotia  in  June  of  that  year.
In  1788  he  took  the  lead  in  the  legislature  in  advo-
cating the  acceptance  of  the  federal  constitution.
He  ceased  to  be  attorney-general  of  New  York  in
1789. He  was  a  member  of  the  continental  con-


gress from  1784  till  1788,  and  was  returned  to  the
first  and  to  the  second  congress,  taking  an  active
part  in  the  deliberations.  He  was  judge  of  the
supreme  court  of  New  York  from  1794  till  1802,
and  also  sat  for  a  time  on  the  federal  bench  as  a
circuit  judge.  He  was  a  member  of  congress  again
in  1813-'5.  From  1789  to  1802  he  was  a  regent
of  the  New  York  university.  In  1808  he  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Harvard,  and  in  1811
from  Dartmouth.  He  was  the  first  president  of
the  New  York  historical  society,  and  author  of  a
"  Vindication  of  the  Captors  of  Major  Andre  "  (New
York,  1817),  and  of  a  monograph  entitled  "  Memoir
on  Dutch  Names  of  Places  "  (1835).

BENSON,  Eugene,  painter,  b.  in  Hyde  Park,
N.  Y.,  in  1837.  He  entered  the  national  academy,
New  York,  about  1856.  and  studied  also  with  J.
H.  Wright,  portrait-painter,  and  afterward  in
Paris,  Venice,  and  Rome,  devoting  himself  partic-
ularly to  the  Venetian  masters.  His  professional
life  has  been  for  the  most  part  spent  on  the  conti-
nent and  in  travels  in  the  east,  Egypt,  Syria,  etc.
He  established  his  studio  in  Florence  in  1871,  and
removed  to  Rome  in  1883.  He  was  elected  an  as-
sociate of  the  national  academy  in  1862.  Among
the  better  known  of  his  pictiires  are  "  Cloud  Tow-
ers "  ;  "  Strayed  Maskers  "  (1873) ;  "  Interior  of  St.
Mark's";  "Reverential  Anatomist"  (1876);  "Ba-
zaar at  Cairo";  "Hay- Boats";  "Peasants  of  Ca-
dore  at  Religious  Worship  "  ;  "  Market- Place,
Egypt "  (1877) ;  "  Study  of  Girl  in  Blue  "  ;  "  Hash-
ish-Smokers "  ;  "  Slave's  Tower  "  (1878) ;  "  Thoughts
in  Exile  " ;  "  Reverie  "  ;  "  Making  the  Best  of  It ";
"Dead  Calm  on  the  Hill";  "Fire- Worshippers"
(1879);  "Mountain  Torrent"  (1881);  "Distin-
guished Company  in  Titian's  Garden  " ;  "  State
Secret  in  Venice"  (1882);  "Spring";  "Art  and
Love  "  ;  "  Afternoon  on  the  Lagoon  " ;  "  Ariadne  "
(1883).  Mr.  Benson  has  been  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  periodicals,  and  has  published  two  books  en-
titled "  Gaspara  Stampa ;  the  Story  of  Her  Life,"
and  "Art  and  Nature  in  Italy"  (Boston,  1881).

BENSON,  Henry  C,  clergyman,  b.  near  Xenia,
Ohio,  in  1815.  He  became  a  Methodist  minister  in
1842,  joining  the  Indiana  conference,  and  in  1850
was  elected  professor  of  Greek  in  Indiana  Asbury
university.  In  1852  he  removed  to  California.
He  was  editor  of  the  "  Pacific  Christian  Advo-
cate" at  Portland,  Oregon,  from  1864  to  1868,  in
which  year  he  became  editor  of  the  "  California
Advocate."  For  several  years  he  labored  among
the  Choctaw  Indians  as  a  missionary,  and  he  has  re-
lated his  experiences  in  a  book  called  "  Life  among
the  Choctaws."  Pie  has  also  published  an  essay
on  "  The  Lord's  Day,  or  the  Christian  Sabbath  the
First  Day  of  the  Week,  not  the  Seventh."

BENSON,  James  Rea,  Canadian  capitalist.
He  has  been  engaged  in  commercial  pursuits  in
connection  with  mills  and  vessels  for  many  years ;
is  a  director  of  the  Imperial  bank  of  Canada,  and
of  the  London  and  Canadian  loan  agency  com-
pany, vice-president  of  the  international  suspen-
sion bridge  company,  and  holds  various  other
offices  of  trust  in  the  commercial  world.  In  1867
he  was  elected  to  the  Canadian  parliament  by  ac-
clamation for  the  Niagara  division,  which  con-
stituency he  represented  until  the  year  following,
when  he  was  sent  to  the  senate.

BENTON,  Jacob,  congressman,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  Vt.,  19  Aug.,  1814.  He  received  an  academic
education,  and,  after  teaching  for  several  years,
studied  law  with  Chief-Justice  Bellows,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1843.  He  began  practice  at
Lancaster,  N.  H.,  made  a  high  reputation  as  a  suc-
cessful advocate, and early  became  an earnest


240


BENTON


BENTON


member  of  the  whig  party,  and  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1854,  1855,  and  1856.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Chicago  convention  of  I860,  and
afterward  commanded  the  state  volunteers  as
brigadier-general.  He  was  elected  to  congress
from  New  Hampshire,  serving  two  terms,  from  4
March,  1867,  till  3  March,  1871.  While  in  con-
gress, Mr.  Benton  favored  all  efforts  to  reduce  the
expenses  of  tlie  government  and  to  equalize  taxa-
tion. Although  a  clear  and  convincing  public
speaker,  Mr,  Benton  rarely  addressed  the  house.

BENTON,  James  Gilchrist,  soldier,  b.  in  Leb-
anon, N.  H.,  15  Sept.,  1820;  d.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  23  Aug.,  1881.  His  father,  Calvin  Benton,
was  a  wool-merchant  and  introduced  merino  sheep
into  New  England.  The  son  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1842,  brevetted  2d
lieutenant  of  ordnance,  served  at  Watervliet,  N.  Y.,
arsenal  until  1848,  was  promoted  to  the  full  rank
of  second  lieutenant,  3  March,  1847,  and  trans-
ferred to  the  ordnance  bureau  in  Washington,
where  he  assisted  in  preparing  the  "  System  of  Ar-
tillery for  the  Land  Service  and  the  "  Ordnance
Manual."  He  was  made  first  lieutenant,  25  March,
1848,  served  at  Harper's  Ferry  armory  in  1849,  and
in  the  San  Antonio  ordnance  depot,  Texas,  from
1849  till  1852,  was  assistant  inspector  of  arsenals
and  armories,  and  commanded  the  Charleston,  S.  C,
arsenal  in  1853.  From  this  time  until  1857  he  was
on  special  duty  in  Washington,  engaged  princi-
pally in  making  experiments  that  led  to  the  adop-
tion of  the  Springfield  rifled  musket  in  place  of
the  old  smooth-bore.  He  was  also  a  member  of
the  ordnance  boards  of  1854  and  1856,  then  pro-
moted to  a  captaincy  after  fourteen  years'  continu-
ous service,  and  appointed  mstructor  of  ordnance
and  gunnery  at  West  Point,  where  he  remained
until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  also  de-
signed the  first  wrought-iron  sea-coast  gun-car-
riage made  in  this  country,  which  was  adopted  by
the  government,  and  has  been  in  use  ever  since.
In  April,  1861,  Capt.  Benton  went  to  Washington
as  principal  assistant  to  Gen.  James  W.  Ripley,
chief  of  ordnance,  was  promoted  major  of  ord-
nance in  1863,  and  in  the  same  year  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  ordnance  board,  when  he  was  put  in
command  of  Washington  arsenal,  where  he  re-
mained until  1866.  Soon  after  he  assumed  com-
mand, when  an  explosion  took  place  in  the  old
penitentiary,  which  had  been  transformed  into  a
storehouse  for  ammunition,  he  entered  the  build-
ing, and,  with  the  assistance  of  a  single  man,  suc-
ceeaed,  with  his  feet  and  hands,  in  putting  out  the
fire  in  the  loose  tow  and  rope-handles  of  the  boxes
before  the  arrival  of  the  fire  department.  In  July,
1864,  he  performed  another  act  of  valor  on  the  oc-
casion of  a  similar  explosion,  when  he  entered  a
magazine,  stripped  off  his  coat,  threw  it  over  an
open  barrel  of  powder  that  was  in  dangerous  prox-
imity to  the  flames,  and  carried  the  whole  in  his
arms  to  a  place  of  safety.  For  these  services  he
was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  13
March,  1865.  Among  the  improvements  made  by
Col.  Benton  in  the  arsenal  grounds  was  cleaning
the  canal,  an  important  sanitary  measure ;  but  the
stirring  of  the  muddy  deposits  engendered  mala-
i-ia,  from  the  effects  of  which  he  never  recovered.
In  June,  1866,  he  was  ordered  to  the  command  of
the  national  armory  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  The  various  models
of  the  Springfield  rifle,  known  as  the  models  of
1866,  1868,  1873,  and  1879,  were  made  under  his
direction.  In  1873,  with  Cols.  Laidley  and  Cris-
pin, he  went  under  orders  from  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment to  Europe  to  collect  information  in  regard


to  the  construction  of  heavy  cannon  and  other
ordnance  manufactures.  His  report  on  this  mat-
ter, as  well  as  his  report  on  "  Experiments  made  at
the  National  Armory  for  the  purpose  of  revising
and  improving  the  System  of  Small  Arms."  was
published  by  the  government  "for  use  in  the  army
and  distribution  to  the  militia."  He  never  took
out  a  patent  for  his  inventions,  holding  that,  as  he
had  been  educated  by  the  government,  it  was  en-
titled to  benefit  in  every  way  by  his  time  and  tal-
ents. Among  his  inventions  was  the  application
of  electricity  to  determine  velocity.  Discovering,
after  a  series  of  carefully  conducted  experiments'
that  the  Navez  electro-ballistic  pendulum  was  too
delicate  and  complicated  for  general  purposes,  he
devised  an  apparatus  with  two  pendulums  of  sim-
ple construction,  known  as  the  Benton  electro-
ballistic  pendulum.  This  was  adopted  by  the
government,  and  came  largely  into  use  in  private
factories  for  testing  powder.  Among  his  other
inventions  were  an  improvement  in  callipers  for
inspecting  shells ;  a  cap-filling  machine ;  the
thread  velocimeter  for  determining  the  velocity  of
projectiles ;  a  system  for  loading  and  manoeuvring
barbette  guns  under  cover  from  the  enemy's  fire,
by  depressing  the  muzzle  of  the  piece  and  using  a
jointed  ramrod ;  re-enforcing-cup  for  cartridge-
case  ;  and  spring-dynamometer.  He  published  "  A
Course  of  Instruction  in  Ordnance  and  Gunnery"
(New  York,  1861 ;  3d  ed.,  1873).

BENTON,  Joel,  author,  b.  in  Amenia,  Dutch-
ess CO.,  N.  Y.,  29  May,  1832.  He  was  educated  at
Amenia  seminary,  leaving  the  school  in  1851,  and
has  devoted  himself  for  the  most  part  to  philo-
sophic and  literary  pursuits.  As  an  essayist  and
as  a  poet  he  has  contributed  largely  to  periodical
literature.  Soon  after  Ralph  Waldo  Emerson's
death  he  made  valuable  contributions  to  the  study
of  his  works,  and  published  "  Emerson  as  a  Poet
(New  York,  1883).

BENTON,  Nathaniel  S.,  politician,  b.  In
Cheshire  co.,  N.  H.,  19  Feb,  1792;  d.  in  Little
Falls,  N.  Y.,  29  June,  1869.  He  was  educated  at
Fryeburg  academy,  Maine,  having  for  one  of  his
instructors  Daniel  Webster,  who  was  then  princi-
pal of  the  institution.  Enlisting  in  the  war  of
1812,  as  a  private,  he  passed  rapidly  through  the
grades  of  ensign,  lieutenant,  and  adjutant,  and  on
two  occasions  while  at  Plattsburg  acted  as  judge
advocate-general.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  war
he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1816
removed  to  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  entering  on  the
practice  of  his  profession.  In  1821  he  became  sur-
rogate of  Herkimer  co.,  but  resigned  in  1828  to
take  a  seat  in  the  state  senate.  From  1831  till
1841  he  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  north-
ern district  of  New  York,  an  office  from  which  he
was  removed  by  President  Harrison.  In  1842
he  received  the  appointment  from  Gov.  Marcy
of  the  judgeship  of  Herkimer  co.,  he  being  the
first  in  the  series  of  judges  in  that  county.  In
1845  he  was  elected  secretary  of  state,  in  which
office  he  continued  until  by  the  adoption  of  the
new  state  constitution  a  change  was  effected.  At
that  time  the  state  superintendency  of  the  pubhc
schools  was  an  ex  officio  duty  of  the  sorretary  of
state,  but  generally  devolved  on  one  of  his  depu-
ties. Mr.  Benton  gave  his  personal  attention  to
the  whole  department,  and  wrought  many  bene-
ficial changes.  From  1848  till  1855  he  was  out  of
office,  when  he  transferred  his  allegiance  to  the
American  party,  and  was  their  candidate  for  canal
commissioner,  and  again  for  lieutenant-governor.
The  party  succeeded  in  1855  in  carrying  the  state
as  well  as  electing  a  majority  of  the  canal  board.


Ye-^y^u/^/  ^rm^l^6f^--


L.Appletcn W C? hjViic'.i


BENTON


BENTON


241


and  Mr.  Benton  v/as  made  auditor  of  the  canal
department.  He  immediately  secured  the  passage
of  certain  legislative  enactments  increasing  the
duties  as  well  as  the  power  of  the  office,  and  effect-
ing radical  changes  and  improvements.  When
the  "American  party"  died,  Mr.  Benton  allied  his
fortunes  with  the  republicans,  but  retained  his
office  of  auditor  until  18(58.

BENTON,  Thomas  Hart,  statesman,  b.  near
Hillsborough,  Orange  co.,  N.  C,  14  March,  1782 ;
d.  in  Washington,  10  April,  1858.  He  was  the  son
of  Col.  Jesse  Benton,  lawyer,  of  North  Carolina,
who  was  private  secretary  to  Gov.  Tryon,  the  last
of  the  royal  governors  of  North  Carolina.  His
mother  was  Ann  Gooch,  of  the  Gooch  family  of
Virginia.  He  was  a  cousin  of  the  wife  of  Henry
Clay,  and  was  consequently  often  quoted  during
his  public  life  as  a  relative  of  the  great  statesman
himself.  He  lost  his  father  before  he  was  eight
years  of  age,  and  was  left  with  a  large  family  of
brothers  and  sisters,  all  of  tender  age,  to  the  care
of  his  mother.  As  Thomas  was  the  eldest,  his
opportunities  for  study  were  few.  He  was  for  some
time  at  a  grammar-school,  and  afterward  at  the
university  of  North  Carolina,  but  did  not  com-
plete a  course  of  study  there,  as  his  mother  re-
moved to  Tennessee  to  occupy  a  tract  of  40,000
acres  that  had  been  acquired  by  his  father.  The
family  settled  twenty-five  miles  south  of  Nashville,
where  for  several  years  the  main  w^ork  was  the
opening  a  farm  in  the  wilderness.  The  place,  a
tract  of  3,000  acres,  was  known  as  "  The  Widow
Benton's  Settlement,"  and  was  on  the  extreme
verge  of  civilization.  The  great  war-trail  of  the
southern  tribes  led  through  the  estate.  Settlers
gradually  came,  and  with  them  a  better  assured  pro-
tection. The  place  was  called  Bentontown,  and  the
name  is  retained  to  this  day.  Thomas  studied  law
with  St.  George  Tucker,  entered  the  U .  S.  army  in
1810,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Nashville  in
1811  under  the  patronage  of  Andrew  Jackson,  at
that  time  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  one  of
his  warmest  friends.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature, where  he  obtained  the  passage  of  a  law  for
the  reform  of  the  judicial  system  of  the  state,  and
another  by  which  the  right  of  trial  by  jury  was
given  to  slaves.  In  the  war  of  1812  he  was  Jackson's
aide-de-camp,  and  he  also  raised  a  regiment  of
volunteers.  Owing  to  a  quarrel  in  which  his  brother
Jesse  and  William  (afterward  Gen.)  Carroll  be-
came involved,  ho  and  his  long-time  friend  Gen.
Jackson  became  bitterly  estranged  for  many  years.
A  duel  had  been  arranged  between  Jesse  Benton  and
Carroll,  and  Gen.  Jackson  was  Carroll's  second.
Jesse  sent  an  offensive  account  of  the  matter  to
Thomas,  who  was  then  serving  under  Gen.  Jackson
in  his  military  capacity.  On  4  Sept.,  1813,  Jackson
with  some  friends  happened  to  meet  the  Benton
brothers  in  the  streets  of  Nashville.  Jackson  ad-
vanced upon  Col.  Benton  and  struck  him  with  a
horse-whip ;  a  meUe  followed,  and  pistols  and  knives
were  freely  used,  and  Jackson  received  a  ball  in  his
left  shoulder,  while  Jesse  Benton  received  severe
dirk-wounds  and  thrusts  from  a  sword-cane.  The
president  appointed  Col.  Benton,  in  1813,  a  lieuten-
ant-colonel in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  he  set  out  to
serve  in  Canada,  but  peace  having  been  declared,
he  returned  and  resigned  his  commission.  In  1815
he  took  up  his  residence  in  St.  Louis,  and  resumed
the  practice  of  law.  He  established  a  newspaper,  the
"  Missouri  Inquirer,"  by  which  he  became  involved
in  several  duels,  and  in  one  of  them  killed  his  op-
ponent, a  Mr.  Lucas.  He  deeply  regretted  the  event,
and  carefully  destroyed  all  the  private  papers  con-
nected with  the  matter.  His  journal  took  a  vigor-
VOL. I. — 16


ous  stand  in  favor  of  the  admission  of  Missouri  to
the  union,  notwithstanding  her  slavery  constitu-
tion, and  at  the  end  of  the  controversy  he  was  re-
warded for  his  efforts  by  being  chosen,  in  1820,  one
of  the  senators  from  the  new  state.  For  a  year  he
devoted  himself  to  a  close  study  of  the  Spanish  lan-
guage, in  order  to  accomplish  his  work  more  thor-
oughly. Possessed  of  a  commanding  intellect  and
liberal  culture,  an  assiduous  student,  resolute,  tem-
perate, industrious,  and  endowed  with  a  memory
whose  tenacity  was  marvellous,  he  soon  placed
himself  among  the  leaders  in  the  national  councils.
One  of  his  earliest  efforts  was  to  secure  a  reform
in  the  disposition  of  the  government  lands  to  set-
tlers. A  pioneer  himself,  he  sympathized  with
the  demands  of  the  pioneer,  and  in  1824,  1826,
and  1828  advocated  new  land  laws.  The  general
distress  that  prevailed  throughout  the  country,
and  bore  with  especial  hardship  on  the  land-pur-
chasers of  the  west,  forced  attention  to  this  sub-
ject. Col.  Benton  demanded :  1,  a  pre-emptive
right  to  all  actual  settlers ;  2,  a  periodic  reduc-
tion according  to  the  time  the  land  had  been  in
the  market,  so  as  to  make  the  prices  correspond
to  the  quality ;  3,  the  donation  of  homesteads  to
impoverished  but  industrious  persons,  who  would
cultivate  the  land  for  a  given  period  of  years.
He  presented  a  bill  embracing  these  features,  and
renewed  it  every  year  until  it  took  hold  upon
the  public  mind,  and  was  at  length  substantially
embodied  in  one  of  President  Jackson's  messages,
which  secured  its  final  adoption.  By  his  earnest-
ness in  advocating  this  bill  and  securing  its  final
adoption,  he  gained  the  lasting  friendship  of  every
pioneer  and  settler  in  the  great  west.  His  position
in  the  senate,  and  his  firmness  as  a  supporter  of
Jackson's  administration,  gave  him  great  influence
with  the  democratic  party,  and  he  impressed  his
views  upon  the  president  on  every  occasion.

Col.  Benton  also  caused  the  adoption  of  a  bill
throwing  the  saline  and  mineral  lands  of  Missouri,
which  belonged  to  the  United  States,  open  for  oc-
cupancy. There  was  at  this  time  a  certain  tribute
levied  on  the  people  of  the  Mississippi  valley,  which
proved  in  many  cases  a  most  unequal  burden  and
was  frequently  oppressive.  One  part,  which  met
with  more  hostility  than  any  other,  was  known  as
the  salt-tax.  Benton  took  up  the  matter,  and  in
the  session  of  1829-'30  delivered  such  elaborate  ar-
guments against  the  tax,  and  followed  them  up
with  such  success,  that  it  was  repealed.  He  was
one  of  the  earliest  advocates  of  a  railroad  to  the
Pacific,  and  was  prominent  in  directing  adventure
to  explorations  in  the  far  west,  in  encouraging
overland  transit  to  the  Pacific,  and  in  working  for
the  occupancy  of  the  mouth  of  the  Columbia.  As
early  as  1819  he  had  written  largely  on  these  sub-
jects, and  on  his  entry  into  congress  renewed  his
efforts  to  engage  the  nation  in  these  great  enter-
prises. He  first  elaborated  the  project  of  overland
connection,  listened  to  the  reports  of  trappers  and
voyageurs,  and  as  science  expanded,  and  knowl-
edge of  the  great  wilderness  toward  the  mountains
became  more  definite,  his  views  took  form  in  the
proposals  that  culminated  in  the  opening  of  the
great  central  Pacific  railway.  He  also  favored
the  opening  up  and  protection  of  the  trade  with
New  Mexico ;  encouraged  the  establishment  of
military  stations  on  the  Missouri,  and  throughout
the  interior;  and  urged  the  cultivation  of  amica-
ble relations  with  the  Indian  tribes,  and  the  fos-
tering of  the  commerce  of  our  inland  seas.  He
turned  his  attention  to  the  marking  out  of  the
great  system  of  post-roads,  and  providing  for  theic
permanent  maintenance.


242


BENTON


BENTON


In  the  first  annual  message  of  President  Jack-
son strong  ground  was  taken  against  the  United
States  bank,  then  the  depository  of  the  national
moneys,  and  subsequently,  when  he  directed  the
withdrawal  of  the  deposits  and  their  removal  to
certain  state  banks,  the  result  was  disastrous  to
the  business  of  the  country.  Benton  took  up  the
matter,  addressed  himself  to  a  consideration  of  the
whole  question  of  finance,  circulating  medium,
and  exchange,  and  urged  the  adoption  of  a  gold
and  silver  currency  as  the  true  remedy  for  the  ex-
isting embarrassments.  He  made  on  this  subject
some  of  the  most  elaborate  speeches  of  his  life,
which  attracted  attention  throughout  the  United
States  and  Europe,  and  the  name  of  "  Old  Bullion  "
was  given  to  him.  His  style  of  oratory  at  this
period  was  unimpassioned  and  very  deliberate,  but
overflowing  with  facts,  figures,  logical  deduction,
and  historical  illustration.  In  later  life  he  was
characterized  by  a  peculiar  exuberance  of  wit  and
raciness  that  increased  with  his  years.  The  elabo-
ration of  his  views  on  the  national  finances  paved
the  way  for  subsequent  legislation,  and  did  much
to  bring  about  the  present  sub-treasury  system  of
the  United  States.

To  Col.  Benton  is  to  be  given  the  credit  of  mov-
ing the  famous  "  expunging  resolutions."  A  for-
midable combination  had  been  effected  in  the  sen-
ate, headed  by  Calhoun,  Clay,  and  Webster,  and  a
resolution  condemning  the  president's  course  had
been  adopted.  Benton  took  it  upon  himself  to
have  the  resolution  expunged  from  the  records.
From  1841  till  1851,  under  Presidents  Tyler,  Polk,
and  Taylor,  he  participated  in  the  discussions  that
arose  in  regard  to  the  Oregon  boundary,  the  an-
nexation of  Texas,  and  other  important  subjects.
The  democratic  administration  of  Mr.  Polk  was
nominally  in  favor  of  lat.  54°  40'  N.  as  the  bound-
ary of  Oregon,  and  his  party  had  promised  this  in
its  platform,  but  was  opposed  with  so  much  force
by  Mr.  Benton,  that  Mr.  Polk  acquiesced  in  his
views  and  accepted  lat.  49°  N.  as  the  line.  By
this  the  United  States  relinquished  a  piece  of  ter-
ritory that  would  now  make  its  possessions  con-
tinuous to  Alaska  and  give  it  every  harbor  on  the
Pacific  coast.  During  the  Mexican  war  Col.  Ben-
ton's services,  and  intimate  acquaintance  with  the
Spanish  provinces  of  the  south,  proved  most  useful
to  the  government.  On  his  suggestion  the  policy
of  a  "  masterly  inactivity,"  at  first  determined
upon  by  the  president,  was  abandoned,  and  that  of
a  vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war  adopted  in  its
stead.  At  one  time  it  was  proposed  by  President
Polk  to  confer  upon  him  the  title  of  lieutenant-
general  with  full  command  of  the  war,  in  order
that  he  might  carry  out  his  conceptions  in  person.
Questions  in  regard  to  slavery  were  brought  on  by
the  acquisition  of  Mexican  territory.  These  were
adjusted  by  the  compromise  acts  of  1850,  which
were  introduced  by  Mr.  Clay,  were  opposed  by
Col.  Benton,  and  defeated  as  a  whole,  but  passed
separately.  In  the  nullification  struggle,  Benton
became  Calhoun's  leading  democratic  opponent,
and  their  opposition  to  each  other  increased  into  a
life-long  animosity.  The  compromise  of  1833
brought  a  lull  in  the  storm ;  but  the  same  views
soon  reappeared  in  connection  with  the  far  more
complicated  question  of  slavery.  The  Calhoun
doctrine  was  introduced  into  the  discussion  of  the
abolition  petitions  in  the  house  of  representatives
in  1835,  and  was  definitely  presented  in  the  session
ot  1846-'7.  On  19  Feb.,  1847,  Mr.  Calhoun,  in
answer  to  the  "  Wilmot  proviso,"  which  excluded
slavery  from  all  territory  subsequently  to  be  ac-
quired, introduced  resolutions  that  embodied  his


doctrine  as  to  state  rights.  Col.  Benton,  although
representing  a  slave  state,  would  not  deviate  from
the  positions  he  had  maintained  on  former  occa-
sions. He  denounced  Calhoun's  resolution  as  a
"  fire-brand."  Calhoun  expressed  his  surprise,
saying  he  expected  Benton's  support  because  he
represented  a  slave  state.  Benton  replied  that  he
had  no  right  to  expect  any  such  thing,  and  from
this  moment  the  two  intellectual  giants  were
matched  in  a  ferocious  warfare  against  each  other's
ideas  and  interests.  The  resolutions  never  came
to  a  vote,  but  they  were  sent  to  the  legislature  of
every  slave  state,  were  adopted  by  several  of  them,
and  were  made  the  basis  of  after-conllict  and  party
organization.  It  was  Calhoun's  determination  to
make  them  a  basis  of  instruction  to  senators  in
congress,  and  in  his  hostility  to  Benton  he  con-
fided them  to  certain  democrats  in  the  Missouri
legislature  whom  he  knew  to  be  unfriendly  to  his
re-election.  By  skilful  management  the  resolu-
tions were  passed  in  both  branches  without  Col.
Benton's  knowledge,  and  a  copy  was  sent  to  Wash-
ington. He  promptly  denounced  them  as  not  ex-
pressing the  sense  of  the  people,  and  containing
disunion  doctrines  designed  to  produce  separation
and  disaster,  and  declared  that  he  would  appeal
from  the  legislature  to  the  people.  On  the  ad-
journment of  congress  he  returned  to  Missouri
and  canvassed  every  section  of  the  state  in  a  series
of  speeches  famed  for  their  bitterness  of  denuncia-
tion, strength  of  exposition,  and  caustic  wit.  The
result  was  the  return  of  a  legislature  in  1849-'50
with  Benton  men  in  the  plurality,  but  composed
of  opposite  wings,  and  he  was  defeated  by  a  coali-
tion between  his  democratic  opponents  (known  as
"  anties  ")  and  the  whigs.  At  the  close  of  his  term
he  therefore  retired  from  the  senate,  after  six  suc-
cessive elections  and  thirty  years'  continuous  ser-
vice. In  1852  he  announced  himself  a  candidate
for  congress,  made  a  direct  appeal  to  the  people  in
his  congressional  district,  and  was  elected  over  all
opposition.  He  gave  his  warm  support  to  the  ad-
ministration of  Franklin  Pierce;  but  when  the
Calhoun  party  obtained  the  ascendency  he  with-
drew. The  administration  then  turned  on  him,
and  displaced  from  ofiice  all  his  friends  through-
out Missouri.  Soon  afterward  the  Kansas-Ne-
braska bill  was  brought  up,  and  he  exerted  him-
self with  all  his  strength  against  it,  delivering  a
memorable  speech,  which  did  much  to  excite  the
country  against  the  act,  but  failed  to  defeat  its
passage.  At  the  next  election  he  was  not  returned
to  congress.  Retiring  from  active  politics,  he  de-
voted two  years  to  literary  pursuits,  when  he  be-
came a  candidate  for  governor  in  1856,  his  old
friends  rallied  to  his  political  standard,  and  his
course  became  a  triumphal  procession  ;  but  a  third
ticket  was  in  the  field,  and  by  the  dividing  of  forces
his  election  was  lost.  In  the  presidential  election
of  the  same  year  Col.  Benton  supported  Mr.  Bu-
chanan in  opposition  to  his  own  son-in-law,  Col.
Fremont,  giving  as  a  reason  that  Mr.  Buchanan,  if
elected,  would  restore  the  principles  of  the  Jack-
son administration,  while  he  feared  that  the  suc-
cess of  Fremont  would  engender  sectional  parties
fatal  to  the  permanence  of  the  union.  Afterward,
during  the  Buchanan  administration,  he  modified
many  of  his  opinions,  and  in  several  instances  took
a  decided  stand  in  opposition.

The  first  volume  of  his  "  Thirty  Years'  View  "
of  the  workings  of  the  government  (New  York,
1854)  presented  a  connected  narrative  of  the  time
from  Adams  to  Pierce,  and  dealt  particularly  with
the  secret  political  history  of  that  period.^  The
second  and  last  volume  appeared  in  185G. He


BENTON


BERG


243


then  undertook  the  task  of  abridging  the  debates
of  congress  from  the  foundation  of  the  government.
A-lthough  at  the  advanced  age  of  seventy-six,  he
labored  at  this  task  daily,  and  brought  the  work

down  to  the
conclusion  of
the  great  com-
promise debate
of  1850,  in
which,  with
Clay,  Calhoun,
Webster,  and
Seward,  he  had
himself  borne
a  conspicuous
part.  The  last
pages  were  dic-
tated in  whis-
pers after  he
had  lost  the
power  of  speak-
ing aloud.  The
work  was  pub-
lished under  the
title  of  "  An
Abridgment  of  the  Debates  of  Congress  "  (15  vols..
New  York).  Having  completed  this  work,  Mr.
Benton  sent  for  several  old  friends  to  bid  them
farewell.  Among  them  was  the  president,  whom
he  thanked  for  taking  an  interest  in  his  child,  and
to  whom  he  said  :  "  Buchanan,  we  are  friends.  1
supported  you  in  preference  to  Fremont,  becaiise
he  headed  a  sectional  party,  whose  success  would
have  been  the  signal  for  disunion.  I  have  known
you  long,  and  I  knew  you  would  honestly  endeavor
to  do  right."  A  week  before  his  death  he  wrote  to
friends  in  congress  requesting  that  neither  house
should  take  notice  of  his  death ;  but  congress,
nevertheless,  adjourned  for  his  funeral.

After  becoming  senator  Col.  Benton  married
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Col.  James  McDowell,  of
Virginia.  Jn  1844  she  suffered  a  stroke  of  paraly-
sis, and  from  that  time  he  was  never  known  to  go
to  any  place  of  festivity  or  amusement.  She  died
in  1854,  leaving  four  daughters,  the  second  of
whom  married  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont.  Notwith-
standing the  temptations  to  which  his  public  life
subjected  him,  he  abstained  wholly  from  the  use
of  tobacco,  gaming,  and  liquors,  saying  that  his
mother  had  wished  it,  and  he  should  adhere  to  her
wishes  through  life.  Besides  his  works  already
mentioned,  he  published  "  An  Examination  of  the
Dred-Scott  Case."  A  fine  bronze  statue  of  him
has  been  erected  in  the  park  in  St.  Louis.  The
steel  portrait  represents  him  in  early  life ;  that  in
the  text,  as  he  appeared  in  later  years.

BENTON,  William  Plummer,  soldier,  b.  near
Newmarket,  Frederick  co,,  Md.,  25  Dec,  1828 ;  d.  in
New  Orleans,  14  March,  1867.  His  father  died
when  he  was  four  months  old,  and  his  mother  re-
moved to  Indiana  in  1886.  At  the  beginning  of
the  Mexican  war,  being  then  eighteen  years  of  age,
he  enlisted  as  private  in  a  regiment  of  mounted
riflemen,  and  took  part  in  the  battles  of  Contreras,
Churubusco,  Chapultepec,  and  the  capture  of  the
city  of  Mexico.  On  his  return  to  Richmond,  Ind.,
he  re-entered  college,  finished  his  studies  as  a  law-
yer, was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,  in  1852  ap-
pointed proseeuting-attorney.  and  in  1856  made
judge  of  the  common  pleas  court.  When  Fort
Sumter  was  fired  upon,  Judge  Benton  was  the  first
man  in  Wavne  co.  to  respond  to  the  president's
call  for  75,000  men.  Twenty-four  hours  after  he
had  begun  to  raise  his  company  he  was  on  his
way  to  Indianapolis,  where  it  was  mustered  into


service,  being  the  first  ofl'ered  by  Indiana.  He  was
soon  promoted  colonel  of  the  8th  Indiana  volun-
teers, and  commanded  at  Rich  Mountain,  where  he
distinguished  himself  by  personal  bravery.  After
three  months  he  was  authorized  to  re-enlist  and  re-
organize the  regiment,  and  did  so,  reporting  to
Gen,  Fremont,  14  Sept.,  1861.  The  regiment  was
placed  in  the  vanguard  of  Fremont's  army,  and
served  in  the  campaign  in  Missouri  and  Arkansas.
He  commanded  a  brigade  at  Pea  Ridge,  and  was
promoted  to  brigadier-general  for  gallantry.  He
was  in  the  battles  of  Port  Gibson,  Jackson,  Cham-
pion Hills,  Black  River  Bridge,  the  siege  of  Vicks-
burg,  and  Mobile.  At  Jackson,  Miss.,  he  was
wounded.  At  the  close  of  the  war  Gen.  Benton
resigned  his  commission  and  returned  to  Richmond,
Ind.,  to  resume  the  practice  of  law.  In  1866  he
went  to  New  Orleans  under  government  appoint-
ment, where  he  died.

BENZONI,  Girolamo,  traveller,  b.  in  Italy
about  1520.  He  spent  many  years  in  America,  and
in  1565  published  an  account  of  his  travels  and  ad-
ventures, from  1541  until  1556,  entitled  "History
of  the  New  World,"  translated  by  W.  H.  Smith,
and  republished  by  the  Hakluyt  society  (1857).

BERARD,  Claudius,  educator,  b.  in  Bordeaux,
France,  21  March,  1786;  d.  at  West  Point,  N.  Y.,
6  May,  1848.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  land,
and  became  an  eminent  Greek  and  Latin  scholar.
He  was  conscripted  into  the  army  of  Napoleon,  but
had  no  taste  for  a  military  life,  and  his  father  pur-
chased a  substitute.  From  earliest  youth  his  mind
was  given  to  books,  and  the  martial  ardor  that
animated  most  young  Frenchmen  in  the  days  of
Napoleon  failed  to  affect  him.  Learning  that  his
siibstitute  had  been  killed  in  the  Spanish  cam-
paign of  1805,  he  determined  to  remove  to  the
United  States.  He  arrived  in  New  Y'ork  in  the
spring  of  1807,  and  soon  afterward  became  pro-
fessor of  ancient  languages  in  Dickinson  college,
at  Carlisle,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  until  his  ap-
pointment, in  1815,  as  professor  of  French  in  the
U.  S.  military  academy  at  West  Point.  He  held
this  chair  until  his  death,  a  period  of  over  thirty-
three  years.  He  was  conversant  with  the  language
and  literature  of  most  of  the  countries  of  Europe,
and  possessed,  at  one  time,  a  copy  of  the  Bible  in
nearly  every  language  into  which  it  had  been
translated.  He  published  "  Le9ons  Frangais,"  long
in  use  at  the  military  academy  (1824),  and  "A
Grammar  of  the  French  Language"  (1826). — His
daughter,  Augusta  Blanche,  b.  in  West  Point,
N.  Y.,  29  Oct.,  1824,  has  devoted  her  life  mostly  to
teaching  and  study,  principally  at  West  Point,
where,  for  many  years,  she  has  been  in  charge  of
the  post-office.  Miss  Berard  has  published  a
"School  History  of  the  United  States"  (1854);
a  "  School  History  of  England  "  (1861) ;  a  "  Manual
of  Spanish  Art  and  Literature"  (1868);  and  has
edited  and  revised  "  Goodrich's  Child's  History  of
the  United  States  "  (1878).

BERG,  Joseph  Frederick,  clergyman,  b.  at
Grace  Hill,  in  the  island  of  Antigua,  in  1812 ;  d.  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J..  20  July,  1871.  His  father
was  a  Moravian  missionary,  and  his  early  education
was  obtained  in  the  Moravian  schools  in  England.
In  1825  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  con-
tinued his  studies  in  the  Moravian  school  at  Naz-
areth, Pa.,  where  he  remained  a  few  years  as  pro-
fessor of  chemistry.  In  1835  he  was  ordained  by
the  synod  of  the  German  Reformed  church,  in  1837
licensed  to  preach,  and  became  pastor  of  the  Race
street  German  Reformed  church  in  Philadelphia,
which  relation  he  continued  until  1852,  when  he
became pastor of the  second Reformed Dutch


244


BERGEN


BERGH


church  in  that  city.  He  was  elected  in  1861  by  the
general  synod  of  the  Reformed  church  professor  of
didactic  and  polemic  theology  in  the  seminary  at
New  Brunswick,  which  chair  he  held  until  his
death.  In  the  early  part  of  his  ministry  he
preached  wholly  v/ithout  notes,  and  as  many  as
two  hundred  persons  have  applied  for  membership
in  his  church  at  one  time.  A  challenge  was  once
given  the  clergy  of  the  city  of  Philadelphia  by
George  Barker,  a  noted  infidel  debater  and  orator,
to  discuss  the  inspiration  and  authenticity  of  the
scriptures.  Two  able  clergymen  had  already  been
defeated  in  the  debate,  when  Dr.  Berg  entered  the
lists.  In  the  discussion,  so  completely  was  Barker
defeated  that  he  gave  up  the  contest,  and,  as  a
result  of  Dr.  Berg's  reasoning,  shortly  after  was
converted,  and  became  an  active  advocate  of  the
faith  he  had  so  long  labored  to  destroy.  Dr.  Berg
published  "  Lectures  on  Romanism "  (1840) ;
"  Synopsis  of  the  Theology  of  Peter  Dens,"  trans-
lated from  the  Latin  with  notes  (1840);  "Papal
Rome  "  (1841) ;  anonymous  pamphlets ;  "  A  Voice
from  Rome " ;  "  Plistory  of  the  Holy  Robe  of
Treves " ;  "  Oral  Controversy  with  a  Catholic
Priest "  (1843) ;  "  Rome's  Policy  toward  the  Bible  "
(1844) ;  "  The  Pope  and  the  Presbyterians  "  (1844) ;
"  Old  Paths ;  or,  a  Sketch  of  the  Order  and  Dis-
cipline of  the  Reformed  Church  before  the  Refor-
mation "  (Philadelphia,  1845) ;  "  Plea  for  the  Divine
Law  against  Murder"  (1846);  "Mysteries  of  the
Inquisition  and  other  Secret  Societies,"  translated
from  the  French  (1846);  "Reply  to  Archbishop
Hughes  on  the  Doctrines  of  Protestantism  "  (1850) ;
"Expose  of  the  Jesuits";  "The  Inquisition";
"Church  and  State;  or,  Romish  Influence,"  a
prize  essay ;  "  Farewell  Words  to  the  German  Re-
formed Church,"  and  a  vindication  of  the  same  in
reply  to  J.  W.  Nevin  (1852) ;  "  Prophecy  and  the
Times  "  (1856) ;  "  The  Stone  and  the  Image  "  (1856) ;
"  Demons  and  Guardian  Angels,"  being  a  refuta-
tion of  spiritualism  (1856);  "The  Olive-Branch ;
or,  White-Oak  Farm,"  a  conservative  view  of
slavery,  a  novel  (1857);  and  translations  of  Van
Horn's  German  tales,  "Europe  and  America  in
Prophecy  "  (1858).— His  only  son,  Herman  Casper,
a  clergyman  of  the  Reformed  church,  who  was
graduated  at  Rutgers  in  1866,  was  in  charge  of  a
congregation  at  College  Point,  N.  Y.,  in  1886.

BEROEN,  Joseph  Young,  Jr.,  educator,  b.  in
Red  Beach,  Me.,  22  Feb.,  1851.  He  was  graduated
at  Antioch  College  in  1872,  after  which  he  spent
some  time  on  the  Ohio  Geological  Survey.  Later  he
became  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Lombard
University,  becoming,  in  1883,  principal  of  the  Pea-
body  (Mass.)  High  School.  He  is  a  regular  con-
tributor to  the  "Journal  of  Education,"  and  has
written  for  the  "Engineering  and  Mining  Jour-
nal." He  is  joint  author  with  his  wife  of  "  The
Development  Theory :  the  Study  of  Evolution  sim-
plified for  General  Readers  "  (Boston,  1884).— His
wife,  Fanny  Dickerson,  educator,  b.  in  Mansfield,
Ohio,  4  Feb.,  1846,  was  graduated  at  Antioch  col-
lege in  1875.  In  1876  she  organized  a  day-school
of  individual  instruction  in  connection  with  the
Chicago  Athenaeum,  which  subsequent  illness  com-
pelled her  to  relinquish.  She  also  taught  in  Mans-
field, in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  for  some  time  in  Antioch
College,  and  afterward  in  Chicago,  where  she  had
charge  of  the  natural  sciences  in  a  large  private
school,  but  was  compelled  through  illness  to  give
up  teaching.  Mrs.  Bergen  has  dramatized  Long-
fellow's poem  of  "  Miles  Standish  "  (Boston,  1888).
She  is  a  regular  contributor  to  the  "American
Teacher"  and  the  "Journal  of  Education,"  and
has  writteri  for  other  periodicals.


BERGH,  Henry,  founder  of  the  American  so-
ciety for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals,  b.  in
New  York  city,  8  May,  1820 ;  d.  there,  12  March,
1888.  His  father,  Christian,  was  ship-builder  for
several  years  in  the  service  of  the  government,  and
died  in  1843,  leaving  his  fortune  to  his  three  chil-
dren. Henry  entered  Columbia,  but,  before  he  had
finished  the  course,  made  a  visit  to  Europe,  where
he  remained  about  five  years.  In  1862  he  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  legation  at  St.  Petersburg,
and  acting  vice-consul.  Being  obliged  by  reason
of  the  severitv  of  the  climate  to  resign  his  office  in
1864,  he  travelled
extensively  in
Europe  and  the
east.  On  his  re-
turn he  deter-
mined to  devote
the  remainder  of
his  life  to  the  in-
terests of  dumb
animals.  Alone,
in  the  face  of  in-
difference, oppo-
sition, and  ridi-
cule, he  began  a
reform  that  is
now  recognized
as  one  of  the  be-
neficent move-
ments of  the  age.
Through  his  ex-
ertions as  a
speaker  and  lec-
turer, but  above
all as a bold

worker  in  the  street,  in  the  court-room,  and  before
the  legislature,  the  cause  he  had  espoused  gained
friends  and  rapidly  increased  in  influence.  Cruel-
ties witnessed  in  Europe  first  suggested  his  mission.
The  legislature  passed  the  laws  prepared  by  him,
and  on  10  April,  1866,  the  society  was  legally  organ-
ized, with  him  as  president.  The  association  moved
steadily  forward,  and  by  August  was  in  a  flour-
ishing condition  financially,  having  received  a
valuable  property  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bergh.  The
work  of  the  society  covers  all  cases  of  cruelty  to
all  sorts  of  animals.  It  employs  every  moral
agency,  social,  personal,  and  legislative;  it  touches
points  of  vital  concern  to  health  as  well  as  to
humanity;  it  looks  after  the  transportation  of
cattle  intended  for  market ;  it  examines  into  the
purity  of  milk;  and  fixes  the  times  and  manner  of
slaughtering  animals  for  food.  The  society  has  a
large  and  influential  membership,  and  it  has  made
many  friends  and  received  many  gifts.  In  the  city
of  New  York  its  officers  are  constituted  special
policemen,  with  authority  to  arrest  any  person
found  practising  cruelty  of  any  kind  to  animals.
In  1871  a  Parisian,  Louis  Bonard,  who  lived
with  extreme  simplicity  in  New  York,  died  and
left  $150,000  to  the  society,  which  permitted  a
removal  to  quarters  larger  and  better  adapted  to
the  work.  A  building  at  the  corner  of  Fourth
avenue  and  22d  street,  New  York  city,  was  pur-
chased and  altered  to  make  it  suitable  for  the  pur-
poses of  the  society.  By  the  courtesy  of  the  district
attorney  of  New  York  Mr.  Bergh  was  authorised
by  the  attorney  general  to  represent  him  in  all
cases  appertaining  to  the  laws  for  the  protection  of
animals.  During  1873  he  made  a  lecturing  tour  m
the  west,  which  resulted  in  the  formation  of  several
societies  similar  to  that  in  New  York.  He  spoke
before  the  Evangelical  Alliance  and  Episcopal  con-
vention, and  was  the  means  of  having  a  new  canon


BERGIN


BERKELEY


245


confirmed,  to  the  effect  that  Protestant  Episcopal
clergyman  should  at  least  once  a  year  preach  a
sermon  on  cruelty  and  mercy  to  animals.  One  of
the  outgrowths  of  his  work  is  the  ambulance  corps
for  removing  disabled  animals  from  the  street,  and
a  derrick  to  rescue  them  from  excavations  into
which  they  may  fall.  He  is  also  the  originator  of  an
ingenious  invention,  which  substitutes  artificial  for
live  pigeons  as  marks  for  the  sportsman's  gun.  Mr.
Bergh  receives  no  salary,  but  gives  his  time  and  en-
ergies freely  to  the  work.  At  the  beginning  of  this
reform,  no  state  or  territory  of  the  United  States
contained  any  statute  relating  to  the  protection  of
animals  from  cruelty.  At  present  (1886)  thirty-
nine  states  of  the  Union  have  adopted  substantially
the  original  laws  procured  by  him  from  the  legisla-
ture of  New  York ;  to  which  may  be  added  Brazil
and  the  Argentine  Republic.  The  society  is  now  in
the  twenty-first  year  of  its  existence,  is  out  of  debt
and  self-sustaining.  By  reason  of  its  fidelity,  dis-
cretion, and  humanity,  it  is  everywhere  recognized
as  a  power  in  the  land  for  good.  In  1874  he  rescued
a  little  girl  from  inhuman  treatment,  and  this  led
to  the  founding  of  a  Society  for  the  Prevention  of
Cruelty  to  Children.  Mr.  Bergh  has  written  sev-
eral plays,  one  of  which  was  acted  in  Philadelphia.
He  has  also  published  a  volume  of  tales  and  sketches
entitled  "  The  Streets  of  New  York  "  ;  a  drama  en-
titled "  Love's  Alternative  "  ;  "  The  Portentous
Telegram  " ;  "  The  Ocean  Paragon,"  and  "  Married
Oflf,"  a  poem  (London,  1859).

BERGrIN,  Darby,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
Toronto,  7  Sept.,  182(5.  He  was  graduated  in  med-
icine at  McGill  college  in  1847.  He  entered  the
volunteer  military  service  as  captain  of  a  com-
pany raised  by  him  during  the  "  Trent "  difficulty
in  1861 ;  became  a  major  in  1866,  and  promoted
in  1869  to  be  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  59th  Stor-
mount  and  Glengarry  battalion.  He  was  appoint-
ed surgeon-general  of  the  Dominion  troops  during
the  Riel  rebellion  of  1885.  He  entered  parlia-
ment as  a  conservative  in  1872,  and  was  returned
for  the  same  constituency  (Cornwall)  in  1878.  In
1881  he  was  elected  president  of  the  medical  coun-
cil of  Ontario,  and  in  1885  president  of  the  college
of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  Ontario.

BERGMANN,  Carl,  musician,  b.  in  Ebersbach,
Saxony,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York,  10  Aug.,  1876.
The  rebellion  of  1848  obliged  him  to  flee  his  na-
tive land,  and  he  came  to  New  York.  In  1850-'2
he  was  the  conductor  of  the  Germania  society.
He  organized  and  conducted  the  great  German
music  festival,  held  in  the  Winter  Garden  theatre,
in  1855,  and  in  1856  introduced  German  opera  at
Niblo's  garden.  He  afterward  became  the  con-
ductor of  German  and  Italian  opera  in  New  York,
and  was  for  a  time  the  leader  of  the  Arion  (sing-
ing) society.  Prof.  Bergmann  excelled  as  a  player
of  the  violoncello  and  the  piano,  and  composed  or-
chestral pieces.  He  was  conductor  of  the  concerts
of  the  philharmonic  society  in  New  York  for  sev-
eral years  preceding  his  (Jeath.

BERGOSA  Y  JORDAN,  Antonio  (ber-go  -sa),
Spanish  prelate,  b.  in  Jaca,  Spain,  late  in  the  18th
century.  He  was  reporting  counsellor  to  the  su-
preme inquisition,  inquisitor  of  the  court  of  New
Spain,  bishop  of  Oaxaca,  and  then  archbishop  of
Guatemala  and  Mexico.  During  the  invasion  of
Spam  by  the  French  and  the  captivity  of  King
Ferdinand  VII.  in  1808,  Archbishop  Bergosa  was
for  some  time  also  governor  ad  intei'im  of  the  ter-
ritories that  were  under  his  religious  Jurisdiction.

BERING,  Vitus,  navigator,  b.  in  Horsens,  Den-
mark, in  1680:  d.  on  Behring  island,  8  Dec,  1741.
He  entered  the  Russian  navy  in  1704,  was  made  a


captain  by  Peter  the  Great,  and  distinguished  him-
self in  the  war  with  Sweden.  He  commanded  an
expedition  to  the  northern  seas  in  1725,  and  in
1728  Peter  the  Great,  who  was  anxious  to  find  out
whether  the  continents  of  Asia  and  America  were
connected,  sent  him  on  an  expedition  for  that  pur-
pose. The  exploration  was  continued  for  several
years,  and  Bering  discovered  the  strait  that  bears
his  name.  On  4  June,  1741,  he  set  sail  again  with
two  vessels,  and  discovered  a  part  of  the  North
American  coast,  supposed  to  be  New  Norfolk.  Al-
though Bering  never  knew  that  he  had  seen  Amer-
ica, his  discoveries  were  the  foundation  of  Russia's
claim  to  the  northwestern  part  of  the  continent.
On  this  last  expedition  Bering  sailed  as  far  north
as  lat.  69°;  but  stormy  weather  and  sickness  among
his  crew  compelled  him  to  return,  and  he  was
wrecked  on  the  desolate  island  that  is  now  known
by  his  name.  Bering  also  founded  the  settlement
of  Petropaulovski  in  Kamtchatka.  See  ''Nou-
velles  decouvertes  faites  des  Russes  entre  I'Asie  et
I'Amerique  "  (Paris,  1781).

BERISTAIN,  Joaquin  (ber-is-tine'),  Mexican
musician,  called  the  Mexican  Bellini,  b.  in  the  city
of  Mexico,  20  Aug.,  1817;  d.  there  in  October,
1839.  He  left  several  beautiful  compositions,  es-
pecially an  overture  called  "  La  Primavera  "  and  a
mass,  which  are  still  played.  His  melodies  are  del-
icate and  full  of  pathos.  "Versos  de  Orquesta
en  octavo  tono  obligados  a  piston "  is  the  name
given  by  Beristain  to  another  of  his  sacred  pieces.

BERISTAIN,  Mariano  (bay-ris-tine'),  Mexican
bibliographer,  b.  in  Puebla.  23  March,  1756 ;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico,  23  March,  1817.  He  studied  in
his  native  city,  went  to  Spain  to  finish  his  educa-
tion, and  was  graduated  there  in  theology.  Charles
III.  appointed  him  professor  of  theology  in  the
university  of  Valladolid,  and  afterward  Beristain
went  to  Mexico  to  fill  several  high  offices  in  the
cathedral  and  in  the  archbishopric,  which  he
twice  governed  ad  interim.  He  was  strongly  op-
posed to  the  Mexican  revolution.  He  left  a  work
entitled  "  Biblioteca  Hispano- Americana  septentri-
onal," a  collection  of  biographical  and  biblio-
graphical articles,  the  first  book  of  the  kind  pub-
lished in  Mexico  or  Central  America.

BERKELEY,  Georgpe,  British  clergyman,  b.  in
Kilcrin,  near  Thomastown,  Kilkenny,  Ireland,  12
March,  1684;  d.  in  Oxford,  England,  14  Jan.,  1753.
He  was  educated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  and
in  1707  became  a  fellow  in  that  institution  and  a
clergyman  of  the  established  church.  He  made
two  prolonged  tours  on  the  continent,  and  in  1724
became  dean  of  Derry.  The  dean  issued  in  1725
"  a  proposal  for  the  better  supplying  of  churches  in
our  foreign  plantations,  and  for  converting  the
savage  Americans  to  Christianity,  by  a  college  to
be  erected  in  the  Summer  islands,  otherwise  called
the  isles  of  Bermudas."  The  concluding  sen-
tence of  the  proposal  is  this :  "  A  benefaction  of
this  kind  seems  to  enlarge  the  very  being  of  a
man,  extending  it  to  distant  places  and  future
times;  inasmuch  as  unseen  countries  and  after-
ages  may  feel  the  effects  of  his  bounty,  while  he
himself  reaps  the  reward  in  the  blessed  society  of
all  those  who,  having  turned  many  to  righteous-
ness, shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  The
project  inspired  the  well-known  verses,  "  On  the
Prospect  of  Planting  Arts  and  Learning  in  Amer-
ica"— four  lines  of  which  are  familiar  to  all  who
know  the  history  of  education  in  the  new  world :
"  Westward  the  course  of  empire  takes  its  way ;
The  first  four  acts  already  past,

A  fifth  shall  close  the  drama  with  the  day ;
Time's  noblest  offspring  is  the  last."


246


BERKELEY


BERKELEY


These  lines  were  quoted  by  Gulian  C.  Verplanck,
of  New  York,  in  an  address  delivered  in  1818,
with  the  remark  that  he  did  not  remember  hav-
ing "  seen  or  heard  the  verses  referred  to  in  this
country."  In  spite  of  opposition  from  Sir  Rob-
ert Walpole,  then  chief  minister,  Berkeley  per
suaded  the  English  government  to  promise  a
grant  of  £20,000,  for  the  foundation  of  the  pro-
posed college  of  St.  Paul's  in  the  Bermudas,  and
full  of  enthusiasm  and  courage  he  sailed  from
Gravesend  17  Sept.,  1728,  expecting  to  begin  the
seminary  and  assume  its  presidency.  He  arrived
at  Newport,  R.  L,  23  Jan.,  1729,  "with  a  view  at
settling  a  correspondence  there  for  supplying  his
college  with  provisions,"  and  awaiting  also  the
promised  financial  support.  He  bought  a  farm,
which  he  named  Whitehall,  erected  upon  it  a
small  house,  engaged  in  correspondence  and  study,
composed  one  of  his  most  famous  treatises,  •'  Alci-
phron,  or  the  Miinite  Philosopher,"  preached  oc-
casionally, and  longed  in  vain  for  the  expected  en-
dowment. It  is  said  that  he  became  convinced
that  the  Bermudas  was  not  the  best  site,  and  that
ho  would  have  gladly  substituted  for  it  some  place
upon  the  mainland.  It  appears  that  he  learned
but  little  of  this  country  by  travel,  but  many
leading  men  came  to  see  him  in  his  philosopher's
retreat,  and  gave  him  just  ideas  of  the  state  of
religion  and  education.  Foremost  among  this
number  was  Samuel  Johnson,  then  a  minister  of
the  Episcopal  church  at  Stratford,  Conn.,  formerly
a  tutor  at  Yale,  and  afterward  president  of  King's
college.  New  York  (now  Columbia).  Jared  Eliot,
a  Congregationalist  minister  in  Connecticut,  and  a
trustee  of  Yale,  was  another  of  Berkeley's  Amer-
ican friends.  To  them,  but  especially  to  Dr.  John-
son, the  credit  seems  due  of  interesting  Berkeley
in  Yale.  Wearied  by  the  long  delays  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  at  length  assured  that  Walpole  had
no  intention  of  giving  him  the  promised  support,
Berkeley  gave  up  his  residence  in  Newport  and  set
sail  for  England,  embarking  at  Boston  i".  Septem-
ber, 1731,  just  three  years  after  his  departure  from
England.  In  the  summer  after  his  return  to  his
native  land,  Berkeley  executed  an  instrument  by
which  he  conveyed  to  Yale  the  Whitehall  farm";
and  after  some  slight  changes  in  the  conditions
had  been  agreed  on,  he  renewed  the  deed  and
dated  it  17  Aug.,  1733.  This  indenture  provided
that  the  income  from  the  property  should  l)e  ap-
plied to  the  maintenance  of  three  students  of  the
said  college,  during  the  time  between  their  first
and  second  degree,  such  students  to  be  known  as
"  scholars  of  the  house,"  to  be  elected  by  the  head
of  the  college  jointly  with  the  senior  Episcopal
missionary  of  Connecticut,  after  an  examination
in  Latin  and  Greek.  Other  details  were  prescribed,
and  the  instrument  is  a  very  interesting  paper^
as  introducing  to  this  country  the  usage  of  gradu-
ate scholarships  and  of  competitive  examinations
for  special  honors.  Any  surplus  of  money,  aris-
ing from  vacancies  in  the  scholarships,  was  to
be  laid  out  in  Greek  and  Latin  books  for  the
encouragement  of  undergraduates  who  should
exhibit  their  skill  in  Latin  composition.  The
Berkelian  scholarships  and  prizes  tnus  established
have  been  regularly  awarded  since  1733,  and
the  list  of  those  who  have  received  these  honors
includes  the  names  of  some  of  the  most  distin-
guished graduates  of  Yale.  The  Whitehall  farm
was  rented  by  the  college  in  1762  for  a  period  of
999  years.  In  addition  to  this  gift,  Berkeley  sent
to  Yale  a  collection  of  books,  given  by  himself  and
several  gentlemen  who  had  been  subscribers  to  his
projected  college. This  was  doubtless  the  best


collection  of  books  that  had  then  been  brought  to
this  country.  Its  value  was  estimated  at  £500.
It  included  copies  of  the  chief  classical  writings!
folio  editions  of  the  apostolic  fathers,  great  histori-
cal works  like  Baronius,  the  Acta  Eruditorum,  the
Elzevir  republics,  important  apparatus  for  the  studv
of  the  Bible,  books  of  mathematical,  physical,  and
medical  science,  modern  English  literature,  Shake-
speare, Milton,  Addison,  Ben  Jonson,  Pope,  Gay,
etc.  Most  of  the  volumes  may  still  be  identified
in  the  library  of  Yale.  Berkeley  also  gave  some
valuable  books  to  Harvard,  and  wrote  a  letter  of
advice  in  respect  to  the  establishment  of  a  college
in  New  York.  Three  years  after  his  return  to  the
old  world  he  became  bishop  of  Cloyne,  and  many
years  later  he  declined  to  be  translated  to  the  see  of
Clogher.  His  health  having  been  impaired,  he  re-
moved in  1752  to  the  university  of  Oxford,  where
he  died.  His  body  is  buried  in  Christ  church.
His  philosophical  writings  are  still  widely  read.
The  name  of  Berkeley  is  honored  not  only  in  New
Haven,  where  a  memorial  window  in  the  Battell
chapel  has  lately  been  placed,  and  where  his
prizes  are  annually  bestowed,  but  also  in  other
seminaries  far  and  wide  through  the  land.  A
school  of  divinity,  established  at  Middletown,
Conn.,  by  Bishop  Williams,  bears  the  name  of
Berkeley.  Another  interesting  tribute  to  his  mem-
ory has  been  given  by  the  promoters  of  liberal
education  in  California.  The  site  of  the  state
university,  opposite  the  Golden  Gate,  is  named
Berkeley.  Upon  one  of .  its  walls  hangs  a  full-
length  portrait  of  the  philosopher,  copied  by  John
F.  Weir,  from  Smybert's  portrait,  which  is  owned
by  Yale.  Thanks  to  the  suggestions  of  Frederick
Billings,  who  proposed  the  name  and  gave  the
portrait,  Berkeley,  whose  enterprise  upon  the  At-
lantic seaboard  came  to  naught  in  the  middle  of
the  last  century,  is  now  held  in  perpetual  remem-
brance upon  the  Pacific  coast  by  the  grateful  stu-
dents of  a  thriving  university.  Berkeley's  influence
at  Newport  in  the  formation  of  the  Redwood  library
should  not  be  forgotten,  nor  his  gift  of  an  organ
to  Trinity  church.  In  1886  a  memorial  chapel
was  dedicated  at  Newport,  R.  I..  Bishop  Clark  offi-
ciating. The  funds  for  its  erection  were  raised  by
private  subscription,  largely  among  the  summer
residents  of  Newport.  It  is  beautifully  decorated
with  memorial  windows,  and  is  a  fitting  tribute  to
the  memory  of  the  distinguished  man  whose  name
it  bears,  and  whose  influence  was  so  closely  identi-
fied with  the  early  history  of  the  town.  Valuable
original  papers  by  Dean  Berkeley  are  in  the  posses-
sion of  Yale  college.  See  Beardsley's  "  Ecclesiasti-
cal History  of  Connecticut "  (New  York,  1865);  and
his  "Life  of  Samuel  Johnson"  (1874);  papers  by
D.  C.  Oilman  in  "  Hours  at  Home  "  (1865),  and  m
the  "  Proceedings  of  the  New  Haven  Colony  His-
torical Society"  (1865);  letters  of  Berkeley  in  the
"Churchman's Magazine"  (vol.vii.);  Prof. Erasers
"Life  and  Works  of  Berkeley"  (4  vols.,  Oxford,
England,  1871);  and  Noah  Porter's  discourse  on
"Bishop  George  Berkeley"  (New  York,  1885).

BERKELEY,  John,  iron-founder.  He  was  a
member  of  the  family  whose  seat  is  Beverstone
Castle,  Gloucester,  England,  and  became  manager
of  the  first  iron-works  established  in  America.
These  works  were  undertaken  by  the  London  com-
pany, which  in  1619  sent  over  150  skilled  artisans
from  Warwickshire,  Staffordshire,  and  Sussex.
The  establishment  was  on  the  west  bank  of  Falling
creek,  a  branch  of  James  river,  Va.,  about  thirty-two
miles  from  the  sea.  Three  of  the  master-workmen
died,  and  in  1621  Berkeley  with  his  son  Maurice
and  a  re-enforcement  of  twenty  men  came  over  to


BERKELEY


BERNARD


247


advance  the  enterprise.  A  considerable  villa^c^e
grew  up  around  Falling  creek:  but  in  May,  1622,
at  a  time  of  supposed  peace,  the  Indians  fell  upon
the  settlement,  and  out  of  a  total  population  of  347
persons  only  a  boy  and  a  girl  escaped  the  general
massacre.  The  iron -works  and  a  glass-furnace
were  demolished,  and  many  years  passed  before
any  attempt  was  made  to  revive  these  industries.

BERKELEY,  Sir  William,  colonial  governor
of  Virginia,  b.  near  London,  England,  about  1610 ;
d.  in  Twickenham,  13  July,  1677.  He  was  a  son  of
Sir  Maurice  Berkeley,  and  brother  of  Lord  John
Berkeley,  of  Stratton,  colonial  proprietary.  He
was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1629,  and  devoted  him-
self to  extensive  travel  in  Europe.  In  1630  he  re-
turned, an  accomplished  cavalier  and  courtier ;  was
made  one  of  the  commissioners  of  Canada  in  1632,
and,  returning  to  England  with  a  high  reputation
for  knowledge  and  experience,  became  a  gentle-
man of  the  privy  chamber  to  Charles  L  On  9
Aug.,  1641,  he  was  commissioned  governor  of  Vir-
ginia. In  1642  he  arrived,  and,  by  various  salutary
measures,  aided  by  his  prepossessing  manners,  ren-
dered himself  acceptable  to  the  people.  During
the  Cromwellian  disturbances  in  England,  Gov.
Berkeley  took  the  royal  side,  and,  when  the  parlia-
mentarians gained  the  ascendency,  he  oifered  an
asylum  in  Virginia  to  gentlemen  who  had  been
loyal  to  the  king.  The  new  parliament  immedi-
ately sent  a  fleet  to  the  colony  to  punish  him ;  but,
unable  to  offer  resistance,  he  displayed  such  shrewd-
ness as  well  as  courage,  that  when  the  fleet  ap-
peared in  James  river,  in  1651,  he  succeeded  in
making  terms  so  satisfactory  to  both  parties  that,
although  he  was  forced  to  resign  his  authority,  he
received  permission  to  remain  on  his  own  plan-
tation. Through  his  management  Virginia  was
among  the  last  of  the  colonial  possessions  to  ac-
knowledge the  authority  of  Cromwell.  On  the
death  of  Samuel  Mathews,  governor  of  Virginia,
Berkeley  was  elected  to  the  office,  and  received
his  commission  from  Charles  II.  soon  after  the
restoration.  His  conduct  in  reference  to  the  so-
called  rebellion  of  Nathaniel  Bacon,  in  refusing  a
commission  and  hampering  Bacon  by  every  means
in  his  power;  his  faithlessness  and  obstinacy  in
dealing  with  the  Indian  question,  which  had  be-
come of  vital  moment  to  the  settlers;  and  his
extreme  severity  to  the  followers  of  Bacon  after
Bacon's  death,  which  in  itself  was  not  without
suspicion,  caused  him  to  lose  popularity.  This
intensified  his  bitterness,  and  he  caused  Bacon's
adherents  to  be  arrested,  tried,  and  executed  in
such  a  hurried  and  indecent  manner  that  the  as-
sembly arose  in  remonstrance.  The  king  himself
IS  reported  to  have  exclaimed,  "  The  old  fool  has
taken  more  lives  in  his  naked  country  than  I  have
taken  for  my  father's  murder,"  and  in  1665  de-
manded his  return.  Nevertheless,  Berkeley  con-
tinued to  administer  the  affairs  of  Virginia  for  the
next  eleven  years.  Religious  tolerance  was  not
one  of  his  virtues,  and  the  state  papers  show  that
he  put  much  pressure  on  Quakers.  A  board  of
commissioners  was  sent  out  by  roval  mandate  to
examine  into  the  condition  of*  the"  colony,  and  in
one  of  his  replies  he  is  quoted  as  saying,'"  Thank
(jodi  there  are  no  free  schools  nor  printing-
presses,  and  I  hope  there  will  be  none  for  a  hun-
^^^d  years ;  for  learning  has  brought  disobedience,
and  heresy,  and  sects  into  the  world,  and  printing
has  divulged  these  and  other  libels."  Through  the
mtiuence  of  the  planters  he  was  obliged  to  obey
the  recall,  and  in  1676  he  returned  to  England,
but  died  before  he  had  an  interview  with  the  king,
lie  pubhshcd  "  The  Lost  Lady ;  a  Tragi-Comedy  "


(London,  1638),  which  is  included  in  the  first  and
fourth  editions  of  Dodsley's  "  Old  Plays,"  and  "  A
Description  of  Virginia"  (1663).

BERLINER,  Emile,  inventor,  b,  in  Hanover,
Germany,  20  May,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at
Samson  college,  Wolfenbiittel,  in  1865.  He  came
to  this  country  in  1870  and  settled  in  Washington,
D.  C,  in  1882.  From  1879  to  1882  he  was  chief
instrument  inspector  of  the  Bell  telephone  com-
pany. He  discovered  early  in  1877  the  loose  con-
tact principle  of  the  modern  telephone  transmitter,
independently  made  known  by  Hughes  in  England
in  the  autumn  of  that  year.'  He  also  introduced
the  use  of  induction-coils  in  telephone  transmit-
ters and  is  the  patentee  of  other  inventions.

BERMUDEZ,  Jos6  Manuel  (ber-moo'-deth),
Peruvian  scholar,  b.  in  Tarma  about  1760;  d.  in
Lima  in  1830.  He  was  vicar  of  Huanecico  for  four-
teen years,  then  went  to  Lima,  filling  several  im-
portant offices ;  was  appointed  canon  in  1812,  dep-
uty for  Tarma,  and  judge  of  the  provincial  dep-
utation from  1814  till  1820,  and  chancellor  of  the
university  in  1819.  When  Viceroy  La  Serna  or-
ganized the  board  of  pacification  during  the  revo-
lutionary war,  Bermiidez,  being  a  distinguished
orator,  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  the  ques-
tions then  at  issue  and  with  the  history  of  his
country,  was  made  a  member.  He  made  a  special
study  of  the  Quechua  language,  and  wrote  a  gram-
mar, an  orthographical  treatise,  and  a  correct  and
rich  dictionary  of  that  language.  These  works  were
published  in  1793.

BERMUDEZ,  Juan  (ber-moo'-deth),  Spanish
navigator  of  the  16th  century.  His  fame  is  chiefly
due  to  his  discovery  of  the  Bermuda  islands  (1522),
which  are  named  in  his  honor.

BERNAL,  Calixto  (berr-naW),  Cuban  jurist,  b.
in  Puerto  Principe,  Cuba,  in  1804.  He  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1822.  In  1841  he  went  to
Madrid,  Spain,  where  he  spent  the  remainder  of
his  life.  There  he  published  his  "  Impresiones  y
Recuerdos  "  (1844) ;  "  Pensamientos  sobre  Refor-
mas  Sociales"  (1847),  published  also  in  French
under  the  title  of  "  De  la  democratic  au  xix.
siecle  " ;  "  Teoria  de  la  Autoridad  "  (1846) ;  and
"  El  Derecho  "  (1877).

BERNARD,  Sir  Francis,  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts Bay,  b.  in  Nettleham,  Lincoln  co.,  Eng-
land, in  1714;  d.  in  Aylesbury,  England.  16  June,
1779.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1736,  studied
law,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  at  the  Middle  Tem-
ple, of  which  he  afterward  became  a  bencher.
He  was  elected  steward  of  the  city  of  Lincoln,  and
recorder  of  the  city  of  Boston  in  England.  In  1768
he  was  appointed  governor  of  the  province  of  New
Jersey,  whence  after  two  years  of  successful  rule
he  was  transferred  to  the  colony  of  Massachusetts
Bay,  arriving  on  5  Aug.,  1760.  The  earlier  part  of
his  administration  of  nine  years  was  successful,  as
was  shown  by  the  salary  of  £1,300  voted  to  him,
and  the  grant  of  the  island  of  Mount  Desert,  off  the
coast  of  Maine,  both  of  which  were  confirmed  by
the  king.  In  1764  the  library  of  Harvard  was  de-
stroyed by  fire,  and  about  6,000  volumes  were  lost.
Gov.  Bernard  took  a  special  interest  in  the  college,
and  successfully  exerted  himself  in  raising  funds
in  its  behalf.  When  two  parties  arose — the  advo-
cates for  the  crown,  and  the  defenders  of  the  rights
of  the  people — Bernard  determined  to  strengthen
the  royal  authority  in  the  colonies,  and  he  proba-
bly did  more  than  any  other  one  man  toward  pre-
cipitating the  war  of  the  revolution.  He  mani-
fested an  unhappy  facility  for  wounding  the  amour
propre  of  the  colonists.  One  of  his  first  acts  that
aroused  indignation  was  the  appointment  of  Mr.


248


BERNARD


BERNARD


Hutchinson  as  chief  justice,  instead  of  Col.  Otis,«of
Barnstable,  to  whom  the  office  had  been  pledged.
This  breach  of  faith  drew  on  him  the  hostility  of
James  Otis,  the  son  of  Col.  Otis,  who  soon  became
a  popular  leader.  Gov.  Bernard  also  gave  special
offence  by  refusing  to  confirm  the  nomination  of
several  members  of  the  council.  He  seemed  to
have  no  talent  for  conciliation,  and,  failing  in  his
preliminary  measures  of  attempted  coercion  to  his
views,  he  made  such  representations  to  the  govern-
ment that  troops  were  ordered  to  Boston.  He  in-
tended to  overawe  the  people,  and  the  act  greatly
excited  the  entire  population  of  Massachusetts  Bay,
and  gave  an  enormous  impetus  to  the  growing  dis-
affection. The  assembly  requested  the  removal  of
the  king's  ships  and  troops,  but  Bernard  refused,
and  business  was  brought  to  a  stand-still.  His  con-
duct drew  on  him  the  indignation  of  the  province,
but  procured  him,  in  1769,  a  baronetcy  in  England
as  a  reward  for  his  "  firmness  and  administrative
ability."  He  had  little  command  of  his  temper,
could  not  conceal  his  resentments,  nor  restrain  his
censures.  One  of  his  last  public  measures  was  to
prorogue  the  general  court  in  July,  in  consequence
of  their  refusal  to  make  provision  for  the  support
of  the  king's  troops.  But  before  his  decree  had
gone  into  effect  the  general  court  had  drafted  reso-
lutions and  petitioned  the  king  for  his  removal.
The  English  government  deemed  it  wise  to  recall
him,  although  claiming  that  it  was  only  on  the
plea  of  consulting  him  in  reference  to  the  general
condition  of  the  province.  He  continued  nominally
governor  for  two  years  longer,  but  never  returned
to  America.  He  published  "  Letters  to  the  Min-
istry" (17G9);  "Letters  to  the  Earl  of  Hills-
borough" (17G9);  and  "Select  Letters  on  the
Trade  and  Government  of  America,  and  the  Prin-
ciples of  Law  and  Polity  applied  to  the  American
Colonies  "  (2d  ed.,  1774).  He  also  edited  "  Antonii
Alsopi  jEdis  Christi  olim  Alumni  Odarum  libri
duo"  (1752).  His  "Letter  Books"  were  bought
by  Dr.  Jared  Sparks  in  1848,  and  by  his  will  be-

aueathed  to  the  library  of  Harvard. — His  son,  Sir
ohn,  bart.,  was  b.  in  England  in  1744;  d.  in  the
West  Indies  in  1809.  At  the  close  of  the  war  of
independence,  his  sympathies  having  been  with  the
colonists  in  their  struggle  with  the  mother  country,
he  did  not  return  to  England.  After  suffering  the
extremes  of  poverty  for  some  time,  the  legislature
of  Massachusetts,  in  consideration  of  his  conduct
during  the  war,  restored  to  him  half  of  the  island
of  Mount  Desert,  part  of  his  father's  property,
which  had  been  confiscated.  Little  is  known  of  his
subsequent  career  in  the  United  States.  Afterward
he  held  offices  under  the  British  government  at
Barbadoes  and  St.  Vincent.  At  the  death  of  his
father,  in  1779,  he  succeeded  to  the  title. — Sir
Thomas,  bart.,  third  son  of  Sir  Francis  Bernard,
was  b.  in  England  about  1746;  d.  there  in  1818.
When  his  father  was  appointed  governor  of  New
Jersey,  he  accompanied  the  family  to  America,  and
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1767.  Subsequently
he  went  to  England  and  married  a  lady  of  fortune.
On  the  death  of  his  brother.  Sir  John,  he  succeeded
to  the  title.  He  was  the  author  of  several  essays,
written  to  improve  the  condition  of  the  humbler
classes,  and  was  noted  for  his  benevolence.

BERNARD,  John,  actor,  b.  in  Portsmouth,
England,  in  1756;  d.  in  London,  29  Nov.,  1828.
He  was  educated  at  Chichester.  His  father,  a  lieu-
tenant in  the  navy,  tried  to  check  his  son's  aspira-
tions for  the  stage  by  placing  him  in  a  solicitor's
office;  but  at  the  age  of  seventeen  he  ran  away
from  home,  joined  a  travelling  company,  and  made
his  first  professional  appearance  as  Jaffier  at  Chew


Magna,  Somerset  co.,  in  a  theatre  improvised  in  a
malt-house.  Pie  was  married  in  the  following  year
and,  after  various  experiences  common  to  strolling
actors,  in  1787  he  made  his  first  appearance  in
London  at  Covent  Garden,  playing  Archer  in  "  The
Beaux'  Stratagem  "  to  the  Mrs.  Sullen  of  his  wife.
One  reason  of  his  success  was  his  extreme  conviv-
iality. He  lost  his  wife  in  1792,  and  in  1797  came
to  the  United  States.  He  made  his  American  debut
4  June,  1797,  as  Goldfinch  in  "  The  Road  to  Ruin  "
at  the  Greenwich  street  theatre,  New  York.  The
following  winter  he  went  to  Philadelphia,  and  in
1803  to  Boston.  In  1806  he  was  associated  with
Powers  in  the  management  of  the  Federal  street
theatre,  Boston,  and  went  to  England  for  a  com-
pany. He  remained  in  the  United  States  as  actor
and  manager  of  various  theatres  for  about  twenty
years,  and  took  final  leave  of  the  stage  in  1820  at
Boston  in  his  favorite  character  of  Lord  Agleby,
when  he  returned  to  England,  and  died  in  poverty.
A  selection  from  his  voluminous  "  Retrospections
of  the  Stage  "  appeared  two  years  after  his  death
(2  vols.,  1830),  and  a  further  selection,  edited  by
his  son,  appeared  in  1850-'l. — His  son,  William
Bayle,  dramatist,  was  b.  in  Boston,  27  Nov.,  1807;
d.  in  London,  England,  5  Aug.,  1875.  At  the  age  of
thirteen  he  went  with  his  father  to  England,  and
studied  at  Uxbridge.  In  1826  he  was  appointed
to  a  clerkship  in  the  army  accounts  office,  which
he  retained  until  1830,  when  the  office  was  abol-
ished. In  1827  he  produced  a  nautical  drama,
"  The  Pilot,"  for  which  he  received  £3,  and,  as  au
incentive  "  to  prompt  him  to  further  exertions,"  he
was  presented  with  £2  more  when  the  play  reached
its  hundredth  night.  At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he
wrote  "The  Freebooter's  Bride"  (5  vols.,  1828).
The  following  year  he  compiled  "  Retrospections
of  the  Stage,"  from  memoranda  found  among  his
father's  papers.  At  the  age  of  twenty-three  he  en-
tered fully  on  the  career  of  a  professional  drama-
tist, and  produced  plays  and  farces  with  an  unex-
ampled rapidity.  The  total  number  of  them  is
114,  not  half  of  which  have  been  printed.  The
best  known  are  "  Rip  Van  Winkle,"  "  The  Nervous
Man,  and  the  Man  of  Nerve,"  "  The  Man  About
Town,"  "Marie  Ducange,"  "His  Last  Legs,"
"Dumb  Belle,"  "The  Boarding-School,"  "The
Middy  Ashore,"  "The  Round  of  Wrong,"  "A
Life's  Trials,"  and  "  A  Splendid  Investment."  His
last  play  was  "The  Doge  of  Venice."  He  also
published  a  life  of  Samuel  Lover  (London,  1874).

BERNARD,  Simon,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Dole,
France,  28  April,  1779;  d.  in  Paris,  5  Nov.,  1836.
He  was  educated  by  charity  in  his  native  town,
and  was  appointed  to  the  polytechnic  school  of
Paris,  whither  he  went  on  foot  and  would  have
died  of  cold  in  the  streets  but  for  the  kindness  of
an  humble  woman  who  sheltered  him  and  took
him  to  his  destination.  His  instructors  were  La-
place, Plauy,  De  Fleury,  P'ourcroy,  and  Monge,
and  he  obtained  the  second  position  in  the  class  of
engineering.  He  was  appointed  in  the  corps  de
genie,  and  first  served  in  the  army  of  the  Rhine,
under  Napoleon,  where  he  soon  became  a  captain,
and,  having  accomplished  an  important  mission,
was  put  at  the  head  of  the  topographical  \f^'^^^
and  made  aide-de-camp  to  the  emperor.  He  led
the  assault  upon  Ivrea  in  1800.  When  a  colonel
he  was  engaged  in  fortifying  Antwerp,  and  his  leg
was  shattered  in  the  retreat  of  the  grand  army
from  the  field  of  Leipsic  in  1813.  The  same  year
he  threw  himself  into  Torgau  with  8,000  men,  su-
perintending the  defence  of  that  place  for  three
months  during  a  terrible  siege.  Napoleon  con-
ferred on  him  the  title  of  lieutenant-general  cl


BERNARDINO


BERRY


249


engineers,  in  which  capacity  he  attained  distinc-
tion. He  gave  in  his  adherence  to  Louis  XVI II.
in  1814,  and  was  appointed  brigadier-general ;  in
1815  he  again  fought  on  the  side  of  Napoleon  at
Waterloo,  and  once  more  entered  the  service  of
Louis  XVIII.;  but,  having  been  ordered  to  leave
Paris  for  Dole,  he  obtained  permission  from  the
king  to  go  to  the  United  States.  Under  a  resolu-
tion of  congress,  which  resolution  was  approved
29  April,  1810,  President  Madison  issued  a  commis-
sion, dated  16  Nov.,  1816,  appointing  Bernard  an
"  assistant  in  the  corps  of  engineers  of  the  United
States,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general  by  bre-
vet." Some  bitter  feeling  was  naturally  engen-
dered in  military  engineering  circles  by  this  invi-
tation of  a  foreigner,  and  one  of  the  results  was
the  resignation  of  Gen.  Joseph  G.  Swift,  chief  en-
gineer, and  of  another  distinguished  officer.  Col.
William  McRee.  In  1824  Gen.  Bernard  arrived
with  Lafayette,  and  soon  entered  upon  duty  as
chief  engineer  of  the  army,  although  his  title  was
"assistant  engineer,"  as  in  the  congressional  reso-
lution. He  had  as  an  associate  Col.  Joseph  G.
Totten,  and  the  two  constituted  a  permanent  board
upon  whom  devolved  the  labor  of  working  out  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  system,  and  of  elabo-
rating the  project  of  defence  for  the  great  sea-
ports. Naval  officers  of  rank  were  associated  with
them  whenever  required,  and  resident  engineer
officers  had  a  voice  in  relation  to  their  own  par-
ticular works.  The  principal  work  planned  and
executed  by  him  was  the  building  of  Fort  Mon-
roe at  the  mouth  of  James  river.  He  also  had  a
prominent  part  in  the  inauguration  of  some  of
the  mammoth  civil  engineering  works  of  the  day,
notably  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  canal,  and  the
Delaware  breakwater.  On  the  breaking  out  of  the
revolution  of  1830,  he  returned  to  France,  and  was
intrusted  by  Louis  Philippe  with  the  preparation
of  plans  for  the  fortification  of  Paris,  as  lieutenant-
general  of  engineers.  He  was  strongly  in  favor  of
the  system  of  detached  forts  that  was  afterward
carried  out.  In  1834  he  was  minister  of  war,  and
ad  interim  of  foreign  affairs,  and  he  was  minister
of  war  a  second  time  from  1836  till  1839.

BERNARDINO,  Fray. See  Cifuentes.

BERNAYS,  Augustus  Charles,  physician,  b.
in  Highland,  III,  13  Oct.,  1854.  He  was  graduated
at  McKendree  college  in  1872,  after  which  he  stud-
ied medicine  in  Heidelberg,  Germany,  and  in  1876
received  the  degree  of  M.  D.  Subsequently  he
spent  some  time  at  the  hospitals  in  Berlin,  Vienna,
and  London,  and  in  November,  1877,  was  elected
a  member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons.  Soon
after  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  settled  in
St.  Louis,  and  in  1883  became  professor  of  anatomy
in  the  St.  Louis  College  of  Physicians  and  Sur-
geons. Dr.  Bernays  is  the  author  of  two  embryo-
logical  monographs— one  on  the  development  of
the  valves  of  the  heart,  and  one  on  the  develop-
ment of  the  knee-joint  and  joints  in  general ;  and
also  of  a  series  of  surgical  papers,  which  appeared
between  the  years  1880  and  1886.  under  the  title  of
"  Chips  from  a  Surgeon's  Workshop."

BERRIAN,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1787 ;  d.  there,  7  Nov.,  1802.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1808,  ordained  in  the
Lpiscopal  church  in  1810,  and  became  assistant
mmister  of  Trinity  parish  in  1811 ;  was  elected
Ju^'!?^  of  Trinity  church  in  1830,  and  trustee  in
1832,  both  of  which  offices  he  held  until  his  death.
Ills  continuous  connection  with  this  parish  em-
braced a  period  of  fifty-one  years,  broken  only  by
a  brief  settlement  in  Belleville,  N.  J.,  and  "two
journeys  abroad. He  published  "  Travels  in  France


•^=^/^MJ0y.


and  Italy"  (New  York,  1820);  "Devotions  for  the
Sick  Room  " ;  "  Enter  Thy  Closet  " ;  "  Family  and
Private  Prayers  "  ;  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Trinity
Church  "  (New  York,  1847) ;  "  Recollections  of  De-
parted Friends  "  (1850) ;  "  On  Communion  "  ;  and
"  The  Sailor's  Manual."  He  also  edited  the  works
of  Bishop  J.  H.  Hobart,  with  a  memoir  (3  vols.,
New  York,  1833).

BERRIEN,  John  Macpherson,  statesman,  b.
in  New  Jersey,  23  Aug.,  1781 ;  d.  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  1  Jan.,  1856.  He  was  a  son  of  Maj.  John
Berrien,  who  served  in  the  war  of  independence.
He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1706,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar
of  Georgia  at  the
age  of  eighteen,
and  attained  a
high  reputation
as  a  lawyer.  He
was  solicitor  of
the  eastern  dis-
trictofGeorgiain
1809,  and  judge
of  the  same  dis-
trict from  1810
till  1821 ;  served
in  the  Georgia
senate  in  1822-3;
and  was  U.  S.
senator  in  1825-
'9,  and  again  in
1840-'52.  He  was
attorney-general
of  the  United
States  from  1829
till  1831,  when  he  resigned  on  account  of  the
inharmonious  condition  of  President  Jackson's
cabinet.  In  1844  he  was  a  delegate  from  Georgia
in  the  convention  at  Baltimore  that  nominated
Henry  Clay  for  the  presidency.  He  was  one  of
the  board  of  regents  of  the  Smithsonian  institute.
In  January,  1829,  he  submitted  a  "protest"  against
certain  measures  before  congress,  backed  by  a  speech
so  clear  and  impressive  that  the  title  of  "  American
Cicero  "  was  given  him.

BERRIEN,  John  M.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Geor-
gia in  1802;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  20  Nov.,  1883.
On  receiving  his  appointment  as  midshipman  he
joined  the  frigate  "  (Jonstellation,"  of  the  West  In-
dia squadron,  in  1827,  was  subsequently  trans-
ferred to  the  frigate  "  Guerriere,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron,  and  then  to  the  sloop  "  Vincennes."  He
was  promoted  to  passed  midshipman  in  1831,  and
joined  the  West  India  squadron,  commissioned
lieutenant  in  1837,  and  served  on  various  vessels  in
the  Pacific  and  Brazil  stations.  In  September,
1844,  he  was  ordered  to  the  frigate  "Potomac,"
and  in  1847  commanded  the  schooner  "  Bonito  "
at  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Tobasco,  Mexico.
Lieut.  Berrien  received  his  conmiission  as  com-
mander, 13  March.  1850,  and  during  1858-'9  was
attached  to  the  navy-yard  at  Portsmouth,  N.  H.
In  February,  1860,  he  was  ordered  to  Hong-Kong,
China,  where  he  took  command  of  the  sloop  of
war  "  John  Adams,"  was  commissioned  captain  in
1862,  and  sent  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  as  assistant  in-
spector of  ordnance  at  the  Fort  Pitt  Works.  He
commanded  at  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1865,  and  was  light-
house inspector  in  1800-'9.  He  was  commissioned
commodore,  20  Sept.,  1866,  and  in  December  was
placed  on  the  retired  list.

BERRY,  Abraham  J.,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  1799;  d.  in  Williamsburg  (now  Brook-
lyn), 22  Oct.,  1865.  He  was  educated  as  a  physi-
cian, and  at  an  early  age  obtained  prominence  in


250


BERRY


BERTRAND


his  profession.  At  the  time  of  the  desolation  of
New  York  by  Asiatic  cholera  in  1882,  he  was
among  the  few  that  remained  at  the  post  of  duty.
He  lal3ored  night  and  day,  and  his  courage  and
zeal  resulted  in  many  expressions  of  respect  and
admiration  from  all  classes,  as  well  as  a  public  ac-
knowledgment by  the  city  authorities.  For  more
than  a  century  a  considerable  part  of  Williamsburg
had  belonged  to  his  family.  He  identified  himself
with  the  interests  of  the  place  when  it  was  made  a
city,  and  became  its  first  mayor.  He  also  assisted
very  materially  in  the  establishment  of  the  im-
portant ferries  connecting  with  New  York.  In
1861  Dr.  Berry,  although  over  sixty  years  of  age,
went  out  as  "surgeon  of  the  38th  New  York  in-
fantry. When  Gen.  McClellan  retreated  to  Har-
rison's Landing  in  July,  1862,  Dr.  Berry  had  more
than  300  patients  in  his  care  near  White  House ;
but  in  the  confusion  incident  to  the  moving  of  the
army  he  and  they  were  forgotten.  When  he  found
that  the  army  had  departed,  he  performed  the  her-
culean task  of  carrying  the  sick  and  convalescent
safely  through  to  the  James  river,  and  when  he
reached  it  the  additions  of  sick  and  wounded  had
swelled  his  train  to  more  than  800.  His  death  was
the  result  of  fever  contracted  at  that  period.

BERRY,  Hiram  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Thomas-
ton  (now  Rockland),  Me.,  27  Aug.,  1824:  d.  at
Chancellorsville,  Va.,  2  May,  1863.  He  learned  the
carpenters  trade,  and  afterward  engaged  in  navi-
gation. He  represented  his  native  town  in  the
state  legislature  several  times,  and  was  mayor  of
the  city  of  Rockland.  He  originated  and  com-
manded for  several  years  the  Rockland  guard,  a
volunteer  company,  which  attained  a  high  reputa-
tion for  drill  and  discipline.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  entered  the  service  as  colonel  of
the  4th  Maine  infantry.  He  took  part  in  the  bat-
tle of  Bull  Run  and  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  was
made  a  brigadier-general  4  April,  1862,  his  com-
mission dating  from  17  March,  1862,  and  was  given
command  of  the  3d  brigade  of  the  3d  division  of
Heintzelman's  3d  army  corps.  He  was  present  at
the  battles  of  Williamsburg  and  Fair  Oaks,  bore  a
conspicuous  part  in  the  seven  days'  fight,  and  was
in  the  second  Bull  Run  campaign  and  Chantilly.
In  January,  1863,  he  was  nominated  by  the  presi-
dent as  major-general  of  volunteers,  with  rank
dating  from  29  Nov..  1862,  confirmed  by  the  sen-
ate on  9  March,  1863.  and  placed  in  command
ol  the  2d  division  of  the  3d  army  corps,  succeed-
mg  Gen.  Sickles.  At  a  critical  juncture  in  the
battle  of  Chancellorsville  Gen.  Berry  received
an  order  from  Gen.  Hooker  to  charge  upon  the
advancing  foe.  It  read :  "  Go  in,  general ;  throw
your  men  into  the  breach  ;  don't  fire  a  shot — they
can't  see  you — but  charge  home  with  the  bayonet.''
They  did  charge  home,  and  for  three  hours  Gen.
Berry's  division,  almost  alone,  withstood  the  attack
of  the  enemy  flushed  with  previous  victory,  drove
them  back,  and  regained  a  portion  of  their  lost
ground.  The  battle  was  renewed  the  next  morn-
ing, and  again  Berry  and  his  division  were  in  the
front,  and  receiving  the  first  assault.  Intent  upon
driving  them  back,  he  headed  one  of  his  brigades
in  several  successful  bayonet  charges,  and  in  one
of  them  was  killed  by  a  shot  from  the  enemy.

BERRY,  Nathaniel  Springer,  governor  of
New  Hampshire,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,  1  Sept.,  1796.
His  father  was  Abner  Berry,  a  ship-builder;  his
grandfather,  John  Berry,  captain  of  infantry  in
the  revolutionary  war.  His  mother  was  Betsy,
daughter  of  Nathaniel  Springer,  a  captain  of  artil-
lery in  the  same  war,  killed  in  battle.  When  he
was  six  years  old  his  father  died,  and  the  condition


of  the  family  was  such  that  his  lot  was  cast  among
strangers,  and  his  educational  advantages  were
limited.  He  became  an  apprentice  as  a  tanner  and
currier  at  Bath,  N.  H.,  at  sixteen,  and  served  until
twenty-one.  In  \pril,  1818,  he  moved  to  Bristol,
N.  H.,  and  in  1820  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of
leather,  which  business  he  followed  about  thirty-
five  years.  He  was  colonel  of  the  34th  regiment  of
New  Hampshire  militia  for  two  years,  was  a  judge
of  the  court  of  common  pleas  from  June,  1841,  till
June,  1850,  and  judge  of  probate  for  the  five  years
ending  5  June,  1861.  In  1828, 1833, 1834,  and  1837
he  represented  Bristol  in  the  state  legislature,  in
1854  represented  the  town  of  Hebron,  and  in  1835
and  in  1836  was  a  state  senator  for  the  11th  dis-
trict. Politically  he  acted  with  the  democratic
party  for  twenty-two  years,  and  was  a  delegate  to
its  national  convention  at  Baltimore  in  1840 ;  but
the  action  of  this  convention  on  the  subject  of
slavery  caused  him  to  break  his  party  ties,  and  he
became  one  of  the  organizers  of  the  free-soil  party
in  New  Hampshire.  At  its  first  state  convention,
in  1845,  he  was  nominated  for  governor,  and  re-
ceived votes  enough  to  prevent  an  election  by  the
people.  He  was  re-nominated  at  the  four  succeed-
ing conventions.  In  March,  1861,  he  was  elected
governor  by  the  republican  party,  inaugurated  in
June  following,  and  re-elected  in  March,  18G2,
serving  until  June,  1863.  He  was  indefatigable  in
his  efforts  to  aid  the  general  government  in  the
suppression  of  the  rebellion  ;  and  enlisted,  armed,
equipped,  and  forwarded  to  the  seat  of  war  more
than  16,000  men.  He  signed,  with  the  other  north-
ern war-governors,  the  letter  of  28  June,  1862,  to
President  Lincoln,  upon  which  he  made  the  call  of
1  July,  1862.  for  300,000  volunteers.  In  1823  Mr.
Berry  became  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church,  and  in  1872  was  a  delegate  to  the  gen-
eral conference.  He  lost  his  wife  in  1857,  and  in
1886  was  residing  with  his  son  in  Bristol.

BERTHIER,  Lonis  Alexandre  (bare-te-a),
prince  of  Wagram,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Versailles,
20  Nov.,  1753 ;  d.  in  Bamberg,  1  June,  1815.  He
was  educated  as  a  soldier  by  his  father,  chief  of
topographical  engineers  under  Louis  XVI.,  and
went  into  active  service  first  as  a  staff-lieutenant,
and  afterward  as  a  captain  of  dragoons,  with  which
latter  rank  he  came  to  America  under  Lafayette,
and  served  during  the  war  for  independence,  1778-
'82.  Of  this  period  of  his  life  little  is  known.  On
his  return  to  France  he  served  the  royal  family
until  the  revolution,  when  his  talents  made  them-
selves felt  and  he  became  one  of  Bonaparte's  gen-
erals of  division,  and  subsequently  his  chief  of
staff,  the  most  confidential  of  all  positions  for  a
military  aide.  He  followed  the  fortunes  of  Napo-
leon to  the  last,  and  was  without  a  peer  in  his  spe-
cial line  of  staff  duty.  He  is  said  to  have  been
murdered  by  six  men  in  masks ;  but  some  doubt
has  been  thrown  upon  this  story.  His  memoirs
were  published  in  Paris  (1826).

BERTRAND,  Saint  Louis,  b.  in  Valencia,
Spain,  in  1526;  d.  there  in  1581.  He  joined  the
Dominicans  in  1544,  and  obtained  permission  from
his  general  to  preach  to  the  Indians  when  he  had
finished  his  studies.  He  arrived  in  Carthagena  m
1562,  and,  after  a  short  stav  in  the  convent  of  St.
Joseph,  was  ordered  to  preach  the  gospel  among
the  savage  tribes  that  dwelt  between  the  river
Magdalena  and  the  Cordilleras.  As  he  knew  no
other  language  than  Spanish,  the  task  seemed  in-
surmountable. It  is  said  that,  in  answer  to  his
prayers,  he  was  able  to  make  himself  understooa
by  his  hearers,  though  speaking  only  his  native
language,  and  that  he  also  received  the  gifts  oi


BESSELS

prophecy  and  miracles.  In  less  than  three  months
he  converted  more  than  10,000  Indians  in  the
province  of  Tubara.  Leaving  some  of  his  com-
panions to  complete  his  work,  he  next  went  among
the  Indians  of  Cipacoa,  whom  he  found  threatened
with  famine,  owing  to  the  absence  of  rain.  This
danger  having  been  averted,  as  the  natives  be-
lieved, by  the  prayers  of  the  missionary,  they  all
embracecl  Christianity.  After  attempting  unsuc-
cessfully to  evangelize  the  Caribs,  he  turned  his
attention  to  the  savages  of  the  St.  Martha  moun-
tiins,  whom,  to  the  number  of  15,000,  he  formed
into  a  civilized  community.  Similar  results  at-
tended his  labors  in  the  province  of  Monpox  and
in  the  island  of  St.  Thomas.  Although  his  efforts
to  Christianize  the  natives  were  hindered  by  some
of  his  countrymen  whose  vices  he  denounced,  he
succeeded  in  converting  all  the  Indians  of  New
Grenada.  He  then  decided  on  returning  to  Spain,
with  the  object  of  enlisting  novices  for  the  Ameri-
can mission.  But  the  entreaties  of  the  Indians,
combined  with  his  election  as  prior  of  the  convent
of  Santa-Fe-de-Bogota,  changed  his  plans.  He
set  out  from  Carthagena ;  but  the  vessel  which  car-
ried him  was  wrecked  on  an  island  in  the  Magda-
lena,  and  he  was  obliged  to  return.  Here  he  was
met  by  a  summons  from  the  general  of  the  Do-
minicans to  return  to  Europe.  A  few  days  later
he  put  to  sea,  reaching  Valencia  in  the.  month  of
October,  15G9.  He  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  no-
vitiate, and  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  training
missionaries  for  the  Indian  mission.

BESSELS,  Eniil,  scientist,  b.  in  Heidelberg.
Germany,  in  1847.  He  studied  medicine  and  zool-
ogy, and  in  1869  accompanied  Petermann  in  his
Arctic  expedition.  He  was  chief  of  the  scientific
department  of  the  "  Polaris  "  expedition  of  1870-
'3,  and  in  1876  edited  the  first  three  volumes  of
scientific  results  of  that  expedition,  devoted  to
hydrography,  meteorology,  and  astronomy.  He
was  also  in  the  expedition  of  Dorst  and  Weyprecht,
and  has  edited  reports  of  the  U.  S.  naval  institute.

BESSEY,  Charles  Edwin,  botanist,  b.  in  Mil-
ton, Wayne  co.,  Ohio,  21  May,  1845.  He  took  a
scientific  course  in  Michigan  "agricultural  college,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1869,  and  afterward
studied  at  Harvard.  He  was  professor  of  botany
in  Iowa  agricultural  college  from  1870  till  1884,
when  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  botany  and
horticulture  in  the  university  of  Nebraska,  He
became  editor  of  the  botanical  department  of  the
"  American  Naturalist "  in  1881,  and  has  published
'•  Geography  of  Iowa  "  (Cincinnati,  1878) ;  "  Botany
for  High  Schools  and  Colleges  "  (New  York,  1880) :
a  revision  of  McNab's  Botany  (1881),  and  "The
Essentials  of  Botany  "  (1884).

BETANCOURT,  Agustin  (bay  -  tahn  -  coor'),
Mexican  monk  of  the  Franciscan  order,  b.  in  the
city  of  Mexico  in  1020 ;  d.  in  1700.  He  was  an  ex-
cellent scholar  and  a  famous  teacher  of  the  Mexi-
can language.  Among  his  works  are  "Arte  de
Lengua  Mejicana,"  "  Via  Crucis,"  in  Mexican,  and
';  Cronografia  sacra."  The  best  is  his  "  Teatro  Me-
jicano,"  a  rich  chronicle  of  Mexican  history  down
to  about  the  end  of  the  17th  century.

BETANCOURT,  Jose  Ramon,  Cuban  lawyer,
b.  in  Puerto  Principe,  Cuba,  in  1828.  He  was
educated  in  Havana,  and  in  1847  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  In  1869  he  removed  to  Madrid,  Spain,
where  he  has  represented  Cuba  several  times  in  the
bpanish  Cortes.  He  has  published  a  novel  entitled
"Una  Feria  de  la  Caridad,"  a  well-drawn  picture
of  Cuban  customs  and  manners.  His  other  works
are  "Cartera  de  Viajes,"  "  Juieios  criticos,"  and

Polemicas  y  otras  Cosas."


BETETA


251


BETANZOS,  Domingo  de  (bay-tan'-thos),
Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Leon,  Spain ;  d.  in  Valla-
dolid,  in  August,  1549.  He  was  educated  at  the
university  of  Salamanca,  and  spent  whatever  time
he  could  spare  from  his  studies  in  visiting  the  hos-
pitals and  in  other  charitable  offices.  At  the  end
of  his  course  he  sold  his  possessions,  distributed
the  proceeds  among  the  poor,  and  begged  his  way
to  a  hermitage  in  Catalonia.  He  led  a  solitary
life  for  some  months,  and  then  set  out  for  Rome,
to  consult  the  pope  on  his  future  vocation.  From
Rome  he  went  to  the  island  of  Ponzo,  near  Naples,
where  he  lived  for  five  years,  seeing  nobody  but  a
fisherman  who  brought  him  the  vegetables  that
formed  his  sole  support.  He  finally  became  a
Dominican  in  the  convent  of  St.  Stephen,  Sala-
manca, and  was  sent  to  Santo  Domingo.  After
studying  the  language  of  the  natives,  he  devoted
himself  to  their  conversion.  He  excited  the  hos-
tility of  the  Spaniards  by  his  efforts  to  protect  the
Indians  from  their  cruelty.  After  a  stay  of  twelve
years  in  Santo  Domingo  he  was  summoned  to
Mexico,  where  the  mission  of  the  Dominicans  was
almost  ruined,  all  its  members  having  died  except
two.  The  preaching  of  Father  de  Betanzos  was  so
effective  with  several  young  Spaniards,  who  had
come  to  America  in  search  of  riches,  that  he  soon
had  a  large  number  of  novices.  He  founded  a
convent  of  his  order  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  and
afterward,  as  every  vessel  that  touched  on  the  coast
afforded  him  recruits,  was  able  to  found  others  in
the  cities  of  Tlascala,  Puebla,  and  Oaxaca.  Satis-
fied that  his  followers  would  complete  his  work  in
Mexico,  he  set  out  on  a  Journey  of  300  miles  for
Guatemala,  with  two  companions,  travelling  on
foot.  He  did  not  remain  long  in  Guatemala,  hav-
ing been  recalled  to  Mexico  in  1530;  but  during
his  stay  he  built  a  church  and  convent  and  made  such
an  impression  upon  the  natives  that  his  name  was
afterward  a  protection  to  other  missionaries.  The
reason  of  his  recall  was  a  claim  set  up  by  the  Do-
minican province  of  Santo  Domingo  to  jurisdiction
over  the  convents  of  the  order  in  Mexico.  Father
de  Betanzos  was  sent  to  Rome  to  defend  the  rights
of  the  province  of  Mexico,  was  successful,  and  on
his  return  was  elected  the  first  provincial  of  the
province  of  St.  James  of  Mexico.  His  next  step
was  to  establish  a  college  for  the  study  of  the  In-
dian dialects,  which  varied  not  only  in  different
provinces,  but  in  different  villages.  He  also  erect-
ed schools  in  the  pueblas  with  the  same  object.
He  was  named  bishop  of  Guatemala,  but  declined
the  appointment.  His  death  occurred  as  he  was
returning  from  Rome,  where  he  had  gone  on  a
mission  connected  with  the  affairs  of  his  order.

BETANZOS,  Pedro  (bay-tan'-thos),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Betanzos.  Galicia,  Spain,  early
in  the  16th  century;  d.  in  Choinez,  Nicaragua,  in
1570.  He  was  the  first  missionary  that  went  to
Central  America,  and  founded  the  province  of
Nicaragua.  In  eight  years  he  learned  fourteen  In-
dian languages  in  Central  America,  and  then  went
to  Mexico  to  learn  Mexican.  He  also  was  the  first
missionary  that,  in  his  sermons  and  teachings  to
Indians,  substituted  the  Spanish  word  "  Dios "
(God)  for  the  Indian  "  Cabovil."  This  course  was
opposed  by  other  missionaries,  and  created  much
discussion  between  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans
of  Guatemala ;  but  Betanzos's  opinion  prevailed.

BETETA,  Oregorio  (bay  -  tay'- tah),  Spanish
missionary,  b.  in  Leon,  Spain,  about  1500;  d.  in
Toledo  in  1562.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  began
his  novitiate  in  the  convent  of  St.  Stej)hen,  Sala-
manca. He  finished  his  course  in  the  university
of  the  same  city,  and,  after  gaining  distinction  as


252


BETHENCOURT


BETHUNE


a  professor  and  preacher,  volunteered  for  the  mis-
sion of  New  Granada.  He  remained  in  the  ishmd
of  Santo  Domingo  from  1534  till  1529,  studying
the  Indian  dialects  and  fitting  himself  otherwise
for  his  work  as  a  missionary.  His  success  in  New
Granada  was  remarkable.  He  preached  first  in
the  valley  of  the  Uruba,  where  the  Indians  were
noted  for  their  ferocity,  and  in  a  short  time  convert-
ed the  inhabitants.  Ambitious  of  martyrdom,  he
penetrated  into  Florida:  but,  as  the  natives  would
neither  kill  him  nor  listen  to  him,  he  was  forced
to  return  to  New  Granada.  He  traversed  every
part  of  the  country,  his  efforts  in  civilizing  the
natives  being  so  successful  as  to  attract  the  favor-
able notice  of  the  Spanish  court.  He  was  nom-
inated bishop  of  Carthagena  in  1555,  endeav-
ored to  decline  the  honor,  and  only  submitted
under  threat  of  censure.  He  set  out  for  Rome,
finally  received  permission  to  surrender  his  bish-
opric, and  then  retired  to  a  convent  in  Toledo.

BETHENCOURT,  Pedro,  Spanish  philanthro-
pist, b.  in  Chasma,  island  of  Teneriffe,  in  1619 ;  d.
in  Guatemala,  25  April,  1667.  He  was  a  descend-
ant of  Juan  Bethencourt,  conqiieror  and  king  of
the  Canary  islands;  went  to  Guatemala  in  1651,
and  devoted  himself  to  literary  studies.  There  he
entered  the  Franciscan  order,  bought  a  building,
which  was  first  used  for  a  school,  and  then  for  a
convent,  a  hospital,  and  a  church.  In  that  house
Bethencourt  founded  the  hospital  order  of  the
Bethlehemites,  and  soon  extended  its  benevolent
services  to  the  rest  of  America.  He  also  made
other  religious  foundations,  giving  all  his  time  to
charitable  work,  and  after  death  he  M^as  beatified.

BETHISY,  Jules  Jaques  Eleonore  (bet-e-sy),
French  soldier,  b.  in  Calais,  France,  in  1747;  d.  in
Paris  in  1816.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  boy,  and
in  1768  was  transferred  first  to  the  regiment  Braf-
f  remont,  and  then  to  the  Royal  Auvergne,  which  he
joined  in  America.  He  became  "colonel  en  se-
cond" of  this  corps,  a  rank  corresponding  to  a
junior  field  officer  of  modern  battalions.  With
this  regiment  he  served  during  the  campaigns  of
1779-'82.  At  the  unsuccessful  siege  of  the  British
in  Savannah,  in  August,  1779,  by  ihe  combined
French  and  American  forces  under  D'Estaing  and
Lincoln,  Bethisy  was  five  times  wounded,  and
while  returning  home  received  two  more  wounds
in  a  sea-fight.  At  the  close  of  the  American  war
he  was  decorated  with  the  cross  of  St.  Louis  and
the  order  of  the  Cincinnati,  and  was  made  '•  colo-
nel eu  second"  of  the  Royal  Grenadiers  of  Pic-
ardy.  During  the  revolution  of  1798  he  emigrated
from  France  and  allied  himself  to  the  house  of
Bourbon,  under  the  prince  of  Conde,  with  whom
he  served  through  the  campaigns  looking  to  the
restoration  of  the  Bourbons,  and  was  made  field
marshal  1  Jan.,  1814.  His  death  was  the  result  of
wounds  received  in  action.

BETHUNE,  Alexander  Neil,  Canadian  bishop,
b.  in  Williamstown,  county  of  Glengarry,  Ontario,
in  August,  1800 ;  d.  in  Toronto  in  February,  1879.
His  family  was  of  Scottish  origin,  and  had  settled
in  Canada  with  a  band  of  U.  E.  loyalists  in  1783.
He  received  his  early  educational  training  at  Corn-
wall grammar-school,  but,  the  war  of  1812  break-
ing up  this  school,  he  resumed  his  studies  in  Mont-
real, where  his  parents  then  resided.  Acting  for
some  time  as  classical  tutor,  he  was  admitted  to
deacon's  orders  in  1823,  and  in  the  year  following
was  ordained  priest.  After  spending  a  few  years
in  Grimsby,  he  became  rector  of  Cobourg,  in  1847
was  appointed  archdeacon  of  York,  and  in  1867
was  consecrated  coadjutor  bishop  in  St.  James's  ca-
thedral, Toronto,  it  being  provided  at  the  time  of


his  consecration  that  he  should  succeed  Bishop
Strachan  on  the  death  of  the  latter.  While  at
Cobourg  he  edited  a  church  newsi)aper,  and  subse-
quently wrote  several  works,  the  most  important  of
which  is  a  "  Memoir  of  the  Right  Reverend  John
Strachan,  D.  D.,  LL.  I).,  First  Bishop  of  Toronto."
—His  son,  Charles  James  Stewart,  clergyman,
b.  in  West  Flamboro',  Ontario,  11  Aug.,  1838,  was
educated  at  private  schools  at  Cobourg,  and  at
Upper  Canada  college,  and  was  graduated  at  Trin-
ity college,  Toronto,  in  1859.  He  was  ordained  a
priest  in  the  church  of  England  in  1852,  and,  after
officiating  as  curate  and  rector  for  several  years,
was,  in  September,  1870,  appointed  head  master
of  Trinity  college  school  at  Port  Hope,  He  has
given  much  attention  to  scientific  subjects,  and
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  entomological  so-
ciety of  Canada,  and  its  president  from  1870  till
1875.  He  was  entomological  editor  of  the  "  Can-
ada Farmer "  for  nine  years,  and  editor  of  the
"Canadian  Entomologist"  from  its  beginning  in
1868  till  1873.  He  has  written  on  practical  and
scientific  entomology,  and  has  contributed  to  the
yearly  report  on  insects  presented  to  the  provincial
legislature.  He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  asso-
ciation for  the  advancement  of  science.

BETHUNE,  George  Washington,  clergyman,
b.  in  New  York  city  in  March,  1805 ;  d.  in  Flor-
ence, Italy,  27  April,  1862.  His  parents  were  dis-
tinguished for  devout  Christianity  and  for  chari-
table deeds.  His
father,  Divie  Be-
thune,  was  an  emi-
nent merchant,
well  known  as  a
philanthropist.  He
was  graduated  at
Dickinson  college,
Carlisle.  Pa.,  in
1822,  studied  the-
ology at  Princeton,
and  after  complet-
ing his  course  was
ordained  as  a  min-
ister in  the  Pres-
byterian church  in
1825.  He  accepted
an  appointment  as

chaplain  to  seamen  in  the  port  of  Savannah,  but
in  1826  returned  to  the  north  and  transferred  his
ecclesiastical  allegiance  to  the  Reformed  Dutch
church,  settling  soon  after  at  Rhinebeck,  N.  ¥.,
where  he  remained  four  years,  when  he  was  called
to  the  pastorate  of  the  first  Reformed  Dutch
church  in  Utica.  In  1834  his  reputation  as  an
eloquent  preacher  and  an  efficient  pastor  led  to  an
invitation  from  a  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Phila-
delphia. He  remained  in  that  city  till  1848.  his
character  as  a  preacher  and  scholar  steadily  grow-
ing, and  then  became  pastor  of  the  newly  organ-
ized "Reformed  Dutch  Church  on  the  Heights"
in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.  For  eleven  years  he  continued
in  the  paVorate  of  this  church,  but  in  1859  im-
paired health  led  him  to  resign  and  visit  Italy.
In  Rome  he  sometimes  preached  in  the  American
chapel,  at  that  time  the  only  Protestant  place  of
worship  in  the  city.  He  returned  in  1860  with  im-
proved health,  and  was  for  some  months  associ:.ic
pastor  of  a  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  New  York
city;  but,  his  health  again  becoming  impaired,  he
returned  to  Italy  in  the  summer  of  1861,  and,  after
some  months'  residence  in  Florence,  died  from  apo-
plexy. Dr.  Bethune,  though  best  remembered  by
his  literary  work,  exercised  a  wide  influence  as  a
clerygmau  and  a  citizen. One  of  his  latest  public


/r


BETHITNE


BEVERIDGE


253


efforts  before  leaving  his  native  city  for  his  last
voyage  to  Europe  was  an  address  delivered  at  the
great"  mass  meeting  in  Union  square,  New  York,
20  April,  1861,  in  which  with  extraordinary  fire
and  eloquence  he  urged  the  duty  of  patriotism  in
the  trying  crisis  that  then  threatened  the  nation.
A  memoir  by  A.  R.  Van  Nest,  D.  D,,  was  published
in  1867.  Dr.  Bethune  was  an  accomplished  student
of  English  literature,  and  distinguished  himself  as
;i  writer  and  editor.  He  published  an  excellent
.'dition  of  the  "  British  Female  Poets,  with  Bio-
graphical and  Critical  Notices"  (Philadelphia,
1848) ;  and  Izaak  Walton's  "  Complete  Angler,"
for  which  last  he  was  peculiarly  qualified  by  his
fondness  for  fishing.  Among  his  original  works
are  "  Lavs  of  Love  and  Faith "  (Philadelphia,
1847);  "Orations  and  Discourses"  (1850);  "Me-
moirs of  Joanna  Bethune "  (New  York,  1863) ;
"  Fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  a  volume  of  sermons ;  and
two  smaller  works,  "  Early  Lost,  Early  Saved,"  and
"  The  History  of  a  Penitent."

BETHUNE,  James,  Canadian  lawver,  b.  in
Glengarry,  Ontario,  7  July,  1840 ;  d.  18  Dec,  1884.
He  was  descended  from  two  old  Scottish  families,
and  was  the  great-grandson  of  Angus  Bethune,  a
loyalist,  who  removed  from  the  United  States  and
settled  in  Glengarry  in  1778.  James  Bethune  en-
tered Queen's  college,  Kingston,  and,  after  a  two
years'  course  there,  attended  University  college,
Toronto,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1861.  Con-
currently with  his  university  pursuits,  he  studied
law,  first  in  Cornwall  and  afterward  in  the  office
of  Edward  Blake,  Toronto,  and  was  called  to  the
l)ar  of  Upper  Canada  in  1862,  and  to  the  bar  of
Quebec  in  1869.  He  began  practice  at  Cornwall,
and  in  1872  was  elected  to  represent  the  county  of
Stonnont  in  the  legislature  of  Ontario ;  was  re-
elected at  the  general  elections  of  1875,  and  repre-
sented this  constituency  until  June,  1879,  when  he
<leclined  to  become  a  candidate.  In  November,
1870,  he  removed  to  Toronto,  and,  in  conjunction
with  Edward  Blake,  S.  H.  Blake,  and  J.  K.  Kerr,
established  the  firm  of  Blake,  Kerr  &  Bethune.
Subsequently  he  joined  Messrs.  F.  Osier  and
('harles  Moss,  and  formed  the  firm  of  Bethune,
Osier  &  Moss.  On  the  elevation  of  Mr.  Osier  to
the  bench,  the  firm  was  known  as  Bethune,  Moss,
Falconbridge  &  Hayles,  and  as  such  became  one
of  the  most  successful  legal  firms  in  Canada.  Mr.
liethune  was  elected  a  bencher  of  the  law  society
of  Ontario  in  1875,  and  was  for  some  years  lecturer
for  that  bodv.

BETTS,  Samuel  Rossiter,  jurist,  b.  in  Rich-
mond, Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  in  1787;  d.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  3  Nov.,,  1868.  He  was  the  son  of  a
farmer,  and  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1806.
lie  studied  law  in  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  be^^an  practice  in  Sullivan  co.,
where  he  was  earning  a  fair  reputation  at  the  out-
break of  the  war  of  1812.  After  a  term  of  service
in  the  army,  he  was  appomted  judge-advocate  by
Gov.  Tompkins.  In  1815  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress for  the  district  comprising  Orange  and  Sulli-
van cos.,  N.  Y.  At  the  close  of  the  term  he
declined  a  re-election,  and  returned  to  the  study
and  practice  of  his  profession.  He  was  for  sev-
eral years  district  attorney  of  Orange  co.  At
that  time  the  bar  of  the  state  of  New  York  con-
tained a  somewhat  notable  array  of  eminent
lawyers.  Martin  Van  Buren,  Elisha  Williams,
rhomas  J.  Oakley,  George  Griffin,  Ogden  Hoffman,
rrescott  Hall,  and  Thomas  Addis  Emmet  were  in
active  practice,  and  with  all  of  them  Mr.  Belts  was
constantly  associated,  and,  though  of  a  younger
generation  than  most  of  them,  was  soon  recognized


as  their  peer  in  the  profession.  In  1823  Mr.
Belts  was  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district
court,  which  office  he  held  for  forty-four  years,
and  throughout  the  whole  term  presided  with  such
dignity,  courtesy,  profundity  of  legal  knowledge,
and  patience  of  imiestigation,  that  he  came  to  be
regarded  as  almost  infallible  in  his  decisions.  To
him  belongs  the  high  honor  of  having  in  a  great
degree  formulated  and  codified  the  maritime  laws
of  the  United  States.  The  complicated  rules  of
salvage,  general  average,  wages  of  seamen,  freight-
ing contracts,  charters,  insurance,  and  prizes  owe
their  present  well-ordered  system  to  Judge  Betts.
During  the  first  twenty  years  of  his  connection
with  the  district  court  there  was  never  an  appeal
from  his  decisions,  and  his  opinions  in  his  own
court  on  maritime  questions,  and  in  the  circuit
court  on  patents,  have  been  uniformly  upheld.
Criminal  causes  of  all  kinds  amenable  to  U.  S.  laws
were  decided  by  him.  The  civil  war  brought  be-
fore him  an  entirely  new  ciass  of  questions,  affect-
ing national  and  international  rights ;  but,  although
beyond  the  age  of  three-score-years-and-ten.  Judge
Betts  applied  himself  to  the  study  of  the  new  con-
ditions, and  his  decisions  regarding  the  neutrality
laws  and  the  slave-trade  are  notable  instances  of
constitutional  reasoning  and  argument.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams  in  1830,
In  1838  he  published  a  standard  work  on  admiralty
practice.  In  May,  1867,  having  entered  upon  his
eighty-first  year.  Judge  Betts  retired  from  the
bench  and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  at  his
home  in  New  Haven.

BETTS,  Thaddeus,  lawyer,  b.  in  Norwalk,
Conn. ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  8  April,  1840.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1807,  as  was  his  father
in  1745,  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  and  began  prac-
tice in  Norwalk.  He  was  a  whig  in  politics,  and
after  holding  many  places  of  public  trust,  includ-
ing the  lieut.-governorship  of  the  state,  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  on  the  nomination  of  the
whig  party,  to  serve  for  six  years,  beginning  4
March,  1839.  Notwithstanding  failing  health,  he
creditably  fulfilled  his  duties  as  senator  until  a  few
days  before  his  death.

BETTS,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bechsgrove,
St.  Croix,  West  Indies,  28  Jan.,  1802  ;  d.  in  Jamaica,
Long  Island,  N.  Y.,  5  July,  1884.  His  early  educa-
tion was  received  in  Jamaica;  thence  he  went  to
Union  college,  N.  Y.,  where  he  stayed  a  year,  and
then,  entering  Columbia,  was  graduated  in  1820.
He  studied  law  with  David  B.  Ogden,  and  subse-
quently entered  the  office  of  his  father-in-law,
Beverley  Robinson.  Mr.  Betts  was  counsel  to
several  old  and  large  corporations  in  New  York,
was  a  trustee  of  Columbia  and  of  the  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons,  and  fi-om  1848  till  1854
was  professor  of  law  in  Columbia.  He  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Columbia  in  1850. — His
son,  Beverley  Robinson,  b.  in  New  York  city,  3
Aug.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1846,
and  at  the  general  theological  seminary  of  the
Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1850.  The  same
year  he  was  ordained  deacon,  and  in  1851  took
orders  as  a  priest.  He  was  successively  rector  of
several  churches  until  1865,  when  he  was  appointed
librarian  of  Columbia.  Of  the  large  library  of  that
college  he  prepared  a  full  catalogue  (1874),  and  in
1883  he  resigned  his  post  as  librarian.  He  has  been
a  frequent  contributor  to  the  church  journals,  and
for  many  years  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  New
York  Genealogical  and  Biographical  Record."

BEVERIDGE,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Scotland.  He
taught  school  in  Edinburgh  for  a  time,  having
among  his  pupils  the  blind  poet  Thomas  Black-


254


BEVERIDGE


BICKER


lock.  In  1752  he  emigrated  to  New  England,
where  he  remained  five  years,  and  then  accepted
the  professorship  of  languages  in  the  college  and
academy  of  Philadelphia.  According  to  his  biogra-
pher, Alexander  Graydon,  he  was  mercilessly  im-
posed upon  by  the  pupils,  he  b^ing  small  of  stature
and  a  poor  disciplinarian.  William  Bradford  pub-
lished for  him  a  volume  of  original  Latin  poems
entitled  "Epistohe  Familiares  et  Alia  quasdam
Miscellanea  "  (17(55).  To  the  Latin  poems  are  ap-
pended translations  for  which  the  editor  quaintly
apologizes,  since  "  they  are  done  by  students  under
age,  and  if  the  critic  will  only  bear  with  them  till
their  understandings  are  mature,  I  apprehend  they
are  in  a  fair  way  of  doing  better."

BEVERIDGE,  John  L.,  soldier,  b.  in  Washing-
ton CO.,  N.  v.,  in  1824.  In  1842  he  removed  west-
ward, first  to  Illinois,  and  then  to  Tennessee,  where
he  became  a  lawyer.  In  1855  he  returned  to  Illi-
nois, settling  in  Chicago,  and  he  gained  promi-
nence in  his  profession.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  volunteered  in  the  service  of  the
United  States,  and  attained  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general  of  volunteers.  He  was  elected  lieutenant-
governor  of  Illinois  in  1872,  and  in  1878  succeeded
Gov.  Oglesby  as  chief  executive  of  the  state.

BEVERLY,  Robert,  historian,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1675;  d.  in  1716.  He  became  clerk  of  the
council  of  Virginia  about  1697,  when  Sir  Edmund
Andros  was  governor.  This  office  his  father,  Maj.
Robert  Beverly,  had  held  before  him.  His  "  His-
tory of  the  Present  State  of  Virginia"  (4  vols.,
London,  1705)  included  an  account  of. the  first
settlement  of  Virginia,  and  the  history  of  the
government  until  that  time.  In  1707  a  French
translation,  with  fourteen  wood-cuts  by  Gribelius,
was  published  in  Amsterdam,  and  in  1722  a  second
English  edition  was  brought  out.  with  the  French
illustrations.  A  third  edition,  with  an  introduction
by  Charles  Campbell,  appeared  in  Richmond  (1855).
Mr.  Beverly  was  the  first  American  citizen  in
whose  behalf  the  habeas  corpus  act  was  brought
into  requisition.

BEWLEY,  Anthony,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tennes-
see, 22  May,  1804 ;  d.  at  Fort  Worth,  Texas,  13  Sept.,
1860.  Mr.  Bewley  began  preaching  in  the  Tennes-
see conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church
in  1829,  and  was  transferred  to  the  Missouri  con-
ference in  1843.  In  the  following  year  the  denomi-
nation was  divided  by  the  slavery  question ;  but
Mr.  Bewley  refused  to  join  his  conference  in
secession,  and  preached  independently,  earning  his
living,  meanwhile,  by  manual  labor.  Other  Meth-
odist preachers  of  a  like  mind  joined  him,  and  he
became  their  presiding  elder.  In  1848  a  reorgan-
ization of  the  church  took  place  in  Missouri,  and
he  entered  its  service  to  find  himself  in  a  short
time  stigmatized  as  an  abolitionist,  and,  like  his
brethren  of  the  same  way  of  thinking,  in  danger  of
violence.  He  continued  to  preach  according  to  his
convictions  until  1858,  when  he  was  appointed  to
Texas,  but  was  driven  temporarily  from  his  post
by  threats  of  violence.  Returning  in  1860,  con-
trary to  the  advice  of  his  friends,  he  remained  for
a  few  weeks ;  but  such  was  the  excitement  that  he
deemed  it  expedient  again  to  flee  for  his  life.  After
his  departure  a  reward  of  $1,000  was  offered  for
his  apprehension,  and  in  September,  1860,  he  was
arrested  in  Missouri,  carried  back  to  Fort  Worth,
Texas,  and  hanged  by  the  mob,  solely  because  he
had  proclaimed  the  injustice  of  human  slavery.

BIARD,  Peter  (be-are),  missionary,  b.  in  (jren-
oble,  France,  in  1565;  d.  in  France  in  1622.  As  a
missionary  priest  of  the  Jesuits  he  came  to  Amer-
ica, visiting  Port  Royal,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1611. In


1612  he  ascended  Kennebec  river  and  established
friendly  relations  with  the  natives.  The  following
year  he  visited  Penobscot  river,  about  the  same
time  establishing  a  colony  on  Mount  Desert  island
hoping  to  make  it  a  permanent  missionary  settle-
ment. The  same  year,  however,  the  little  hamlet
was  destroyed  by  the  English  under  Samuel  Argall,
deputy-governor  of  Virginia.  One  of  Biard's  assist-
ants was  killed,  and  he  himself  made  prisoner  and
carried  away.  This  outrage  caused  the  earliest  ac-
tual hostilities  between  the  French  and  English
colonists.  In  1616  was  published  in  Lyons,  from
his  pen,  the  first  of  the  remarkable  series  of  "  Jesuit
Relations "  (40  vols.,  1632-72),  which  have  proved
among  the  richest  sources  of  information  for  his-
torians of  America.  Biard's  volume  was  entitled
"  Relation  de  la  nouvelle  France,"  etc.

BIBAUB,  Michel  (be-bo),  Canadian  author,  b.
near  Montreal,  20  Jan.,  1782 ;  d.  there.  3  Aug.,  1857,
He  entered  the  Roman  Catholic  college  of  St.
Raphael,  and,  being  naturally  inclined  to  litera-
ture, devoted  himself  to  studies  in  that  direction,
giving  his  attention  mainly  to  the  defence  of
Canadian  nationality  and  the  preservation  there  of
the  French  vernacular.  He  published  the  first
French  history  of  Canada  since  the  conquest,  pro-
duced much  creditable  poetry,  wrote  an  essay  on
"  Arithmetique  elementaire,"  and  contributed  to
the  leading  French  publications  of  Canada.  Dur-
ing the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  was  engaged  in
translating  into  French  the  report  of  the  geological
commission. — His  son,  Francois  Marie  Uncas
Maximilien,  author,  b.  in  Montreal  in  Novem-
ber, 1824,  is  law  professor  at  the  Jesuit  college  in
his  native  city.  His  literary  work,  which  has  been
mainly  in  the  line  of  history,  includes  "  Discours
historique  sur  les  races  sauvage  de  I'Amerique
septentrionale "  (1846);  "Les  sagamas  illustre  de
I'Amerique  septentrionale"  (1848);  " Dictionnaire
historiques  des  hommes  illustres  du  Canada  et  de
I'Amerique"  (1857);  " Tableau  historique  des  pro-
gres  materiels  et  intellectuels  du  Canada"  (1858);
and  "  Pantheon  Canadien  "  (1858).

BIBB,  George  M.,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1772 :  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.  C,  14  April,  1859.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1792,  studied  law,
and  settled  in  Kentucky,  where  he  was  presently
elected  to  the  legislature,  three  times  chosen  chief
justice  of  the  state,  and  for  two  years  in  its  senate.
In  1811-'4  and  1829-35  he  was'  a  member  of  the
U.  S.  senate.  President  Tyler  appointed  him  secre-
tary of  the  treasury  in  1844.  after  which  he  practised
law  in  Washington,  and  was  an  assistant  in  the
attorney-general's  office.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Re-
ports of  (5ases  at  Common  Law  and  in  Chancery  in
the  Kentucky  Court  of  Appeals"  (1808-11).

BIBB,  William  Wyatt,  governor  of  Alabama,
b.  in  Virginia,  1  Oct.,  1*780;  d.  near  Fort  Jackson,
Ala.,  9  July.  1820.  He  was  the  son  of  Capt.  Will-
iam Bibb,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  col-
lege, and  studied  medicine  at  the  university  of
Pennsylvania,  receiving  the  degree  of  M.  D.  in
1801.  Removing  to  Georgia,  he  was  a  member
successively  of  the  two  branches  of  the  legislature.
He  was  a  member  of  congress  from  1807  till  1313,
when  he  was  chosen  to  the  TJ.  S.  senate,  and  re-
tained his  seat  there  until  1816.  He  removed  to
Alabama,  then  a  territory,  and  was  governor  in
1817-'9,  when  it  was  adniitted  as  a  state,  and  he
was  elected  as  its  first  executive.  He  died  while  in
office,  and  his  son,  Thomas  Bibb,  succeeded  him  as
governor,  1820-1.

BICKER,  YTalter,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city,
29  Feb.,  1796;  d.  at  Far  Rockaway,  L.  I.,  3  June,
1886. He  served  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  at  the


BICKMORE


BIDDLE


255


time  of  his  death  was  its  last  surviving  officer.  He
resigned  from  the  army  forty  years  before  his  death,
and  went  into  business  in  the  city  of  New  York.
Me  resided  in  Brooklyn,  where  he  was  for  many
years  an  active  member  and  elder  of  the  1st  Re-
formed church.  He  retained  his  mental  and  phys-
ical vigor  almost  up  to  the  period  of  his  death,  and
only  a  few  weeks  preceding  that  event  wrote  a
series  of  articles  for  a  religious  journal,  giving  his
recollections  of  New  York  city  in  the  olden  time.

BICKMORE,  Albert  Smith,  naturalist,  b.  in
St.  George,  Me.,  1  March,  1889.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1860,  and  then  studied  under
Agassiz  at  Lawrence  scientific  school.  During  the
years  18()5-'9  he  travelled  extensively  in  the  Ma-
lay archipelago  and  eastern  Asia,  collecting  objects
in  natural  history,  principally  shells.  In  1870  he
became  professor  of  natural  history  in  Madison
university  at  Hamilton,  N.  Y.  Later  he  was  asso-
ciated in  the  management  of  the  American  museum
of  natural  history  in  New  York.  .  He  was  for  some
time  its  superintendent,  but  in  1885  became  curator
of  the  ethnological  department.  He  is  also  in
charge  of  the  department  of  public  instruction,
and  on  Saturday  mornings,  during  the  winters,  he
delivers  lectures  on  subjects  in  natural  history  be-
fore the  teachers  of  the  public  schools  of  New
Y'ork  and  vicinity.  Under  the  direction  of  the
state  superintendent  of  public  instruction,  he
gives  lectures  before  the  normal  schools.  Prof.
Bickraore  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  to
which  he  has  contributed  numerous  papers.  He
has  published  "  Travels  in  the  East  Indian  Archi-
pelago "  (New  York,  18G9).

BICKNELL,  Thomas  Williams,  educator,  b.
in  Barrington,  R.  L,  6  Sept.,  1884.  He  began  his
collegiate  education  at  Amherst,  but  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1860.  During  his  senior  year  in  col-
lege he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Rhode  Island
state  legislature.  From  1860  till  1869  he  taught,
and  was  principal  of  schools  in  Rehobart,  Bristol,
Providence,  R.  I.,  and  in  Elgin,  111.,  after  which,
until  1875,  he  was  state  commissioner  of  public
schools.  While  holding  that  office  he  secured  the
re-establishment  of  the  State  Normal  School  in  1871,
the  appointment  of  a  school  superintendent  in  each
town,  the  organization  of  a  board  of  education,  and
other  important  measures.  Mr.  Bicknell  has  been
very  active  in  educational  journalism,  and  during
the  years  1874-'86  he  founded,  edited,  and  owned
"  The  Journal  of  Education,"  "  The  Primary
Teacher,"  "The  American  Teacher,"  "Education;
a  Bimonthly  Magazine,"  and  "  Good  Times."  The
New  England  Bureau  of  Education  and  the  Na-
tional Council  of  Education  were  organized  by
him.  He  has  delivered  numerous  educational  lec-
tures and  addresses,  and  has  at  various  times  been
president  of  the  Rhode  Island  Institute  of  Instruc-
tion, American  Institute  of  Instruction,  National
Council  of  Education,  National  Educational  Asso-
ciation, Interstate  Commission  for  Federal  Aid,
Chautauqua  Teachers'  Reading  Union,  and  of  the
Massachusetts,  New  England,  and  International
Sunday-school  unions.  He  has  published  "  Biog-
raphy of  William  Lord  Noyes"  (Providence,  1867);
"  Historical  Sketches  of  Barrington,  R.  I."  (Provi-
dence, 1870);  "Reports  of  the  Commissioner  of
Public  Schools  "  (Providence,  1869-75) ;  and  "  His-
tory of  the  Bicknell  Family  "  (Boston,  1882).

BIDDLE,  Clement,  "  Quaker  soldier,"  b.  in
i  hiladelphia,  10  May,  1740;  d.  there,  14  Julv,  1814.
Descended  from  one  of  the  early  Quaker  settlers  of
^ew  Jersey— refugees,  for  the  most  part,  from  Prot-
estant intolerance— he  was  brought  up  in  the  strict
order  of  the  sect,  and  engaged  in  commercial  pur-


suits in  Philadelphia.  In  1764  some  friendly  In-
dians sought  refuge  in  Philadelphia  from  a  band
of  desperadoes  known  as  the  "  Paxton  Boys,"  who
had  recently  murdered  some  unoffending  Connes-
toga  Indians  at  Lancaster.  These  ruffians,  power-
ful enough  in  numbers  to  defy  the  authorities,  ad-
vanced to  within  six  miles  of  the  city,  threatening
vengeance  upon  all  who  offered  resistance.  But
the  vigor  of  the  military  preparations,  including  a
company  of  Quakers  headed  by  Biddle,  was  so
manifest  that  the  outlaws  retreated.  Close  upon
this  local  disturbance  came  the  resolution  of  the
British  house  of  commons  to  charge  stamp  duties
in  the  colonies,  and  the  subsequent  passage  of  the
act  induced  the  adoption  of  the  "  non-importation
resolutions  "  in  Philadelphia,  25  Oct.,  1765.  Among
the  signers  of  this  agreement  were  Mr.  Biddle  and
his  brother  Owen.  W^hen  actual  hostilities  became
imminent  he  entered  into  projects  for  defence,  and
was  active  in  organizing  that  military  anomaly
the  "  Quaker  "  company  of  volunteers,  of  which  he
was  elected  an  officer  in  1775  before  it  joined  the
army.  In  June,  1776,  congress  authorized  the
formation  of  a  "  flying  camp  "  of  10,000  men,  and
on  8  July,  1777,  elected  Col.  Biddle  its  deputy-
quartermaster.  After  the  battle  of  Trenton,
Washington  sent  him  to  receive  the  swords  of  the
Hessian  prisoners.  He  was  present  at  the  battles
of  Princeton,  Germantown,  Brandywine,  and  Mon-
mouth, and  he  also  shared  in  the  sufferings  of  the
army  at  Valley  Forge.  He  remained  in  the  mili-
tary service  until  1780,  when  the  pressure  of  his
private  affairs  compelled  his  resignation.  In  the
early  political  movements  of  the  state  and  nation
he  took  an  active  part,  alike  in  the  revolutionary
state  constitution  of  1776  and  in  the  organization
of  the  federal  constitution  in  1787.  At  this  time
he  was  appointed  by  Washington  U.  S.  marshal  of
Pennsylvania.  In  1794  the  whiskey  rebellion  in
western  Pennsylvania  called  him  again  into  the
field,  and,  as  quartermaster-general  of  the  state  (to
which  office  he  was  appointed  11  Sept.,  1781),  he
accompanied  the  expedition  for  the  suppression  of
that  formidable  insurrection.  He  was  the  warm
personal  friend  of  Washington,  as  well  as  of  the
best  of  his  generals. — His  son,  Clement  Cornell,
soldier,  was  b.  in  Philadelphia,  24  Oct.,  1784 ;  d.  21
Aug.,  1855.  Prior  to  the  war  of  1812  he  entered
the  navy,  but  soon  resigned,  taking  up  the  study
of  law,  and  gaining  admission  to  the  bar.  On  the
occurrence  of  the  "  Chesapeake  "  outrage  in  1807,
he  anticipated  war  with  England,  and  entered  the
army,  on  appointment  of  the  president,  as  captain
of  dragoons.  When  the  British  disavowed  the
attack  on  the  "  Chesapeake,"  Capt.  Biddle  re-
signed, having  no  taste  for  other  than  active  mili-
tary life.  War  actually  came,  however,  and  in
1812  he  raised  a  company  of  volunteers — "the
State  Fencibles  " — was  elected  its  captain,  and  sub-
sequently was  colonel  of  the  1st  Pennsylvania  in-
fantry. At  the  conclusion  of  hostilities  he  devoted
himself  to  the  study  of  political  economy,  and  an-
notated an  edition  of  Say's  treatise  on  that  science.
He  took  part  in  the  free-trade  convention  in  Phila-
delphia in  September,  1831,  and  was  an  influential
adviser  of  the  government  as  to  its  financial  policy
at  that  time.

BIDDLE,  Horace  P.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Fairfield
CO.,  Ohio,  about  1818.  He  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  at  Cincinnati  in  1839,  and  settled  at
Logansport,  Ind.  He  was  presiding  judge  of  the
8th  judicial  circuit  in  1846-'52 :  member  of  the  In-
diana constitutional  convention  in  1850.  Elected
supreme  judge  in  1857,  but  not  commissioned.  He
made  some  excellent  translations  from  French  and


2m


BIDDLE


BIDDLE


German  poets ;  became  a  contributor  to  the  "  South-
ern Literary  Messenger"  in  1842,  and  afterward
contributed  to  the  "  Ladies'  Repository  "  and  other
periodicals.  Collections  of  his  poems  were  pub-
lished in  1850,  '52,  and  '58,  at  Cincinnati.

BIDDLE,  James,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia in  1788;  d.  there,  1  Oct.,  1848.  He  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1800,  was  on  board
the  frigate  "  Philadelphia  "  when  she  was  wrecked
off  the  coast  of  Tripoli  in  1808,  and  with  the  rest
of  the  officers  and  crew  was  held  in  captivity  dur-
ing the  war  with  the  Barbary  states.  After  his
release  he  was  on  ordinary  duty  until  the  war  of
1812,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  sloop-of-war
"  Wasp,"  and  was  present  at  the  capture  of  the
British  sloop  "  Frolic."  He  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  prize,  with  orders  to  make  for  some
southern  port  of  the  United  States ;  but  while  the
two  vessels  were  hastily  repairing  damages,  a  Brit-
ish seventy-four,  the  "  Poictiers,"  appeared,  and,  as
the  two  late  antagonists  could  neither  fight  nor
escape,  they  were  both  captured.  On  being  ex-
changed in  March,  1813,  Mr.  Biddle  was  promoted
master-commandant  and  placed  in  charge  of  a
gun-boat  flotilla  in  the  Delaware,  but  was  soon
transferred  to  the  "Hornet,"  then  blockaded  by
the  British  in  the  port  of  New  London,  Conn.  He
escaped  with  his  ship,  and  shortly  afterward  sailed
for  Tristan  d'Acunha.  When  off  that  island  (28
March,  1815)  he  fought  and  captured  the  British
brig  "  Penguin,"  after  a  sharp  engagement  of
twenty-two  minutes  at  close  quarters,  during  which
the  "  Penguin "  was  so  shattered  by  the  "  Hor-
net's "  fire  that  she  had  to  be  scuttled  and  aban-
doned. Just  at  the  end  of  the  action  Biddle  was
severely  wounded.  Ha  zing  repaired  the  damages
to  his  ship,  he  sailed  for  the  Cape  of  Good  Plope,
and  on  27  April  encountered  a  British  line-of-battle
ship,  which  followed  the  "  Hornet "  for  nearly  thirty-
six  hours,  pressing  her  so  closely — often  within
cannon-range — that  Biddle  was  obliged  to  throw
his  guns  overboard,  only  escaping  capture  by  the
exercise  of  good  seamanship.  He  sailed  for  San
Salvador  to  refit,  but  when  he  reached  port  found
that  a  treaty  of  peace  had  been  concluded.  Reaching
New  York  on  30  July,  he  found  that  he  had  been  pro-
moted post-captain  while  at  sea.  Congress  voted
him  a  gold  medal,  and  New  York  gave  him  a  state
dinner,  while  his  native  city  presented  him  with  a
service  of  plate.  He  asked  for  a  court  of  inquiry
to  investigate  the  sacrifice  of  his  armament,  and
the  return  of  the  "  Hornet,"  which  acquitted  him
of  all  blame,  and  commended  the  skill  that  had
saved  the  ship  from  capture.  After  the  war  he
was  almost  continuously  on  active  duty.  In  1817
he  took  possession  of  Oregon  for  the  United  States,
and  in  1826  represented  the  government  in  nego-
tiating a  commercial  treaty  with  Turkey.  At  his
suggestion,  while  governor  of  the  naval  asylum
at  Philadelphia  (1838-'42),  Sec.  Paulding  sent
thither  unemployed  midshipmen  for  instruction,
thus  laying  the  foundation  of  a  naval  school.  He
was  flag-officer  of  the  East  India  squadron  in  1845,
and  negotiated  the  first  treaty  with  China,  after-
ward landing  in  Japan.  This  was  his  last  extend-
ed cruise,  though  he  was  in  command  on  the  Cali-
fornian  coast  during  the  Mexican  war.

BIDDLE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
9  March,  1789;  d.  in  White  Sulphur  Springs,  Va.,
25  Aug.,  1859.  He  became  second  lieutenant  in
the  8d  artillery,  6  July,  1812,  first  lieutenant  in
March,  1813,  captain  in  the  42d  infantry  in  Octo-
ber, and  assistant  inspector-general,  with  the  rank
of  major,  on  19  June,  1817.  He  became  U.  S.  In-
dian agent  at  Green  Bay,  Wis.,  in  February,  1821,


and  resigned  in  May  of  the  same  year.  He  then
removed  to  Detroit,  Mich.,  and  was  territorial  dele-
gate in  congress  from  1829  till  1881,  when  he  was
appointed  register  of  the  land-office  in  Detroit.
MaJ.  Biddle  travelled  extensively  in  Europe  just
before  his  death.  He  wrote  many  interesting  pa-
pers on  Michigan  history.

BIDDLE,  Nicholas,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 10  Sept.,  1750 ;  killed  in  action,  7  March,
1778.  On  22  Dec,  1775,  congress  passed  a  resolu-
tion appointing  nineteen  naval  officers,  of  whom
five  were  captains.  Nicholas  Biddle,  one  of  these,
was  assigned  to  the  "Andrea  Doria,"  an  arraed'
brig.  In  October,  1776,  the  number  of  captains
had  been  increased  to  twenty-fom-,  and  it  became
necessary  to  settle  the  question  of  rank.  A  resolu-
tion was  passed  accordingly,  and  Biddle's  name
stands  fifth  on  the  list.  His  maritime  experience
prior  to  this  time  had  been  somewhat  extended.
When  a  boy  of  thirteen  he  went  on  a  voyage  to  the
West  Indies,  and  was  cast  away  on  a  desert  island,
where,  with  two  companions,  he  remained  two
months.  In  1770  he  entered  the  British  navy  as  a
midshipman,  such  appointments  being  open  to  the
sons  of  colonial  gentry.  Three  years  afterward,
hearing  of  Capt.  Phipps's  proposed  Arctic  exploring
expedition,  he  deserted  his  own  vessel  and  shipped
as  a  seaman  on  board  one  of  Phipps's  vessels,  where
he  met  Nelson,  the  future  admiral,  a  volunteer  like
himself.  Both  boys  were  made  cockswains  before
the  voyage  was  over,  and  Biddle  served  through
the  cruise,  but  returned  to  America  as  soon  as
revolution  threatened.  Being  now  an  experienced
sailor,  he  was  given  an  independent  command.
The  "  Andrea  Doria"  mounted  fourteen  or  sixteen
guns,  and  her  first  cruise  was  to  the  Bahamas  with
a  small  squadron  under  Fleet-Captain  Hopkins.
Biddle  participated  in  the  very  creditable  capture
and  occupation  of  New  Providence,  where  a  large
quantity  of  munitions  of  war  were  seized,  and
loaded  upon  the  vessels  of  the  squadron  for  trans-
portation to  the  United  States.  Off  Montauk
point,  Long  Island,  two  small  British  cruisers  were
captured  (4  and  5  April),  and  on  6  April  a  large
ship,  the  "  Glasgow,"  was  engaged.  In  this  fight,
which  was  indecisive,  Biddle  took  part.  The  Eng-
lishman drew  off  after  having  sustained  and  in-
flicted much  damage,  and,  being  a  better  sailer
than  the  heavily-  laden  Americans,  made  her  escape.
After  refitting  in  New  London,  the  "  Andrea  Doria"
cruised  on  the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  captured
two  armed  transports  filled  with  soldiers,  and  made
prizes  of  so  many  merchantmen  that  when  he  re-
turned to  the  Delaware  Biddle  retained  but  five  of
his  original  crew,  the  rest  having  been  placed  on
board  prizes.  On  6  June,  1776,  he  was  appointed
by  congress  to  command  the  "Randolph,"  a  32-
gun  frigate  then  building  in  Philadelphia.  She
was  launched  near  the  close  of  the  year,  and  sailed
early  in  1777.  Some  constructional  defects  were
discovered  in  the  ship,  and  Capt.  Biddle  put  into
Charleston  for  repairs.  These  made,  he  sailed,  and
was  back  again  in  a  few  days  with  four  prizes,  one  of
which  had  an  armament  of  twenty  guns.  The  South
Carolinians  were  so  pleased  with  these  successes
that  they  voluntarily  equipped  four  small  vesseis,
which  thev  placed  under  his  command,  and  the
squadron  sailed  in  search  of  British  cruisers  sup-
posed to  be  in  the  neighborhood.  On  7  March  they
encountered  the  British  64-gun  ship  "Yarmouth.
Prudence  dictated  flight  from  so  powerful  an  an-
tagonist, but  she  soon  overtook  and  engaged  the
"  Randolph."  After  a  sharp  action  of  twenty  min-
utes at  close  quarters  the  latter  blew  up,  and  the
vessels  were  so  close  together  that  fragments  oi


BIDDLE

the  wreck,  including  an  American  flag  rolled  up
tightly,  fell  on  the  "  Yarmouth's "  deck.  The
British  ship  had  suffered  so  severely  in  the  action
that  she  was  unable  to  overtake  any  other  of  the
American  ships.  On  12  April,  while  in  the  same
vicinity,  she  picked  up  four  survivors  of  the  explo-
sion, who  reported  that  Capt.  Biddle  had  been
severely  wounded  during  the  action,  and  was  hav-
ing his  wound  dressed  on  deck  when  the  explosion
occurred.  The  rest  of  the  "  Randolph's "  crew,
310  in  number,  perished.  It  was  generally  be-
haved that  Capt.  Biddle  possessed  all  the  qualities
that  go  to  make  a  great  naval  commander,  and  his
untimely  death,  with  the  simultaneous  loss  of  the
first  American  frigate  ever  launched,  was  a  serious
blow  to  the  infant  navy  of  the  revolted  colonies. —
His  brother,  Edward,  b.  1739 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  5
Sept.,  1779,  was  an  officer  in  the  French  war  of
1756-'63.  He  became  eminent  as  a  lawyer  in
Reading,  Pa. :  was  a  member  and  speaker  of  the
assembly,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  first  congress
M  1774-^'5.  He  was  one  of  the  foremost  advocates
I  independence.

BIDDLE,  Nicholas,  financier,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 8  Jan.,  1786;  d.  there,  27  Feb.,  1844.  His
l)reparatory  education  was  received  at  an  academy
in  Philadelphia,  where  his  progress  was  so  rapid
that  he  entered  the  class  of  1799  in  the  universi-
ty of  Pennsylvania,
and  would  have
taken  his  degree  at
the  age  of  thirteen
had  it  not  been
deemed  wise  to
keep  him  longer
at  his  books.  He
was  accordingly
sent  to  Princeton,
entered  the  sopho-
more class,  and  was
graduated  in  1801
as  valedictorian,
dividing  the  first
honor  of  the  class
with  his  only  rival.
The  ancestors  of
the  Biddle  family
came  over  with
William  Penn,  and
bore  themselves
nobly  throughout  the  earlier  colonial  struggles
against  the  proprietaries  and  the  Indians.  In  the
war  for  independence,  Charles,  father  of  Nicholas,
was  prominent  in  devotion  to  the  cause,  while  his
uncle  was  among  the  most  gallant  of  the  early
naval  heroes.  Another  uncle  served  in  the  old
P'fench  war,  and  was  a  member  of  the  congress  of
1774.  Mr.  Biddle  is  said  to  have  been  the  hand-
somest man  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  offered  an
official  position  before  he  had  finished  his  law
tudies.  As  secretary  to  John  Armstrong,  U.  S.
jnmister  to  France,  he  went  abroad  in  1804,  was  in
Paris  at  the  time  of  Napoleon's  coronation,  and
iiterward,  when  the  diplomatic  relations  of  France
md  the  United  States  were  seriously  complicated,
Biddle  was  detailed  to  audit  and  pay  certain


BIDDLE


257


/


>


,^-


A


'i^^a^


Mr.


:launs- against  the  United  States,  the  disburse-
nents  being  made  from  the  purchase-money  paid
or  Louisiana.  Thus  he  acquired  his  first  experi-
■nee  in  financial  affairs,  being  brought  into  inti-
nate  association  with  the  dignitaries  of  the  French
>mcial  bureau,  who  never  ceased  to  marvel  alike  at
us  youth  and  his  abilities.  After  completing  sat-
■siaetorily  the  arduous  task  of  paying  the  claims,
ke  travelled  extensively  through  Europe  and  Greece,

VOL. I.— 17


returning  to  England  to  serve  as  secretary  for  Mr.
Monroe,  then  U.  S.  minister  to  England.  In  this
capacity  he  accompanied  him  to  Cambridge,  where,
in  a  company  of  very  learned  scholars,  he  found
himself  drawn  into  a  conversation  involving  fa-
miliarity with  the  modern  Greek  dialect  as  com-
pared with  that  of  Homer.  He  acquitted  himself
so  well  that  the  incident  was  never  forgotten  by
Mr.  Monroe,  who  often  related  the  story  of  the  dis-
cussion between  the  young  American  and  the  Cam-
bridge professors.  In  1807  Mr.  Biddle  returned
home  and  began  the  practice  of  law,  devoting  such
time  as  he  could  spare  to  literature,  contributing
papers  on  various  subjects,  but  chiefly  on  the  fine
arts,  to  different  publications.  His  literary  tastes
led  him  to  undertake,  with  Joseph  Dennie,  the  as-
sociate editorship  of  the  "  Port-Folio,"  a  magazine
of  high  character  (1806-'23).  After  Dennie's  death,
in  1812,  Mr.  Biddle  conducted  the  magazine  alone,
engaging  also  in  other  literary  work,  the  most  im-
portant of  which  was  the  preparation  for  the  press
of  Lewis  and  Clarke's  report  of  their  exploring
expedition  to  the  mouth  of  Columbia  river.  He
induced  Mr,  Jefferson  to  write  an  introductory
memoir  of  Capt.  Lewis.  Mr.  Biddle's  name  does
not  appear,  as  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legisla-
ture (1810-'l),  and  was  compelled  to  turn  over  the
whole  work  to  Paul  Allen,  who  supervised  its  pub-
lication, and,  with  the  consent  of  all  parties,  was
the  recognized  editor.  It  is  said,  however,  by
Robert  T.  Conrad,  that  Mr.  Biddle  actually  wrote
the  two  volumes  from  Lewis  and  Clarke's  notes.
In  the  legislature  he  at  once  became  prominent,
possessing  in  a  high  degree  the  qualities  of  a
statesman.  He  originated  a  bill  favoring  popular
education,  which  was  a  quarter  of  a  century  in  ad-
vance of  the  times  and  was  defeated,  but  came  up
again  in  different  forms  until,  in  1830,  the  Pennsyl-
vania common-school  system  was  inaugurated  as
a  direct  result  of  his  efforts.  He  was  more  suc-
cessful in  advocating  the  recharter  of  the  United
States  bank,  and  on  this  subject  made  his  first
speech,  which  attracted  general  attention  at  the
time,  and  was  warmly  commended  by  Chief-Jus-
tice Marshall  and  other  leaders  of  public  opinion.
This  was  his  first  step  toward  a  financial  career.
The  war  of  1812  intervened.  During  its  continu-
ance he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  lent
his  support  to  all  reasonable  war  measures.  In
1815  his  judicious  course  in  regard  to  the  proposi-
tions of  the  Hartford  convention  gave  a  turn  to
events  that  seemingly  averted  grave  sectional  dis-
sensions. When  the  United  States  bank  was  re-
chartered,  largely  through  Mr.  Biddle's  efforts  in
1819,  President  Monroe  appointed  him  a  gov-
ernment director,  and  on  the  resignation  of  Mr.
Cheves  he  became  president  of  the  bank,  conduct-
ing its  vast  business  with  marked  ability.  During
his  connection  with  it  he  was  appointed  by  Monroe,
under  authority  from  congress,  to  prepare  a  "  Com-
mercial Digest "  of  the  laws  and  trade  regulations
of  the  world,  which  was  for  many  years  an  author-
ity. The  "  bank  war,"  inaugurated  by  President
Jackson  in  1829,  undermined  the  credit  of  the  in-
stitution, and  after  the  bill  for  its  recharter  was
vetoed  in  1832,  Mr.  Biddle's  efforts  to  save  the
bank  were  unavailing.  The  withdrawal  of  the
government  deposits  by  Jackson's  order  in  1833
precipitated  financial  disasters  that  involved  the
whole  country.  Mr.  Biddle's  friends  assert  that
his  refusal  to  lend  the  influence  of  the  bank  to
partisan  ends  was  the  provoking  cause  of  the  presi-
dent's hostility,  but  this  is  denied  by  Jackson  s  ad-
mirers. The  literature  of  the  "  bank  war  "  is  volu-
minous, including  a  series  of  letters  by  Mr.  Biddle,


258


BIDDLE


BIDWELL


vindicating  his  own  course.  In  1839  he  resigned
the  bank  presidency,  and  in  1841  the  bank  failed.
He  was  a  leading  spirit  in  the  establishment  of
Girard  college  under  the  provisions  of  the  found-
er's will,  and,  in  spite  of  the  unfortunate  conclu-
sion of  his  otherwise  brilliant  financial  career,  he
commanded  the  confidence  and  admiration  of  all
that  knew  him  well.  Full  discussions  of  the  con-
temporary questions  involved  may  be  found  in
the  "  Merchants'  Magazine,"  "  Niles's  Register,"
the  "  Bankers'  Magazine,"  and  the  reports  of  con-
gressional committees. — His  brother,  Bicliard,
author,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  35  March,  1796 ;  d.  in
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  7  July,  1847,  received  a  classical
education  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  practising
at  Pittsburg,  where  he  became  eminent  in  his
profession.  He  went  to  England  in  1827,  and  re-
mained three  years,  publishing  while  there  a  criti-
cal "Review  of  Captain  Basil  Hall's  Travels  in
North  America."  He  also  published  "  A  Memoir
of  Sebastian  Cabot,  with  a  Review  of  the  History
of  Maritime  Discovery  "  (London,  1831),  in  which
many  new  facts  were  brought  to  light.  He  was
chosen  to  congress,  as  a  whig,  and  re-elected,  serv-
ing from  4  Sept.,  1837,  till  his  resignation  in  1840.
— Nicholas's  son,  Charles  John,  soldier,  b.  in
Philadelphia  in  1819 ;  d.  there,  28  Sept.,  1873,  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1837,  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840 ;  served  as  a  cap-
tain of  the  voltigeurs  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  the
Mexican  war,  and  was  m  the  actions  of  Contreras,
Churubuseo,  Molino  dsl  Rey,  Chapultepec,  and  at
the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  For  gallant
and  meritorious  services  in  these  engagements  he
was  bre vetted  major.  At  the  close  of  that  war  he
resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession  in  his  native
city.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  a  colonel  in  the
Pennsylvania  reserve  volunteer  corps,  and  in  Oc-
tober of  that  year  was  elected  to  congress,  to  fill
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Edward
J.  Morris.  He  was  tendered  a  commission  as
brigadier-general,  but  declined  it.  After  the  war
he  became  one  of  the  proprietors  and  editor-in-
chief  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Age,"  and  retained  that
place  during  the  remainder  of  his  life.  His  liter-
ary work  was  confined  mainly  to  editorial  contri-
butions to  the  columns  of  this  journal.  The  only
separate  publication  from  his  pen  is  "  The  Case  of
Major  Andre,"  a  carefully  prepared  essay  read  be-
fore the  Pennsylvania  historical  society,  vindicat-
ing the  action  of  Washington.  The  immediate
occasion  was  a  passage  in  Lord  Mahon's  "  History
of  England,"  which  denounced  the  execution  of
Andre  as  the  greatest  blot  upon  Washington's
record.  By  an  authority  so  high  as  the  London
"  Critic,"  this  essay  was  *  subsequently  pronounced
a  fair  refutation  of  Lord  Mahon's  charge.

BIDDLE,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
21. Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  29  Aug.,  1831.
He  was  appointed  captain  of  artillery  6  July,  1812,
and  distinguished  himself  at  Fort  George  and
Stony  Creek.  At  the  reduction  of  Fort  Erie  he
commanded  the  artillery,  and  was  subsequently
severely  wounded  in  the  defence  of  that  place.  At
the  battle  of  Lundy's  Lane,  25  July,  1814,  he  com-
manded a  light  battery,  and  was  wounded  again.
The  only  British  field-piece  retained  by  the  Ameri-
cans on  that  occasion  was  brought  away  as  a
trophy  by  Capt.  Biddle.  On  15  Aug.,  1814,  he
was  bre  vetted  major,  and  in  December  became
aide  to  Gen.  Izard.  In  1820  he  was  paymaster.
He  met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  Spencer  Pettis
in  a  duel.  In  consequence  of  Maj.  Biddle's  defect-
ive eyesight,  the  distance  was  made  five  feet,  and
both  men  were  mortally  wounded  at  the  first  fire.


BIDWELL,  Daniel  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  about  1816 ;  d.  near  Cedar  Creek,  Va.,  19
Oct.,  1864.  He  resided  in  Buffalo,  and  for  twenty
years  prior  to  the  civil  war  was  identified  with  the
military  organizations  of  the  state  and  city.  When
the  war  began  he  resigned  his  office  of  police  jus-
tice, enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  65tli  N,  Y.  infant-
ry, and  was  soon  promoted  captain.  Withdraw-
ing his  company  from  the  regiment,  he  made  it
the  nucleus  of  the  74th  regiment,  N.  Y.  infantry.
He  was  commissioned  colonel  of  the  49th  regiment
in  September,  1861,  served  with  it  through  the
peninsular  campaign,  and  during  the  "  seven  days'
battles  "  was  in  command  of  a  brigade,  continuing
in  charge  from  Harrison's  Landing  to  Washington,
and  up  to  the  time  of  the  battles  of  South  Moun-
tain and  Antietam,  when  he  resumed  command  of
his  regiment.  Col.  Bid  well  took  a  prominent  part
in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg  and  Chancellors-
ville,  commanded  a  brigade  at  Gettysburg,  and,
when  Gen.  Grant  took  command  of  the  armies  in
Virginia,  was  again  placed  in  charge  of  a  brigade,
participating  in  the  overland  campaign.  He  was
commissioned  brigadier-general  in  July,  1864,  and
served  with  honor  in  the  Shenandoah  campaigns,
during  the  summer  preceding  the  action  at  Cedar
Creek,  where  he  lost  his  life.

BIDWELL,  John,  politician,  b.  in  Chautauqua
CO.,  N.  Y.,  5  Aug.,  1819.  In  1829  he  settled  with
his  parents  in  Erie,  Pa.,  and  in  1831  removed  to
Ashtabula  co.,  where  he  was  educated  in  Kings-
ville  academy.  During  the  winter  of  1838-'9  he
taught  school  in  Darke  co.,  and  subsequently  for
two  years  in  Missouri.  In  1841  he  emigrated
to  California,  being  one  of  the  first  to  make  the
journey  overland,  which  occupied  at  that  time  six
months.  On  the  Pacific  coast  he  had  charge  of
Bodega  and  Fort  Russ,  and  also  of  Gen.  Sutter's
Feather  river  possessions.  He  served  in  the  war
with  Mexico  until  its  close,  rising  from  second
lieutenant  to  major,  and  was  among  the  first  to
find  gold  in  1848  on  Feather  river.  In  1849  he
was  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional  conven-
tion, and  during  the  same  year  became  a  member
of  the  senate  of  the  new  state.  He  was  one  of  the
committee  appointed  to  convey  a  block  of  gold-
bearing  quartz  to  Washington  in  1850,  and  was  a
delegate  to  the  national  democratic  convention
held  in  Charleston  in  1860.  Since  then  he  has
been  a  brigadier-general  of  the  militia,  and  in  1864
he  was  elected  a  representative  from  California  to
congress,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1865,  to  3  March,
1867.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadel^jhia  con-
vention in  1866,  and  in  1875  he  was  candidate  for
governor  of  California,  but  was  defeated.

BIDWELL,  Marshal  S.,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
England  in  1798 :  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Oc^,
1872.  At  an  early  age  he  removed  to  Canada,
where  he  practised  law,  rose  rapidly  in  his  profes-
sion, and  entered  political  life  while  still  a  young
man.  He  was  returned  several  times  from  Kings-
ton and  Toronto  to  the  Canadian  parliament,  and
during  two  terms  was  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was
leader  of  the  liberal  party  previous  to  and  during
the  rebellion  of  1837,  and  became  so  formidable  to
the  government  that  he  was  ordered  to  leave  Cana-
da. He  accordingly  removed  to  New  York  city,
where  he  subsequently  practised  law  in  the  higher
courts  and  was  considered  one  of  the  ablest  and
best  men  at  the  bar.  He  was  at  the  time  of  his
death  president  of  the  oldest  savings-bank  m  New
York  city,  a  director  in  the  American  Bible  socie-
ty, and  a  prominent  member  of  the  historical  so-
ciety, before  which  he  delivered  an  address  a  short
time  before  his  death.


BIDWELL


BIERSTADT


259


BIDWELL,  Walter  Hilliard,  journalist,  b.
in  Farinington,  Conn.,  21  Jiuie,  1798 ;  d.  in  No-
vember, 1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1827,
studied'  theology  there,  and  in  1833  became  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  at  Medfield,  Mass.
He  resigned  in  1838,  on  account  of  the  failure  of
his  voice,  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and  in  1841
began  a  long  editorial  career,  conducting  the
"  American  National  Preacher  "  for  about  nineteen
years.  He  also  edited  the  New  York  "  Evangelist "
from  1843  till  1855,  and  in  1846  became  proprietor
of  the  "  Eclectic  Magazine  "  and  the  "  American
Biblical  Repository."  He  became  publisher  and
proprietor  of  the  "  American  Theological  Review  "
in  1860,  and  kept  it  till  1862,  when  it  was  incorpo-
rated with  the  "  Presbyterian  Quarterly  Review."
Between  1848  and  1854  he  published  a  series  of
seven  valuable  maps,  of  which  his  brother.  Rev.  0.
B.  Bidwell,  was  the  author.  He  was  appointed  by
Sec.  Seward,  in  1867,  special  commissioner  of  the
United  States  to  visit  various  points  in  western
Asia,  and  travelled  for  eight  months  through
Greece,  Egypt,  Palestine,  Syria,  and  Turkey.

BIEDMA,  Luis  Hernandez  de  (be-ed'-ma),
Spanish  soldier.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  army  of
Fernando  de  Soto  in  the  expedition  for  the  con-
([uest  of  Florida  in  1538.  He  wrote  a  "  Relacion
(le  la  Isla  de  la  Florida,"  printed,  in  1857,  in  the
'•  Coleccion  de  Varios  Documentes  para  la  Historia
de  la  Florida."

BIENPICA  Y  SOTOMAYOR,  Salvador  (be-
cn-pe'-ka),  Spanish  bishop,  b.  in  Ceuta  in  1730;  d.
'3  Aug.,  1802.  He  was  graduated  as  doctor  in  can-
on law  at  Salamanca,  and,  after  travelling  in  Italy,
went  to  Mexico  as  canon  of  the  cathedral  of  Valla-
(l(>lid  (now  Morelia).  He  returned  to  Spain,  and,
lining  a  similar  office  at  the  primate  of  Toledo,  was
consecrated  at  Havana  as  bishop  of  Puebla,  where
his  pastoral  work  began  27  Aug.,  1790.  Bienpica
founded  the  seminario  palafoxiano  of  Puebla,  and
iiiive  1150,000  for  improvements  in  the  cathedral.
BIENVILLE,  Jean  Baptiste  le  Moyne,  Sieur
<le,  French  governor  of  Louisiana,  b.  in  Montreal,
23  Feb.,  1680 ;  d.  in  France  in  1765.  He  was  a  son
of  Charles  le  Moyne,  and  the  third  of  four  brothers
(Iberville, Serigny, Bienville, and Chateauguay)

who  played  im-
portant parts  in
the  early  histo-
ry of  Louisiana.
Bienville,  while
a  lad  on  board
the  French  ship
"  Pelican,"  was
severely  wound-
ed in  a  naval  ac-
tion off  the  coast
of  New  Eng-
land. In  1698
Iberville  set  out
from  France  to
found  a  colony
at  the  mouth  of
the  Mississippi,
taking  with  him
his  brother  Bien-
ville, and  Sau-
volle.  The  first
settlement  was
made  at  Biloxi,  where  they  arrived  in  May,  1699,
and  erected  a  fort  with  twelve  cannon.  Sauvolle
was  left  in  command,  while  Bienville  was  engaged
in  exploring  the  surrounding  country.  Iberville,
who  had  returned  to  France,  came  back  with  a  com-
mission appointing  Sauvolle  governor  of  Louisiana.


In  1700  Bienville  constructed  a  fort  fifty-four  miles
above  the  mouth  of  the  river.  Sauvolle  died  in
1701,  and  Bienville  succeeded  to  the  direction  of
the  colony,  the  seat  of  which  was  transferred  to
Mobile.  In  1704  he  was  joined  by  his  brother  Cha-
teauguay, who  brought  from  Canada  seventeen  set-
tlers. A  ship  from  Prance  brought  twenty  women,
who  had  been  sent  out  by  the  king  to  be  married
to  the  settlers  at  Mobile.  Iberville  soon  after
died  ;  troubles  arose  in  the  colony,  Bienville  quar-
relled with  La  Salle,  the  royal  commissioner,  was
charged  by  him  with  various  acts  of  misconduct,
and  on  13  July,  1707  was  recalled ;  but  his  suc-
cessor dying  on  the  voyage  from  France,  Bienville
retained  the  command.  Meanwhile,  in  1708,  the
attempt  to  cultivate  the  land  by  Indian  labor  hav-
ing failed,  Bienville  proposed  to  the  home  govern-
ment to  send  negroes  from  the  Antilles  to  be  ex-
changed for  Indians,  at  the  rate  of  three  Indians
for  two  negroes.  In  1709  and  1710  the  colony  was
reduced  to  famine.  In  1712  the  French  king
granted  to  Antoine  Crozat  for  fifteen  years  the
exclusive  right  to  trade  in  Louisiana,  and  to  intro-
duce slaves  from  Africa.  On  17  May,  1713,  Cadil-
lac was  sent  out  as  governor,  bringing  with  him  a
commission  for  Bienville  as  lieutenant-governor.
Quarrels  arose  between  them,  and  the  governor
sent  Bienville  on  an  expedition  to  the  Natchez
tribe,  hoping  that  he  would  lose  his  life.  But
Bienville  succeeded  in  inducing  the  Natchez  to
build  a  fort  for  him,  in  which  he  left  a  garrison,
and  returned  to  Mobile,  4  Oct.,  1716.  On  9  March,
1717,  Cadillac  was  superseded  by  Epinay,  and
Bienville  received  the  decoration  of  the  cross  of
St.  Louis.  Crozat  surrendered  his  charter  in  1717,
and  Law's  Mississippi  company  was  formed  the
same  year,  its  first  expedition  arriving  in  1718,
with  a  commission  for  Bienville  as  governor.  He
now  founded  the  city  of  New  Orleans.  War
breaking  out  between  France  and  Spain,  Bienville
took  Pensacola,  placing  Chateauguay  in  command.
In  1723  the  seat  of  government  was  transferred
to  New  Orleans.  On  16  Jan.,  1724,  Bienville  was
summoned  to  France,  to  answer  charges  which  had
been  brought  against  him.  He  left  behind  him
the  "  code  noir,"  which  remained  in  force  till  the
annexation  of  Louisiana  to  the  United  States,  and
much  of  it  was  incorporated  in  the  law  of  the
state.  This  code  regulated  the  condition  of  the
slaves,  banished  the  Jews,  and  prohibited  every
religion  except  the  Roman  Catholic.  On  9  Aug.,
1726,  he  was  removed  from  office,  and  Chtiteauguay
was  also  displaced  as  lieutenant-governor,  and
ordered  back  to  France.  Bienville  remained  in
Prance  till  1733,  when  he  was  sent  back  to  the  colo-
ny as  governor,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-gen-
eral. In  1736, 1739,  and  1740  he  made  unsuccessful
expeditions  against  the  Chickasaw  Indians,  in  con-
sequence of  which  he  was  superseded,  and  in  1743
returned  to  France.

BIERSTADT,  Albert,  painter,  b.  in  Dussel-
dorf,  Germany,  7  Jan.,  1830.  He  was  brought  by
his  parents  in  1831  to  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  where
he  early  developed  a  taste  for  art  and  made
clever  crayon  sketches  in  his  youth.  In  1851  he
began  to  paint  in  oils,  and  in  1853  went  to  Diissel-
dorf  and  studied  four  years  in  the  academy  there
and  in  Rome,  making  sketching  tours  during  the
summers  in  Oermany  and  Switzerland.  Return-
ing to  the  United  States  in  1857,  he  made  an  ex-
tended tour  in  the  west,  especially  in  Colorado
and  California,  obtaining  from  this  and  other  vis-
its material  for  many  of  his  more  important  pic-
tures. He  again  visited  Europe  in  1867,  in  1878,
and  in  1833. Mr.  Bierstadt has  received many


260


BIGELOW


BIGELOW


honors.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the  nation-
al academy  in  1860,  and  has  been  awarded  med-
als in  Austria,  Bavaria,  Belgium,  and  Germany.
In  1867  he  was  decorated  with  the  cross  of  the
legion  of  honor,  and  in  1869  with  that  of  St.  Stan-
islaus, of  which  he  received  also  the  second  class  in
1872.  In  1882  his  studio  at  Irvington,  N.  Y.,  was
destroyed  by  fire,  with  many  valuable  pictures.
Among  his  best-known  works  are :  "  Laramie
Peak  "  (1861),  now  in  the  Buffalo  academy  of  fine
arts;  "Lander's  Peak  in  the  Rocky  Mountains"
<1863),  bought  by  James  McHenry,  of  London,  for
$25,000;  "North  Fork  of  the  Platte"  (1864);
"  Looking  down  the  Yosemite  "  (1865) ;  "  El  Capi-
tan  on  Merced  River  "  (1866) ;  "  Storm  on  Mt.  Ro-
salie" (1866);  "Valley  of  the  Yosemite"  (1866),
in  the  Lenox  library ;  "  Settlement  of  California  "
and  "  Discovery  of  Hudson  River,"  both  in  the
Capitol  at  Washington ;  "  Emerald  Pool  on  Mt.
Whitney"  (1870);  "In  the  Rocky  Mountains"
(1871) ;  "  Great  Trees  of  California  "  (1874) ;  "  Val-
ley of  Kern  River,  California  "  (1875) ;  "  Mt.  Whit-
ney, Sierra  Nevada"  (1877);  "Estes  Park,  Colo-
rado," "  Mountain  Lake,"  and  "  Mount  Corcoran,  in
Sierra  Nevada"  (1878),  Corcoran  gallery,  Washing-
ton ;  "  Geysers  "  (1883) ;  "  Storm  on  the  Matter-
horn,"  and  "  View  on  Kern  River  "  (1884) ;  "  Val-
ley of  Zermatt,  Switzerland  "  (1885) :  "  On  the  Saco,
New  Hampshire,"  and  "  California  Oaks  "  (1886).

BIOELOW,  Erastus  Brigham,  inventor,  b.  in
West  Boylston,  Mass.,  2  April,  1814 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  6  Dec,  1879.  He  was  the  son  of  a  cotton-
weaver,  and it  was  his  parents'  desire  that  he

should  become  a
physician,  but,
his  father's  busi-
ness not  being
successful,  he  was
unable  to  con-
tinue his  studies,
and  so  turned  his
attention  to  in-
venting. Before
he  had  reached
the  age  of  eigh-
teen years  he  had
devised  a  hand-
loom  for  sus-
pender-webbing,
and  also  a  ma-
chine for  making
piping-cord.  His
work  on  "  Sten-

£__ A /^t^^^w- SSalVshSt-
^  handwriting,  was

written  and  pub-
lished about  this  time.  In  1838  he  patented  an
automatic  loom  for  weaving  counterpanes,  which  he
subsequently  modified  so  as  to  produce  an  article
equal  to  the  finest  imported  counterpanes.  He  then
invented  a  loom  for  weaving  coach-lace,  and  soon
afterward  turned  his  attention  to  carpet-weaving.
In  1839  he  contracted  to  produce  a  power-loom
capable  of  weaving  two-ply  ingrain  carpets,  such  as
had  been  hitherto  woven  exclusively  by  the  hand-
loom,  which  only  produced  eight'  yards  a  day.
With  his  first  loom  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  ten  or
twelve  yards  daily,  which  he  increased  by  improve-
ments until  a  product  of  twenty-five  yards  was
regularly  obtained.  Afterward  he  invented  a  power-
loom  for  weaving  Brussels  tapestry  and  velvet
tapestry  carpets,  his  most  important  invention,
which  attracted  much  attention  at  the  World's
Fair  in  London  in  1851. The  town  of  Clinton,


Worcester  co.,  Mass.,  owes  its  growth  and  manufac-
turing importance  to  him,  as  it  contains  the  coaeh-
lace  works,  the  Lancaster  Quilt  Company,  and  the
Bigelow  Carpet  Company,  all  of  which  are  direct
results  of  his  inventive  ability.  In  1863  Mr.
Bigelow  prepared  a  scheme  of  uniform  taxation
throughout  the  United  States  by  means  of  stamps
and  he  published  "  The  Tariff  Question,  considered
in  regard  to  the  Policy  of  England  and  the  Inter-
ests of  the  United  States "  (Boston,  1863).  Mr.
Bigelow  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Boston  His-
torical Society  in  April,  1864,  and  in  1869  pre-
sented to  that  society  six  large  volumes  entitled
"  Inventions  of  Erastus  Brigham  Bigelow  patented
in  England  from  1837  to  1868,"  in  which  were
gathered  the  printed  specifications  of  eighteen
patents  granted  to  him  in  England.  See  the  me-
morial sketch  by  Robert  C.  Winthrop  in  "Win-
throp's  Addresses  and  Speeches  "  (Boston,  1886).

BIOELOW,  Jacob,  physician,  b.  in  Sudbun^
Mass.,  27  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  Boston,  10  Jan.,  1879.
He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1806,  studied
medicine,  opened  his  office  in  Boston  in  1810,  and
displayed  unusual  skill.  In  1811  he  delivered  be-
fore the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  a  poem  on  "  Pro-
fessional Life,"  afterward  published  at  Boston.  He
early  made  a  reputation  as  a  botanist,  had  an  ex-
tensive European  correspondence,  and  different
plants  were  named  for  him  by  Sir  J.  E.  Smith,  in
the  supplement  to  "  Rees's  Cyclopaedia,"  by  Schra-
der  in  Germany,  and  De  Candolle  in  France.  He
was  one  of  the  committee  of  five  selected  in  1820  to
form  the  "  American  Pharmacopoeia,"  and  is  to  be
credited  with  the  principle  of  the  nomenclature  of
materia  medica  afterward  adopted  by  the  British
colleges,  substituting  a  single  for  a  double  word
whenever  practicable.  He  founded  Mount  Auburn,
the  first  garden  cemetery  established  in  the  United
States,  and  the  model  after  which  all  others  in  the
country  have  been  made.  The  much-admired  stone
tower,  chapel,  gate,  and  fence  were  all  built  after
his  designs.  During  a  term  of  twenty  years  Dr.
Bigelow  was  a  physician  of  the  Massachusetts  gen-
eral hospital,  and  in  1856  the  trustees  of  that  insti-
tution ordered  a  marble  bust  of  him  to  be  placed  in
the  hall.  He  was  professor  of  materia  medica  in
Harvard  university  from  1815  to  1855,  and  from
1816  to  1827  held  the  Rumford  professorship  in  the
same  institution,  deliv£ring  lectures  on  the  appli-
cation of  science  to  the  useful  arts.  These  lectures
were  published  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Elements  of
Technology,"  republished  with  the  title  "Useful
Arts  considered  in  Connection  with  the  Applications
of  Science"  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1840).  Notable
among  his  papers  was  one  entitled  "  A  Discourse
on  Self -Limited  Disease,"  which  was  delivered  as  an
address  before  the  Massachusetts  medical  society  in
1835,  and  had  a  marked  effect  in  modifying  the
practice  of  physicians.  He  was  during  many  years
the  president  of  that  society,  and  was  also  presi-
dent of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.
Retiring  from  the  active  practice  of  his  profession
some  years  before  his  death.  Dr.  Bigelow  gave  much
attention  to  the  subject  of  education,  and  especial-
ly to  the  matter  of  establishing  and  developing
technological  schools.  In  an  address  '^^ On  the
Limits  of  Education,"  delivered  in  1865  betore
the  Massachusetts  institute  of  technology,  he  em-
phasized the  necessity  of  students  devoting  them-
selves to  special  technical  branches  of  knowledge.
He  published,  besides  works  already  mentioned,
"Florula  Bostoniensis  "  (1814 ;  enlarged  eds.,l»^4
and  1840) ;  an  edition,  with  notes,  of  Sir  J.  ^_-
Smith's  work  on  botanv  (1814) ;  "  American  Mem-
cal  Botany  "  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1817-'20) ;  "  Nature  m


BIGELOW


BIGLER


261


Disease,"  a  volume  of  essays  (1854) ;  "  A  Brief  Expo-
sition of  Rational  Medicine,"  to  which  was  prefixed
"The  Paradise  of  Doctors,  a  Fable  "  (Philadelphia,
1858);  "History  of  Mount  Auburn"  (1860);  and
"Modern  Inquiries"  and  "Remarks  on  Classical
Studies"  (Boston,  1867).  Dr.  Bigelow  was  also
known  as  a  writer  on  other  than  medical  subjects.
lie  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  reviews  and
periodicals,  and  was  the  reputed  author  of  a
volume  of  poems  entitled  "  Eolopoesis  "  (New  York,
1855),  containing  imitations  of  American  poets.

BIGELOW,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Maiden,  N.
Y.,  25  Nov.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
college  in  1835,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1889,
and  practised  law  in  New  York  for  several  years,
but  gradually  became  identified  with  journalism
to  an  extent  that  led  him  to  abandon  the  law.  He
was  editor  of  "  The  Plebeian "  and  the  "  Demo-
cratic Review,"  and  prepared  for  the  press  Gregg's
•  Commerce  of  the  Prairies  "  and  other  books  of
; ravel.  In  1845-8  he  was  an  inspector  of  Sing
Sing  state  prison.  He  became  a  partner  of  Will-
iam Cullen  Bryant  in  1849  as  joint  owner  of  the
"  Evening  Post,"  and  was  managing  editor  of  that
journal  until  1861,  when,  after  the  accession  of
President  Lincoln,  he  went  to  Paris  as  U.  S.  con-
sul. After  the  death  of  Mr.  Dayton  in  1865  he
became  U.  S.  minister  to  France,  where  he  re-
mained until  1867.  During  1867  and  1868  he  was
secretary  of  state  for  New  York.  In  the  spring  of
1886  he  was  designated  by  the  New  York  chamber
of  commerce  to  inspect  so  much  of  the  Panama
canal  as  was  then  under  construction,  and  on  the
receipt  of  his  report  he  was  unanimously  elected
an  honorary  member  of  the  chamber.  The  same
year  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.
from  Racine  college,  Wisconsin.  By  the  will  of
Samuel  J.  Tilden  (August,  1886)  he  was  appointed
a  trustee  of  several  million  dollars,  to  be  applied
to  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  a  public
hbrary  in  New  York  city,  and  he  is  the  testator's
authorized  biographer.  His  published  writings
are  "Jamaica  in  1850;  or,  The  Effect  of  Sixteen
Years  of  Freedom  on  a  Slave  Colony,"  and  "  Life
of  Fremont  "  (1856)  and  "  Les  Etats-Unis  d'Ame-
rique  en  1863  "  (Paris).  He  edited  the  autobiogra-
phy of  Franklin  from  the  original  manuscript,
which  he  found  in  France  (1868),  and  in  1869  pub-
lished "  Some  Recollections  of  the  late  Antoine
Pierre  Berryer."  "  The  Wit  and  Wisdom  of  the
Haytiens "  was  published  in  1876,  and  a  mono-
graph on  "  Molinos  the  Quietist  "  in  1882.  In  1886
he  edited  a  life  of  William  Cullen  Bryant ;  a  two-
volume  edition  of  the  speeches  of  Mr.  Tilden,  and
"The  Complete  Works  of  Benjamin Franklin."

His  eldest  son,  Jolin,  is  an  officer  in  the  10th
regiment  U.  S.  cavalry  and  author  of  sketches  of
army  life  m  the  west. — His  second  son,  Poultney,
is  editor  of  "  Outing,"  an  illustrated  magazine  for
the  encouragement  of  out-of-door  recreations.  His
daughter  Grace  translated  Count  Moltke's  "Let-
ters from  Russia  "  (New  York,  1877).

BIGELOW,  Lewis,  lawyer,  b.  in  Petersham,
Mass.,  about  1783 ;  d.  in  Peoria,  111.,  3  Oct.,  1838.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1803,  studied  law,
and  practised  in  Petersham,  Mass.  He  was  elected
a  member  of  congress,  serving  from  3  Dec,  1821,
till  3  March,  1823.  He  removed  to  Illinois,  prac-
tised law  there,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was
clerk  of  court,  Peoria  eo.  He  was  the  author  of  a
'Digest  of  the  First  Seventeen  Volumes  of  Massa-
chusetts Reports,"  and  also  of  a  "  Digest  of  Picker-
^"^s  Reports,  Vols.  II.-VII."  (2d  ed.,  Boston,  1825).

JSIGELOW,  Melville  Madison,  author,  b.  in
liaton  Rapids,  Mich.,  2  Aug.,  1846. He  was  gradu-


ated at  the  university  of  Michigan  in  1866,  and
afterward  studied  at  Harvard,  receiving  the  degree
of  Ph.  D.  in  1879.  He  has  published  "  Law  of  Es-
toppel "  (4th  ed.,  Boston,  1886) ;  "  Law  of  Torts "
(2d  ed.,  1882) ;  "  Leading  Cases  on  Torts  "  (1875) ;
"  Law  of  Fraud  "  (1877) ;  "  Elements  of  Equity  "
(1879);  "History  of  Procedure  in  England — Nor-
man Period  "  (London,  1880) ;  and  "  Rhymes  of  a
Barrister  "  (1884).  He  has  edited  "  Story  on  Con-
flict of  Laws"  (8th  ed.,  Boston,  1883);  Story's
"  Equity  Jurisprudence "  (13th  ed.,  1886) ;  and
"  Placita  Anglo-Normannica."

BIGELOW,  Timothy,  soldier,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  12  Aug.,  1739 ;  d.  there,  31  March,  1790.  At
the  beginning  of  the  revolutionary  war  he  was  a
blacksmith  at  Worcester  and  a  zealous  patriot.
Hearing  of  the  battle  of  Lexington,  he  led  a  com-
pany of  minute-men  to  Cambridge,  and  on  23  May,
1775,  became  a  major  in  Ward's  regiment.  He  ac-
companied Arnold  in  his  expedition  to  Quebec  in
1775,  and  was  captured  there,  remaining  a  prisoner
until  1776.  He  was  made  colonel,  8  Feb.,  1777,
and,  when  in  command  of  the  15th  Massachusetts
regiment,  assisted  at  the  capture  of  Burgoyne.  He
was  also  at  Valley  Forge,  West  Point,  Monmouth,
and  Yorktown.  After  the  war  Col.  Bigelow  had
charge  of  the  arsenal  at  Springfield.  He  was  one
of  the  original  grantees  of  Montpelier  and  a  bene-
factor of  the  Leicester,  Mass.,  academy. — His  son,
Timothy,  lawyer,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  30  April,
1767 ;  d.  18  May,  1821,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1786,  studied  law,  and  practised  at  Groton,
Mass.,  from  1789  until  1807,  when  he  removed  to
Medford  and  opened  a  law  office  in  Boston.  He
was  an  active  federalist,  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture in  1790,  and  served  there  twenty  years,  eleven
years  of  the  time  as  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was
also  a  member  of  the  Hartford  convention  of  1814.
He  was  an  active  member  of  many  literary  and
benevolent  societies,  a  prominent  freemason,  and
stood  high  in  his  profession.  It  is  said  that  in  the
course  of  thirty-two  years  he  argued  15,000  cases.
He  published  an  oration,  delivered  before  the  Phi
Beta  Kappa  society  (1797).

BIGGS,  Asa,  lawyer,  b.  in  Williamstown,  N.  C,
4  Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  6  March,  1878.
He  received  a  common-school  education  and  studied
law,  beginning  practice  in  1831,  was  elected  to  the
state  constitutional  convention  in  1835,  to  the
lower  branch  of  the  legislature  in  1840  and  1842,  (
and  to  the  state  senate  in  1844.  He  was  chosen  a
member  of  congress  in  1845,  and  was  one  of  the
three  commissioners  appointed  in  1850  who  pre-
pared the  revised  code  of  North  Carolina,  which
went  into  operation  in  1854.  In  the  latter  year  he
was  again  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  in  1854
was  chosen  U.  S.  senator,  which  office  he  resigned
in  1858  to  accept  the  judgeship  of  the  U.  S.  district
court  of  North  Carolina.  He  held  this  office  until
the  war  broke  out,  and  in  May,  1861,  he  was  elected
to  the  state  convention  that  passed  the  ordinance
of  secession.  After  the  war  he  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  law,  and  subsequently  engaged  in  the  com-
mission business  at  Norfolk,  Va.

BIGLER,  David,  Moravian  bishop,  b.  in  Hagers-
town,  Md.,  26  Dec,  1806 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  2
July,  1875.  He  prepared  for  service  in  the  foreign
mission  field,  and  went  to  the  West  Indies  in  1831,
where  he  labored  for  five  years  with  great  zeal  and
success.  His  wife's  failing  health  then  compelled
him  to  return  to  the  United  States,  where  he  suc-
cessively took  charge  of  the  Moravian  churches  in
Philadelphia,  New  York,  and  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.
At  the  place  last  named  he  was  consecrated  to  the
episcopacy  on  31 July,  1864,  after  which  he  re-


262


BIGLER


moved  to  Lancaster,  where  he  continued  until  his
-death.  He  was  a  man  of  genial  character,  exer-
-cised  a  great  influence  socially,  and  was  successful
^s  a  preacher.

BIGLER,  John,  governor  of  California,  b.  in
Cumberland  co.,  Pa.,  8  Jan.,  1804 ;  d.  13  Nov.,  1871.
He  was  of  German  descent.  Learning  the  printer's
trade,  he  became  a  journalist,  afterward  a  lawyer,
and  removed  to  Illinois  in  1846.  He  went  to  Cali-
fornia among  the  emigrants  of  1849.  There  he  be-
came a  prominent  democratic  politician  and  gained
the  name  of  "  honest  John  Bigler."  From  1852  till
1856  he  was  governor  of  the  state.— His  brother,
William,  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  was  b.  in
Shermansburg,  Pa.,  in  1814 ;  d.  in  Clearfield,  Pa.,
9  Aug.,  1880.  In  1829  he  began  to  aid  his  brother
John  as  a  printer  in  the  office  of  the  "  Center  Dem-
ocrat," published  at  Bellefonte.  In  1833  he  re-
moved to  Clearfield  and  established  the  "  Clearfield
Democrat,"  a  Jackson  paper,  which  became  pros-
perous and  notable.  He  sold  it  in  1836,  and  en-
tered the  lumber  business.  But  his  editorial  ca-
reer had  so  extended  his  reputation  that  he  was
already  regarded  as  a  political  leader.  In  1841  he.
was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  he  was  its  speak-
er in  1843-'4.  In  1849  he  was  appointed  one  of
the  revenue  commissioners,  and  in  1851  was  elected
governor,  he  received  the  gubernatorial  nomina-
tion a  second  time  in  1854,  but  was  defeated  by
the  American  party.  In  1855  he  was  sent  to  the
U.  S.  senate.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Charleston
convention  in  1860,  and  was  temporary  chairman
of  the  democratic  convention  of  1864,  and  a  mem-
ber of  that  of  1868.  After  the  election  of  Mr.  Lin-
coln, Mr.  Bigler  drew  up  a  bill,  and  advocated  it
before  the  senate,  for  submitting  the  Crittenden
compromise  proposition  to  a  vote  of  the  people  of
the  several  states.  In  1873  he  was  delegate-at-
large  of  the  constitutional  convention  at  Erie.  In
1874  he  was  an  efficient  member  of  the  board  of
finance  of  the  centennial  exhibition.

BIGLOW,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Natick,
Mass.,  22  Sept.,  1773 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  12  Jan.,
1844.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1794,
taught  school  in  Salem,  and  then  became  principal
of  the  Latin  school  iii  Boston,  where  he  wrote  a
number  of  text-books.  He  also  preached  occasion-
ally, and  wrote  for  periodicals.  He  subsequently
taught  a  village  school  in  Maine,  and  in  later  life
was  proof-reader  in  the  university  press  at  Cam-
bridge. He  wrote  "  The  Cheerful  Parson "  and
other  songs  that  became  popular ;  "  History  of
Natick  "  (1830) ;  "  History  of  Sherburne  " ;  "  The
Youth's  Library"  (1808);  "Introduction  to  the
Making  of  Latin "  (1809) ;  and  "  Education,  a
Poem,"  delivered  at  Cambridge  in  1799.

BILLINGS,  Elkanali,  Canadian  geologist,  b.
in  Gloucester,  Canada,  5  May,  1820.  He  was  the
son  of  an  emigrant  from  Massachusetts,  who  settled
near  Brockville  after  the  revolution,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1845,  and  practised  in  Ottawa,  but  in
1856  became  paleontologist  of  the  geological  sur-
vey of  Canada.  During  that  year  he  edited  the
"  Canadian  Naturalist,"  to  which  he  has  since  con-
tributed. He  has  also  written  for  other  scientific
journals  and  prepared  memoirs  of  the  third  and
fourth  decades  of  the  geological  survey.

BILLINGS,  George  Herrick,  metallurgist,
b.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  8  Feb.,  1845.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Pittsburg,  and  since  1862  his  attention
has  been  occupied  with  the  study  and  practice  of
iron  metallurgy  and  its  chemistry.  Of  late  he  has
been  the  general  manager  of  the  Norway  Iron  and
Steel  Company  in  Boston.  He  has  invented  im-
proved forms  of  machinery  for  the  manufacture  of


BILLINGS

iron  and  steel,  principally  appliances  for  drawing
iron  and  steel  bars  for  shafting  and  finishing  rods.
Mr.  Billings  is  a  member  of  the  American  institute
of  mining  engineers,  and  has  contributed  papers
to  its  transactions,  among  which  is  "  The  Proper-
ties of  Iron  alloyed  with  other  Metals  "  (1877).

BILLINGS,  Hammatt,  architect,  d.  in  Bos-
ton, 14  Nov.,  1874.  He  lived  in  Boston  for  many
years,  and  designed  numerous  churches  and  public
buildings  throughout  the  United  States.  He  was
an  artist  of  versatile  talent  and  refined  taste,  and
executed  decorative  designs  and  drew  illustrations
for  books,  besides  making  plans  for  buildings  and
monuments.  The  Pilgrims'  monument  at  Plym-
outh, and  the  case  of  the  great  organ  in  Boston
music-hall,  are  after  his  designs.  Many  book-
covers  were  designed  by  him.  He  made  in  sepia
a  noted  drawing  called  the  "  Enchanted  Monk.

BILLINGS,  John  Shaw,  surgeon,  b.  in  Swit-
zerland CO.,  Ind.,  12  April,  1838.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Miami  University  in  1857,  and  at  the  Ohio
Medical  College  in  I860.  At  first  he  settled  in
Cincinnati,  but  in  November,  1861,  he  was  appointed
acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army.  Until
March,  1863,  he  was  assistant  surgeon,  having
charge  of  hospitals  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and
West  Philadelphia.  He  then  served  with  the  Army
of  the  Potomac,  being  with  the  5th  corps  at  the
battles  of  Chancellorsville  and  Gettysburg.  From
October,  1863,  till  February,  1864,  he  serVed  on
Hospital  duty  at  David's  and  Bedlow's  islands  in
the  vicinity  of  New  York  city,  also  acting  as  a
member  of  the  board  of  enrollment,  after  which
he  became  medical  inspector  to  the  Army  of  the
Potomac,  and  from  December,  1864,  was  connected
with  the  surgeon-general's  office  in  Washington.
In  December,  1876,  he  was  appointed  surgeon,
with  the  rank  of  major,  in  the  regular  army.
He  is  also  medical  adviser  of  the  Johns  Hopkins
Hospital,  and  lecturer  on  municipal  hygiene  at
the  Johns  Hopkins  University.  Dr.  Billings  is  a
member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,  inchiding
the  American  Medical  Association  and  the  Nation-
al Academy  of  Sciences  (1883),  and  he  is  also  an
honorary  member  of  the  Statistical  Society  of
London.  During  1879-80  he  was  vice-president
of  the  National  Board  of  Health,  and  in  1884  he
received  the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  the
University  of  Edinburgh.  During  August,  1886,
he  was  present  at  the  meeting  of  the  British  Medi-
cal Association,  and  delivered  an  important  address
on  "  medicine  in  the  United  States."  His  contri-
butions to  the  periodical  literature  of  medicine  are
numerous,  and  he  has  also  published  reports  on
"  Barracks  and  Hospitals  "  (War  Department,Wash-
ington,  1870) ;  "  The  Hygiene  of  the  U.  S.  Army  "
(1875) ;  and  "  Mortality  and  Vital  Statistics  of  the
United  States  "  (Census  Reports,  1880).  His  great
work,  however,  has  been  the  "Index-Catalogue
of  the  Library  of  the  Surgeon-General's  Office,
U.  S.  army  (Washington,  1880  et  seq.),  in  large
quarto  volumes,  which  contain  the  bibliography
of  every  medical  subject  as  far  as  it  is  found  m
the  library  at  present  under  Dr.  Billings's  care.  It
is  expected  that  the  work  will  consist  of  ten  vol-
umes, of  which  six  have  been  issued  up  to  1886.

BILLINGS,  Joseph,  English  navigator,  b.  in
Turnham  Green,  near  London,  about  1758.  ne
was  a  sailor  on  the  "  Discovery  "  in  Captain  Cook  s
last  fatal  voyage,  entered  the  Russian  navy  as  a
lieutenant  after  his  return,  and  in  1785  was  ap-
pointed to  the  command  of  an  expedition  to  tne
northwest  extremity  of  Asia.  The  expedition
assembled  at  Irkutsk  in  February,  1786.  In  two  ^
vessels  it  explored  the  coasts  of  Siberia  and  Alaska, i


BILLINGS


BINGHAM


263


and  the  interjacent  seas  and  islands,  returning
after  nine  years.  See  "An  Account  of  a  Geo-
jrraphical  and  Astronomical  Expedition  to  the
Nortliern  Parts  of  Russia,  performed  by  Commo-
dore Joseph  Billings,"  from  the  papers  of  Martin
Sauer,  secretary  to  the  expedition  (London,  1802).

BILLINGS,  Josh. See  Shaw,  Henry  Wilson.

BILLINGS,  William,  composer,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  7  Oct.,  1746 ;  d.  there,  26  Sept.,  1800.  He  was
a  tanner  by  trade,  and  afterward  became  a  teacher.
He  was  the  earliest  of  American  composers,  and  in-
troduced in  New  England  the  lively  and  spirited
style  of  devotional  music.  This  was  already  in  vogue
in  England;  but,  from  the  long  popularity  of  Bill-
ings's compositions,  it  came  to  be  called  in  derision
the  Yankee  style.  Although  deficient  in  technical
requirements,  his  compositions  were  superior  in
melody  to  the  airs  of  Tansur  and  other  English  com-
posers'in  the  same  style.  The  introduction  of  his
airs,  which  contained  many  fugues  and  melodious
phrasing  in  the  bass  and  intermediate  parts  that
were  often  contrary  to  correct  principles  of  harmony,
necessitated  the  cultivation  of  the  art  of  singing,
which  was  entirely  neglected  so  long  as  the  music
sung  in  the  congregations  was  confined  to  a  few
slow,  simple,  old  sacred  melodies.  Billings  wrote
the  words  to  many  of  his  tunes.  He  was  a  zealous
patriot,  and  during  the  revolution  produced  a
number  of  patriotic  pieces,  including  "  Lamenta-
tion over  Boston,"  "  Retrospect,"  "  Independence,"
and  "  Columbia,"  as  well  as  verses  set  to  the  air  of
"  Chester,"  which  were  popular  in  the  camps  of  the
revolutionary  army.  He  published  "  The  New
England  Psalm-Singer,  or  American  Chorister,
containing  a  Number  of  Psalm-Tunes,  Anthems,
and  Canons,"  in  Boston,  in  1770.  The  pieces  con-
tained in  it  were  deficient  not  only  in  harmony,  but
in  melody,  and  especially  in  accent.  In  1778  he
issued  "  The  Singing-Master's  Assistant,"  professing
to  be  an  abridgment  of  the  former  work,  in  which
the  greater  part  of  the  tunes  was  omitted,  and
those  retained  were  improved  in  melody  and  ac-
cent. This  collection  grew  to  be  very  popular,  and
was  known  as  "  Billings's  Best."  In  1779  he  pub-
lished "  Music  in  Miniature,"  containing  thirty-two
tunes  from  his  previous  books,  eleven  old  European
tunes,  and  thirty-one  new  and  original  composi-
tions. In  1781  appeared  "  The  Psalm-Singer's
Amusement,"  which  became  exceedingly  popular.
His  subsequent  publications  were  "  The  Suffolk
Harmony"  (1786);  "The  Continental  Harmony"
(1794);  and  anthems  entitled  "Except  the  Lord
build  the  House,"  "Mourn,  Mourn,  ye  Saints,"
"  The  Lord  is  Risen  from  the  .Dead,"  and  "  Jesus
Christ  is  Risen  from  the  Dead."

BILLOPP,  Christopher,  soldier,  b.  on  Staten
Island,  N.  Y.,  in  1737 ;  d.  in  St.  John,  New  Bruns-
wick, in  1827.  His  name  was  originally  Farmer ;
but  he  married  the  daughter  of  Capt.  Christopher
Billopp,  of  the  British  navy,  who  had  obtained  a
patent  for  a  large  tract  of  land  on  Staten  Island,
and  when  his  wife  inherited  this  estate  he  adopted
her  father's  name.  He  commanded  a  corps  of
loyalist  niilitia,  recruited  in  the  vicinity  of  New
York,  during  the  American  revolution,  and,  having
been  taken  prisoner,  was  confined  in  the  jail  at
Jiurlington,  N.  J.  In  1782  he  was  superintendent
of  police  on  Staten  Island.  Under  the  act  of  New
)^ork  his  large  property  was  confiscated,  includ-
ing the  Billopp  house  \still  standing,  as  shown
in  the  engraving),  which  he  had  erected,  and  at
which  Lord  Howe,  as  a  commissioner  for  Great
britain,  met  Franklin,  John  Adams,  and  Edward
Kutledge,  a  committee  of  congress,  with  the  ex-
pectation of  removing  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  re-


turn of  the  colonies  to  their  allegiance.  At  the
close  of  the  war  Col.  Billopp  went  to  Nova  Scotia,
and  was  one  of  the  fifty-five  petitioners  for  land  in
that  province  in  1783. Soon  afterward  he  removed


to  New  Brunswick,  and  was  a  member  of  the  house
of  assembly  and  of  the  provincial  council  there.
He  claimed  the  office  of  administrator  of  the  gov-
ernment in  1823,  on  the  death  of  Gov.  Smythe,  but
was  unsuccessful.

BINGHAM,  Hiram,  missionary,  b.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  11  Nov.,
1869.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  college  in
1816,  and  at  Andover  seminary  in  1819,  being  or-
dained as  a  Congregational  minister  the  same  year.
Having  a  strong  desire  to  carry  the  gospel  to  the
Sandwich  islands,  he  ofl'ered  his  services  to  the
American  board  and  received  an  appointment  in
1819.  He  was  stationed  on  the  island  of  Oahu  at
Honolulu,  which  soon  became  the  permanent  seat
of  government,  and  the  chief  resort  of  whaling  and
other  ships'  of  the  North  Pacific.  His  labors  for
twenty  years  gave  him  a  strong  influence  over  the
rulers  of  the  islands.  In  1841  he  returned  to  the
United  States.

BINGHAM,  John  A.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Mercer,  Pa.,
in  1815.  He  passed  two  years  in  a  printing-office,
and  then  entered  Franklin  college,  Ohio,  but  left,
on  account  of  his  health,  before  graduation.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  was  district  at-
torney for  Tuscarawas  co.,  Ohio,  from  1846  till
1849,  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  republican  in
1854,  and  re-elected  three  times,  sitting  from  1855
till  1863.  He  prepared  in  the  34th  congress  the
report  on  the  contested  Illinois  elections,  and  in
1862  was  chairman  of  the  managers  of  the  house  in
the  impeachment  of  Judge  Humphreys  for  high
treason.  He  failed  of  re-election  in  1864,  and  was
appointed  by  President  Lincoln  judge-advocate  in
the  army,  and  later  the  same  year  solicitor  of  the
court  of  claims.  He  was  special  judge-advocate  in
the  trial  of  the  assassins  of  President  Lincoln.  In
1865  he  returned  to  congress,  and  sat  until  1873,
serving  on  the  committees  on  military  affairs,  freed-
men,  and  reconstruction,  and  in  the  40th  congress
as  chairman  of  the  committees  on  claims  and
judiciary,  and  as  one  of  the  managers  in  the  im-
peachment trial  of  President  Johnson.  On  3  May,
1873,  he  received  the  appointment  of  minister  to
Japan,  which  post  he  held  until  1885,  when  he  was
recalled  by  President  Cleveland.

BINGHAM,  Judsoii  David,  soldier,  b.  at  Mas-
sena  Springs,  St.  Lawrence  eo.,  N.  Y.,  16  May,  1831.
He  was  appointed  to  West  Point  from  Indiana,  and
graduated  in  1854.  He  took  part  in  the  suppression
of  John  Brown's  raid  at  Harper's  Ferry  in  1859,
and  during  the  civil  war  served  in  charge  of  trains


264


BINGHAM


BINNEY


and  supplies  of  Gen.  Banks's  command  in  Maryland
in  18G1,  of  tlie  quartermaster's  depot  at  Nashville,
Tenn.,  in  1862-3,  and  as  chief  quartermaster  of
the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  He  took  part  in  the
siege  of  Vicksburg  and  in  the  invasion  of  Georgia.
On  9  April,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral for  faithful  and  meritorious  services  during
the  rebellion.  After  the  war  he  was  successively
chief  quartermaster  of  the  department  of  the  lakes,
assistant  quartermaster-general  at  Washington,  be-
ing in  charge  of  the  bureau  a  part  of  the  time,  as
commissioner  to  audit  the  Kansas  war  accounts,
and  as  chief  quartermaster  with  the  rank  of  lieuten-
ant-colonel at  the  headquarters  of  the  division  of
the  Pacific  and  the  department  of  the  Missouri,  and
from  4  June,  1886,  at  Chicago,  111.,  as  chief  quarter-
master of  the  division  of  the  Misouri.

BINGHAM,  Kinsley  S.,  senator,  b.  in  Camillus,
N.  Y.,  16  Dec,  1808 ;  d.  at  Oak  Grove,  Mich.,  5  Oct.,
1861.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  was  clerk  in  a  lawyer's .  office  for  three  years.
In  1833  he  emigrated  to  Michigan  and  settled  upon
a  farm.  In  1837  he  was  elected  to  the  Michigan
legislature,  continued  during  eight  years  a  member
of  that  body,  and  for  three  years  as  speaker.  In
1849  he  was  elected  a  representative  in  congress,
and  served  on  the  committee  of  commerce.  In
1854  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state,  and  in
1859  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator.

BINGHAM,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1751 ;  d.  in  Bath,  England,  7  Feb.,
1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  college
in  1768,  went  as  agent  for  the  continental  congress
to  Martinique,  and  afterward  was  consul  at  St.
Pierre.  In  1787-8  he  was  a  delegate  in  the  old  con-
gress from  Pennsylvania.  In  1795  he  was  elected  a
senator,  and  served  till  1801,  in  1797  as  president
of  the  senate  pro  tempore.  He  was  a  strong  sup-
porter of  President  Adams.  In  1793  he  purchased,
for  $250,000,  more  than  2,000,000  acres  in  Maine,
which  he  described  in  a  pamphlet  published  the
same  year.  In  1794  he  published  a  "  Letter  from
an  American  on  the  Subject  of  the  Restraining
Proclamation."— His  wife,  Anne  Willing,  was  dis-
tinguished in  Philadelphia  by  her  beauty,  elegance

of  manners,  and
the  magnifi-
cent hospitality
which  the  means
of  her  husband,
who  was  at
that  time  the
wealthiest  citi-
zen of  Pennsyl-
vania, permitted
her  to  dispense.
The  aeeompany-
ingportrait  is  af-
ter one  by  Gilbert
Stuart.  —  Their
V'V^^''"\?^V'^ T"'  •  eldest  daughter,

%SC^  c*\-- r  Anne Louisa,

^' '  who died in

1848,  married  m
Philadelphia,  23
Aug.,  1798,  Al-
exander Baring,
negotiator  of  the  Webster-Ashburton  treaty.—
Their  second  daughter,  Maria  Matilda,  married
James  Alexander,  Comte  de  Tilly,  for  her  second
husband  Henry  Baring,  brother  of  Lord  Ashbur-
ton,  and  for  her  third  the  Marquis  de  Blaisel.

BINGHAM,  William,  educator,  b.  in  North
Carolina  in  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  North  Carolina  in  1856,  and  succeeded


to  the  management  of  a  classical  school  at  Me-
banesville,  Alamance  co.,  N.  C,  which  had  been
conducted  with  success  by  his  father  and  grand-
father. He  has  published  "A  Grammar  of  the
Latin  Language  " ;  "  A  Grammar  of  the  English
Language";  and  "Caesar's  Commentaries,  with
Notes  and  a  Vocabulary."

BINNEY,  Amos,  merchant  and  naturalist,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,
18  Feb.,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1821,  and  obtained  a  medical  diploma  in  1826,  but
engaged  with  success  in  commercial  pursuits',  de-
voting his  leisure  to  natural  science.  He  was  a
founder  of  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history,
and  was  its  president  from  1843  until  his  death^
and  was  active  in  establishing  the  American  asso-
ciation of  geologists  and  naturalists.  As  a  mem-
ber of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  he  was  instru-
mental in  securing  the  appointment  of  the  zoologi-
cal and  botanical  commissions,  which  resulted  in
the  valuable  reports  of  Harris,  Emerson,  Storer,
and  Gould  on  injurious  insects,  forest-trees,  fishes,
and  invertebrate  animals.  To  the  "  Journal "  and
"  Proceedings "  of  the  Boston  society  of  natural
history  he  contributed  many  scientific  papers.  He
devoted  many  years  to  the  study  of  American  mol-
lusks,  and  spent  a  large  amount  of  money  in  pre-
paring a  treatise  on  the  subject  of  land  moUusks,
sending  exploring  parties  to  Florida,  Texas,  and
other  regions,  and  employing  skilful  artists  ti
make  drawings  and  engrave  plates.  His  "  Terres-
trial and  Air-Breathing  Mollusks  of  the  United
States  "  was  published  under  the  direction  of  Dr.
A.  A.  Gould  (Boston,  1847-'51).  His  son,  W.  G.
Binney,  became  known  as  a  conchologist.

BINNEY,  Hibbert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nova
Scotia,  12  Aug.,  1819.  He  was  educated  at  King's
college,  London,  and  at  Worcester  college,  Oxford.
He  was  graduated  with  classical  and  mathematical
honors  in  1842,  became  a  fellow  of  his  college,  and
was  tutor  there  from  1846  till  1851,  when  he  re-
turned to  Nova  Scotia,  and  was  consecrated  as  the
fourth  Anglican  bishop  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Prince
Edward  Island.

BINNEY,  Horace,  lawj-er,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  4  Jan.,  1780 ;  d.  there,  12  Aug.,  1875.  He  was
of  English  and  Scotch  descent.  His  father  was  a
surgeon  in  the  revolutionary  army.  In  1788,  the
year  after  his  father's  death,  he  was  placed  in  a
classical  school  at  Bordentown,  N.  J.,  where  he
continued  three  years,  and  distinguished  himself
especially  by  his  attainments  in  Greek.  In  July,
1793,  he  entered  the  freshman  class  of  Harvard,
and  at  graduation  in  1797  he  divided  the  highest
honor  with  a  single  classmate.  He  had  acquired
the  art  and  habit  of  study,  and  a  love  for  it  which
never  abated  until  the  close  of  his  life.  This  art
he  ever  regarded  as  his  most  valued  acquisition.
He  began  the  study  of  law  in  November,  1797,  in
the  office  of  Jared  Ingersoll,  and  was  called  to  the
bar  in  March,  1800,  when  he  was  little  more  than
twenty  years  of  age.  His  clientage  for  some  years
was  nieagre,  but  his  industry  continued  unflagging,
and  gradually,  in  the  face  of  a  competition  with
eminent  lawvers,  such  as  no  other  bar  in  the  coun-
try then  exhibited,  he  became  an  acknowledged
leader.  In  1806  he  was  sent  to  the  legislature  of
the  state,  in  which  he  served  one  year,  declining  »
re-election.  So  early  as  1807  his  professional  en-
gagements had  become  extremely  large,  and  before
1815  he  was  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  that  the  legal
profession  could  give,  whether  of  reputation  or
emolument.  Between  1807  and  1814  he  prepared
and  published  the  six  volumes  of  reported  deci-
sions of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania  that


BINNEY


BINNEY


265


%/7'  //"yri^n^^ ^  ^r>-^^^^v.^mt.^xi^


bear  his  name.  They  are  among  the  earliest  of
American  reports,  and  are  regarded  as  almost  per-
fect models  of  legal  reporting.  Soon  after  1880
Mr.  Binney's  health  began  to  be  impaired,  and  he  de-
sired to  withdraw
from  the  courts
and  throw  off  the
business  that  op-
pressed him.  It
was  this,  in  part,
that  made  him
willing  to  accept
a  nomination  for
congress;  but  there
was  doubtless  an-
other reason  that
influenced  him —
the  hostility  of
President  Jack-
son to  the  United
States  bank.  The
veto  of  the  bill
for  its  recharter
aroused  the  deep-
est feeling  of  al-
most the  entire
business  commu-
nity of  Philadelphia,  and  with  that  community  Mr.
Cinney  was  closely  associated,  while  his  ability,  com-
bined with  his  well-known  knowledge  of  the  con-
dition and  operations  of  the  bank,  pointed  him  out
as  the  fittest  man  to  defend  the  institution  in  con-
gress. He  accepted  a  nomination,  and  was  elected
to  the  23d  congress.  In  the  consideration  of  great
subjects,  notably  that  of  the  removal  of  the  public
deposits  from  the  United  States  bank,  he  proved
himself  to  be  a  statesman  of  high  rank  and  an  ac-
complished debater.  But  official  life  was  distaste-
ful to  him,  and  he  declined  a  re-election.  On  his
return  to  Philadelphia  he  refused  all  professional
engagements  in  the  courts,  though  he  continued  to
give  written  opinions  upon  legal  questions  until
1850.  Many  of  these  opinions  are  still  preserved.
They  relate  to  titles  to  real  estate,  to  commercial
questions,  to  trusts,  and  to  the  most  abstruse  sub-
jects in  every  department  of  the  law.  They  are
model  exhibitions  of  profound  and  accurate  knowl-
edge, of  extensive  research,  of  nice  discrimination,
and  wise  conclusion,  and  they  were  generally  ac-
cepted as  of  almost  equal  authority  with  judicial
decision.  Once  only  after  1836  did  Mr.  Binney
appear  in  the  courts.  In  1844,  by  appointment  of
the  city  councils  of  Philadelphia,'he  argued  in  the
supreme  court  of  the  United  States  the  case  of
Bidal  V8.  Girard's  executors,  in  which  was  involved
the  validity  of  the  trust  created  by  Mr.  Girard's
will  for  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  a
college  for  orphans.  The  argument  is  in  print,
and  it  is  still  the  subject  of  admiration  by  the
legal  profession  in  this  country,  and  almost  equally
so  by  the  profession  in  Great  Britain.  It  lifted  the
law  of  charities  out  of  the  depths  of  confusion  and
obscurity  that  had  covered  it,  and  while  the  ful-
ness of  its  research  and  the  vigor  of  its  reasoning
were  masterly,  it  was  clothed  with  a  precision  and
a  beauty  of  language  never  surpassed.  The  argu-
ment was  a  fitting  close  to  a  long  and  illustrious
professional  life.  Mr.  Binney  had  a  fine,  com-
manding person,  an  uncommonly  handsome  face,
a  dignified  and  graceful  manner, 'and  a  most  melo-
dious voice,  perfectly  under  his  control,  and  modu-
lated with  unusual  skill.  In  fine,  he  was  in  all
particulars  a  most  accomplished  lawyer.  No  words
can  better  describe  him  than  those"^  which  he  ap-
plied to  a  great  man,  the  friend  of  his  early  man-


hood :  "  He  was  an  advocate  of  great  power ;  a
master  of  every  question  in  his  causes ;  a  wary  tac-
tician in  the  management  of  them ;  highly  accom-
plished in  language  ;  a  faultless  logician ;  a  man
of  the  purest  integrity  and  the  highest  honor ;  flu-
ent without  the  least  volubility ;  concise  to  a  de-
gree that  left  every  one's  patience  and  attention
unimpaired,  and  perspicuous  to  almost  the  lowest
order  of  understanding,  while  he  was  dealing  with
almost  the  highest  topics."  If  it  be  added  to  this
that  his  mental  power  was  equal  to  the  compre-
hension of  any  legal  subject,  that  his  mode  of  pres-
entation was  the  best  possible,  that  his  rhetoric
was  faultless,  that  he  had  an  aptness  of  illustration
that  illuminated  the  most  abstruse  subjects,  and  a
personal  character  without  a  visible  flaw,  it  will  be
seen  that  he  must  have  been,  as  he  was,  a  most
persuasive  and  convincing  advocate.  In  1837,  by
invitation  of  the  bar  of  Philadelphia,  he  delivered
an  address  on  the  life  and  character  of  Chief-Jus-
tice Tilghman ;  and  in  1835,  complying  wath  a  re-
quest of  the  select  and  common  councils  of  the
city,  an  address  on  the  life  and  character  of  Chief-
Justice  Marshall.  Until  the  close  of  his  life  he
was  a  constant  reader  and  an  indefatigable  stu-
dent. He  kept  himself  well  informed  of  current
events,  and  in  regard  to  all  public  questions  he
not  only  sought  information,  but  matured  settled
opinions.  In  1858  he  published  a  sketch  of  the
life  and  character  of  Justice  Bushrod  Washing-
ton, in  which  he  delineated  the  qualities  that  make
up  a  perfect  nisi  prius  judge,  with  singular  acute-
ness.  In  the  same  year  he  published  sketches  of
three  leaders  of  the  old  Philadelphia  bar,  which
were  greatly  admired.  He  also  in  1858  gave  to  the
press  a  more  extended  discussion,  entitled  "  An
Inquiry  into  the  Formation  of  Washington's  Fare-
well Address,"  strikingly  illustrative  of  the  charac-
ter of  his  own  mind,  and  of  his  habits  of  investi-
gation and  reasoning.  And  in  1862  and  in  1863
he  published  three  pamphlets  in  support  of  the
power  claimed  by  President  Lincoln  to  suspend
the  writ  of  habeas  corpus.  His  argument  was  not
less  remarkable  than  the  best  of  his  earlier  efforts.
Throughout  his  life  Mr.  Binney  manifested  a  deep
interest  in  many  literary,  scientific,  and  art  institu-
tions of  Philadelphia,  and  in  many  of  the  noblest
charities.  He  was  also  an  earnest  Christian,  a  de-
vout member  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
and  often  a  leading  member  of  its  conventions.
The  activity  of  his  mind  remained  undiminished
until  his  death.  This  occurred  forty  years  after
the  age  when  most  men  are  at  the  zenith  of  their
reputation,  forty  years  after  he  had  substantially
retired  from  public  view  and  from  participation
in  all  matters  that  attract  public  notice,  and
at  the  end  of  a  period  when  public  recollection
of  most  lawyers  has  faded  into  indistinctness.
— His  son,  Horace,  Jr.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,

21  Jan.,  1809 :  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1870,  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1828,  studied  law  with  his  father,  and
practised  his  profession  in  his  native  city  from  his
admission  to  the  bar  in  1831,  confining  himself
mostly  to  chamber  consultations.  In  early  life  he
took  a  deep  interest  in  municipal  politics.  He  was
president  of  the  Philadelphia  associates  of  the  sani-
tary commission,  founder  of  the  union  league  of
that  city,  and  president  of  the  association  at  the
time  of  his  death.  A  memoir  of  Mr.  Binney,  read
before  the  American  philosophical  society,  6  May,
1870,  by  Charles  J.  Stille,  has  been  published.

BINNS,  John,  journalist,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,

22  Dec,  1772:  d.  m  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  June,
1860.  He  received  a  good  education,  but,  becoming
involved  in  the  revolutionary  movement  in  Ireland,


2m


BIRCH


BIRKBECK


was  arrested,  and  for  two  years  imprisoned.  Soon
after  his  release  in  1801  he  went  to  Baltimore  with
his  brother  Benjamin,  and  in  March,  1803,  founded
at  Northumberland,  Pa.,  the  "  Republican  Argus,"
which  gave  him  great  influence  with  the  demo-
cratic party.  From  1807  until  November,  1829,
he  conducted,  at  Philadelphia,  the  "  Democratic
Press,"  the  leading  paper  in  the  state  until,  in  1824,
it  opposed  the  election  of  Jackson.  He  was  for
twenty  years  an  alderman  of  Philadelphia.  In  1854
he  published  "  Recollections  of  the  Life  of  John
Binns :  Twenty-nine  Years  in  Europe,  and  Fifty-
three  in  the  United  States."  He  was  also  the
author  of  "  Binns's  Magistrate's  Manual "  (1850).

BIRCH,  Thomas,  artist,  b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, about  1779 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Jan.,
1851.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1793,
established  himself  in  Philadelphia  about  1800,
and  began  the  painting  of  portraits.  A  visit  to  the
capes  of  Delaware  in  1807  turned  his  attention  to
marine  views,  in  which  he  acquired  a  high  reputa-
tion. During  the  war  of  1812  he  executed  a  series
of  historical  paintings,  representing  the  naval  vic-
tories of  the  United  States.  He  also  painted  land-
scapes, particularly  snow  scenes.  The  Harrison
collection  in  Philadelphia  contains  his  paintings  of
the  engagements  between  the  "  United  States  "  and
the  "  Macedonian,"  and  between  the  "  Constitu-
tion "  and  the  "  Guerriere."  Three  of  his  marine
views  are  in  the  Claghorn  collection.

BIRD,  Robert  Montg-omery,  novelist,  b.  in
Newcastle,  Del.,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
22  Jan.,  1854.  He  was  educated  for  the  medical
profession,  and,  after  taking  his  diploma  in  Phila-
delphia, practised  for  one  year,  but  early  turned
his  attention  to  literature,  contributed  to  the
"  Monthly  Magazine "  of  Philadelphia,  and  wrote
three  tragedies — "  The  Grladiator,"  "Oraloosa,"  and
"  The  Broker  of  Bogota'* — all  of  which  have  been
popular  on  the  stage,  especially  the  first,  the  prin-
cipal character  of  which  was  one  of  the  favorite  per-
sonations of  Edwin  Forrest.  His  first  novel,  "  Cala-
var,"  appeared  in  1834,  and  was  succeeded  by  "  The
Infidel "  (Philadelphia,  1835),  the  scene  of  which,
as  well  as  that  of  his  first  story,  was  in  Mexico
at  the  time  of  the  Spanish  conquest ;  "  The  Hawks
of  Hawk  Hollow";  "Sheppard  Lee";  "Nick  of
the  Woods  "  (1837),  the  scene  of  which  is  laid  in
Kentucky  about  the  close  of  the  revolution ;
"  Peter  Pilgrim  "  (1838),  a  collection  of  tales  and
sketches,  including  one  of  the  earliest  descriptions
of  the  Mammoth  Cave ;  and  "  Robin  Day  "  (1839).
They  are  marked  by  picturesqueness  of  description,
and  an  animated  narration.  In  1839  Dr.  Bird  re-
tired to  his  native  village,  but  for  a  few  years  pre-
vious to  his  death  edited  the  "North  American
Gazette "  at  Philadelphia,  of  which  he  became  a
joint  proprietor.— His  son,  Frederick  Mayer,
clergyman,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  June,  1838,
was  graduated  at  the  university  of  Pennsylvania
in  1857,  and  at  the  union  theological  seminary  in
New  York  in  1860,  was  ordained  as  a  Lutheran  min-
ister, and  served  during  the  civil  war  as  a  chaplain
in  the  army.  He  took  orders  in  the  Protestant  Epis-
copal church  in  1868,  and  became  rector  in  Spotts-
wood,  N.  J.,  in  1870,  and  subsequently  in  South
Bethlehem,  Pa.  In  1881  he  accepted  the  professor-
ship of  psychology.  Christian  evidence,  and  rhetoric
in  Lehigh  university.  He  collected  a  large  hymno-
logical  library,  and  was  the  main  editor  of  the
"Liitheran  Hymn-Book"  (Baltimore,  1864),  and
collaborator  with  Bishop  Odenheimer  in  "  Hymns
of  the  Spirit "  (New  York,  1871).  He  has  published
"  Charles  Wesley  seen  in  his  Finer  and  Less  Famil-
iar Poems  "  (1866),  and  a  series  of  articles  on  hymn


writing,  which  appeared  in  the  New  York  "  Inde-
pendent "  in  1886  and  previous  years.

BIRDSALL,  William  Randall,  phvsician,  b.
in  Greene,  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  1  Jan.,  1852.  He
was  graduated  in  medicine  at  the  university  of
Michigan  in  1876,  entered  upon  practice  in  K^ew
York  city,  subsequently  studied  neurology  in  Eu-
rope, and  after  his  return  was  engaged  as  a  clinical
teacher  on  nervous  diseases.  Besides  articles  in
medical  journals  and  cyclopaedias,  he  has  written
"  Electro-Therapeutics  and  Electro-Diagnosis."

BIRGE,  Edward  Asaliel,  naturalist,  b.  in  Troy,
N.  Y.,  7  Sept.,  1851.  He  was  educated  at  the  Troy
high  school  in  1869,  and  graduated  at  Williams  in
1873,  after  which  he  studied  at  Harvard,  where,  in
1878,  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  I).  In  1875  he
was  appointed  instructor  of  natural  history  and
zoology  in  the  University  of  Wisconsin,  and  subse-
quently became  professor  in  that  department.  He
has  contributed  papers  to  scientific  journals,  and
edited  the  revision  of  Prof.  James  Orton's  "  Com-
parative Zoology"  (New  York,  1882),  and  also
wrote  the  article  on  "  Entomostraca  "  in  the  "  Stand-
ard Natural  History  "  (Boston,  1884).

BIRGE,  Henry  Warner,  soldier,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  25  Aug.,  1825;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1
June,  1888.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was"  an
aide  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  W.  A.  Buckingham.  On
the  day  of  the  president's  first  call  for  troops  (15
April,  1861)  he  began  organizing  the  first  regi-
ments of  Connecticut's  quota.  On  23  May  he  was
appointed  major  of  the  4th  Connecticut  volunteers,
which  was  the  first  "  three-years'  regiment "  of  state
troops  mustered  into  the  service  of  the  United
States.  He  served  in  Maryland  and  Virginia  until
November,  1861,  when  he  was  appointed  colonel  of
the  13th  Connecticut  infantry;  joined  Gen.  But-
ler's army  in  New  Orleans  in  March,  1862,  and  was
placed  in  command  of  the  defences  of  the  city.  In
September  he  commanded  his  regiment  in  a  move-
ment in  the  La  Fourche  district,  and  in  December,
when  Gen.  Butler  was  succeeded  by  Gen.  Banks,
he  was  assigned  to  a  brigade,  which  he  commanded
through  the  first  Red  river  campaign  and  the  siege
of  Port  Hudson  (April  to  July,  1863).  Before  the
surrender  of  this  stronghold  Gen.  Birge  volun-
teered to  organize  and  lead  a  volunteer  battalion  to
carry  the  confederate  works  by  assault.  Such  was
his  reputation  among  the  rank  and  file  that  his
own  regiment,  the  13th  Connecticut,  volunteered
almost  in  a  body,  and  the  full  complement  of  1,000
men  was  ready  within  two  days.  The  assault  was
planned  for  the  night  of  10  July,  but  the  news  of
the  fall  of  Vicksburg  was  received,  and  Port  Hud-
son surrendered  8  July,  1863.  He  was  promoted
brigadier-general  9  Sept.,  1863.  In  1864  he  accom-
panied the  second  Red  river  expedition,  and  after
the  engagements  at  Sabine  Cross-Roads,  Pleasant
Hill,  and  Cane  river,  returned  to  Alexandria  and
was  sent  to  take  command  at  Baton  Rouge,  La.,
which  post  was  threatened  by  the  confederates.  In
July,  1864,  he  was  ordered  north  with  the  2d  divi-
sion of  the  19th  corps,  joining  Gen.  Sheridan  in
the  Shenandoah  valley  in  August,  and  being  pres-
ent in  all  the  battles  of  the  ensuing  campaign.  In
February  and  March,  1865,  he  was  in  command  of
the  defences  of  Savannah,  Ga.,  where  he  reniained
until  November,  when  he  resigned  his  commission.
His  services  were  recognized  by  the  brevet  of  ma-
jor-general of  volunteers,  and  by  a  vote  of  thanks
from  the  legislature  of  his  native  state.

BIRKBECK,  Morris,  traveller,  b.in  England;
d.  in  1825.  He  purchased  16,000  acres  of  land  m
Illinois,  founded  the  town  of  New  Albion,  and  re-
sided there. W^hen  the  state  was  organized  m


BIRNEY


BIRNEY


267


1818,  he  opposed  the  introduction  of  slavery  into
it.  He  was  the  author  of  '■  Notes  on  a  Journey
through  France"  (1815)  and  "Notes  on  a  Jour-
ney in  America"  (1818),  in  which  he  gave  sanguine
accounts  of  Illinois,  and  of  "  Letters  from  Illinois  "
(1818).  He  was  drowned  while  returning  from  a
visit  to  Robert  Owen  at  New  Harmony,  Ind,

BIRNEY,  James  Gillespie,  statesman,  b.  in
Danville,  Ky.,  4  Feb.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Perth  Amboy,  N.
J.,  25  Nov.,  1857.  His  ancestors  were  Protestants
of  the  province  of  Ulster,  Ireland.  His  father,  mi-
grating to  the  United  States  at  sixteen  years  of
age,  settled  in  Kentucky,  became  a  wealthy  mer-
chant, manufacturer,  and  farmer,  and  for  many
years  was  president  of  the  Danville  bank.  His
mother  died  when  he  was  three  years  old,  and  his
early  boyhood  was  passed  under  the  care  of  a  pious
aunt,  (jiving  promise  of  talent  and  force  of  char-
acter, he  was  liberally  educated  with  a  view  to  his
becoming  a  lawyer  and  statesman.  After  prepara-
tion at  good  schools  and  at  Transylvania  univer-
sity he  was  sent  to  Princeton,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated with  honors  in  1810.  Having  studied  law  for
three  years,  chiefly  under  Alexander  J.  Dallas,  of
Philadelphia,  he  returned  to  his  native  place  in
1814  and  began  practice.  In  1816  he  married  a
daughter  of  William  McDowell,  judge  of  the  U.  S.

circuit  courtand
one  of  several
brothers  who,
with  their  rela-
tives, connec-
tions, and  de-
scendants, were
the  most  influ-
ential family  in
Kentucky.  In
the  same  year
he  was  elected
to  the  legisla-
ture, in  which
body  he  opposed
and  defeated  in
its  original  form
a  proposition  to
demand  of  the
states  of  Ohio
and  Indiana  the
enactment  of
laws for the


seizure,  impris-
onment, and  delivery  to  owners  of  slaves  es-
caping into  their  limits.  His  education  in  New
Jersey  and  Pennsylvania  at  the  time  when  the
gradual  emancipation  laws  of  those  states  were  in
operation  had  led  him  to  favor  that  solution  of  the
slavery  problem.  In  the  year  1818  he  removed  to
Alabama,  bought  a  cotton  plantation  near  Hunts-
ville,  and  served  as  a  member  of  the  first  legislature
that  assembled  under  the  constitution  of  1819.
Though  he  was  not  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  instrument,  it  was  chiefly  through
his  influence  that  a  provision  of  the  Kentucky  con-
stitution, empowering  the  general  assembly  to
emancipate  slaves  on  making  compensation  to  the
owners,  and  to  prohibit  the  bringing  of  slaves  into
the  state  for  sale,  was  copied  into  it,  with  amend-
ments designed  to  secure  humane  treatment  for
that  unfortunate  class.  In  the  legislature  he  voted
against  a  resolution  of  honor  to  Gen.  Jackson,  as-
signing his  reasons  in  a  forcible  speech.  This
placed  him  politically  in  a  small  minority.  In
1833,  having  found  planting  unprofital)le,  'partly
because  of  his  refusal  to  permit  his  overseer  to
use  the  lash,  he  resumed  at  Huntsville  the  practice


of  his  profession,  was  appointed  solicitor  of  the
northern  circuit,  and  soon  gained  a  large  and  lu-
crative practice.  In  1826  he  made  a  public  pro-
fession of  religion,  united  with  the  Presbyterian
church,  and  was  ever  afterward  a  devout  Christian.
About  the  same  time  he  began  to  contribute  to  the
American  colonization  society,  regarding  it  as  pre-
paring the  way  for  gradual  emancipation.  In  1827
he  procured  the  enactment  by  the  Alabama  legis-
lature of  a  statute  "  to  prohibit  the  importation  of
slaves  into  this  state  for  sale  or  hire."  In  1828  he
was  a  candidate  for  presidential  elector  on  the  Ad-
ams ticket  in  Alabama,  canvassed  the  state  for  the
Adams  party,  and  was  regarded  as  its  most  promi-
nent member.  He  was  repeatedly  elected  mayor
of  Huntsville,  and  was  recognized  as  the  leader  in
educational  movements  and  local  improvements.
In  1830  he  was  deputed  by  the  trustees  of  the  state
university  to  select  and  recommend  to  them  five
persons  as  president  and  professors  of  that  in-
stitution, also  by  the  trustees  of  the  Huntsville
female  seminary  to  select  and  employ  three  teach-
ers. In  the  performance  of  these  trusts  he  spent
several  months  in  the  Atlantic  states,  extending
his  tour  as  far  north  as  Massachusetts.  His  selec-
tions were  approved.  Returning  home  by  way  of
Kentucky,  he  called  on  Henry  Clay,  with  whom  he
had  been  on  terms  of  friendship  and  political  sym-
pathy, and  urged  that  statesman  to  place  himself
at  the  head  of  the  gradual  emancipation  move-
ment in  Kentucky.  The  result  of  the  interview
was  the  final  alienation  in  public  matters  and  poli-
tics of  the  parties  to  it,  though  their  friendly  per-
sonal relations  remained  unchanged.  Mr.  Birney
did  not  support  Mr.  Clay  politically  after  1830  or
vote  for  him  in  1832.  For  several  years  he  was
the  confidential  adviser  and  counsel  of  the  Chero-
kee nation,  an  experience  that  led  him  to  sympa-
thize with  bodies  of  men  who  were  wronged  under
color  of  law.  In  1831  he  had  become  so  sensible  of
the  evil  influences  of  slavery  that  he  determined  to
remove  his  large  family  to  a  free  state,  and  in  the
winter  of  that  year  visited  Illinois  and  selected
Jacksonville  as  the  place  of  his  future  residence.
Returning  to  Alabama,  he  was  winding  up  his  law
business  and  selling  his  property  with  a  view  to
removal,  when  he  received,  most  unexpectedly,  an
appointment  from  the  American  colonization  so-
ciety as  its  agent  for  the  southwest.  From  motives
of  duty  he  accepted  and  devoted  himself  for  one
year  to  the  promotion  of  the  objects  of  that  so-
ciety. Having  become  convinced  that  the  slave-
holders of  the  gulf  states,  with  few  exceptions,  were
hostile  to  the  idea  of  emancipation  in  the  future,
he  lost  faith  in  the  efficacy  of  colonization  in  that
region.  In  his  conversations  about  that  time  wdth
southern  politicians  and  men  of  influence  he  learned
enough  to  satisfy  him  that,  although  the  secret
negotiations  in  1829  of  the  Jackson  administration
for  the  purchase  of  Texas  had  failed,  the  project
of  annexing  that  province  to  the  United  States
and  forming  several  slave  states  out  of  its  territory
had  not  been  abandoned ;  that  a  powerful  combi-
nation existed  at  the  south  for  the  purpose  of
sending  armed  adventurers  to  Texas;  and  that
southern  politicians  were  united  in  the  design  to
secure  for  the  south  a  majority  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
The  situation  seemed  to  him  to  portend  the  per-
manence of  slavery,  with  grave  danger  of  civil  war
and  disunion  of  the  states.  Resigning  his  agency
and  relinquishing  his  Illinois  project,  he  removed,
in  November,  1833,  to  Kentucky  for  the  purpose
of  separating  it  from  the  slave  states  by  effecting
the  adoption  of  a  system  of  gradual  emancipation.
He  thought  its  example  might  be  followed  by  Vir-


268


BIRNEY


ginia  and  Tennessee,  and  that  thus  the  slave  states
would  be  placed  in  a  hopeless  minority,  and  slavery
in  process  of  extinction.  But  public  opinion  in
his  native  state  had  greatly  changed  shice  he  had
left  it;  the  once  powerful  emancipation  element
had  been  weakened  by  the  opposition  of  political
leaders,  and  especially  of  Henry  Clay.  His  efforts
were  sustained  by  very  few.  In  June,  1834,  he  set
free  his  own  slaves  and  severed  his  connection  with
the  colonization  society,  the  practical  effect  of
which,  he  had  found,  was  to  afford  a  pretext  for
postponing  emancipation  indefinitely.  From  this
time  he  devoted  himself  with  untiring  zeal  to  the
advocacy  in  Kentucky  of  the  abolition  of  slavery.
On  19  March,  1835,  he  formed  the  Kentucky  anti-
slavery  society,  consisting  of  forty  members,  sev-
eral of  whom  had  freed  their  slaves.  In  May,  at
New  York,  he  made  the  principal  speech  at  the
meeting  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society,  and
thenceforward  he  was  identified  with  the  Tap-
pans,  Judge  William  Jay,  Theodore  D.  Weld,
Alvan  Stewart,  Thomas  Morris,  and  other  north-
ern abolitionists,  who  pursued  their  object  by  con-
stitutional methods.  In  June,  1835,  he  issued  a
prospectus  for  the  publication,  beginning  in  Au-
gust, of  an  anti-slavery  weekly  paper,  at  Danville,
Ky. ;  but  before  the  time  fixed  for  issuing  the
first  number  the  era  of  mob  violence  and  social
persecutions,  directed  against  the  opponents  of
slavery,  set  in.  This  was  contemporaneous  with
the  renewed  organization  of  revolts  in  Texas ;  the
beginning  of  the  war  for  breaking  up  the  refuge
for  fugitive  slaves,  waged  for  years  against  the
Florida  Seminoles ;  and  the  exclusion,  by  conniv-
ance of  the  postmaster-general,  of  anti-slavery  pa-
pers from  the  U.  S.  mails;  and  it  preceded,  by  a
few  months  only,  President  Jackson's  message,
recommending  not  only  the  refusal  of  the  use  of
the  mails,  but  the  passage  of  laws  by  congress  and
also  by  the  non-slaveholding  states  for  the  sup-
pression of  "incendiary"  (anti  -  slavery)  publica-
tions. Mr.  Birney  found  it  impossible  to  obtain  a
publisher  or  printer ;  and  as  his  own  residence  in
Kentucky  had  become  disagreeable  and  dangerous,
he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  established
his  paper.  His  press  was  repeatedly  destroyed  by
mobs ;  but  he  met  all  opposition  with  courage  and
succeeded  finally  in  maintaining  the  freedom  of
the  press  in  Cincinnati,  exhibiting  great  personal
courage,  firmness,  and  judgment.  On  22  Jan.,
1836,  a  mob  assembled  at  the  court-house  for  the
purpose  of  destroying  his  property  and  seizing  his
person ;  the  city  and  county  authorities  had  noti-
fied him  of  their  inability  to  protect  him ;  he  at-
tended the  meeting,  obtained  leave  to  speak,  and
succeeded  in  defeating  its  object.  As  an  editor,,
he  was  distinguished  by  a  thorough  knowledge
of  his  subject,  courtesy,  candor,  and  large  attain-
ments as  a  jurist  and  statesman.  The  "  Philan-
thropist "  gained  rapidly  an  extensive  circulation.
Having  associated  with  him  as  editor  Dr.  Gama-
liel Bailey,  he  devoted  most  of  his  own  time  to
public  speaking,  visiting  in  this  work  most  of
the  cities  and  towns  in  the  free  states  and
addressing  committees  of  legislative  bodies.  His
object  was  to  awaken  the  people  of  the  north  to
the  danger  menacing  the  freedom  of  speech  and  of
the  press,  the  trial  by  jury,  the  system  of  free
labor,  and  the  national  constitution,  from  the  en-
croachments of  the  slave-power  and  the  plotted
annexation  of  new  slave  states  in  the  southwest.
In  recognition  of  his  prominence  as  an  anti-slavery
leader,  the  executive  committee  of  the  American
anti-slavery  society  unanimously  elected  him,  in  the
summer  of  1837,  to  the  office  of  secretary. Having


BIRNEY


accepted,  he  removed  to  New  York  city,  20  Sept.
1837.  In  his  new  position  he  was  the  executive
officer  of  the  society,  conducted  its  correspondence
selected  and  employed  lecturers,  directed  the  or-
ganization of  auxiliaries,  and  prepared  its  reports.
He  attended  the  principal  anti-slavery  conventions'
and  his  wise  and  conservative  counsel  had  a
marked  influence  on  their  action.  He  was  faithful
to  the  church,  while  he  exposed  and  rebuked  the
ecclesiastical  bodies  that  sustained  slavery;  and
true  to  the  constitution,  while  he  denounced  the
constructions  that  severed  it  from  tlie  principles
contained  in  its  preamble  and  in  the  declaration
of  independence.  To  secession,  whether  of  the  north
or  south,  he  was  inflexibly  opposed.  The  tolera-
tion or  establishment  of  slavery  in  any  district  or
territory  belonging  to  the  United  States,  and  its
abolition  in  the  slave  states,  except  under  the  war
power,  he  held  was  not  within  the  legal  power  of
congress ;  slavery  was  local,  and  freedom  national.
To  vote  he  considered  the  duty  of  every  citizen,
and  more  especially  of  every  member  of  tlie  Amer-
ican anti-slavery  society,  the  constitution  of  which
recognized  the  duty  of  using  both  moral  and  po-
litical action  for  the  removal  of  slaveiy.  In  the
beginning  of  the  agitation  the  abolitionists  voted
for  such  anti-slavery  candidates  as  were  nominated
by  the  leading  parties;  but  as  the  issues  grew,
under  the  aggressive  action  of  the  slave  power,  to
include  the  right  of  petition,  the  freedom  of  speech
and  of  the  press,  the  trial  by  jury,  the  equality  of
all  men  before  the  law,  the  right  of  the  free  states
to  legislate  for  their  own  territory,  and  the  right
of  congress  to  exclude  slavery  from  the  territories,
the  old  parties  ceased  to  nominate  anti-slavery
candidates,  and  the  abolitionists  were  forced  to
make  independent  nominations  for  state  officers
and  congress,  and  finally  to  form  a  national  and
constitutional  party.  Mr.  Birney  was  their  first
and  only  choice  as  candidate  for  the  presidency.
During  his  absence  in  England,  in  1840,  and  again
in  1844,  he  was  unanimously  nominated  by  nation-
al conventions  of  the  liberty  party.  At  the  former
election  he  received  7,369  votes ;  and  at  the  latter,
62,263.  This  number,  it  was  claimed  by  his  friends,
would  have  been  much  larger  if  the  electioneering
agents  of  the  whig  party  had  not  circulated,  three
days  before  the  election  and  too  late  for  denial
and  exposure,  a  forged  letter  purporting  to  be
from  Mr.  Birney,  announcing  his  withdrawal  from
the  canvass,  and  advising  anti-slavery  men  to  vote
for  Mr.  Clay.  This  is  known  as  "the  Garland
forgery."  Its  circulation  in  Ohio  and  New  York
probably  gave  the  former  state  to  Mr.  Clay,  and
greatly  diminished  Mr.  Birney's  vote  in  the  latter.
In  its  essential  doctrines  the  platform  of  the  liberty
party  in  1840  and  1844  was  identical  with  those
that  were  subsequently  adopted  by  the  free-soil
and  republican  parties.  In  the  summer  of  1845
Mr.  Birney  was  disabled  physically  by  partial  pa-
ralysis, caused  by  a  fall  from  a  horse,  and  from
that  time  he  withdrew  from  active  participation  m
politics,  though  he  continued  his  contributions  to
the  press.  In  September,  1839,  he  emancipated
twenty-one  slaves  that  belonged  to  his  late  father  s
estate,  setting  off  to  his  co-heir  $20,000,  in  com-
pensation for  her  interest  in  them.  In  1839  Mr.
Birney  lost  his  wife,  and  in  the  autumn  of  lo4l
he  married  Miss  Fitzhugh.  sister  of  Mrs.  Gemt
Smith,  of  New  Y^ork.  In  1842  he  took  up  his  resi-
dence in  Bay  City,  Mich.  In  person  he  was  ot
medium  height,  robust  build,  and  handsome  coun-
tenance. His  manners  were  those  of  a  polished
man  of  the  world,  free  from  eccentricities,  and
marked  with  dignity. He  had  neither  vices  nor


BIRNEY

bad  habits.  As  a  presiding  oiRcer  in  a  public
meeting  he  was  said  to  have  no  superior.  As  a
public  speaker  he  was  generally  calm  and  judicial
in  tone;  but  when  under  strong  excitement  he
rose  to  eloquence.  His  chief  writings  were  as  fol-
lows: "Ten  Letters  on  Slavery  and  Colonization,"
addressed  to  R.  K.  Gurley  (the  first  dated  12  July,
1833,  the  last  11  Dec,  1888);  "Six  Essays  on
Slavery  and  Colonization,"  published  in  the  Hunts-
ville  (Ala.)  "Advocate"  (May,  June,  and  July,
1833);  "Letter  on  Colonization,"  resigning  vice-
presidency  of  Kentucky  colonization  society  (15
July,  1834) ;  "  Letters  to  the  Presbyterian  Church"
(1834);  "Addresses  and  Speeches"  (1835);  "Vin-
dication of  the  Abolitionists"  (1835);  "The  Phi-
lanthropist," a  weekly  newspaper  (1886  and  to  Sep-
tember, 1837) ;  "  Letter  to  Col.  Stone"  (May,  1836) ;
'Address  to  Slaveholders"  (October,  1886);  "Argu-
ment on  Fugitive  Slave  Case  "  (1887) ;  "  Letter  to
F.  H.  Elmore,"  of  South  Carolina  (1838) ;  "  Politi-
cal Obligations  of  Abolitionists  "  (1839) ;  "  Report
on  the  Duty  of  Political  Action,"  for  executive
committee  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society
(May,  1839);  "American  Churches  the  Bulwarks
of  American  Slavery  "  (1840) ;  "  Speeches  in  Eng-
land" (1840);  "  Letter  of  Acceptance  ' ;  "Articles
in  Q.  A.  S.  Magazine  and  Emancipator  "  (1887-44) ;
"Examination  of  the  Decision  of  the  U.  S.  Su-
preme Court,"  in  the  case  of  Strader  et  ah,  v.
Graham  (1850). — His  son,  Jaines,  b.  in  Danville,
Ky.,  7  June,  1817,  was  a  state  senator  in  Michigan
in  1859,  and  was  lieutenant-governor  of  the  state
and  acting  governor  in  1861-3.  He  was  appoint-
ed by  President  Grant,  in  1876.  minister  at  the
Hague,  and  held  that  office  until  1882. — Another
son,  William,  lawyer,  b.  near  Huntsville,  Ala.,
28  May,  1819.  While  pursuing  his  studies  in  Paris,
in  February,  1848,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the
revolution,  and  he  was  appointed  on  public  compe-
tition professor  of  English  literature  in  the  college
at  Bourges.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  national  service
as  captain  in  April,  1861,  and  rose  through  all  the
grades  to  the  rank  of  brevet  major-general  of
volunteers,  commanding  a  division  for  the  last  two
years  of  the  civil  war.  He  participated  in  the
principal  battles  in  Virginia,  and,  being  sent  for  a
short  time  to  Florida  after  the  battle  of  Olustee,
regained  possession  of  the  principal  parts  of  the
state  and  of  several  of  the  confederate  strongholds.
In  1863-'4,  having  been  detailed  by  the  war  de-
partment as  one  of  three  superintendents  of  the
organization  of  U.  S.  colored  troops,  he  enlisted,
mustered  in,  armed,  equipped,  drilled,  and  sent  to
the  field  seven  regiments  of  those  troops.  In  this
work  he  opened  all  the  slave-prisons  in  Baltimore,
and  freed  their  inmates,  including  many  slaves  be-
longing to  men  in  the  confederate  armies.  The
result  of  his  operations  was  to  hasten  the  abolition
of  slavery  in  Maryland.  He  passed  four  vears  in
Florida  after  the  war,  and  in  1874  removed  to
Washington,  D.  C,  where  he  practised  his  profes-
sion and  became  attorney  for  the  District  of  Co-
lumbia.—The  third  son,  Dion,  physician,  entered
the  army  as  lieutenant  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  rose  to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  died
in  1864  of  disease  contracted  in  the  service.— The
fourth  son,  David  Bell,  b.  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  29
May,  1825 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  Oct.,  1864,
studied  law  in  Cincinnati,  and,  after  engaging  in
business  in  Michigan,  began  the  practice  of  law  in
l^hiladelphia  in  1848.  He  entered  the  army  as
heutenant-colonel  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  was  made  colonel  of  the  28d  Pennsyl-
vania volunteers,  which  regiment  he  raised,  prin-
cipally at his  own  expense, in the summer  of


BISHOP


269


1861.  He  was  promoted  successively  to  brigadier-
and  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  distinguished
himself  in  the  battles  of  Yorktown,  Williamsburg,
the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  B^redericksburg,
Chancellorsville,  and  Gettysburg.  After  the  death
of  Gen.  Berry  he  commanded  the  division,  receiv-
ing  his commission as major-general, 23 May,

1863.  He  commanded  the  8d  corps  at  Gettysburg,
after  Gen.  Sickles  was  wounded,  and  on  23  July,

1864,  was  given  the  command  of  the  10th  corps.
He  died  of  disease  contracted  in  tlie  service. — A
fifth  son,  Fitzliiig"!!,  died,  in  1864,  of  wounds  and
disease,  in  the  service  with  the  rank  of  colonel. — A
grandson,  James  Gillespie,  was  lieutenant  and
captain  of  cavalry,  served  as  staff  officer  under
Custer  and  Sheridan,  was  appointed  lieutenant  in
the  regular  army  at  the  close  of  the  war,  and  died
soon  afterward  of  disease  contracted  in  the  service.

BISCACCIANTI,  Eliza  (Ostinelli),  vocalist,
b.  in  Boston  in  1825.  Louis  Ostinelli,  her  father,
leader  of  orchestras,  married,  in  April,  1822,  the
daughter  of  Mr.  Hewett,  a  musical  composer  of
Boston.  Eliza  went  to  Italy  in  1843,  studied  under
the  best  masters,  married  Signer  Biscaccianti,  also
a  musician,  and  in  May,  1847,  made  her  first  ap-
pearance at  Milan  with  success.  She  made  her
debut  in  America  at  the  Astor  place  opera-house,
New  York,  in  February,.  1848,  and  in  Philadelphia,
1  March,  1848,  at  the  Chestnut  street  theatre,  as
Lucia.  She  sang  in  the  principal  cities  of  the
United  States  with  success,  and  became  an  espe-
cial favorite  in  California.

BISHOP,  Anna,  singer,  b.  in  London,  England,
in  1814 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  18  March,  1884.  She
was  the  daughter  of  a  drawing-master  named  Ri-
viere, studied  the  piano-forte  under  Moscheles,  be-
came distinguished  for  her  singing,  in  1881  became
the  wife  of  the
composer  Sir  Hen-
ry Rowley  Bishop,
and  took  a  promi-
nent part  in  the
oratorios  and  coun-
try festivals  in
England.  On  the
advice  of  the  harp-
ist Bochsa,  she  cul-
tivated Italian  mu-
sic, and,  eloping
with  him  in  1889,
she  sang  in  the
principal  cities  of
the  continent  till
1843,  and  then  in
Italy,  where  she
achieved  success  as
an  operatic  singer.
In  1846  she  returned  to  England,  and  in  1847
crossed  the  Atlantic  and  sang  with  great  applause
in  the  United  States,  Canada,  and  Mexico.  In
1855,  while  making  a  tour  in  Australia,  Bochsa,
her  companion,  died.  After  her  return  to  the
United  States  she  married  Martin  Schultz,  a  mer-
chant of  New  York.  She  continued  to  sing  in
American  cities,  where  her  high  and  flexible  so-
prano voice  was  highly  appreciated,  and  imide
various  tours  to  Australia,  China,  the  East  Indies,
and  Spanish-American  countries.  In  February,
1866,  on  a  voyage  from  Honolulu  to  China,  the
vessel  was  wrecked  on  a  coral  reef,  and  she  suf-
fered forty  days  of  privation,  but  reached  the  La-
drone  ishinds  in  safety,  whence  she  embarked  for
Manila  and  sang  there  and  in  China,  although
her  wardrobe  and  ]ewelry  were  lost.  In  1868  she
lost  her  voice  and  retired  from  the  concert  stage.


Ly^i^2.^yui^  ty<At^',^'n^<r^


270


BISHOP


BISSELL


— Robert  Nicholas  Charles  Bochsa,  the  musi-
cian with  whom  Madam  Bishop  eloped,  was  born
in  Montmedy,  France,  in  1789,  and  was  a  performer
in  public  upon  the  piano-forte  when  seven  years  of
age.  He  was  first  harpist  in  Napoleon's  private
concerts,  and  wrote  about  150  compositions  for  the
harp  in  a  new  and  superior  style.  In  1822  he  be-
came director  of  the  oratorios  in  London.

BISHOP,  George,  author,  joined  the  Quakers
in  1654,  and  between  IGGO  and  1668  published  sev-
eral works  on  their  doctrines.  He  published  in
1661  "  New  England  judged,  being  a  Brief  Rela-
tion of  the  Sutferings  of  the  Quakers  in  that  part
of  America  from  the  Beginning  of  the  5th  Month,
1656,  to  the  End  of  the  10th  Month,  1660."  A
second  part  appeared  in  1667 ;  and  both  were  re-
printed in  1703,  with  "An  Answer  to  Cotton
Mather's  Abuses,"  by  John  Whiting.

BISHOP,  Joel  Prentiss,  author,  b.  in  Volney,
Oswego  CO.,  N.  Y.,  in  1814.  He  has  published
"  Commentaries  on  the  Law  of  Marriage  and  Di-
vorce" (1856);  "Criminal  Law"  (Boston,  2  vols.,
1856-'8) ;  "  Thoughts  for  the  Times  "  (1863) ;  "  Se-
cession and  Slavery  "  (1864) ;  "  Commentaries  on
Criminal  Procedure  "  (1866) ;  "  First  Book  of  the
Law  "  (1868) ;  "  Directions  and  Forms  " ;  "  Law  of
Married  Women  "  ;  "  Statutory  Crimes  " ;  "  On  the
Written  Laws  " ;  and  "  Prosecution  and  Defence,"
with  a  general  index  to  the  author's  series  of  crimi-
nal law  works  (Boston,  1885).

BISHOP,  Levi,  lawyer,  b.  in  Russell,  Hampden
CO.,  Mass.,  15  Oct..  1815 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,,  23
Dec,  1881.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, and  in  1880  became  apprentice  clerk  in  a
leather  manufactory.  He  removed  to  Detroit,
Mich.,  in  1836,  and  having  lost  his  right  arm  by
an  accident  in  1839,  left  his  business,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1842.  He  was
elected  justice  of  the  peace  in  1842,  and  from  1846
till  1858  was  president  of  the  Detroit  board  of  edu-
cation. The  largest  school  building  in  Detroit
now  bears  his  name,  and  he  was  a  regent  of  the  state
university  from  1857  till  1863.  He  was  a  promi-
nent war  democrat,  urging  the  suppression  of  the
rebellion  at  every  hazard.  In  1864  he  was  the
democratic  candidate  for  attorney-general.  He
was  much  interested  in  the  early  history  of  the
west,  organized  the  Detroit  Pioneer  Society  in
1871,  and  was  its  president  till  his  death.  He  was
a  delegate  to  the  International  Congress  of  Ameri-
canists at  Luxembourg,  France,  in  1876,  and  in  1877
was  appointed  historiographer  of  Detroit.  In  this
capacity  he  wrote  more  than  fifty  historical  papers,
under  the  title  "  Historical  Notes."  On  15  July,
1880,  he  was  made  corresponding  member  of  the
Royal  Historical  Society  of  Great  Britain.  Mr,
Bishop  lectured  occasionally  on  literary  topics,  and
published  "  The  Dignity  of  Labor,"  a  poem  (1864),
and  "Teuchsa  Grondie,"  a  poem  in  twenty-eight
cantos,  devoted  to  the  Indian  lore  of  Detroit  river
(1870).  He  also  translated  from  the  French  sev-
eral historical  works  concerning  the  early  settle-
ment of  the  northwest.

BISHOP,  Robert  Hamilton,  clergyman,  b.
near  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  26  July,  1777;  d.  at
College  Hill,  Ohio,  29  April,  1855.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  university  of  Edinburgh  in  1797,  and
came  in  1801,  at  the'soiicitation  of  Dr.  Mason,  to
New  York  city,  where  he  preached  a  while  in  a
Presbyterian  church.  He  then  went  as  a  mission-
ary to  the  northwest  territory,  and  arrived  at  Chil-
licothe  in  1802.  He  became  a  professor  in  Tran-
sylvania college  in  1804.  In  consequence  of  diffi-
culties with  the  Associate  Reformed  synod,  which
he  had  joined  upon  coming  to  America,  he  con-


nected himself  in  1819  with  the  central  assembly
and  accepted  the  presidency  of  Miami  college  in
1824,  in  which  he  remained  till  1841.  He  con-
tinued there  as  professor  of  history  and  political
science  until  1844,  and  after  that  filled  the  chair
of  history  and  political  economy  in  Farmers'  col-
lege, near  Cincinnati.  His  writings  include  "  Ser-
mons "  (1808) ;  "  Memoirs  of  David  Rice  "  (1824) ;
"  Elements  of  Logic  "  (1833) ;  "  Philosophy  of  the
Bible  "  (1833) ;  "  Science  of  Government ''  (1839) ;
and  "  Western  Peacemaker  "  (1839).

BISHOP,  William  Darius,  commissioner  of
the  patent-office,  b.  in  Bloomfield,  N.  J.,  14  Sept.,
1827.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1849,  studied
law,  and  engaged  in  railroad  enterprises,  becoming
president  of  the  Naugatuck  railroad  company.  In
1856  he  was  elected  a  delegate  to  congress  from
Connecticut,  and  was  chairman  of  the  committee
on  manufactures.  On  23  May,  1859,  he  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  of  patents,  but  resigned  that
office  in  January,  1860.  He  was  elected  for  the
second  time  to  the  Connecticut  legislature  in  18G6,
and  subsequently  held  important  state  offices.  He
was  for  a  time  president  of  the  New  York,  New
Haven,  and  Hartford  railroad  co.,  residing  in
Bridgeport,  Conn.

BISHOP,  William  Henry,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
1803 ;  d,  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  2  July,  1873.  He  was
a  preacher  in  the  Zion  African  Methodist  Episco-
pal church,  and  afterward  became  a  bishop  in  that
denomination.

BISHOP,  William  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  7  Jan.,  1847.  lie  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1867,  and  has  published  a  romance  entitled
"  Detmold  "  (Boston,  1879) ;  "  The  House  of  a  Mer-
chant Prince,"  a  novel  of  New  York  life  (1882) ;
"  Choy  Susan,  and  other  Stories  "  (1884) ;  a  volume
of  travels  entitled  "  Old  Mexico  and  her  Lost  Prov-
inces "  (New  York,  1884) ;  "  Fish  and  Men  in  the
Maine  Islands  "  (1885).  He  is  a  frequent  contfibu-
tor  to  periodical  literature.  His  novels  first  ap-
peared as  serials  in  the  "Atlantic  Monthly"  or
"  Harper's  Magazine."  In  1886  he  published  seri-
ally in  the  former  periodical  a  new  novel,  entitled
"  The  Golden  Justice."

BISPHAM,  Henry  Collins,  artist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  in  1841.  He  studied  in  Philadelphia
under  William  T.  Richards,  and  in  Paris  as  the
pupil  of  Otto  Webber.  In  1869  he  sent  to  the
national  academy  "  On  the  Campagna,"  "  To  the
Front,"  and  "  Noonday  Rest."  In  1875  he  exhib-
ited "  A  Misty  Day  "  ;  and  in  1878  "Tigris"  and
"  Landscape  and  Cattle."  He  excels  in  pastoral
cattle-scenes  and  in  wild  landscapes  with  animals.
Among  his  other  paintings  are  "  Dead  in  the  Des-
ert" (1867);  "Roman  Bull"  (1867);  "The  Wine-
Cart"  (1868);  "The  Raid"  (1866);  "Hunted
Down"  (1871);  "Crouching  Lion";  and  "The
Stampede"  (1873).

BISSELL,  Clark,  jurist,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,
in  1782;  d.  in  Norwalk,  Conn.,  15  Sept.,  1857.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806,  and  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  that  college  in  1847.  He
was  a  lawyer,  and  during  most  of  his  life  resided
at  Norwalk.  From  1829  till  1839  he  was  judge  of
the  supreme  court  of  Connecticut,  and  from  1847
till  1855  professor  of  law  at  Yale.  In  1847-  4^
he  was  governor  of  Connecticut.

BISSELL,  Daniel,  soldier,  d.  in  St.  Loms,  Mo..
14  Dec,  1833.  He  was  appointed  a  cadet  from  Con-
necticut in  September,  1791 ;  became  ensign,  U
April,  1792;  lieutenant  in  January,  1794;  captaui
in  January,  1799;  lieutenant-colonel,  18  Ang-,
1808 ;  colonel,  15  Aug.,  1812 ;  brigadier-general,  «  ■
March,  1814. He  commanded  in  the  successful  al-


BISSELL


BLACK


271


fair  at  Lyons  Creek,  U.  C,  19  Oct.,  1814 ;  in  May,
1815,  became  colonel  of  the  1st  infantry,  with  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general,  and  was  transferred  to
the  2d  artillery  on  16  Jan.,  1826.

BISSELL,  Josiah  Wolcott,  engineer,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  12  May,  1818.  He  was  the  son
of  Josiah  Bissell,  an  early  settler  of  Rochester,  N.
y,,  who  employed  his  wealth,  derived  from  land
speculations,  lor  benevolent  objects,  and  who  es-
tablished a  line  of  stage-coaches  that  did  not  run
on  Sundays.  He  was  engaged  before  the  civil  war
in  banking,  and  in  architectural  and  engineering
work.  During  the  war  he  was  colonel  of  an  en-
gineer regiment  attached  to  Gen.  Pope's  army,  and
superintended  the  construction  of  the  canal  that
enabled  the  national  gun-boats  to  approach  the
confederate  works  on  Island  No.  10  in  Mississippi
river.  After  his  return  to  civil  life  he  took  a  promi-
nent part  in  the  enterprise  of  collecting  and  index-
ing records  of  real  estate  titles,  so  as  to  simplify
searches,  and  was  engaged  in  that  work  in  Cincin-
nati, and  afterward  in  Boston.

BISSELL,  Simon  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Ver-
mont, 28  Oct.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  18  Feb.,
1883.  He  became  a  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy
6  Nov.,  1824,  and  was  promoted  to  be  a  lieutenant
9  Dec,  1837 ;  commander,  14  Sept.,  1855 ;  captain,
16  July,  1862 ;  commodore,  10  Oct.,  1866.  He  was
attached  to  the  sloop  "  Albany "  during  the  war
with  Mexico,  and  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz.  He  commanded  the  sloop  "  Cyane."  Pacific
squadron,  in  1861-2;  was  on  duty  in  the  navy-
yard  at  Mare  island,  Cal.,  in  1863-'4 ;  commanded
the  sloop-of-war  " Monongahela "  in  1866-7 ;  was
on  special  service  in  1869 ;  and  was  placed  on  the
retired  list  on  1  March,  1870.

BISSELL,  WillLam  H.,  statesman,  b.  in  Hart-
wick,  near  Cooperstown,  X.  Y.,  25  April,  1811 ;  d.
in  Springfield,  III,  18  March,  1860.  He  was  self-
educated,  attending  school  in  summer  and  teaching
in  the  winter ;  was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  medi-
cal college  in  1835,  and  practised  medicine  two
years  in  Steuben  co.,  N.  Y.,  and  three  years  in  Mon-
roe CO.,  111.  He  was  elected  to  the  Illinois  legisla-
ture in  1840,  and  distinguished  himself  as  a  forcible
and  ready  debater.  He  studied  law,  and  practised
successfully  in  Belleville,  St.  Clair  co.,  and  became
prosecuting  attorney  in  1844.  He  was  a  captain  in
the  2d  Illinois  volunteers  in  the  Mexican  war,  and
distinguished  himself  at  Buena  Vista.  He  was  a
representative  in  congress  from  Illinois  as  an  inde-
pendent democrat,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3
March,  1845.  He  separated  from  the  democratic
party  on  the  passage  of  the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill,
and  was  chosen  governor  as  a  republican  in  1856.
He  was  re-elected,  and  died  in  office.  While  he  was
in  congress  his  resistance  of  the  ]Missouri  compro-
mise involved  him  in  a  controversy  with  the  south-
ern democrats,  and  hot  words  passed  between  him
and  Jefferson  Davis  on  the  subject  of  the  bravery
of  the  northern  as  compared  with  the  southern
soldiers,  which  led  to  a  challenge  from  Mr.  Davis.
In  accepting  the  challenge  to  a  duel,  Mr.  Bissell
chose  as  the  weapons  muskets,  at  tliirty  paces,
whereupon  the  friends  of  Mr.  Davis  interfered.

BISSELL,  WiUiain  Henry  Augustus,  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Randolph,  Vt.,  14  Nov.,  1814.  He  was
graduated  at  Vermont  university  in  1836,  and  was
ordained  deacon  29  Sept.,  1839,  and  priest  in  Au-
gust, 1840.  He  was  rector  of  Trinity  church.  West
Troy,  N.  Y.,  in  1841-'5 ;  of  Grace  church,  Lvons,
^.  Y.,  m  1845-'8 ;  and  of  Trinitv  church,  Geneva.
^.  Y.,  in  1848-'68.  He  was  elected  bishop  of  Ver-
mont, and  consecrated  in  Christ's  church,  Mont-
poher,  3  June,  1868.


BIXBY,  John  Mnnson,  lawyer,  b.  at  Fairfield,
Conn.,  in  February,  1800 ;  d.  in  New  York,  22  Nov.,
1876.  He  studied  law  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  and  be-
gan practice  in  New  York  city.  After  nearly  thirty
years'  practice  in  New  York  city,  he  retired  in
1849.  He  married  a  cousin  of  Edgar  Allan  Poe,
and  was  the  author  of  two  novels,  "  Standish,  the
Puritan  "  (New  York,  1850),  and  "  Overing,  or  the
Heir  of  Wycherly  "  (1852),  both  of  which  were  pub-
lished under  the  pen-name  of  E.  Grayson.  After
his  retirement  he  invested  in  real  estate  on  Fifth
avenue.  Thirty-ninth  street,  and  Broadway,  which
increased  greatly  in  value.  His  estate  was  esti-
mated after  his  death  at  1 1,800,000.— His  only  son,
Robert  F.,  receives  an  annual  ground-rent  from
the  union  league  club  of  a  larger  amount  than  his
father  paid  for  the  property  on  which  the  edifice  is
erected,  on  Fifth  avenue.

BLACK,  James,  candidate  for  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  in  Lewisburg,  Pa,,  23  Sept.,  1823.
He  was  educated  at  Lewisburg  academy,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1846,  and  practised  in  Lancas-
ter. He  joined  a  temperance  society  in  1840,  aided
in  organizing  the  sons  of  temperance  in  Lancaster
city  in  1846,  and  in  1852  was  chairman  of  a  county
committee  appointed  to  secure  the  election  of  mem-
bers of  the  legislature  favorable  to  the  enactment  of
a  prohibitory  liquor-law  in  Pennsylvania.  He  took
a  leading  part  in  the  organization  of  the  good
templars,  was  the  delegate  that  presented  to  Presi-
dent Lincoln  in  1864  the  memorial  praying  for  the
abolition  of  the  whiskey  ration,  and  was  the  author
of  the  "  cider  tract."  In  February,  1867,  as  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  resolutions  in  a  temper-
ance convention  held  in  Harrisburg,  he  first
advanced  the  proposition  to  form  a  distinct  tem-
perance party.  He  became  president  of  the  Penn-
sylvania state  temperance  union,  organized  at  the
same  convention,  was  one  of  the  committee  that
called  a  national  convention  to  organize  a  prohibi-
tion party,  and  was  elected  president  of  the  conven-
tion, which  met  in  Chicago,  1  Sept.,  1869.  The
nominating  convention  that  was  held  in  Columbus,
Ohio,  on  22  Feb.,  1872,  made  him  the  first  nominee
of  the  party  for  president  of  the  United  States,
the  Rev.  John  Russell,  of  Michigan,  receiving  the
nomination  for  vice-president.  The  ticket  received
5,608  votes  at  the  polls.  In  1876  he  was  chairman
of  the  executive  committee  of  the  party,  then  called
the  national  prohibition  reform  party.  Mr.  Black
was  originator  of  the  scheme  to  establish  a  temper-
ance publication  society,  and  drew  up  the  constitu-
tion of  the  national  temperance  society  and  publi-
cation house.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Is  there  a  Ne-
cessity for  a  Prohibition  Partv?"  (Philadelphia,
1876);  "A  Historv  of  the  Prohibition  Party"
(1880) ;  and  "  The  Prohibition  Party  "  (1885).

BLACK,  James  Rnsh,  physician,  b.  near  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  3  March.  1827.  His  education  was
received  at  Granville  College  (now  Dennison  Uni-
versity), Ohio  Medical  College,  and  the  medical
department  of  the  University  of  New  York,  where
he  received  his  degree  in  1849.  He  resided  first  in
Milwaukee,  Wis.,  and  then  in  Ohio,  at  Linville  and
Cambridge,  settling  in  Newark,  Ohio,  in  1863.
During  the  civil  war  he  was  surgeon  of  the  113th
Ohio  infantry,  and  afterward  medical  director  on
Gen.  Gilbert's  staff.  He  has  since  devoted  his  at-
tention chiefly  to  fetiology  and  hygiene,  and  in  1876
was  called  to  fill  the  chair  of  hygiene  at  Columbus
Medical  College.  He  is  a  member  of  numerous
medical  societies,  including  the  American  Medical
Association  and  the  Ohio  State  Medical  Society.
Dr.  Black  has  written  for  the  medical  and  scien-
tific journals,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Ten  Laws  of


272


BLACK


BLACKBURN


Health,  and  Guide  to  Protection  against  Epidemic
Diseases  "  (Philadelphia,  3d  ed.,  1^85).

BLACK,  Jeremiah  Sullivan,  jurist,  b.  in  the
Glades,  Somerset  co..  Pa.,  10  Jan.,  1810 ;  d.  at  his
home  in  York,  Pa.,  19  Aug.,  1883.  His  ancestry
was  Scotch-Irish.  James  Black,  his  grandfather,
came  to  America  from  the  north  of  Ireland,  and
settled  in  Somerset  co.,  Pa.,  where,  in  1778,  Henry
Black,  father  of  Jeremiah,  a  man  of  note  in  his
day,  was  born.  Jeremiah's  early  education  was
obtained  at  school  near  his  father's  farm. He

studied  law,  was
taken  into  the
office  of  Chaun-
cey  Forward,  a
lawyer  in  Somer-
set county,  and
was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1831.
In  1838  he  mar-
ried a  daughter
of  Mr.  Forward.
After  an  active
and  successful
practice  of  eleven
years,  he  was
raised  to  the
bench.  He  was
a  Jeffersonian
^  <P  x/3k7  /ly  flemocrat.  and
0<1  » Cv  t  '^  <y  /Kjtyy^C was nommated

by  a  democrat-
ic governor,  in
April,  1842,  for  president-judge  of  the  district  where
he  lived,  which  post  he  held  for  nine  years.  In
1851  Judge  Black  was  elected  one  of  the  supreme
court  judges  of  Pennsylvania.  After  serving  the
short  term  of  three  years,  he  was  re-elected,  in  1854,
for  a  full  term  of  fifteen  years.  On  the  accession
of  James.  Buchanan  to  the  presidency,  in  1857,
Judge  Black  became  attorney-general.  He  was
very  industrious  and  successful,  in  connection  with
Edwin  M.  Stanton,  in  protecting  the  interests  of
the  nation  against  false  claimants  to  grants  of  land
made  by  the  Mexican  government  to  settlers  in
California  before  that  country  came  under  the
control  of  the  United  States.  When  the  seces-
sion crisis  arrived,  in  1860-1,  Buchanan  held  that
there  was  no  authority  for  coercmg  a  state,  if  it
chose  to  secede  and  set  up  as  an  independent  gov-
ernment ;  but  Attorney-General  Black  was  of  the
opinion  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  government  to
put  down  insurrection,  and  that  the  constitution
contained  no  provision  for  a  dissolution  of  the
union  m  any  manner  whatever.  Gen.  Cass  having
resigned  as  secretary  of  state  in  December.  1860,
Judge  Black  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy,
Edwin  M.  Stanton  taking  the  post  of  attorney-
general.  Judge  Black  occupied  this  office  during
the  remainder  of  Buchanan's  administration,  and
exerted  himself  to  save  the  government  from  fall-
ing into  the  hands  of  the  secessionists.  In  March,
1861,  when  Abrahanl  Lincoln  became  president,
Judge  Black  retired  from  public  life.  He  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  supreme  court  reporter,  but  soon  re-
signed that  office,  and  entered  again  upon  the
practice  of  law  at  his  home,  near  York,  Pa.  He
was  engaged  in  several  prominent  lawsuits  during
the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life,  and  retained  his
vigor  and  professional  skill  to  the  close  of  his
career.  The  Vanderbilt  will  contest,  the  Milliken
case,  and  the  McGarrahan  claim  were  among  the
more  noted  cases  in  which  he  was  engaged.  He
was  a  contributor  to  periodical  literature,  fur-
nished an  account  of  the  Erie  railway  litigation.


argued  the  third-terra  question  in  magazine  arti-
cles, and  had  a  newspaper  discussion  with  Jeffer-
son Davis. — His  son,  Chaiiiicey  Forward,  was
elected  lieutenant-governor  of  Pennsylvania  in
1882,  and  in  1886  was  the  democratic  candidate  for
the  governorship.

BLACK,  John,  diplomatist,  b.  in  New  York  in
1792 :  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1873.  He  was
for  forty  years  a  resident  of  the  city  of  Mexico
where  he  was  a  long  time  United  States  consul'
and  where  he  performed  the  duties  of  minister
duiing  the  Mexican  war.

BLACK,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  England
in  1760 ;  d.  8  Sept.,  1834.  He  emigrated  to  Nova
Scotia  in  1775,  and  there  became  a  Wesleyan
Methodist  preacher,  and  the  founder  of  the  ^V'es-
leyan  church  in  that  province.  Afterward  he  was
the  general  superintendent  of  the  Wesleyan  mis-
sions in  British  America.

BLACKBURN,  Gideon,  clergyman,  b.  in  Au-
gusta CO.,  Va.,  27  Aug.,  1772 ;  d.  in  Carlinville,  111.,
23  Aug.,  1838,  He  was  educated  at  Martin  acade-
my, Washington  co.,  Tenn.,  licensed  to  preach  by
Abingdon  presbytery  in  1795,  and  settled  many
years  at  Marysville,  Tenn.  He  was  minister  of
Franklin,  Tenn.,  in  1811-3,  and  of  Louisville,
Ky.,  in  1823-7.  He  passed  the  last  forty  years  of
his  life  in  the  western  states,  in  preachingli  organ-
izing churches,  and,  from  1803  to  1809,  during  a
part  of  each  year,  in  his  mission  to  the  Cherokees,
establishing  a  school  at  Hywassee.  He  established
a  school  in  Tennessee  in  1806,  and  from  1827  till
1830  was  president  of  Center  college,  Kentucky.

BLACKBURN,  Joseph  Clay  Styles,  U.  S.
senator,  b.  in  Woodford  county,  Ky.,  1  Oct.,  1838.
He  was  graduated  at  Center  college,  Danville,  Ky.,
in  1857,  studied  law  with  George  B.  Kincaid  in
Lexington,  Ky.,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1858,
and  practised  in  Chicago  till  1860,  when  he  re-
turned to  his  nativl  county.  He  entered  the  Con-
federate army  in  1861,  and  served  through  the  war.
In  1865  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  and  in
1871-3  was  in  the  Kentucky  legislature.  In  1875
he  entered  congress  as  a  Democrat.  He  was  re-
elected in  1876,  1878,  1880,  and  1882,  and  became
U.  S.  senator  in  1885.— His  half-brother,  Luke
(1816-'87),  was  governor  of  Kentucky  in  1879.

BLACKBURN,  William,  pioneer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1814 ;  d.  in  California  in  1867.  He  went
to  California  in  1845,  took  part  as  volunteer  in  the
conquest  of  that  country  in  1846-'7,  and  was  ap-
pointed alcalde  at  Santa  Cruz  immediately  there-
after. In  this  office  he  served  two  years,  and  in
1850  was  elected  county  judge  of  Santa  Cruz
CO.  He  was  one  of  the  best  representatives  of  the
large  class  of  early  popular  alcaldes  in  the  new
territory,  legally  untrained  but  socially  important
men,  who  administered  justice  after  a  manner  less
accurate  in  a  technical  sense  than  useful  for  the
needs  of  the  singular  comnmnity  of  those  days.
His  decisions  were  in  some  cases  widely  discussed,
and  are  often  quoted  in  historical  sketches.

BLACKBURN,  William  Jasper,  editor,  b.  in
Randolph  co..  Ark.,  24  July,  1820.  He  was  early
left  an  orphan,  and  received  his  education  in  public
schools,  also  studving  during  the  years  1838-'9  m
Jackson  College,  Columbia,  Tenn. ;  after  which  he
became  a  printer,  and  worked  in  various  offices  m
Arkansas  and  Louisiana.  Later  he  settled  in  lio-
mer.  La.,  where  he  established  "  Blackburn's  Homer
Iliad,"  in  which  he  editorially  condemned  the  as-
sault on  Charles  Sumner  bv  Preston  S.  Brooks,
being  the  onlv  southern  editor  that  denouncea
that  action.  Although  born  m  a  slave  state,  he
was  always  opposed  to  slavery,  and  his  office  wa"


BLACKBURN

twice  mobbed  therefor.  The  "  Iliad  "  was  the  only
loyal  paper  published  during  the  civil  war  in  the
-fulf  states.  He  was  a  member  of  the  constitutional
'onvention  of  Louisiana  convened  in  18{)7,  and  was
lected  as  a  republican  to  congress,  serving  from
17  July,  1868,  till  3  March,  1869.  From  1872  till
1876  he  was  a  member  of  the  Louisiana  state  sen-
ite.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Little  Rock,
.\ri<.,  and  became  owner  and  editor  of  the  Little
Rock  "  Republican."  He  received  the  nomination
)f  the  republicans  for  the  state  senate,  but  failed
;o  secure  his  seat,  though  he  claimed  to  have  been
'lected  by  2,000  majority.  Mr.  Blackburn  is  known
IS  an  occasional  writer  of  verse.

BLACKBURN,  William  Maxwell,  clergy-
nan,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Ind.,  30  Dec,  1828.  He  was
,'raduated  at  Hanover  college.  Lid.,  in  1850,  and  at
Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1854.  He  was
)astor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Erie,  Pa.,
'rem  1856  till  1863,  and  at  Trenton,  N.  J.,  from
[854  till  1868,  in  which  year  he  was  called  to  the
'hair  of  biblical  and  ecclesiastical  history  in  the
Presbyterian  theological  seminary  of  the  north-
vest  at  Chicago,  111.,  which  he  held  until  1881,
vhen  he  became  pastor  of  the  Central  church  in
L'incinnati,  Ohio.  In  1884  he  was  called  to  the
)residency  of  the  territorial  university  of  North
Jakota,  and  in  1886  became  president  of  Pierre
miversity  at  East  Pierre,  Dak.  He  published
pecial  studies  in  religious  history  and  biography
'.nd  numerous  story-books  for  the  young,  and  has
tontributed  to  the  "  Princeton  Review "  and  the
'American  Presbyterian  Review."  His  principal
)ublished  works  are  "  Exiles  of  Madeira  "  (Phila-
lelphia,  1862) ;  "  Judas  the  Maccabee  and  the  As-
nonean  Princes"  (1864);  "The  Rebel  Prince"
1864); "William Farel  and  his  Times"  (1866);

•  The  College  Days  of  Calvin  "  (1866) ;  "  Young
Mvin  in  Paris"  (1866);  "  Ulrich  Zwingli,  the
'atriotie  Reformer"  (1868);  "Geneva's  Shield"
New  York,  1868) ;  "  St.  Patrick  and  the  Early  Irish
'hurch  "  (Philadelphia,  1869) ;  "  Admiral  Coligny
.nd  the  Rise  of  the  Huguenots"  (1869);  "The
riieban Legion" (1871); and  a  comprehensive

•  History  of  the  Christian  Church  from  its  Origin
0  the  Present  Time."  He  also  wrote  "  Ancient
ichoolmaster  " ;  "  A  Curious  Chapter  and  how  its
Prophecies  were  Fulfilled";  "The  Benefit  of
Christ's  Death,"  and  the  "  Uncle  Aleck  "  series  of
woks  for  the  young,  including  "  Cherry  Bounce,"

Early  Watermelons,"  "The  Nevers,"  "Blind  Annie
jorrimer,"  and  "  Blood  on  the  Doorposts."

BLACKFORD,  Eugene  0.,  pisciculturist,  b.  in
viorristown,  :N.  J.,  8  Aug.,  1839.  He  was  educated
11  the  public  schools  and  trained  in  mercantile  life
II  New  York  city  from  the  age  of  fourteen,  and
vhen  about  twenty-five  years  of  age  embarked  in
usiness  as  a  fish-dealer  in  Fulton  market.  Through
lis  efforts  the  red  snapper,  whitebait,  pompano,
.nd  other  varieties  of  fish  were  first  introduced
nto  the  New  York  market,  and  the  methods  of
reezing,  shipping,  and  storing  fish  have  been  im-
)roved.  He  was  appointed  one  of  the  four  eoni-
nissioners  of  fish  and  fisheries  of  the  state  of  New
^ork  in  1879,  and  was  instrumental  in  establishing
^hatching-station  for  sea  and  fresh- water  fish  at
^old  Spring  harbor,  on  the  north  shore  of  Long
sland.  He  conducted  an  investigation  into  the
leerease  of  oysters  in  the  waters  of  New  York,  and
las  published  papers  on  whitebait  and  the  ques-
lon  of  legislative  protection  of  ocean  fisheries.

BLACKFORD,  Isaac  Newton,  jurist,  b.  in
iound  Brook,  N.  J.,  6  Nov.,  1786;  d.  in  Washing-
on,  D.  C,  31  Dec,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at
rmeeton  in 1806. After  completing his  legal

VOL. 1.— 18


BLACK  HAWK


373


studies  under  Gabriel  Ford,  of  Morristown,  N.  J.,
he  removed  to  Indiana,  and  in  1812  settled  in  Vin-
cennes.  He  was  clerk  of  the  territorial  legislature
in  1813;  judge  of  the  first  judicial  circuit,  1814-'5 ;
speaker  of  the  first  state  legislature,  1816 ;  judge
of  the  supreme  court  of  Indiana,  1819-'35 ;  and  a
judge  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims  from  March,
1855,  until  his  death.  His  reports  fill  eight  volumes.
BLACK  HAWK  (Ma-ka-tae-mish-kia-kiak),  a
noted  chief  of  the  Sac  and  Fox  tribes  of  Indians,
though  by  birth  a  Pottawattamie,  b.  in  Kaskaskia,
111.,  in  1767;  d.  at  his  camp  on  the  river  Des
Moines,  3  Oct.,  1838.  At  fifteen  he  was  ranked
with  the  braves,  and  became  a  successful  leader  in
expeditions  against  the  Osage  and  Cherokee  tribes.
About  1788  he  succeeded,  as  head  chief  of  the  Sacs,
his  father,  who
had  been  killed
by  a  Cherokee.
In  1804  the
Sacs  and  Foxes
signed  at  St.
Louis  a  treaty
with  Gen.  Har-
rison, by  which
for  an  annui-
ty of  $1,000  a
year  they  trans-
ferred to  the  U.
S.  government
their  lands,  ex-
tending about
700  miles  along
Mississippi  riv-
er. This  ar-
rangement was

repudiated  by  Black  Hawk,  who  averred  that  the
chiefs  were  drunk  when  they  signed  the  treaty.
Moved  by  the  exhortations  of  the  Shawnee  prophet
Elskwatawa,  brother  of  Tecumseh,  and  by  the
presents  of  British  agents.  Black  Hawk,  with  the
title  of  general,  joined  the  British  with  500  war-
riors during  the  war  of  1812 ;  but  a  repulse  in
a  battle  near  Detroit,  and  an  unsuccessful  attack
on  a  fort,  surprised  and  disgusted  the  red  men,
who  soon  tired  of  the  service.  The  cession  of  their
territory  was  ratified  by  another  treaty  made  in
1815  after  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  and  by  a
third  treaty,  which  Black  Hawk  himself  signed  at
St.  Louis  in  1816.  In  1823  the  main  body  of  the
Sacs  and  Foxes  removed,  under  the  lead  of  Chief
Keokuk,  to  their  reservation  across  the  Mississippi ;
but  Black  Hawk  and  his  followers  remained.  By
the  new  treaty  made  at  Prairie  du  Chien,  15  July,
1830,  signed  by  chiefs  of  various  tribes,  among
them  Keokuk,  their  lands  east  of  the  Mississippi
became  the  property  of  the  whites.  Their  removal
west  was  opposed  by  Black  Hawk,  who,  when  the
crops  of  his  people  were  ploughed  up  and  the  lands
seized  for  the  white  settlers  who  had  purchased
the  sites  of  their  villages,  threatened  retaliation.
The  militia  of  Illinois  were  then  called  out,  and  on
25  June,  1831,  a  force  under  Gen.  Gaines  compelled
the  Indians  to  depart.  Black  Hawk  returned  in
the  spring  across  the  Mississippi.  After  a  band
of  fifty  warriors  was  attacked  and  scattered  by  the
militia,  they  separated  into  squads  and  began  to
massacre  the  whites.  Gen.  Scott  marched  a  force
of  U.  S.  troops  against  them,  but  was  hindered  in
his  operations  by  an  outbreak  of  cholera  among  the
soldiers.  The  Indians  were  driven  back  to  Wis-
consin river,  where  they  su^;tained  a  defeat,  in-
flicted by  Gen.  Dodge,  on  21  July,  1832.  They
were  completely  defeated  at  the  river  Bad  Axe,  1
and  2  Aug.,  by  Gen.  Atkinson,  and  the  surrender  of


274


BLACKMAN


BLACKWELL


Black  Hawk  took  place  on  the  27th.  Black  Hawk,
his  two  sons,  and  seven  other  head  warriors  who
were  detained  as  hostages  were  taken  through  the
principal  eastern  cities,  and  then  confined  in  For-
tress Monroe  until  5  June,  1833.  Black  Hawk
was  deposed,  and  Keokuk  made  chief  of  the  Sacs
and  Foxes,  who  to  the  number  of  about  3,000  were
removed  to  the  region  about  Fort  Des  Moines.
A  "  Life  of  Black  Hawk  "  from  his  own  lips,  edit-
ed by  J.  B.  Patterson,  was  published  in  1834.  See
his  "  Life,"  by  Benjamin  Drake,  also  Drake's  "  In-
dian Biography,"  and  "Life  of  Black  Hawk,"  by
W.  J.  Snelling.

BLACKMAN,  Georg-e  Curtis,  surgeon,  b.  in
Newtown,  Conn.,  20  April,  1819;  d.  in  Avondale,
Ohio,  19  July,  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  the  col-
lege of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New  York  city,  in
1840,  and  in  1854  became  professor  of  surgery  in
the  medical  college  of  Ohio,  at  Cincinnati.  During
the  war  he  served  as  an  army  surgeon.  He  was  a
bold  and  skilful  operator,  and  an  able  writer  and
lecturer.  He  translated  and  edited  Vidal's  "  Treat-
ise on  Venereal  Disease  "  (New  York,  1854),  edited
a  new  edition  of  Mott's  translation  of  Velpeau's
"  Surgery,"  with  notes  and  additions  of  his  own,
and  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  medical  journals.
He  was  a  member  of  the  society  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  London.

BLACKMAN,  Learner,  missionary,  b.  in  New
Jersey  about  1781 ;  d.  in  Ohio  in  1815.'  He  entered
tha  ministry  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
1800 :  and  it  is  said  that  the  people  among  whom
he  was  at  first  sent,  interpreting  his  surname  liter-
ally, thought  they  were  to  have  a  negro  for  their
preacher.  His  appearance  dispelled  their  fears,
and  he  soon  became  popular.  After  preaching  two
years  in  Delaware,  he  removed  to  the  west,  and  in
1805  was  sent  as  a  missionary  to  Natchez,  Miss.,
then  in  a  wild  country,  inhabited  by  Indians  and
pioneers.  To  reach  his  destination  he  travelled
800  miles  on  horseback.  His  labors  did  much  to
establish  Methodism  in  that  section  of  the  coun-
try. In  1808  he  went  to  Tennessee,  where  he
labored  with  zeal  and  success.  In  1815,  while  he
was  crossing  the  Ohio  river  at  Cincinnati  in  a  flat-
boat,  his  horses  became  frightened  and  plunged
into  the  water.  In  the  effort  to  hold  them,  Mr.
Blackman  was  dragged  overboard  and  drowned.

BLACKSTONE,  William,  pioneer,  d.  in  Reho-
both,  Mass.,  26  May,  1675.  He  is  supposed  to  have
been  a  graduate  of  Emmanuel  college,  Cambridge,
in  1617,  and  a  clergyman  of  the  church  of  Eng-
land. He  moved,  about  1623,  from  Plymouth  to
the  peninsula  of  Shawmut,  or  Trimountain,  where
Boston  was  afterward  built,  and  was  living  there
alone  when  Gov.  Winthrop  arrived  at  Charles-
town  in  1630.  Blackstone  went  to  Winthrop,
told  him  of  an  excellent  spring  at  Shawmut.  and
invited  him  thither.  The  governor  and  the  greater
part  of  the  church  accepted  this  invitation.  The
land,  although  Blackstone  had  occupied  it  first,
belonged  to  the  governor  and  com  pan  v,  and  on
1  April,  1633,  they  gave  him  fifty  aeres^  near  his
house,  "  to  enjoy  forever."  Blackstone,  however,
did  not  like  his  Puritan  neighbors,  and  in  1634
sold  his  estate  to  the  company  for  c€30,  which  was
raised  by  assessing  six  shillings  or  more  on  each
inhabitant.  He  purchased  cattle  with  the  proceeds
of  his  sale,  and  removed  to  a  place  on  the  river
now  called  by  his  name,  a  few  miles  north  of  Provi-
dence. It  is  said  that  he  planted  the  first  orchard
in  Massachusetts,  and  also  the  first  in  Rhode  Island
Although  the  first  white  settler  of  Rhode  Island,
he  took  no  part  in  founding  the  colony.  He  did
not  sympathize  with  Roger  Williams,  and  always


C^Z-Z^^Cr-t-PtZ^l^i. -=<-  ■ 'y^^'


^-2<ir-6^»t,


acknowledged  allegiance  to  Massachusetts.  While
living  near  Providence  he  often  preached  in  that
town,  and,  when  he  grew  too  old  to  walk  there  lie
was  accustomed  to  ride  upon  a  bull,  as  he  owned
no  horse.  After  his  death  his  place  was  plundered
and  his  library  burned  by  the  Indians,  in  the  wai
of  1675.  The  cellar  of  his  house  is  still  shown,
and  a  small  eminence  near  by,  where  he  wa-i
accustomed  to  read,  is  known  as  "Study  Hill."
See  "  William  Blackstone  in  his  Relation  to  Massa-
chusetts and  Rhode  Island  "  (New  York,  1880).

BLACKWELL,  Antoinette  Louisa  Brown
author  and  minister,  b.  in  Henrietta,  Monroe  co '
N.  Y.,  20  May,  1825.  When  sixteen  years  old  she
taught  school,  and  then,  after  attending  Henrietta
academy,  went  to  Oberlin,  where  she  was  gradu-
ated in  1847.  She  spent  her  vacations  in  teaching
and  in  the  study  of  Hebrew  and  Greek.  In  the
winter  of  1844
she  taught  in
the  academy  at
Rochester,  N.
Y.,  where  she
delivered  her
first  lecture.
After  gradu-
ation she  en-
tered upon  a
course  of  theo-
logical study
at  Oberlin,  and
completed  it
in  1850.  When
she  asked  for
the  license  to

f)reach,  usual-
y  given  to
the  theologi-
cal students,  it

was  refused ;  but  she  preached  frequently  on  her
own  responsibility.  The  four  years  following  her
graduation  were  spent  in  study,  preaching,  and  in
lecturing  on  literary  subjects,  temperance,  and  the
abolition  of  slavery.  At  the  woman's  riglits  con\  r
tion  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  in  1850,  Miss  Brown  \
one  of  the  speakers,  and  she  has  since  been  pnni.:
nent  in  the  movement.  In  1853  she  was  regularly
ordained  pastor  of  the  orthodox  Congregational
church  of  South  Butler  and  Savannah,  Wayne  co.,
N.  Y.,  but  gave  up  her  charge  in  1854  on  account
of  ill  health  and  doctrinal  doubts.  In  1855  she  in-
vestigated the  character  and  causes  of  vice  in  New
York  city,  and  published,  in  a  New  York  journal,  a
series  of  sketches  entitled  "  Shadows  of  our  Social
System."  In  1856  she  married  Samuel  C.  Black-
well,  brother  of  Elizabeth  Blackwell.  They  have
six  children,  and  now  live  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.  Mrs.
Blackwell  still  preaches  occasionally,  and  has  be-
come a  Unitarian.  She  is  the  author  of  "Studies
in  General  Science " (New  York,  1869);  "The  Mar-
ket Woman":  "The  Island  Neighbors"  (187V-
"  The  Sexes  Throughout  Nature  "  (1875) ;  and  "  'I
Physical  Basis  of  Immortality"  (1876).  Sheji
in  preparation  (1886)  "  The  Many  and  the  One.

BLACKWELL,  Elizabeth,  physician,  b.  jn
Bristol,  England,  in  1821.  Her  father  emigrated
with  his  family  in  1832,  and  settled  in  New  \ork,
but  removed  in  1838  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  who<.-e  he
died  a  few  months  afterward,  leaving  a  widow  aiiu
nine  children  almost  destitute.  Elizabetli,  then
seventeen  years  old,  opened  a  school  in  connec-
tion with  two  elder  sisters,  and  conducted  it  suc-
cessfully for  several  years.  A  friend  now  sug-
gested that  she  should  study  medicine,  and  she  re-t
solved  to  become  a  physician. At  first  she  pursued


BLADEN


her  studies  in  private,  with  some  help  from  Dr.
John  Dixon,  of  Asheville,  N.  C,  in  whose  family  she
was  governess  for  a  year.  She  then  continued  her
studies  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  supporting  herself  by
teaching  music,  and  after  that  in  Philadelphia,  un-
der Dr.  Allen  and  Dr.  Warrington.  She  now  made
formal  application  to  the  medical  schools  of  Phila-
delphia, New  York,  and  Boston  for  admission  as  a
student'  but  in  each  instance  the  request  was  de-
nied, although  several  professors  avowed  interest
in  her  undertaking.  Rejecting  advice  to  adopt  an
assumed  name  and  male  attire,  she  persevered  in
her  attempt,  and  after  several  more  refusals  was
finally  admitted  to  the  medical  school  at  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  where  she  took  her  degree  of  M.  D.  in  regu-
lar course  in  January,  1849.  During  her  connec-
tion with  the  college,  when  not  in  attendance  there
upon  lectures,  she  pursued  a  course  of  clinical
study  in  Blockley  hospital,  Philadelphia.  After
graduation  she  went  to  Paris,  and  remained  there
six  months,  devoting  herself  to  the  study  and  prac-
tice of  midwifery.  The  next  autumn  she  was  ad-
mitted as  a  physician  to  walk  the  hospital  of  St.
Bartholomew  in  London,  and  after  nearly  a  year
spent  there  she  returned  to  New  York,  and  began
practice  in  1851.  In  1854,  with  her  sister,  i)r.
Emily  Blackwell,  she  organized  the  New  York  in-
firmary for  women  and  children.  In  1859  she  re-
visited England,  and  delivered  in  London  and
other  cities  a  course  of  lectures  on  the  necessity  of
medical  education  for  women.  In  1861,  having  re-
turned to  New  York,  she  held,  with  Dr.  Emily
Blackwell,  a  meeting  in  the  parlors  of  the  infirm-
ary, at  which  the  first  steps  were  taken  toward  or-
ganizing the  women's  central  relief  association
for  sending  nurses  and  medical  supplies  for  the
wounded  soldiers  during  the  civil  war.  In  1867
the  two  sisters  organized  the  women's  medical  col-
lege of  the  New  York  infirmary,  in  which  Dr.
Elizabeth  Blackwell  held  the  chair  of  hygiene  and
Dr.  Emily  Blackwell  the  chair  of  obstetrics  and
diseases  of  women.  In  1869,  leaving  Dr.  Emily  in
3harge  of  their  joint  work,  Dr.  Elizabeth  returned
to  London  and  practised  there  for  several  years,
taking  an  active  part  in  organizing  the  women's
medical  college,  in  which  she  was  elected  professor
Df  the  diseases  of  women.  She  also  took  part  in
forming  in  England  the  national  health  society,
ind  the  society  for  repealing  the  contagious-dis-
3ases  acts.  Besides  several  health  tracts,  she  has
aublished  "  Laws  of  Life,  or  the  Physical  Educa-
:ion  of  Girls  "  (Philadelphia,  1852),  and  "  Counsel
:o  Parents  on  the  Moral  Education  of  their  Chil-
Iren  "  (1879),  which  has  been  translated  into  French.
BLADEN,  Thomas,  governor  of  Maryland,
ived  in  the  18th  century.  He  went  to  England,
narried  there  Miss  Jansen,  sister  of  Lady  Balti-
nore,  and  returned  as  governor  in  1742.  During
lis  administration  the  western  boundary  of  the
province  was  fixed  by  treaty  with  the  Indians,  and
he  manufacture  of  flour  began  to  attract  the  at-
ention  of  the  government.  Gov.  Bladen  began  to
Juild  a  house  for  the  residence  of  colonial  officers ;
iut  it  was  not  finished  during  his  administration,
tie  returned  to  England  in  1746,  and  was  suc-
jeeded  by  Samuel  Ogle.  In  1751  he  was  an  execu-
or  of  the  will  of  Charles,  fifth  Lord  Baltimore.

BLAIKIE,  William,  athlete,  b.  in  York,  Liv-
ngston  CO.,  N.  Y.,  34  Mav,  1843.  He  was  gradu-
ited  at  Harvard  in  1866,  and  at  Harvard  law  school
n  1868.  In  tlie  following  year  he  accompanied  the
harvard  crew  to  England  as  their  secretary  and
reasurer.  After  a  year  as  pardon  clerk  iii  the
ittorney-general's  office  at  Washington,  and  two
•s  as  assistant  in  the  IT.  S.  attorney's  office  in


BLAINE


275


New  York,  he  entered  into  active  practice  in  the
latter  city  in  January,  1873.  For  eight  years  he
was  commissioner  of  the  U.  S.  court  of  claims.  Mr.
Blaikie  is  widely  known  for  the  interest  he  has
taken  in  athletic  sports  and  in  physical  training.
He  has  written  largely,  and  lectured  on  the  sub-
ject, and  has  published  "  How  to  Get  Strong,  and
How  to  Stay  So"  (New  York,  1879),  and  "Sound
Bodies  for  our  Boys  and  Girls  "  (1884).

BLAINE,  James  Gillespie,  statesman,  b.  in
West  Brownsville,  Washington  co.,  Pa.,  31  Jan.,
1830.  He  is  the  second  son  of  Ephraim  L.  Blaine
and  Maria  Gillespie.  On  his  father's  side  he  in-
herited the  hardy  and  energetic  qualities  of  the
Scotch-Irish  blood.  His  great-grandfather,  Eph-
raim Blaine,  b.  1741 ;  d.  1804,  bore  an  honorable
part  in  the  revolutionary  struggle,  was  an  officer  of
the  Pennsylvania  line,  a  trusted  friend  of  Washing-
ton, and  during  the  last  four  years  of  the  war  served
as  the  commissary-general  of  the  northern  depart-
ment of  his  command.  Possessed  of  ample  means,
he  drew  largely  from  his  own  private  purse  and
enlisted  the  contributions  of  various  friends  for  the
maintenance  of  the  army  through  the  severe  and
memorable  winter  at  Valley  Forge.  From  the  Cum-
berland valley,  where  his  ancestors  had  early  set-
tled and  had  been  among  the  founders  of  Carlisle,
Mr.  Blaine's  father  removed  to  Washington  co.  in
1818.  He  had
inherited  what
was  a  fortune
in  those  days,
and  had  large
landed  posses-
sions in  west-
ern Pennsylva-
nia; but  their
mineral  wealth
had  not  then
been  developed,
and  though
relieved  from
poverty  he  was
not  endowed
with  affluence,
and  a  large
family  made  a
heavy  drain  on
his  means.  He
was  a  man  of
liberal  educa-
tion, and had

travelled  in  Europe  and  South  America  before  set-
tling down  in  western  Pennsylvania,  where  he  served
as  prothonotary.  Mr.  Blaine's  mother,  a  woman  of
superior  intelligence  and  force  of  character,  was  a
devout  Catholic ;  but  her  son  has  adhered  to  the
Presbyterian  convictions  and  communion  of  his
paternal  Scotch-Irish  ancestry.  The  early  educa-
tion of  Mr.  Blaine  was  sedulously  cultivated.  He
had  the  advantage  of  excellent  teachers  at  his  own
home,  and  for  a  part  of  the  year  1841  he  was  at
school  in  Lancaster,  Ohio,  where  he  lived  in  the
family  of  his  relative,  Thomas  Ewing,  then  secre-
tary of  the  treasury.  In  association  with  Thomas
Ew'ing,  Jr.,  afterward  a  member  of  congress,  young
Blaine  began  his  preparation  for  college  under  the
instruction  of  a  thoroughly  trained  Englishman.
William  Lyons,  brother  of  Lord  Lyons,  and  at  the
age  of  thirteen  he  entered  Washington  college  in
his  native  county,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1847.
It  is  said  that  when  nine  years  old  he  was  able
to  recite  Plutarch's  lives.  He  had  a  marked  taste
for  historical  studies,  and  excelled  in  literature
and  mathematics. In  the  literary  society  he  dis-


3^


276


BLAINE


BLAINE


played  the  political  aptitude  and  capacity  that
distinguished  his  subsequent  career.  Some  time
after  graduation  he  became  a  te  icher  in  the  west-
ern military  institute,  at  Blue  Lick  Springs,  Ky.
Here  he  formed  the  acquaintance  of  Miss  Harriet
Stanwood,  of  Maine,  who  was  connected  with  a
seminary  for  young  ladies  at  the  neighboring  town
of  Millersburg,  and  to  whom  within  a  few  months
he  was  married.  He  soon  returned  to  Pennsyl-
vania, where,  after  some  study  of  the  law,  he  be-
came a  teacher  in  the  Pennsylvania  institution  for
the  blind  at  Philadelphia.  The  instruction  was
chiefly  oral.  The  young  teacher  had  charge  of  the
higher  classes  in  literature  and  science,  and  the
principal  has  left  a  record  that  his  *'  brilliant  men-
tal powers  were  exactly  qualified  to  enlighten  and
instruct  the  interesting  minds  before  him."  After
an  association  of  two  years  with  this  institution,  he
removed  in  1854  to  Augusta,  Maine,  where  he  has
since  made  his  home.  Purchasing  a  half  interest
in  the  Kennebec  "  Journal,"  he  became  its  editor,
his  ready  faculty  and  trenchant  writing  being  pecu-
liarly adapted  to  this  field.  He  speedily  made  his
impress,  and  within  three  years  was  a  master  spirit
in  the  politics  of  the  state.

He  engaged  in  the  movement  for  the  formation
of  the  republican  party  with  all  his  energy,  and
his  earnest  and  incisive  discussion  of  the 'rising
conflict  between  freedom  and  slavery  attracted
wide  attention.  In  1856  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
flrst  republican  national  convention,  which  nomi-
nated Gren.  Fremont  for  the  presidency.  His  re-
port at  a  public  meeting  on  his  return  home,  where
he  spoke  at  the  outset  with  hesitation  and  embar-
rassment, and  advanced  to  confident  and  fervid
utterance,  first  illustrated  his  capacity  on  the  plat-
form and  gave  him  standing  as  a  public  speaker.
The  next  year  he  broadened  his  journalistic  work
by  taking  the  editorship  of  the  Portland  "  Adver-
tiser"; but  his  editorial  service  ended  when  his
parliamentary  career  began.  In  1858  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature,  remaining  a  member  through
successive  annual  re-elections  for  four  years,  and
serving  the  last  two  as  speaker.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  Mr.  Blaine  gained  distinction  not
only  for  his  parliamentary  skill,  but  for  his  foren-
sic power  in  the  debates  that  grew  out  of  that  crisis.
The  same  year  that  he  was  elected  to  the  legisla-
ture he  became  chairman  of  the  state  committee,
a  position  which  he  continued  to  hold  uninterrupt-
edly for  twenty  years,  and  in  which  he  led  in  shap-
ing and  directing  every  political  campaign  of  his
party  in  Maine.

In  1862  Mr.  Blaine  was  elected  to  congress,  where
in  one  branch  or  the  other  he  served  for  eighteen
years.  To  the  house  he  was  chosen  for  seven  succes-
sive terms.  His  growth  in  position  and  influence
was  rapid  and  unbroken.  In  his  earlier  years  he
made  few  elaborate  addresses.  During  his  first
term  his  only  extended  speech  was  an  argument  in
favor  of  the  assumption  of  the  state  war  debts  by
the  general  government,  and  in  demonstration
of  the  ability  of  the  north  to  carry  the  war  to  a
successful  conclusion.  But  he  gradually  took  an
active  part  in  the  running  discussions, 'and  soon
acquired  high  repute  as  a  facile  and  effective  de-
bater. For  this  form  of  contention  his  ready  re-
sources and  alert  faculties  were  singularly  fitted.
He  was  bold  in  attack,  quick  in  repartee,  and  apt
in  illustration.  His  close  study  of  political  history,
his  accurate  knowledge  of  the  record  and  relations
of  public  men,  and  his  unfailing  memory,  gave  him
great  advantages.  As  a  member  of  the  committee
on  post-offices,  he  was  largely  instrumental  in
securing  the  introduction  of  the  system  of  postal


cars.  He  earnestly  sustained  all  measures  for  the
vigorous  prosecution  of  the  war,  but  sought  to
make  them  judicious  and  practical.  In  this  spirit
he  supported  the  bill  for  a  draft,  but  opposed  abso-
lute conscription.  He  contended  that  it  should  be
relieved  by  provisions  for  commutation  and  substi-
tution, and  urged  that  an  inexorable  draft  had
never  been  resorted  to  but  once,  even  under  the
absolutism  of  Napoleon.  At  the  same  time  he  en-
forced the  duty  of  sustaining  and  strengthening
the  armies  in  the  field  by  using  all  the  resources  of
the  nation,  and  strongly  advocated  the  enrolment
act.  The  measures  for  the  reconstruction  of  the
states  that  had  been  in  rebellion  largely  engrossed
the  attention  of  congress  from  1865  till  1869,  and
Mr.  Blaine  bore  a  prominent  part  in  their  discus-
sion and  in  the  work  of  framing  them.  The  basis
of  representation  upon  which  the  states  should  be
readmitted  was  the  first  question  to  be  determined.
Thaddeus  Stevens,  chairman  of  the  committee  on
reconstruction,  had  proposed  that  representation
should  be  apportioned  according  to  the  number  of
legal  voters.  Mr.  Blaine  strenuously  objected  to
this  proposition,  and  urged  that  population,  instead
of  voters,  should  be  the  basis.  He  submitted  a
constitutional  amendment  providing  that  "repre-
sentatives and  direct  taxes  shall  be  apportioned
among  the  several  states  which  shall  be  included
within  this  union  according  to  their  respective
numbers,  which  shall  be  determined  by  taking  the  ■
whole  number  of  persons,  except  those  whose  politi-
cal rights  or  privileges  are  denied  or  abridged  by
the  constitution  of  any  state  on  account  of  race  or
color."  He  advocated  this  plan  on  the  ground
that,  while  the  other  basis  of  voters  would  accom-
plish the  object  of  preventing  the  south  from  se-
curing representation  for  the  blacks  unless  the
blacks  were  made  voters,  yet  it  would  make. a  radi-
cal change  in  the  apportionment  for  the  northern
states  where  the  ratio  of  voters  to  population  dif-
fered very  widely  in  different  sections,  varying
from  a  minimum  of  19  per  cent,  to  a  maximum  of
58  per  cent.  The  result  of  the  discussion  was  a
general  abandonment  of  the  theory  that  apportion-
ment should  be  based  on  voters,  and  the  14th
amendment  to  the  constitution,  as  finally  adopted,
embodied  Mr.  Blaine's  proposition  in  substance.

On  6  Feb.,  1867,  Mr.  Stevens  reported  the  recon-
struction bill.  It  divided  the  states  lately  in  re-
bellion into  five  military  districts,  and  practically
established  military  government  therein.  The  civil
tribunals  were  made  subject  to  military  control.
While  the  majority  evinced  a  readiness  to  accept
the  bill,  Mr.  Blaine  declared  his  unwillingness  to
support  any  measure  that  would  place  the  south
under  military  government,  if  it  did  not  at  the
same  time  prescribe  the  methods  by  which  the
people  of  a  state  could  by  their  own  action  reestab-
lish civil  government.  He  accordingly  proposed
an  amendment  providing  that  when  any  one  of  the
late  so-called  confederate  states  should  assent  to
the  14th  amendment  to  the  constitution  and  should
establish  equal  and  impartial  suffrage  without  re-
gard to  race  or  color,  and  when  congress  should
approve  its  action,  it  should  be  entitled  to  repre-
sentation, and  the  provisions  for  military  govern-
ment should  become  inoperative.  This  proposition
came  to  be  known  as  the  Blaine  amendmeuL  1"
advocating  it,  Mr.  Blaine  expressed  the  belief  that
the  true  interpretation  of  the  election  of  1866  was
that,  in  addition  to  the  proposed  constitutional
amendment— the  14th— impartial  suffrage  should
be  the  basis  of  reconstruction,  and  he  urged  ttie
wisdom  of  declaring  the  terms  at  once.  The  ap-
plication of  the  previous  question  ruled  out  tne


BLAINE

Blaine  amendment,  but  it  was  renewed  in  the
senate  and  finally  carried  through  both  branches,
and  under  it  reconstruction  was  completed.

The  theory  that  the  public  debt  should  be  paid
in  greenbacks  developed  great  strength  in  the
summer  of  1807  wliilc  INlr.  Blaine  was  absent  in
Europe.  On  his  return  at  the  opening  of  the  next
session  he  made  an  extended  speech  against  the
doctrine,  and  was  the  first  man  in  congress  to  give
utterance  to  this  opposition.  The  long  unsettled
question  of  protecting  naturalized  American  citi-
zens while  abroad  attracted  special  attention  at
this  time.  Costello,  Warren,  Burke,  and  other
Irish- Americans  had  been  arrested  in  England,  on
the  charge  of  complicity  in  Fenian  plots.  Costello
had  made  a  speech  in  1865  in  New  York,  which
was  regarded  as  treasonable  by  the  British  govern-
ment, and  he  was  treated  as  a  British  subject  and
tried  under  an  old  law  on  this  accusation.  His
plea  of  American  citizenship  was  overruled,  and  he
was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  sixteen  years'
penal  servitude.  Mr.  Blaine,  who,  with  other
American  statesmen,  resisted  the  English  doctrine
of  perpetual  allegiance,  and  maintained  that  a
naturalized  American  was  entitled  to  the  same
protection  abroad  that  would  be  given  to  a  native
American,  took  active  part  in  pressing  these  ques-
tions upon  public  attention,  and,  as  the  result  of
the  agitation,  Costello  was  released.  The  discussion
of  these  cases  led  to  the  treaty  of  1870,  in  which
Great  Britain  abandoned  the  doctrine  of  ''  once  a
subject  always  a  subject,"  and  accepted  the  Amer-
ican principle  of  equal  rights  and  protection  for
adopted  and  for  native  citizens. .  Mr.  Blaine  was
chosen  speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives  in
1869,  and  served  by  successive  reflections  for  six
years.  His  administration  of  the  speakership  is
commonly  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant
and  successful  in  the  annals  of  the  house.  He  had
rare  aptitude  and  equipment  for  the  duties  of  pre-
siding officer ;  and  his  complete  mastery  of  parlia-
mentary law,  his  dexterity  and  physical  endurance,
his  rapid  despatch  of  business,  and  his  firm  and
impartial  spirit,  were  recognized  on  all  sides.
Though  necessarily  exercising  a  powerful  influence
upon  the  course  of  legislation,  he  seldom  left  the
chair  to  mingle  in  the  contests  of  the  floor.  On  one
of  those  rare  occasions,  in  March,  1871,  he  had  a
sharp  tilt  with  Gen.  Butler,  who  had  criticised  him
for  being  the  author  of  the  resolution  providing  for
an  investigation  into  alleged  outrages  perpetrated
upon  loyal  citizens  of  the  south,  and  for  being
chiefly  instrumental  in  securing  its  adoption  by
the  republican  caucus.  The  political  revulsion  of
1874  placed  the  democrats  in  control  of  the  house,
and  Mr.  Blaine  became  the  leader  of  the  minority.
The  session  preceding  the  presidential  contest  of
1876  was  a  period  of  stormy  and  vehement  conten-
tion. A  general  amnesty  bill  was  brought  forward,
removing  the  political  disabilities  of  participants
in  the  rebellion  which  had  been  imposed  by  the
14th  amendment  to  the  constitution.  Mr.  Blaine
moved  to  amend  by  making  an  exception  of  Jeffer-
son Davis,  and  supported  the  proposition  in  an
unpassioned  speech.  After  asserting  the  great
magnanimity  of  the  government,  and  pointing  out
now  far  amnesty  had  already  been  carried,  he  de-
nned the  ground  of  his  proposed  exception.  The
reason  was,  not  that  Davis  was  the  chief  of  the
confederacy,  but  that,  as  Mr.  Blaine  affirmed,  he
was  the  author,  "  knowingly,  deliberately,  guiltily,
and  wilfully,  of  the  gigantic  murders  and  crimes
ot  Andersonville."  In  fiery  words  Mr.  Blaine  pro-
ceeded to  declare  that  no  military  atrocities  in  his-
tory had  exceeded  those  for  which  Davis  was  thus


BLAINE


277


responsible.  His  outburst  naturally  produced  deep
excitement  in  the  house  and  throughout  the  coun-
try. If  Mr.  Blaine's  object  as  a  political  leader  was
to  arouse  partisan  feeling  and  activity  preparatory
to  the  presidential  struggle,  he  succeeded.  An  acrid
debate  followed.  Benjamin  H.  Hill,  of  Georgia,
assumed  the  lead  on  the  other  side,  and  not  only
defended  Davis  against  the  accusations,  which
he  pronounced  unfounded,  but  preferred  similar
charges  against  the  treatment  of  southern  prison-
ers in  the  north.  In  reply,  Mr.  Blaine  turned  upon
Mr.  Hill  with  the  citation  of  a  resolution  intro-
duced by  him  in  the  confederate  senate,  providing
that  every  soldier  or  officer  of  the  United  States
captured  on  the  soil  of  the  confederate  states
should  be  presumed  to  have  come  with  intent  to
incite  insurrection,  and  should  suffer  the  penalty
of  death.  This  episode  arrested  universal  atten-
tion, and  gave  Mr.  Blaine  a  still  stronger  hold  as  a
leader  of  his  party.

He  now  became  the  subject  of  a  violent  personal
assault.  Charges  were  circulated  that  he  had  re-
ceived $64,000  from  the  Union  Pacific  railroad
company  for  some  undefined  services.  On  24  April,
1876,  he  rose  to  a  personal  explanation  in  the  house
and  made  his  answer.  He  produced  letters  from
the  officers  of  the  company  and  from  the  bankers
who  were  said  to  have  negotiated  the  draft,  in
which  they  declared  that  there  had  never  been  any
such  transaction,  and  that  Mr.  Blaine  had  never
received  a  dollar  from  the  company.  Mr.  Blaine
proceeded  to  add  that  the  charge  had  reappeared
in  the  form  of  an  assertion  that  he  had  received
bonds  of  the  Little  Rock  and  Fort  Smith  railroad
as  a  gratuity,  and  that  these  bonds  had  been  sold
through  the  Union  Pacific  company  for  his  benefit.
To  this  he  responded  that  he  never  had  any  such
bonds  except  at  the  market  price,  and  that,  instead
of  deriving  any  profit  from  them,  he  had  incurred
a  large  pecuniary  loss.  A  few  days  later  another
charge  was  made  to  the  effect  that  he  had  received
as  a  gift  certain  bonds  of  the  Kansas  Pacific  rail-
road, and  had  been  a  party  to  a  suit  concerning
them  in  the  courts  of  Kansas.  To  this  he  answered
by  producing  evidence  that  his  name  had  been  con-
founded with  that  of  a  brother,  who  was  one  of  the
early  settlers  of  Kansas,  and  who  had  bought  stock
in  the  Kansas  Pacific  before  Mr.  Blaine  had  even
been  nominated  for  congress.

On  2  May  a  resolution  was  adopted  in  the  house
to  investigate  an  alleged  purchase  by  the  Union
Pacific  railroad  company,  at  an  excessive  price,  of
certain  bonds  of  the  Little  Rock  and  Fort  Smith
railroad.  It  soon  became  evident  that  the  investi-
gation was  aimed  at  Mr.  Blaine.  An  extended
business  correspondence  on  his  part  with  Warren
Fisher,  of  Boston,  running  through  years  and  re-
lating to  various  transactions,  had  fallen  into  the
hands  of  a  clerk  named  Mulligan,  and  it  was  al-
leged that  the  production  of  this  correspondence
would  confirm  the  imputations  against  Mr.  Blaine.
When  Mulligan  was  summoned  to  Washington,
Mr.  Blaine  possessed  himself  of  the  letters,  to-
gether with  a  memorandum  that  contained  a  full
index  and  abstract.  On  5  June  he  tose  to  a  per-
sonal explanation,  and,  after  denying  the  power
of  the  house  to  compel  the  production  of  his  pri-
vate papers,  and  his  willingness  to  go  to  any  ex-
tremity in  defence  of  his  rights,  he  declared  his
purpose  to  reserve  nothing.  Holding  up  the  let-
ters he  exclaimed :  "  Thank  God,  I  am  not  ashamed
to  show  them.  There  is  the  very  original  package.
And  with  some  sense  of  humiliation,  with  a  mor-
tification I  do  not  attempt  to  conceal,  with  a  sense
of  outrage  which  1  think  any  man  in  my  position


278


BLAI03


BLAINE


would  feel,  I  invite  the  confidence  of  forty-four
millions  of  my  countrymen,  while  I  read  those  let-
ters from  this  desk."  The  demonstration  closed
with  a  dramatic  scene.  Josiah  Caldwell,  one  of
the  originators  of  the  Little  Rock  and  Fort  Smith
railroad,  who  had  full  knowledge  of  the  whole
transaction,  was  travelling  in  Europe,  and  both
sides  were  seeking  to  communicate  with  him.
After  finishing  the  reading  of  the  letters,  Mr.
Blaine  turned  to  the  chairman  of  the  committee
and  demanded  to  know  whether  he  had  received  any
despatch  from  Mr.  Caldwell.  Receiving  an  evasive
answer,  Mr.  Blaine  asserted,  as  within  his  own  knowl-
edge, that  the  chairman  had  received  such  a  des-
patch, "  completely  and  absolutely  exonerating  me
from  this  charge,  and  you  have  suppressed  it."  A
profound  sensation  was  created,  and  Gen.  Garfield
said :  "  I  have  been  a  long  time  in  congress,  and
never  saw  such  a  scene  in  the  house."

The  republican  national  convention  was  now  at
hand,  and  Mr.  Blaine  was  the  most  prominent  can-
didate for  the  presidential  nomination.  He  had  a
larger  body  of  enthusiastic  friends  than  any  other
leader  of  his  party,  and  the  stirring  events'  of  the
past  few  months  had  intensified  their  devotion.
On  11  June,  the  Sunday  preceding  the  convention,
just  as  he  was  entering  church  at  Washington,  he
was  prostrated  with  the  extreme  heat,  and  his  ill-
ness for  a  time  created  wide  apprehension.  The
advocates  of  his  nomination,  however,  remained
unshaken  in  their  support.  On  the  first  ballot  he
received  285  votes  out  of  a  total  of  754,  the  re-
mainder being  divided  among  Senator  Morton,
Sec.  Bristow,  Senator  Conkling,  Gov.  Hayes,  and
several  others.  On  the  seventh  ballot  his  vote  rose
to  351,  lacking  only  28  of  a  majority,  but  a  union
of  the  supporters  of  all  the  other  candidates  gave
Gov.  Hayes  384  and  secured  his  nomination.  Im-
mediately after  the  convention,  on  the  resignation
of  Senator  Morrill  to  accept  the  secretaryship  of
the  treasury,  Mr.  Blaine  was  appointed  senator  to
fill  the  unexpired  term,  and  in  the  following  win-
ter he  was  chosen  by  the  legislature  for  the  full
ensuing  term.  In  the  senate  he  engaged  in  the
discussion  of  current  questions.  He  opposed  the
creation  of  the  electoral  commission  for  the  settle-
ment of  the  disputed  presidential  election  of  1876,
on  the  ground  that  congress  did  not  itself  possess
the  power  that  it  proposed  to  confer  on  the  com-
mission. He  held  that  President  Hayes's  southern
policy  surrendered  too  much  of  what  had  been
gained  through  reconstruction,  and  contended  that
the  validity  of  his  own  title  involved  the  mainte-
nance of  the  state  governments  in  South  Carolina
and  Louisiana,  which  rested  on  the  same  popular
vote.  On  the  currency  question  he  always  assumed
a  pronounced  position.  While  still  a  member  of
the  house,  in  February,  187G,  he  had  made  an  elabo-
rate speech  on  the  national  finances  and  against
any  perpetuation  of  an  irredeemable  paper  cur-
rency, and  soon  after  entering  the  senate,  when
the  subject  was  brought  forward,  he  took  strong
ground  against  the  deterioration  of  the  silver  coin-
age, lie  strenuously  opposed  the  Bland  bill,  and,
when  its  passage  was  seen  to  be  inevitable,  sought
to  amend  it  by  providing  that  the  dollar  should
contain  425  grains  of  standard  silver,  instead  of
412^  grains.  He  favored  a  bi-metallic  currency,
and  equally  resisted  the  adoption  of  the  single  gold
standard  and  the  depreciation  of  silver.  Measures
for  the  development  and  protection  of  American
shipping  early  engaged  his  attention.  In  1878  he
advocated  the  establishment  of  a  line  of  mail
steamers  to  Brazil,  and  unhesitatingly  urged  the
application  of  a  subsidy  to  this  object. On  fre-


quent occasions  he  recurred  to  the  subject,  con-
tending that  Great  Britain  and  France  had  built
up  their  commerce  by  liberal  aid  to  steamship  lines,
and  that  a  similar  policy  would  produce  similar
results  here.  He  argued  that  congi-ess  had  en-
dowed the  railroad  system  with  $o(J(),()00,000  of
money,  which  had  produced  |5,006,000,000  to  the
country,  and  that  the  policy  ought  not  to  stop
when  it  reached  the  sea.

In  March,  1879,  congress  was  deeply  agitated
by  a  conflict  over  the  appropriation  bills.  The
democrats,  being  in  control  of  both  houses,  had
refused  to  pass  the  necessary  measures  for  the  sup-
port of  the  government  unless  accompanied  by  a
proviso  prohibiting  the  presence  of  troops  at  any
place  where  an  election  was  being  held.  The  re-
publicans resisted  this  attempt,  and,  in  consequence
of  the  failure  of  the  bills  at  the  regular  session,  the
president  was  compelled  to  call  an  extra  session.
Mr.  Blaine  was  among  the  foremost  in  the  senate
in  defending  the  executive  prerogative  and  in  op-
posing what  he  denounced  as  legislative  coercion.
He  pointed  out  how  few  troops  there  were  in  all
the  states  of  the  south,  and  said :  "  I  take  no  risk  in
stating,  I  make  bold  to  declare,  that  this  issue  on
the  troops  being  a  false  one,  being  one  without
foundation,  conceals  the  true  issue,  which  is  simply
to  get  rid  of  the  federal  presence  at  federal  elec-
tions, to  get  rid  of  the  civil  power  of  the  United
States  in  the  election  of  representatives  to  the  con-
gress of  the  United  States."  He  proceeded  to  charac-
terize the  proposition  to  withhold  appropriations  ex-
cept upon  the  condition  of  executive  compliance
as  revolutionary,  saying :  "  I  call  it  the  audacity  of
revolution  for  any  senator  or  representative,  or  any
caucus  of  senators  or  representatives,  to  get  to-
gether and  say :  '  We  will  have  this  legislation,  or
we  will  stop  the  great  departments  of  the  govern-
ment.' "  The  resistance  was  unsuccessful,  and  the
army  appropriation  bill  finally  passed  with  the
proviso.  Mr.  Blaine  at  all  times  defended  the  sanc-
tity of  the  ballot,  and  in  December,  1878,  pending
a  resolution  presented  by  himself  for  an  inquiry
into  certain  alleged  frauds  in  the  south,  made  a
powerful  plea  as  to  the  injustice  wrought  by  a  de-
nial of  the  franchise  to  the  blacks.  When  the  at-
tempt was  made  to  override  the  plain  result  of  the
election  of  1879  in  Maine,  and  to  set  up  a  state
government  in  defiance  of  the  popular  vote,  Mr.
Blaine  took  charge  of  the  effort  to  establish  the
rightful  government,  and  through  his  vigorous
measures  the  scheme  of  usurpation  was  defeated
and  abandoned.  On  the  Chinese  question  he  early
declared  himself  decidedly  in  favor  of  restricting
their  immigration.  In  a  speech  on  14  Feb.,  1879,
when  the  subject  came  before  the  senate,  he  argued
that  there  were  only  two  courses :  that  the  Chinese
must  be  excluded  or  fully  admitted  into  the  famUy
of  citizens ;  that  the  latter  was  as  impracticable
as  it  was  dangerous ;  that  they  could  not  be  assimi-
lated with  our  people  or  institutions ;  and  that  it
was  a  duty  to  protect  the  free  laborer  of  America
against  the  servile  laborer  of  China.

As  the  presidential  convention  of  1880  ap-
proached, it  was  apparent  that  Mr.  Blaine  retained
the  same  support  that  had  adhered  to  him  so  tena-
ciously four  years  before.  The  contest  developed
into  an  earnest  and  prolonged  struggle  between  hir-
friends  and  those  who  advocated  a  third  term  for
Gen.  Grant.  The  convention,  one  of  the  most
memorable  in  American  history,  lasted  through  six
days,  and  there  were  thirtv-six  ballots.  On  the
first  the  vote  stood  :  Grant  304,  Blaine  284,  Sher-
man 93,  Edmunds  34,  Washburne  30,  Windom  10,
Garfield  1. On  the  final ballot the  friends  of


BLAINE


BLAINE


279


Blaine  and  Sherman  united  on  Gen.  Garfield,  who
received  899  votes  to  306  for  Grant,  and  was  nomi-
nated. On  his  election,  Mr.  Blaine  was  tendered
and  accepted  the  office  of  secretary  of  state.  He
remained  at  the  head  of  the  department  less  than
ten  months,  and  his  effective  administration  was
practically  limited  by  the  assassination  of  Presi-
dent Garfield  to  four.  Within  that  period,  how-
ever, he  began  several  important  undertakings.  His
foreign  policy  had  two  principal  objects.  The  first
was  to  secure  and  preserve  peace  throughout  this
continent.  The  second  was  to  cultivate  close  com-
mercial relations  and  increase  our  trade  with  the
various  countries  of  North  and  South  America.
The  accomplishment  of  the  first  object  was  pre-
liminary and  essential  to  the  attainment  of  the
second,  and,  in  order  to  promote  it,  he  projected  a
peace  congress  to  be  held  at  Washington,  to  which
all  the  independent  powers  of  North  and  South
America  were  to  be  invited.  His  plan  contemplated
the  cultivation  of  such  a  friendly  understanding  on
the  part  of  the  powers  as  would  permanently  avert
the  horrors  of  war  either  through  the  influence  of
pacific  counsels  or  the  acceptance  of  impartial  ar-
bitration. Incidentally,  it  assumed  that  the  as-
sembling of  their  representatives  at  Washington
would  open  the  way  to  such  relations  as  would  in-
ure to  the  commercial  advantage  of  this  country.
The  project,  though  already  determined,  was  de-
layed by  the  fatal  shot  at  Garfield,  and  the  letter
of  invitation  was  finally  issued  on  29  Nov.,  1881,
fixing  24  Nov.,  1882,  as  the  date  for  the  proposed
congress.  On  19  Dec.  Mr.  Blaine  retired  from  the
cabinet,  and  within  three  weeks  his  successor  had
reversed  his  policy  and  the  plan  was  abandoned,
after  the  invitation  had  been  accepted  by  all  the
American  powers  except  two.

When  Mr.  Blaine  entered  the  department  of
state,  war  was  raging  between  Chili  and  Peru,
and  he  sought  to  exercise  the  good  offices  of  our
government,  first,  for  the  restoration  of  peace,  and,
second,  to  mitigate  the  consequences  of  the  crush-
ing defeat  sustained  by  Peru.  Other  efforts  fail-
ing, he  despatched  William  Henry  Trescott  on  a
special  mission  to  offer  the  friendly  services  of  the
United  States ;  but  this  attempt,  like  the  one  for
the  peace  congress,  was  interrupted  and  frustrated
by  his  retirement  from  the  department.  His  brief
service  was  also  signalized  by  an  important  corre-
spondence with  the  British  government  concern-
ing the  modification  of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty.
The  Colombian  republic  had  proposed  to  the  Eu-
ropean powers  that  they  should  unite  in  guarantee-
ing the  neutrality  of  the  Panama  canal.  On  24
June  Mr.  Blaine  issued  a  circular  letter  declaring
the  objection  of  this  government  to  any  such  con-
certed action,  and  asserting  the  prior  and  para-
mount rights  and  obligations  of  this  country.  He
pointed  out  that  the  United  States  had  entered
into  a  guarantee  by  the  treaty  of  1846  with  the  re-
public of  New  Grenada — now  Colombia ;  that  this
country  had  a  supreme  interest  in  watching  over
any  highway  between  the  two  coasts ;  and  that  any
agreement  among  European  powers  to  super-
sede this  guarantee  and  impair  our  exclusive  rights
would  be  regarded  as  an  indication  of  unfriendly
feeling.  In  this  connection  he  made  formal  pro-
posal to  the  British  government  for  the  abrogation
of  certain  clauses  of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty,
which  were  not  in  harmony  with  the  rights  of  the
United  States  as  secured  by  the  convention  with
the  Colombian  republic.  He  urged  that  the  treaty,
by  prohibiting  the  use  of  land  forces  and  of  forti-
fications, without  any  protection  against  superior
naval  power,  practically  conceded  to  Great  Britain


the  control  of  any  interoceanic  canal  that  might  be
constructed  across  the  isthmus,  and  he  proposed
that  every  part  of  the  treaty  which  forbids  the
United  States  fortifying  the  canal  and  holding  the
political  control  of  it  in  conjunction  with  the
country  in  which  it  is  located  should  be  cancelled.
To  the  answer  of  the  British  government  that  the
treaty  was  an  engagement  which  should  be  main-
tained and  respected,  Mr.  Blaine  replied  that  it
could  not  be  regarded  as  a  conclusive  determina-
tion of  the  question ;  that  since  its  adoption  it  had
been  the  subject  of  repeated  negotiations  between
the  two  countries ;  that  the  British  government  had
itself  proposed  to  refer  its  doubtful  clauses  to  arbi-
tration ;  and  that  it  had  long  been  recognized  as  a
source  of  increasing  embarrassment.  Throughout
the  correspondence  Mr.  Blaine  insisted  in  the  firm-
est tone  that  "  it  is  the  fixed  purpose  of  the  United
States  to  consider  the  isthmus  canal  question  as  an
American  question,  to  be  dealt  with  and  decided
by  the  American  governments."

Upon  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Blaine  from  the
state  department  in  December,  1881,  he  was,  for
the  first  time  in  twenty-three  years,  out  of  public
station.  He  soon  entered  upon  the  composition
of  an  elaborate  historical  work  entitled  "  Twenty
Years  of  Congress,"  of  which  the  first  200  pages
give  a  succinct  review  of  the  earlier  political  his-
tory of  the  country,  followed  by  a  more  detailed
narrative  of  the  eventful  period  from  Lincoln  to
Garfield.  The  first  volume  was  published  in  April,
1884,  and  the  second  in  January,  1886  (Norwich,
Conn.).  The  work  had  a  very  wide  sale,  and  se-
cured general  approval  for  its  impartial  spirit  and
brilliant  style.  When  the  republican  national  con-
vention of  1884  met  at  Chicago,  it  was  clear  that
Mr.  Blaine  had  lost  none  of  his  hold  upon  the  en-
thusiasm of  his  party.  On  the  first  ballot  he  re-
ceived 3343^  votes.  President  Arthur  278,  Senator
Edmunds  93,  Senator  Logan  633^,  and  the  rest
were  scattering.  His  vote  kept  gaining  till  the
fourth  ballot,  when  he  received  541  out  of  a  total
of  813  and  was  nominated.  The  canvass  that  fol-
lowed was  one  of  peculiar  bitterness.  Mr.  Blaine
took  the  stump  in  Ohio,  Indiana,  New  York,  and
other  states,  and  in  a  series  of  remarkable  speeches,
chiefly  devoted  to  upholding  the  policy  of  protec-
tion to  American  industry,  deepened  the  popular
impression  of  his  intellectual  power.  The  election
turned  upon  the  result  in  New  York,  which  was
lost  to  Mr.  Blaine  by  1,047  votes,  whereupon  he
promptly  resumed  the  work  upon  his  history,
which  had  been  interrupted  by  the  canvass.  After
the  result  had  been  determined,  he  made,  at  his
home  in  Augusta,  a  speech  in  which  he  arraigned
the  democratic  party  for  carrying  the  election  by
suppressing  the  republican  vote  in  the  southern
states,  and  cited  the  figures  of  the  returns  to  show
that,  on  an  average,  only  one  half  or  one  third  as
many  votes  had  been  cast  for  each  presidential
elector  or  member  of  congress  elected  in  the  south
as  for  each  elected  in  the  north.  This  speech  had
a  startling  effect,  and  attracted  universal  attention,
though  Mr,  Blaine  had  set  forth  the  same  thing  in
a  speech  in  congress  as  long  before  as  11  Dec,  1878,
when  he  said :

"  The  issue  raised  before  the  country  is  not  one
of  mere  sentiment  for  the  rights  of  the  negro ;
though  far  distant  be  the  day  when  the  rights  of
any  American  citizen,  however  black  or  however
poor,  shall  form  the  mere  dust  of  the  balance  in
any  controversy!  .  .  .  The  issue  has  taken  a  far
wider  range,  one  of  portentous  magnitude;  and
that  is,  whether  the  white  voter  of  the  north  shall
be  equal  to  the  white  voter  of  the  south  in  shaping


■280


BLAIR


BLAIR


the  policy  and  fixing  the  destiny  of  this  country ;
or  whether,  to  put  it  still  more  boldly,  the  white
man  who  fought  in  the  ranks  of  the  union  army
shall  have  as  weighty  and  influential  a  vote  in  the
government  of  the  republic  as  the  white  man  who
fought  in  the  ranks  of  the  rebel  army.  ...  In
Iowa  and  Wisconsin  it  takes  132,000  white  popula-
tion to  send  a  representative  to  congress;  but  in
South  Carolina,  Mississippi,  and  Louisiana,  every
60,000  white  people  send  a  representative."

Mr.  Blaine  took  an  active  part  in  the  Maine  can-
vass of  1886,  opening  it,  24  Aug.,  in  a  speech  at
Sebago  Lake  devoted  chiefly  to  the  questions  of
the  fisheries,  the  tariff,  and  the  third-party  prohi-
bition movement.  The  fishery  controversy  had  ac-
quired renewed  interest  and  importance  from  recent
seizures  of  American  fishing-vessels  on  the  Cana-
dian coast,  and  Mr.  Blaine  reviewed  its  history  at
length,  and  sharply  criticised  the  attitude  and  ac-
tion of  the  administration.  He  presented  the  issue
of  protection  against  free-trade  as  the  foremost  one
between  the  two  parties ;  and,  with  regard  to  pro-
hibition, insisted  that  there  was  no  warrant  or  rea-
son for  a  third-party  movement  in  Maine,  because
the  republican  party  had  enacted  and  enforced  a
prohibitory  law.  His  succeeding  speeches,  contin-
ued throughout  the  canvass,  followed  the  same  line.

BLAIR,  Austin,  governor  of  Michigan,  b.  in
Caroline,  Tompkins  co.,  N.  Y.,  8  Feb.,  1818.  He
was  educated  at  Hamilton  and  Union  colleges,  be-
ing graduated  at  the  latter  in  1839,  studied  law,
and  removed  to  Michigan.  He  was  county  clerk
of  Eaton  co.,  member  of  the  legislature  in  1846,
and  prosecuting  attorney  of  Jackson  co.  from  1852
till  1854.  He  was  state  senator  from  1854  till
1856,  and  from  1861  till  1865  was  governor  of
the  state,  in  which  office  he  was  active  in  his  sup-
port of  the  national  government.  In  1866  he  was
elected  as  a  republican  to  congress,  where  he  was  a
member  of  the  committees  on  foreign  affairs,  rules,
and  militia,  and  was  twice  re-elected  in  succession,
serving  on  the  committee  on  land-clajms.  In  1873
he  resumed  law  practice  in  Jackson,  Mich.

BLAIR,  Francis  Preston,  statesman,  b.  in
Abingdon,  Va.,  12  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Silver  Spring,
Md.,  18  Oct.,  1876.  He  was  educated  at  Transyl-
vania university,  Kentucky,  and  studied  law,  but
never  practised.  He  early  took  part  in  politics,
and  in  1824  supported  Henry  Clay  for  the  presi-
dency. He  dissented,  however,  from  Clay's  views
in  relation  to  the  United  States  Bank,  and  in  1828
became  an  ardent  Jackson  man.  In  1829  an  arti-
cle in  a  Kentucky  paper  by  Mr.  Blair  against  the
nullification  movement  attracted  the  president's
attention,  and  he  invited  the  writer  to  establish  a
Journal  at  Washington  to  support  the  union.  This
led  to  the  establishment  of  the  "  Globe,"  which  was
the  recognized  organ  of  the  democratic  party  un-
til 1845,  when  President  Polk,  against  Gen.  Jack-
son's published  protest,  removed  Mr.  Blair  from
the  management.  This  action  signified  the  tri-
umph of  Calhoun  and  his  adherents  over  the  Jack-
son or  national  democracy.  President  Polk  of-
fered Mr.  Blair  the  Spanish  mission,  which  was
declined.  He  supported  Mr.  Van  Buren  in  1848,
and  promoted  the  reunion  of  the  party,  by  which
Pierce's  election  was  secured  in  1852.  After  the
repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise  in  1854,  Mr.
Blair  was  active  in  the  organization  of  the  republi-
can party,  presiding  over  the  Pittsburg  convention
of  1856  and  drawing  up  the  platform  adopted  there.
After  peremptorily  refusing  to  allow  his  own  name
to  be  used,  he  favored  the  nomination  of  Col.  Fre-
mont for  the  presidency.  Mr.  Blair  was  also  one
of  the  leaders  in  the  Chicago  convention  of  1860,


which  nominated  Lincoln,  and,  after  the  election
of  the  latter,  had  much  influence  with  his  admin-
istration. In  1864  Mr.  Blair  conceived  the  idea
that,  through  his  personal  acquaintance  with  many
of  the  confederate  leaders,  he  might  be  able  to  ef-
fect a  peace.  Without  telling  the  president  of  his
intention,  he  asked  for  a  pass  to  the  south,  and
had  several  interviews  with  Jefferson  Davis  and
others.  His  efforts  finally  led  to  the  unsatisfac-
tory "peace  conference"  of  3  Feb.,  1865.  After
Lincoln's  death,  Mr.  Blair's  opposition  to  the  re-
construction measures  and  to  the  general  policy  of
the  republicans  led  to  his  co-operation  with 'the
democratic  party,  though  his  counsels  were  disre-
garded by  its  leaders  till  1876,  when  Mr.  Tilden
was  nominated  for  the  presidency.

BLAIR,  Francis  Preston,  soldier,  b.  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  19  Feb.,  1821 :  d.  in  St.  liouis,  Mo.,  8
July,  1875,  was  a  son  of  Francis  P.  Blair  noticed
above.  After  graduation  at  Princeton,  in  1841,
he  studied  law
in  Washington
and  was  admit-
ted to  the  Ken-
tucky bar  in
1843,  and  began
to  practise  in  St.
Louis.  In  1845
he  went  for  his
health  to  the
Rocky  moun-
tainswithacom-
pany  of  trap-
pers, and  when
the  war  with
Mexico  began
he  enlisted  in
the  army  as  a
private.  After
the  war  he  re-
turned to  the
practice  of  his
profession  in  St.
Louis.  In  1848  he  joined  the  free-soil  branch  of
the  democratic  party,  was  for  a  time  editor  of  the
"Missouri  Democrat,"  and  from  1852  till  1856  was
a  member  of  the  Missouri  legislature.  In  1856  he
joined  the  newly  organized  republican  party,  and
was  elected  to  congress,  where,  in  1857,  he  spoke  in
favor  of  colonizing  the  negroes  of  the  United  States
in  Central  America.  In  1858  the  democratic  can-
didate for  congress  was  returned.  Mr.  Blair  suc-
cessfully contested  the  seat,  but  immediately  re-
signed, and  was  defeated  in  the  election  that  fol-
lowed. He  was,  however,  elected  again  in  1860  and
in  1862.  Soon  after  the  South  Carolina  secession
convention  was  called,  in  November,  1861,  Mr.
Blair,  at  a  meeting  of  the  republican  leaders  in  St.
Louis,  showed  the  necessity  of  immediate  effort  to
prevent  the  seizure  by  the  state  authorities  of  the
St.  Louis  arsenal,  containing  65,000  stand  of  arms
belonging  to  the  government.  He  became  the  head
of  the  military  organization  then  formed,  which
guarded  the  arsenal  from  that  tiine ;  and  it  was  at
his  suggestion  that  the  state  troops  under  Gen.
Frost  were  captured  on  10  May,  1861,  without
orders  from  Washington.  It  is  claimed  that  he
thus  saved  Missouri  and  Kentucky  to  the  union.
Entering  the  army  as  a  colonel  of  volunteers,  he
was  made  brigadier-general  7  Aug.,  1861,  and  ma-
jor-general 29  Nov.,  1862,  resigning  his  seat  in
congress  in  1863.  lie  commanded  a  dinsion  m
the  Vicksburg  campaign,  led  his  men  in  the  bat-
tles of  Lookout  Mountain  and  Missionary  Rwge,
and  was  at  the  head  of  the  17tli  corps  during  Sher-


/V:^^t^o^


Ut'^


BLAIR


BLAIR


281


man's  campaigns  in  1864-5,  including  the  march
to  the  sea.  In  1806  he  was  nominated  by  Presi-
dent Johnson  as  collector  of  internal  revenue  at  St.
Louis,  and  afterward  as  minister  to  Austria ;  but
in  each  case  his  opposition  to  the  reconstruction
measures  led  to  his  rejection  by  the  senate,  lie
was  afterward  commissioner  of  the  Pacific  railroad.
His  dissatisfaction  with  the  policy  of  the  repub-
licans led  him  to  return  to  the  democratic  party,
and  in  1868  he  was  its  candidate  for  the  vice-presi-
dency. In  January,  1871,  Gen.  Blair  again  entered
the  legislature  of  Missouri,  and  in  the  same  month
he  was  elected  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate,
where  he  remained  until  1873,  when  he  was  a  can-
didate for  re-election,  but  was  defeated.  At  the
time  of  his  death  he  was  state  superintendent  of
insurance.  He  published  "The  Life  and  Public
Services  of  General  Williain  0.  Butler"  (1848).
— His  son,  Andrew  Alexander,  chemist,  b.  in
Woodford  co.,  Ky.,  20  Sept.,  1846.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1866,  and  sub-
sequently entered  upon  the  practice  of  chemis-
try as  an  analyst.  He  settled  in  St.  Louis,  and
soon  became  an  authority  on  the  analysis  of  iron.
The  analyses  of  coals,  iron  ores,  and  irons  of  Mis-
souri made  for  the  geological  survey  of  that  state
and  published  in  the  report  of  1873  were  executed
by  him  in  conjunction  with  Regis  Chauvenet.  From
1875  till  1878  he  was  chief  chemist  to  the  U.  S.
commission  appointed  to  test  iron,  steel,  and  other
metals,  and  from  1879  till  1881  chief  chemist  to
the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey  and  the  tenth  census.
Afterward  he  became  associated  with  James  C.
Booth  and  T.  H.  Garrett  as  an  analytical  and  con-
sulting chemist  in  Philadelphia.  He  has  pub-
lished papers  on  the  analysis  of  iron  and  similar
subjects  in  the  "American  Journal  of  Science,"
"Metallurgical  Review,"  "Transactions  of  the
American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers,"  and
"American  Chemical  Journal."  Among  his  re-
ports furnished  to  the  government  are  "  Methods
of  Analysis  of  Iron,  Steel,  Copper,  Tin,  Zinc,  and
other  Alloys"  (1878),  and  "Methods  of  Analysis  of
Iron  Ores"  (1881).

BLAIR,  Henry  William,  senator,  b.  in  Camp-
ton,  N.  H.,  6  Dec,  1834.  His  parents  died  before
he  had  completed  his  thirteenth  year,  and  his  boy-
hood was  spent  in  the  family  of  Richard  Bartlett,  of
Campton,  where  he  worked  on  the  farm,  and  attend-
ed school  at  intervals  until  he  was  seventeen,  when
he  began  to  teach,  hoping  to  earn  enough  money  to
take  him  through  college.  Compelled  by  ill  health
to  give  up  this  plan,  he  read  law  with  William
Leverett,  of  Plymouth,  N.  H,,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1859,  and  in  1860  was  elected  prosecuting
attorney  for  Grafton  co.  When  the  civil  war
began  he  enlisted  in  the  15th  New  Hampshire
volunteers,  was  chosen  captain  of  his  company,
soon  became  major,  and  finally  lieutenant-colonel
He  was  twice  wounded  severely  at  the  siege  of
Port  Hudson,  and  was  prevented  by  his  wounds,
and  disease  contracted  in  service,  from  taking  any
active  part  in  the  remainder  of  the  war.  He  was
elected  to  the  New  Hampshire  house  of  representa-
tives in  1866,  and  in  1867  and  1868  to  the  state
senate.  He  served  in  the  U.  S.  house  of  repre-
sentatives from  1875  till  1879,  and,  declining  a  re-
nomination,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  the
latter  year,  and  reelected  in  1885.  Senator  Blair
has  given  much  attention  to  social  questions,  and
IS  an  ardent  temperance  reformer.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  the  "  Blair  Common  School  Bill,"  which
was  introduced  by  him  in  the  47th  congress.  As
passed  by  the  senate  in  April,  1884,  the  bill  ap-
propriates $77,000,000  to  be  distributed  among  the


states  in  proportion  to  their  illiteracv.  In  the
original  bill  the  amount  was  $105,000,000.  In  the
49th  congress  the  senate  again  passed  the  bill,
making  the  appropriation  $79,000,000.  Senator
Blair  has  also  introduced  prohibitory  temperance
and  woman  suffrage  amendments  to  the  national
constitution,  is  the  author  of  the  Blair  scientific
temperance  education  bill  and  the  Blair  pension
bill,  and  has  made  important  speeches  on  finan-
cial subjects.

BLAIR,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1656;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  1  Aug.,  1743.  He
was  educated  in  Scotland,  and  became  a  clergy-
man of  the  Episcopal  church ;  but,  discouraged  by
the  situation  of  that  establishment  in  his  native
country,  he  resigned  his  preferments  and  removed
to  England  in  the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Charles
II.  There  his  talents  brought  him  to  the  notice  of
Compton,  bishop  of  London,  who  prevailed  upon
him  in  1685  to  go  as  a  missionary  to  Virginia.
Here,  in  1689,  he  gained  by  his  ability  the  office  of
commissary,  the  highest  ecclesiastical  post  in  the
province,  by  virtue  of  which  he  had  a  seat  in  the
colonial  council,  presided  at  ecclesiastical  trials,
and  had,  in  general,  the  powers  of  a  bishop.  Per-
ceiving that  the  province  was  greatly  in  need  of  a
seminary,  he  resolved  to  establish  one,  and  began
by  taking  up  a  subscription,  which  amounted  to
£2,500.  In  1691  he  was  sent  by  the  colonial  assem-
bly to  England  to  secure  the  patronage  of  the  king
and  queen,  and  on  14  Feb.,  1692,  obtained  the
charter  of  William  and  Mary  college,  and  was
named  as  its  first  president.  He  did  not  formally
enter  upon  the  duties  of  his  office  until  1729,  al-
though he  watched  carefully  over  the  interests  of
the  institution.  The  college  was  not  at  first  suc-
cessful, as  the  wealthy  planters  still  sent  their  sons
to  England  for  education,  and  in  1705  the  college
building  was  destroyed  by  fire.  Mr.  Blair  was  op-
posed in  his  plans  by  the  royal  governors  and  even
by  the  clergy,  and,  had  it  not  been  for  his  energy,
the  enterprise  would  probably  have  been  given  up.
He  was  for  some  time  president  of  the  colonial
council,  and  rector  of  Williamsburg.  In  1727  he
assisted  in  compiling  "  The  State  of  His  Majesty's
Colony  in  Virginia,"  and  in  1722  published  "  Our
Saviours  Divine  Sermon  on  the  Mount  Explained
and  Recommended  in  divers  Sermons  and  Dis-
courses" (4  vols.,  8vo);  republished  with  a  com-
mendatory preface  by  Dr.  Waterland  (1740).

BLAIR,  Jolin,  statesman,  b.  in  Williamsburg,
Va.,  in  1689;  d.  there,  5  Nov.,  1771.  Pie  was  a
nephew  of  President  James  Blair  noticed  above.
As  early  as  1736  he  was  a  member  of  the  house  of
burgesses,  and  he  was  president  of  the  council,  and
acting  governor  of  Virginia  in  1757-8  and  1768.
Campbell,  on  page  554  of  his  "  History  of  Virginia  "
(Philadelphia,  1860),  gives  a  letter  concerning  the
Baptists,  written  to  the  king's  attorney  of  Spottsyl-
vania  by  Blair,  when  he  was  acting  governor,  and
showing  a  spirit  of  toleration  as  rare  at  that  time
as  it  was  creditable. — His  son,  John,  jurist,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  Va.,  in  1732;  d.  there,  31  Aug.,
1800,  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  college,
studied  law  at  the  Temple,  London,  soon  became
prominent  in  his  profession,  and  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  as  early  as  1765.  On  the  dissolution
of  the  assembly  in  1769,  Blair  was  one  of  those
that  met  at  the  Raleigh  tavern  and  drew  up  the
non-importation  agreement.  In  June,  1776,  he
was  a  member  of  the  committee  that  drew  up  a
plan  for  governing  the  state,  was  chosen  to  the
council,  and  in  1777  became  a  judge  of  the  court  of
appeals.  He  was  afterward  chief  justice,  and  in
1780  judge  of  the  high  court  of  chancery. When


282


BLAIR


BLAIR


the  Virginia  legislature  established  circuit  courts,
and  directed  the  judges  of  the  court  of  appeals  to
perforin  the  duties  of  circuit  judges,  Judge  Blair,
with  his  colleagues,  remonstrated,  and  declared  the
act  unconstitutional.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
convention  that  drew  up  the  federal  constitution,
and  with  Washington  and  Madison,  alone  of  all  the
Virginia  delegates,  voted  for  its  adoption.  He  af-
terward supported  it  also  in  the  state  convention.
In  September,  1789,  he  was  appointed  by  Wash-
ington a  justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  in
1796  resigned  his  seat.

BLAIR,  John  Iiisley,  capitalist,  b.  in  Warren
CO.,  N.  J.,  22  Aug.,  1802.  He  is  directly  descended
from  John  Blair,  who  came  to  this  country  from
Scotland  in  1720.  The  education  received  by  the
boy  was  limited  to  a  few  brief  months  of  schooling
during  the  winter,  and  ceased  when  he  reached  the
age  of  eleven.  About  1813  he  entered  the  store  of
a  relative  in  Hope,  N.  J.,  for  the  purpose  of  learn-
ing business,  and  remained  so  occupied  until  1821,
when  he  settled  in  Blairstown,  N.  J.  Here,  with
his  relative,  John  Blair,  he  established  a  general
country  store,  but  two  years  later  the  partnership
was  dissolved,  and  the  business  continued  inde-
pendently by  John  I.  Blair  before  he  was  of  age.
For  forty  years  he  remained  in  this  place,  constantly
extending  his  business  and  acquiring  Ijranches  at
Marksborough,  Paulina,  Huntsville,  N.  J.,  and  John-
sonsburgh,  N.  Y.,  in  which  his  brothers  and  broth-
ers-in-law were  associated  with  him  as  partners.
During  these  years  Mr.  Blair  was  also  developing
business  interests  in  other  lines,  such  as  flour-mills,
the  manufacture  of  cotton,  and  the  marlfeting  of
the  produce  of  the  country  round  about,  and  also  in
wholesaling  many  goods  to  other  stores.  He  like-
wise filled  the  office  of  postmaster  in  Blairstown  for
forty  years.  About  1838  he  became  associated  with
others  in  the  development  of  iron-mines  in  the
vicinity  of  Oxford  Furnace,  a  forge  that  had  been
in  operation  in  pre-re volution ary  times.  Success
in  this  venture  led,  in  1846,  to  his  being  connected
with  the  organization  of  the  Lackawanna  coal  and
iron  company.  His  ownership  and  interest  in  the
building  of  railroads  for  the  transportation  of  the
outputs  from  the  mines,  of  which  he  was  part  pro-
prietor, followed  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  road
from  Owego  to  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  was  bought  and  re-
built by  him  and  his  associates  during  1849.  Later,
the  Legget's  Gap  road,  from  Scranton  to  Great
Bend,  was  constructed,  and  thrown  open  in  1851.
In  1852,  by  consolidation,  building,  and  reorgani-
zation, the  corporation  known  as  the  Delaware,
Lackawanna,  and  "Western  railroad  came  into  ex-
istence. In  the  development  of  this  road  he
was  actively  interested,  and  is  one  of  its  largest
stockholders.  It  has  since  been  entirely  rebuilt,
and  is  a  most  valuable  property,  transporting  over
6,700,000  tons  of  coal  in  1885,  and  its  combined
cost  and  capital  amount  to  |100,000.000.  He  has
been  engaged  in  railroad  building  in  Iowa,  Wis-
consin, Kansas,  Nebraska,  Dakota,  Missouri,  and
Texas.  He  was  the  organizer  of  the  railroad  sys-
tem of  Iowa,  having  built  the  first  railroad  across
that  state  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Missouri
rivers,  and  subsequently  more  than  2,000  miles  in
Iowa  and  Nebraska,  ile  was  one  of  the  original
directors  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  and  is  now
a  director  in  seventeen  companies,  as  well  as  presi-
dent of  three.  Mr.  Blair  is  likewise  controlling
owner  of  a  large  number  of  other  wealthy  corpora-
tions both  in  the  east  and  the  west.  He  has  been
a  life-long  attendant  upon  and  supporter  of  the
Presbyterian  church,  to  whose  institutions  he  has
at  various  times  given  upward  of  $500,000. Among


these  benefactions  is  $70,000  to  the  college  of  New
Jersey,  Princeton,  of  which,  in  1866,  he  became  a
trustee;  $57,000  to  Lafayette;  and  upward  of
$100,000  to  the  Blair  Presbyterian  Academy.  In
the  eighty  towns  that  he  has  laid  out  in  the  west
more  than  100  churches  have  been  erected,  largely
through  his  liberality.  In  politics  Mr.  Blair  has
always  been  a  strong  republican,  and  he  was  the
candidate  of  that  party  for  governor  of  New  Jer-
sey in  1868.  He  has  also  been  a  delegate  to  every
national  republican  convention  since  the  organiza-
tion. One  of  his  daughters  married  Charles  Scrib-
ner,  founder  of  the  publishing-house  in  New  York.

BLAIR,  Montg-omery,  statesman,  b.  in  Frank-
lin CO.,  Ky.,  10  May,  1813;  d.  in  Silver  Spring,
Md.,  27  July,  1883.  He  was  a  son  of  Francis  P.
Blair,  Sr.,  was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1835,
and,  after  serving  in  the  Seminole  war,  resigned
his  commission  on  20  May,  1836.  He  then  stud-
ied law,  and,  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  in
1839,  began  practice  in  St.  Louis.  He  was  ap-
pointed IJ.  S.  district  attorney  for  Missouri,  and'in
1842  was  elected  mayor  of  St.  Louis.  He  was
raised  to  the  bench  as  judge  of  the  court  of  com-
mon pleas  in  1843,  but  resigned  in  1849.  He  re-
moved to  Maryland  in  1852,  and  in  1855  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  solicitor  in  the  court  of  claims.  He
was  removed  from  this  office  by  President  Bu-
chanan in  1858,  having  left  the  democratic  party
on  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise.  In  1857
he  acted  as  counsel  for  the  plaintiff  in  the  cele-
brated Dred  Scott  case.  He  presided  over  the
Maryland  republican  convention  in  1860,  and  in
1861  was  appointed  postmaster-general  by  Presi-
dent Lincoln.  _  It  is  said  that  he  alone  of  Mr.
Lincoln's  cabinet  opposed  the  surrender  of  Fort
Sumter,  and  held  his  resignation  upon  the  issue.
As  postmaster-general  he  prohibited  the  sending  of
disloyal  papers  through  the  mails,  and  introduced
various  reforms,  such  as  money-orders,  free  deliv-
ery in  cities,  and  postal  railroad  cars.  In  1864  Mr.
Blair,  who  was  not  altogether  in  accord  with  tlie
policy  of  the  administration,  told  the  president
that  he  would  resign  whenever  the  latter  thought
it  necessary,  and  on  23  Sept.  Mr.  Lincoln,  in  a
friendly  letter,  accepted  his  offer.  After  this  Mr.
Blair  acted  with  the  democratic  party,  and  in
1876-'7  vigorously  attacked  Mr.  Hayes's  title  to
the  office  of  president.

BLAIR,  Samuel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ulster,  Ire-
land, 14  June,  1712;  d.  5  July,  1751.  He  came,
while  young,  to  Pennsylvania,  and  received  his
education  at  William  Tennant's  "  Log  College,"  in
Neshaminy,  Pa.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
Philadelphia  presbytery  on  9  Nov.,  1733,  and  in
September,  1734,  accepted  a  call  to  Middletown
and  Shrewsbury.  N.  J.  He  was  one  of  the  original
members  of  New  Brunswick  presbji:ery,  formed  in
1738,  and  in  November,  1739,  took  charge  of  the
church  at  New  Londonderrv,  or  Fogg's  Manor,  in
Chester  co..  Pa.  Shortly  after  his  settlement  there
he  established  a  seminary,  at  which  young  men
were  educated,  some  of  whom  were  afterward
prominent  in  the  Presbyterian  church,  among
them  Rev.  Samuel  Davies  and  Rev.  John  Rodgers.
In  the  controversy  about  revivals,  which  followed
the  visit  of  Whitefield  to  this  country,  and  which
finally  divided  the  Presbyterian  church,  Mr.  Blair
sided  with  the  so-called  "  New  Side."  His  princi-
pal writings  were  collected  by  his  brother  John
(Philadelphia,  1754).  with  an  elegy  by  Samuel  Da-
vies,  and  Dr.  Finley's  funeral  sermon.  This  vol-
ume contains  an  elaborate  treatise  on  "  Pi-edestina-
tion  and  Reprobation."— His  brother,  Joliii,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Ireland  in  1720 ;  d.  in  Walkill,  Orange


BLAKE

CO.,  N.  Y.,  8  Dec,  1771,  was  educated  at  the  "Log
College"  of  Dr.  Tennant.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  Newcastle  presbytery,  belonging  to
the  "  New  Side "  division  of  the  Presl)yterian
church,  and  on  27  Dec,  1742,  was  ordained 'pastor
of  three  churches  in  Cumberland  co..  Pa.  While
here  he  made  two  visits  to  Virginia,  the  last  in
1746,  and  organized  several  new  congregations.
As  his  parishes  were  frontier  settlements,  exposed
to  Indian  depredations,  Mr.  Blair  resigned  his
charge  on  28  Dec,  174S,  and  returned  to  the  more
civilized  part  of  the  colony.  In  1757  he  succeeded
his  brother  as  pastor  at  Fogg's  Manor,  Pa.,  and
also  as  head  of  the  seminary.  In  1767  he  was
chosen  professor  of  divinity  at  Princeton,  and  vice-
president  of  the  college,  acting  also  as  president
for  a  short  time.  In  1769,  as  the  college  proved
unable  to  support  a  professorship  of  divinity,  Mr.
Blair  resigned,  and,  on  19  May  of  that  year,  accept-
ed a  call  to  Walkill,  where  he  remained  until  his
death.  He  published  a  treatise  on  "Regenera-
tioTi,"  Calvinistic  in  its  tone;  a  treatise  on  the
"  Terms  of  Admission  to  the  Lord's  Supper,"  and
several  sermons. — John's  son,  John  Diirbarrow,
b.in  Fogg's  Manor,  15  Oct.,  1759;  d.  in  Richmond,
Va.,  in  January,  1823,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1775,  and  preached  for  many  years  in  Rich-
mond.—Samuel,  son  of  Samuel,  noticed  above,
clergyman,  b.  in  Fogg's  Manor,  Pa.,  in  1741 ;  d.  in
Germantown,  Pa.,  24  Sept.,  1818,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1760,  and  was  tutor  there  from  1761
'  till  1764,  when  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  New-
!  castle  presbytery.  In  1767  Mr.  Blair,  though  but
]  twenty-six  years  old,  was  elected  to  the  presidency
'  of  Princeton  college.  Dr.  Witherspoon  having  de-
I  dined  the  first  call  of  the  trustees.  But  learning
:  that,  owing  to  a  change  of  circumstances.  Dr.
I  Witherspoon  was  willing  to  accept,  Mr.  Blair  de-
clined in  his  favor.  In  November,  1766,  he  was
settled,  as  colleague  of  Dr.  Sewall,  over  the  Old
South  church,  Boston.  While  on  his  way  thither
from  Philadelphia,  he  was  shipwrecked,  and  nar-
rowly escaped  with  his  life.  His  health  was  much
injured  by  the  exposure,  and  in  the  spring  of  1769
he  had  a  severe  illness,  which,  in  connection  with
some  theological  diiferences  between  him  and  his
congregation,  induced  him  to  resign.  He  left  the
Old  South  church  in  1769,  and  in  the  same  year
married  a  daughter  of  Dr.  Shippen,  of  Philadel-
phia. The  rest  of  his  life  was  passed  in  German-
town,  Pa.,  where  he  was  the  principal  founder  of
the  English  Presbyterian  church,  and  preached
gratuitously  for  a  season.  He  was  several  times  a
member  of  the  Pennsylvania  assembly,  and  was  for
two  years  chaplain  to  the  continental  congress.
In  1790  the  university  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  He  published  an  oration  on
the  death  of  George  II.  (1761).

BLAKE,  CLarence  John,  physician,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  23  Feb.,  1843.  He  studied  at  Lawrence
scientific  school,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Harvard
medical  school  in  1865,  after  which  he  spent  some
time  abroad  and  received  the  degree  of  "  obstetrical
magistruin  "  at  Vienna  in  1867.  He  began  to  prac-
tise in  Boston  in  1869,  and  has  devoted  his  atten-
tion principally  to  diseases  of  the  ear.  In  1871  he
became  aural  surgeon  in  the  Massachusetts  charita-
ble eye  and  ear  infirmary,  and  during  the  same
year  was  appointed  instructor  in  otology  in  Har-
vard medical  school.  He  is  a  member  of  medical
and  scientific  societies,  and  was  president  of  the
American  otological  society  in  1876-7.  Dr.  Blake
has  invented  several  surg'ical  instruments  for  use
m  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  ear.  principally
the  membrana  tympani  phonautograph. He  has


BLAKE


283


published  papers  on  subjects  in  acoustics  and  otol-
ogy, and  was  the  editor  of  the  "  American  Journal
of  Otology "  in  1879-'82,  and  also  of  Riidinger's
"  Atlas  of  the  Osseous  Anatomy  of  the  Human
Ear  "  (Boston,  1870).

BLAKE,  Eli  Whitney,  inventor,  b.  in  W^est-
borough,  Mass.,  27  Jan.,  1795 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  18  Aug.,  1886.  He  studied  at  Leicester
(Mass.)  Academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1816,  after  which  he  studied  law  with  Judge  Gould
in  Litchfield,  Conn.  But  this  he  soon  abandoned
at  the  request  of  his  uncle,  Eli  Whitney,  who  de-
sired his  assistance  in  erecting  and  organizing  the
gun-factory  at  Whitneyville.  Here  he  made  im-
portant improvements  in  the  machinery  and  in  the
processes  of  manufacturing  arms.  On  the  death
of  Mr.  Whitney  in  1825  he  associated  with  himself
his  brother  Philos,  and  continued  to  manage  the
business.  In  1836  they  were  joined  by  another
brother,  John  A.,  and,  under  the  firm-name  of
Blake  Brothers,  established  at  Westville  a  factory
for  the  production  of  door-locks  and  latches  of
their  own  invention.  The  business  was  afterward
extended  so  as  to  include  casters,  hinges,  and  other
articles  of  hardware,  most  of  which  were  covered
by  patents.  In  this  branch  of  manufacture,  Blake
Brothers  were  among  the  pioneers,  and  long  held
the  front  rank.  The  ideas  that  they  originated
still  characterize  the  forms  of  American  locks,
latches,  casters,  hinges,  and  other  articles  of  house-
furnishing  hardware  wherever  manufactured.  In
1852  Mr.  Blake  was  appointed  to  superintend  the
macadamizing  of  the  city  streets,  and  his  attention
was  directed  to  the  want  of  a  proper  machine  for
breaking  stone.  This  problem  he  solved  in  1857
by  the  invention  of  the  Blake  stone-breaker,  which,
for  originality,  simplicity,  and  effectiveness,  has
justly  been  regarded  by  experts  as  unique.  This
crusher  is  now  used  in  all  parts  of  the  world  for
breaking  ores,  road  metal,  and  similar  purposes.
Mr.  Blake  was  one  of  the  founders,  and  for  several
years  president,  of  the  Connecticut  Academy  of
Science.  He  contributed  valuable  papers  to  the
"  American  Journal  of  Science  "  and  other  period-
icals, the  most  important  of  which  he  published  in
a  single  volume  as  "  Original  Solutions  of  Several
Problems  in  Aerodynamics  "  (1882). — His  son,  Eli
Whitney,  b.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  20  April,  1836,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1857,  and  then  spent  a
year  at  Sheffield  Scientific  School,  after  which  he
studied  chemistry  and  physics  in  the  Universities
of  Heidelberg,  Marburg,  and  Berlin.  Prof.  Blake
has  been  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  University
of  Vermont  (1867) ;  professor  of  physics  at  Cornell
(1868-'70);  acting  professor  of  physics  at  Colum-
bia (1868-9);  and  professor  of  physics  at  Brown
(1870-'86).  He  is  a  fellow  of  the  American  Associa-
tion for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  and  member
of  other  scientific  bodies,  to  whose  proceedings  he
has  frequently  contributed  valuable  papers.

BLAKE,  (xeor^e  A.  H.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania in  September,  1812 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.,
27  Oct.,  1884.  He  became  lieutenant  in  the  2d  dra-
goons 11  June,  1836,  was  made  captain  in  Decem-
ber, 1839,  and  was  in  the  actions  with  the  Seminoles
at  Port  Miller  and  Jupiter  inlet,  in  1841.  During
the  Mexican  war,  in  1846-'7,  he  was  in  the  battles
at  Cerro  Gordo,  Puebla,  Contreras,  Molino  del  Rey,
Chapultepec,  and  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  was  bre-
vetted  major  for  gallant  conduct  at  St.  Augustine,
Mexico.  In  July,  1850,  he  became  major  of  the  1st
dragoons,  and  served  against  the  Apache  and  Nava-
jo Indians.  In  May,  1861,  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  1st  tJ.  S.  cavalry,  and  colonel  on  15
Feb.,  1862. He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Gaines's


284


BLAKE


BLAKE


Mill,  27  June,  1862,  where  he  was  slightly  wounded,
and  was  also  in  the  actions  at  Aldie,  Middletown,
Upperville,  and  at  Gettysburg,  where  he  distin-
guished himself.  He  was  afterward  chief  commis-
sary of  musters  for  the  department  of  Virginia,  and
in  the  cavalry  corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.
On  18  March,  1865,  he  was  bre vetted  brigadier-gen-
eral U.  S.  A.  for  his  services  at  Gettysburg.  From
February,  1865,  till  March,  1866,  he  was  member  of
a  military  commission  B,t  Washington,  and  after-
ward commander  at  Fort  Vancouver,  Washington
territory. On  15  Dec,  1870,  he  was  retired.

BLAKE,  George  Smith,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Worcester,  Mass.,  in  1803;  d.  in  Ijongwood,  Mass.,
24  June,  1871.  His  father,  Francis  Blake,  was  a
prominent  lawyer  in  Worcester.  On  1  Jan.,  1818,
he  was  appointed  to  the  navy  as  midshipman.  On
5  Nov.,  1821,  the  schooner  "  Alligator,"  on  which
he  was  serving,  was  attacked  near  the  Cape  Verde
islands  by  a  Portuguese  ship,  which  was  captured
and  sent  to  the  United  States,  with  Blake  as  her
executive  officer.  Commissioned  lieutenant,  31
March,  1827,  he  cruised  in  the  "Grampus,"  on  the
West  India  station,  for  the  suppression  of  piracy.
He  was  employed  on  a  survey  of  Narragansett  bay
in  1832,  was  attached  to  the  navy-yard  at  Philadel-
phia in  1833,  and  from  1837  till  1848  was  connect-
ed with  the  coast  survey.  The  secretary  of  the
treasury,  in  a  letter  to  the  navy  department,  speaks
highly  of  Lieut.  Blake's  zeal'  and  fidelity  in  this
service.  In  1846,  while  commanding  the  brig
"  Perry "  in  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  he  was  wrecked
on  the  Florida  coast  in  the  great  hurricane,  but
succeeded  in  getting  his  vessel  off,  and  brought
her  to  Philadelphia  under  jurymasts.  The  secre-
tary of  the  navy,  in  a  letter  to  Lieut.  Blake,  com-
mended his  conduct  on  this  occasion.  He  was
made  commander  27  Feb.,  1847,  and  attached  to
the  bureau  of  construction.  From  1849  till  1852
he  was  fleet  captain  in  the  Mediterranean.  On  14
Sept.,  1855,  he  was  made  captain,  and  assigned  to
special  duty  at  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  in  connection  with
the  building  of  the  Stevens  battery  there.  Li  1858
he  became  superintendent  of  the  naval  academy  at
Annapolis.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  his
prompt  measures  saved  the  government  property
at  the  academy  from  capture,  and  he  superintend-
ed the  removal  of  the  school  to  Newport,  R.  I.  He
was  commissioned  commodore  on  16  July,  1862,
left  the  naval  academy  in  1865,  and  from  1866  till
1869  he  was  light-house  inspector  of  the  second  dis-
trict, residing  at  Boston.

BLAKE,  Homer  Crane,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Cleveland.  Ohio,  1  Feb.,  1822;  d.  21  Jan.,  1880.
He  was  appointed  to  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,
2  March,  1840,  and  served  on  the  frigate  "Con-
stellation," of  the  East  India  squadron,  1841-3;
the  sloop  "Preble,"  1843-5;  at  the  naval  acade-
my in  1846,  when  he  was  made  passed  midship-
man ;  and  again  on  the  "  Preble  "  until  1848.  Un-
til 1856  he  served  on  receiving-ships  at  New
York  and  Boston,  with  the  exception  of  two  years
in  the  Pacific,  and  in  1855  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant. From  1857  till  1859  he  served  on  the  "  St.
Lawrence,"  of  the  Brazil  squadron,  and  from  1861
till  1862  on  the  "  Sabine,"  of  the  home  squadron.
He  was  then  made  lieutenant-commander  and
given  the  command  of  the  "  Hatteras,"  of  the  west-
ern gulf  blockading  squadron,  formerly  a  merchant
steamer.  On  11  July,  1863,  the  "  Hatteras,"  while
at  anchor  off  Galveston,  Texas,  was  ordered  to
chase  a  suspicious  vessel,  which  proved  to  be  the
confederate  cruiser  "  Alabama,"  and  after  a  short
action  Commander  Blake  was  obliged  to  surrender,
as  the  "Hatteras," no match  for  her  adversary.


was  disabled  and  sinking.  The  crew  was  taken
off,  and  the  "  Hatteras  "  went  down  in  ten  minutes.
Blake  was  carried  to  Jamaica,  where  he  was  pa-
roled, returned  to  the  United  States,  and  was  soon
exchanged.  From  1863  till  1865  he  commanded
the  steamer  "  Utah,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  block-
ading squadron,  where  he  did  good  service,  shell-
ing three  divisions  of  the  confederate  army  on  the
James  in  1864,  and  assisting  to  repel  an  attack  on
the  Army  of  the  James  on  23  Jan.,  1865.  He  was
made  commander,  3  March,  1866,  commanded  the
"Swatara"  and  the  "Alaska,"  and  became  captain,
25  May,  1871.  From  1873  till  1878  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  naval  rendezvous  at  New  York,  and
in  1880  was  promoted  to  commodore.

BLAKE,  John  Lauris,  author,  b.  in  North-
wood,  N.  H.,  21  Dec,  1788 ;  d.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,  6
July,  1857.  When  a  boy  he  alternately  worked  on
his  father's  farm  and  attended  the  district  school.
Showing  a  taste  for  mechanics,  at  thirteen  years  of
age  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  cabinet-maker,  and
afterward  labored  as  a  journeyman  in  Salem,  Mass.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1812,  and  licensed
to  preach  bv  the  Rhode  Island  association  of  Con-
gregational ministers  in  1813 ;  but,  becoming  inter-
ested in  the  Episcopal  church,  was  ordained  deacon
by  Bishop  Griswold  in  1815.  Soon  afterward  he
organized  the  parish  of  St.  Paul's,  in  Pawtueket,
where  he  remained  until  1820.  In  that  year  he  re-
turned to  New  Hampshire  and  took  charge  of  the
churches  in  Concord  and  Hopkinton.  Pie  also  or-
ganized a  young  ladies'  school  in  Concord,  and  in
1822  removed  it  to  Boston,  remaining  at  its  head
until  1830,  and  making  for  it  a  high  reputation.
From  1824  till  1832  he  was  rector  of  St.  Matt  lie  w's
church,  Boston,  and  subsequently  devoted  himself
entirely  to  literary  work.  He  was  editor  of  the
"  Literary  Advertiser  "  and  the  "  Gospel  Advocate,"
and  was  an  active  member  of  the  Boston  school
committee  for  several  years.  He  wrote  or  com-
piled about  fifty  volumes,  mostly  text-books,  era-
bracing  treatises  on  astronomy,  chemistry,  natural
philosophy,  botany,  geography,  and  history.  His
first  work  was  a  "Text-Book  of  Geography  and
Chronology  "  (1814).  His  "  Biographical  Diction-
ary "  was  published  in  New  York  in  1835,  and  just
before  his  death  he  published  a  revised  edition  un-
der the  title  "  Universal  Biographical  Dictionary  "
(Philadelphia,  1857),  on  which  he  had  spent  many
years  of  hard  work.  He  was  also  the  author  of  the
"  Family  Encyclopaedia  of  Agriculture  and  Domes-
tic Economy "  and  the  "  Farmer's  Every-Day .
Book"  (New  York,  1852);  "Modern  Farmer^'
(1853) ;  "  Letters  on  Confirmation  " ;  and  several
small  books  for  school  libraries,  such  as  the  "  Book
of  Nature  Laid  Open,"  "  Wonders  of  the  Earth,"
and  "  Wonders  of  Art "  (Troy,  N.  Y.,  1845).

BLAKE,  Joseph,  colonist,  b.  about  1620;  d.
about  1700.  He  was  a  brother  of  the  famous  Eng-
lish admiral,  and  from  him  inherited  a  considerable
fortune,  which  he  largely  devoted  to  the  cause  of
emigration.  At  that  time  (1683)  the  Carolinas  were
especially  attractive  to  English  colonists,  and  Blake
conducted  to  Charleston  from  Somersetshire  a  com-
pany of  exceptionally  good  character,  as  is  attested
by  a  contemporary  historian.  Blake  was  impatient
even  of  such  religious  oppression  as  existed  under
Charles  II.,  and,  fearing  a  Romanist  successor,  did
all  in  his  power  to  favor  Protestant  emigration  to
America.  As  a  result,  large  numbers  of  Protestant
English  and  Scotch-Irish  settled  along  this  section
of  the  coast.

BLAKE,  Lillie  Devereux,  reformer,  b.  in  Ral-
eigh, N.  C.,  12  Aug.,  1835.  She  was  educated  in
New  Haven  at  Miss  Apthorp's  school,  and  subse-


BLAKE


BLAKE


285


(M^  Mi^-e^r-i^c^^^.


a


quently  took  the  Yale  course  with  tutors  at  home.
She  became  interested  in  woman's  enfranchisement
in  1869,  and  has  since  spoken  extensively  on  that
subject,  addressing  committees  of  congress  and
state  legislatures  on  the  question.  In  1876  she  was
a  member  of  the  delegation  from  the  national  asso-
ciation, that  presented  the  woman's  declaration  of

rights  in  Phila-
delphia on  4  Ju-
ly, 1876.  For
five  years  she
has  been  presi-
dent of  the  New
York  State  Wom-
an Suffrage  As-
sociation, and  she
was  the  first  per-
son to  ask  that
Columbia  college
be  open  to  wom-
en. Mrs.  Blake
has  taken  an  act-
ive interest  in
many  political
campaigns,  and
was  instrumen-
tal in  securing
the  passage  of
the  law  giving
school-suffrage  to  the  women  of  New  York  state.  She
has  been  twice  married :  in  1855  to  Frank  G.  Quay
Umsted,  who  died  in  1859,  and  in  1866  to  Grenfill
Blake.  She  has  written  serial  stories,  short  sketches,
and  letters,  for  various  periodicals  and  newspapers.
Her  published  works  include  "  South  wold  "  (New
York,  1859) ;  "  Rockford,  or  Sunshine  and  Storm  "
(1863) ;  "  Fettered  for  Life  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Woman's
rlace  To-day,"  a  series  of  lectures  in  reply  to  Dr.
Morgan  Dix's  lenten  sermons  on  the  "  Calling  of  a
Christian  Woman  "  (1883).

BLAKE,  Thomas  Holdsworth,  politician,  b.  in
Calvert  co,,  Md.,  14  June,  1792 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  28  Nov.,  1849.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  and  then  studied  law  in  Washington,
D.  C.  In  1814  he  served  in  the  militia  of  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Bladensburg.  Subsequently  he  removed  to  Ken-
tucky, and  thence  to  Indiana,  where  he  began  the
practice  of  law  at  Terre  Haute,  becoming  prose-
cuting attorney  and  judge  of  the  circuit  courts.  He
then  relinquished  his  profession  and  was  engaged
in  business  for  several  years,  and  also  for  some  time
a  member  of  the  Indiana  legislature.  In  1827  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  an  Adams  republican,
but  he  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  reelection.
From  May,  1842,  till  April,  1845,  he  was  commis-
sioner of  the  general  land  office,  having  received
the  appointment  to  that  position  from  President
Tyler.  Later  he  was  appointed  president  of  the
Wabash  and  Erie  canal  company,  and  also  sent  to
Europe  as  the  financial  agent  of  the  state  of  In-
diana, where  he  made  satisfactory  arrangements
with  its  public  creditors.

BLAKE,  William  Hume,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Kiltegan,  Wicklow,  Ireland,  10  March,  1809 ;  d.
in  Toronto,  17  Nov.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at
Trinity  college,  Dublin,  and  studied  surgery  under
Surgeon-General  Sir  Philip  Crampton,  and  also
studied  theology,  but  before  completing  his  course
he  emigrated  to  Canada.  He  was  for  some  time  a
farmer  near  Strathroy,  county  of  Middlesex,  On-
tario, before  he  removed  to  Toronto  (then  known
as  York),  and  studied  law.  When  the  Mackenzie
rebellion  began  in  1837  he  was  appointed  pay-
master of  the  Royal  Foresters. In  183B  he  was


called  to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada,  and  at  once  took
a  leading  place  in  his  profession.  In  1847  Mr.
Blake  was  elected  to  parliament  for  East  \ork
(now  the  county  of  Ontario),  and  became  solicitor-
general  in  the  Baldvvin-Lafontaine  ministry.  In
November,  1849,  he  was  appointed  to  the  chan-
cellorship  of  Upper  Canada.  He  retired  from  the
bench  in  I860.— His  son,  Edward,  statesman,  was
b.  in  Adelaide,  Middlesex  co.,  Ontario,  13  Oct.,
1833.  He  is  descended,  on  his  father's  side,  from
the  Blakes  of  Castlegrove,  Galway,  and  on  his
mother's  from  William  Hume,  M.  P.  for  Wicklow.
He  was  born  on  his  father's  farm,  but  was  taken
to  Toronto  when  a  year  old.  The  son  followed,
professionally,  closely  in  his  father's  footsteps,  as
did  also  his  younger  brother,  Samuel  Hume  Blake,
who  never  entered  public  life,  but  was  raised  at
a  very  early  age  to  the  post  of  vice-chancellor  in
the  court  over  which  his  father  formerly  pre-
sided. Edward  Blake  was  educated  at  Upper
Canada  college  and  University  college,  Toronto,
was  graduated  from  the  latter  with  honors  in  1857.
He  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1859,  and  rose  rapidly
to  a  foremost  position  as  a  chancery  practitioner.
In  1867  he  was  a  candidate  for  election  at  once  to
the  House  of  Commons  of  the  Dominion,  and  to
the  Legislative  Assembly  of  Ontario.  Having  been
elected  as  a  member  for  South  Bruce,  he  was
chosen  leader  of  the  opposition  in  the  Ontario  As-
sembly very  soon  after  it  began  its  course,  and  dur-
ing the  first  parliamentary  term  frequently  intro-
duced bills,  many  of  which  were  voted  down,  only
to  be  taken  up  afterward  and  carried  through  as
government  measures.  A  principle  that  Mr.  Blake
always  kept  before  the  public  was  the  obligation
resting  on  the  government  to  give  the  people's
representatives

detailed  knowl-

edge  of  the  des-
tination of  pub-
lic moneys  be-
fore they  are
voted  by  parlia-
ment. This  very
principle  was
the  final  issue  on
which  the  Sand-
field  Macdonald
government  was
defeated  in  1871,
and  it  therefore
became  the  most
important  plank

Mr. Blake re-  ''— ^ '

tained  the  lead-
ership of  the  opposition  until  20  Dec,  1871,  when
he  succeeded  the  Hon.  John  Sandfield  Macdonald
as  premier  of  the  Ontario  legislature,  but  only  re-
tained the  ofiice  for  one  session,  when  he  resigned,
owing  to  the  passing  of  the  dual  representation  act.
In  1873  the  conservative  ministry,  presided  over  by
Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,  was  compelled  to  resign,
and  the  liberal  party  came  at  once  into  power,  with
Alexander  Mackenzie  as  premier.  In  November,
1873,  Mr.  Blake  was  made  a  member  of  the  Cana-
dian cabinet  under  the  Mackenzie  administration,
and  he  held,  for  various  periods,  the  office  of  min-
ister of  justice  and  the  portfolio  of  president  of
the  council.  He  was  offered  successively  the
chancellorship  of  Ontario  and  the  chief  justice-
ship of  the  supreme  court  of  the  Dominion,  both
of  which  he  refused.  While  he  was  minister  of
justice  it  fell  to  his  lot  to  discuss,  by  correspond-


286


BLAKE


BLAKELEY


ence  with  the  secretary  of  state  for  the  colonies,
Lord  Carnarvon,  a  somewhat  important  point  in
connection  with  the  relation  of  Canada  to  the
mother-country.  Long  after  the  Red  river  insur-
rection was  repressed,  the  final  disposal  of  the
chief  insurgents  continued  to  be  a  difficult  ques-
tion, owing  to  uncertainty  as  to  what  had  been
really  promised  to  them.  Lord  Dufferin  under-
took to  cut  the  Gordian  knot  by  an  exercise  of  the
royal  prerogative  under  his  "  instructions  "  (by  com-
muting the  death  sentence  passed  upon  Lepine  into
exile),  without  taking  the  advice  of  his  ministers.
A  request  was  then  sent  to  the  imperial  govern-
ment to  amend  the  instructions,  so  that  thereafter
the  prerogative  of  pardon,  like  all  other  preroga-
tives, should  be  exercisable  by  the  governor  only
on  the  advice  of  his  ministers.  To  this  Lord  Car-
narvon demurred,  but  Mr.  Blake's  arguments  at
last  convinced  the  imperial  authorities  of  the  ab-
surdity and  danger  of  leaving  the  way  open  to  a
governor  to  create  serious  trouble  between  the  two
countries,  and  the  obnoxious  instruction  was  modi-
fied as  desired.  The  general  election  of  1878  was
disastrous  to  the  Mackenzie  administration,  and
among  other  defeated  candidates  was  Mr.  Blake,
who  had  sat  for  South  Bruce  for  two  parliaments.
He  remained  out  of  the  Commons  for  one  session,
and,  when  he  returned  to  it  as  member  for  West
Durham,  he  was  chosen  leader  of  the  Liberal  party.
The  discarding  of  Mr.  Mackenzie,  and  the  selection
of  Mr.  Blake  as  the  leader  of  the  Liberals,  did  not
take  place  without  a  decided  protest  on  the  part  of
many  prominent  in  the  politics  of  the  party,  as
well  as  among  the  rank  and  file,  and  the  result  was
a  lack  of  unanimity  among  the  liberals  after  Mr.
Blake's  assumption  of  the  leadership.  He  is  a  very
fluent  public  speaker,  and  impresses  an  audience
with  the  consciousness  of  his  exhaustless  resources ;
but  he  fails  to  create  that  enthusiasm  and  devotion
in  his  followers  to  which  his  great  political  oppo-
nent. Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,  owes  his  most  signal
successes.  In  the  session  of  the  Dominion  parlia-
ment of  1886  Mr.  Blake  spoke  in  favor  of  the
Landry  motion,  the  object  of  which  was  to  censure
the  government  for  the  execution  of  Riel,  the  leader
of  the  northwest  rebellion.  The  motion  was  lost
by  a  large  majority,  many  of  the  leading  liberals
voting  with  the  government.  In  1876  Mr.  Blake
visited  England  and  received  many  marks  of  pub-
lic esteem.  He  has  always  enjoyed  the  confidence
of  his  fellow-members  of  the  law  society  of  the
province,  of  which  he  has  for  years  been  the  pre-
siding and  chief  executive  oificer.  He  has  been
equally  fortunate  in  securing  the  suffrages  of  his
fellow-graduates  of  the  Provincial  university,  who
have  repeatedly  elected  him  by  acclamation  to  the
post  of  chancellor.  He  declined  the  honor  of  the
knighthood  in  1877,  as  his  father  did  in  1853. —
Another  son,  Samuel  Hume,  jurist,  b.  in  Toronto,
31  Aug.,  1835,  received  his  education  by  private
tuition  and  at  Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto.  On
leaving  college  he  spent  four  years  with  the  firm
of  Ross,  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Toronto,  at  the  expiration
of  which  period  he  began  the  study  of  law,  and  at
the  same  time  took  a  course  in  arts  in  University
College,  Toronto,  being  graduated  there  and  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  m  1858.  He  then  entered  into
partnership  with  his  brother,  and  the  firm  became
known  as  that  of  E.  &  S.  II.  Blake.  He  was  vice-
chancellor  of  Ontario  from  1872  till  16  May,  1881.
BLAKE,  William  Phipps,  mineralogist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  1  June,  1826.  He  studied  at  the
Yale  scientific  school,  and  in  1852  was  one  of  the
seven  who  received  the  newly  created  degree  of
Ph.  B. In  1853  he  became  geologist  and  mineral-


ogist for  a  U.  S.  Pacific  railroad  expedition.  He
edited  the  "  Mining  Magazine  "  from  1859  till  I860,
and  from  1861  till  1863  was  employed  as  a  mining
engineer,  and  in  connection  with  explorations  in
Japan,  China,  and  Alaska.  In  1864  he  became
professor  of  mineralogy  and  geology  in  the  college
of  California.  He  has  been  connected  with  many
industrial  exhibitions,  publishing  professional  re-
ports, and  numerous  papers  on  scientific  subjects,
and  has  invented  improvements  in  metallurgieai
machinery.  His  report  on  the  precious  metals,
forming  one  of  the  government  volumes  on  the
Paris  exposition  of  1867,  is  full  of  valuable  infor-
mation. Pie  was  the  first  to  recognize  the  tellur-
ides  among  the  products  of  California,  and  was  also
the  first  to  draw  attention  to  the  platinum  metals
associated  with  the  gold-washings  of  that  state.

BLAKE,  William  Rufus,  actor,  b.  in  Halifax,
Nova  Scotia,  in  1805 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  April,
1863.  He  was  of  Irish  parentage.  When  only
seventeen  years  old  he  went  on  the  stage  at  Hali-
fax, N.  S.,  taking  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,
in  "  Richard  the  Third,"  with  a  company  of  stroll-
ing players.  His  first  appearance  in  New  York
was  in  1824,  at  the  old  Chatham  theatre,  as  Fred-
erick, in  "The  Poor  Gentleman,"  and  in  "The
Three  Singles."  While  playing  at  the  Tremont
theatre,  Boston,  in  1827,  he  received  the  first  call
before  the  curtain  ever  given  to  an  actor  in  this
country.  In  1839  he  visited  England,  making  his
first  appearance  there  in  the  Haymarket  theatre,
London.  On  21  April,  1863,  while  playing  Sir
Peter  Teazle,  in  the  Boston  theatre,  he  was  sud-
denly taken  ill,  and  died  the  next  day.  Mr.  Blake
was  a  man  of  good  education,  and  a  fiuent  speaker.
He  excelled  in  the  delineation  of  old  men.  One  of
his  best  characters  was  that  of  Jesse  Rural  in  "  Old
Heads  and  Young  Hearts."  He  was,  at  different
times,  stage  manager  of  the  Tremont  theatre,
Boston,  joint  manager  of  the  Walnut  street  theatre,
Philadelphia,  and  stage  manager  of  the  Broadway
theatre,  New  York.  He  was  the  author  of  the
plays  "  Nero  " ;  "  The  Turned  Head  " ;  an  adaptation
of  Theodore  S.  Fay's  novel  "  Norman  Leslie  " :  and
"The  Buggs,"  a  burlesque. — His  wife,  Caroline
Placide,  widow  of  Leigh  Waring,  was  an  actress.

BLAKELEY,  Johnston,  naval  officer,  b.  near
Seaford,  county  Down,  Ireland,  in  October,  1781;
lost  at  sea  in  1814.  His  father,  John  Blakeley,
brought  him  to

this country  -<5^

when he was  ^"i^J."

only  two  years
old,  and  settled
in  Wilmington,
N.  C.  Young
Blakeley  was
sent  in  1790  to
New  York  city,
where  he  spent
five  years  in
study,  and,  in
1796,  entered
the  university
of  North  Caro-
lina. His  father
died  in  1797,
leaving  him
alone  in  the
world,  and  in
1799 financial

troubles  compelled  him  to  leave  college.  On  5
February,  1800,  he  obtained  a  midshipman's  war-
rant in  the  navy.  He  was  made  lieutenant  10
Feb.,  1807,  and  in  1813  commanded  the  brig  "  En-


BLAKELOCK


BLANCHARD


287


terprise,"  and  did  good  service  in  protecting  the
coasting  trade.  On  24  July,  1813,  he  was  made
master  commander,  and  in  August  was  appointed
to  the  command  of  the  new  sloop  "  Wasp,"  which
sailed  from  Portsmouth,  N.  PI.,  on  a  cruise,  1
May,  1814.  On  28  June  he  fell  in  with  the  Brit-
ish brig  "  Reindeer,"  and  captured  her  after  a
severe  action  of  nineteen  minutes.  The  "  Rein-
deer "  made  three  unsuccessful  attetnpts  to  board
the  "  Wasp,"  and  in  the  last  of  these  her  com-
mander, Captain  Manners,  was  killed.  The  loss
of  the  "Reindeer"  was  25  killed,  42  wounded;
that  of  the  "  Wasp,"  5  killed,  22  wounded.  Ow-
ing to  the  danger  of  recapture,  Blakeley  burned
liis  prize,  and,  having  placed  a  portion  of  his
wounded  prisoners  on  a  neutral  vessel,  put  into
L'Orient.  Congress  voted  him  a  gold  medal  for
his  exploit.  Sailing  from  L'Orient  on  27  Aug.,
the  "  Wasp  "  made  several  captures,  one  of  them  a
vessel  laden  with  military  stores.  On  the  evening
of  1  Sept.  he  fell  in  with  the  brig  "  Avon,"  and
compelled  her  to  surrender,  but  the  approach  of
the  two  brigs  "■  Castilian  "  and  "  Tartarus  "  forced
him  to  abandon  his  prize,  which  soon  sank.  After
capturing  and  scuttling  two  more  vessels,  the
"  Wasp,"  on  21  Sept.,  captured  the  brig  "  Atalan-
ta,"  which  was  sent  to  Savannah,  and  on  24  Nov.,
JBlakeley  was  made  captain.  After  this  nothing
more  was  heard  of  the  "  Wasp,"  or  those  on  board
of  her,  until  it  was  discovered  that  a  Swedish  ship
had  spoken  her  on  9  Oct.,  which  was  the  last  news
of  her.  It  seems  probable  that  the  vessel,  being
heavily  armed  and  sparred,  and  very  deep-waisted,
foundered  in  a  gale.  Blakeley's  only  child,  a  daugh-
ter, was  educated  at  the  expense  of  the  state  of
North  Carolina.

BLAKELOCK,  Ralph  Albert,  artist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  15  Oct.,  1847.  He  was  educated  in
the  public  schools  and  in  the  college  of  the  city  of
New  York,  being  graduated  in  1869.  In  the  same
year  he  travelled  through  the  western  states,  Mexi-
co, and  the  West  Indies.  He  has  studied  his  art
with  no  master,  but  has  grown  an  artist  under  his
own  experiments.  He  has  painted  landscapes,
Indian  figures,  and  moonlight  scenes.  One  of  his
pictures  represents  the  Ta-vo-kok-i,  or  circle-dance
of  the  Kavavite  Indians.  In  1882  he  exhibited  at
the  national  academy  "  Cloverdale,  Cal.,"  "  Moon-
light," and  "  The  Indian  Fisherman  " ;  in  1884,  "A
Landscape,"  and  "  On  the  Face  of  Quiet  Waters  " ;
and  in  1885,  "  Cumuli."  All  his  works  are  ideal  or
creative.  Mr.  Blakelock's  idea  of  his  art  is  that
"  the  laws  of  the  art  of  painting  are  the  laws  of  the
creator,  as  to  expression,  color,  form,  unity,  har-
monji',  height,  depth,  tone ;  when  the  knowledge  is
obtamed,  then  we  may  trust  our  emotional  nature
or  spirit  to  create,  and  then,  upon  comparison,  we
find  tliem  like  nature."  He  has  endeavored  to
bring  out  the  beauty  of  a  painting  by  the  treat-
ment of  color,  "until  it  seems  to  flow  upon  the
senses,  as  some  melody."

BLANC,  Anthony,  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in  Surv,
France.  11  Oct.,  1792 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  20  June,
1860.  He  was  ordained  in  1816,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  sailed  from  Bordeaux  in  company  with
twenty  young  missionaries  who  had  volunteered
for  duty  under  Bishop  Dubourg  in  the  southwest-
ern states.  He  landed  at  Annapolis  and  was  for
some  months  the  guest  of  Charles  Carroll  at  Car-
roUton.  In  1818  he  was  appointed  pastor  at  Vin-
cennes  under  Bishop  Flaget,  and  succeeded  in
erecting  two  log  chapels,  the  first  seen  in  that
country.  Bishop  Dubourg  recalled  him  to  New
Orleans  in  1820,  and  he  was  created  bishop  of  New
Orleans  in  1835. In  1838  Texas  was  added  to  his


diocese,  which  originally  consisted  of  Louisiana
and  Mississippi.  To  remedy  the  evils  caused  by
the  size  of  his  bishopl-ic,  he  obtained  from  the  pope
the  erection  of  two  new  sees  within  his  jurisdiction,
and  opened  a  theological  seminary  for  the  training
of  a  native  clergy.  He  introduced  the  Lazarists
and  Jesuits,  and  intrusted  the  schools  of  higher
education  to  their  control.  A  controversy  between
the  lay  trustees  of  the  cathedral  of  New  Orleans
and  Bishop  Blanc  at  one  time  assumed  an  alarm-
ing aspect.  The  trustees  refused  to  receive  the
rector  whom  the  bishop  had  appointed,  and  an  in-
terdict was  laid  on  the  church.  With  tlie  co-opera-
tion of  other  bishops,  however,  a  reconciliation  was
effected  in  1844.  As  Bishop  Blanc  had  more  than
doubled  the  number  of  churches  in  his  diocese  in
a  few  years  after  his  consecration,  and  as  the  num-
ber of  Catholics  had  largely  increased,  the  council
of  Baltimore,  which  met  in  1849,  advised  the  pope
to  erect  it  into  an  archbishopric.  In  1850,  there-
fore, Bishop  Blanc  was  made  archbishop  of  New
Orleans  with  four  suffragan  dioceses.  In  1855  he
visited  Rome  to  take  part  in  the  council  then  sit-
ting, and  on  his  return  he  introduced  the  Christian
Brothers  and  several  other  educational  orders,  male
and  female,  into  his  diocese.  Before  his  death  the
churches  had  increased  through  his  efforts  from
twenty-six  to  seventy-three,  and  the  number  of
clergy  from  twenty-seven  to  seventy-three.  He
erected  three  colleges,  eight  academies  for  young
ladies,  nine  free  schools,  thirteen  orphan  asylums,
and  three  convents.

BLANC,  Vincent  Le,  traveller,  b.  in  France  in
1554 ;  d.  in  1640.  From  his  twelfth  to  his  sixtieth
year  he  travelled  in  Asia,  Africa,  and  America,  and
he  gives  in  his  "  Voyages  fameux "  (1648)  an  ac-
count of  Canada,  which  is  valuable  in  some  re-
spects, though  confused  in  its  dates.

BLANCHARD,  Albert  G.,  soldier,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  Mass.,  in  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1829,  and  served  on  fron-
tier duty  and  recruiting  service  until  1  Oct.,  1840,
when  he  resigned,  with  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant.
From  1840  till  1846  he  was  a  merchant  at  New
Orleans,  La.,  and  was  director  of  public  schools
there  from  1843  till  1845.  During  the  Mexican  war
he  served  as  captain  of  Louisiana  volunteers,  being
at  the  battle  of  Monterey  and  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  he  re-entered  the  regular  army  on  27  May,
1847,  as  major  of  the  12th  infantry,  serving  till  25
July.  1848.  After  teaching  in  the  New  Orleans
public  schools  he  became  a  surveyor,  and  was  after-
ward connected  with  several  railroad  companies.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  in  1861,  he  was
made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  confederate  army,
and  on  29  Feb.,  1862,  issued  from  Norfolk,  Va.,  an
order  that  became  quite  celebrated,  urging  the  in-
habitants to  fire  at  the  national  army  from  behind
trees,  and  obstruct  its  passage  in  every  possible
way.  Since  the  war,  Gen.  Blanchard  has  been  a
civil  engineer  and  survevor  in  New  Orleans.

BLANCHARD,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Dun-
stable, near  Nashua,  N.  IL,  11  Feb.,  1704;  d.  7
April,  1758.  He  was  a  mandamus  councillor  from
1740  till  1758 ;  judge  of  the  superior  court  of  New
Hampshire  from  1749  till  1758 :  commanded  a  New
Hampshire  regiment  in  1755.  and  was  engaged  at
Crown  Point.  He  speculated  in  lands,  and,  in  con-
junction with  the  Rev.  Samuel  Langdon,  published,
in  1761,  a  map  of  New  Hampshire.

BLANCHARD,  Joshna  P.,  peace  advocate,  b.
in  1782 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  October,  1868.  He
was  the  oldest  apostle  of  peace  in  the  United
States,  laboring  for  the  cause  with  Dr.  Channing
and  under  the  leadership  of  Dr.  Worcester. He


388


BLANCHARD


BLANCHET


gave  freely  for  its  aid,  and  wrote  much  in  support
of  it.  Though  one  of  the  most  radical  on  the
peace  question,  however,  he  was  thoroughly  con-
sistent, and,  having  decided  that  Christianity  not
only  discountenances  but  forbids  war,  he  accepted
all  legitimate  inferences  from  this  position.

BLANCHARD,  Justus  Wardwell,  soldier,  b.
in  Milford,  N.  II.,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,
14  Sept.,  1877.  Before  the  civil  war  he  was  cap-
tain of  the  Burgess  corps  of  Albany,  N.  Y.  He
entered  the  national  service  as  captain  in  the  3d
N.  Y.  volunteers  in  1861,  became  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  1863,  and  brevet  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers on  13  March,  1865.  He  was  at  Big  Bethel
in  1861,  took  part  in  Banks's  Red  River  expedi-
tion, volunteered  on  a  forlorn  hope  at  Port  Hud-
son, and  was  with  Sheridan  in  his  Shenandoah
campaign  in  1864.

BLANCHARD,  Thomas,  inventor,  b.  in  Sut-
ton, Mass.,  24  June,  1788;  d.  in  Boston,  16  April,
1864.  He  had  a  fondness  for  mechanical  employ-
ment, and  was  associated  with  his  brother  in  the
manufacture  of  tacks  by  hand.  This  process  was
exceedingly  slow  and  tedious,  and  in  1806  he  in-
vented a  machine,  which  he  subsequently  so  im-
proved that  five  hundred  tacks  could  be  made  in  a
minute,  with  heads  and  points  more  perfect  than
those  made  by  the  old-fashioned  plan.  This  patent
he  sold  for  $5,000  to  a  company  that  afterward
went  extensively  into  the  manufacture.  After  this
he  turned  his  attention  to  the  manufacture  of  a
machine  for  turning  and  finishing  gun-barrels  by  a
single  operation ;  and  this  he  accomplished,  finish-
ing the  octagon  portion  of  the  barrel  by  changing
the  action  of  his  lathe  to  vibratory  motion.  This
invention,  afterward  extended  to  the  turning  of  all
kinds  of  irregular  forms,  was  one  of  the  most  re-
markable improvements  made  in  the  century.  Dur-
ing the  progress  of  its  development  he  was  em-
ployed at  the  Springfield  armory,  where  he  received
nine  cents  allowance  from  the  government  for  each
musket  made  by  his  machines,  and  this  was  his
only  compensation  during  the  first  term  of  his
patent,  originally  granted  in  1820.  In  1831  he  re-
ceived a  j)atent  for  an  improved  form  of  steamboat,
so  constructed  as  to  ascend  rapids  or  rivers  having
strong  currents,  which  was  used  on  the  Connecticut
river  and  in  the  west.  He  introduced  several  im-
provements in  the  construction  of  railroads  and
locomotives,  and  was  the  inventor  of  a  steam
wagon  before  any  railroad  had  ever  been  built.  In
1851  he  devised  a  process  for  bending  heavy  timber.
He  also  constructed  machines  for  cutting  and  fold-
ing envelopes  at  a  single  operation,  and  several
mortising  machines.  Mr.  Blanchard  was  awarded
more  than  twenty-five  patents  for  his  inventions,
for  some  of  which  he  received  ample  compensation.

BLANCHELANDE,  Pliilibert  Francois
Roussel  de  (blonsh'-lond),  French  soldier,  b.  in
Dijon,  France,  in  1735;  d.  in  Paris,  11  April,  1793.
He  entered  the  army  in  1747  and  in  1779  was
sent  to  America,  where  he  became  lieutenant-col-
onel. He  successfully  defended  the  isle  of  St.
Vincent  against  the  English,  for  which  service  he
was  made  a  brigadier.  He  assisted  at  the  taking
of  Tobago,  and  was  made  its  governor  in  1781.
This  office  he  afterward  exchanged  for  that  of
Dominica,  which  he  retained  until  his  return  to
France  at  the  epoch  of  the  revolution.  Later  he
was  sent  to  St.  Domingo  as  governor  of  the  French
part  of  that  island ;  but  showing  a  disposition  to
disregard  the  authority  of  the  nationalvasserably,
he  was  taken  to  France,  condemned,  and  executed.

BLANCHET,  Augustine  Magloire  Alexan-
der,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  St.  Pierre,  Quebec,  in  1797.


After  his  ordination,  in  1821,  he  performed  mis-
sionary duties  in  various  parts  of  Canada.  He  was
canon  of  the  cathedral  at  Montreal  when  he  was
nominated  to  the  newly  created  see  of  Walla  Walla
in  1845.  He  reached  his  diocese  in  1847,  accom-
panied by  four  oblate  fathers  and  two  secular
priests,  and  labored  among  the  Indians  for  about  a
year,  but  with  little  success,  owing  to  troubles
among  the  natives.  The  see  of  Nesqually  was
erected  in  1850,  to  which  he  was  transferred  the
same  year.  He  took  up  his  residence  at  Fort  Van-
couver on  the  Columbia,  where  he  built  a  cathe-
dral, and  also  erected  churches  at  Olympia  and
Steilacoom,  on  Cowlitz  river,  and  among  the  Chi-
nooks.  The  Catholic  population  of  his  diocese  had
increased  to  more  than  6,000  in  1853,  when  the  ter-
ritory of  Washington,  which  included  the  see  of
Nesqually,  was  organized.  He  resigned  his  diocese
in  1879,  owing  to  failing  health.  During  his  mis-
sion he  erected  twenty-four  churches.  He  founded
colleges  at  Vancouver  and  Walla  Walla,  several  in-
stitutions conducted  by  the  sisters  of  mercy,  and
flourishing  Indian  missions  at  Fort  Colville,  Yaki-
ma, and  Tulalip.

BLANCHET,  Emilio  (blahn-shay),  Cuban
author,  b.  in  Matanzas,  Cuba,  in  1829.  In  1870  he
went  to  Barcelona,  Spain,  where  he  received  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.,  and  where  he  has  resided  since.  His
principal  works  are  "  El  anillo  de  Maria  Tudor,"
a  drama ;  "  Prosa  y  Verso  "  (1858) ;  a  "  Manual  of
Cuban  History  " ;  "  Flores  de  la  Literatura  Franee-
sa  " ;  and  "  El  Libro  de  las  Expiaciones."

BLANCHET,  Francis  Norbert,  R.  C.  arch-
bishop, b.  near  Quebec  in  1795 ;  d.  in  Portland,
Oregon,  in  1883.  He  received  his  ecclesiastical
training  at  the  Petit  seminaire,  Quebec,  and  was
ordained  by  Archbishop  Plessis  in  1819.  He  la-
bored for  seven  years  on  the  missions  of  the  gulf
of  St.  Lawrence,  and  was  then  appointed  cure  of  St.
Joseph  de  Soulanges  at  The  Cedars,  where  he  re-
mained nine  years.  After  John  Jacob  Astor  estab-
lished the  trading-post  of  Astoria  at  the  mouth  of
Columbia  river,  and  after  the  organization  of  the
Hudson  bay  company  in  Oregon,  there  was  a  great
influx  of  Canadian  Catholics,  who  intermarried
with  the  Indians.  In  1838  the  archbishop  of  Que-
bec decided  to  establish  a  mission  among  them,
and  for  this  purpose  selected  fathers  Blanchet  and
Demers.  Father  Blanchet  made  Vancouver  his
headquarters,  and  for  the  next  four  years  he  and
his  companion  were  the  only  priests  in  Oregon,
which  then  included  British  Columbia  and  extend-
ed along  the  Pacific  to  the  California  boundary.  In
1843  he  was  created  vicar-apostolic  and  received
episcopal  consecration  from  the  archbishop  of  Que-
bec. At  the  close  of  1844  he  had  converted  most
of  the  Indian  tribes  of  the  Sound,  Caledonia,  and
the  lower  Oregon.  He  had  founded  nine  missions
— four  in  the  Rocky  mountains  and  five  in  lower
Oregon.  Eleven  churches  had  been  erected,  and
two  educational  establishments  founded — one  for
boys  and  one  for  girls.  There  were  fifteen  priests
in  the  country,  besides  sisters.  In  accordance  with
the  representations  of  Bishop  Blanchet,  the  pope
formed  his  vicariate  into  an  ecclesiastical  province,
divided  into  three  sees,  over  one  of  which,  that  of
Oregon  City,  he  was  appointed  bishop.  In  1878  he
received  Bishop  Seghers  as  coadjutor,  and  in  1881  he
was  obliged  to  retire,  after  a  priesthood  of  sixty
two  years  and  an  episcopate  of  thirty-six.  He  has
been' called  the  "Apostle  of  Oregon."

BLANCHET,  Joseph  Goderick,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  St.  Pierre,  7  June,  1829.  He  was
educated  at  the  Quebec  seminary  and  at  the  St.
Anne  college,  and  graduated  as  a  physician.


In


BLANCO


BLASHFIELD


289


1863  he  raised  the  17th  battalion  of  volunteer  in-
fantry, and  became  its  lieutenant-colonel.  He  was
elected  president  of  the  "  Cercle  de  Quebec "  in
1871 ;  president  of  the  Levis  and  Kennebec  rail-
way in  1872  ;  and  in  1878  was  appointed  a  member
of  the  Catholic  section  of  the  council  of  public
instruction  for  the  province  of  Quebec.  After  the
St.  Albans  raid  in  1864  he  was  in  command  of  a
battalion  on  the  frontier,  and  commanded  the
force  on  the  south  shore  of  the  St.  Lawrence,
Quebec  district,  during  the  Fenian  raid  in  1866,
and  again  in  1870.  He  was  elected  to  the  provin-
cial legislature,  and  chosen  speaker,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  officiated  from  the  meeting  of  the  first  par-
liament after  the  union  in  1867  until  the  dissolution
of  the  second  parliament  in  1875.  He  was  mayor
of  the  town  of  Levis  for  six  years,  and  a  representa-
tive in  the  Canadian  assembly  from  1861  till  1874,
when  he  resigned  his  seat  in  that  body  (in  conse-
quence of  the  operation  of  the  act  respecting  dual
representation)  in  order  to  remain  in  the  Quebec
assembly,  to  which  he  had  been  first  elected  in
1867  and  in  which  he  continued  until  1875,  when
he  was  defeated.  On  23  Nov.,  1875,  he  was  re-
turned for  Bellechasse,  which  he  represented  until
1878,  when  he  was  re-elected  for  Levis.  He  is  a
liberal-conservative.

BLANCO,  Nuiiez  Tela,  Spanish  viceroy  of
Peru  in  1543,  during  the  great  troubles  among
Gonzalo  Pizarro,  Vaca  de  Castro,  Carvajal,  and
others.  The  viceroy  tried  to  leave  the  country
several  times,  and  finally  fell  in  one  of  the  battles
fought  by  the  insurgents  against  each  other.

BLAND,  Richard,  statesman,  b.  in  Virginia,  6
May,  1710;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Ya.,  26  Oct.,  1776.
He  was  educated  at  William  and  Mary  college  and
at  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  In  1745  he  was
elected  to  the  house  of  burgesses  and  became  one
of  its  most  distinguished  members.  He  opposed
the  stamp  act  in  1764,  and  served  on  the  commit-
tee to  memorialize  the  king,  lords,  and  commons.
In  1768  he  was  one  of  the  committee  appointed  to
remonstrate  with  parliament  on  the  subject  of
taxation.  After  the  dissolution  of  the  house  in
the  following  year  he  was  among  the  first  to
sign  the  non-importation  agreement  proposed
at  the  subsequent  meeting  held  at  Raleigh  tavern.
In  1773  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  cor-
respondence, and  in  1774  a  delegate  to  congress.
He  was  re-elected  in  1775,  but  declined  the  honor
on  account  of  his  advanced  age.  He  was  a  fine
classical  scholar,  and  had  acquired  the  name  of
"  Virginia  Antiquary  "  on  account  of  his  familiar-
ity with  every  part  connected  with  the  settlement
and  progress  of  the  colony.  Moreover,  he  was  ac-
cepted as  an  authority  on  all  questions  touching
the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  colony.  Mr.  Bland
published  "A  Letter  to  the  Clergy  "on  the  Two-
penny Act"  (1760);  and  "An  Inquiry  into  the
Rights  of  the  British  Colonies  "  (1766),  "which  was
the  first  tract  written  on  that  subject.

BLAND,  Richard  Parks,  congressman,  b.  near
Hartford,  Ohio  co.,  Ky.,  19  Aug.,  1835.  He  was
orphaned  at  an  early  age,  and  worked  during  the
summer  months  in  order  to  obtain  means  with
which  to  attend  school  in  the  winter.  When  he
became  of  age  he  taught,  and  so  was  enabled  to
follow  his  academic  studies.  Later  he  studied  law,
was  admitted^to  the  bar,  and  practised  his  profes-
sion. In  1855  he  removed  to  Missouri,  and  then
westward  to  California.  Subsequently  he  settled
m  Virginia  City,  Nevada,  where  he  became  inter-
ested in  various  mining  operations,  and  also  de-
voted his  attention  to  law.  In  1860  he  became
treasurer  of  Carson  co.,  Nevada,  and  continued  in

VOL.  I. — 19


that  office  until  the  organization  of  the  state  gov-
ernment. In  1865  he  returned  to  Missouri  and
settled  in  Rolla,  entering  into  a  law  partnership
with  his  brother,  C.  C.  Bland.  In  1869  he  removed
to  Lebanon,  where  he  followed  his  profession.
In  1873  he  was  elected  to  congress  from  Missouri
as  a  democrat,  and  he  has  since  been  regularly  re-
elected. He  became  in  1875  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  mines  and  mining,  and  introduced  in
the  44th  congress  the  well-known  "  Bland  Bill,"
which  provided  that  the  secretary  of  the  treasury
shall  purchase  sufficient  bullion  to  coin  the  mini-
mum amount  of  $2,000,000  a  month  in  silver  dol-
lars of  412^  grains  each,  and  that  these  dollars
shall  be  legal  tender.

BLAND,  Theodorlc,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  George
CO.,  Va,,  in  1742 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1  June,  1790.
In  1753  he  was  sent  to  England,  and,  after  prelim-
inary studies  at  Wakefield,  he  pursued  the  aca-
demic and  subsequently  the  medical  course  at  the
University  of  Edinburgh.  After  being  admitted
to  the  practice  of  medicine  in  England,  he  returned
to  this  country  about  1764.  Dr.  Bland  was  one  of
the  number  who  petitioned  the  house  of  burgesses
to  enact  a  law  forbidding  any  person  to  practise
medicine  in  the  colony  without  a  proper  license.
He  was  among  those  who  removed  from  Lord  Dun-
more's  palace  the  arms  and  ammunition  which  that
official  had  abstracted  from  the  public  arsenal,  and
he  afterward  published  a  series  of  bitterly  indig-
nant letters  against  the  governor,  under  the  pen-
name  of  "Cassius."  He  continued  active  in  his
profession  until  the  beginning  of  the  revolutionary
war,  when  he  at  once  sided  with  the  colonists  and
became  captain  of  the  first  troop  of  Virginia  cav-
alry. After  the  enrolment  of  six  companies  he
joined  the  main  army  in  1777  as  lieutenant-colonel.
Later  he  became  colonel,  and  throughout  the  war
signalized  himself  as  a  vigilant  and  efficient  officer,
enjoying  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  Gen.  Wash-
ington. He  especially  distinguished  himself  at  the
battle  of  Brandywine,  and  was  placed  in  command
of  the  prisoners  taken  at  Saratoga,  who  were
marched  to  Charlottesville,  Va.  In  1779  he  had
command  of  the  troops  at  the  Albemarle  barracks
in  Virginia.  He  served  during  the  war  for  one
term  in  the  Virginia  senate,  and  later  was  elected
to  the  continental  congress,  serving  from  1780  till
1783.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the  Virginia  con-
vention of  1788  on  the  adoption  of  the  federal  con-
stitution, and  was  among  those  opposed  to  adop-
tion. Then  he  became  representative  from  Vir-
ginia to  the  first  congress,  taking  liis  seat  30  March,
1789.  His  death  occurred  during  the  sessions  of
congress,  and  he  was  the  first  member  whose  de-
cease was  announced  in  that  body.  He  was  buried
in  Trinity  churchyard.  See  the  "  Memoir  of  Theo-
doric  Bland,"  in  "'  The  Bland  Papers,"  collected  by
Charles  Campbell  (Petersburg,  1840).

BLASCO,  Nuiiez,  one  of  the  Spanish  conquer-
ors of  America,  b.  in  1490.  After  making  explora-
tions along  the  coasts  of  Darien,  he  discovered
near  the  gulf  of  Urabe  an  isthmus  (Panama)  sepa-
rating the  two  oceans,  and  had  four  fortresses  built
there.  He  defeated  the  Indian  caciques  and  at-
tempted to  become  the  sovereign  of  that  portion  of
America,  but  was  soon  overcome  by  Spanish  troops
and  executed  bv  order  of  King  Ferdinand.

BLASHFIELD,  Edwin  Howland,  painter,  b.
in  New  York,  15  Dec,  1848.  He  was  prepared  to
enter  Harvard  at  the  Boston  Latin  school,  but  dur-
ing his  course  of  study  there  developed  a  taste  for
art  so  pronounced  that  it  was  decided  to  send  him
abroad.  He  studied  and  painted  for  ten  years  in
Paris,  and  then,  in  pursuit  of  his  profession,  made


290


BLATCHFORD


BLAVATSKY


five  visits  to  Italy,  several  pedestrian  trips  through
Switzerland,  and  spent  some  time  in  Germany  and
Belgium,  His  studio  is  in  New  York,  and  when
he  is  in  the  United  States  his  summers  are  passed
at  Little  Compton,  R.  I.  He  is  a  member  of  the
society  of  American  artists,  an  associate  of  the  na-
tional academy,  and  a  member  of  water-color  and
pastel  societies.  His  favorite  subjects  are  figures,
with  carefully  studied  landscape  or  architecture.
Historical  subjects  and  portraiture,  with  particu-
lar devotion  to  accuracy  of  detail,  also  claim  his
attention.  Some  of  his  principal  paintings  are :
"A  Poet"  (Paris  salon,  1876);  "Toreador"  and
"Monseigneur"(1877);  " The  Augur "  (1878) ;  "A
Roman  Emperor  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Fencing-Lesson—
Roman  Ladies"  (1880);  and  "The  Besieged,"  a
fine  picture,  has  been  exhibited  in  the  royal  acad-
emies of  London  and  Edinburgh ;  at  the  national
academy,  Dublin;  and  at  Liverpool,  Manchester,
Bristol,  and  Glasgow.  He  has  been  very  successful
in  the  execution  of  large  canvases  for  the  interior
decoration  of  some  of  the  finest  private  houses  in
New  York  city.

BLATCHFORl),  Richard  Milford,  lawyer,  b.
in  Stratford,  Conn.,  23  April,  1798;  d.  in  New-
port, R.  L,  3  Sept.,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at
Union  in  1818,  taught  school  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,
and  studied  law  at  the  same  time.  After  being
admitted  to  the  bar  he  settled  in  New  York,  and
rose  rapidly  in  his  profession.  In  1826  he  was  ap-
pointed financial  agent  and  counsel  for  the  bank  of
England,  later  he  held  the  same  appointment  from
the  bank  of  the  United  States,  and  in  1836,  when
the  charter  of  that  bank  expired,  he  satisfactorily
settled  the  affairs  between  it  and  the  bank  of  Eng-
land. In  1855  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  a  promi-
nent member  of  the  union  defence  committee,
and  President  Lincoln  appointed  him  on  the
committee  charged  with  the  disbursement  of  the
large  sums  of  money  appropriated  for  obtaining
soldiers  for  the  union  army.  The  other  mem-
bers of  the  committee  w^ere  Gen.  John  A.  Dix
and  George  Opdyke.  In  1862  he  received  the  ap-
pointment of  minister-resident  to  the  States  of  the
Church,  and  remained  in  Rome  until  October,  1863.
fie  was  a  commissioner  of  Central  Park  from  April,
1859,  till  April,  1870,  when  he  was  removed  by  the
operation  of  the  new  charter.  In  1872  he  was  ap-
pointed a  Commissioner  of  Public  Parks,  but  was
afterward removed by  the enactment  of a  new

charter.  He  was
a  w^arm  personal
friend  of  Daniel
Webster,  and  one
of  the  executors
to  his  will. — His
son,  Samuel,  jur-
ist, b.  in  New
York,  9  March,
1820,  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia
in  1837.  Two
years  later  he
became  private
secretary  to  Gov.
William  H.  Sew-
ard, and  he  was
military  secre-
tary on  the  gov-
ernor's staff  till
1843.  In  1842  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  in  1845  was  made  a
counsellor  of  the  Supreme  court  of  New  York
state. During  the  latter  part  of  the  same  year  he


^.z^Jhs^cH^Jl^


settled  in  Auburn,  and  became  associated  with  W.
H.  Seward  and  Christopher  Morgan  in  a  law  part^
nership.  In  1854  he  removed  to  New  York  city
and  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession.  He
was  appointed  in  May,  1867,  district  judge  of  the
U.  S.  court  for  the  southern  district  of  New  York
and  in  March,  1882,  became  an  associate  justice  of
the  Supreme  court  of  the  United  States.  Since
1867  he  has  been  a  trustee  of  Columbia  college.
For  several  years  he  published  reports  of  eases  in
the  circuit  courts  of  the  United  States.

BLATHWAYT,  or  BLATHWAYTE,  Will-
iam,  politician,  b.  at  St,  Martin  in  the  Fields,  Eng-
land, about  1649 ;  d.  at  Dyrham  Park,  Worcester-
shire, in  August,  1717.  Jle  was  in  the  English
diplomatic  service  as  early  as  1668,  clerk  of  the
privy  council,  and  one  of  the  important  witnesses
at  the  trial  of  the  seven  bishops  for  libel  under
James  II.,  in  1688.  Pie  is  identified  with  Ameri-
can affairs  through  his  commissionerships  of  trade
and  plantations,  under  William  III.  This  board
was  created  by  the  king  in  May,  1696,  for  the  more
efficient  administration  of  colonial  affairs.  The
instructions  under  which  it  acted  are  suggestive,
in  the  light  of  subsequent  history,  as  indicating
the  spirit  with  which  England  aimed  to  utilize  her
colonies.  The  commissioners  were  directed  to  in-
quire into  the  means  of  making  the  colonies  "  most
useful  and  beneficial  to  England,"  and  as  to  the
means  of  "  diverting  them  (the  colonies)  from  trades
which  may  prove  prejudicial  to  England."  Blath-
wayt  drew  up  the  new  charter  of  Massachusetts,
and  with  the  rest  of  the  commissioners  vainly  en-
deavored to  devise  some  plan  whereby  the  colonial
governments  could  be  consolidated  and  yet  left  in-
dependent. In  1686  he  mari-ied  Mary,  only  sur-
viving daughter  and  heir  of  John  Wynter,  of  Dyr-
ham Park,  Gloucestershire,  on  which  estate  he
died,  and  was  buried  in  its  parish  church.  Many
of  his  manuscripts  are  preserved  in  the  Bodleian
library,  in  the  British  museum,  at  Dyrham  Park,
and  in  the  collections  described  by  the  Historical
manuscripts  commission.

BLAUVELT,  Augustus,  clergyman,  b,  in  Co-
vert, Seneca  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  April,  1832.  He  wa45  pre-
pared in  the  Ovid  Academy,  was  graduated  at  Rut-
gers in  1858,  and  at  the  "theological  seminary  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J„  in  1861.  After  which  he
was  invited  by  John  Wanamaker  to  take  charge  of
Bethany  chapel  in  Philadelphia,  and  later  became
assistant  in  the  Madison  street  chapel.  New  York,
and  from  1862  to  1864  was  missionary  to  China.
He  was  pastor  at  Bloomingdale,  N.  Y.,  from  1866
to  1871,  subsequent  to  whidi  he  devoted  his  atten-
tion to  literary  work.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was
conferred  on  him  by  Rutgers  because  of  certain
able  articles  which  he  wrote  in  defence  of  Chris-
tian truth.  He  contributed  numerous  articles  to
the  New  York  "Times,"  "The  Independent,"
"  Princeton  Review,"  and  other  journals.  Among
these  was  a  series  specially  prepared  for  "Scrib-
ner's  Monthly,"  on  doctrinal  subjects,  in  which  he
admitted  certain  views,  and  in  consequence  was
deposed  from  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Re-
formed (Dutch)  church  in  1877.  Incessant  labor
and  mental  anxiety  resulted  in  loss  of  health  and
he  became  insane.  Dr.  Blauvelt  was  an  occasional
writer  of  verse,  and  was  the  author  of  the  "  King-
dom of  Satan"  (New  York,  1868)  and  of  "The
Present  Religious  Conflict "  (1882).

BLAVATSKY,  Helene  Petrovna,  theosophist,
b.  in  Russia  about  1831.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Col.
Peter  Hahn  and  widow  of  Gen.  Nicephore  V.  Bla-
vatsky,  some  time  governor  of  Armenia.  She  has
been  prominent  in  the  modern  movement  towanl


BLEDSOE


BLEECKER


291


Buddhism  or  theosophy.  Mme.  Blavatsky,  after
spending  seven  years  in  a  Himalayan  retreat  study-
ing the  mysteries  of  this  subject,  came  to  the  Unit-
ed States  and  was  naturalized.  About  1875  she
founded  the  Theosophical  Society,  with  Col.  Fred-
erick P.  Olcott  as  its  president  and  herself  as  secre-
tary. The  objects  of  the  organization  are :  1.  To
form  the  nucleus  of  a  universal  brotherhood ;  2.
To  study  Aryan  literature,  religion,  and  science ;
3.  To  indicate  the  importance  of  this  inquiry ;  4.
To  explore  the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature  and  the
latent  powers  of  man.  Branches  of  the  society
were  founded  in  America  and  in  England ;  and  sub-
sequently Mme.  Blavatsky  returned  to  India,  there
to  establish  the  society  among  the  natives.  She  has
written  ''  Isis  Unveiled  :  a  Master-Key  to  the  Mys-
teries of  Ancient  and  Modern  Science  and  Theol-
ogy" (New  York,  1877),  and  is editor  of "The


Theosophist,"  published  in  India.
Wo


See  "The  Oc-
cult World,"  by  A.  P.  Sinnett  (London,  1884),  and
"  Memoirs  of  Mme.  Blavatsky  "  by  the  same  author
(New  York,  188G).

BLEDSOE,  Albert  Taylor,  educator,  b.  in
Frankfort,  Ky.,  9  Nov.,  1809  ;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,
8  Dec,  1877. '  He  was  appointed  from  Kentucky  to
the  U.  S.  Military  Academy,  and  was  graduated  in
1830,  after  which  he  served  in  the  army  at  Fort
Gibson,  Indian  territory,  until  31  Aug.,  1832,  when
he  resigned.  From  1833  till  1834  he  was  adjunct
professor  of  mathematics  and  teacher  of  the  French
language  at  Kenyon,  and  in  1835-6  professor  of
mathematics  at  Miami.  After  studying  theology
he  was  ordained  a  clergyman  in  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  in  1835,  and  was  connected  with
various  churches  in  Ohio  until  1838.  Having  pre-
viously studied  law,  he  began  its  practice  in  Spring-
field, 111.,  in  1838,  and  continued  it  there  and  in
Washington,  D.  C.,  till  1848.  During  the  years
1848-54  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  and  as-
tronomy at  the  University  of  Mississippi,  and  from
1854  till  1801  professor  of  mathematics  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Virginia.  In  1861  he  entered  the  con-
federate service  as  colonel,  but  was  soon  made  chief
of  the  war  bureau  and  acting  assistant  secretary  of
war.  In  1863  he  went  to  England  to  collect  mate-
rial for  his  work  on  the  constitution,  which  he  pub-
lished on  his  return  in  1866.  He  then  settled  in
Baltimore  and  began  the  publication  of  the  "  South-
ern Review,"  hitherto  mainly  of  a  political  charac-
ter, which  under  his  editorship  assumed  a  theo-
logical tone  and  became  the  recognized  organ  of
the  Methodist  Episcopal  Church  South.  In  1868
he  became  principal  of  the  Louisa  school,  Balti-
more, and  in  1871  was  ordained  a  minister  in  the
Methodist  church.  In  addition  to  numerous  con-
tributions to  periodicals  he  published  "  An  Exam-
inatjon  of  Edwards  on  the  Will"  (Philadelphia,
1845);  "A  Theodicy  or  Vindication  of  the  Divine
Glory"  (New  York,  1853);  "Libertv  and  Slavery"
(Philadelphia,  1857) ;  "  Is  Davis  a  Traitor  ?  or  was
Secession  a  Constitutional  Right  previous  to  the
War  of  1861  ?"  (Baltimore.  1866) ;  and  "  Philosophy
of  Mathematics  "  (Philadelphia,  1860).

BLEDSOE,  Jesse,  senator,  b.  in  Culpepper  co.,
ya.,  6  April,  1776;  d.  near  Nacogdoches,  Texas,  30
June,  1837.  When  a  boy  he  emigrated  to  Ken-
tucky and  then  studied  at  the  Transylvania  semi-
nary, where  he  became  a  fine  scholar.  He  after-
ward studied  law  and  practised  with  great  success.
In  1808  he  became  secretary  of  state  under  Gov.
Chas.  Scott,  and  in  1812  was  a  member  of  the
^gislature.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from
Kentucky,  and  served  from  May,  1813,  till  1815.
irom  1817  till  1820  he  was  state  senator.  In  1820
he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in  1822  was  ap-


pointed circuit  judge  in  the  Lexington  district.
Accordingly  he  settled  in  Lexington,  where  he  also
became  professor  of  law  in  Transylvania  University.
Later  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  his  profession,
in  1833  removed  to  Mississippi,  and  in  1835  to
Texas,  where  he  was  engaged  collecting  historical
material  at  the  time  of  his  death.

BLEECKER,  Ann  Eliza,  poet,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  October,  1752 ;  d.  in  Tomhannock,  near  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  23  Nov.,  1783.  She  was  the  youngest
daughter  of  Brandt  Schuyler,  of  New  York,  and
passed  her  early  life  in  that  city.  In  1769  she  mar-
ried John  J.  Bleecker,  of  New  Rochelle,  and,  after
a  year's  residence  in  Poughkeepsie,  settled  in  Tom-
hannock. Here  her  life  was  very  happy  until  the
arrival  of  Burgoyne's  army  in  1777,  when  she  fled
with  her  young  children  under  conditions  of  great
suffering,  reaching  Albany  at  first,  and  then  Red
Hook,  where  she  remained  until  after  the  surren-
der of  Burgoyne.  Soon  after  returning  to  her
home  at  Tomhannock  she  was  taken  sick  and  died.
Her  poems,  devoted  principally  to  domestic  topics,
were  rather  melancholy,  and  were  written  as  the
occasion  suggested,  without  any  intention  of  publi-
cation. A  number  of  these,  however,  appeared  in
the  "  New  York  Magazine."  Some  years  after  her
death  her  stories  and  poems  were  collected  and
published  under  the  title  of  "  Posthumous  Works
of  Ann  Eliza  Bleecker  in  Prose  and  Verse,"  with  a
memoir  by  her  daughter,  Margaretta  V.  Faugeres
(new  ed.,  New  York,  1809).

BLEECKER,  Anthony,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city  in  October,  1770 ;  d.  there  13  March,  1827.  He
was  the  son  of  Anthony  Lispenard  Bleecker,  who
resided  on  the  estate  through  which  Bleecker  street
now  passes,  and  from  which  it  has  taken  its  name.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1791  and  studied
law,  but  never  was  a  successful  practitioner  on  ac-
count of  his  unconquerable  diffidence.  His  natural
tastes  led  him  to  the  pursuit  of  letters,  and  for
thirty  years  he  was  a  prolific  contributor  of  both
prose  and  verse  to  the  periodical  literature  of  New
York  and  Philadelphia.  The  "Narrative  of  the
Brig  Commerce  "  is  one  of  his  best-known  works.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  York  His-
torical Society,  and  excelled  all  his  associates,  ex-
cept Pintard,  in  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the
new  institution;  also  a  trustee  of  the  New  York
Society  Library  from  1810  till  1826.  The  poet
Bryant  wrote  in  1825:  "Anthony  Bleecker,  who
read  everything  that  came  out,  and  sometimes
wrote  for  the  magazines,  was  an  amusing  com-
panion, always  ready  with  his  puns,  of  whom  Miss
Eliza  Fenno,*  before"  her  marriage  to  Verplanck  in
1811,  wrote  that  she  had  gone  into  the  country  to
take  refuge  from  Anthony  Bleecker's  puns." — His
nephew,  Richard  Wade,  b.  in  New  York  city,  27
Aug.,  1821 ;  d.  there,  21  April,  1875.  He  was  en-
gaged in  business  in  New  York  city,  and  for  some
time  was  president  of  the  North  American  Fire
Insurance  Company.  He  was  an  active  patron  of
the  arts  and  sciences,  and  the  literary  receptions
held  at  his  residence  were  attended  by  prominent
artists  and  authors.  Mr.  Bleecker  was  a  member
of  the  New  York  Historical  Society,  a  fellow  of
the  National  Academy  of  Design,  a  member  of  the
American  Institute,  and  also  of  other  art  and  his-
torical societies  both  at  home  and  abroad.

BLEECKER,  Harmanus,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,  1779;  d.  there,  19  July,  1849.  He
studied  at  Union,  but  before  the  completion  of  his
course  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Albany,  where
he  practised  many  years  as  a  partner  of  Theodore
Sedgwick.  Afterward  he  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  federalist,  serving  from  4  Nov.,  1811,  till  3


292


BLENAC


BLENNERHASSETT


March,  1813,  His  career  in  congress  was  memora-
ble for  his  opposition  to  the  war  of  1812,  From
1822  till  1834  he  was  a  regent  of  the  University  of
the  State  of  New  York.  In  1839  he  was  appointed
charge  d'affaires  at  the  Hague,  where  he  remained
until  1842,  when  he  returned  to  Albany,  N,  Y.

BLENAC,  Charles  de,  governor  of  the  French
colonies  in  ihe  West  Indies  and  South  America
from  1712  to  1736,  He  died,  soon  after  he  was  re-
called by  the  king  of  Prance,  in  the  latter  year.
During  his  administration,  which  was  most  pros-
perous, the  secretaries  of  finance,  justice,  and  po-
lice for  the  French  section  of  the  island  of  Santo
Domingo  were  first  appointed,  1718,  Several  seri-
ous revolts  (from  1720  to  1728)  were  suppressed  by
pacific  means.  Then  Blenac  procured  a  revocation
of  the  privileges  of  the  West  India  company,  which
were  the  cause  of  the  troubles,  the  company  having
the  exclusive  right  to  import  slaves  into  the  island,
Blenac  also  put  an  end  to  filibusterism,  which  had
long  been  the  only  occupation  of  many  men  in
Hayti, He  promoted  agriculture  and  commerce.

BLENKER,  Louis,  soldier,  b,  in  Worms,  Hesse
Darmstadt,  Germanv,  31  July,  1812 ;  d.  in  Rock-
land CO.,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1863.  In  his  youth  he  was
apprenticed  to  a  jeweller,  but  on  becoming  of  age
he  enlisted  in  the  Bavarian  legion  that  was  raised
to  accompany  Prince  Otho,  then  recently  elected
king,  to  Greece.  When  the  legion  was  disbanded
m  1837,  he  received  the  rank  of  lieutenant.  He
then  returned  home  and  began  the  study  of  medi-
cine in  the  University  of  Munich,  but  soon  gave
this  up  to  engage  in  the  wine  business  in  Worms.
In  1849  he  was  a  leading  member  of  the  revolu-
tionary government  in  that  city,  and  also  burgo-
master and  commander  of  the  national  guard.  He
fought  in  several  successful  engagements  with  the
Prussians ;  but  the  revolutionists  being  soon  com-
pletely crushed,  he  retired  into  Switzerland.  In
September, 1849,  having  been  ordered to  leave

that  country,
he  came  to  the
United  States
and  settled  in
Rockland  CO.,  N.
Y.,  where  he  un-
dertook to  cul-
tivate a  farm.
Later  he  en-
gaged in  busi-
ness in  New
York,  and  so
continued  until
the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,
when  he  organ-
ized the  8th  reg-
iment of  New
York  volun-
teers, of  which
he  was  commis-
sioned colonel,
31  May,  1861,
After  some  time  spent  in  Washington  his  regiment
was  incorporated  with  others  into  a  brigade  attached
to  Col.  Miles's  5th  division  in  Gen,  IVIcDowell's  army.
During  the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run  this  division
acted  as  a  reserve,  and  covered  the  retreat  with
great  steadiness,  recovering  two  Union  colors  left
on  the  field  of  battle  by  retreating  soldiers.  For
his  services  at  that  time  he  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  the  volunteers  9  Aug.,  1861.  He  re-
mained with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  until  the
beginning  of  the  peninsular  cami)aign,  when  he
was  ordered  to  western  Virginia. He  took  an  act-


ive part  in  the  battle  of  Cedar  Keys,  8  June,  1862  •
but  after  the  arrival  of  Gen,  Fi-emont  he  was  suc-
ceeded by  Gen.  Sigel.  Gen.  Blenker  was  then  or-
dered to  Washington,  and  on  31  March,  1863  was
mustered  out  of  service.  He  returned  to  his  farm
in  Rockland  co.,  where  he  remained  until  his
death,  which  resulted  from  internal  injuries  re-
ceived from  a  fall  of  his  horse  in  entering  the  town
of  Warrenton,  Va..  while  with  his  command.

BLENNERHASSETT,  Harman,  scholar,  b,  in
Hampshire,  England,  8  Oct,,  1764  or  1765;  d,  on
the  island  of  Guernsey,  1  Feb.,  1831.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Westminster  school,  London,  and  at
Trinity  college,  Dublin,  where  he  also  studied  law,
and  received  the  degree  of  B.  A.  and  LL.  B.  in
1790.  Having  succeeded  to  the  family  property,
he  spent  some  time  in  travel  on  the  continent,


where  he  acquired  the  republican  ideas  that  were
prevalent  at  that  time.  He  therefore  decided  to
settle  in  the  United  States,  and,  after  marrying
Adeline  Agnew,  daughter  of  the  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  the  isle  of  Man,  disposed  of  his  estates,
supplied  himself*  with  an  extensive  library  and
philosophical  apparatus,  and  sailed  in  1797  for
New  York.  In  1798  he  purchased  a  small  island
in  the  Ohio  river,  a  few  miles  below  Parkersburg,
then  called  Backus  island.  Here  he  erected  a
spacious  mansion  which  he  fitted  up  with  rich  fur-
niture, costly  pictures  and  statues,  and  had  the
surrounding  grounds  elaborately  cultivated.  In
this  romantic  locality  he  passed  his  time  in  the
study  of  chemistry, '  galvanism,  astronomy,  and
similar  sciences,  an&  in  dispensing  a  generous  hos-
pitalily  to  his  many  distinguished  guests.  Among
the  latter  was  Aaron  Burr,  who  visited  him  in
1805,  and  succeeded  in  interesting  him  in  his  trea-
sonable schemes,  the  real  character  of  which  Blen-
nerhassett  probably  did  not  realize.  The  fortune
that  had  been  so  liberally  expended  in  the  fitting
up  of  his  property  had  "become  somewhat  dimin-
ished, and  he  gladly  entered  upon  any  enterprise
by  means  of  which  large  returns  might  be  secured.
He  published  a  series  of  papers  supporting  the
views  of  Burr  in  the  "  Ohio  Gazette,"  under  the
pen-name  of  Querist,  and  he  also  invested  large
sums  of  monev  in  boats,  provisions,  arms,  and  am-
munition for  the  expedition.  Soon  after  this  he
went  to  Kentucky,  whence,  on  being  warned  of
Burr's  real  designs,  he  returned  to  his  island
greatly  disheartened  ;  but  in  response  to  the  re-
peated solicitations  of  Burr  and  to  the  persuasions
of  his  wife,  he  persisted  in  the  undertaking.  ^
proclamation  against  the  scheme  having  been  is-
sued by  President  Jefferson,  Blennerhassett,  wlio
was  expecting  arrest,  escaped  from  the  island,  and,
eluding  pursuit,  joined  Burr  at  the  mouth  of  C  uni-
berland  river.  Meanwhile  his  home  was  overrim
by  a  partv  under  Col.  Phelps,  who  wantonly  tle-
stroyed  miich  of  the  property. Burr's  scheme  lia\-


BLISS


ing  resulted  in  total  failure,  Blennerhassett  was
arrested,  but  was  soon  discharged.  He  then  at-
tempted to  return  to  his  island  home,  but  while  on
his  way  was  again  arrested  at  Lexington,  Ky.,  and
thrown  into  prison.  He  secured  the  legal  services
of  Henry  Clay,  who  was  unsuccessful  in  procuring
his  discharge,  and  in  consequence  he  was  taken  to
Richmond  for  trial  on  a  charge  of  treason.  The
prosecution  against  Burr  having  failed,  Blenner-
hassett and  the  other  conspirators  were  discharged
in  1807.  His  property  had  been  seized  by  credit-
ors, the  beautiful  grounds  used  for  the  cultivation
of  hemp,  and  the  mansion  converted  into  a  store-
house for  the  preservation  of  crops.  It  was  after-
ward burned,  having  been  accidentally  fired  by
some  careless  negroes.  Blennerhassett  then  settled
in  Natchez,  and  afterward  purchased  1,000  acres  of
land  for  the  cultivation  of  cotton,  near  Port  Gib-
son, Miss. ;  but  this  venture  proved  unfortunate.
The  war  of  1812  prevented  the  success  of  most
commercial  enterprises,  and  his  property  steadily
diminished.  In  1819  he  removed  to  Montreal,
where  he  began  the  practice  of  law,  hoping  through
the  favor  of  his  old  schoolmate,  the  duke  of  Rich-
mond, to  obtain  a  judgeship.  Failing  in  this,  he
sailed  for  Ireland  in  1822,  in  order  to  recover  his
estates  by  means  of  a  reversionary  claim,  but  was
unsuccessful.  After  various  efforts  to  secure  em-
ployment he  retired  to  Guernsey,  where  he  died.
See  William  H.  Saiford's  "  Life  of  Harman  Blen-
nerhassett "  (Cincinnati,  1853)  and  "  Blennerhassett

i  Papers,  embodying  the  Private  Journal  of  Harman

I  Blennerhassett" (New  York,  1864). John S.  C.

j  Abbott,  under  the  title  of  "  And  who  was  Blenner-
hassett ?  "  has  very  pleasantly,  in  "  Harper's  Maga-
zine "  for  February,  1877,  spoken  of  the  life  of  this
interesting  character  in  his  island  home  in  the  Ohio.

|— His  wife,  Adeline  Ag-iiew,  whom  he  married  in
1796,  was  a  woman  of  great  beauty  and  much  talent.
She  was  an  accomplished  linguist  and  a  poet  of  some
ability.  Her  works  include  "  The  Deserted  Isle  "
(1822)  and  "The  Widow  of  the  Rock,  and  other
Poems"  (1824).  In  1842,  after  the  death  of  her
husband,  she  returned  to  the  United  States  and
petitioned  congress  for  a  grant  of  money  as  com-
pensation for  the  spoliation  of  her  former  home.
The  petition  was  presented  by  Henry  Clay,  and  a
committee  of  the  senate  reported  favorably  upon
it;  but  she  died  before  the  bill  was  acted  upon,
and  was  buried  in  New  York  by  sisters  of  charity.
BLISS,  Daniel,  missionary,  b.  in  Georgia,  Vt.,
17  Aug.,  1823.  He  studied  at  Kingsville,  Ohio,
academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1852.
He  studied  from  1852  till  1855  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  and  was  ordained  a  Congrega-
tional clergyman,  17  Oct.,  1855.  He  was  mission-
ary of  the  American  board  at  Mt.  Lebanon,  Syria,
from  1856  till  1862,  and  subsequently,  till  1864,
was  secretary  to  the  board  in  New  York.  During
1864-'6  he  labored  in  England  in  behalf  of  the
Protestant  college  at  Beyrout,  Syria,  of  which  he
has  been  president  since  '1864.  He  has  published
several  tracts,  and  is  the  author  of  a  "  Mental  Phi-
losophy"^ and  "Natural  Philosophy"  in  Arabic.

BLISS,  Daniel,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Concord,
Mass.,  in  1740 ;  d.  in  Lincoln,  New  Brunswick,  in
1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1760,  and
was  one  of  the  barristers  and  attorneys  that  were
addressers  of  Gov.  Hutchinson  in  1774.  He  was
proscribed  under  the  act  of  1778,  joined  the  British
army,  and  was  appointed  commissary.  Soon  after
the  revolution  he  removed  to  New  Brunswick,  and
became  a  member  of  the  provincial  council,  and
chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.— His
^on,  John  Murray,  jurist,  b.  in  Massachusetts  in


BLISS


293


1771 ;  d.  in  St.  John,  New  Brunswick,  in  August,
1834.  He  settled  in  New  Brunswick  in  1786,  stud-
ied law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  represented
the  county  of  York  in  the  house  of  assembly.  In
1816  he  was  elevated  to  the  bench  and  to  a  seat  in
his  majesty's  council.  On  the  decease,  in  1824,  of
Ward  Chipman,  who  was  president  and  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  colony,  Judge  Bliss  admin-
istered the  government  until  the  arrival  of  Sir
Howard  Douglas,  a  period  of  nearly  a  year.  He
was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  was  the
senior  justice  at  the  time  of  his  death.

BLISS,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  16  Nov.,  1793 ;  d.  there,  19  April,  1873.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1813,  studied  law  under
his  father,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  entered
upon  practice  at  Monson,  Mass.,  where  he  remained
for  seven  years.  He  then  returned  to  Springfield,
and  formed  a  law  partnership  with  Jonathan
Dwight,  Jr.,  and  in  1827  was  elected  to  the  lower
branch  of  the  legislature.  He  served  for  three
successive  terras,  and  also  in  1853,  when  he  was
elected  speaker.  In  1835  he  was  elected  president
of  the  state  senate.  His  attention  was  subse-
quently occupied  with  the  completion  of  the  West-
ern railroad  between  Worcester  and  Albany,  and
prior  to  1846  he  was  president  of  the  road.  After
retiring  from  this  office  he  spent  some  time  in
travel  abroad,  and  on  his  return  again  interested
himself  in  railroad  enterprises,  chiefly  in  the  west-
ern states,  in  conducting  which  he  gained  a  wide
reputation.  From  May,  1860,  until  his  death  he
lived  in  retirement  at  Springfield.

BLISS,  Jonathan,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in
Springfield,  Mass.,  in  1742 ;  d.  in  Fredericton,  New
Brunswick,  in  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1763,  and  studied  law  in  the  office  of
Lieut.-Gov.  Hutchinson.  He  was  a  member  of  the
general  court  of  Massachusetts  in  1768,  was  one  of
the  seventeen  rescinders,  and  was  proscribed  under
the  act  of  1778.  He  removed  to  New  Brunswick
with  other  loyalists  in  1783,  and  in  1785  was
elected  to  the  provincial  legislature,  and  the  same
year,  while  in  England,  was  appointed  the  second
attorney-general  of  the  province.  In  1809  he  be-
came chief  justice,  which  office  he  retained  until
his  death.  He  was  also  president  of  the  council.
One  of  his  sons,  William  Blowers,  became  a  judge
of  the  supreme  court,  Halifax,  and  another,  Henry,
was  a  lawyer  in  London,  and  for  many  years  agent
for  New  Brunswick  in  England.

BLISS,  Philip  Paul,  singing  evangelist,  b.  in
Clearfield  co..  Pa.,  9  July,  1838 ;  d.  near  Ashtabu-
la, Ohio,  29  Dec,  1876.  His  early  years  were
Eassed  in  the  wilds  of  Pennsylvania  and  Ohio,  and
is  education  was  of  the  most  rudimentary  de-
scription ;  but  he  possessed  an  innate  passion  for
music,  which  at  first  was  only  cultivated  by  listen-
ing to  his  father  singing  hymns.  When  about  ten
years  old  he,  for  the  first  time,  heard  a  piano,  and
was  unable  to  resist  the  temptation  that  lured  him
through  the  open  door  and  into  the  room.  He
stood  spell-bound  until  the  music  ceased,  and  the
player,  becoming  aware  of  his  presence,  barefooted
and  in  rags,  harshly  ordered  him  away.  Until
1855  he  worked  on  a  farm  and  at  wood-cutting,
but  so  faithfully  improved  his  occasional  opportu-
nities for  study  that  by  1856  he  had  obtained
enough  education  to  teach  a  school  in  Hartsville,
Alleghany  co.,  N.  Y.  The  following  winter  he,
for  the  first  time,  attended  a  singing-school  in  To-
wanda.  Pa.  The  same  winter  he  attended  a  musi-
cal convention  in  Rome,  N.  Y.  In  1858  he  taught
school  in  Rome,  his  vocal  powers  developing
through  constant  exercise. In  the  summer  of  1860


294


BLISS


BLOCK


he  was  providentially  enabled  to  attend  the  nor-
mal academy  of  music  at  Geneseo,  N.  Y.,  and  in
the  following  winter  began  to  teach  music  and  to
compose  songs,  which  soon  attained  local  popular-
ity. During  1865  he  was  drafted  into  the  army,
and  reported  for  duty  at  Carlisle  barracks ;  but,  as
the  war  was  over,  he  was  soon  discharged.  During
the  twelve  years  beginning  with  1864  he  wrote  the
songs  that  have  made  him  famous.  In  1865  he
formed  a  business  partnership  with  a  Chicago
firm,  and  held  musical  conventions  and  gave  con-
certs throughout  the  northwestern  states.  His
fame  as  a  '•  singing  evangelist "  did  not  spread  be-
yond the  localities  whither  his  engagements  led
him  until  a  chance  meeting  with  D.  L.  Moody,  the
famous  revivalist  leader,  brought  about  a  warm
friendship  between  the  two,  and  resulted  in  his
self-consecration  to  missionary  labors  that  carried
his  songs  all  over  the  world.  But  it  was  not  until
1874  that  he  deliberately  devoted  himself  to  evan-
gelistic work,  though  he  had  always  been  religiously
inclined,  and  had  united  with  the  Baptist  church
at  Elk  Run,  Pa.,  when  thirteen  years  old.  A  fine
personal  presence,  a  native  gift  of  effective  speech,
and  a  wonderful  voice,  gave  him  an  irresistible
power  over  miscellaneous  audiences.  His  singing,
though  not  scientific,  according  to  classical  stand-
ards, appealed  strongly  to  the  hearts  of  the  multi-
tudes. According  to  an  expert,  the  "  chest  range  "
of  his  voice  was  from  D  flat  below  to  A  flat  above,
and  this  without  straining  or  confusing  the  vowel
sounds.  The  motive  of  his  most  famous  song
was  supplied  by  a  message  signalled  by  flag  during
the  civil  war  from  Kenesaw  mountain,  Georgia,  to
Altoona  Pass,  twenty  miles  distant,  over  the  heads
of  the  enemy.  It  ran  thus :  "  Hold  the  fort ;  I  am
coming. — W.  T.  Sherman."  These  words  and  the
inspiring  air  that  Mr.  Bliss  composed  to  accom-
pany them  are  sung  wherever  English  is  spoken.
Others  of  his  compositions  have  commanded  a  pop-
ularity hardly  second  to  that  of  "  Hold  the  Fort."
Among  them  are  "  Down  Life's  Dark  Vale  we
Wander,"  "  Hallelujah !  'tis  done ! "  "  Jesus  Loves
Me,"  and  "Pull  for  the  Shore,  Sailor!"  As  a
conductor  of  popular  meetings  for  the  purpose  of
stimulating  religious  zeal,  Mr.  Bliss  was  remark-
ably successful;  his  services  were  in  demand
throughout  the  United  States  and  Canada,  and  his
influence  as  a  revivalist  was  extraordinary.  He
lost  his  life  in  a  railway  disaster  near  Ashtabula,
Ohio,  where  a  bridge  gave  way  under  the  train.
When  last  seen  alive  Mr.  Bliss  was  striving  to  res-
cue his  wife  from  the  burning  wreck.  His  "  Me-
moirs," by  D.  W.  Whittle,  with  contributions  by
D.  L.  Moody  and  Ira  D.  Sankey,  were  published  in
1877.  The  published  collections  of  his  songs  are
"The  Charm"  (1871);  "The  Song  Tree"  (1872);
"  The  Joy  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Gospel  Songs  "  (1874).

BLISS,  Porter  Cornelius,  journalist,  b.  in
Erie  co.,  X.  Y.,  28  Dec,  1838 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  2  Feb.,  1885.  He  was  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Asher
Bliss,  for  many  years  missionary  to  the  Indians  on
the  reservations  in  western  New  York.  He  stud-
ied at  Hamilton  and  Yale,  and  in  1860  travelled
through  Maine,  New  Brunswick,  and  Nova  Scotia
to  investigate  the  condition  of  the  remnants  of
Indian  tribes,  and  in  1861  became  private  secre-
tary to  James  Watson  Webb,  appointed  minister
to  Brazil.  In  1862  Mr.  Bliss  was  commissioned
by  the  Argentine  government  to  explore  the  Gran
Chaco,  where  he  spent  eight  months  in  learning
the  Indian  dialects  and  investigating  the  antiqui-
ties. The  results  were  published  by  the  government.
He  edited  for  a  short  time,  at  fJuenos  Ay  res,  the
"  River  Plate  Magazine,''  and  then  went  to  Para-


guay, where  he  became  private  secretary  of  the
U.  S.  minister,  Charles  A.  Washburn,  in  1866.
President  Lopez  commissioned  him  to  write  a  his-
tory of  Paraguay ;  but  while  he  was  engaged  in
this  work  the  war  between  that  country  and  Bra-
zil began,  he  fell  under  suspicion,  and  was  thrown
into  prison,  where  he  was  tortured  to  compel  him
to  confess  that  he  had  been  a  Brazilian  spy.  At
the  end  of  three  months  (December,  1868)  he  was
released  on  the  demand  of  the  U.  S.  government,
supported  by  the  presence  of  an  American  squad-
ron. He  went  to  Washington,  was  a  translator  in
the  war  department,  edited  the  "  Chronicle  "  for  a
year  and  a  half,  and  was  then  (July,  1870)  ap-
pointed secretary  of  legation  in  Mexico,  which
office  he  held  for  four  years.  During  that  time  he
made  archaeological  explorations,  and  wrote  much
on  the  condition  of  Mexico  and  its  opportunities
for  American  enterprise.  By  his  sole  personal  ex-
ertions he  saved  from  execution  three  American
officers  in  the  army  of  Diaz,  who  had  been  cap-
tured and  condemned  by  a  court-martial.  In  the
summer  of  1874  Mr.  Bliss  came  to  New  York,  and
for  the  next  three  years  he  was  at  work  on  "John-
son's Cyclopfedia."  After  that  he  edited  a  weekly
called  "  The  Library  Table."  wrote  a  history  of  the
Russo- Turkish  war  of  1877,  and  in  1879  went  to
South  America  as  a  correspondent  of  the  New
York  "  Herald."  He  was  for  two  years  president
of  the  philological  society,  and  was  an  enthusias-
tic student  of  oriental  antiquities.

BLISS,  WilHam  Wallace  Smith,  soldier,  b.
in  Whitehall,  N.  Y.,  in  August,  1815 ;  d.  in  East
Pascagoula,  Miss.,  5  Aug.,  1853.  He  was  a  son  of
Capt.  John  Bliss  (West  Point,  1811),  and  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1883.  All
serving  in  the  Cherokee  war  of  1833-'4,  he  \'
assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at  WestPoi;.;
from  1834  till  1840,  and  then  became  assistant  ad-
jutant-general at  the  headquarters  of  the  western
military  departments,  1842  till  1845.  During  the
Mexican  war  he  was  chief  of  staif  to  Gen.  Taylor,
and  took  an  active  part  in  the  engagements  of  talc
Alto,  Resaca  de  la  Palraa,  Monterey,  and  Buena
Vista.  In  appreciation  of  his  conduct  as  a  soldier,
the  state  of  New  York  presented  him  with  a  gold
medal,  and  for  gallant  services  he  was  bre vetted
lieutenant-colonel.  From  4  March,  1849,  till  9  July,
1850,  he  was  private  secretary  to  President  Taylor,
whose  youngest  daughter  he  married.  Subsequent
to  the  death  of  Taylor  he  was  adjutant-general  of
the  western  division,  with  headquarters  at  New
Orleans,  La.,  from  19  Nov.,  1850,  till  his  death.

BLITZ,  Antonio,  prestidigitateur,  b.  in  Deal,
Kent,  England,  21  June,  1810 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  28  Jan.,  1877.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  years
he  began  his  career  in  Hamburg,  Germany.  After
travelling  for  two  years  in  northern  Europe,  I
returned  to  England,  appearing  first  in  Dover
December,  1825.  He  then  visited  Ireland  and  Scul
land.  In  1834  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and,
after  performing  in  New  York,  travelled  through-
out the  country.  Later  he  visited  Canada  and  the
West  Indies.  On  his  return  from  the  south  he
settled  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  where  he  resided  until
his  death.  His  experiences  have  been  related  in
"  Fifty  Years  in  the  Magic  Circle  "  (Hartford,  18(1),
written  by  himself.  „^.,,

BLOCK,  or  BLOK,  Adriaen,  navigator.  With-
in three  years  after  the  discovery  of  Hudson  river
(1610)  Block  visited  Manhattan  (now  New  York)
bav,  making  a  successful  voyage  and  bringing
back  to  Amsterdam  a  cargo  of  rich  furs  and  two
sons  of  native  sachems.  In  1614,  encouraged  by
an  ordinance  of  the  states-general  favoring  explo-


BLODGET


BLOMMAERT


295


ration,  he  brought  out  another  ship,  the  "  Tiger,"
one  of  a  fleet  of  five  equipped  by  merchants  for
tradino-.  and  again  visited  Manhattan.  The
"Tiger"  was  accidentally  burned  in  port,  but
Block  and  his  crew  built  a  yacht  of  sixteen  tons,
named  the  "  Unrest,"  with  which  he  explored  the
neighboring  waters.  First  of  all  Europeans,  he
dared  the  perilous  passage  of  Hell  Gate,  and,  sailing
eastward  through  Long  Island  sound,  discovered
the  "  River  of  Red  Hills  "  and  the  "  Freshwater,"
known  to  us  respectively  as  the  Housatonic  and
the  Connecticut.  The  latter  he  explored  as  far  as
the  site  of  Hartford.  Still  pushing  eastward,  he
named  "  Roode  Eiland  " — the  red  island,  from  the
color  of  the  clay  on  parts  of  the  coast.  The  island
had,  however,  been  previously  discovered  by  Eng-
lish navigators.  He  discovered  Block  island,  which
bears  his  name.  He  sailed  as  far  north  as  Nahant.
and  then,  leaving  the  "  Unrest,"  first  of  American-
built  yachts,  at  Cape  Cod  to  be  used  in  the  fur
trade,  he  returned  to  Holland  in  one  of  the  ships
that  accompanied  him  in  the  westward  voyage.

BLODGET,  Lorin,  physicist,  b.  near  James-
town, Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  25  May,  1823.  He
was  educated  at  Jamestown  Academy  and  at  Ge-
neva (now  Hobart)  College.  In  November,  1851,  he
became  assistant  at  the  Smithsonian  Institution  in
charge  of  researches  on  climatology,  and  at  the
meeting  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Ad-
vancement of  Science,  held  in  Cleveland  in  1853,  he
presented  seven  papers  on  atmospheric  physics.
These  early  contributions  were  among  the  first
ever  published  in  this  country  on  that  subject,  and
were  of  value  in  establishing  the  science.  From
1853  till  185G  he  was  associated  with  the  engineers
on  the  Pacific  railroad  surveys,  and  directed  the
determination  of  altitudes  and  gradients  by  means
of  the  barometer.  The  latter  part  of  this  period
was  spent  in  the  war  office,  to  which  he  had  been
transferred.  In  1857  he  published  "  The  Climatol-
ogy of  the  United  States  and  of  the  Temperate
Latitudes  of  the  North  American  Continent,"
which  was  the  most  valuable  contribution  on  that
subject  ever  issued  in  this  country.  It  was  exten-
sively circulated,  and  500  copies  sent  to  Europe
were  disposed  of  in  six  months.  The  book  was
highly  complimented  by  Humboldt.  In  1863  he
was  placed  in  charge  of  the  financial  and  statisti-
cal reports  of  the  treasury  department,  and  in
that  capacity  published  several  volumes  of  official
reports.  From  1865  till  1877  he  was  U.  S.  ap-
praiser-at-large  of  customs,  and  during  1874-'5
he  was  special  assistant  of  the  treasury  department.
While  connected  with  the  government  service  he
wrote  reports  on  finance,  revenue,  industrial  prog-
ress, and  census  of  industry.  From  1858  till  1865
he  was  secretary  of  the  "Philadelphia  Board  of
Trade,  and  from  1859  till  1864  the  editor  of  the
"  North  American,"  published  there.  His  publica-
tions include  150  bound  volumes  and  350  pam-
jjhlets,  with  thousands  of  editorial  articles.  The
most  important  of  these  are  probably  the  accounts
of  his  researches  on  climatology,  and  were  published
by  the  government.  His  "  Commercial  and  Finan-
cial Resources  of  the  United  States"  (1864)  was
circulated  to  the  extent  of  over  30,000  copies,  was
reprinted  in  Nuremberg,  Germany,  and  did  much
to  sustain  the  credit  of  the  United  States  in  the
money  markets  of  the  old  world.  The  industrial
census  of  Philadelphia  has  been  taken  four  times
by  him,  and  he  has  resided  in  that  city  since  1857.

BLODGET,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Woburn,
Mas^s.,  1  April,  1724 ;  d.  in  Haverhill,  Mass.,  1  Sept.,
1807.  He  participated  in  the  French  and  Indian
war,  was  a  member  of  the  expedition  against  Louis-


burg  in  1745,  and  afterward  became  a  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  the  county  of  Hills-
borough, N.  H.  In  1783,  with  a  machine  of  his
own  invention,  he  raised  a  valuable  cargo  from  a
ship  sunk  near  Plymouth,  and  then  went  to  Europe
for  the  purpose  of  engaging  in  similar  enterprises.
He  met  with  discouragement  in  Spain,  and  his
proposition  in  England  to  raise  the  "  Royal  George  "
was  unsuccessful.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  established  a  duck  factory  in  1791,  and
in  1793  removed  to  New  Hampshire,  where  he
began  the  canal  that  bears  his  name,  around
Amoskeag  falls  in  the  Merrimack.  He  expended  a
large  sum  of  money  on  this  enterprise  without
being  able  to  complete  the  work,  and,  becoming
financially  embarrassed,  was  for  a  time  impris-
oned for  debt.  See  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Col-
lections "  (new  series,  vol.  iv.).

BLODGETT,  Foster,  politician,  b.  in  Augusta,
Ga.,  15  Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Atlanta,  12  Nov.,  1877.
He  became  mayor  of  Augusta  in  1859,  and  was  re-
elected in  1860,  but  was  defeated  in  1861.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  captain  of  the  Blodgett  artil-
lery, from  Augusta.  After  the  war  he  joined  the
republican  party  and  was  appointed  postmaster  of
Augusta  in  1865,  but  was  removed  from  that  office
in  1868,  and  reinstated  in  1869.  In  1867  he  was
made  president  of  the  Union  Republican  Club  of
Augusta,  and  during  the  same  year  he  was  again
chosen  mayor.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  constitu-
tional convention  of  1867,  and  in  1870  claimed  to
have  been  chosen  U.  S.  senator  from  Georgia,  but
failed  to  secure  his  seat,  as  the  senate  decided  in
favor  of  the  claims  of  Thomas  M.  Norwood.

BLOEDE,  Marie,  author,  b.  of  a  noble  family  in
Silesia,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  12  March,
1870.  Her  brother,  Friedrich  von  Sallet,  was  a
poet  of  merit  and  an  intense  liberal  in  his  politi-
cal views,  who  died  in  1843.  His  sister  shared  his
poetical  gifts  and  his  liberal  sympathies.  She
married  early,  and  in  opposition  to  the  wishes  of
her  family.  Dr.  G.  Bloede,  and  in  the  revolution  of
1848  her  husband,  foremost  in  the  liberal  ranks,
was  arrested,  tried,  and  condemned  to  death,  at
Dresden,  but  escaped  to  the  United  States.  Her
poems  and  articles,  both  in  English  and  German,
attracted  attention.  Her  husband,  as  the  editor  of
the  "  New-Yorker  Demokrat,"  a  daily  republican
paper,  received  assistance  from  her  literary  labors.

BLOMMAERT,  Samuel,  colonial  patroon,  b.
about  1590 ;  d.  about  1670.  He  was  one  of  the  di-
rectors of  the  Amsterdam  chamber,  and,  in  com-
pany with  Samuel  Godyn,  a  fellow-director,  bar-
gained with  the  natives  for  a  tract  of  land  reaching
from  Cape  Henlopen  to  the  mouth  of  Delaware
river.  This  was  in  1629,  three  years  before  the
charter  of  Maryland,  and  is  the  oldest  deed  for
land  in  Delaware.  Its  water-front  nearly  coincides
with  the  coast  of  Kent  and  Sussex  cos.  The  pur-
chase was  ratified  in  1630  by  Peter  Minuit  and
his  council  at  Fort  Amsterdam  (New  York).  A
company — including,  besides  the  two  original  pro-
prietors, Kiliaen  Van  Rensselaer,  De  Laet,  the  histo-
rian, and  David  Pietersen  De  Vries — was  formed  to
colonize  the  tract,  and  a  ship  of  eighteen  guns  was
fitted  out  to  bring  over  the  colonists  and  subse-
quently defend  the  coast,  with  incidental  whale-
fishing  to  help  defray  expenses.  A  colony  of  more
than  thirty  souls  was  planted  on  Lewes  creek,  a
little  north  of  Cape  Henlopen,  and  its  governorship
was  intrusted  to  Gillis  Hosset.  This  settlement
antedated  by  several  years  any  in  Pennsylvania,
and  the  colony  at  Lewes  practically  laid  the  foun-
dation and  defined  the  singularly  limited  area  of
the  state  of  Delaware,  the  major  part  of  which  was


296


BLONDIN


BLOUNT


incliuled  in  the  purchase.  A  palisaded  fort  was
built,  with  the  ''red  lion,  rampant,"  of  Holland
affixed  to  its  gate,  and  the  country  was  named
Swaanendael,  while  the  water  was  called  Godyn's
bay.  The  estate  was  further  extended,  on  5  May,
1630,  by  the  purchase  of  a  tract  twelve  miles  square
on  the  coast  of  Cape  May,  opposite,  and  the  trans-
action was  duly  attested  at  Fort  Amsterdam.  The
existence  of  the  little  colony  was  short,  for^the  In-
dians came  down  upon  it  in  revenge  for  an  arbi-
trary act  on  the  part  of  Hosset,  and  it  was  destroyed,
not  a  soul  escaping  to  tell  the  tale.  According  to
acknowledged  precedent,  occupancy  of  the  wilder-
ness served  to  perfect  title  ;  but  before  the  Dutch
could  reoccupy  the  desolated  site  at  Lewes,  the
English  were  practically  in  possession.

BLONDIN,  Eiiiile  Gravelet,  funambulist,  b.  in
France,  about  1880.  In  1855  he  was  engaged  by
William  Niblo  to  perform  with  the  Ravel  troupe  in
New  York,  and  was  subsequently  part  proprietor
of  a  circus.  On  30  June,  1859,  he  accomplished  the
remarkable  exploit  of  crossing  the  Niagara  river  on
a  tight  rope,  and  afterward  crossed  with  a  man  on
his  back,  and  performed  similar  feats  in  other  parts
of  America  and  Europe.  The  rope  on  which  he
crossed,  a  short  distance  below  the  falls,  at  a  height
of  150  feet  from  the  water,  was  1,300  feet  long  and
8:^  inches  in  diameter.

BLOODGOOD,  Delavan,  surgeon,  b.  in  Spring-
ville,  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Aug.  1881.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Madison  University,  Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  in
1852,  studied  medicine  in  the  college  of  physicians
and  surgeons,  New  York  city,  Michigan  University,
and  Jefferson  Medical  College,  Philadelphia,  where
he  received  his  degree  of  M.  D.,  and  entered  the
U.  S.  navy  as  assistant  surgeon  13  March,  1857.
In  his  first  cruise,  in  the  steam  frigate  "Merri-
mac,"  of  the  Pacific  squadron,  he  volunteered  his
services  when  a  supposed  epidemic  broke  out  among
the  employes  of  the  Pacific  steam  navigation  com-
pany at  Tobago.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  was  on  duty  in  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  and
afterward  in  Hampton  Roads,  receiving  promotion
as  surgeon,  24  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  subsequently
attached  to  the  West  India  flying  squadron  when
yellow  fever  broke  out  on  board,  and  to  the  Caro-
lina blockading  squadron  when  a  severe  epidemic  of
small-pox  occurred.  He  was  ordered  to  the  "  James-
town "  at  Panama  in  February,  1867,  and  was  one  of
the  few  survivors  of  the  virulent  epidemic  of  yellow
fever  that  raged  among  the  men.  He  was  pro-
moted, 22  Aug.,  1884,  to  medical  director,  and  as-
signed to  the  naval  laboratory  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.

BLOODGOOD,  Simeon  Be  Witt,  merchant  and
author,  b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1799  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  14  July,  1866.  He  wrote  "  The  Sexagenary,
or  Reminiscences  of  the  American  Revolution  "
(Albany,  1833),  and  a  treatise  "  On  Roads  "  (1888),
and  contributed  largely  to  the  periodical  press.  A
few  months  before  his  death  he  was  appointed  con-
sul-general for  the  United  States  of  Colombia.

BLOODWORTH,  Timotliy,  statesman,  b.  in
1736 ;  d.  near  Washington,  N.  C,  24  Aug.,  1814.
He  was  for  thirty  years  a  member  of  the  legisla-
tive assembly  of  North  Carolina  ;  member  of  the
continental  congress  in  1786-'7;  a  member  of
congress  in  1790  and  1791 ;  U.  S.  senator,  1795-
1801,  and  afterward  collector  of  the  port  of  Wil-
mington. He  was  brought  up  in  poverty,  followed
by  turns  the  callings  of  farmer,  smith,  preacher,
doctor,  wheelwright,  and  politician,  and  was  noted
for  his  benevolence.

BLOOMER,  Amelia  Jenks,  reformer,  b.  in
Homer,  N.  Y.,  27  May,  1818.  She  married,  in
1840,  Dexter  C.  Bloomer,  a  lawyer,  and  resided  in


Seneca  Falls,  N.  Y.,  where  she  wrote  frequently
on  the  enfranchisement  of  women,  and  on  1  Jan..
1849,  issued  the  first  number  of  "The  Lily,"  a
semi-monthly  publication,  devoted  to  temperance
and  woman's  rights,  which  attained  a  circulation
of  4,000.  In  1858  she  removed  with  her  husband
to  Mt.  Vernon,  Ohio,  where  she  continued  the  pub^
lication  of  "  The  Lily,"  and  was  also  associate  edi-
tor of  the  "  Western  Home  Journal,"  a  literary
weekly.  In  1855,  on  account  of  her  husband'*s
business  interests,  they  removed  to  Council  BluiTs
Iowa,  where  it  was  impracticable,  for  lack  of  manu-
facturing and  postal  facilities,  to  continue  the  pub-
lication of  the  paper,  which  she  therefore  sold  to
Mary  B.  Birdsall.  She  advocated  women's  rights
on  the  lecture  platform  as  well  as  in  the  columns
of  her  paper,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
movement  for  woman  sufiirage.  She  also  lectured
on  temperance  m  the  principal  cities  of  the  north-
west, and  adopted  and  publicly  recommended  a
sanitary  dress  for  women,  known  as  the  Bloomer
costume,  which  was  first  introduced  by  Elizabeth
Smith  Miller,  daughter  of  Gerrit  Smith.  It  con-
sisted of  skirts  reaching  just  below  the  knee  and
Turkish  trousers.  In  the  winter  of  1855  Mrs.
Bloomer  addressed  the  territorial  legislature  of
Nebraska  on  the  subject  of  conferring  the  ballot
on  women.  She  took  part  in  organizing  the  Iowa
state  suffrage  association,  and  was  at  one  time  its
president,  but  in  later  years  withdrew  entirely  from
public  life.

BLOOMFIELD,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Wood-
bridge,  N.  J. ;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  3  Oct.,  1823.
He  studied  law  until  the  beginning  of  the  war  of
independence,  when  he  was  made  a  captain  in  Day-
ton's regiment,  the  8d  New  Jersey,  in  1776,  and
served  through  the  war,  attaining  the  rank  of
major.  He  was  subsequently  admitted  to  the. bar,
and,  after  practising  for  some  time  at  Burlington,
became  attorney-general  of  the  state.  Pie  was  gov-
ernor of  New.  Jersey  in  1801-12,  was  brigadier-
general  during  the  war  of  1812-5,  was  a  represen-
tative in  congress  during  1817-21,  and  chairman
of  a  committee  on  revolutionary  pensions.  He  was
a  firm  republican  in  politics,  and  a  brave  soldier.

BLOSSOM,  Tliomas,  pioneer,  d.  in  Plymouth.
Mass.,  in  the  summer  of  1633.  He  was  a  deacon  of
the  church  of  Plymouth,  and  a  correspondent  of
Gov.  Bradford,  who  speaks  of  him  as  one  of  "  our
ancient  family  in  Holland."  The  church  records
describe  him  as  being  "a  holy  man  and  experi-
enced saint,"  and  one  "  competently  accomplished
with  abilities."

BLOT,  Pierre,  cook,  b.  in  France  about  1818 ;
d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  26  Aug.,  1874.  He  aimed  at
popularizing  good  cookery  and  effecting  economy
in  the  preparation  of  food,  published  a  series  of
magazine  articles  in  which  he  imparted  practical
information  and  discountenanced  the  consumption
of  game  and  fish  out  of  season,  and  wrote  a  book
on  cookery,  entitled  •'  What  to  Eat,  and  how  to  Cook
it "  (New  York,  1863),  containing  over  a  thousand
recipes.  He  also  lectured  on  that  subject,  estab-
lished schools  of  instruction  in  the  art,  and  en-
gaged in  business  enterprises  in  Brooklyn  and  New
York,  partly  with  the  view  of  carrying  into  effect
his  views  on  the  preparation  of  food.

BLOUNT,  William,  statesman,  b.  in  North
Carolina  in  1744 ;  d.  in  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  21  March,
1800.  He  was  a  son  of  Jacob  Blount,  who  was
a  member  of  the  provincial  assemblies  of  Ino
-'6.  Pie  was  a  delegate  from  North  Carolma  to
the  old  congress  in  1782-'3  and  1786-'7,  member
of  the  assembly  from  Newbern  in  1780  and  l/»4,
a  signer  of  the'federal  constitution  in  1787,  and  m


BLOW


BLUNT


297


1790  was  appointed  governor  of  the  territory  south
of  the  Ohio.  Chosen  president  of  the  convention
to  form  the  state  of  Tennessee  in  179G,  he  was  its
representative  in  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1796,  but  was
expelled  in  July,  1797,  for  being  concerned  in  a
conspiracy  to  deliver  New  Orleans  to  Great  Britain,
and  for  having  instigated  the  Creeks  and  Chero-
kees  to  assist  the  British  in  conquering  the  Spanish
territory  of  Louisiana.  The  proceedings  against
him  increased  his  popularity  in  Tennessee,  and  he
was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  chosen  presi-
dent of  that  body.— His  brother,  Thomas,  soldier,
was  b.  in  Edgecombe  co.,  N.  C,  in  1700 ;  d.  in  Wash-
ington. D.  C,  7  Feb.,  1812.  He  volunteered  in  the
revolutionary  army  at  sixteen,  became  deputy  pay-
master-general in  1780,  and,  with  the  rank  of
major,  commanded  a  battalion  of  North  Carolina
militia  at  Eutaw  Springs.  He  became  a  major-
general  of  militia,  and  was  a  representative  in
congress  in  1793-'9,  1805-'9,  and  1811-'2.  He
again  sat  in  congress,  being  elected  as  a  democrat.
—Another  brother,  "VViUie,  governor  of  Tennessee,
was  b.  in  North  Carolina  in  1767 ;  d.  near  Clarks-
ville,  Tenn.,  10  Sept.,  1835.  He  was  secretary  to
his  brother  William  while  the  latter  was  territorial
governor  of  Ohio,  and  afterward  removed  to  Mont-
gomery CO.,  Tenn.,  and  was  soon  returned  to  the
legislature.  He  was  governor  of  the  state  from
1809  till  1815.

BLOW,  Henry  T.,  statesman,  b.  in  Southamp-
ton CO.,  Va.,  15  July,  1817 ;  d.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,
11  Sept.,  1875.  He  went  to  Missouri  in  1830,  and
was  graduated  at  St.  Louis  university.  He  then
engaged  in  the  drug  business  and  in  lead-mining,
in  which  he  was  successful.  Before  the  civil  war
he  took  a  prominent  part  in  the  anti-slavery  move-
ment, and  served  four  years  in  the  state  senate.  In
1861  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Venezuela,  bvit
resigned  in  less  than  a  year.  He  was  a  republican
member  of  congress  from  1863  till  1867,  and  served
on  the  committee  of  ways  and  means.  He  was  \
minister  to  Brazil  from  1869  till  1871,  and  was  ap-
pointed one  of  the  commissioners  of  the  District  of
Columbia  in  1874.

BLOWERS,  Sampson  Salters,  jurist,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  22  March,  1742;  d.  in  Halifax,  N.  S.,
25  Oct.,  1842.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Rev.  Thomas
Blowers,  minister,  of  Beverly  (1701-29),  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1763,  and  studied  law  under
Gov.  Hutchinson.  With  Adams  and  Quincy  he
was  engaged  as  junior  counsel,  in  1770,  in  the  de-
fence of  the  British  soldiers  concerned  in  the  Bos-
ton massacre.  Beijig  a  loyalist,  he  went  to  England
in  1774,  but  returned  in  the  spring  of  1778  to  his
native  city,  and  after  a  short  imprisonment  went
to  Halifax,  where  he  successfully  pursued  his  pro-
fession. In  1785  was  appointed  attorney- general
and  speaker  of  the  house  of  assembly  ;  and  in  1795
was  appointed  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  hav-
ing had  for  some  years  a  seat  in  the  council.  In
1799  he  became  chief  justice  of  Nova  Scotia,  with
the  presidency  of  the  council,  which  offices  he  re-
signed in  1833.

BLUNT,  Edmnnd  March,  author,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth N.  H.,  20  June,  1770;  d.  in  Sing  Sing,  N.
1- I  J  I^-'  ■^^^^-  ^®  was  a-  bookseller,  and  pub-
lished the  Newburyport  "Herald."  In  1796  he
published  his  first  "  American  Coast  Pilot,"  which
is  still  m  use  and  has  been  translated  into  most  of
•^^^^.^anguages  of  Europe.  About  thirty  editions
IT  .';'s,^o^"k>  which  describes  all  the  ports  of  the
United  States,  with  sailing  directions,  lists  of  light-
Muses,  and  other  knowledge  important  to  seamen,
tiaye  been  issued.  He  also  published  "  Stranger's
juide  to  N.  Y.  City  "  (1817),  and  numerous  nauti-


cal books  and  charts.— His  son,  Joseph,  lawyer,  b.
in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  in  February,  1792;  d.  in
New  York  city,  16  June,  1860,  first  came  into  notice
by  writing  on  the  Missouri  question  in  1820.  Soon
afterward  he  wrote  an  article  on  the  Laybach  cir-
cular, published  in  the  "  North  American  Review,"
which  attracted  the  attention  of  politicians.  He
was  long  a  leading  whig  and  protectionist,  was  one
of  the  first  members  of  the  republican  party,  and
drew  up  the  original  resolutions  of  the  republican
state  convention  at  Saratoga  in  1854.  Mr.  Blunt
declined  the  commissionership  to  China  offered
him  by  President  Fillmore.  He  was  appointed
district  attorney  not  long  bef(^re  his  death.  He
edited  the  "  American  Annual  Register  "  (1827-35),
and  published  "Historical  Sketch  of  the  Forma-
tion of  the  American  Confederacy"  (New  York,
1825);  "Speeches,  Reviews,  and  Reports"  (1843);
"  Merchants'  and  Shipmasters'  Assistant "  (1829  and
1848). — Another  son,  Edmund,  hydrographer.  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1799 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  2  Sept.,  1866,  manifested  in  early  life  a
taste  for  practical  mathematics,  and  when  scarcely
seventeen  made  the  first  accurate  survey  of  New
York  harbor.  In  1819-'20  he  made  the  first  survey
of  the  Bahama  banks  and  the  shoals  of  George  and
Nantucket,  and  in  1824  surveyed  the  entrance  of
New  York  harbor  from  Barnegat  to  Fire  Island.
In  1825-'6  he  ran  the  line  of  levels  from  the  river
San  Juan  to  the  Pacific  ocean  for  a  canal  on  the
Nicaragua  route.  In  1827-30,  as  a  private  enter-
prise, he  surveyed  Long  Island  sound  from  New
York  to  Montauk  Point.  On  the  organization  of  the
U.  S.  coast  survey  in  1832  he  was  appointed  first  as-
sistant, holding  that  place  till  the  time  of  his  death.
In  1855-'6  he  furnished  the  points  to  determine  the
exterior  line  of  New  York  harbor.  While  he  was
on  the  coast  survey  his  attention  was  directed  to
the  inferiority  of  the  lights  in  the  American  light-
houses, and  he  was  the  proposer  and  advocate  of
the  introduction  of  Fresnel's  system  of  signal-
lights.  He  also  invented  the  dividing-engine.  He
was  a  partner  of  his  brother  in  the  firm  of  E.  &
Gr.  W.  Blunt,  nautical  publishers,  of  New  York. —
Another  son,  George  W.,  hydrographer,  b.  in  New-
buryport, Mass.,  11  March,  1802  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  19  April,  1878,  was  a  sailor  from  fourteen  to
nearly  twenty-one  years  of  age.  From  1822  till
1866  he  was  a  publisher  of  charts  and  nautical
books  in  New  York.  From  1819  till  1826  he  was
engaged  in  marine  surveys  on  the  Bahama  banks
and  New  York  harbor,  neither  of  which  had  been
recently  surveyed.  In  1834  he  called  the  attention
of  the  government  to  the  superiority  of  the  French
light-houses,  as  his  brother  Edmund  did  in  1838,
and  the  result  was  the  establishment  in  1856  of
the  present  light-house  board,  and  the  adoption  of
the  French  system.  In  1845  he  was  one  of  a  com-
mittee to  organize  the  present  system  of  pilotage
for  New  York.  He  was  appointed  a  pilot  com-
missioner in  that  year,  and  continued  to  be  one,
except  during  six  months,  to  the  time  of  his  death.
In  1857  he  was  made  a  harbor  commissioner  to  pro-
tect the  harbor  of  New  York.  He  was  for  five
years  a  trustee  of  the  seaman's  retreat,  and  in
1852-4  a  commissioner  of  emigration.  He  pub-
lished "  Atlantic  Memoir,"  "  Sheet  Anchor,"  "  Pilot
Laws  and  Harbor  and  Quarantine  Regulations  of
New  York  "  (New  York,  1869),  and  "  Plan  to  Avoid
the  Centre  of  Violent  Gales  "  (1867),  and  prepared
several  editions  of  the  "  American  Coast  Pilot."

BLUNT,  James  (x.,  soldier,  b.  in  Hancock  co..
Me.,  in  1826;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1881.
From  his  fifteenth  to  his  twentieth  year  he  was  a
sailor. He  was  graduated  at  the  Starling  medical


298


BLYDEN


BOARDMAN


college,  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1849,  and  practised
medicine  in  Darke  co.  until  1856,  when  he  settled
in  Anderson  co.,  Kansas.  He  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  contest  over  the  introduction  of  slavery
into  Kansas,  and  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  constitution  of  the  state. In  July,

1861,  he  entered  the  army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  8d  Kansas  volunteers.  He  commanded  the  cav-
alry in  Gen.  James  Lane's  brigade,  and  on  8  April,

1862,  was  promoted  brigadier-general  and  assigned
to  the  command  of  the  military  department  of
Kansas.  On  23  Oct.,  1862,  in  the  battle  of  Old  Fort
Wayne,  his  Kansas  and  Cherokee  troops  routed
the  confederate  force  concentrated  at  Maysville,  on
the  western  border  of  Arkansas.  On  28  Nov.  he
attacked  and  defeated  Marmaduke's  forces  at  Cane
Hill,  Ark.  On  7  Dec,  1862,  he  encountered  and
defeated,  with  the  aid  of  Gen.  Herron,  the  confed-
erates under  Hindman  at  Prairie  Grove,  and  there-
by checked  the  advance  of  the  southern  troops  into
Missouri.  On  28  Dec.  he  captured  Fort  Van  Buren
on  Arkansas  river.  He  was  promoted  to  be  major-
general,  29  Nov.,  1862.  In  June,  1863,  being  re-
lieved of  the  command  of  the  department  of  Kan-
sas, he  took  the  field  with  the  army  of  the  frontier.
On  16  July,  1863,  he  defeated  Gen.  Cooper  at  Honey
Springs ;  and  on  28  Oct.,  1864,  at  Newtonia,  Mo.,
with  the  assistance  of  Gen.  Sanborn's  cavalry,  his
troops  gave  the  final  blow  to  Price's  invasion  of
Missouri.  During  the  latter  part  of  the  war  he  was
military  commandant  of  the  district  of  south  Kan-
sas. After  he  was  mustered  out  he  settled  in  Leav-
enworth, Kansas.

BLYDEN,  Edward  Wilmot,  negro  author,  b.
in  St.  Thomas,  West  Indies,  3  Aug.,  1832.  His
parents  were  of  pure  negro  blood,  of  decided  char-
acter and  strong  religious  feeling.  Young  Blyden
received  the  rudiments  of  an  education  in  the
secular  schools  of  the  island  ;  but  the  stimulus  for
higher  training  came  from  the  late  Rev.  J.  P.
Knox,  of  Newtown,  L.  I.,  who  was  temporarily  in
charge  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  at  St.  Thom-
as. At  the  instance  of  this  gentleman,  young
Blyden  came  to  New  York  in  1845,  seeking  en-
trance into  some  American  college.  But  so  hostile  to
negroes  was  the  feeling  in  the  schools  of  the  country
that  he  gave  up  his  purpose,  and  was  about  return-
ing to  his  island  home.  At  this  Juncture  the  New
York  colonization  society  offered  him  a  free  pas-
sage to  Liberia,  West  Africa,  which  country  he
reached  in  January,  1850.  He  at  once  entered  the
Alexander  high  school,  then  under  the  charge  of
the  Rev.  David  Wilson,  and  began  acquiring  a
classical  education  with  a  view  to  the  ministry  of
the  Presbyterian  church.  He  was  graduated  at
this  school  in  1858,  and  soon  afterward  became  its
principal.  Very  early  in  life  Dr.  Blyden  developed
a  decided  talent  for  languages,  and  he  has  since  be-
come distinguished  in  that  branch  of  learning.
At  the  age  of  ten,  during  a  brief  residence  in  Vene-
zuela, he  acquired  the  Spanish  language.  At  the
Alexander  high  school  he  became  proficient  in
Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew,  and  to  these  he  added
French  and  Italian  at  a  later  period.  In  1876  he
undertook  Arabic,  and  went  to  the  Orient  to  im-
prove his  knowledge  of  that  language.  His  attain-
ments have  placed  him  in  many  responsible  posi-
tions in  the  young  republic  of  Liberia.  As  a
preacher  and  teacher  he  has  filled  the  positions  re-
spectively of  Presbyterian  pastor,  principal  of  the
Alexander  high  school,  professor,  and  in  1880  presi-
dent, of  Liberia  college,  commissioner  to  the  gen-
eral assembly  of  the  American  Presbyterian  church
in  1861,  and  again  in  1880.  At  the  age  of  nineteen
he  was  editor  of  the  "  Liberia  Herald,"  and  since


then  he  has  been  government  commissioner  to  the
colored  people  of  the  United  States.  He  has  held
the  offices  of  secretary  of  state  and  of  the  interior
several  times.  Twice  he  has  been  appointed  min-
ister to  the  court  of  St.  James.  He  has  published
"  Liberia's  Offering  "  and  "  From  West  Africa  to
Palestine  "  (1873).  His  contributions  to  periodi-
cals include  "  The  Negro  in  Ancient  History,"
"Liberia,  its  Status  and  its  Field,"  "Mohamme-
danism and  the  Negro  Race,"  "Christianity  and
the  Negro  Race,"  "  Islam  and  Race  Distinctions,"
and  "  Africa  and  the  Africans."

BLYTHE,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mecklen-
burg CO.,  N.  C,  28  Oct.,  1765;  d.  near  Hanover.
Ind.,  20  May,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  Hamp-
den-Sidney  in  1789,  studied  theology  under  the
Rev.  Dr.  Hall,  and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
Presbyterian  church  in  Pisgah,  Ky.,  25  July,  1793.
When  the  Kentucky  academy,  for  which  he  had
secured  contributions  in  the  eastern  states,  was
merged  into  the  university  of  Transylvania,  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  mathematics'  and  natu-
ral philosophy.  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.
from  Princeton  in  1805.  In  1812  he  began  the
publication  of  the  "  Evangelical  Record  and  West-
ern Review,"  which  only  reached  the  second  vol-
ume. He  was  president  of  Transylvania  college
for  several  years,  but  resigned  about  1818  and
established  a~  seminary  for  young  ladies,  continu-
ing his  connection  with  the  college  as  professor
of  chemistry  in  the  medical  department,  and  fill-
ing at  the  same  time  a  pastoral  charge  as  associate
pastor  of  the  church  in  Lexington.  In  1832  he  ac-
cepted the  presidency  of  South  Hanover  college,
which  he  resigned  in  1836.  He  was  subsequently
pastor  of  the  New  Lexington  church.

BLYTHE,  Samuel,  British  naval  officer,  b.  in
1784;  d.  4  Sept.,  1814.  He  commanded  the  brig
"  Boxer,"  which  engaged  the  American  cruiser
"  Enterprise,"  commanded  by  Lieut.  Burrows,  off
Portland,  Me.,  on  4  Sept.,  1814.  Capt.  Blythe's
ship,  having  been  riddled  with  shot,  was  captured
and  taken  into  Portland.  The  commanders  of  both
vessels  fell  at  the  first  exchange  of  shots,  and  were
buried  side  by  side  with  military  honors  in  Port-
land. Their  death  was  made  the  subject  of  one  of
Longfellow's  tenderest  poems.

BOARDMAN,  David  Sherman,  lawver,  b.  in
1768 ;  d.  in  New  Milford,  Conn.,  2  Dec,  1864.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1793,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1795,  and  soon  took  a  high  rank  in  the
profession.  For  several  years  he  was  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of  Connecticut.  Judge
Boardman  was  a  friend  of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  and
also  of  the  poet's  father.

BOARDMAN,  EHjali,  senator,  b.  in  New  Mil-
ford,  Conn.,  7  March,  1760 ;  d.  in  Boardman,  Ohio,
8  Oct.,  1823.  After  receiving  a  classical  education,
he  turned  his  attention  to  business  pursuits,  and
was  very  successful.  For  several  terms  he  was  a
member  of  the  lower  branch  of  the  Connecticut
legislature,  and  for  some  time  a  member  of  the  ex-
ecutive council.  In  1821  he  was  elected  to  the  JJ.
S.  senate  from  Connecticut,  and  served  in  the  17th
congress.  His  death  occurred  at  Boardman,  Ohio,
a  town  in  which  he  was  largely  interested.

BOARDMAN,  George  Daiia,  missionary,  b.  in
Livermore,  Me.,  8  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Burmah,  H
Feb.,  1831.  He  was  the  son  of  a  clergyman,  was
graduated  at  Waterville  in  1822,  studied  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary,  and  was  ordained  m
the  Baptist  church,  with  the  intention  of  becoming
a  missionary,  at  West  Yarmouth,  Me.,  16  Feb.,
1825.  He  married  Sarah  Hall,  4  July,  and  on  the
16th  sailed  for  Calcutta,  where  he  arrived  2  Dec.


BOARDMAN


BOEHLER


299


1825.  After  acquiring  the  Burman  language,  he
entered  upon  his  labors  at  Mauiniain  in  May,  1827,
and  planted  a  mission,  which  became  the  central
point  of  all  the  Baptist  missions  in  Burmah.  In
April,  1828,  he  established  a  mission  at  Tavoy,
where  he  soon  afterward  baptized  Ko-mah-byn,  a
Karen  convert,  whose  labors  were  very  successful
among  his  countrymen.  On  5  Feb.,  1828,  he  set
out  on  a  tour  among  the  Karen  villages,  and  met
with  such  success  that  he  detennined  on  a  syste-
matic course  of  itinerary  labor.  On  these  trips  he
was  usually  accompanied  by  Ko-mah-byn  or  some
other  convert.  His  exertions  occasioned  the  loss
of  his  health  and  brought  on  his  early  death  by
consumption.  His  widow  married  the  liev.  Adoni-
ram  Judson,  the  missionary.  See  "Memoir  of
George  Dana  Boardman,"  by  the  Rev.  A.  King
(Boston),  and  "  Gr.  D.  Boardman  and  the  Burman
Mission  "  (Boston,  1875).— His  son,  George  Dana,
clergyman,  b.  in  Tavoy,  Burmah,  18  Aug.,  1828,
was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1852,  and  at  Newton
theological  institution  in  1855,  and  in  that  year  be-
came pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Barnwell,
S.  C.  But  his  views  on  the  slavery  question  im-
pelled him  to  exchange  his  charge  in  1856  for  a
church  in  the  north.  He  was  pastor  of  the  2d
Baptist  church  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  until  1864,  and
after  that  of  the  1st  church  in  Philadelphia.  Be-
sides review  articles,  sermons,  and  addresses,  he
has  published  "  Studies  in  the  Creative  Week "
(New  York,  1878) ;  "  Studies  in  the  Model  Prayer  "
(1879);  "Epiphanies  of  the  Risen  Lord"  (1879);
and  "  Studies  in  the  Mountain  Instruction  "  (1880).

BOARDMAN,  Henry  Augustus,  clergyman,
b.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  9  Jan.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  15  June,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1829  with  the  highest  class  honors,  and  at  Prince-
ton theological  seminary  in  1830.  He  was  a  lead-
ing member  in  Presbyterian  societies,  and  pastor  of
the  10th  Presbyterian  church  of  Philadelphia  from
1833  till  1876,  when  he  became  pastor  emeritus.
His  published  works  include  "  The  Scripture  Doc-
trine of  Original  Sin  "  (Philadelphia,  1839) ;  "  Hints
on  Cultivating  the  Christian  Temper  " ;  "  On  High-
Church  Episcopacy  "  ;  "  Correspondence  with
Bishop  Doane  on  the  Oxford  Tracts"  (1841);
"  The  Prelatical  Doctrine  of  the  Apostolical  Suc-
cession Examined"  (1844);  "The  Importance  of
Religion  to  the  Legal  Profession"  (1849);  "The
Bible  in  the  Family"  (1851);  "The  Bible  m  the
Counting-House "  (1853);  "Vanity  of  a  Life  of
Fashionable  Pleasure  " ;  "  Discourse  on  the  Low
Value  set  upon  Human  Life  in  the  United  States  "
(1853):  "The  Great  Question,  Will  you  Consider
the  Subject  of  Personal  Religion  1 "  which  passed
through  many  editions  (1855) ;  "  Discourse  on  the
American  Union"  (1858);  "The  Christian  Minis-
try not  a  Priesthood  " ;  "  The  Book  "  (1861) ;  and
"Earthly  Suffering  and  Heavenly  Glory"  (1875).
Passages  from  his  writings  were  published  under
the  title  "  A  Handful  of  Corn  "  (New  York,  1884).

BOARMAN,  Charles,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Maryland;  d.  in  Martinsburg,  W.  Va.,  13  Sept.,
1879.  He  was  appointed  a  niidshipman  from  the
District  of  Columbia,  and,  after  attending  the  naval
school  at  the  navy-yard  in  Washington,  he  was
ordered  to  the  sloop  "Erie,"  and  then  attached,
during  the  war  of  1812,  to  the  brig  "  Jefferson  "  on
Lake  Ontario.  He  was  commissioned  as  lieuten-
ant, 15  March,  1817 ;  as  commander,  9  Feb.,  1837 ;
as  captain,  29  March,  1844,  commanding  the  flag-
ship "  Brand}-wine  "  in  the  Brazil  squadron  from
1844  till  1850,  and  the  navy-yard  at  Brooklyn  from
1852  till  1855.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  on
special  service. He  was  retired  with  the  rank  of


commodore  on  4  April,  1867,  and  made  a  rear-
admiral  on  the  retired  list,  15  Aug.,  1876.

BOBADILLA,  Francisco  (bo-bah-deel'-ya),
Spanish  official ;  d.  29  June,  1502.  He  was  sent
to  Santo  Domingo  to  re-establish  order  and  to  put
an  end  to  dissensions,  arriving  in  1500.  He  soon
ordered  Columbus  and  his  brother  sent  to  Spain  as
prisoners  in  chains.  When  they  arrived  at  Cadiz,
Queen  Isabella  and  King  Ferdinand  disapproved
of  Bobadilla's  action,  reinstated  Columbus  in  his
honors  and  emoluments,  and  immediately  sent  Ni-
colas de  Obando  to  replace  Bobadilla.  tinder  his
administration  disorders  had  multiplied  to  an
alarming  extent.  Columbus  landed  again  in  His-
paniola  on  the  very  day  that  Bobadilla  and  several
of  his  supporters  started  for  Spain.  Their  fleet
was  hardly  out  of  sight  when  it  was  wrecked  by  a
hurricane,  and  Bobadilla  perished.

BOCOCK,  Thomas  S.,  politician,  b.  in  Buck-
ingham CO.,  Va.,  in  1815.  He  received  a  classical
education  at  Hampden-Sidney,  studied  law,  and
began  practice  at  Appomattox  Court-House,  Va.,
was  state's  attorney  in  1845-'6,  sat  for  several  terms
in  the  house  of  delegates,  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  democrat  in  1846,  and  sat  for  seven  successive
terms,  until  the  ordinance  of  secession  was  enacted.
In  1861  he  was  elected  to  the  confederate  congress.
He  had  been  a  candidate  for  speaker  in  the  36th
federal  congress,  and  was  elected  speaker  of  the
confederate  house  of  representatives  on  its  perma-
nent organization,  18  Feb.,  1862.

BODEGA  Y  (QUADRA,  Juan  Francisco  (bo-
day'-gah),  South  American  navigator,  b.  in  Lima,
Peru ;  d.  in  1794.  He  won  a  high  rank  in  the
Spanish  navy ;  was  chief  officer  at  San  Bias,  ex-
ploring the  coasts  of  California,  and  constructed
a  special  chart  of  them,  which  was  engraved  and
published  in  Mexico.

BODISCO,  Waldeniar  de,  b.  in  Russia ;  d.  at
Jordan  Alum  Springs,  Va.,  31  July,  1878.  He
came  to  this  country  at  an  early  age  with  his
uncle,  the  Russian  minister  at  Washington,  and
was  graduated  at  Georgetown  college.  For  nearly
twenty  years  he  was  secretary  of  the  Russian  lega-
tion at  Washington,  in  1866  and  1869  acted  as
charge  d'affaires,  and  was  appointed  Russian  con-
sul-general at  New  York  in  1871,  holding  that
office  at  the  time  of  his  death.

BODMER,  Karl,  artist,  b.  in  Zurich,  Switzer-
land, in  1805.  He  travelled  in  America  in  1832-'4
with  Maximilian,  prince  of  Wied,  and  executed  the
copper-plates  in  the  atlas  accompanying  the  latter's
"Journey  through  North  America  "  (1838-43).  He
also  drew  a  series  of  water-colors,  reproduced  and
published  in  1836  under  the  name  of  "  Costumes  et
personnages  indiennes."  He  resided  subsequently
in  Paris  and  in  Germany,  painting  pictures  of  ani-
mal life,  and  etching.

BODWELL,  Joseph  R.,  governor  of  Maine,  b.
in  Methuen,  Mass.,  18  June,  1818;  d.  in  Ilallowell,
Me,,  15  Dec,  1887.  Pie  opened  quarries,  in  1852,
on  an  island  in  Penobscot  bay.  and  organized  the
Bodwell,  and,  in  1870,  the  Hallowell  granite  com-
pany. He  served  twice  in  the  legislature,  and  in
1886  was  elected  governor  bv  the  republicans.

BOEHLER,  Peter  (bay-ler),  Moravian  bishop,
b.  in  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  Germany,  31  Dec,
1712  ;  d.  in  London,  England,  27  April,  1775.  He
was  graduated  at  Jena,  and  in  1736  became  a  tutor.
On  16  Dec,  1737,  he  was  ordained  a  Moravian  min-
ister by  Count  Zinzendorf,  founder  of  the  brother-
hood. In  1738  he  was  sent  as  a  Moravian  evangelist
to  the  negro  population  of  Carolina  and  Georgia ;
but  on  his  way  thither  he  was  detained  for  several
months  in  England,  and  became  acquainted  with


300


BOEHM


BOGA^US


John  and  Charles  Wesley,*  and  a  number  of  awak-
ened students  at  Oxford.  His  influence  upon  John
Wesley  formed  and  directed,  to  a  considerable  ex-
tent, the  religious  convictions  of  the  founder  of
Methodism,  and  it  is  recorded  in  Wesley's  pub-
lished journal  that  Boehler  was  the  person  through
whose  instrumentality  Wesley  was  brought  to  be-
lieve in  Christ.  Having  reached  Georgia,  Boehler
devoted  himself  to  evangelistic  labors  among  the
negroes  and  Oglethorpe's  colonists,  and  subsequent-
ly in  the  German  settlement  in  South  Carolina.
When  the  Moravian  colony,  in  consequence  of  the
war  with  Spain,  was  broken  up  in  1740,  he  led  the
remnant  to  Pennsylvania,  and  there  established  the
settlement  of  Bethlehem.  On  the  Delaware  river
Boehler  was  met  by  Count  Zinzendorf,  Nitschman,
the  first  bishop  of  the  renewed  Unitas  Fratrum,  and
the  elders  David  Nitschman  and  Arma,  who  had
come  to  America  on  a  mission  to  the  Indians.  He
accompanied  them  in  their  perilous  undertaking,
and  underwent  severe  toils  and  privations.  In
1741  he  returned  to  Europe,  and  two  years  later
brought  a  large  colony  of  Moravians  to  America.
For  several  years  he  officiated  as  pastor  of  the
Moravians  at  Bethlehem,  and  came  to  be  recog-
nized as  one  of  the  superintendents  of  the  sect.  As
the  church  expanded,  the  community  of  Nazareth
was  founded  by  Boehler  near  the  original  settle-
ment. In  1745  he  again  went  to  Europe,  where,  on
10  Jan.,  1748,  he  was  consecrated  to  the  episco-
pacy at  Herrnhut  and  given  the  oversight  of  the
churches  in  England,  Ireland,  Wales,  and  America.
After  discharging  the  duties  of  his  office  in  various
parts  of  Germany  and  England,  he  arrived  in  1753
a  third  time  in  America,  where  he  assisted  in  su-
perintending the  Moravian  churches  until  1764,
when  he  was  called  to  Germany  to  take  his  seat  in
the  directory,  which  stood  at  the  head  of  the  whole
Unitas  Fratrum.  He  died  while  on  an  official  visit
to  the  English  churches.  Bishop  Boehler  is  high-
ly esteemed,  even  at  the  present  day,  both  among
Wesleyans  and  Methodists ;  the  former,  as  a  visible
token  of  what  he  did  for  John  Wesley,  have  built  a
memorial  chapel  in  London,  known  as  the  Peter
Boehler  chapel.  See  T.  P.  Lockwood's  "  Memorials
of  the  Life  of  Peter  Boehler  "  (London,  1868).

BOEHM,  Henry  (bame),  clergyman,  b.  in  Co-
nestoga.  Pa.,  8  June,  1775;  d.  near  Richmond,
Staten  Island,  28  Dec.,  1875.  His  grandfather,
Jacob  (b.  in  Switzerland  in  1693),  having  become  a
disciple  of  the  Baptist  Menno,  came  to  America
in  1715  and  settled  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  then  a  colo-
ny of  Mennonites.  Martin,  father  of  Henry,  was
in  early  life  a  licensed  preacher  among  the'  Men-
nonites, but  afterward  joined  the  Moravian  Breth-
ren, and  finally  became  a  Methodist.  In  1791  the
Methodists  built  a  chapel  on  land  given  by  his
uncle.  In  this  building,  known  as  Boehm's  Chap-
el, Plenry  first  heard  Bishop  Asbury  preach  in  1799.
His  own  life  as  an  itinerant  began  in  1800,  on  the
eastern  shore  of  Maryland.  In  1803  he  made  a
short  tour  with  the  bishop  as  his  travelling  com-
panion, and  in  1808  and  the  four  succeeding  years
accompanied  the  bishop,  who  was  feeble  and  rheu-
matic, in  all  his  travels.  Speaking  German  as  well
as  English,  Boehm  often  preached  to  the  German
colonists  in  various  parts  of  America.  He  journeyed
about  40,000  miles  with  Bishop  Asbury,  and  dur-
ing his  entire  itinerary  travelled  on  horseback  more
than  100,000  miles.  He  was  appointed  presiding
elder  of  the  Schuylkill  district  by  Bishop  Asbury,
who  made  him  one  of  his  executors.  He  also  made
tours  with  Bishops  George  and  McKendree.  In
1842  he  was  placed  on  the  supernumerary  list  and
stationed  on  Staten  Island,  where  he  continued  to


preach  for  many  years.  Father  Boehm,  as  he  was
called,  was  seventy-four  years  in  the  ministry,  and
at  the  time  of  his  death  was  the  oldest  Methodist
preacher  in  America.  A  special  service  was  held
8  June,  1875,  in  celebration  of  his  hundredth  birth-
day. He  published  a  volume  of  "Reminiscences
of  Sixty-four  Years  in  the  Ministry "'  (Xew  York,
1865),  of  which  a  new  edition  was  published  in
1875,  with  additional  chapters  and  notes  by  the
Rev.  Dr.  J.  B.  Wakeley  and  others,  with  a  preface
by  Boehm,  dated  July,  1875.

BOERNSTEIN,  Henry  (bairnstine),  journalist,
b.  in  Hamburg,  Germany,  4  Nov.,  1805.  His  par-
ents removed  in  1813  to  Lemberg,  where  he  re-
ceived at  the  university  a  medical  education.  After
serving  in  the  Austrian  army,  he  was  some  years
connected  with  the  stage  in  Vienna ;  became  mana-
ger of  the  German  opera  at  Paris  in  1842,  and  a
playwright,  and  came  to  the  United  States  in  De-
cember, 1848.  In  March,  1850,  he  became  editor
and  proprietor  of  the  "Anzeiger  des  Westens,"
published  in  St.  Louis.

BOERUM,  Simon,  patriot,  b.  of  Dutch  parents
in  New  Lots,  Kings  co.,  N.  Y.,  29  Feb.,  1724 ;  d.
at  his  house  at  Brooklyn  Ferry,  11  July,  1775.  He
was  a  farmer,  and  for  twenty-five  years  county
clerk.  He  was  a  patriotic  member  of  the  New
York  general  assembly  from  1761  till  1775.  and  of
the  continental  congress  of  1774  and  1775.  See
"Life  of  Simon  Boerum,"  by  Franklin  Burdge
(1876) ;  also  an  account  of  the  defeat  of  Galloway's
plan,  in  the  "  Magazine  of  American  History  "  for
April,  1879.

BOGARDUS,  Abraham,  photographer,  b.  in
Fishkill,  N.  Y.,  29  Nov.,  1822.  He  received  his
early  education  at  the  Newburg  Academy,  and  at
the  age  of  fourteen  became  a  dry-goods  clerk  in
New  York.  After  several  years'  experience  in  this
line  he  was  induced  to  take  lessons  in  making  da-
guerreotypes from  George  W.  Prosch,  and,  finding
this  occupation  agreeable,  he  opened  in  1846  a  gal-
lery in  New  York.  At  first  progress  was  very  slow,
and  frequently  he  found  it  impossible  to  make  more
than  two  pictures  a  week.  Later  the  photograph
was  invented,  and  he  at  once  began  the  production
of  this  kind  of  pictures.  His  business  increased  rap-
idly, and  frequently  orders  amounting  to  one  hun-
dred dozen  photographs  were  received  during  a
single  day.  Numerous  improvements  in  the  prepa-
rations of  solutions,  processes,  and  apparatus  have
been  devised  by  him,  and  he  has  published  many
articles  on  the  technicalities  of  his  business  in  the
photographic  journals.  Mr.  Bogardus  was  active
in  the  establishment  of  the  national  photographic
association  in  1868,  and  was  elected  its  president
by  acclamation  at  that  time,  and  for  the  ensuing
five  years.  His  presidential  addresses  are  valuable
contributions  to  the  literature  of  the  art.

BOGARDUS,  Everardus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hol-
land ;  drowned  in  Bristol  channel,  27  Sept.,  1647.
He  came  to  New  Amsterdam  in  1633,  and  was  the
second  minister  in  the  colony.  He  publicly  ac-
cused Gov.  Van  Twiller,  whom  he  had  accompa-
nied from  Holland,  of  mal-administration,  and  in
consequence  was  himself  charged  with  unbecom-
ing conduct,  and  was  about  to  depart  for  Holland
in  order  to  defend  himself,  but  was  detained  by
Gov.  Kieft.  In  1642  a  new  church  was  built  for
him.  The  following  year  he  warned  Gov.  Kieft
against  making  war  upon  the  Indians,  and  in  1645
denounced  him  for  drunkenness  and  rapacity.
Kieft  brought  the  clergyman  to  trial,  but  the  dis-
pute was  compromised.  "  When  Kieft  returned  to
Holland,  after  the  arrival  of  Stuyvesant  in  1047,
Bogardus sailed in  the  same  vessel,  to  answer


BOaARDUS


BOCIARDUS


301


charges  brought  against  him,  before  the  elassis  in
Amsterdam.  The  vessel  entered  Bristol  channel  by
a  mistake,  and  struck  upon  a  rock,  going  down  with
eighty  persons,  among  them  Bogardus  and  Kieft.
—His  wife,  Aiiiietje  Jansen,  corrupted  into  An-
neke  Jans,  b.  in  Holland  about  1000 ;  d.  in  the
village  of  Beverwyck,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1663.  She
first  came  to  America  in  1630,  with  her  first  hus-
band, Roelof  Jansen,  of  Waterland,  who  had  been
sent  out  by  Patroon  Van  Rensselaer  as  assistant
steward  at  Albany.  They  afterward  removed  to
New  Amsterdam,  among  the  earliest  Dutch  settlers.
Here,  in  1636,  they  obtained  from  Gov.  Wouter  Van
Twiller  a  grant  of  sixty-two  acres  of  land,  the  pres-
ent boundaries  of  which  are  the  North  river,  Chris-
topher street,  Bedford  street.  West  Houston  street,
Sullivan  street,  Canal  street,  West  Broadway,  Bar-


clay street,  Broadway,  and  Fulton  street,  around  to
the  river  again.  Shortly  afterward  Jansen  died,  leav-
ing Anneke  with  four  children.  In  1638  she  mar-
ried Everardus  Bogardus.  After  the  death  of  Do-
minie Bogardus,  Anneke,  again  a  widow,  with  four
additional  children,  continued  to  reside  in  the  city,
and  in  1654  she  obtained  from  Gov.  Stuyvesant  a
patent  in  her  own  name  of  the  farm  above  men-
tioned. In  her  will  she  named  as  her  sole  heirs
Sarah  Roelofson,  Katrina  Roelof  son,  Jannettys  and
Rachel  Hartgers  (two  children  of  her  deceased
daughter  Frytie),  and  John  Roelofson,  her  children
by  her  first  husband,  and  William,  Cornelius,
Jonas,  and  Peter  Bogardus,  children  of  the  second
marriage.  On  27  Aug.,  1664,  the  grant  of  land
was  confirmed  by  the  English  government,  as  may
be  found  recorded  in  the  office  of  the  secretary  of
state  at  Albany  in  the  "  Patent  Book,"  pp.  28-30.
In  1670  part  of  the  land,  a  salt  meadow  north  of
Canal  street,  was  sold  at  public  auction ;  but  the
sale  was  never  carried  out,  on  account  of  some  al-
leged flaw  in  the  title.  In  1671  five  of  the  heirs
conveyed  the  whole  farm  (or  homvery)  to  Col.  Fran-
cis Lovelace,  then  governor  of  the  pf ovince  of  New
York.  But  one  of  the  sons,  Cornelius,  did  not  join
in  this  conveyance,  and  therefore  his  heirs  have
always  claimed  that  they  have  a  right  to  their
share  of  the  property.  In  1705  the  estate,  then
known  as  the  "  King's  Farm,"  was  leased  or  grant-
ed by  the  colonial  authorities  under  Queen  Anne
to  Trinity  church ;  and,  in  spite  of  numerous  con-
tests, that  corporation  has  continued  to  enjoy  all
the  benefits  and  revenues  of  the  vast  property  to
this  day.  Nicholas  Brower,  one  of  the  heirs,
brought  a  suit  in  ejectment  in  1750,  claiming  that
the  title  was  not  in  Queen  Anne.  He  was  non-
suited by  default,  renewed  his  suit  in  1760,  and
was  again  beaten.  In  1807  Col.  Malcolm,  who  had
married  an  heir,  brought  an  unsuccessful  suit  in
the  New  York  supreme  court,  to  recover  a  part  of
the  property.  In  1830  three  other  heirs  had  a
snnilar  experience. Chancellor  Walworth  in  1834


dismissed  a  suit  brought  by  Jonas  Humbert.  In
1847  Cornelius  Brower  brought  nine  suits,  all  of
which  were  dismissed.  In  these  Vice  Chancellor
Sanford,  after  examining  every  fact  on  both  sides,
decided  that,  waiving  all  other  points,  the  church
had  acquired  a  perfectly  valid  title  by  undisputed
possession  longer  than  the  limitation  at  which  title
might  be  gained  by  possession  in  1705,  when  the
land  came  to  the  church.  The  accompanying  view
represents  New  York  at  that  time.

BOGARDUS,  James,  inventor,  b.  in  Catskill,
N.  Y.,  14  March,  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13
April,  1874.  He  received  the  ordinary  school  edu-
cation afforded  by  his  native  town,  at  the  age  of
fourteen  was  apprenticed  to  a  watchmaker,  and
soon  became  skilled  as  a  die-sinker  and  engraver.
His  inventive  ability  was  first  manifested  by  an
eight-day,  three- wheeled  chronometer  clock,  for
which  he  received  the  highest  premium  at  the  first
fair  of  the  American  institute,  after  which  he  pro-
duced an  eight-day  clock  with  three  wheels  and  a
segment  of  a  wheel,  which  struck  the  hours,  and,
without  dial-wheels,  marked  the  hours,  minutes,
and  seconds.  In  1828  he  invented  the  "  ring  flier  "
for  cotton-spinning,  which  afterward  came  into
general  use,  and  in  1829  devised  an  eccentric  mill,
in  which  the  grinding-stones  or  plates  run  in  the
same  direction  with  nearly  equal  speed.  In  1831
he  made  an  engraving-machine  with  which  gold
watch-dials  could  be  made,  turning  imitation  fili-
gree works,  rays  from  the  centre,  and  the  figures
in  relief,  all  by  one  operation.  The  steel  die  from
which  the  gold  medal  of  the  American  institute  is
struck,  and  other  beautiful  medallions,  were  made
with  this  machine.  He  also  invented  the  transfer-
machine  for  producing  bank-note  plates  from  sepa-
rate dies,  which  is  now  in  general  use.  In  1832  he
invented  the  first  dry  gas-metre,  and  in  1836,  by
giving  a  rotary  motion  to  the  machinery,  he  made
it  applicable  to  all  current  fluids.  While  in  Eng-
land, in  1836,  he  produced  a  medallic  engraving-
machine,  with  which  portraits  of  the  queen.  Sir
Robert  Peel,  and  numerous  other  distinguished
persons  were  engraved,  and  he  also  agreed  to  con-
struct in  London  a  machine  for  engine-turning  that
would  copy  all  kinds  of  known  machine  engraving,
but  could  not  imitate  its  own  work.  The  British
government  in  1839  offered  a  reward  for  the  best
plan  of  manufacturing  postage-stamps,  and  that
submitted  by  him  was  selected  from  among  2,600
competing  designs,  and  it  is  still  in  use.  His  later
inventions  include  a  machine  for  pressing  glass,
appliances  for  shirring  India-rubber  fabrics,  and
for  cutting  India-rubber  into  fine  threads.  Besides
improvements  in  drilling-machines  and  in  eccen-
tric mills,  he  patented  in  1848  a  sun-and-planet
horse-power,  and  a  dynamometer  for  measuring  the
speed  and  power  of  machinery  while  in  motion.
His  factory  in  New  York  city,  built  in  1847  en-
tirely of  cast-iron,  five  stories  high,  was  the  first
building  so  constructed  in  the  United  States,  and
probably  the  first  in  the  world.  His  success  in
this  undertaking  led  to  his  engaging  in  the  busi-
ness of  erecting  iron-ware  buildings  throughout
the  country.  He  invented  a  pyrometer  of  great
delicacy,  and  a  deep-sea  sounding-mafchine,  which
can  be  used  without  a  line  and  is  very  accurate,
and  also  made  numerous  improvements  in  the
manufacture  of  tools  and  machinery.

BOGARDUS,  Robert,  lawyer,  b.  in  1771 ;  d.  in
New  York  city,  12  Sept.,  1841.  He  practised  law
in  New  York  i'or  nearly  fifty  years.  In  the  war  of
1812  he  was,  from  July,  1813,'  till  June,  1815,  colo-
nel of  infantry.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the
New  York  state  senate.


302


BOGART


BOnORQUES


BOGrART,  Elizabeth,  poet,  b.  in  New  York
city  about  1806.  She  was  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.
David  S.  Bogart,  and  contributed  to  periodicals,
chiefly  the  New  York  •'  Mirror,"  under  the  pen-
name  of  "  Estelle,"  her  first  pieces  appearing  in
1825.  Specimens  of  her  poetry  are  reprinted  in
Griswold's  "  Female  Poets  of  America."  She  wrote
two  prize  stories,  entitled  "  The  Effect  of  a  Single
Folly"  and  "The  Forged  Note,"  evincing  con-
structive ability ;  but  ''  He  Came  too  Late,"  and
other  poems,  were  her  most  admired  productions.

BOGART,  William  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,  1810;  d.  in  Aurora,  N.  Y.,  21
Aug..  1888.  His  early  life  was  passed  at  Aurora.
He  wrote  a  life  of  Daniel  Boone  and  "  Who  Goes
There?"  a  book  of  historical  reminiscences;  but
his  chief  work  was  done  as  the  "  Sentinel  "  corre-
spondent of  the  New  York  "  Courier  and  En-
quirer," and  the  New  York  "  World,"  in  reviving
the  taste  for  American  antiquarian  history,  espe-
cially of  the  colonial  period  of  New  York.  He  con-
tributed a  monograph  on  Cornelius  and  William
H.  Vanderbilt  to  the  "  New  York  Genealogical  and
Biographical  Record  "  for  April,  1880.

BO(t(xS,  Charles  Stuart,  naval  officer,  b.  in
New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  28  Jan.,  1811;  d.  there  22
April,  1888.  A  nephew  of  Capt.  James  Law-
rence, he  entered  the  navy  1  Nov..  1826.  He  was
promoted  a  lieutenant  6  Sept.,  1837,  was  in  the
"Princeton,"  of  Com.  Conner's  squadron,  during
the  Mexican  war,  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  commanded  the  boat  expedition  that  de-
stroyed the  "  Truxtun  "  after  her  surrender  to  the
Mexicans.  He  was  promoted  commander,  14  Sept.,
1855,  and  assigned  to  the  U.  S.  mail  steamer  "  Illi-
nois," which  he  commanded  three  years.  He  then
became  light-house  inspector  for  California,  Ore-
gon, and  Washington  territory.  In  1861  he  was
ordered  to  the  gun-boat  "  Varuna,"  of  Farragut's
gulf  squadron.  In  the  attack  on  Forts  St.  Philip
and  Jackson,  in  April,  1862,  he  destroyed  six  of  the
confederate  gun-boats,  but  finally  lost  his  own
vessel,  which  steamed  ahead  of  the  fleet  and  en-
gaged the  confederate  squadron  above  the  forts.
She  was  attacked  by  two  rams  and  run  into  the
banks  of  the  river  and  there  sank,  causing,  how-
ever, the  destniction  of  her  antagonists,  which  were
both  burned.  He  returned  to  Washington  as  bearer
of  despatches,  and  was  ordered  to  the  command  of
the  new  sloop-of-war  "Juniata."  He  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  captain  on  16  July,  1862,  and  was
made  a  commodore,  25  July,  1866.  He  commanded
the  steamer  "  De  Soto,"  of  the  North  Atlantic
squadron,  in  1867-'8.  In  1869-'70  he  was  assigned
to  the  European  fleet,  and  prepared  a  report  on
the  condition  of  steam-engines  afloat.  On  1  July,
1870,  he  received  promotion  to  rear-admiral,  and
was  appointed  light-house  inspector  of  the  3d  dis-
trict. . He  was  placed  on  the  retired  list  in  1873.

BOGKxS,  L.  W.,  pioneer,  b.  in  Kentucky  in
1798 ;  d.  in  California  in  1861.  He  was  governor
of  Missouri  in  1836,  and  took  a  prominent  part  in
the  expulsion  of  the  Mormons.  In  1846  he  mi-
grated to  California,  and  in  the  years  1847-'9  was
alcalde  of  the  Sonoma  district,  where  he  gained
reputation  for  his  energy  and  ability  in  a  trying
position  during  the  period  of  the  interregnum.

BOGrLE,  James,  painter,  b.  in  Georgetown,  S.
C,  in  1817;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  11  Oct.,  1873.
He  came  to  New  York  in  1836  and  entered  the
studio  of  Prof.  Morse,  inventor  of  the  telegraph
and  the  founder  of  the  national  academy  of  design.
Mr.  Bogle,  confining  himself  to  portrait  painting,
soon  achieved  distinction  in  that  department.  In
1850  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  national


academy,  and  in  1861  an  academician.  For  many
years  his  pictures  occupied  annually  a  prominent
position  at  the  academy ;  but  he  exhibited  only  at
rare  intervals  in  the  later  years  of  his  life,  when
the  state  of  his  health  compelled  him  to  live  in  the
south.  He  executed  portraits  of  John  C.  Calhoun,
Henry  Clay,  Daniel  Webster,  Chief-Justice  Jones'
Bishop  Atkinson,  of  North  Carolina,  De  Witt  Clin-
ton, and  Rev.  Dr.  Budington.  Among  his  later
pictures  were  portraits  of  Gen.  John  A.  Dix  and
Henry  J.  Raymond.

BOGrY,  Lewis  T.,  senator,  b.  in  St.  Genevieve,
Mo.,  9  April,  1813 :  d.  in  St.  Louis,  20  Sept..  1877.
He  was  descended  from  the  early  French  settlers  of
the  region,  received  a  common-school  education,
was  for  some  years  a  clerk,  afterward  studied  law
in  Illinois  and  Kentucky,  was  graduated  at  the
Lexington  law  school,  Ky.,  in  1835,  and  began
practice  in  St.  Louis.  He  was  several  times  elect-
ed to  the  legislature,  and  in  1867-'8  was  commis-
sioner of  Indian  affairs.  He  was  interested  in  the
development  of  the  mineral  resources  of  the  state,
and  was  a  projector  of  the  St.  Louis  and  Iron
Mountain  railroad,  of  which  he  was  president  for
two  years.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a
democrat  in  1873,  and  served  on  the  committees  on
Indian  affairs,  land  claims,  and  education  and  labor.

BOHLEN,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Bremen,  Ger-
manv,  22  Oct.,  1810 ;  killed  near  Rappahannock
Station,  Va.,  22  Aug.,  1862.  He  came  to  the  United
States  when  young,  and  settled  as  a  liquor  mer-
chant in  Philadelphia,  acquiring  wealth  in  that
trade.  In  1861  he  became  colonel  of  the  75th
Pennsylvania  (German)  volunteers,  and  was  at-
tached to  Gen.  Blenker's  command,  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  28  April,  1862,  and
served  under  Fremont  in  western  Virginia,  distin-
guishing himself  at  the  battle  of  Cross  Keys,  8
June,  when  Gen.  Fremont  attacked  "Stonewall
Jackson  "  and  drove  him  from  a  strong  position
beyond  Harrisonburg.  He  was  also  specially  com-
mended for  his  services  in  the  Shenandoah  valley
under  Gen.  Sigel.  He  covered  the  retreat  of  the
army  of  Virginia  across  the  Rappahannock,  and
fell  while  directing  the  movements  of  his  brigade
in  a  skirmish  near  that  river.  Pie  led  his  brigade
across  the  river  to  attack  a  detachment  of  Long-
street's  division,  but  was  assailed  by  superior  num-
bers, and  re-crossed  under  cover  of  the  batteries.

BOHORQUES,  Juan  (bo-or-kes),  Mexican  prel-
ate, b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  late  in  the  16th  cen-
tury ;  d.  in  1633.  He  was  rector  of  the  college  of
St.  Louis  in  Puebla,  filling  several  high  ecclesias-
tical offices  in  Mexico,  and  representing  his  coun-
try in  the  Cortes  at  Madrid  and  his  ecclesiastical
province  at  Rome.  Philip  III.  of  Spain  caused
Bohorques  to  be  appointed  bishop  of  Caracas  in
1610,  but  soon  afterward  he  was  placed  in  charge
of  the  bishopric  of  Oaxaca,  Mexico,  which  he  ad-
ministered until  his  death.

BOHORQUES,  Pedro  (bo-or'-kes),  Spanish  sol-
dier, d.  in  1667.  He  served  in  the  army  of  Peru  and
made  the  Indians  believe  that  he  was  a  descendant
of  the  Incas  and  must  reinstate  the  Peruvian  king-
dom. He  set  out  to  discover  the  Paititi,  a  kind
of  El  Dorado,  also  called  Jurac  Ouari  ("  the  white
palace  "),  which  was  said  to  be  at  the  borders  of
Guallago  river.  He  found  only  a  very  poor  Indian
town  belonging  to  the  Felados  ("  hairless,"  mean-
ing extremely  poor),  so  called  on  account  of  their
utmost  misery.  They  proclaimed  him  sovereign ;
but  he  soon  grew  weary  of  his  miserable  kingdom,
disappeared  from  it,  and  then  was  made  a  prisoner
by  Spanish  troops.  He  was  sentenced  to  death
and  executed  in  the  city  of  Lima.


BOISE


BOLIVAR


303


BOISE,  Jaines  Robinson,  educator,  b.  in
Blanclford,  Hampden  co.,  Mass.,  27  Jan.,  1815.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1840,  became  a  tu-
tor of  Latin  and  Greek  in  that  college  the  same
year,  and  in  1843  professor  of  Greek,  which  chair
he  held  until  1850.  From  1852  to  1868  he  was
professor  of  Greek  in  the  university  of  Michigan,
and  after  1868  in  the  university  of  Chicago.  He
published  in  Chicago  Xenophon's  "Anabasis,"
with  English  notes,  the  first  six  books  of  Homer's
"  Iliad,"  "  Greek  Syntax,"  ''  First  Lessons  in  Greek,"
and  other  text-books,  and  in  1884  "  Notes  Critical
and  Explanatory  on  St.  Paul's  Epistles."

BOKCR,  George  Henry,  author,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  6  Oct.,  1828 :  d.  there,  2  Jan.,  1890.  He
was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  banker,  was  graduated
at  Princeton  in  1842,  and  studied  law,  but  did  not
practise. In  1847,  after  his  return  from  a  tour

in  Europe,  he
published  "The
Lesson  of  Life,
and  other  Po-
ems," followed
in  1848  by  a  trag-
edy called  "  Ca-
laynos,"  which
was  successful-
ly brought  out
on  the  stage  in
England.  He
next  produced
in  succession
the  tragedies  of
"Anne  Boleyn"
(1850),  "  Leonor
de  Guzman,"
and  "  Frances-
ca  da  Rimini."

^ Amonghisother

plays  are  "The
Betrothal"  and
In  1856  he  published
"  Plays  and  Poems."
Among  his  individual  poems,  "The  Ivory-Car-
ver," "The  Podesta's  Daughter,"  "Song  of  the
Earth,"  "  A  Ballad  of  Sir  John  Franklin,"  and
"Dirge  for  a  Soldier,"  are  noteworthy.  During
the  civil  war  he  wrote  many  patriotic 'lyrics,  col-
lected in  a  volume  and  published  under  the  title
of  "  Poems  of  the  War "  (Boston,  1864).  Later
works  were  "  Street  Lyrics,"  "  Konigsmark,  and
other  Poems"  (1869),  and  "The  Book  of  the
Dead"  (1882).  In  the  autumn  of  1871  he  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Grant  U.  S.  minister  to
Turkey,  and  in  1875  was  transferred  to  the  more
important  mission  of  Russia.  He  returned  to
Philadelphia  in  1879.  Mr.  Boker's  dramas  are
classical  in  form,  and  his  sonnets  and  other  lyrical
poems  greatly  admired.  He  also  wrote  vigorous
and  eloquent  prose,  especially  the  stirring  appeals
contained  in  the  reports  of  the  union  league  club,
of  which  he  was  secretary  from  the  time  of  its
establishment  until  recently,  when  he  was  elected
its  president.  His  latest  work  was  a  volume  of
sonnets,  which  appeared  in  1886.

BOLIVAR,  (Ireg'orio,  Spanish  missionary.
Early  in  the  16th  century  he  preached  the  gos-
pel for  twenty-five  yeai's' among  the  Indians  of
Mexico,  Peru,  and  other  regions  where  Euro-
pean civilization  had  not  yet  reached.  He  be-
longed to  the  Franciscan  order,  and  left  a  curious
work  entitled  "Memorial  de  Arbitrios  para  la
^eparacion  de  Espaiia."

BOLIVAR,  Simon,  the  liberator,  leader  in  the
struggle  for  South  American  independence,  b.  in


^^.-  A^^


•'The  Widow's  Marriage."
m  Boston  two  volumes  of


Caracas,  Venezuela,  24  July,  1783 ;  d.  in  San  Pedro,
near  Santa  Martha,  17  Dec,  1830.  His  father  was
Juan  Vicente  Bolivar  y  Ponte,  a  wealthy  proprietor
of  Peru,  of  noble  descent,  as  was  also  his  mother,
Maria  Concepcion  Palacios  y  Sojo.  Losing  his
parents  early,  young  Bolivar  was  brought  up  by  his
uncle,  the  Marquis  de  Palacios.  After  receiving  a
liberal  education  at  home,  he  spent  several  years  in
the  study  of  law  at  Madrid,  and  in  travel,  mostly
in  the  south  of  Europe.  He  remained  some  time  in
Paris,  and  was  a  witness  of  the  closing  scenes  of
the  revolution.  Returning  to  Madrid,  he  married,
in  1801,  a  daughter  of  Don  N.  Toro.  Embarking
for  America  with  the  intention  of  devoting  himself
to  the  care  of  his  estate,  Bolivar  lost  his  young  wife,
who  died  of  yellow  fever.  He  again  visited  Eu-
rope to  assuage  his  sorrow,  in  1804,  and  spent  five
years  in  Paris.  On  his  return  to  Venezuela,  in
1809,  he  passed  through  the  United  States,  where
he  had  the  opportunity  of  observing  the  working
of  free  institutions.  He  soon  afterward  joined  in
the  revolutionary  movement  in  South  America,
and,  having  taken  part  in  the  uprising  in  Caracas
of  19  April.  1810,  he  received  a  colonel's  commis-
sion from  the  junta,  and  was  sent  with  Luis  Lopez
Mendes  to  Great  Britain  to  purchase  arms  and
solicit  the  protection  of  the  government,  returning
in  1811  with  a  cargo  of  arms.

After  the  declaration  of  Venezuelan  independ-
ence, 5  July,  1811,  he  joined  the  insurgent  forces,
was  attached  to  Gen.  Miranda's  staff  in  September
as  lieutenant-colonel,  and  was  placed  in  command
of  the  important  fortress  of  Puerto  Cabello.  He
lost  that  place,  the  strongest  fortified  post  in  the
country,  through  a  revolt  of  the  Spanish  prisoners
of  war  in  the  citadel.  The  fortress  was  reoccupied
by  the  Spaniards  under  Monteverde,  the  Spanish
troops  regained  possession  of  the  province,  and
Miranda,  on  the  authority  of  the  congress,  signed
the  treaty  of  Victoria,  restoring  Venezuela  to
Spanish  rule,  25  July,  1812.  Bolivar,  with  other
officers,  who  attributed  their  failure  to  the  inactiv-
ity of  Miranda,  apprehended  the  latter  at  La
Guayra,  and  delivered  him  up  to  the  Spanish  au-
thorities. Hearing  of  important  movements  in
New  Granada,  Bolivar  went  from  Curagao,  where
he  had  taken  refuge,  to  Carthagena,  and  obtained
a  commission  to  operate  against  the  royalist  forces
on  Magdalena  river.  He  set  out  in  January,  1813,
with  300  men,  enlisted  for  the  expedition  from
refugees  at  Carthagena.  Manuel  Castillo  accom-
panied him  with  500  grenadiers,  detailed  for  the
expedition  by  the  president  of  Carthagena,  but  soon
decamped  with  his  force.  Bolivar  and  his  cousin
Ribas  advanced  up  the  river,  driving  the  Span-
iards out  of  Tenerife,  Mompox,  and  other  places
as  far  as  the  valley  of  Cucuta  on  the  Venezuelan
border.  He  then  determined  to  endeavor  to  re-
kindle the  revolution  in  Venezuela  and  risk  an-
other encounter  with  Monteverde,  and  Bolivar  and
Ribas  were  commissioned  as  generals  by  the  con-
gress of  New^  Granada,  sitting  at  Santa  Fe  de  Bo-
gota. Amid  many  discouragements  he  pressed  for-
ward with  his  small  force,  not  exceeding  500  men,
and  reached  Merida  and  Truxillo,  important  towns
in  western  Venezuela,  where  he  succeeded  in  rais-
ing the  population  in  his  support.  Dividing  his
force  into  two  columns,  Bolivar  marched  upon
Caracas  at  the  head  of  one  division,  while  Ribas
proceeded  with  the  other  by  another  route.  Re-
cruits flocked  to  the  revolutionary  standard  as  they
advanced  into  Venezuela.  Incensed  at  the  cruel
methods  of  warfare  practised  by  the  royalists.  Boli-
var, on  13  Jan.,  1813,  issued  his  famous  proclama-
tion of  war  to  the  death  (guerra  a  muerte). Ribas


304


BOLIVAR


BOLIVAR


met  Gen.  Monteverde  at  Lostaguenas  and  inflicted
upon  him  a  crushing  defeat,  following  upon  re-
verses at  Niquihao,  Betisoque,  Carache,  Barquise-
meto,  and  Varinas.  Gen.  Monteverde  was  com-
pelled to  fall  back  upon  Puerto  Cabello  and  shut

himself  up  in
the  fortress
with  the  rem-
nant of  his
army.  Gen.
Fierro,  gover-
nor of  Caracas,
signed  a  capit-
ulation at  Vic-
toria, and  on
4  Aug.,  1814,
Bolivarentered
Caracas  at  the
head  of  the  lib-
erating army.
Gen.  Marino
had  recovered
from  the  royal
troops  the  east-
ern part  of  the
province,  and
assumed  the
title  of  dictator
of  eastern  Ven-
ezuela. Boli-
var was  hon-
ored with  a  triumphal  entry  into  the  capital,  being
conveyed  on  a  car  drawn  by  twelve  young  ladies,
proclaimed  himself  dictator  and  liberator  of  the
western  provinces  of  Venezuela,  set  up  a  body-
guard, and  established  the  "  Order  of  the  Liber-
ator." The  enthusiasm  of  the  people  was  damp-
ened by  this  display  of  courtly  pomp,  and  by  the
arrogance  of  Bolivar's  officers,  while  the  royal-
ists concentrated  their  forces  and  applied  all  their
efforts  to  regaining  possession  of  Venezuela.  Sev-
eral sanguinary  battles  were  fought,  in  which  the
revolutionists  were  at  first  successful.  Public  dis-
satisfaction impelled  Bolivar,  on  1  Jan.,  1814,  to
call  together  a  junta  of  influential  citizens  of  Ca-
racas and  offer  to  resign  the  dictatorship  into  their
hands,  but  the  assembly,  by  its  decision  on  the
following  day,  insisted  upon  his  retaining  the  su-
preme military  and  civil  authority.  The  Spanish
general  Boves,  collecting  a  large  force  for  a  de-
cisive encounter,  marched,  in  June,  1814,  from
Calabozo  upon  La  Puerta,  where  the  united  forces
of  Bolivar  and  Mariiio  were  encamped.  The  revo-
lutionary army  was  split  up  into  three  divisions  as
the  Spanish  army  came  up,  and  on  11  June  Boves
inflicted  upon  the  patriots  a  ruinous  defeat  near
Cura,  and  well-nigh  annihilated  their  army,  kill-
ing 1,500.  The  Spaniards  then  took  Caracas,  and
defeated  Bolivar  a  second  time  at  Aragua.

Bolivar  escaped  to  Cumana  with  some  of  his
officers,  and  sailed  thence  to  Carthagena,  proceed-
ing thence  to  Tunja,  where  the  revolutionary  con-
gress was  sitting,  and  offered  his  services  to  the
confederated  provinces  of  New  Granada.  Not-
withstanding his  misfortunes  and  the  detractions
of  his  numerous  enemies,  he  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  forces  of  the  federal  repub-
lic, and  ordered  to  march  against  Cundinamarea,
the  president  of  which  province  refused  to  ac-
knowledge the  authority  of  the  central  govern-
ment and  the  union  of  the  provinces.  He  liberated
Cundinamarea,  and  took  possession  of  Santa  Fe  de
Bogota.  He  appeared  before  that  city  in  Decem-
ber, 1814,  with  2,000  men,  carried  the  suburbs  by
storm,  and  forced  the  leaders  of  the  defection  to


capitulate.  For  this  service  he  received  the  thanks
of  congress,  which  immediately  made  Sante  Fe  the
seat  of  government.  Bolivar  was  then  sent  to  re-
capture Santa  Marta,  which  had  fallen  into  the
hands  of  the  enemy,  being  the  only  sea-port  in
New  Granada  in  their  possession.  Castillo,  the
commandant  in  Carthagena,  refused  to  supply  the
troops  with  arms  and  ammunition  ordered  from  the
citadel,  whereupon  Bolivar  led  his  forces  against
that  city,  laid  siege  to  it,  and  remained  there  till
May.  Meanwhile,  Gen.  Morillo  had  arrived  from
Spain  with  large  reenforcements,  debarked  on  the
island  of  Margarita,  25  March,  1815,  relieved  the
Spanish  garrison  in  Santa  Marta,  and  soon  after-
ward captured  Carthagena.

Bolivar,  on  10  May,  1815,  embarked  with  about  a
dozen  of  his  officers  for  Kingston,  Jamaica,  where
he  looked  for  assistance.  While  he  remained  in
Jamaica,  for  eight  months,  New  Granada  was  over-
run by  Morillo's  troops,  though  the  patriots  in
Venezuela  and  Gen.  Arismendi  in  the  island  of
Margarita  held  their  ground  against  the  Spaniards.
In  Kingston,  Bolivar  narrowly  escaped  being  mur-
dered by  a  hired  assassin,  who  stabbed  his  secre-
tary instead  of  him.  From  Kingston  he  went  to
Port  au  Prince,  in  Hayti.  On  his  promising  to
emancipate  the  slaves.  President  Petion,  of  Hayti,
furnished  him  with  four  negro  battalions.  At
Cayes  he  met  Admiral  Brion,  who  had  arrived
from  England  with  a  corvette  and  a  supply  of
arms  and  military  stores  for  the  patriots.  Bolivar
gathered  a  force,  enlisted  from  patriot  refugees,
and  with  it  and  his  negro  troops  sailed  for  Marga-
rita, 16  April,  1816,  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  Aris-
mendi. The  Spaniards  occupied  only  the  single
spot  of  Pampatar  on  the  island.  With  the  ap-
proval of  Gen.  Arismendi,  upon  Bolivar's  promise
to  call  a  national  congress  as  soon  as  his  power
should  be  established  in  Venezuela,  a  junta  was
summoned  in  the  cathedral  of  La  Villa  del  Norte,
which  proclaimed  Bolivar  commander-in-chief  of
the  forces  of  Venezuela  and  New  Granada.  Land-
ing at  Carripano  on  1  June,  he  issued  a  proclama-
tion emancipating  the  slaves.  Marino  and  Piar
withdrew  the  forces  under  their  command,  in  order
to  undertake  an  expedition  on  their  own  account
against  Cumana,  leaving  Bolivar  with  about  650
men.  He  sailed  for  the  mainland  in  thirteen  vessels,
seven  of  which  were  armed,  landed  at  Ocumare  on
3  July,  and  marched  toward  Valencia.  His  force
was  increased  through  the  enrolment  of  liberated
slaves  to  about  800  men.  Not  far  from  Ocumare
he  met  a  Spanish  detachment  commanded  by  Gen.
Morales,  and  was  beaten  and  compelled  to  recin-
bark.  He  sailed  first  to  the  island  of  Buen  Ayre,
and  then  to  Cumana;  but,  being  coldly  received
by  Piar  and  the  other  generals,  who  threatened  to
try  him  by  court-martial  for  cowardice  and  deser-
tion, he  returned  to  Aux  Cayes.  A  few  months  later
a  majority  of  the  superior  Venezuelan  officers  united
in  requesting  Bolivar  to  resume  the  chief  com-
mand. Collecting  another  band  at  Aux  Cayes,  he
landed  a  second  time  on  the  island  of  Margarita,
on  31  Dec,  1816.  Arms,  munitions  of  war,  and
provisions  were  supplied  by  the  president  of  Hayti.
On  2  Jan..  1817,  he  was  joined  by  Arismendi,  and
proclaimed  martial  law  and  the  union  of  the  civil
and  military  power  in  his  person.  Five  days  later
Arismendi's  troops  were  surprised  in  an  ambush
bv  the  Spaniards.  Bolivar  fled  to  Barcelona,  where
he  was  joined  by  the  patriot  troops  that  escaped  and
by  re-enforcements  sent  by  Louis  Brion,  with  arms
and  ammunition.  He  soon  collected  a  new  force
of  1,100  men.  Morillo  advanced  against  him  with
a  strong  division of royalist  troops. The  two


BOLIVAR


BOLIVAR


305


forces  met  on  16  Feb.,  1817,  and  a  desperate  battle
ensued,  lasting  three  days,  at  the  end  of  which  the
Spaniards  were  defeated  and  retired  in  disorder.
During  their  retreat  they  were  set  upon  and  entirely
cut  to  pieces  by  the  Uaneros  of  Paez.  While  Boli-
var pursued  his  victories  in  the  west,  Piar,  the  ne-
gro leader,  wrested  from  the  Spaniards  the  prov-
inces of  Guiana,  his  land  force  being  supported  by
Brion's  fleet  of  gun-boats.  On  15  April,  ten  days
after  Bolivar  had  left  that  city  in  search  of  new
recruits,  Barcelona  was  captured  by  the  Spaniards,
who  slaughtered  the  garrison,  comprising  the  entire
force  that  he  had  collected  up  to  that  time  ;  but  a
new  army  was  enlisted,  and  by  the  middle  of  July
the  royalists  had  evacuated  all  the  provinces.  On
20  July,  while  Bolivar  was  absent,  Piar,  Zea,  Mari-
ne, Arismendi,  and  the  other  military  chiefs  sum-
moned at  Angostura  a  provincial  congress,  which
recorded  a  decision  to  vest  the  executive  powers  in
a  triumvirate,  consisting  of  Bolivar  and  two  asso-
ciates. On  hearing  of  this  action,  Bolivar  hastened
to  Angostura,  and,  supported  by  Brion,  dissolved
the  congress,  suppressed  the  powers  of  the  trium-
virate, and  proclaimed  a  supreme  council  of  the  na-
tion, consisting  of  himself  as  chief  with  Louis  Brion
and  Antonio  Francisco  Zea  as  assistants,  the  for-
mer being  the  director  of  the  military,  and  the  lat-
ter of  the  political  department.  Piar,  who  assailed
the  character  of  Bolivar,  stigmatizing  him  as  a
"  Napoleon  of  retreat,"  was  arrested  and  tried  by  a
council  of  war,  presided  over  by  Brion.  on  a  charge
of  conspiring  against  the  whites,  plotting  against
the  life  of  Bolivar,  and  aiming  at  the  supreme
power.  He  was  convicted,  condemned  to  death,
and  shot  on  16  Oct.,  1817.  Warned  by  the  fate  of
Piar,  Marifio  desisted  from  his  rivalry  with  Boli-
var and  wrote  an  abject  letter,  throwing  himself
upon  the  mercy  of  the  liberator.  Bolivar  had  an
army  of  9,000  well-armed,  equipped,  and  provi-
sioned troops,  double  the  Spanish  force  in  the
country ;  yet  the  patriot  forces  were  so  scattered
that  in  the  campaign  that  followed  they  were  beat-
en in  detail  a  dozen  times,  and  by  the  end  of  May,
1818,  were  driven  from  the  provinces  north  of  the
Orinoco.  Defection  and  discontent  were  rife.  Bol-
ivar retired  to  Angostura,  where  he  fell  in  with
Santander,  a  citizen  of  New  Granada,  who  in-
formed him  that  the  people  of  that  colony  were
prepared  for  a  general  revolt,  and  begged  for  as-
sistance in  invading  the  country.  Bolivar  aided
him  to  carry  out  that  project ;  and  English,  French.
German,  and  Polish  officers  flocked  to  Angostura
and  offered  their  services  to  Bolivar,  while  sup-
plies, vessels,  arms,  and  volunteers  came  from
England.  On  the  advice  of  Dr.  Roscio,  Bolivar
summoned,  on  15  Feb.,  1819,  a  national  congress  at
Angostura,  and  was  soon  in  a  position  to  put  14,000
men  in  the  field  and  resume  the  offensive.  At  the
opening  of  the  congress  he  submitted  a  detailed
exposition  of  his  views  of  government,  and  offered
to  surrender  his  powers  into  the  hands  of  the  con-
gress, which,  however,  requested  him  to  retain  the
supreme  authority  until  the  independence  of  the
country  should  be  completely  established.

Bolivar  then  reorganized  the  army  and  decided
upon  a  bold  strategical  plan  to  march  over  the
Cordilleras,  unite  with  Santander's  guerrillas,  seize
Bogota,  and  drive  the  Spaniards  out  of  New  Gra-
nada, after  first  inducing  them  to  concentrate  their
forces  in  Venezuela  by  a  diversion  in  the  coast
provinces  of  that  country.  On  24  Feb.,  1819,  he
left  Angostura  with  the  army,  after  nominating
^ea  president  of  the  congress  and  vice-president  of
the  republic  during  his  absence.  By  the  bold  and
successful  manffiuvres  of  Paez,  Morillo  and  La
VOL.  I, — 20


Torre  were  routed  at  Achaguas,  a  victory  that  re-
sulted in  the  occupation  of  the  province  of  Barima,
leaving  the  way  open  into  New  Granada.  Boli-
var's daring  and  original  plan  of  campaign  was  en-
tirely successful.  He  marched  his  army,  a  third
part  of  his  troops  consisting  of  Englishmen  and
other  foreigners,  through  the  difficult  passes  of
the  Andes  in  June,  encountered  and  defeated  the
enemy  on  1  July  in  the  province  of  Tunja,  entered
the  town  of  Tunja  on  28  July  after  a  sharp  battle
on  the  adjoining  heights,  and  decided  the  fate  of
Bogota  and  of  all  New  Granada  on  7  Aug.  by  the
victory  of  Boyaca.  On  12  Aug.  the  liberator  made
his  triumphal  entry  into  Santa  Fe.  All  the  prov-
inces of  New  Granada  rose  against  the  Spaniards,
who  shut  themselves  up  in  the  fortified  town  of
Mompox.  After  organizing  a  government  in  Bo-
gota and  leaving  Gen.  Santander  as  commander-
in-chief,  Bolivar  returned  to  Montecal,  in  Venezue-
la, where  he  had  ordered  the  patriot  leaders  to
assemble  with  their  forces,  arriving  there  on  3
Nov.,  1819.  Morillo  had  fallen  back  before  the  at-
tacks of  Paez  from  San  Fernando  de  Apure  to  San
Carlos;  but  internal  discord  prevented  Bolivar
from  following  up  these  victories  and  crushing  the
Spanish  force,  now  reduced  to  4,500,  with  his  army
of  9,000  men.  In  October,  1819,  the  congress  at
Angostura  compelled  Zea  to  resign,  and  elected
Arismendi  in  his  place.  Bolivar,  upon  hearing  of
this,  marched  upon  Angostura  with  his  foreign
legion,  restored  Vice-President  Zea,  and  arrested
Arismendi  and  exiled  him  to  the  island  of  Marga-
rita. He  then  proclaimed  the  republic  of  Colombia,
securing  the  enactment  of  a  fundamental  law  on
17  Dec,  1819,  for  the  union  of  the  states  of  Vene-
zuela and  New  Granada  under  his  presidency,  with
a  common  congress  and  a  single  constitution.  The
seat  of  government  was  transferred  provisionally
to  Rosario  de  Cucuta,  on  the  border-line  between
the  two  provinces.  The  absence  of  the  foreign
legion  and  the  patriot  commander  gave  Morillo  an
opportunity  to  collect  re-enforcements,  and  the
Spaniards  were  encouraged  furthermore  by  the
news  of  a  formidable  expedition  about  to  start
from  Spain  under  O'Donnell ;  but  an  insurrection
in  Spain  prevented  the  sending  of  O'Donnell's  ex-
pedition. Bolivar  took  the  field  again,  and  on  20
Jan.,  1820,  returned  to  San  Fernando  de  Apure.
The  republican  army  was  now  larger  and  better  ap-
pointed than  at  any  previous  time,  and  gained  impor-
tant advantages  over  the  royalists.  By  autumn,  fif-
teen of  the  twenty-two  provinces  of  New  Granada
had  joined  the  government  of  Colombia,  while  the
Spaniards  still  retained  only  Carthagena  and  the
fortified  posts  on  the  isthmus  of  Panama.  In  Vene-
zuela the  government  of  the  republic  was  effective
in  six  out  of  the  eight  provinces.  On  25  Nov.,
1820,  Bolivar,  probably  in  the  hope  of  avoiding  fur-
ther bloodshed,  concluded  with  Morillo  at  Truxillo
an  armistice  of  six  months.  On  17  Dec,  Gen.  Mo-
rillo embarked  for  Spain,  leaving  Gen.  Miguel  de
la  Torre  in  command  of  the  Spanish  forces.

On  10  March,  1821,  Bolivar  notified  Gen.  La
Torre  that  hostilities  would  be  resumed  at  the  ex-
piration of  thirty  days.  The  Spaniards  were  strongly
intrenched  at  Carabobo,  southwest  of  Valencia,  but
had  not  brought  up  all  their  forces.  Paez  with  his
8,000  Uaneros,  and  the  British  legion,  1,100  strong,
turned  the  enemy's  position  through  a  side-path
and  threw  them  into  complete  confusion,  when
Torre  retreated  with  the  remnant  of  his  army  to
Puerto  Cabello.  This  victory,  which  occurred  on
24  June,  1821,  virtually  ended  the  war  in  Venezue-
la, and  Bolivar  entered  Caracas  on  29  June.  By
the  end  of  the  year  Puerto  Cabello  was  the  only


306


BOLIVAR


BOLIVAR


post  still  held  by  the  Spaniards.  In  New  Granada
the  powerful  fortress  of  Carthagena  surrendered
to  Gen.  Santander  on  21  Sept.,  1821.  The  naval
battle  of  Maracaibo,  in  August,  1823,  and  the  capit-
ulation of  Puerto  Cabello  in  July,  1824,  were  neces-
sary to  drive  the  Spaniards  from  their  last  foot-
hold. Yet  after  the  decisive  victory  of  Carabobo
the  republicans  were  masters  of  the  country  and
free  to  attend  to  its  political  organization.  The
congress  of  Colombia  assembled  in  Cucuta  in  May,
1821,  and  on  30  Aug.,  1821,  the  constitution  of  tlie
republic  of  Colombia  was  adopted  with  the  general
approval  of  the  people.  Bolivar  was  acclaimed  the
president  of  the  new  republic,  notwithstanding  his
protests.  Although  he  had  sacrificed  his  enormous
private  fortune  in  the  cause  of  independence,  he
renounced  his  claims  to  the  annual  salary  of  50,000
dollars  due  him  as  president  since  1819,  and  also
to  his  share  in  the  public  property  distributed
among  the  generals  and  soldiers  of  the  republic.
The  Spaniards  were  still  in  possession  of  the  prov-
inces of  Ecuador  and  Peru,  and  Bolivar  determined
to  effect  the  liberation  of  the  whole  country.  At  the
head  of  his  army  he  marched  upon  Quito,  the  chief
place  in  Ecuador,  whither  the  Spaniards  had  retired
after  being  driven  from  the  isthmus  of  Panama.
A  severe  battle  was  fought  at  Pichincha,  which  was
won  for  the  republicans  through  the  able  strategy
of  Gen.  Sucre,  Bolivar's  colleague.  Bolivar  entered
Quito  in  June,  1822,  and  incorporated  Quito,  Pasto,
and  Guayaquil  in  the  Colombian  republic.  Then,
in  response  to  an  appeal  from  San  Martin,  the
patriot  leader  in  Peru,  he  left  the  direction  of  the
government  to  the  vice-president,  Santander,  and
marched  upon  Lima,  which  was  evacuated  by  the
royalists  at  the  approach  of  the  Colombian  army.
He  made  a  triumphal  entry  into  the  Peruvian  capi-
tal on  1  Sept.,  1823,  and  on  10  Feb.,  1824,  the  con-
gress of  Lima  made  him  dictator  of  Peru  and  au-
thorized him  to  employ  all  the  resources  of  the
country.  He  tendered  his  resignation  as  president
of  Colombia,  but  was  continued  in  that  office  by
the  vote  of  a  large  majority  of  the  congress.  The
intrigues  of  the  opposing  factions  in  Peru  forced
Bolivar  to  retire  to  Truxillo,  whereupon  Lima  was
reoccupied  by  the  Spaniards  under  Canterac.  By
June,  Bolivar  had  organized  another  army,  which
routed  the  advance  guard  of  the  royalist  force,
and,  pushing  forward,  defeated  Canterac  on  the
plains  of  Junin,  6  Aug.,  1824.  After  this  decisive
victory  Bolivar  returned  to  Lima  to  reorganize  the
government,  while  Sucre  pursued  the  Spaniards  on
their  retreat  through  upper  Peru,  and  shattered
their  forces  in  the  final  victory  of  Ayachuco  on  9
Dec,  1824.  The  Spaniards  were  reduced  to  the
single  post  of  Callao,  in  Peru,  from  which  they
could  not  be  dislodged  until  more  than  a  year  later.
On  10  Feb.,  1825.  Bolivar  convoked  a  constituent
congress  and  resigned  the  dictatorship  of  Peru;
but  that  body,  on  account  of  the  unsettled  state  of
the  country,  decided  to  invest  him  with  dictatorial
powers  for  a  year  longer.  Congress  voted  hira  a
grant  of  a  million  dollars,  which  was  declined.

A  convention  of  the  provinces  of  upper  Peru
was  held  at  Chuquisaea,  in  August,  1825,  which
detached  that  territory  from  the  government  of
Buenos  Ayres  and  constituted  it  a  separate  state,
called.  In  honor  of  the  liberator,  Bolivia.  Bolivar
was  declared  perpetual  protector  of  the  new  repub-
lic, and  was  requested  to  prepare  for  it  a  constitu-
tion. He  returned  to  Lima  after  visiting  upper
Peru,  and  thence  sent  a  project  of  a  constitution
for  Bolivia,  which  was  presented  to  the  congress  of
that  state  on  25  May,  1826,  accompanied  by  an  ad-
dress in  which  he  defined  the  forms  of  government


that  he  conceived  to  be  most  expedient  for  the
newly  established  republics.  The  Bolivian  code,
copied  in  some  of  its  features  from  the  code  Napo-
leon, contained  a  provision  for  vesting  the  execu-
tive authority  in  a  president  for  life,  without  re-
sponsibility to  the  legislature,  and  with  power  to
nominate  his  successor.  This  proposal  excited  the
apprehensions  of  a  section  of  the  republicans  m
Bolivia,  Peru,  Venezuela,  New  Granada,  and  even
in  Buenos  Ayres  and  Chili.  The  tendencies  that
Bolivar  had  manifested  in  the  direction  of  politi-
cal consolidation  caused  the  alarm  to  spread  be-
yond the  confines  of  the  territory  affected  by  the
new  code,  and  he  was  suspected  of  a  design  toVeld
the  South  American  republics  into  an  empire  and
to  introduce  the  Bolivian  code  and  make  himself
perpetual  dictator.  Peru,  as  well  as  Bolivia,
adopted  the  new  code ;  but  from  this  time  the  pop-
ulation of  the  republics  were  divided  into  angry
factions  on  questions  raised  by  that  instrument,
and  a  long  and  bitter  struggle  ensued  between  the
centralists,  or  Bolivarists,  and  the  federalists,  the
military  rivals  of  Bolivar  uniting  with  the  latter
party.  A  serious  trouble  occurred  in  Venezuela
during  the  absence  of  the  president.  Paez,  vice-
president  of  that  republic,  having  been  accused  of
arbitrary  conduct  in  the  enrolment  of  the  militia,
refused  to  obey  the  summons  of  the  senate,  and,
encouraged  by  a  strong  separatist  party  in  the
northern  provinces,  openly  rebelled  against  the
central  government.  Bolivar  confided  affairs  in
Peru  to  a  council  nominated  by  himself,  with
Santa  Cruz  for  its  chief,  and  hastened  to  the  scene
of  the  disturbances,  leaving  Lima  in  September,  and
reaching  Bogota  on  14  Nov.,  1826.  On  23  Nov.  he
issued  a  decree  from  Bogota  assuming  the  extraor-
dinary powers  conferred  upon  the  president  in  case
of  rebellion,  and  hastened  to  Venezuela  to  stop  the
spilling  of  blood,  reaching  Puerto  Cabello  on  31
Dec.  The  following  day  he  issued  a  proclamation
declaring  a  general  amnesty.  In  an  interview
with  Paez  he  confirmed  him  in  his  command,  and,
fixing  his  headquarters  at  Caracas,  checked  the
disturbances  in  the  northern  departments.  In
1826  Bolivar  and  Santander  were  re-elected  presi-
dent and  vice-president  of  Colombia  for  the  term
beginning  in  January,  1827.  In  February,  Boli-
var, in  order  to  silence  his  detractors  and  prove
that  he  was  free  from  ambitious  designs  and  in-
terested motives,  insisted  on  resigning  the  presi-
dency and  retiring  into  private  life.  Santander
urged  him  to  retract  his  decision,  declaring  that
the  agitations  of  the  country  could  only  be  dis-
pelled through  the  influence  and  authority  of  the
liberator,  while  in  the  congress  there  was  a  ma-
jority of  his  supporters,  and  a  resolution  was  car-
ried requesting  him  to  continue  in  the  presidency.
He  accordingly  withdrew  his  resignation,  and  re-
paired to  Bogota  to  take  the  oath  of  office;  but
before  doing  so  he  issued  a  proclamation  calling  a
national  convention  to  be  held  at  Ocana  in  March,
1828.  Another  decree  granted  a  general  amnesty,
and  a  third  proclaimed  the  establishment  of  con-
stitutional order  throughout  Colombia.

Shortly  after  the  departure  of  Bolivar  from
Lima,  the  Bolivian  code  was  adopted  as  the  con-
stitution of  Peru,  and  under  it  the  liberator  was
elected,  on  9  Dec,  1826,  president  for  life.  A  lew
weeks  later,  while  he  was  restoring  order  m  Vene-
zuela, a  counter-revolution  was  effected  in  Peru
bv  the  third  division  of  the  Colombian  auxiliary
army,  then  stationed  at  Lima.  This  consisted  ol
veteran  troops  under  Lara  and  Sands,  who  had
hitherto  been  the  liberator's  most  elRcacious  in-
struments, not  only  in  conquering  the  independ-


BOLIVAR


BOLLAN


307


ence  of  the  South  American  republics,  but  in  impos-
ing his  own  ideas  of  government  on  the  states  he
had  created,  but  who  now  became  infected  with  the
growing  republican  reaction  against  centralized
power,  and  were  filled  with  distrust  toward  Boli-
var. Six  weeks  after  rhe  adoption  of  the  Bolivian
code  the  Peruvian  republicans  hostile  to  Bolivar,
with  the  support  of  the  Colombian  troops  cantoned
in  Lima,  deposed  the  council  appointed  by  Boli-
var, abolished  the  Bolivian  code,  and  organized  a
provisional  gov^ernment.  Gen.  Lamar  was  chosen
president  of  Peru,  and  the  Colombian  troops  de-
parted from  her  soil.  Those  stationed  in  Bolivia
were  expelled,  with  the  aid  of  the  Peruvians,  and
after  a  brief  war  a  treaty  was  concluded  between
Colombia  and  Bolivia,  by  which  the  boundaries  of
the  latter  were  extended  to  their  original  limits,
its  debt  was  separated  from  that  of  Colombia,  and
its  complete  independence  and  equality  were  recog-
nized. The  third  division  sailed  from  Callao  on
17  March,  1827,  and  in  April  landed  in  southern
Colombia.  Bolivar,  who  was  in  the  north,  pre-
pared to  march  against  the  rebellious  soldiery;
but  the  latter  made  no  attempt  to  carry  the  revo-
lution into  Colombia,  and  quietly  submitted  to
Gen.  Ovando.  The  congress  of  Ocaila  met  on  2
March,  1828.  A  new  constitution,  giving  the  ex-
ecutive stronger  and  more  permanent  authority,
was  submitted.  When  it  was  found  that  the  ma-
jority was  opposed  to  its  adoption,  the  friends  of
Bolivar  vacated  their  seats,  leaving  the  body  with-
out a  quorum.  From  his  country-seat  in  the
neighborhood  of  Ocana,  Bolivar  published  an  ad-
dress, which,  while  reprehending  the  proceeding
of  his  partisans,  appealed  to  the  country  to  sup-

?ort  him  in  introducing  stability  and  order,
'opular  conventions  in  Bogota,  Caracas,  and  Car-
thagena  called  upon  the  liberator  to  adopt  extra-
ordinary means  to  establish  tranquillity  and  secu-
rity, and  in  August,  1838,  he  was  invested  by
popular  elections  with  dictatorial  powers.  The
anti-Bolivar  republicans  entered  into  a  conspiracy
to  assassinate  the  president.  Vice-President  San-
tander  and  the  other  leaders  of  the  party  were  im-
plicated in  this  crime.  Bolivar  was  attacked  in
his  bedroom  in  Bogota,  25  Sept.,  1828,  but  escaped
by  leaping  from  the  balcony  and  hiding  from  the
murderers.  The  chief  instigators  were  tried.
Santander  was  convicted  and  condemned  to  ban-
ishment, and  Gen.  Padilla  expiated  with  a  felon's
death  his  part  in  the  plot.  This  occurrence
prompted  Bolivar  to  exercise  more  arbitrary
powers,  a  course  that  augmented  the  popular  sus-
picions of  his  aims  and  motives  and  the  aversion
to  a  military  dictatorship.  A  decree  was  issued
from  Bogota,  27  Aug.,  1828,  by  which  Bolivar  as-
sumed unlimited  authority  in  Colombia.  It  was
at  a  time  when  party  passion  in  Colombia  was  in-
flamed to  an  extraordinary  degree  that  Peru,  in
1829,  declared  war  against  the  dictator  of  Colom-
bia. Bolivar,  in  a  new  address  to  the  people  of
Colombia,  asked  them  to  indicate  their  desires  re-
garding the  revision  of  the  constitution.  While
he  was  marching  against  the  Peruvians,  an  assem-
bly m  Caracas,  on  25  Nov.,  1829,  condemned  him
for  ambitious  designs,  declared  the  separation  of
V  enezuela  from  Bolivia,  and  elected  Paez  presi-
dent. In  Colombia  the  senate  adhered  to  the
liberator ;  but  insurrections  broke  out  in  various
places.  In  January,  1830,  Bolivar  for  the  fifth
tune  resigned  the  presidency,  but  was  again  con-
nrmed  in  his  position  by  the  general  voice.  He
then  undertook  to  compel  Paez  and  the  Venezue-
lan disunionists  to  submit  to  the  Colombian  con-
gress. The  congress,  however,  now  contained  a


majority  made  up  from  his  opponents,  and  it  voted
to  accept  his  proffered  resignation,  granting  him
a  pension  of  3,000  dollars  on  condition  of  his  re-
siding abroad.  The  patriot  leader  sent  in  his  final
resignation  to  congress  on  27  April,  1830,  and  left
Bogota  on  9  May  with  the  intention  of  embarking
for  England  from  Carthagena ;  but  his  adherents
induced  him  to  remain  in  the  country,  and  made
ineffectual  attempts  to  restore  him  to  power.
Suffering  from  the  malady  of  which  he  died,  he
went  to  Santa  Marta  to  visit  the  bishop  of  that
see,  who  was  his  friend,  and  there  breathed  his
last.  In  accordance  with  an  act  of  the  congress  of
New  Granada,  his  remains  were  removed  in  1842
to  Caracas,  where  a  monument  was  erected  in  his
honor.  In  1858  the  city  of  Lima  erected  an  eques-
trian statue  of  Bolivar,  who  was  described  in  the
inscription  as  the  "  liberator  of  the  Peruvian  na-
tion." A  statue  of  him,  the  gift  of  the  govern-
ment of  Venezuela,  was  erected  in  1883  in  Central
park,  New  York  city.  There  is  also  a  fine  statue
of  him  in  Santa  Fe  de  Bogata.

It  was  Bolivar's  hope  and  ambition  to  unite  the
South  American  republics  into  a  strong  confedera-
tion. The  congress  that  met  at  Panama  in  1827,
with  the  object  of  establishing  an  international
code  for  the  Latin  republics,  was  set  on  foot  by
him.  The  example  of  Napoleon  led  him  into  acts
too  arbitrary  and  a  policy  too  autocratic  to  please
the  independent  temper  of  his  compatriots.  Dur-
ing the  faction  fights  that  prevailed  in  his  lifetime
he  was  a  mark  for  virulent  calumnies;  but  suc-
ceeding generations  of  South  Americans  have  paid
due  honor  to  his  memory.  His  lack  of  judgment
and  of  coolness  in  the  battle-field  betrayed  his
military  incapacity,  and  brought  him  at  times  into
contempt  and  disrepute ;  yet  the  pertinacity  and
patience  with  which  he  clung  to  the  cause  of  inde-
pendence through  every  danger  and  discourage-
ment revealed  a  noble  order  of  courage.  His  sac-
rifices and  sufferings,  voluntarily  undergone  for
the  sake  of  the  cause  in  which  he  engaged,  are
sufficient  to  disprove  the  charges  brought  against
him  of  ignoble  ambition  and  egotism.  Of  tlie  ac-
counts that  have  been  published  of  the  life  of  Boli-
var, the  "Histoire  de  Bolivar,"  by  Gen.  Ducou-
drey-Holstein,  continued  down  to  his  death  by  A.
Viollet  (Paris,  1831),  was  written  with  a  hostile
animus,  and  is  full  of  baseless  calumniation  and
misrepresentation.  The  "  Vida  del  Libertador  Si-
mon Bolivar"  (New  York,  1866)  is,  on  the  other
hand,  an  indiscriminate  panegyric.  See  also
"  Memoirs  of  Gen.  John  Miller  (in  the  Service  of
the  Republic  of  Peru)";  Col.  Hippisley's  "Ac-
count of  his  Journey  to  the  Orinoco "  (London,
1831).  The  publication  of  the  correspondence  of
Bolivar,  including  his  messages,  manifestoes,  and
proclamations,  preceded  by  his  life,  was  begun  in
New  York,  and  the  first  two  volumes,  containing
the  life,  written  in  Spanish,  by  Felipe  Larrazabal,
appeared  in  1871.

BOLL,  Jacob,  naturalist,  b.  in  Switzerland,  29
May,  1828;  d.  in  Wilbarger  co.,  Texas,  29  Sept.,
1880.  He  was  a  pupil  of  Louis  Agassiz,  and  was
employed  by  Edward  D.  Cope  to  go  to  Texas  and
examine  the  fossiliferous  and  iron  deposits  of  that
state,  with  a  view  to  determining  their  geological
character.  He  had  been  engaged  in  these  studies
six  years  when  he  died.  Mr.  Boll  made  many  im-
portant discoveries  in  the  formations  that  he  ex-
plored. He  was  an  expert  naturalist,  and  a  most
successful  collector  in  many  departments  of  natural
history,  and  wrote  much  on  the  subject.

BOLLAN,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  England ;  d.
in  Massachusetts  in  1776. He  was  educated  for


308


BOLLER


BOLTON


the  legal  profession  in  England,  removed  to  Massa-
chusetts about  1740,  settled  in  Boston,  married  a
daughter  of  Gov.  Shirley  in  1743,  and  became  ad-
vocate-general. In  1745  he  was  sent  to  London  as
agent  of  the  colony,  to  secure  from  the  govern-
ment the  repayment  of  £183,649  advanced  by
Massachusetts  for  the  Cape  Breton  expedition,  in
which  mission  he  succeeded  after  three  years.  He
was  sent  to  England  a  second  time  as  agent  for
the  colony,  but  was  dismissed  by  the  general
court  in  1662,  because  of  his  connection  with  the
deposed  governor,  and  of  his  adherence  to  the
episcopal  form  of  worship.  He  still  acted  as
agent  of  the  council,  and  his  popularity  in  the
colony  was  restored  when  he  obtained  from  Alder-
man Beckford  in  London,  and  sent  over  to  Massa-
chusetts in  1769,  thirty-three  letters  of  Gov.  Ber-
nard and  Gen.  iGage  calumniating  the  colonists,
for  which  act  he  was  denounced  by  Lord  North  in
parliament.  In  1775  he  Avrote  in  favor  of  concili-
atory measures  toward  the  colonies.  John  Han-
cock declared,  in  the  Massachusetts  house  of  repre-
sentatives, that  there  was  no  man  to  whom  the
colonies  were  more  indebted.  He  published  nu-
merous political  tracts  relating  chiefly  to  Ameri-
can affairs,  among  which  the  most  important  were
"The  Importance  of  Cape  Breton  truly  Illus-
trated" (London,  1746);  "Coloniae  Anglicans  II-
lustrati"  (1762);  "The  Ancient  Right  of  the  Eng-
lish Nation  to  the  American  Fishery  Examined
and  Stated"  (1764);  "The  Mutual  Interests  of
Great  Britain  and  the  American  Colonies  Consid-
ered" (1765);  "The  Importance  of  the  Colonies  in
North  America  and  the  Interests  of  Great  Britain
with  regard  to  them  Considered"  (1766);  "Free-
dom of  Speech  and  Writing  upon  Public  Affairs
Considered"  (1766);  "Epistle  from  Timoleon"
(1768) :  "  Continued  Corruption  of  Standing  Ar-
mies "  (1768) ;  "  The  Free  Briton's  Memorial,  in  De-
fence of  the  Right  of  Election  "  (1769) ;  and  "  A
Supplemental  Memorial,  on  the  Origin  of  Parlia-
ments, etc."  (1770).  As  agent  for  the  council  of
the  province  of  Massachusetts,  he  offered  "  A  Peti-
tion to  the  King  in  Council,  Jan.  26,  1774,  with
Illustrations  intended  to  Promote  the  Harmony  of
Great  Britain  and  her  Colonies."

BOLLER,  Alfred  Pancoast,  civil  engineer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  23  Feb.,  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1858,
and  at  the  Rensselaer  Polytechnic  Institute,  Troy,
N.  Y.,  in  1861.  He  has  been  connected  as  assist-
ant engineer  with  the  Lehigh  Coal  and  Navigation
Company  (1862),  Philadelpliia  and  Erie  Railroad
(1864),  and  Atlantic  and  Great  Western  Railroad
(1866) ;  as  chief  engineer  with  the  Hudson  River
Railroad  (1866),  Westside  and  Yonkers  Railroad
(1880),  Yonkers  Rapid  Transit  Commission  (1881),
Manhattan  Elevated  Railroad  Company  (1882),
Albany  and  Greenbush  Bridge  Company  (1882),
and  Staten  Island  Rapid  Transit  Railroad  (1885) ;
and  he  has  held  consulting  relations  with  the  Zaza
railroad  in  Cuba  (1877),  Department  of  Public
Parks,  New  York  (1883),  and  with  other  corpora-
tions. For  some  years  he  has  been  engaged  in
business  as  a  contractor,  and  has  made  a  specialty
of  bridge  construction.  The  double-track  bridge
over  the  Hudson  river  at  Albany,  the  Eighth  ave-
nue bridge  over  the  Harlem,  the  Madison  avenue
bridge  over  the  same  river,  the  Crotoii  lake  bridge,
the  Central  avenue  bridge,  Newark,  N.  J.,  the  great
gas-holder  tanks  of  the  Bay  State  Gas  Company,  in
Boston,  the  tunnel  under  the  light-house  grounds,
Staten  Island,  and  all  of  the  locomotive  turn-tables
on  the  West  Shore  Railroad,  were  built  under  his
supervision. He  is  a  member  of  the  American  insti-


tutes of  civil  engineers  and  mining  engineers,  and
is  the  author  of  various  reports  on  bridge  construc-
tion and  of  a  "  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Construc-
tion of  Iron  Highway  Bridges"  (New  York,  1877).

BOLLES,  Edwin  Cortlandt,  microscopist,
b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  19  Sept.,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  in  1855,
after  which  he  studied  theology  and  became  a  Uni-
versalist  clergyman.  His  attention  has  been  large-
ly devoted  to  microscopy,  in  which  science  he  has
achieved  eminence.  From  1870  to  1875  he  was  pro-
fessor of  microscopy  in  St.  Lawrence  university,
Canton,  N.  Y.,  and  since  1870  has  lectured  on  that
subject  in  Tufts  college  at  College  Hill,  Mass.  He
has  contributed  articles  on  his  specialty  to  periodi-
cals, and  published  sermons.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.  from  the  university  of  St.  Lawrence
in  1860,  and  that  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Tufts  college  in
1881.  Pie  is  a  member  of  several  scientific  societies,
to  whose  proceedings  he  has  contributed  papers.

BOLLES,  John  A.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Eastford,
Conn.,  16  April,  1809;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
25  May,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1829,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Boston  in  1833,  and  in
1843  chosen  secretary  of  state  under  Gov.  Marcus
Morton.  He  was  a  member  of  the  harbor  and  back
bay  commission  in  1852.  From  1862  till  1865  he
served  as  judge-advocate  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  John
A.  Dix,  who  was  his  brother-in-law.  He  was  bre-
vetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  1865,  and
appointed  naval  solicitor  the  same  year.

BOLLMAN,  Eric,  physician,  b.  in  Hoya,  Han-
over, in  1769;  d.  in  Jamaica,  W.  I.,  9  Dec,  1821.
He  studied  medicine  at  Gottingen,  and  practised  in
Carlsruhe  and  in  Paris,  where  he  settled  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  French  revolution.  He  accom-
panied Count  Narbonne,  who  fled  to  England  in
1792,  and  in  London  fell  in  with  Lally-Tollendal,
who  induced  him  to  go  to  Austria  and  endeavor  to
find  out  where  Gen.  Lafayette  was  kept  in  confine-
ment. He  established  himself  as  a  physician  in
Vienna.  Learning  that  Lafayette  was  a  prisoner
at  Olmiitz,  he  formed  a  plan  to  rescue  him  with
the  assistance  of  Francis  Kinlock  Huger,  a  young
American.  Communicating  with  the  prisoner
through  the  prison  surgeon,  the  two  fell  upon  his
guards  while  he  was  taking  exercise  in  a  carriage,
and  succeeded  in  getting  him  away  on  a  horse ;  but
he  rode  in  the  wrong  direction  and  was  recap-
tured. Dr.  Bollman  escaped  to  Prussia,  but  was
handed  over  to  the  Austrian  authorities,  who  kept
him  in  prison  for  nearly  a  year,  and  then  released
him  on  condition  that  he  should  leave  the  country.
He  came  to  the  United  States  and  was  well  re-
ceived ;  but  in  1806  was  implicated  in  Aaron  Burr's
conspiracy  and  was  Burr's  agent  in  New  Orleans.
In  1814  he  returned  to  Europe,  and,  after  another
visit  to  the  United  States,  took  up  his  residence  in
London.  He  published  "Paragraphs  on  Banks"
(2d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1811);  "Improved  System  of
the  Money  Concerns  of  the  Union"  (1816);  and
"  Strictures  on  the  Theories  of  M.  Ricardo."

BOLTON,  Henry  Carrington,  chemist,  b.  m
New  York  city,  28  Jan.,  1843.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbia  in  1862,  and  then  studied  chemistry  m
Paris  under  Wurtz  and  Dumas,  in  Heidelberg  un-
der Bunsen,  in  Gottingen  under  Wohler,  and  in
Berlin  under  Hofmann.  In  1866  he  received  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D,  from  the  University  of  Gottingen,  his
thesis  being  on  the  "  Fluorine  Compounds  of  Urani-
um." He  then  spent  some  years  in  travel,  and  from
1872  till  1877  was  assistant'in  quantitative  analysis
hi  the  Columbia  School  of  Mines.  In  1874  he  was
called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  the  Woman  s
Medical  College  of  the  New  York  Infirmary,  which


BOLTON


BONAPARTE


309


he  resigned  in  1877,  when  he  became  professor  of
chemistry  and  natural  science  in  Trinity  College.
The  celebration  of  the  centennial  of  chemistry  at
Northumberland,  Pa.,  the  home  of  Joseph  Priest-
ley, who  discovered  oxygen  in  1774,  was  suggested
and  brought  about  by  Dr.  Bolton.  Among  his  in-
vestigations, that  of  the  action  of  organic  acids  on
minerals  is  perhaps  the  most  important ;  but  most
of  his  work  has  been  literary,  and  his  private  col-
lection of  early  chemical  books  is  not  surpassed  in
the  United  States.  Dr.  Bolton  is  a  prominent
member  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Ad-
vancement of  Science,  and  was  its  general  secretary
in  1878  and  1879,  and  vice-president  of  the  chemi-
cal section  in  1882.  For  several  years  he  was  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  New  York  Academy  of
Sciences.  He  has  been  a  large  contributor  to  chem-
ical literature,  and  his  numerous  papers  may  be
found  in  the  "  American  Chemist,"  "  Proceedings
of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,"  '•  Chemi-
cal News  "  (London),  and  similar  periodicals.  In
1883  he  began  the  annual  preparation  of  a  "  Record
of  the  Progress  of  Chemistry  "  for  the  annual  re-
ports of  the  Smithsonian  institution.  Among  his
compilations  are  "  Literature  of  Uranium  "  (1870,
revised  ed.,  188G);  "Literature  of  Manganese"
(1877);  and  an  extensive  "Catalogue  of  Scientific
and  Technical  Periodicals,  1665-1882  "  (Smithsoni-
an institution,  Washington,  1885).  He  is  the  author
of  "  Student's  Guide  in  Quantitative  Analysis "
(New  York,  1879),  and  has  edited  several  minor
chemical  text-books.

BOLTON,  Sarah  Knowles,  author,  b.  in  Farm-
ington,  Conn.,  15  Sept.,  1841.  Her  maiden  name  was
Knowles.  She  married  Charles  E.  Bolton,  a  mer-
chant and  philanthropist.  She  has  written  exten-
sively for  the  press,  was  one  of  the  first  correspond-
ing secretaries  of  the  Woman's  national  temperance
union,  was  for  three  years  associate  editor  of  the
Boston  "  Congregationalist,"  and  travelled  for  two
vears  in  Europe,  studying  profit-sharing,  female
higher  education,  and  other  social  questions.  Her
published  works  are  "  Orlean  Lamar,  and  other
poems"  (New  York,  1868);  "The  Present  Prob-
lem," a  novelette  (1874) ;  "  How  Success  is  Won  "
(Boston,  1884) ;  "  Lives  of  Poor  Boys  Avho  became
Famous"  (New  York,  1885);  "Girls  who  became
Famous"  (1886);  "Social  Studies  in  England"
(Boston,  1886);  and  a  collection  of  short  stories
under  the  title  "  Stories  from  Life "  (New  York,
1886).  She  presented  a  paper  on  "  Employers  and
Employed  "  to  the  Social  science  association.  She
was  engaged  in  1886  on  a  joint  collection  of  poems
by  herself  and  her  son,  Charles  Knowles  Boltox.

BOLTON,  Sarah  Tittle,  poet,  b.  in  Newport,
Ky.,  18  Dec,  1815.  Her  father,  Jonathan  B.  Bar-
rett, removed  to  Indiana.  At  sixteen  she  wrote
Verses  for  a  newspaper,  and  married  the  editor,  Na-
thaniel Bolton.  In  1855  her  husband  was  appoint-
ed consul  at  Geneva,  and  during  the  two  years  that
she  spent  abroad  she  wrote  letters  to  American
newspapers.  She  has  contributed  many  short
poems  to  periodicals,  among  them  "  Paddle  Your
Own  Canoe"  and  "Left  on  the  Battlefield."  A
volume  of  her  poems  was  published  in  New  York
in  1865,  and  a  complete  collection,  with  a  life  by
Jonathan  W.  Gordon  (Indianapolis,  1886).

BOMBERGER,  John  Henry  An^ustus,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  13  Jan.,  1817.  He
was  graduated  at  Marshall  college  in  1837,  and  at
Mereersburg  theological  seminary  in  1838 ;  was  or-
damed  a  minister  of  the  German  Reformed  church
the  same  year,  was  a  pastor  at  Wavnesborough,  Pa.,
"\lS40-'5,  at  Easton,  Pa.,  in  184o-'54,  and  in  the
1st  Reformed  church  of  PhUadelphia  from  1854  till


1870,  when  he  became  president  of  Ursinus  college,
at  Collegeville,  Pa.  He  translated  six  volumes  of
Herzog's  "  Protestant  Theological  and  Ecclesiasti-
cal Encyclopaedia,"  condensed  into  two  volumes
(Philadelphia,  1856-'8),  and  published  "  Five  Years
at  Race  Street  Church  "  (1859) ;  "  The  Revised  Lit-
urgy "  (1866) ;  "  Reformed  not  Ritualistic  "  (1867).

BOMFORD,  George,  military  officer,  b.  in  New
York  in  1780:  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  25  March.  1848.
He  entered  West  Point  from  New  York,  was  grad-
uated in  1805,  and  became  lieutenant  in  the  corps
of  engineers.  He  served  as  assistant  engineer  on
the  fortifications  of  New  York  harbor  in  1805-8,
then  on  the  defences  of  Chesapeake  bay  from
1808  till  1810,  and  as  superintending  engmeer  of
the  works  on  Governor's  island  from  1810  till
1812.  During  the  war  of  1812-5  with  Great
Britain  he  served  in  the  ordnance  department,
with  the  rank  of  major  on  the  staff,  was  appointed
assistant  commissary-general  of  ordnance,  18  June,
1812,  and  attached  to  the  corps  of  engineers,  6  July,
1812.  He  introduced  bomb  cannons,  made  on  a
pattern  of  his  own  invention,  which  were  called
columbiads,  a  form  of  heavy  gun  combining  the
qualities  of  gun,  howitzer,  and  mortar.  He  was
promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  9  Feb.,  1815,  and  was
continued  on  ordnance  duty,  though  attached  to
the  artillery  after  the  reorganization  of  the  army
in  1821.  On  the  organization  of  the  ordnance
corps  he  was  promoted  colonel,  and  appointed
chief  of  ordnance,  30  May,  1832.  He  was  in  com-
mand of  the  ordnance  corps  and  bureau  at  Wash-
ington until  1  Feb.,  1842,  when  he  became  in-
spector of  arsenals,  ordnance,  arms,  and  munitions
of  war,  in  which  duty  he  continued  until  his  death.
The  cannons '  invented  by  him  were  further  de-
veloped by  Dahlgren,  but  were  superseded  by  the
Rodman  type  about  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  In  July,  1841,  he  conducted  experiments  to
ascertain  the  expansive  force  of  powder  in  a  gun
by  firing  bullets  through  tubes  inserted  in  the
sides. — His  son,  James  V.,  soldier,  b.  on  Gover-
nor's island.  New  York  harbor,  5  Oct.,  1811,  was
graduated  at  West  Point  in  1832,  and  served  as
first  lieutenant  in  the  military  occupation  of  Tex-
as, and  as  captain  in  the  war  with  Mexico.  He
was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto,  Resaca  de
la  Palma,  and  Monterey,  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,
the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  the  capture  of  San  An-
tonio, and  the  battle  of  Churubusco,  receiving  the
brevet  of  major,  20  Aug.,  1847,  for  gallantry  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco.  He  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  and  meritorious  con-
duct at  the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rey,  distinguished
himself  at  the  storming  of  Chapultepec,  and  was
present  at  the  capture  of  Mexico.  Serving  on
frontier  duty  in  Texas  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  he  was  promoted  major,  17  Oct.,  1860,
and  was  prisoner  of  war  from  9  May,  1861,  till  9
April,  1862.  On  10  Jan.,  1862,  he  was  made  a
lieutenant-colonel,  and,  after  his  return  to  his
regiment,  was  engaged  in  the  movements  of  Gen.
Buell's  army  in  Alabama  and  Kentucky.  At  the
battle  of  Perryville  he  served  as  chief  of  staff  to
Gen.  McCook,  and  received  the  brevet  of  colonel
for  meritorious  services  in  that  action.  He  was
retired  from  active  service  8  June,  1872.

BONAPARTE,  Charles  Lucien  Jules  Lau-
rent, prince  of  Canino  and  Musignano,  ornitholo-
gist, b.  in  Paris,  24  May,  1803  ;  d.  there,  30  July,
1857.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Lucien  Bonaparte,
and  in  1822  married  a  daughter  of  Joseph  Bona-
parte, king  of  Spain.  Soon  afterward  he  settled
with  his  father-in-law  in  Philadelphia,  and  during
his  residence  in  the  United  States  studied  the  orni-


310


BONAPARTE


BONAPARTE


thology  of  the  country.  In  1828  he  removed  to
Italy,  in  the  revolution  of  1848  was  a  leader  of  the
republican  party  in  Rome,  and  in  1849  was  chosen
vice-president  of  the  constituent  assembly.  After
the  occupation  of  Rome  by  French  troops,  he  re-
turned to  France,  but  was  expelled  by  order  of
Louis  Napoleon.  Permitted  to  return  to  Paris  in
1850,  he  became  in  1854  director  of  the  Jardin  des
Plantcs.  He  published  in  the  United  States  a
supplement  to  Wilson's  "  Ornithology,"  entitled
"  American  Ornithology,  or  History  of  the  Birds  of
the  United  States"  (4  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1825-'38),
containing  more  than  100  new  species  discovered
by  himself;  also  " Observations  on  the  Nomencla-
ture of  Wilson's  '  Ornithology,' "  printed  in  the
"Journal"  of  the  academy  of  Philadelphia;  a
"  Synopsis  of  the  Birds  of  the  United  States  "  in
the  "Annals"  of  the  lyceum  of  New  York;  a
"  Catalogue  of  the  Birds  of  the  United  States  "  in
the  "  Contributions  "  of  the  Maclurian  lyceum  of
Philadelphia;  and  other  papers  on  the  same  sub-
ject. In  Italy  he  was  the  originator  of  several
scientific  congresses,  and  lectured  and  wrote  exten-
sively on  American  and  European  ornithology  and
other  branches  of  natural  history.  He  published
"Specchio  Comparativo  delle  Ornithologie  di  Roma
e  di  Filadclfia  "  (Pisa,  1827),  presenting  a  compar-
ison between  birds  of  the  latitude  of  Philadel-
phia and  Italian  species ;  "  Iconografia  della  Fauna
Italica "  (Rome,  1833-41),  an  elaborate  illustrated
work  on  the  fauna  of  Italy ;  "  List  of  the  Birds  of
Europe  and  North  America"  (1838);  "Conspectus
Generum  Avium "  (Leyden,  1850) ;  "  Revue  cri-
tique de  I'ornithologie  Europcenne"  (Brussels,
1850) ;  in  collaboration  with  H.  Schlegel,  "  Mono-
graphic des  loxiens  "  (Leyden,  1850) ;  and,  after  his
return  to  Paris,  "  Catalogue  des  oiseaux  d'Eu-
rope"  (Paris,  1856);  also  a  descriptive  catalogue
of  pigeons  and  one  of  parrots,  prepared  in  conjunc-
tion with  M.  de  Pouance  and  published  after  his
death.  His  "  Memoirs,"  written  by  himself,  ap-
peared in  New  York  in  1836.

BONAPARTE,  Jerome,  king  of  Westphalia,  b.
in  Ajaccio,  Corsica,  15  Nov.,  1784;  d.  in  Villegenis,
near  Paris,  24  June,  1860.  He  entered  the  navy
in  1800,  and  in  1803,  during  a  visit  to  the  United
States,  married  Miss  Patterson,  of  Baltimore,  with-
out the  consent
of  his  family.
This  marriage
was  declared
null  by  Napo-
leon in  1806.
He  was  pro-
moted to  rear-
admiral  by  Na-
poleon in  1806,
and  in  the  same
year  was  trans-
ferred to  the
army,  becom-
ing a  general  of
brigade.  His
corps  gained
some  successes
in  Silesia  in
1807,andinJuly
of  that  year  his
brother  placed
him  on  the
throne  of  the
new  kingdom  of  Westphalia.  He  married  the  pnn-
cess  Catherine  of  Wlirtemberg,  in  August.  1807,  and
reigned  till  the  expulsion  of  the  French  from  Ger-
many in  October,  1813. After  Napoleon's  return


/^-^^.^ .^<=^  i.(7:


from  Elba,  Jerome  joined  him,  and  commanded  a
division  at  Waterloo,  winning  the  special  praise  of
Napoleon  for  his  gallantry  there.  After  living  in
exile  at  Trieste,  Rome,  and  Lausanne,  he  returned
to  France  in  1847,  and  became  a  field-marshal  in
1850.— His  wife.  Elizabeth  Patterson,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  6  Feb.,  1785 ;  d.  there,  4  April,  1879.
Her  father,  William  Patterson,  emigrated  from
Ulster  to  Amer-
ica when  a  lad,
pushed  his  way
in  business,  be-
came the  owner
of  a  line  of  clip-
per ships,  and,
Charles  Carroll,
of  Carrollton,
only  excepted,
was  the  wealthi-
est citizen  of
Maryland.  At
a  ball  at  the
house  of  Samuel
Cha^e,  a  signer
of  the  Declara-
tion of  Indepen-
dence, in  the  au-
tumn of  1803,
Capt.  Jerome  Bo-
naparte was  in-
troduced to  Miss
Patterson.  They  were  mutually  pleased ;  but  her
father,  foreseeing  that  his  daughter's  marriage  with
a  youth  with  such  brilliant  prospects  would  prove
distasteful  to  the  first  consul,  forbade  the  court-
ship, and  sent  his  daughter  to  Virginia.  The  lov-
ers contrived  to  correspond,  and  in  a  short  time  be-
came engaged,  and  Jerome  went  so  far  as  to  pro-
cure a  marriage  license.  The  match  was  postponed
until  24  Dec,  1803,  when  Jerome  would  have
passed  his  nineteenth  birthday.  All  legal  formali-
ties were  carefully  complied  with;  the  contract
was  drawn  up  by  Alexander  Dallas,  afterward  sec-
retary of  the  treasury,  and  the  vice-consul  of  France,
the  mayor  of  Baltimore,  and  many  other  digni-
taries witnessed  the  ceremony,  which  was  solem-
nized by  Archbishop  Carroll.  Joseph  and  Lucien
advised  Jerome  to  become  an  American  citizen,
and  took  steps  to  procure  him  a  provision  enabling
him  to  live  there  in  accordance  wdth  his  rank.
From  first  to  last  Napoleon  remained  obdurate.
Jerome  received  a  message  from  his  brother  to  the
effect  that  if  he  left  the  "  young  person  "  hi  Amer-
ica, his  youthful  indiscretion  would  be  forgiven;
if  he  brought  her  with  him,  she  should  not  put  a
foot  on  French  territory.  Capt.  Bonaparte  and  his
wife  sailed  in  March,  1805,  on  one  of  Mr.  Patter-
son's ships,  reached  Lisbon,  and  found  a  French
frigate  there  to  prevent  her  landing.  Jerome  left
his  young  wife  and  went  to  Paris  to  plead  her
cause  with  the  emperor,  while  the  vessel  proceeded
to  Amsterdam.  At  the  mouth  of  the  Texel  two
men-of-war  awaited  her,  and  Elizabeth  Bonaparte
was  forced  to  seek  an  asylum  in  England.  Pitt
sent  a  regiment  to  Dover  to  prevent  mischief,  so
great  was  the  multitude  that  thronged  thither  to
witness  her  landing.  A  few  days  later  her  son,  Je-
rome Napoleon  Bonaparte,  was  born,  7  July,  180;,
at  Camberwell.  Here  she  continued  to  reside,  con-
stantly receiving  messages  and  letters  from  Jerome,
protesting  his  fidelity  and  affection.  Napoleon
applied  to  Pius  VII.  to  dissolve  the  marriage,  which
the  pontiff  steadfastly  refused ;  but  a  decree  of  di-
vorce was  passed  by  the  imperial  council  of  state.
On  condition  of  her  going  to  America,  the  emperor


BONAPARTE


BONAPARTE


311


offered  Madame  Bonaparte  a  pension  during  her
life  of  60,000  francs  a  year,  "  provided  she  does  not
taice  the  name  of  my  family,"  and  after  some  time
she  consented  to  return  to  America,  hoping  thus
to  conciliate  her  imperial  brother-in-law.  When
Jerome  was  admitted  to  Napoleon's  presence,  the
emperor  upbraided  him  rudely,  and  concluded:
"  As  for  your  affair  with  your  little  girl,  I  do  not  re-
gard it."  As  a  reward  for  his  desertion,  Jerome  was
created  a  prince  of  the  empire,  and  was  promoted
admiral.  He  received  subsequently  the  rank  of
general.  In  1806  he  was  made  by  the  senate  suc-
cessor to  the  imperial  throne  in  the  event  of
Napoleon's  leaving  no  male  heir,  and  in  1807  was
created  king  of  Westphalia.  On  12  Aug.,  1807,  he
married  Catherine  Frederica,  princess  of  Wiirtem-
burg.  By  his  second  marriage  he  had  three  chil-
dren, of  whom  the  surviving  son,  Prince  Napo-
leon, is  dynastic  heir  to  the  imperial  throne.
Madame  Bonaparte  employed  every  means  to  main-
tain the  legality  of  her  marriage  and  the  legitima-
cy of  her  son.  When  Napoleon  III.  mounted  the
throne,  a  formal  trial  was  granted  her.  Jerome,
the  father,  appealed  to  the  council  of  state  to  for-
bid "Jerome  Patterson"  to  assume  the  name  of
Bonaparte.  Nevertheless,  the  council  decreed  that
the  son  of  Madame  Elizabeth  Patterson  was  enti-
tled to  the  name  of  Bonaparte,  although  he  could
not  be  recognized  as  a  member  of  the  imperial
family.  After  the  death  of  Jerome  she  brought
suit  for  a  share  in  his  estate;  but  documentary
proofs,  the  fact  that  the  validity  of  her  mar-
riage had  been  sustained  by  the  church,  and  the
zeal  and  eloquence  of  her  advocate,  Berryer,  did
not  prevent  an  adverse  decision,  probably  inspired
by  the  imperial  court.  Her  son  was,  however,  rec-
ognized by  official  decree  as  a  legitimate  child  of
Prance.  Jerome  Bonaparte,  the  son,  refused  to
sue  for  the  hand  of  a  daughter  of  Joseph  Bona-
parte, as  his  mother  desired,  and  married  Miss
Williams,  of  Roxbury,  Mass.  Alienated  by  her
proud  and  ambitious  temper  both  from  her  son
and  her  father,  Madame  Bonaparte  passed  much
of  her  time  in  Europe,  where  her  unfortunate  po-
sition attracted  sympathy  and  attention.  She  in-
herited a  part  of  her  father's  wealth  in  the  form
of  real  property  in  Baltimore,  which  rose  in  value
and  made  her  a  millionaire.  She  became  penurious
and  misanthropic,  but  retained  her  noble  manner
and  brilliant  conversational  powers.  She  passed
many  winters  in  Florence,  and  counted  with  pride
royal  and  distinguished  persons  among  her  ac-
quaintance. After  the  downfall  of  the  second  em-
pire and  the  death  of  Napoleon  III.,  she  actively
put  forward  the  claims  of  her  grandson.  Col.  Bona-
parte, who  had  served  with  distinction  in  the  French
army,  and  hoped  to  see  him  called  to  the  regency,  or
perhaps  to  the  imperial  throne. — Jerome  Napo-
leon, Madame  Bonaparte's  son,  b.  in  Camberwell,
England,  7  Julv,  1805;  d.  in  Baltimore,  where  he
had  passed  his  life,  17  June,  1870.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1826,  and  studied  law,  but  did
not  practise.  He  was  never  naturalized  as  an  Ameri-
can citizen,  and  cultivated  terms  of  intimacy  with
his  father  and  the  French  court.  His  management
of  his  inherited  fortune  and  the  property  that  came
to  him  by  marriage  made  him  one  of  the  richest
residents  of  Baltimore.  He  left  two  sons,  who  in-
herited his  and  their  grandmother's  wealth.— The
elder,  Jerome  Napoleon,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in
1832,  jvas  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1852,  and  served  on  the  Texas  frontier.  He  re-
signed from  the  service  on  16  Aug.,  1854,  and  was
appointed  a  lieutenant  of  di-agoons  in  the  French
imperial  army. He  served  through  the  Crimean


war,  distinguishing  himself  at  Balaklava,  Inkerman,
Tchernaia,  and  the  siege  of  Sebastopol,  and  received
the  decoration  of  the  Medjidie  order  from  the  sul-
tan of  Turkey,  the  Crimean  medal  from  the  queen
of  England,  and  became  a  knight  of  the  legion
of  honor.  Being  then  transferred  to  the  chasseurs
d'Afrique,  he  served  as  lieutenant,  and  afterward
as  captain  in  that  corps  in  the  Algerian  campaign
of  1857,  and  in  several  actions  against  the  Kabyles.
In  the  Italian  campaign  against  Austria  he  served
with  distinction  in  the  battles  of  Montebello  and
Solferino  and  in  various  skirmishes,  receiving
French  and  Italian  decorations.  He  was  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  chef  d'escadron  in  1865,  and
in  1867  transferred  to  the  empress's  dragoon
guards. — The  younger  grandson  of  Madame  Bona-
parte, Charles  Joseph,  b.  in  Baltimore.  Md.,  9
June,  1851,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1871,
and  at  the  Harvard  law  school  in  1874,  was  admit-
ted to  practice,  and  has  attained  a  respectable  rank
at  the  Baltimore  bar.

BONAPARTE,  Joseph,  king  of  Spain,  b.  in
Corte.  Corsica,  7  Jan.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Florence,  Italy,
28  July,  1844.  He  was  the  elder  brother  of  Napo-
leon Bonaparte,  became  an  advocate  in  Corsica,  and
was  an  early  supporter  of  the  French  revolution.
He  was  military  commissary  of  Napoleon's  army  in
Italy  in  1796,  French  minister  to  Rome  in  1797,
and  afterward  member  of  the  council  of  five  hun-
dred, of  the  tribunate,  and  of  the  council  of  state  in
Paris.  By  his  shrewd  statecraft  and  engaging
manners  he  rendered  his  brother  effective  assistr-
ance  in  his  political  schemes.  He  negotiated  the
treaty  of  peace  with  the  United  States  in  1800,  the
treaty  with  Germany  in  1801,  and  the  treaty  with
Great  Britain  at  Amiens  in  1802.  He  was  sent
with  an  army  to  Naples  in  February,  1806,  and  en-
tered the  city  and  assumed,  in  obedience  to  Napo-
leon's commands,  the  title  of  king.  In  1808  he  re-
luctantly exchanged  the  throne  of  Naples  for  that
of  Spain.  His  rule  being  regulated  by  his  brother's
policy  and  not  by  his  own  well-meaning  impulses,
he  was  twice  driven  out  of  Madrid  by  hostile
armies,  and  twice  reinstated,  but  in  June,  1813,
was  defeated  by  Wellington  at  V  ittoria,  and  soon
afterward  left  Spain.  In  January,  1814,  he  was
appointed  lieutenant-general  of  the  empire  in  the
absence  of  Napoleon,  and  in  March  he  consented
to  the  capitulation  of  Paris.  When  Napoleon  re-
turned in  1815,  Joseph  went  to  Paris  and  exerted
himself  to  obtain  the  support  of  his  influential
friends  for  a  restoration  of  the  empire  under  con-
stitutional guarantees.  He  had  a  single  interview
with  his  brother  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  ar-
ranged to  meet  him  in  the  United  States,  and  sailed
for  New  York  from  Royan,  25  July,  1815,  under
the  assumed  name  of  Comte  de  Survilliers.  He
bought  a  mansion  in  Philadelphia,  and  a  country-
seat  near  Bordentown,  N.  J .  An  act  to  enable  him
to  hold  real  estate  was  passed  by  the  legislature  of
New  Jersey  in  1817,  and  when  he  acquired  a  sum-
mer-place on  the  edge  of  the  Adirondack  forest  a
similar  law  was  enacted  by  the  New  York  assembly.
He  was  accompanied  to  the  United  States  by  his
two  daughters  and  the  prince  of  Canino,  husband
of  the  elder  daughter,  Zenaide ;  but  his  wife,  who
was  the  daughter  of  a  merchant  of  Marseilles  and
sister  of  the  queen  of  Sweden,  remained  an  inva-
lid in  Europe.  His  benevolence  and  hospitality,
his  affable  and  courtly  manners,  and  his  knowledge
and  taste,  made  him  a  general  favorite.  He  en-
deavored to  advance  the  claims  of  Napoleon  II.
after  the  revolution  of  July,  1830,  and  in  1832,
when  the  duke  of  Reichstadt  fell  ill,  he  went  to
Europe,  but  remained  in  England  upon  hearing  of


312


BONARD


BOND


his  nephew's  death.  He  returned  to  the  United
States  in  1837,  but  remained  only  two  years.  Ob-
taining permission  in  1841  to  reside  in  Italy,  he
passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  Florence.  The
confidential  letters  that  passed  between  him  and
Napoleon  1.  were  published  in  "  Memoires  et  cor-
respondance  politique  et  militaire  du  roi  Joseph,"
by  A.  du  Casse.  See  also  "  Memoires,"  by  Miot  de
Melito,  and  "  Biographical  Sketch  of  Joseph  Bona-
parte "  (London,  1888).

BONARD,  Louis,  raiser,  b.  in  Rouen,  France,
in  1809 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  20  Feb.,  1871.  Of
his  life  previous  to  his  coming  to  the  United  States
in  1851  nothing  is  known.  During  his  residence
in  New  York  city  he  occupied,  in  squalor  and
wretchedness,  a  room  six  by  eight  feet  in  dimen-
sions on  an  obscure  street.  Heavy  wooden  bars
were  fastened  across  the  solitary  dingy  window,  and
bars  and  bolts  protected  the  door.  The  room  was
devoid  of  furniture,  save  a  broken  table,  a  mattress
lifted  from  the  floor  by  a  few  boards  supported  by
bricks,  and  a  trunk.  There  was  no  fire  and  no
place  for  one.  On  14  Feb.,  a  few  days  before  his
death,  he  sent  a  message  to  Henry  Bergh,  of  the
society  for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals,
whom  he  had  never  met,  and  desired  to  make  his
will.  In  it  was  revealed  that  he  had  property  to
the  value  of  $150,000,  all  of  which  was  devised  to
Mr.  Bergh's  society.  The  trunk  was  filled  with
gold  and  silver  watches  in  alternate  layers,  together
with  a  large  quantity  of  jewelry  and  diamonds.
Bonard's  remains  were  buried  in  Greenwood  ceme-
tery and  a  suitable  memorial  erected  over  them.

BOND,  Henry,  physician  and  genealogist,  b.  in
Watertown,  Mass.,  2rMarch,  1790;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  4  May,  1859.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Col.
William  Bond,  of  the  revolutionary  army,  who  died
near  Ticonderoga,  31  Aug.,  1776.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1813,  studied  medicine,  and
practised  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  and  from  November,
1819,  till  his  death,  in  Philadelphia.  For  several
years  he  was  president  of  the  Philadelphia  board  of
health.  Besides  numerous  contributions  to  medi-
cal and  other  journals,  he  published  a  remarkably
thorough  genealogical  work  entitled  "  Genealogies
of  the  Families  and  Descendants  of  the  Early  Set-
tlers of  Watertown,  Mass.,  including  Waltham  and
Weston  "  (Boston,  1856).

BOND,  John  R.  S.,  journalist,  b.  in  Ohio  in  1822 ;
d.  in  Chillicdthe,  Ohio,  in  December,  1872.  He  was
the  son  of  a  pioneer  of  Ohio.  In  his  youth  he
travelled  on  horseback  through  the  wilderness  to
Kankakee  river,  and  then  in  a  skiff  down  that
river  and  the  Mississippi  to  St.  Louis.  He  owned
at  different  times  as  many  as  eight  western  news-
papers, was  the  founder  of  the  Louisville  "  Courier-
Journal,"  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  editor
of  the  Scioto  '  Gazette."

BOND,  Shadrack,  governor  of  Illinois,  b.  in
Maryland;  d.  in  Kaskaskia,  111.,  13  April,  1832.
He  received  a  liberal  education  and  removed  to
Kaskaskia,  then  in  Indiana  territory,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  of  the  territory  of  Illinois,
and  was  its  first  delegate  to  congress,  serving  from
8  Dec,  1812,  till  18  April,  1814.  In  1814  he  was
appointed  receiver  of  public  moneys,  and  when  Illi-
nois became  a  state  he  was  elected  its  first  govern-
or, serving  from  1818  till  1822.

BOND,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Maryland  in
1712  ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1784.  He  was  a
distinguished  practitioner  of  Philadelphia,  deliv-
ered the  first  clinical  lectures  in  the  Pennsylvania
hospital,  and  was  associated  with  Dr.  Franklin  and
Dr.  John  Bartram,  the  botanist,  in  a  literary  so-
ciety of  that  city.


BOND,  Thomas  Emerson,  Journalist,  b.  in  Bal-
timore, Md.,  in  February,  1782;  d.  in  New  York,
14  March,  1856.  He  studied  medicine  in  Philadel-
phia and  Baltimore,  practised  with  success  in  Bal-
timore, and  was  called  to  a  chair  in  the  medical
college  of  Maryland,  which  after  a  few  years  he
resigned  on  account  of  failing  health.  For  many
years  he  was  a  local  preacher  in  the  Methodist
lEpiscopal  church.  During  the  controversy  carried
on  from  1816  till  1880  over  reform  in  church
government,  which  resulted  in  the  secession  of  the
opponents  of  the  episcopate  and  advocates  of  lay
representation  in  1880  and  the  formation  of  the
Methodist  Protestant  churcli,  he  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  discussion.  In  1827  he  published  an
appeal  to  Methodists,  directed  against  the  proposed
changes,  in  1828  a  "Narrative  and  Defence  of  the
Church  Authorities,"  and  in  1881  and  1882  he
defended  the  polity  of  Episcopal  Methodism  in  a
journal  printed  in  Baltimore  called  the  "Itiner-
ant," of  which  he  was  editor.  He  subsequently
edited  for  twelve  years  the  "Christian  Advocate
and  Journal,"  the  leading  Methodist  organ,  of
which  he  assumed  charge  in  1840.  He  contributed
important  articles  to  the  "Methodist  (Quarterly."
— His  son,  Thomas  Emerson,  journalist,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1818,  d.  in  Plarford  co.,  MA.,
18  Aug.,  1872,  early  became  a  local  Methodist
preacher,  and  also  studied  medicine  and  took  his
degree  in  Baltimore.  His  father  was  editor  of  the
Baltimore  "  Christian  Advocate  and  Journal,"  and
young  Bond  became  his  etficient  assistant,  distin-
guished for  humor  and  sarcastic  power.  In  18G0,
pending  the  difficulties  that  culminated  in  the
civil  war,  he  joined  the  southern  Methodist  church,
and  gave  his  abilities  to  the  cause  of  the  south.
After  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  one  of  the  origi-
nators of  the  "  Episcopal  Methodist,"  the  organ  of
the  southern  church,  but  subsequently  severed  his
connection  with  that:  paper  and  established  another
journal  in  the  same  interest.  After  publishing
that  for  a  short  time  he  consolidated  it  with  the
"  Southern  Christian  Advocate,"  published  simul-
taneously in  Baltimore  and  St.  Louis,  of  which  he
was  associate  editor. — Another  son,  Hugh  L.,  ju-
rist, b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  16  Dec,  1828,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  university  of  the  city  of  New  York  in
1848,  returned  to  Baltimore,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1851,  and  practised  in  Balti-
more. He  took  part  in  the  Know-nothing  move-
ment. In  March,  1860,  he  was  appointed  judge  of
the  Baltimore  criminal  court,  and  on  5  Nov.,  18(51,
was  elected  by  the  people  to  that  office,  which  he
held  during  the  trying  times  of  the  war.  After
the  massacre  of  national  soldiers  on  19  April,  18C1,
when  the  city  authorities  decided  that  no  more
northern  troojDs  should  be  allowed  to  pass  through
Baltimore,  he  charged  the  grand  jury  that  those
who  took  part  in  the  riot  were  guilty  of  murder.
The  police  commissioners  made  an  order  forbid-
ding the  display  of  any  flag ;  but  the  seventy-five
loyalists  that  were  arrested  under  this  order  for
raising  the  national  standard  were  discharged  on
habeas  corpus  by  Judge  Bond.  In  later  years,
when  several  military  commissioners  undertook  to
sit  in  Baltimore  and  try  citizens  for  offences
against  the  United  States,  he  charged  the  grand
jury  to  indict  the  olflcers  on  these  commissions,
because  they  had  no  jurisdiction  over  persons  not
in  the  military  service  of  the  government,  especiaJ-
ly  when  the  civil  courts  were  open.  Shortly  be-
fore the  close  of  his  term.  Gov.  Swann  claimed  the
right  to  remove  the  police  commissioners  and  ap-
point others,  and  when  the  de  facto  commissioners  \
fortified  the  station-houses,  and  armed  the  police


BOND


BONNER


313


to  defend  their  right  to  the  office,  authorized  his
appointees  to  raise  followers  sufficient  to  put  the
resisting  commissioners  out,  and  called  upon  Presi-
dent Johnson  to  send  federal  troops  to  interfere.
Judge  Bond  told  Gen.  Grrant,  who  came  to  investi-
gate the  situation,  that  the  de  facto  commissioners
would  obey  a  written  order  from  the  president
brought  by  a  single  soldier  bearing  the  U.  S.  flag ;
but  tiiat.  if  the  federal  authorities  declined  to  in-
terfere, he  would  arrest  the  Swann  commissioners,
and  hold  them  to  bail  to  keep  the  peace,  which  was
accordingly  done.  After  the  emancipation  of  the
slaves  under  the  revised  constitution  of  1864,  the
slave-holders  took  advantage  of  an  old  apprentice
law,  and  had  the  children  of  the  free  negroes
brought  to  the  probate  courts  and  apprenticed  to
themselves.  Judge  Bond  decided  that  these  ap-
prentices were  held  in  involuntary  servitude,  and
released,  on  habeas  corpus,  all  that  were  brought
before  him.  He  was  a  prominent  member  of  an
association  for  the  education  of  colored  people,  to
which  his  friend,  Sec.  Stanton,  transferred  all  the
federal  barracks  in  Maryland  for  the  purpose  of
building  school-houses.  With  assistance  from  the
freedmen's  aid  societies,  schools  were  established
in  all  the  counties  of  the  state,  and  Judge  Bond
visited  every  locality,  and  made  speeches  intended
to  overcome  the  prejudices  of  the  people  against
the  schools,  which  frequently  broke  out  into  vio-
lence. He  lost  his  seat  on  the  bench  in  1868,  when
the  democrats  obtained  political  ascendency  in  the
state,  and  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  Balti-
more. On  13  July,  1870,  President  Grant  nomi-
nated him  judge  of  the  4th  circuit  of  the  U.  S.
court,  which  includes  the  states  of  Maryland,  the
two  Virginias,  and  the  two  Carolinas.  In  1871  he
conducted,  at  Raleigh,  N.  C,  and  Columbia,  S.  C,
many  trials  of  ku-klux  conspirators,  more  than
100  of  whom  he  sentenced  to  the  penitentiary.

BOND,  William  Bennett,  Canadian  bishop,  b.
in  Truro,  Cornwall,  England,  in  1815.  At  an  early
age  he  emigrated  to  Newfoundland,  and  in  1841
was  ordained  a  priest  of  the  church  of  England.
Under  the  direction  of  Bishop  Mountain,  of  Que-
bec, he  organized  many  mission  stations  in  the
eastern  townships  of  Canada  East,  and  finally  took
charge  of  the  parish  of  St.  George's,  Montreal.  He
maintained  his  connection  with  this  parish  for
thirty  years,  successively  becoming  archdeacon  of
Hochelaga  and  dean  of  Montreal,  and  in  1879  bish-
op of  Montreal.  Bishop  Bond  is  president  of  the
theological  college  of  the  diocese  of  Montreal,  and
is  an  LL.  D.  of  McGill  university.

BOND,  William  Cranch,  astronomer,  b.  in
Portland,  Me.,  9  Sept.,  1789;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1859.  He  was  the  son  of  a  watch-
maker, and  was  brought  up  to  that  trade,  but  at
the  same  time  studied  astronomy  and  conducted
observations  in  a  private  observatory  that  he  built
in  Dorchester.  In  1815  he  went  to  Europe  to  carry
out  a  commission  for  Harvard  university  with  ref-
erence to  a  contemplated  observatory.  In  1838
the  U.  S.  government  commissioned  him  to  con-
duct a  series  of  astronomical  and  meteorological
observations  in  connection  with  the  exploring  ex-
pedition to  the  South  sea.  He  superintended  the
erection  of  the  Harvard  observatory  in  1839  and
became  its  director.  The  result  of  his  observations
was  published  in  the  "  Annals  of  the  Observatory  of
Harvard  College."  Those  on  Saturn  and  the  fixed
stars  gave  him  an  extensive  reputation.  He  was
associated  with  his  son,  George  Phillips,  in  the  dis-
covery of  the  eighth  satellite  of  Saturn  and  of  the
single  moon  of  Neptune,  and  was  also  one  of  the
earliest  astronomers  that  employed  photography  to


record  the  aspects  of  heavenly  bodies. — His  son,
George  Phillips,  astronomer,  b.  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  in  1825,  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  17  Feb.,  1865,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1845,  and  in  February,
1859,  was  appointed  professor  of  astronomy  and
director  of  the  observatory  of  Harvard  college.
Among  other  works  he  wrote  "  A  Treatise  on  the
Construction  of  the  Rings  of  Saturn,"  in  which  their
fluid  nature  was  first  established ;  another  on  the
"  Elements  of  the  Orbits  of  Hyperion  and  the  Sat-
ellite of  Neptune,'"  having  participated  in  the  dis-
covery of  both.  He  published  papers  also  on  the
nebula  of  Andromeda,  on  various  comets,  and  on
stellar  photography.  The  royal  astronomical  so-
ciety of  London  voted  a  gold  medal  to  Mr.  Bond
for  a  work  on  the  Donati  comet  (Cambridge,  1862).

BONDI,  Jonas,  Jewish  rabbi,  b.  in  Dresden,
Saxony,  15  July,  1804;  d.  in  New  York,  11  March,
1874.  He  received  a  thorough  secular  and  theo-
logical education  at  Prague,  but  did  not  enter  upon
the  active  duties  of  the  ministry  until  his  call  to
New  York  in  1859  as  rabbi  of  a  synagogue.  At
the  expiration  of  his  term  he  engaged  in  literary
pursuits,  contributing  to  the  "  Occident,"  of  Phila-
delphia, and  establishing  in  New  York  the  "  Hebrew
Leader,"  which  he  edited  until  his  death.  Dr.
Bondi  was  earnest  and  eloquent  as  a  speaker  and
writer  in  the  German  language,  regarded  as  an
authority  on  Talmudical  and  rabbinical  questions,
and  belonged  to  the  conservative  school  of  Jewish
thought.  He  was  prominently  connected  with  J  ew-
ish  charitable  organizations.

BONHAM,  Milled^e  L.,  soldier,  b.  in  South
Carolina,  6  May,  1815  :  d.  in  White  Sulphur  Springs,
Va.,  28  Aug.,  1890.  He  was  graduated  in  1834,  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  at  Columbia  in  1837,  and  settled
and  began  practice  in  Edgefield.  In  the  Mexican
war  he  commanded  a  battalion  of  South  Carolina
volunteers.  From  1848  till  1850  he  was  state  so-
licitor for  the  southern  circuit,  in  1856  elected  to
congress  as  a  state-rights  democrat,  and  in  1858
re-elected.  On  21  Dec,  1860,  he  left  congress  with
the  other  members  of  the  South  Carolina  delega-
tion. He  was  a  commissioner  from  South  Caro-
lina to  Mississippi,  and  detailed  as  major-general
to  command  the  South  Carolina  troops.  He  en-
tered the  confederate  army  with  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general, and  commanded  a  brigade  at  the  bat-
tles of  Blackburn's  Ford  and  Bull  Run.  He  was
then  elected  a  representative  from  South  Carolina
in  the  confederate  congress,  and  served  until  he
was  elected  governor  of  that  state  for  the  term
1862-4.  In  1864  he  returned  to  the  confederate
army,  and  served  until  the  close  of  the  war.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  national  democratic  conven-
tion held  in  New  York  in  1868.

BONNER,  Robert,  publisher,  b.  near  London-
derry, Ireland,  28  April,  1824,  His  parents  were
Scotch-Irish  Presbyterians.  He  came  to  the  United
States  and  learned  the  printer's  trade.  In  1839  he
was  employed  in  the  office  of  the  Hartford  "  Cour-
ant,"  where  he  gained  the  reputation  of  being  the
most  rapid  compositor  in  Connecticut.  In  1844
he  removed  to  New  York,  and  in  1851  purchased
the  "  Ledger,"  at  that  time  an  insignificant  sheet.
By  printing  the  most  popular  class  of  interesting
stories,  he  gave  the  paper  a  wide  circulation,  which
was  further  extended  by  the  contributions  of  Fanny
Fern,  Edward  Everett,  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  and
other  eminent  authors  and  clergymen.  He  has
made  large  gifts  of  money  to  Princeton  college,
and  to  various  charities.  To  gratify  his  taste  for
fast  horses,  he  has  purchased  several  of  the  most
celebrated  trotters  in  the  world,  but  withdrawn
them  from  the  race-course. Among  his  horses  are


814


BONNER


BONVOULOIR


Peerless,  Dexter,  and  Maud  S.,  which  he  purchased,
with  a  record  of  2.09f ,  afterward  reduced  to  2.08f ,
from  William  H.  Vanderbilt  for  |40,000.

BONNER,  Sherwood. See  McDowell,  Kate.

BONNEVILLE,  Benjamin  L.  E.,  explorer,  b.
in  France  about  1795 ;  d.  at  Fort  Smith,  Ark.,  12
June,  1878.  He  was  appointed  to  West  Point  from
New  York,  was  graduated  in  1815,  became  lieu-
tenant of  artillery,  and  in  1820  was  engaged  in
the  construction  of  a  military  road  through  Mis-
sissippi. He  became  a  captain  of  infantry  in  1825,
and  in  1831-6  engaged  in  explorations  in  the
Rocky  mountains  and  in  California.  His  journal
was  edited  and  amplified  by  Washington  Irving,
and  published  under  the  title  of  "  Adventures  of
Captain  Bonneville,  U.  S.  A.,  in  the  Rocky  Moun-
tains and  the  Far  West "  (Philadelphia,  1837).  He
was  promoted  major,  15  July,  1845,  and  fought
through  the  Mexican  war,  taking  part  in  the  march
through  Chihuahua,  in  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  the
battle  of  Cerro  Gordo,  the  capture  of  San  Antonio,
the  battle  of  Churubusco,  where  he  was  wounded,
the  battle  of  Molino  del  Rev,  the  storming  of  Cha-
pultepec,  and  the  assault  and  capture  of  the  city
of  Mexico.  For  gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Chu-
rubusco he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel.  He
was  promoted  to  the  full  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel
on  7  May,  1849,  and  to  the  grade  of  colonel  on  3
Feb.,  1855.  He  was  commandant  at  Santa  Fe  in
1856-7,  commanded  the  Gila  expedition  in  1857,
resumed  command  of  the  department  of  New
Mexico  in  1858,  and  on  9  Sept.,  1861,  was  retired
from  active  service  for  disability.  During  the
civil  war  he  served  as  superintendent  of  recruiting
in  Missouri,  and  from  1862  till  1865  as  commandant
of  Benton  barracks  in  St.  Louis.  On  13  March,
1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  long
and  faithful  services.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  the  oldest  officer  on  the  retired  list.

BONNEVILLE,  C.  de,  French  engineer,  b.  in
Lyons  about  1710 ;  d.  about  1780.  He  served  as
captain  of  engineers  in  the  beginning  of  the  seven
years'  war  in  Prussia,  and  afterward  in  America,
until  the  close  of  the  war  in  1763.  During  his
stay  in  America  he  studied  the  productions  of  the
country  and  the  manners  of  the  inhabitants,  and,
besides  other  works,  published  in  1771  "  De  I'Ame-
rique  et  des  Americains."

BONNYCASTLE,  Sir  Richard  Henry,  Eng-
lish soldier,  b.  in  1791 ;  d.  in  1848.  He  served  in
Canada  during  the  war  in  1812,  became  a  captain
of  engineers  in  1825,  and  took  part  in  the  capture
of  Fort  Castine  and  the  occupation  of  the  Maine
coast  east  of  Penobscot.  He  commanded  the  en-
gineers in  Canada  West  during  the  rebellion  of
1837-'9,  was  knighted  for  services  in  the  defence
of  Kingston  in  1838,  was  subsequently  commander
of  engineers  in  Newfoundland,  and  in  1848  was
made  lieutenant-colonel.  Most  of  his  life  was
passed  in  British  North  America.  He  published
"  Spanish  America  "  (London,  1818 ;  Philadelphia,
1819);  "The  Canadas  in  1842"  (London,  1842):
'•Canada  and  the  Canadians  in  1846"  (London,
1846) ;  and  "  Canada  as  it  Was,  Is,  and  May  be,"
edited  by  Sir  J.  E.  Alexander  (1846).— His  brother,
Charles,  mathematician,  b.  in  Woolwich,  England,
in  1792 ;  d.  in  Charlottesville,  Va.,  in  October,  1840.
He  was  a  son  of  John  Bonnycastle,  professor  of
mathematics  at  Woolwich  military  academy,  and
assisted  his  father  in  the  preparation  of  mathe-
matical text-books,  besides  contributing  to  cyclo-
paedias and  periodicals.  At  the  organization  of
the  University  of  Virginia,  in  1825,  he  came  over
to  take  the  professorship  of  natural  philosophy,
which  he  exchanged  in  1827  for  that  of  mathemat-


ics. He  published  treatises  on  "  Inductive  Geome-
try "  (Philadelphia,  1832) :  '•  Algebra  "  (New  York) ;
"  Mensuration  "  (Philadelphia) ;  and  various  papers
on  scientific  subjects.

BONPLAND,  Aim6,  French  traveller,  b.  in
La  Rochelle,  France,  22  Aug.,  1773 ;  d.  in  Santa
Anna,  Uruguay,  11  May,  1858.  He  studied
medicine  in  Paris,  was  surgeon  on  a  war  vessel
afterward  studied  under  Corvisart,  and  became  in-
timate with  Alexander  von  Humboldt,  whom  he
accompanied  in  the  explorations  described  in
"  Travels  to  the  Equinoctial  Regions  of  the  New
Continent."  The  collections  made  during  his  five
years'  travels  in  Mexico,  Colombia,  and  the  Ori-
noco and  Amazon  valleys  were  presented  by  him
to  the  French  government,  which  rewarded  him
with  a  pension,  and  appointed  him  superintendent
of  the  gardens  at  Malmaison.  He  collected  and
classified  about  6,000  plants,  for  the  most  part
previously  unknown,  which  he  afterward  deseril»(l
in  "  Plantes  equinoxiales  "  (Paris,  1806-10).  After
endeavoring  to  persuade  Napoleon  to  retire  to  the
United  States,  he  departed  for  Buenos  Ayres  in
1816,  taking  with  him  a  number  of  European  plants.
In  Buenos  Ayres  he  was  appointed  professor  of
natural  history,  but  this  office  he  soon  resigned  in
order  to  explore  the  central  parts  of  South  America.
In  Paraguay  he  was  arrested  as  a  spy  in  1821  by
order  of  Dr.  Francia,  and  was  a  prisoner  for  ten
years,  during  which  period  he  devoted  his  services
as  a  physician  gratuitously  to  the  poor.  On  re-
gaining his  liberty  he  settled  at  San  Borje,  in  Cor-
rientes,  where  the  government  of  the  province
presented  him  with  an  estate.  In  1853  he  removed
to  Santa  Anna,  where  he  gave  his  attention  to  the
cultivation  of  the  orange-tree,  which  he  introduced,
as  well  as  to  scientific  research.  His  principal  work
was  "  Nova  Genera  et  Species  Plantarum  (Paris,
1815-'29).

BONVOULOIR,  M.  de,  diplomatic  agent,  bom
and  died  in  France  during  the  18th  century.  He
was  the  secret  envoy  of  Vergennes,  the  French
minister  of  state,  through  whom  the  negotiations
were  opened  in  1775  that  resulted  in  French  inter-
vention for  American  independence.  He  is  de-
scribed as  a  man  of  remarkable  prudence  and  judg-
ment. He  had  been  in  Santo  Domingo,  and  returned
home  about  July,  1775,  by  way  of  the  colonies,  then
in  revolt  against  Great  Britain.  Visiting  Philadel-
phia, New  York,  ProWdenee,  and  Boston,  he  was
well  qualified  to  express  an  opinion  regarding  the
state  of  affairs  in  America.  At  this  time  De  Gui-
nes,  French  ambassador  to  the  court  of  St.  James,
became  aware  of  a  faction  in  England  that  favored
war  with  France,  on  the  ground  that  the  colonies
would  thereby  be  driven  back  to  their  old  allegiance,
through  a  fear  that  Canada  would  be  regained  by
the  French.  Bonvouloir,  who  was  well  known  to
De  Guines,  offered  a  perfectly  trustworthy  medium,
and  was  sent  to  America,  at  the  suggestion  of  the
French  minister  of  state,  with  verbal  instructions
to  learn  what  he  could  of  public  sentiment,  and  so
far  as  possible  eradicate  the  idea  of  jealousy  re-
garding the  reannexation  of  Canada.  He  reached
America  just  as  the  leading  spirits— Franklm,
Harrison,  Jay,  and  the  rest— were  in  secret  con-
clave on  the  very  problem  that  he  came  to  solve.
Seeking  an  introduction  to  Franklin,  he  had  ';3V-
eral  conferences  with  the  committee,  and  conduct-
ed his  part  of  the  delicate  negotiations  with  con-
summate tact  and  wisdom.  His  written  reports  to
the  French  minister  were  prudent  and  truthful,
and  speedily  brought  about  deliberations  of  the  f
most  momentous  character,  resulting  in  the  ma-
terial  aid  aftorded by  France to  the  struggling


BOOKER


BOONE


315


American  colonies. See  Trescot's  "  Diplomacy  of
the  Revolution"  (New  York,  1852).

BOOKER,  George  William,  lawyer,  b.  in
Patrick  co.,  Va.,  14  Dec,  1821 ;  d.  in  Martinsville,
Va.,  4  June,  1883.  He  studied  law  and  taught
school,  soon  after  his  admission  to  the  bar  became
a  justice  of  the  peace  in  Henry  co.,  and  from  1857
till  1802  was  the  presiding  justice  of  Henry  co.
court.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  an  uncon-
ditional union  man.  In  1865  he  was  elected  to  the
house  of  delegates  of  the  legislature  of  Virginia,
and  in  1868  received  the  nomination  of  state  attor-
ney-general. This  office  he  resigned,  and  was
elected  as  a  conservative  to  congress,  where  he
served  from  31  Jan.,  1870,  till  3  March,  1871.  He
was  elected  to  the  state  legislature  in  November,
1873,  and,  after  serving  for  two  years,  retired  en-
tirely from  public  life.

BOOMER,  Greorffe  Boardman,  soldier,  b.  in
Sutton,  Mass.,  26  July,  1832  ;  killed  at  Vicksburg,
Miss.,  22  May,  1863.  He  removed  to  St.  Louis  at
an  early  age  and  became  a  bridge-builder.  The
town  of  Osage  Rock,  on  Osage  river,  was  laid  out
and  partly  built  by  him.  He  was  present,  as  colo-
nel of  the  22d  Missouri  volunteers,  at  the  surrender
of  Island  No.  10,  and  distinguished  himself  at  the
battle  of  luka,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.
He  commanded  the  second  brigade  of  Gen.  Quin-
by's  division  of  MacPherson's  corps  at  the  battle  of
Champion  Hills  with  conspicuous  gallantry,  and
was  recommended  for  promotion.  While  leading
his  brigade  in  an  assault  upon  the  works  on  the
east  side  of  the  city  of  Vicksburg  he  was  killed  by
a  sharp-shooter.

BOONE,  Daniel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Bucks  co..  Pa.,
11  Feb.,  1735;  d.  in  Missouri,  26  Sept.,  1820.
Among  the  immigrants  that  landed,  10  Oct.,  1717,
at  Philadelphia  was  George  Boone,  of  Exeter,  Eng-
land, who  came
with  his  wife  and
eleven  children,
bought  land  near
Bristol,  Bucks  co.,
Pa.,and  joined  the
society  of  Friends.
His  son.  Squire
Boone,  married
Sarah  Morgan,
and  Daniel  was
their  son.  Squire
Boone,  who  was
a  farmer,  moved,
about  1748,  to
Holman's  Ford,
on  the  Yadkin,  in
North  Carolina.
Daniel's  educa-
tion was  very  lim-
ited ;  he  could
read  and  write,
but  beyond  that
all  he  knew  related  to  the  fields,  the  woods,  the  net,
the  rifle,  and  hunting.  He  was  a  hunter  born,  and
loved  the  solitude  of  the  forest.  Strong,  brave,
lithe,  inured  to  hardship  and  privation,  he  traced
his  steps  through  the  pathless  forest,  sought  out
the  hiding-places  of  panther,  bear,  and  wolf,  and
was  the  match  of  any  Indian  in  the  sagacity  with
which  he  jletected  the  footsteps  of  the  red  man.
About  1755  he  married  Rebecca  Bryan  and  set  up
his  own  log-cabin,  but,  displeased  with  the  en-
croachments of  civilization  on  his  solitude,  and  in-
cited by  the  glowing  accounts  brought  by  John
Finley,  who  had  penetrated  into  the  unknown  re-
gions of  Kentucky,  formed  a  company  of  six  kin-


^^^^.


/^fyz^c-


dred  spirits,  and,  bidding  adieu  to  his  family  and
the  comforts  of  home,  on  1  May,  1769,  set  out  on
his  perilous  journey  of  exploration.  After  numer-
ous adventures  with  the  Indians,  having  become
intimately  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the
country,  established  an  enviable  reputation  for  sa-
gacity and  integrity  on  important  frontier  service
assigned  to  him  by  Lord  Dunmore  in  the  campaign
against  the  Indians,  usually  called  "Lord  Dun-
more's  War,"  and  constructed  a  strong  fort  on  the
left  bank  of  Kentucky  river,  which  he  named
"  Boonesborough,"  he  determined  to  bring  his  wife
and  family  to  the  new  home.  Some  of  his  neigh-
bors joined  him,  and  he  conducted  the  party,  num-
bering upward  of  thirty,  safely  to  "Boonesbor-
ough without  having  encountered  any  other
difficulties  than  such  as  are  common  to  this  pas-
sage. On  one  occasion  Boone,  with  an  armed
party  of  thirty  men,  had  gone  for  a  supply  of  salt
to  a  place  called  "  Salt  Licks,"  nearly  100  miles
north  of  Boonesborough,  and  was  captured,  with
twenty-seven  of  his  men,  by  a  band  of  more  than
100  Indian  warriors  led  by  two  Frenchmen.  They
carried  them  first  to  Old  Chillieothe,  on  the
Miami,  and  then  to  Detroit,  where  they  surren-
dered for  a  ransom  all  their  prisoners  except  Boone ;
him  they  took  back  to  Old  Chillieothe,  where  the
great  Llackfish,  a  renowned  Shawanese  chief,
adopted  him  into  his  family  under  an  imposing
but  painful  ceremonial ;  all  his  hair,  except  a  tuft
three  or  four  inches  in  diameter  on  the  crown  of
the  head,  was  plucked  out ;  that  tuft  was  allowed
to  grow  to  the  length  of  the  "  war-lock,"  dressed
with  feathers  and  ribbons;  an  ablution  m  the
river  was  supposed  to  cleanse  him  from  the  taint
of  white  blood ;  a  coat  of  paint  on  his  face,  and  a
solemn  charge  from  Blackfish,  completed  the  rite.
After  a  prolonged  and  anxious  residence  among
them,  during  which  he  was  kindly  treated,  he  dis-
covered their  intention  of  marching  upon  Boones-
borough, and  resolved,  at  the  peril  of  certain  death
in  the  event  of  recapture,  to  attempt  his  escape
and  save  his  family  and  friends.  Chased  by  450
Indians,  he  performed  that  daring  feat  in  the
forty-third  year  of  his  age,  and  thus  simply  records
it :  "  On  the  16th  [of  June],  before  sunrise,  I  de-
parted in  the  most  secret  manner,  and  arrived  at
Boonesborough  on  the  20th,  after  a  journey  of  160
miles,  during  which  I  had  but  one  meal."  At  the
fort  he  learned  that  his  wife  and  children,  despair-
ing of  ever  seeing  him  again,  had  returned,  and
safely  reached  her  father's  home  in  North  Caro-
lina. The  Indians  assailed  the  fort,  but  were  re-
pelled with  loss,  and  retreated.  Boone  then,  in
the  autumn  of  1778,  rejoined  his  family  on  the
Yadkin,  and  returned  with  them  to  Kentucky  in
1780.  The  country,  though  well  settled,  was  still
unsafe,  and,  soon  after  his  return,  Boone  and  his
brother,  Squire,  were  surprised  by  Indians ;  Squire
was  killed  and  scalped,  and  Daniel  had  a  narrow
escape.  A  sanguinary  engagement,  called  the
"  Battle  of  the  Blue  Licks,"  took  place  in  1782,  in
which  Boone's  two  sons  fought  at  his  side.  One
of  them  was  killed,  and  the  other  severely  wound-
ed. Boone  was  full  of  expedients,  and  on  one  oc-
casion extricated  himself  from  four  armed  Indians
by  blinding  them  with  tobacco-dust.  Kentucky
was  admitted  into  the  union,  4  Feb.,  1791,  and  in
the  survey  of  the  state  the  title  to  Boone's  land
was  disputed.  The  case  was  decided  against  him,
and,  stung  to  the  quick  by  the  wrong,  he  had  again
to  seek  a  new  home,  which  he  established  at  Point
Pleasant,  between  the  Ohio  and  the  Great  Kana-
wha ;  but  in  1795  he  removed  to  Missouri,  then  a
Spanish  possession,  and  received  not  only  the  ap-


316


BOONE


BOOTH


pointment  of  commandant  of  the  Femme  Osage
district,  but  a  grant  of  8,000  acres.  The  Spanish
possessions  passed  into  the  hands  of  Napoleon,
who  sold  them  to  the  United  States,  and,  in  the
survey  that  followed,  the  Spanish  grant  of  Boone's
lands  was  pronounced  invalid.  An  appeal  to  the
legislature  of  Kentucky,  and  another  to  congress,
resulted  in  a  grant  by  the  latter  of  850  acres.
Boone  was  then  seventy-five  years  of  age,  hale  and
strong.  The  charm  of  the  hunter's  life  clung  to
him  to  the  last,  and  in  his  eighty-second  year  he
went  on  a  hunting  excursion  to  the  mouth  of  Kan-
sas river.  He  had  made  his  own  coffin  and  kept
it  under  his  bed,  and  after  his  death  they  laid  him
in  it  to  rest  by  the  side  of  his  wife,  who  had  passed
away  seven  years  before.  On  18  Sept.,  1845,  their
remains  were  removed  to  the  cemetery  near  Frank-
fort, Ky.,  a  few  miles  from  the  fort  of  Boonesbor-
ough,  by  the  concurrent  action  of  the  citizens  of
Frankfort  and  the  legislature  of  Kentucky. — His
son,  Enoch,  b.  in  Boonesborough,  Ky.,  in  1777;  d.
8  March,  1862,  was  the  first  white  male  child  born
in  Kentucky.  Daniel  Boone's  wife,  with  her
daughters,  went  to  live  with  her  husband  in  his
palisaded  fort  in  June,  1776,  and  while  there  gave
birth  to  this  son ;  but  after  Boone's  capture,  on  7
Feb.,  1778,  his  family  returned  to  North  Carolina.

BOONE,  Thomas,  colonial  governor  of  New
Jersey  and  South  Carolina.  He  was  appointed
governor  of  New  Jersey  in  1760,  was  succeeded  by
Thomas  Hardy  the  following  year,  and  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  South  Carolina  in  1762.  He
mcensed  the  people  of  that  colony  by  interfering
with  the  elective  franchise,  claiming  the  exclusive
right  to  administer  the  oath,  and  assuming  the
power  to  reject  members  whom  the  house  had  de-
clared to  be  regularly  elected.  The  representa-
tives in  the  legislature,  led  by  Laurens,  Gadsden,
Lynch,  Pinckney,  and  the  Rutledges,  refused  to
hold  any  intercourse  with  him.  In  1763  he  was
superseded  by  William  Bull.

BOONE,  WilHain  Jones,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Walterborough,  S.  C,  1  July,  1811 ;  d.  in  Shang-
hai, China,  17  July,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
the  college  of  South  Carolina  in  1829,  studied  law
with  Chancellor  De  Saussure,  and  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1833 ;  but  soon  afterward  went  to  the  theo-
logical seminary  of  Virginia  to  prepare  for  orders.
Intending  to  devote  himself  to  missionary  life  and
work,  he  went  through  a  course  of  medical  study,
and  received  the  degree  of  M.  D,  from  the  South
Carolina  medical  college.  He  was  ordained  dea-
con in  Charleston,  S.  C,  18  Sept.,  1836,  and  priest
the  year  following.  Dr.  Boone  was  appointed
missionary  to  China,  and  sailed  for  that  country
in  July,  1837.  In  1844  he  was  elected  mission-
ary bishop  to  China,  the  first  one  appointed  by
the  American  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  and
was  consecrated  in  Philadelphia,  25  Oct.,  1844.
At  the  close  of  the  year  he  returned  and  spent
the  last  twenty  years  of  his  life  at  his  post  of  duty,
excepting  two  visits  to  the  United  States,  in  1852
and  1857,  for  the  benefit  of  his  health.  He  re-
turned to  the  east  from  his  last  visit  to  the  United
States  in  December,  1859,  and  occupied  himself
with  the  new  mission  in  Japan.  Bishop  Boone  was
noted  for  scholarship  in  the  Chinese  language  and
literature,  and  did  eminent  service  in  securing  an
accurate  version  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  and  of  the
Prr.yer-Book  into  that  difficult  tongue.  He  began
his  trarxlation  of  the  Prayer-Book  in  1846,  and  in
1847  was  appointed  one  of  the  committee  of  dele-
gates from  the  several  missions  to  recast  the  trans-
lation of  the  Bible,  a  work  on  which  he  was  already
engaged.— His  son,  WilHam  Jones,  P.  E.  bishop,


b.  in  Shanghai  in  1847,  obtained  his  early  education
from  members  of  the  China  mission,  after  which
he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1865.  He  studied  theology
at  the  divinity  school  in  Philadelphia,  spent  two
years  in  the  Alexandria  seminary,  and  then  went
abroad  for  a  year  of  further  study.  He  was  ap-
pointed missionary  to  China  in  1869,  and  reached
Shanghai  in  January,  1870.  He  was  ordained  dea-
con in  Petersburg,  Va.,  in  1868,  and  priest  in  the
English  church,  at  Hankow,  China,  in  1870.
Having  been  appointed  missionary  bishop,  he  was
consecrated  in  Shanghai,  28  Oct.,  1884,  by  Bishop
Williams,  of  Yedo,  and  Bishops  Moule  and  Scott,
English  missionary  bishops  in  China.

BOOKMAN,  James,  merchant,  b.  in  Kent  co.,
England,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  24  Jan..  186G.
He  accompanied  his  parents  to  the  United  States
when  about  twelve  years  of  age,  was  apprenticed
to  Divie  Bethune,  of  New  York,  and  entered  into
partnership  with  him  in  1805.  Afterward,  in  con-
nection with  John  Johnston,  he  formed  the  firm  or
Boorman  &  Johnston,  which  almost  entirely  con-
trolled the  Dundee  trade,  and  dealt  largely  in
Swedish  iron  and  Virginia  tobacco.  Mr.  Boorman
was  one  of  the  pioneers  in  the  construction  of  the
Hudson  river  railroad,  and  was  for  many  years  its
president.  He  was  also  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Bank  of  Commerce.  He  retired  from  active  busi-
ness in  1855.  The  institution  for  the  blind,  the
Protestant  half-orphan  asylum,  the  southern  aid
society,  and  the  union  theological  seminary  were
among  the  recipients  of  his  bounty.

BOOT,  John  Fletcher,  Cherokee  preacher,  h.
about  1796;  d.  8  Aug.,  1853.  He  was  a  brave  war-
rior and  a  member  of  the  Cherokee  national  coun-
cil. In  1825  he  was  converted  to  Christianity,  and
in  1827  licensed  to  preach.  He  was  subsequently
ordained  a  deacon  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church,  south,  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  and  later  re-
ceived ordination  as  elder  in  Lebanon.  He
preached  effectively  in  the  Cherokee  tongue.

BOOTH,  Benjamin,  writer  on  book-keeping.
He  was  an  American  merchant,  who  became  clerk
in  a  store  in  New  York  about  1759,  and  when  he
rose  to  the  chief  clerkship  introduced  a  system  of
book-keeping  of  his  own  invention  which  he  em-
ployed also  in  his  own  business.  He  was  a  retail
merchant  in  New  York  until  the  war  of  independ-
ence interfered  with  his  business,  when  he  retired
and  went  to  England.  There  he  made  known  his
system  of  keeping  accounts  in  a  volume  entitled
"  A  Complete  System  of  Book- Keeping  by  an  Im-
proved Method  of  Double  Entry,  containing  also  a
New  Method  of  stating  Factorage  Accounts,  adapt-
ed particularly  to  the  Trade  of  the  British  Colo-
nies "  (London,  1789).  It  was  written  humorously,
with  fanciful  entries,  under  the  names  of  noted
persons,  to  illustrate  the  new  method.

BOOTH,  James  Curtis,  chemist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia. Pa.,  28  Julv,  1810.  He  was  educated  at
classical  schools  in  Philadelphia,  then  at  Hartsville
seminary,  and  was  graduated  at  the  university  of
Pennsylvania  in  1829,  after  which  he  spent  a  year
at  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  where  he
afterward  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  In  183^
he  went  to  Germany,  and  studied  chemistry  m
Wohler's  private  laboratory  in  Cassel,  at  a  time
when  there  were  no  laboratories  in  Germany  ar-
ranged for  the  regular  reception  of  students.  He
spent  some  time  under  G.  Magnus  in  Berlin,  then
in  Vienna,  and  afterward  devoted  himself  untu
1835  to  studying  technical  chemistry  at  various
places  in  Germanv  and  England.  In  1836  he  estaD-
lished  in  Philadelphia  a  laboratory,  the  first  of  its


BOOTH

kind  in  the  United  States,  for  instruction  in  chemi-
cal analysis  and  chemistry  applied  to  the  arts.  A
coui"se  under  Dr.  Booth  was  considered  essential  to
those  who  followed  chemistry,  and  many  of  his
students  have  become  well  known.  Among  these
are  J.  F.  Frazer,  Thos.  11.  Garrett,  his  present
partner,  R.  S.  McCulloh,  Campbell  Morfit,  Clarence
Morfit,  and  11.  E.  Rogers.  During,  the  same  year
(183G)  he  became  professor  of  applied  chemistry  at
the  Franklin  institute,  and  for  nine  successive  win-
ters he  continued  his  lectures,  making  three  full
courses  of  three  years  each.  In  1849  he  was  ap-
pointed melter  and  refiner  of  the  U.  S.  mint  in
Philadelphia,  a  place  which  he  has  since  retained.
His  published  papers  cover  topics  in  the  entire  do-
main of  analytical  and  technical  chemistry.  His
larger  works  mclude  the  first  and  second  "  Annual
Report  of  the  Delaware  Geological  Survey  "  (Dover,
183 J);  "The  Memoirs  of  the  Geological  Survey  of
the  State  of  Delaware  "  (Dover,  1841) ;  "  Encyclo-
p;i3dia  of  Chemistry,"  in  the  preparation  of  which
lie  was  assisted  by  "Martin  H.  Boye,  R.  S.  McCulloh,
and  Campbell  Morfit  (Philadelphia,  1850) ;  and  a
report  on  "  Recent  Improvements  in  the  Chemical
Arts"  (Washington,  1852).  He  was  president  of
the  American  chemical  society  in  1884  and  1885.

BOOTH,  Junius  Brutus,  actor,  b.  in  London,
1  May,  1796 ;  d.  3  Nov.,  1852. His  father,  Richard
Booth,  the  son  of  a  silversmith  of  Bloomsbury,
after  studying  law,  having  become  imbued  with
republican  ideas,  embarked  with  a  cousin  to  volun-
lleer  in  the  cause  of  American  independence,  but
Iwas  taken  prisoner  and  carried  back  to  England.
iHe  practised  his  profession  with  success,  lived  in  af-
fluence in  Bloomsbury,  and  was  known  as  a  scholar,
but  unpopular  on  account  of  his  republicanism.
lit  was  one  of  his  eccentricities  to  insist  upon  his
Ifriends  paying  reverence  to  a  portrait  of  Wash-
ington in  his  drawing-room. Junius  Brutus,  the
eldest  son,  received  a  classical  education,  essayed
painting,  sculpture,  and  poetry,  was  induced  for  a
time  to  work  in  his  father's  office  with  a  view  of
becoming  a  solicitor,  and  then,  evincing  a  prefer-
ence for  naval  life,  was  commissioned  as  a  mid-
shipman to  Capt.  Blythe's  brig  "  Boxer  "  ;  but,  when
that  vessel  was  ordered  to  Nova  Scotia,  the  father,
anwilling  that  his  son  should  serve  against  the
United  States,  dissuaded  him  from  joining  the  ship.
After  appearing  as  an  amateur  in  a  small  London
heatre,  he  announced  his  intention  of  becoming
m  actor,  and,  against his  father's  wishes,  made
m  engagement,  and  played  subordinate  parts,  in
Peekham,  Deptford, and  in 1814  made  a pro-
'essional  tour  through  Holland  and  Belgium. A
ew  critics  and  influential  friends,  who  recognized
lis  talents,  seconded  his  efforts  to  secure  a  London
ingagement ;  but  he  was  forced  to  accept  an  offer
0  play  in  the  Worthing  and  Brighton  theatres  for
he  season  of  1815. He  left  there  in  October,  hav-
ng  finally  secured  a  contract  with  the  manage-
nent  of  Covent  Garden  theatre. But,  as  he  was
nnounced  for  inferior  parts  instead  of  for  Rich-
ird  HI.,  he  returned  to  Worthing,  and  gained  a
numph  as  a  substitute  for  Edmund  Kean  in  the
haracter  of  Sir  Giles  Overreach,  captivating  an
udierice  that  was  at  first  indignant  at  the  young
-ctor's  presumption. He  continued to play  at
Vorthing,  and  found  influential admirers,  who
irevailed  upon  the  manager,  Harris,  to  give  him  a
nal  as  Richard  III.  at  Covent  Garden,  where  he
ppeared  in  that  character  on  17  Feb.,  1817,  and
delighted  the  metropolitan  audience. Before  the
nn-d  performance,  after  a  quarrel  with  the  man-
ger, he  was  induced  by  Kean,  of  the  Drury  lane
ompany,  to  enter  into"  an  engagement  with  the


BOOTH


317


rival  theatre,  where  he  was  announced  to  play
lago  to  Kean's  Othello ;  but  he  soon  learned  with
chagrin  that  in  entrapping  him  into  signing  the
articles  Kean  designed  only  to  prevent  rivalry  by
robbing  the  new  favorite  of  the  opportunity  to  ap-
pear in  leading  parts.  Booth,  when  made  aware
of  this,  signed  an  agreement  with  the  proprietors
of  Covent  Garden  theatre,  who  apprised  him  of  legal
flaws  in  the  Drury  lane  contract.  The  town  was
divided  into  Boothites  and  Keanites,  and  Booth's
reappearance  at  Covent  Garden  as  Richard  was  the
occasion  of  a  riotous  tumult,  which  was  renewed
on  subsequent  evenings.  He  played  Richard  and
Sir  Giles  Overreach  alternately,  and  then  Post-
humus  in  "  Cymbeline,"  appeared  as  Othello  at
Woolwich,  afterward  as  Sir  Edward  Mortimer  in
"  The  Iron  Chest "  at  Covent  Garden,  acted  with
applause,  in  July,  1818,  at  Glasgow  and  Edinburgh,
strolled  through  the  provinces,  gave  Shylock  in
the  Jewish  dialect  at  Covent  Garden  during  the
succeeding  autumn,  and  in  the  winter  entered  into
ax\  engagement  with  the  Coburg  theatre,  where  he
acted  Richard,  Horatius,  and  Brutus.  In  April,
1820,  he  appeared  again  at  Covent  Garden  as
Lear,  which  was  recognized  as  one  of  his  finest
parts.  In  August,  1820,  he  performed  with  Kean
at  Drury  lane,  playing  lago,  Edgar  in  "  King  Lear,"
and  Pierre.  In  the  winter,  while  Kean  was  in  the
United  States,  he  acted  Lear,  Cassius,  and  the  part
of  an  Indian  chief  at  Drury  lane  theatre.  On  18
Jan.,  1821,  Mr.  Booth  married  Mary  Anne  Holmes,
and  after  a  wedding  tour  they  sailed  for  the  West
Indies,  but  stopped  at  Madeira,  and  took  passage
thence  for  the  United  States,  landing  at  Norfolk,
Va.,  30  June,  1821.  On  6  July,  Booth  appeared  in
Richmond.  His  freedom  from  vanity  and  calcu-
lating self-interest  was  evinced  in  his  sudden  ar-
rival unheralded  in  the  United  States.  After  a
triumphant  appearance  in  New  York  and  in
southern  cities  he  seriously  entertained  the  idea
of  retiring  from  the  stage  and  spending  his  days
in  quiet  as  a  light-house  keeper.  His  first  appear-
ance in  New  York  was  at  the  Park  theatre  on
5  Oct.,  1821.  In  the  summer  of  1822  he  pur-
chased, in  Harford  co.,  Md.,  twenty-five  miles  from
Baltimore,  a  retreat  in  the  midst  of  woods,  to  which
he  always  afterward  retired  when  not  occupied  on
the  stage,  and  where  he  carried  on  amateur  farm-
ing with  the  help  of  a  few  slaves.  Thither  his
father,  the  constant  admirer  of  America,  came  the
same  year  to  pass  his  remaining  days.  In  1825  he
again  visited  London  with  his  family,  and  when  the
Royalty  theatre  was  burned  lost  his  entire  ward-
robe. After  he  returned  to  the  United  States  he
began  an  engagement  at  the  Park  theatre.  New
York,  on  24  March,  1827,  in  which  he  acted  Selim
in  the  "  Bride  of  Abydos  "  at  his  benefit.  In  June
he  appeared  in  the  part  of  Pescara  in  "  The  Apos-
tate," a  character  written  for  him  by  Shiel.  In
1828  he  undertook  the  management  of  the  Camp
street  theatre  in  New  Orleans,  and,  while  playing
Richard  III.  to  packed  houses,  studied  French  parts,
and  afterward  personated  characters  in  several
French  dramas,  astonishing  the  audience  with  the
purity  of  his  accent  and  his  familiarity  with  the
peculiarities  of  French  acting.  The  manager  of
the  Theatre  d'Orleans  persuaded  him  to  take  the
part  of  Orestes  in  Racine's  "  Andromaque,"  in
which  he  greatly  pleased  the  French-speaking
public.  In  September,  1881,  in  New  York,  he
played  Pierre  in  "  Venice  Preserved,"  and  Othello
to  Forrest's  Jaflier  and  lago.  The  same  year  he
took  the  lease  of  the  Adelphi  theatre  in  Baltimore.
While  his  theatre  was  undergoing  repairs  he  took
the  Holiday  street  theatre.  During  the  season  he  ap-


318


BOOTH


BOOTH


E eared  in  several  new  characters,  such  as  Roderick
>hu,  Selim,  Richard  II,,  Penruddock,  Falkland  in
"  The  Rivals,"  and  Luke  in  "  Riches."  In  January,
1832,  he  appeared  in  the  Chestnut  street  theatre,
Philadelphia,  in  "  Sertorius,"  a  new  play,  by  the
Philadelphia  lawyer,  David  Paul  Brown.  The
death  of  two  of  his  children  robbed  him  for  a  time
of  his  reason,  and  after  his  recovery  an  enf^^age-
ment,  made  with  the  actor  Hamblin,  for  Rich-
mond, was  renewed  for  the  Bowery  theatre.  New
York.  He  next  played  in  New  Orleans  and  Mo-
bile, and  on  a  tour  through  the  west,  during  which,
and  from  that  time  forth,  his  mental  disorder,
slight  attacks  of  which  had  occurred  in  earlier
years,  returned  with  increasing  frequency  and  se-
verity. As  he  grew  older  his  partial  insanity  was
aggravated  by  intemperance.  After  playing  Shy-
lock  for  eight  nights  to  crowded  houses  at  the  Na-
tional theatre.  New  York,  and  visiting  Baltimore
and  Philadelphia,  he  sailed,  in  October,  1836,  for
Europe  with  his  family,  played  Richard  and  lago
at  Drury  lane  theatre,  and  in  Birmingham,  where
he  was  prostrated  with  the  news  of  the  death  of
his  favorite  son,  Henry  Byron,  in  London,  from
small-pox.  He  immediately  returned  to  the
United  States,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1837  per-
formed at  the  Olympic  in  New  York,  afterward
sailed  for  the  south  on  a  professional  tour,  and
during  the  voyage  attempted  suicide  in  a  moment
of  aberration.  On  the  same  trip  his  nose  was
broken,  impairing  the  beauty  of  his  face  and  his
rich  tones  of  voice ;  but  in  the  course  of  two  years
he  regained  the  strength  and  scope  of  his  vocal
organs.  During  the  last  ten  years  of  his  life  he
spent  much  of  his  time  with  his  family,  residing  in
Baltimore,  and  only  visiting  his  farm  in  the  heat
of  summer.  He  played  when  and  where  he  pleased,
often  in  small,  out-of-the-way  theatres,  but  made
annual  visits  to  New  Orleans  and  Boston,  where
he  was  an  established  favorite.  In  1850  and  the
succeeding  season  he  played  at  the  National  theatre,
New  York,  and  made  his  last  appearance  in  that
city  on  19  Sept.,  1851.  In  1851  he  performed  sev-
eral parts  at  the  Chestnut  street  theatre,  Philadel-
phia, and  in  the  spring  of  1852,  with  his  son  Edwin
(Junius  Brutus  had  previously  gone  thither),  he
went  to  California,  playing  to  crowded  houses  in
San  Francisco  with  Edwin  in  companion  charac-
ters. Leaving  his  sons,  he  returned  to  the  east
with  the  intention  of.  retiring  completely  from  the
stage.  Arriving  at  New  Orleans  in  November,  he
performed  six  nights  with  his  usual  ability,  but
contracted  a  cold,  and  during  his  passage  up  the
Mississippi  river  remained  in  his  state-room,  suf-
fering from  fever  and  dysentery,  and  died  for  lack
of  medical  care.  See  Asia  Booth  Clarke's  "The
Elder  and  the  Younger  Booth  "  in  the  American
Actor  Series  (Boston,  1882) ;  Genest's  "  History  of
the  Stage  " ;  and  "  Booth  Memorials,"  by  his  daugh-
ter Asia  (New  York,  1866).— His  son,  Edwin,  actor,
b.  in  Bel  Air,  Md.,  13  Nov.,  1833,  was  named  Edwin
Thomas,  in  compliment  to  his  father's  friends,  Ed-
win Forrest  and  Thomas  Flynn.  When  a  boy  he
received  instruction  from  different  teachers  in  the
immediate  neighborhood  of  his  home ;  but  this  tui-
tion was  neither  continuous  nor  thorough.  He  was
thoughtful  and  studious,  and  made  much  of  his
limited  opportunities.  He  was  reticent  and  sin-
gular, profound  and  sensitive,  and  the  eccentric
genius  of  the  elder  Booth  found  in  him  an  object
of  peculiar  sympathy.  The  father  and  son  were
fondly  attached  to  each  other  from  the  first,  and
while  Ed\yin  was  yet  very  young  his  father  made
a  companion  of  him  in  professional  journeys.  It
was  in  the  course  of  one  of  these  tours  that  Edwin


Booth  made  his  first  regular  appearance  upon  the
stage,  at  the  Boston  Museum,  on  10  Sept.,  1849.
The  play  was  Cibber's  version  of  Shakespeare's
"Richard  III.,"  and  the  youth  came  forward  in
the  little  part  of  Tressil.  At  first  the  elder  Booth
opposed  his  son's  choice  of  the  stage,  but  ultimate-
ly he  relinquished  his  opposition.  The  boy  perse-
vered, and  presently,  still  acting  in  his  father's
train,  he  appeared  at  Providence,  li.  I.,  at  Philadel-
phia, and  at  other  places,  as  Cassio  in  "  Othello,"
and  as  Wilford  in  "  The  Iron  Chest  "—the  latter
impersonation  being  deemed  particularly  good.
Edwin  Booth  continued  to  act  with  his  father  for
more  than  two  years  after  the  advent  at  the  Boston
Museum.  His  first  appearance  on  the  New  York
stage  was  on  27  Sept.,  1850,  at  the  National  the-
atre, Chatham  street,  as  Wilford.  At  the  same  the-
atre, in  1851,  his  father  being  ill,  he  suddenly  and
promptly  took  the  place  of  the  elder  tragedian,
and  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  enacted  Richard
III.  This  effort,  remarkably  successful  for  a  com-
parative novice,  was  hailed  as  the  indication  of
great  talent  and  as  the  augury  of  a  brilliant  future.
In  the  summer  of  1852  he  accompanied  his  father
to  San  Francisco,
where  his  elder
brother,  J.  B.
Booth,  Jr.,  had
already  estab-
lished himself  as
an  actor  and  a
theatrical  man-
ager, and  where
the  three  now
acted  in  compa-
ny. Other  cities
were  visited  by
them,  and  the
elder  Booth  re-
mained in  Cali-
fornia for  about
three  months.
One  night,  at  Sac-
ramento, seeing
Edwin  dressed
for  Jaffier  in
"  Venice  Pre-
served," he  said

to  him :  "  You  look  like  Hamlet :  why  don't  you  play
it  ?  "  a  remark  that  the  younger  Booth  has  had  good
reason  to  remember,  for  no  actor  has  ever  played
Hamlet  so  often  or  over  so  wide  a  range  of  territory.
Just  as  the  name  of  Junius  Brutus  Booth  is  insepa-
rably associated  with  Richard  III.,  so  the  name  of
Edwin  Booth  is  inseparably  associated  with  Hamlet.
In  October,  1852,  the  father  and  son  parted  for  the
last  time.  The  California  period  of  Edwin  Booth's
professional  career  lasted  from  the  summer  of
1852  till  the  autumn  of  1856,  and  included  a  trip
to  Australia.  The  voung  actor  at  first  played
parts  of  all  kinds,  and  he  had  a  severe  experience
of  poverty  and  hardship.  Soon,  however,  he  be-
gan to  display  uncommon  merit,  and  thereupon  to
attract  uncornmon  admiration.  One  of  his  earliest
and  best  successes  was  obtained  as  Sir  Edward
Mortimer  in  "  The  Iron  Chest."  For  a  time,  in-
deed, he  travelled  in  California,  conveymg  his
wardrobe  for  this  piece  in  a  trunk  fashioned  a!i(-
painted  to  resemble  a  chest  made  of  iron,  tiis
trip  to  Australia,  in  1854,  was  made  with  a  dra-
matic company  that  included  the  popular  actress
Miss  Laura  Keene  as  leading  woman,  rie-
vious  to  this  he  had,  in  his  brother's  theatre  ai
San  Francisco,  acted  Richard  III.,  Shylock,  Mac-
beth, and Hamlet, had made  an extraordinary


TTT^^


BOOTPI


BOOTH


319


impression,  and  acquired  abundant  local  popu-
larity. At  this  time  his  acting  began  to  receive
thouo-htful  attention  from  learned  and  critical
authorities.  He  stopped  and  acted  at  the  Sand-
wich islands  on  his  return  voyage  from  Australia
to  San  Francisco,  and  reappeared  there  at  the
Metropolitan  theatre,  then  (1855)  managed  by
Miss  Catherine  Sinclair  (Mrs.  Edwin  Forrest,  who
had  left  her  husband  and  obtained  a  divorce  from
him),  and  he  was  then  and  there  the  original
representative  in  America  of  Raphael  in  "  The
Marble  Heart."  In  1856  he  took  leave  of  California,
being  cheered  on  his  way  by  several  farewell  testi-
monial benefits,  organized  and  conducted  by  one  of
his  earliest  and  best  friends,  Mr.  M.  P.  Butler,  of
Sacramento,  and  his  steps  were  now  turned  toward
the  cities  of  the  east.  He  first  appeared  at  the
Front  street  theatre,  Baltimore,  and  tlien  made  a
rapid  tour  of  all  the  large  cities  of  the  south,  being
everywhere  well  received.  In  April,  1857,  he  ap-
peared at  the  Boston  theatre  as  Sir  Giles  Overreach
in  "A  New  Way  to  Pay  Old  Debts,"  and  his  great
success  on  this  occasion,  always  regarded  by  him
as  the  turning-point  in  his  career,  determined  him
to  persist  in  the  resolute  endeavor  to  win  the  first
place  as  a  tragic  actor.  His  career  since  then  has
been  marked  by  many  vicissitudes  of  personal  ex-
perience and  by  fluctuations  of  fortune,  but  it  has
been  one  of  lofty  endeavor  and  of  continuous  ad-
vancement. On  14  May,  1857,  he  came  forward  in
New  York,  at  Burton's  Metropolitan  theatre,  as
Richard  HI.,  and  in  the  following  August  he  was
again  seen  there  in  a  round  of  great  characters,  all
of  which  he  acted  with  brilliant  ability  and  greatly
to  the  public  satisfaction.  On  7  July,  1800,  he
married  Miss  Mary  Devlin,  of  Troy,  N.  Y.,  an
actress,  whom  he  had  met  three  years  before  at
Richmond,  Va.,  with  whom  he  shortly  afterward
made  a  visit  to  England.  Their  only  child,  a
daughter.  Edwina,  was  born  in  Fulham,  9  Dec,
1861.  After  their  return  to  America,  Mrs.  Booth,
sinking  under  a  sudden  illness,  died  at  Dorchester,
Mass.,  on  21  Feb.,  1863.  While  in  England,  Booth
appeared  at  the  London  Haymarket  theatre,  under
the  management  of  J.  B,  Biickstone,  enacting  Shy-
lock,  Sir  Giles,  and  Richelieu.  The  latter  part,
with  which,  almost  as  much  as  with  Hamlet,  his
name  is  identified,  he  had  first  assumed  at  Sacra-
mento, Cal.,  in  July,  1856.  His  performance  of  it
was  much  admired  in  London,  and  also  at  Liver-
pool and  Manchester,  where  he  afterward  acted.
On  returning  to  America,  Booth  soon  became  man-
ager of  the  Winter  Garden  theatre.  New  York,
which  had  been  Burton's  Metropolitan,  but  which
Dion  Boucicault  had  leased,  refitted,  and  renamed.
Here  Booth  appeared  on  29  Dec,  1862,  and  with
this  house  he  was  associated  until  23  March,  1867,
when  it  was  destroyed  by  fire.  A  particular  record
of  his  proceedings  at  this  theatre  would  make  a
volume.  Here  he  effected  magnificent  productions
of  II  Hamlet,"  "  Othello,"  "  The  Merchant  of  Ven-
ice," "Richelieu,"  and  other  plays,  and  here  he
accomplished  the  remarkable  achievement  of  run-
ning "  Hamlet "  for  one  hundred  consecutive
nights,  an  exploit  that  was  commemorated  by  the
public  presentation  to  him,  on  22  Jan..  1867.  of  a
gold  medal,  suitably  inscribed,  and  offered  in  be-
half of  leading  citizens  of  New  York.  In  recent
days  such  an  artistic  feat  would  not  be  so  difficult
ot  accomplishment ;  at  that  time  it  was  an  extra-
ordmary  exploit.  Booth's  brother-in-law,  the  cele-
brated comedian  John  S.  Clarke,  was  his  partner
m  the  management  of  the  Winter  Garden  the-
atre, and  they  associated  with  themselves  an  old
journalist  and  theatrical  agent,  William Stuart


(real  name,  Edmund  O'Flaherty),  formerly  of  Gal-
way,  Ireland,  but  then  an  exile.  Clarke  &  Booth
were  also  associated  in  the  management  of  the
Walnut  street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  from  the  sum-
mer of  1863  till  March,  1870,  when  the  interest  of  the
latter  was  purchased  by  the  former.  The  hundred-
night  run  of  "Hamlet"  extended  from  21  Nov.,

1864,  till  24  March,  1865.  On  23  April,  1864,  for
the  benefit  of  the  fund  for  erecting  a  Shakespeare
monument  in  Central  park,  Booth  produced  "  Ro-
meo and  Juliet,"  and  enacted  Romeo. In  April,

1865,  an  appalling  tragedy  compelled  Edwin  Booth
to  leave  the  stage,  and  it  was  then  his  wish  and
purpose  never  to  return  to  it ;  but  business  obliga-
tions constrained  him,  and  he  appeared  at  the
Winter  Garden  on  3  Jan.,  1866,  as  Hamlet,  and
was  received  with  acclamation  by  a  great  audience.
'•  Richelieu  "  was  revived  that  year,  on  1  Feb.,  with
much  splendor  of  scenic  attire.  An  equally  fine
revival  was  made,  on  28  Jan.,  1867,  of  "  The  Mer-
chant of  Venice."  On  23  March  the  theatre  was
burned  down.  On  8  April,  1868,  the  corner-stone
was  laid  of  Booth's  theatre,  at  the  south-east  cor-
ner of  23d  street  and  6th  avenue,  New  York,  and
on  3  Feb.,  1869,  Booth  opened  the  new  house  with
"  Romeo  and  Juliet,"  Romeo  being  played  by  him-
self and  Juliet  by  Miss  Mary  McVicker.  This  lady
was  the  daughter  of  Mrs.  Runnion,  who  became  the
wife  of  James  H.  McVicker,  of  Chicago,  a  promi-
nent actor  and  manager,  and  the  child's  name  was
changed  from  Runnion  to  McVicker.  Booth  mar-
ried her  on  7  June,  1869.  and  she  died  in  New  York,
in  1881,  leaving  no  children.  Booth's  theatre  had  a
career  of  thirteen  years,  and  its  stage  was  adorned
with  some  of  the  grandest  pageants  and  graced  by
the  presence  of  some  of  the  most  renowned  actors
that  have  been  seen  in  this  century.  Its  story,
however,  ended  in  May,  1882,  when  it  was  finally
closed,  its  career  ending  with  a  performance  of  Ju-
liet by  Madame  Modjeska.  After  this  it  was  torn
down,  and  a  block  of  stores  has  been  built  upon
its  site.  Booth's  theatre  was  managed  by  Edwin
Booth  until  the  spring  of  1874,  when  it  passed  out
of  his  possession.  During  his  reign  therein  as
manager  he  accomplished  sumptuous  and  noble
revivals  of  "  Romeo  and  Juliet,"  "  Othello,"  "  Ham-
let," "  Richelieu,"  "  The  Winter's  Tale,"  "  Julius
Cjesar,"  "  Macbeth,"  "  Much  Ado  About  Nothing,"
"  The  Merchant  of  Venice,"  "  Brutus,"  and  other
plays,  and  he  presented  on  his  stage  a  series  of  mis-
cellaneous attractions  of  an  equally  reputable  order.
His  stock  company  at  one  time  included  Lawrence
Barrett,  Edwin  L.  Davenport,  J.  W.  Wallack,  Jr.,
Mark  Smith,  Edwin  Adams,  A.  W.  Fenno,  D.  C.
Anderson,  D.  W.  Waller,  Robert  Pateman,  Mrs.
Emma  Waller,  Bella  Pateman,  and  others — one  of
the  ablest  dramatic  organizations  ever  formed  in
America.  Among  the  stars  who  acted  at  his  the-
atre were  Joseph  Jefferson,  Kate  Bateman,  James
H.  Hackett,  Charlotte  Cushman,  John  S.  Clarke,
John  E.  Owens,  and  James  H.  McVicker.  Booth's
theatre  was  almost  invariably  a  prosperous  house ;
but  it  was  not  economically  managed,  and  for  this
reason,  and  this  alone,  it  eventually  carried  its
owner  into  bankruptcy.  Edwin  Booth  then  began
his  career  over  again,  and  in  course  of  time  paid
his  debts  and  earned  another  fortune.  In  1876  he
made  a  tour  of  the  south,  which  was  in  fact  a  tri-
umphal progress.  Thousands  of  spectators  flocked
to  see  him  in  every  city  that  he  visited.  In  San
Francisco,  where  he  acted  for  eight  weeks,  he  drew
upward  of  $96,000,  a  total  of  receipts  till  then
unprecedented  on  the  dramatic  stage.  In  1880,
and  again  in  1882,  he  visited  Great  Britain,  and  he
acted  with  brilliant  success  in  London  and  other


320


BOOTH


BOUDA


cities.  He  went  into  Germany  in  the  autumn  of
1883,  and  was  there  received  with  extraordinary
enthusiasm.  In  1883  he  returned  home  and  re-
sumed his  starring  tours  of  America.  Booth  has
acted  many  parts  in  his  day,  but  of  late  years  his
repertory  has  been  limited  to  Hamlet,  Macbeth,
King  Lear,  Othello,  lago,  Wolsey,  Richard  III.,
Shylock,  Richard  II.,  Benedick,  Petruchio,  Riche-
lieu,. Payne's  Brutus,  Bertuccio  (in  "The  Fool's
Revenge,"  by  Tom  Taylor),  Ruy  Bias,  and  Don
Caesar  de  Bazan.  He  has  published  an  edition  of
these  plays,  in  fifteen  volumes,  the  text  cut  and
adapted  by  himself  for  stage  use,  with  introductions
and  notes  by  William  Winter  (Boston,  1877-'8).

BOOTH,  Mary  H.  C,  poet,  b.  in  Connecticut  in
1881;  d.  in  New  York^  city,  11  April,  1865.  She
married  a  journalist,  and  went  to  reside  in  Mil-
waukee, Wis.,  about  1850.  She  lived  in  Zurich,
Switzerland,  several  years  for  the  benefit  of  her
health,  and  while  there  corresponded  with  Amer-
ican journals.  In  18(34,  just  before  her  return  to
the  United  States,  she  published  a  volume  of  poet-
ry, partly  original  and  partly  translated,  entitled
"  Wayside  Blossoms  among  Flowers  from  German
Gardens"  (Milwaukee).  She  reached  New  York
in  the  last  stage  of  consumption,  but  succeeded,
before  her  death,  in  preparing  a  revised  edition  of
her  poetry  (Philadelphia,  1865).

BOOTH,  Mary  Louise,  author,  b.  in  Millville,
now  Yaphank,  I^.  Y.,  19  April,  1881 ;  d.  in  New
York  city,  5  March.  1889.  She  was  descended  on  her
father's  side  from  John  Booth,  who  came  to  America
about  1649,  while  her  mother  was  the  granddaugh-
ter of  a  refugee  of  the  French  revolution.  At  an
early  age  she  became  a  contributor  to  various  jour-
nals. In  1845  and  1846  she  taught  in  her  father's
school  at  Williamsburg,  L.  I.,  but  gave  up  that  pur-
suit on  account  of  her  health,  and  devoted  herself  to
literature.  Besides  writing  tales  and  sketches  for
newspapers  and  magazines,  she  translated  from  the
French  "  The  Marble- Worker's  Manual "  (New
York,  1856)  and  "  The  Clock  and  Watch  Maker's
Manual."  She  translated  Mery's  "  Andre  Chenier  "
and  About's  "  King  of  the  Mountains  "  for  "  Emer-
son's Magazine,"  which  also  published  original  ar-
ticles from  her  pen.  She  next  translated  Victor
Cousin's  "  Secret  History  qf  the  French  Court ;  or,
Life  and  Times  of  Madame  de  Chevreuse  "  (1859).
The  same  year  appeared  the  first  edition  of  her
"  History  of  the  City  of  New  York,"  which  was  the
result  of  great  research.  After  its  publication  Miss
Booth  assisted  0.  W.  Wight  in  making  a  series  of
translations  of  the  French  classics,  and  she  also
translated  Edmund  About's  "  Germaine  "  (Boston,
I860).  During  the  civil  war  sHe  engaged  in  the  pa-
triotic task  of  translating  the  writings  of  eminent
Frenchmen  in  favor  of  the  cause  of  the  union,  and
these  were  published  in  rapid  succession :  Gaspa-
rin's  "  Uprising  of  a  Great  People  "  and  "  America
before  Europe  "  (New  York,  1861),  Edouard  Labou-
laye's  "  Paris  in  America  "  (New  York,  1865),  and
Augustin  Cochin's  "  Results  of  Emancipation  "  and
"Results  of  Slavery"  (Boston,  1862).  For  this
work  she  received  praise  and  encouragement  from
President  Lincoln,  Senator  Sumner,  and  other
statesmen.  During  the  entire  war  she  maintained
a  correspondence  with  Gasparin,  Cochin,  Henri
Martin,  Laboulaye,  Montalembert,  and  other
European  sympathizers  with  the  union.  She  also
translated  at  that  time  the  Countess  de  Gasparin's
"  Vesper,"  "  Camille,"  and  "  Human  Sorrows,"  and
Count  Gasparin's  "Happiness."  Documents  for-
warded to  her  by  French  friends  of  the  union
were  translated  and  published  in  pamphlets,  issued
by  the  union  league  club,  or  printed  in  the  New


York  journals.  Miss  Booth's  next  undertaking
was  a  translation  of  Henri  Martin's  "History  of
France."  The  two  volumes  treating  of  "  The  Age
of  Louis  XIV."  were  issued  in  1864,  and  two  others
the  last  of  the  seventeen  volumes  of  the  original
work,  in  1866  under  the  title  of  "  The  Decline  of
the  French  Monarchy."  It  was  intended  to  follow
these  with  the  other  volumes  from  the  beginning,
but,  although  two  others  were  translated  by  Miss
Booth,  the  enterprise  was  abandoned  for  lack  of
success,  and  no  more  were  printed.  Her  trans-
lation of  Martin's  abridgment  of  his  "History  of
France"  appeared  in  1880.  She  also  translated
Laboulaye's  "  Fairy  Book,"  and  Mace's  "  Fairy
Tales."  An  enlarged  edition  of  the  "  History  of
the  City  of  New  York  "  was  printed  in  1867,  and  a
second  revised  edition,  brought  down  to  date,  in
1880.  Miss  Booth  was  the  editor  of  "Harper's
Bazar"  since  its  establishment  in  1867.

BOOTH,  Newton,  senator,  b.  in  Salem,  Indiana,
25  Dec,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  Asbury  Uni-
versity in  1846,  after  which  he  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1850  at  Terre  Haute.
Subsequently  he  removed  to  California,  and  en-
gaged in  business  as  a  wholesale  grocer  in  Sacra-
mento. In  1857  he  returned  to  Terre  Haute,  where
he  practised  his  profession  until  1860,  when  he
again  went  to  California.  He  was  elected  to  the
state  senate  in  1863,  and  in  1871  to  the  governor-
ship on  an  independent  ticket.  This  office  he  re-
signed in  1875,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate  as  an  anti-monopolist.  He  took  his  seat  on
9  March,  1875,  and  served  until  3  March,  1881.
Subsequently  he  engaged  in  commercial  occupa-
tions in  California.

BOOTT,  Elizabeth,  artist,  b.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.  She  studied  painting  on  the  continent  of
Europe,  ending  her  studies  in  Paris  with  Couture,
remained  in  that  city,  and  devoted  herself  mainly
to  figure-painting.  She  sent  a  portrait  to  the
Philadelphia  centennial  exhibition.  Some  of  her
pictures  were  exhibited  in  Boston  in  1877 ;  and  at
the  mechanics'  fair  in  Boston  in  1878  she  exhibited
"  Head  of  a  Tuscan  Ox  "  and  "  Old  Man  Reading."
At  the  national  academy  exhibition  of  1886  she
had  "  Hydrangias"  and  "  Old  Woman  Spinning."

BORi)A,  Jean  Charles,  French  navigator,  b.  in
Dax,  4  May,  1733;  d.  in  Paris,  20  Feb.,  1799.  He
was  a  teacher  of  mathematics,  and  when  a  young
man  served  in  both  the  army  and  navy.  He  com-
manded the  ship  "  Solitaire  "  with  great  distinction
during  the  American  war  of  independence,  rose  to
the  rank  of  major-general  of  marines,  and  by  his
scientific  knowledge  was  of  great  service  to  the
Count  d'Estaing.  He  was  chosen  a  member  of  the
academy  in  1756,  and  contributed  valuable  papers
to  it  on  the  subjects  of  projectiles  and  the  con-
struction of  ships.  In  1771  he  was  employed  by
the  government  on  an  expedition  to  ascertain  the
value  of  chronometers  in  determining  longitudes.
In  1771,  1774,  and  at  a  later  period,  he  made  voy-
ages to  America  for  scientific  purposes,  of  which  he
published  an  account.  He  was  one  of  the  commis-
sioners, with  Delambre  and  Mechain,  to  determine
an  arc  of  the  meridian  as  a  basis  for  the  metric
system  of  weights  and  measures,  and  was  sent  on
several  expeditions  to  decide  this  question,  lie
founded  the  school  of  naval  architecture  in  France,
and  invented  an  instrument  for  measuring  the  in-
clination of  the  magnetic  needle.  His  corrections
of  the  seconds  pendulum  are  still  in  use;  but  ms
reputation  rests  principally  on  his  improvement  oi
the  reflecting  circle,  on  which  instrument  he  puD-
lished  a  work  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1787).  He  also  pu  >
lished  several  able  treatises  on  hydraulics,  wrote


BORDEN

on  mnthematics  and  navigation,  and  constructed
logarithmic  tables  for  the  centesiinal  division  of
the  quadrant.

BORDEN,  Enoch  R.,  journalist,  b.  in  1823;  d.
in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  16  May,  1870.  For  twenty  years
before  his  death  he  was  editor  of  the  "  Daily  State
Gazette,"  except  while  serving  as  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  Newell  and  as  secretary  to  the  New  Jersey
state  senate  in  1865-'6.  Under  the  administra-
tion of  President  Fillmore  he  held  an  appointment
in  the  public  document  department,  and  afterward
in  the  pension  agency  at  Washington.

BORDEN,  Gail,  inventor,  b.  in  Norwich,  N.
Y.,  6  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Borden,  Texas,  11  Jan.,
1874 His  parents  were  of  New  England  descent,
and  in  1814  they  emigrated  from  New  York,  set-
tling in  Covington,  Ky.,  and  later  in  Madison,  then
in  the  territory  of  Indiana. In  1822,  finding  his
health  impaired,  he  removed  to  Mississippi,  where
he  taught,  and  also  filled  the  positions  of  county
surveyor  and  U.  S.  deputy  surveyor. In  1829  he
went  to  Texas. He  was  elected  delegate  to  the
convention  that,  in  1833,  petitioned  the  Mexican
^ovemraent for  separation,  and he  was  also in
i^harge  of  the  official  surveys  of  the  colony,  com-
biling  the  first  topographical  map  of  Texas. The
i  and  office  at  San  Felipe  was  under  his  charge  up
i;o  the  time of  the  Mexican  invasion. In 1835,
Lvith  his  brother,  Thomas  H.,  he  established  the
I'  Telegraph  and  Texas  Land  Register  "  at  San  Fe-
ipe,  which  was  afterward  transferred  to  Houston,
and  was  the  first  and  only  newspaper  published  in
Texas  during  the  war  for  the  independence  of  that
'olony. After  the  establishment  of  the  republic
•f  Texas  he  was  appointed  by  President  Houston
irst  collector  of  the  port  of  Galveston. That  city
n  1837  had  not  been  laid  out,  and  its  first  surveys
vere  made  by  him. From  1839  till  1857  he  was
;gent  of  the  Galveston  city  company,  a  corpora-
ion  owning  several  thousand  acres  of  land  on
(rhich  the  city  is  now  built. About  1849  his  atten-
ion  was  drawn  to  the  need  of  more  suitable  sup-
lies  for  emigrants  crossing  the  plains,  and  after
ome  experimenting  he  produced  the  "  pemmican,"
?hich  Dr.  Kane  carried  with  him  on  his  Arctic
xpedition. The  "  meat  biscuit,"  the  most  simple,
conomical,  and  efficient  form  of  portable  concen-
rated  food,  was  invented  by  him. This  article
ained  for  him  the  "  great  council  medal "  at  the
'•orld's  fair,  London,  1852,  and  he  was  elected  an
onorary  member  of  the  London  Society  of  Arts.
leeting  with  opposition  from  the  army  contract-
us, he  was  unsuccessful  in  the  manufaclure  of  his
iscuit,  and  lost  his  entire  means. He  then*  re-
loved  to  the  north  and  turned  his  attention  to  the
reservation  of  milk,  and  in  1853  applied  for  a
atent  for  "  producing  concentrated  sweet  milk  by
i^aporation  in  vacuo,  the  same  having  no  sugar  or
:her  foreign  matter  mixed  with  it,"  but  failed  of
souring  it  until  1856. Later,  the  New  York  Con-
snsed  Milk Company  was  formed, and works
ere  established  at  Brewster's  station,  N.  Y.,  and
:  Elgin,  111. During  the  civil  war  his  condensed
ilk  was  extensively  used  in  the  army  and  navy,
ondensed meat-juices  were then experimented
pon,  and  he  produced  an  extract  of  beef  of  supe-
pr  quality,  which  at  first  he  made  in  Elgin,  but
terward  established  his  factory  at  Borden,  Texas,
ater,  he  produced  excellent  preparations  of  con-
msed  tea,  coffee,  and  cocoa,  and  in  1862  patented
process  by  means  of  which  the  juice  of  fruit—
tch  as  apples,  currants,  and  grapes — could  be  re-
iced  to  one  seventh  of  its  original  bulk. Mr.
orden  acquired  great  wealth  from  his  patents,  and
as  very  liberal  in  the  use  of  his  money.
VOL. I. — 21


BOREMAN


321


BORDEN,  Simeon,  inventor,  b.  in  Freetown,
now  Fall  River,  Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1798 ;  d.  in  Fall
River,  28  Oct.,  1856.  He  acquired  a  rudimentary
education  in  the  district  school  at  Tiverton,  R.  I.,
and  pursued  by  himself  the  study  of  geometry  and
applied  mathematics.  Without  serving  any  ap-
prenticeship, he  made  himself  a  thorough  work-
man in  wood  and  metals.  He  also  practised  sur-
veying with  success,  constructing  his  own  compass.
In  1828  he  took  charge  of  a  machine-shop  in  Fall
River.  He  devised  and  constructed,  in  1830,  an
apparatus  for  measuring  the  base  line  of  the  trigo-
nometrical survey  of  Massachusetts,  which  was
found  to  be  more  accurate  and  convenient  than
any  instrument  of  the  kind  then  in  existence.  The
apparatus,  fifty  feet  in  length,  was  enclosed  in  a
tube,  and  was  accompanied  by  four  compound
microscopes,  the  tube  and  microscopes  being
mounted  on  trestles,  and  adjusted  so  as  to  move  in
any  desired  direction.  Mr.  Borden  assisted  in  fix-
ing the  base  line,  and  in  the  subsequent  triangula-
tion  in  1834  the  state  authorities  appointed  him
superintendent  of  the  survey,  which  he  completed
in  1841.  This  work,  the  first  geodetic  survey  ac-
complished in  America,  is  described  in  the  ninth
volume  of  the  "  American  Philosophical  Transac-
tions." Its  accuracy  was  subsequently  established
by  the  U.  S.  coast  survey.  Mr.  Borden  was  em-
ployed as  surveyor  in  the  case  of  Rhode  Island
V.  Massachusetts,  tried  before  the  U.  S.  supreme
court  in  1844.  After  the  case  was  decided  he
surveyed  and  marked  the  boundary-line  between
the  two  states.  He  engaged  later  in  the  con-
struction of  railroads,  and  in  1851  published  a
volume  entitled  "A  System  of  Useful  Formula),
adapted  to  the  Practical  Operations  of  Locating
and  Constructing  Railroads."  In  1851  he  accom-
plished the  engineering  feat  of  stringing  a  tele-
graph wire,  suspended  on  masts  220  feet  high,
across  the  Hudson  river  from  the  Palisades  to  Fort
Washington,  a  distance  of  more  than  a  mile.

BORDLEY,  John  Beale,  agricultural  writer,
b.  in  Annapolis,  Md.,  11  Feb.,  1727 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, 26  Jan.,  1804.  He  was  a  lawyer  by  pro-
fession, was  prothonotary  of  Baltimore  co.  in  1753-
^QQ,  judge  of  the  provincial  court  in  1766  and  of
the  admiralty  court  in  1767-'76,  and  a  commis-
sioner to  fix  the  boundary-line  between  Maryland
and  Delaware  in  1768.  Pie  was  one  of  the  few
members  of  the  provincial  councils  who  sympa-
thized with  the  movement  for  independence.  Re-
moving to  Philadelphia  in  1793,  he  established
there  the  first  agricultural  society  in  the  United
States.  By  his  experiments  upon  his  estate  in
Wye  island,  Chesapeake  bay,  and  by  his  writings,
he  was  instrumental  in  diffusing  a  knowledge  of
the  art  of  husbandry.  He  published  "  Forsyth  on
Fruit-Trees,  with  Notes  " ;  "  On  Rotation  of  Crops  "
(1792) ;  "  Essays  and  Notes  on  Husbandry  and  Ru-
ral Affairs,  with  Plates"  (1799-1801);  and  "A
View  of  the  Courses  of  Crops  in  England  and
Maryland  "  (1784).

BOREMAN,  Arthur  In^raham,  governor  of
West  Virginia,  b.  in  Waynesburg,  Pa.,  24  July,
1823.  While  he  was  a  child  his  father  removed  to
western  Virginia.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1845,  and  began  practice  at  Parkersburg.  He  was
elected  to  the  Virginia  house  of  delegates  in  1855,
and  re-elected  for  each  successive  term  until  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  a  member  oi
the  extra  session  of  the  legislature  in  1861,  and  a
vigorous  opponent  of  secession.  Of  the  Wheeling
convention  of  unionists  of  the  northwestern  coun-
ties, called  in  June,  1861,  for  the  purpose  of  reor-


322


BORGELLA


BORLAND


ganizing  the  government  of  Virginia,  he  was  made
president.  In  October,  1861,  he  was  elected  a  judge
of  the  circuit  court,  and  in  1863  governor  of  the
newly  constituted  state  of  West  Virginia.  He  was
twice  re-elected,  but  during  his  third  terra  of  office
resigned,  as  he  had  been  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
in  which  he  held  a  seat  from  4  March,  1869,  till  3
March,  1875.

BORCxELLA,  J6r6ine-Maxiiiiilien,  president
of  Hayti,  b.  in  Port  au  Prince,  6  May,  1773 ;  d.  in
September,  1842.  His  mother  being  a  colored
woman,  Borgella  could  not  legally  use  the  name
of  his  father,  who  was  white ;  but  he  obtained  that
right  on  the  proclamation  of  equality,  4  April,
1792.  After  receiving  some  education  he  entered
a  carpenter's  shop  to  learn  that  trade  in  1786,  and
three  years  later  joined  the  mulatto  insurgents  and
fought  against  the  negroes  and  the  whites;  but
the  negroes  under  Toussaint  prevailed,  and  Bor-
gella suffered  persecution.  When  Napoleon  I,  sent
troops  to  Hayti  to  put  down  the  insurrection,  Bor-
gella served  in  the  French  army  for  some  time,
but  returned  to  the  revolutionary  party  and  dis-
tinguished himself  by  his  bravery  and  his  generos-
ity toward  the  vanquished,  many  of  these  being
saved  by  him  when  Dessalines  ordered  the  slaughter
of  the  whites.  He  took  an  active  and  important
part  in  the  civil  wars  during  the  early  period  of
the  republic,  of  which  he  was  appointed  president
by  the  assembly  as  successor  of  Rigauld,  who
died  18  Sept.,  1811.  Borgella  afterward  fdled  the
highest  offices  in  the  army,  in  the  chambers,  and
in  several  departments  of  the  government,  during
Boyer's  administration.

BORGESS,  Caspar  H.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ad-
drup,  Grand  Duchy  of  Oldenburg,  in  1826;  d.  in
Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  3  May.  1890.  In  this  country  he
pursued  his  classical  and  philosophical  studies  in
Philadelphia  and  at  St,  Charles  seminary,  finished
his  theological  course  in  St.  Xavier's  college,  Cin-
cinnati, and  was  ordained  in  1848.  He  was  sta-
tioned for  ten  years  at  Columbus,  Ohio,  and  in
1859  appointed  rector  of  St.  Peter's  cathedral,  Cin-
cinnati, where  he  remained  until  he  was  promoted
to  the  see  of  Detroit.  He  was  consecrated  titular
bishop  of  Caledonia  in  1870,  and  succeeded  to  the
bishopric  of  Detroit  in  1871.

BORIE,  Adolph  E.,  secretary  of  the  navy,  b.
in  Philadelphia  in  1809;  d.  there,  5  Feb.,  1880.
He  was  a  descendant,  on  the  mother's  side,  of  a
family  of  refugees  from  Santo  Domingo,  of  whom
a  large  number  settled  in  Philadelphia.  In  1826
he  was  graduated  at  the  Pennsylvania  university,
and  went  to  Paris  to  complete  his  education.
After  spending  several  years  abroad  he  returned
to  the  United  States  and'  entered  upon  mercantile
pursuits,  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  firm
of  McKean,  Borie  &  Co.,  and  acquired  a  large  for-
tune in  the  East  India  trade.  In  1862,  when  the
first  union  league  of  the  country  was  formed  in
Philadelphia,  Mr.  Borie  was  one  of  its  founders
and  its  vice-president.  He  gave  large  sums  toward
the  enlistment  and  care  of  soldiers  during  the  civil
war,  but  took  no  part  in  politics.  On  5  March,
1869,  he  became  a  member  of  the  cabinet  appointed
by  President  Grant,  as  secretary  of  the  navy,  which
office  he  resigned,  22  June,  1869.  He  accompanied
Gen.  Grant  during  a  part  of  his  tour  around  the
world  in  1877-'8.

BORJA,  Ana,  daughter  of  the  duke  de  Gandia,
and  wife  of  count  de  Lemos,  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.
about  1635 ;  d.  in  Madrid,  23  Sept.,  1706.  She  ar-
rived at  Lima  with  her  husband  21  Nov.,  1667.
When  the  viceroy  went  to  Puno  on  account  of  seri-
ous trouble,  and  riots  occurred  in  Laicacota, in


1668,  he  did  not  transfer  his  powers  to  the  Audien-
cia,  as  was  customary,  but  to  his  wife,  all  the  au-
thorities consenting.  She  governed  Peru  till  about
the  end  of  the  year  1669,  and  soon  after  the  death
of  the  viceroy  returned^  to  Spain,

BORJA  Y  A R AGON,  Francisco  (bor-ha),  a
descendant  of  the  kings  of  Aragon,  prince  of  Es-
quilache  and  viceroy  of  Peru,  b.  in  Madrid  in  1582 ;
d.  there,  26  Sept.,  1658.  He  studied  in  Spain,  and
had  won  a  good  literary  reputation  and  dis-
charged high  offices  in  the  court  of  Philip  HI.
when  he  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Peru  in  1614.
There  he  founded  several  colleges  and  made  im-
portant changes  in  the  organization  of  the  univer-
sity of  San  Marcos.  He  instituted  the  tribunal  del
consulado,  a  special  court  and  corporation  to  regu-
late commercial  affairs  generally,  increased  the
navy  and  the  artillery,  and  gave  a  great  impulse
to  mining  in  the  province  of  Chucuito.  On  tin
death  of  Philip,  Borja  embarked  to  return  to  Spain
31  Dec,  1621.  Plis  best-known  works  are  "  Napokv-
recuperada  por  el  Rey  Alfonso,"  a  poem  (1651) ;
"Obras  en  Verso"  (Antwerp,  1654);  and  "Oraei-
ones  y  Meditaciones  de  la  Vida  de  Jesueristo"
(Brussels,  1661).

BORLAND,  Solon,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia:  d.
in  Texas,  31  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  educated  in  North
Carolina,  studied  medicine,  and  settled  as  a  physi-
cian in  Little  Rock,  Ark.  He  served  in  the  Mexi-
can war  as  major  in  Yell's  cavalry,  and  was  taken
prisoner  with  Maj.  Gaines  in  January,  1847.  He
was  discharged  when  his  troop  was  disbanded  in
June  of  that  year,  but  continued  in  the  service  as
volunteer  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Worth  during  the
remainder  of  the  campaign,  from  the  battle  of  El
Molino  to  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico  on
14  Sept.,  1847.  After  his  return  to  Arkansas,  Mr.
Borland  was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  .
by  the  resignation  of  Senator  Ambrose  II.  Sevier,
and  subsequently  elected  by  the  legislature  to
serve  through  Mr.  Sevier's  unexpired  term.  After
serving  in  the  senate  from  24  April,  1848,  till  3
March,  1853,  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Nicara-
gua, being  also  accredited  to  Costa  Rica,  Guate-
mala, Honduras,  and  Salvador.  He  received  his
credentials,  18  April,  1853,  and  remained  in  Nicara-
gua till  17  April,  1854,  when  he  returned  home,
and  on  30  June  resigned.  At  San  Juan  de  Nicara-
gua, when  he  was  returning  to  the  United  States,
the  authorities  of  the  town  attempted  to  arrest
him  in  May,  1854,  for  interfering  to  prevent  the
arrest  of  a  person  charged  with  murder  at  Puntas
Arenas.  He  took  refuge  in  a  hotel,  and  while  he
was  engaged  in  protesting  against  arrest  a  man  in
the  crowd  threw  a  glass  bottle  and  struck  the  en-
voy. This  insult  was  the  chief  ground  for  the
bombardment  and  destruction  of  Greytown,  or  San
Juan  de  Nicaragua,  by  the  sloop-of-war  "  Cyane,"
under  Commander  Hollins,  on  13  July,  1854,  under
instructions  from  the  U.  S.  government.  Presi-
dent Pierce  offered  the  post  of  governor  of  ^e\v
Mexico  to  Mr.  Borland  after  his  return,  but  he  de-
clined the  appointment  and  remained  at  Little
Rock  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  takmg  no
part  in  politics  except  occasionally  to  declare  hnn-
self  an  adherent  of  the  state-rights  doctrines.  In
the  spring  of  1861,  before  the  ordinance  of  seces-
sion, which  was  passed  6  May,  he  organized  a  bodv
of  troops,  and,  under  the  direction  of  Gov.  Rector,
on  24  April  at  midnight,  took  possession  of  tlie
buildings  at  Fort  Smith  an  hour  after  the  with-
drawal of  Capt.  Sturgis  with  the  garrison.  He
raised  the  3d  Arkansas  confederate  cavalry  ana
became  colonel  of  that  regiment,  and  was  aiter-
ward  a  brigadier-general  in  the  same  service.


BORRE


BOSTWICK


323


BOBRE,  Pnidhomme  de,  general  in  the  con-
tinental army,  b.  in  France.  He  was  a  French
nobleman  who  volunteered,  with  other  officers,  to
fight  in  the  cause  of  American  independence,  and
on  1  Dec,  1776,  was  commissioned  by  congress  a
brigadier-general,  but  resigned  on  14  Dec,  1777.

BORRERO,  Eusebio  (bor-ray'-ro),  South
American  soldier,  b,  in  Cali,  Colombia,  in  1793;  d.
there  in  1856.  He  entered  the  revolutionary  army
of  New  Granada  in  1811,  fought  in  the  battle  of
Palace,  which  was  the  first  in  the  campaign  against
Spain,  and  served  during  the  whole  war,  being
gradually  promoted  to  the  rank  of  general.  After
the  establishment  of  the  republic  in  New  Granada,
J3orrero  was  several  times  a  member  of  congress,
where  he  distinguished  himself  as  a  parliamentary
orator.  In  1845  he  was  a  candidate  for  the  office
of  president  of  the  republic

BOSCAWEN,  Edward,  British  admiral,  b.  in
Cornwall,  England,  19  Aug.,  1711 :  d.  near  Guild-
ford, 10  Jan.,  1761.  He  was  the  third  son  of  Hugh
Boscawen,  first  Lord  Falmouth,  his  mother  being
daughter  of  a  sister  of  Marlborough.  He  entered
the  navy  3  April,  1726,  became  a  lieutenant  on  25
May,  1732,  and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  cap-
tain 13  March,  1737.  Having  specially  distin-
guished himself  at  Portobello  and  Carthagena,  he
was  promoted,  in  1744,  to  the  "  Dreadnought,"
sixty  guns,  in  which  he  took  the  "  Medee  "  in  the
channel,  28  April,  1744.  He  signalized  himself
under  Anson,  at  the  battle  off  Cape  Finisterre  in
1747,  where  he  was  severely  wounded,  and,  being
made  a  rear-admiral,  was  despatched,  in  1748,  with
a  squadron  to  the  East  Indies.  He  failed  in  an  at-
tempt upon  Pondicherry,  but  took  Madras,  and,
on  his  return  to  England,  became  a  member  of  the
admiralty  board  in  1751.  He  sailed  for  North
America  in  1755,  and  in  an  action  with  a  French
squadron  captured  two  ships  of  the  line.  In  1756
he  became  vice-admiral  of  the  blue,  and  in  1758,
in  conjunction  with  Gen.  Amherst,  who  com-
manded the  land  forces,  reduced  Louisburg  and
Cape  Breton.  In  1759,  having  charge  of  the  Med-
iterranean fleet,  he  pursued  the  Toulon  fleet  under
De  la  Clue  through  the  straits  of  Gibraltar,  and,
overtaking  it  in  Lagos  bay,  defeated  it,  taking
three  ships  and  burning  tWo.  He  received  the
thanks  of  parliament,  a  pension  of  £3,000  a  year,
and  the  rank  of  general  of  marines.  On  his  return
to  Spithead  with  2,000  prisoners  and  his  prizes,  he
received  the  freedom  of  the  Scottish  capital,  and
had  many  other  marks  of  public  regard  conferred
upon  him.  He  was  elected  to  parliament  in  1741
for  Truro,  and  served  in  that  capacity  until  1761.
Lord  Chatham  said  of  him:  "When  I  apply  to
other  officers  respecting  any  expedition  I  may
chance  to  project,  they  always  raise  difficulties;
Boscawen  aiwavs  finds  expedients."

BOSOMWORTH,  Thomas,  clergyman.  He
came  to  America  with  Gen.  Oglethorpe's  regiment
of  Highlanders  in  1736.  About  1749  he  married
Mary  Musgrove,  or  Mathews,  a  woman  of  the
Creek  nation,  who  had  been  twice  widowed  of
white  husbands.  When  the  English  first  arrived,
she  had  no  especial  influence  with  the  Indians,  but
gradually  came  to  be  recognized  by  them  as  their
queen.  Gov.  Oglethorpe  gave  her  a  yearly  allow-
ance of  $500,  in  payment  for  her  services  as  inter-
preter, and  in  order  to  retain  her  good-will.  Bos-
oraworth  and  his  wife  settled  upon  a  tract  of  land
granted  him  by  the  crown,  and  ran  heavilv  in  debt
to  the  surrounding  planters  for  live  stock  and  sup-
plies. In  the  hope,  apparently,  of  retrieving  his
iortunes,  he  persuaded  his  wife  to  assert  her  right
at  first  to  some  of  the  coast  islands,  and  afterward


as  hereditary  sovereign  to  a  large  part  of  the  Creek
territory.  The  ambition  of  the  claimants  seeming-
ly grew  with  their  demands,  and  the  "queen,"
prompted  no  doubt  by  her  husband,  assumed  the
title  of  an  independent  empress,  disavowing  all  re-
lations with  Great  Britain  save  such  as  might  sub-
sist between  two  sovereigns.  She  incited  the
powerful  Creek  nation  to  revolt,  sent  a  messenger
to  Gov.  Oglethorpe  to  notify  him  that  she  was  com-
ing to  reclaim  her  own,  and  marched  toward  Sa-
vannah with  a  large  body  of  armed  Indians.  The
authorities  could  muster  fewer  than  two  hundred
men  in  the  town,  but  sent  with  haste  for  all  avail-
able re-enforcements.  A  troop  of  horse,  under  Capt,
Jones,  met  the  savages  outside  the  town  and  made
them  lay  down  their  armg  before  entering  the  place.
Then  Bosomworth,  in  his  canonical  robes,  with  his
queen  by  his  side,  inarched  to  the  parade,  followed
by  the  chiefs  in  order  of  rank,  and  a  great  number
of  warriors.  They  were  received  with  distinguished
courtesy,  the  militia  firing  a  salute,  and  a  long  con-
sultation was  held  by  the  authorities  and  the  chiefs,
the  Bosom  worths  being  excluded.  By  some  means
the  Indians  regained  possession  of  their  arms,  and
for  a  tune  the  settlement  was  in  imminent  peril.
But  the  authorities  were  able  to  seize  and  confine
the  Bosomworths,  and  employed  agents  to  spread
rumors  among  the  Indians  that  the  whole  affair
was  a  plot  on  the  chaplain's  part  to  secure  means
to  pay  his  own  personal  debts.  This  course  was
for  a  time  successful,  and  the  watch  upon  the
queen  and  her  husband  was  imprudently  relaxed,
whereupon  the  mercurial  savages  were  again  stirred
up  to  revolt,  and  seemingly  a  massacre  of  the  whites
might  have  begun  at  any  moment.  In  this  man-
ner several  days  passed,  and  the  English  settlers
were  well-nigh  worn  out  with  constant  guard-duty,
while  their  women  were  in  a  state  of  distraction
with  the  ceaseless  terror  of  Indians  yelling  through
the  streets.  More  than  once  both  sides  grasped
their  arms,  but  some  trifle  turned  the  tide,  and  at
last  diplomacy  and  presents  prevailed,  and  Mary
was  locked  up  under  strict  guard.  Bosomworth
was  brought  before  the  council,  with  a  view  to  ap-
pealing to  his  reason,  but  he  seized  the  opportunity
to  make  an  abusive  speech,  and  had  in  turn  to  be
removed  by  force.  When  the  leaders  were  thus
disposed  of,  the  Indians  were  with  difficulty  per-
suaded to  leave  the  town.  After  a  period  of  con-
finement, Bosomworth  perceived  the  folly  of  at-
tempting to  enforce  his  wife's  claim,  and,  having
made  suitable  apologies  and  promises  for  her  as
well  as  for  himself,  he  was  liberated.

BOSSU,  F.,  French  traveller,  b.  in  Baigneux-
les-Juys  about  1725.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  navy,
and  one  of  the  first  travellers  to  explore  Louisiana.
He  made  three  journeys  to  this  country,  by  order
of  his  government,  and  published  an  account  of
his  explorations,  in  two  works,  entitled  "  Nouveaux
voyages  aux  Indies  occidentales,"  etc.  (Paris,  1768),
which  was  translated  into  English  by  J.  B.  Foster,
with  the  title,  "  Travels  through  that*^Part  of  North
America  formerly  called  Louisiana"  (London,
1771),  and  "  Nouveaux  voyages  dans  I'Amerique
septentrionale  "  (Amsterdam,  1777).

BOSTWICK,  David,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Milford,  Conn.,  8  Jan.,  1721 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
12  Nov.,  1763.  His  ancestor,  Arthur,  emigrated
from  Cheshire,  England,  in  1668.  David  became
a  teacher  in  Newark  academy,  entered  the  minis-
try of  the  Presbyterian  church,  was  first  settled
over  a  congregation  in  Jamaica,  L.  I.,  9  Oct.,  1745,
and  in  May,  1756,  transferred  by  the  synod  to  the
Presbyterian  church  in  New  York.  His  sermon
on  "  Self  disclaimed  and  Christ  exalted  "  was  pub-


324


BOSTWICK


BOTTA


lished  in  1758.  In  1761  he  published  an  "Ac-
count of  the  Life,  Death,  and  Character  of  Presi-
dent Da  vies,"  prefixed  to  a  sermon  of  the  latter  on
the  death  of  George  II.  A  "  Vindication  of  Infant
Baptism,"  containing  the  substance  of  several  of
his  sermons,  was  published  after  his  death  and  re-
printed in  London  in  1765.

BOSTWICK,  Helen  Louise,  poet,  b.  in  Charles-
town,  N.  H.,  in  1826.  She  is  a  daughter  of  Dr.
Putnam -Barron,  who  removed  to  Bucyms,  Ohio,
in  1838.  In  early  life  she  became  a  contributor  to
literary  journals.  After  her  marriage  she  resided
at  Ravenna,  Ohio.  A  volume  of  her  poems,  enti-
tled "  Buds,  Blossoms,  and  Berries,"  was  published
in  New  York  in  1864.

BOTETOURT,  Norborne  Berkeley,  baron,
colonial  governor  of  Virginia,  b.  in  England  about
1717;  d.  in  Williamsburg,  Va.,  15  Oct.,  1770.  He
was  colonel  of  the  North  Gloucestershire  militia  in
1761,  and  represented  that  division  of  the  county
in  parliament  until  he  was  made  a  peer  in  1764.
He  claimed  the  title  of  Baron  Botetourt,  or  Botte-
tourt,  as  the  lineal  descendant  of  Sir  Maurice  de
Berkeley,  who  died  in  1347.  Having  lost  heavily
at  gambling,  he  solicited  an  appointment,  and  in
July,  1768,  was  made  governor  of  Virginia.  He
was  instructed  to  impress  the  colonists  with  a  dis-
play of  power  and  dignity,  and  to  enforce  submis-
sion to  the  principle  of  parliamentary  supremacy,
while  humoring  the  colonists  in  every  other  par-
ticular. He  succeeded  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst,  who,
like  his  predecessors  for  three  quarters  of  a  century,
would  not  go  out  to  Virginia  to  reside.  Lord  Bote-
tourt was  expected  to  arrive  in  a  seventy-four,  and
to  set  up  a  state  carriage  and  a  body-guard.  He
arrived  in  the  James  river  in  November,  1768,  and
was  soon  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Virginians.
In  May,  1769,  when  the  assembly  passed  resolutions
condemnatory  of  parliamentary  taxation  and  of  the
sending  of  accused  persons  to  England  for  trial,
Botetourt  dissolved  the  legislature,  in  which
Thomas  Jefferson,  a  young  lawyer  recently  elected
from  Albemarle  county,  was  a  leader.  The  next
day  they  met  in  convention  at  the  Raleigh  tavern
and  passed  resolutions  against  the  use  of  any  mer-
chandise that  should  be  imported  from  Great  Brit-
ain. These  articles  of  association  were  recom-
mended to  the  other  colonies  and  sent  to  England.
All  of  the  members  were  re-elected  except  those
who  had  dissented  from  the  action  of  the  majority.
Lord  Botetourt  did  not  forfeit  the  respect  and  es-
teem of  the  people  by  that  act.  In  his  correspond-
ence with  Hillsborough,  Lord  Botetourt  wrote  that
the  colonists  would  eagerly  assist  the  mother-coun-
try if  called  upon  by  requisition,  as  formerly,  but
that  they  would  never  assent  to  the  principle  of
parliamentary  taxation.  He  received  from  Lord
Hillsborough  a  promise  of  repeal,  and,  finding
himself  deceived,  demanded  his  recall,  and  shortly
afterward  died,  his  death  having  been  hastened
by  chagrin  at  the  failure  of  his  efforts  to  effect  a
reconciliation  between  the  colonists  and  the  home
authorities.  He  interested  himself,  during  his  resi-
dence in  Virginia,  in  William  and  Mary  college,
and  presented  gold  and  silver  medals  to  the  stu-
dents. In  1770  the  assembly  voted  to  erect  a  statue
of  the  deceased  governor,  which  was  executed  in
1774  and  placed  in  front  of  the  capitol,  whence  it
was  removed  in  1797  to  the  front  of  William  and
Mary  college,  where  it  stood  until  the  civil  war,
during  which  it  was  taken  to  the  inclosure  of  the
insane  asylum  at  Williamsburg.

BOTSFORI),  William,  jurist,  b.  in  New  Ha-
ven, Conn.,  in  April,  1763 ;  d.  in  Sackville,  New
Brunswick,  8  May,  1864. He  was  a  son  of  Amos


Botsford,  a  loyalist,  who  was  born  in  Newtown,
Conn.,  31  Jan.,  1744,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1763,  became  a  lawyer,  and  after  his  removal  to
Nova  Scotia  was  elected  to  the  assembly,  for  two
years  speaker  of  that  body,  and  died  in  St.  Johns,
14  March,  1812.  The  son  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1795,  a  judge  of  admiralty  in  New  Brunswick
in  1802-7,  elected  to  the  assembly  in  1812.  and  for
every  succeeding  term  until  1823,  holding  the  office
of  speaker  from  1817  to  1823,  and  in  the  latter  year
became  judge  of  the  supreme  court,  and  retained
that  position  till  1846. — His  son,  Amos  Edwin,
Canadian  jurist,  b,  in  St.  John,  N.  B.,  in  1804,  was
educated  at  Sackville,  studied  law,  and  admitted
to  the  bar.  He  has  been  prominently  connected
with  military  affairs,  is  a  lieutenant-colonel,  and
has  been  president  or  vice-president  of  the  domin-
ion rifle  association  since  its  organization.  He  was
a  member  of  the  executive  council.  New  Bruns-
wick, from  1838  till  1840,  and  of  the  legislative
council  from  1833  till  1867,  a  senior  judge  of  the
court  of  common  pleas  for  several  years,  and  a
commissioner  with  L.  B.  Chandler  to  settle  boun-
dary-line between  New  Brunswick  and  Nova  Scotia
in  1836.  He  went  to  Washington  as  a  commis-
sioner respecting  the  border  difficulty  in  1839,  and
again  in  1852  with  respect  to  reciprocity  with  the
United  States,  a  treaty  for  which  was  concluded
in  1854.  He  is  a  conservative  in  politics,  and  was
called  to  the  senate  in  1867.

BOTTA,  Carlo  Giuseppe  Ou^lielmo,  Italian
historian,  b.  in  San  Giorgio  del  Canovese,  Pied-
mont, 6  Nov.,  1766;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  10  Aug.,
1837.  He  was  educated  as  a  physician  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Turin,  and  pursued  also  botanical,
literary,  and  musical  studies.  After  undergoing
seventeen  months  of  imprisonment  in  1792-*3,  on
a  groundless  political  accusation,  he  became  a  sur-
geon in  the  French  army,  and  published  a  scheme
for  the  government  of  Lombardy.  While  stationed,
in  1796,  in  the  Venetian  islands  of  the  Adriatic,  he
wrote  a  "Historical  and  Medical  Description  of
the  Island  of  Corfu."  In  1798  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  short-lived  provisional  government
of  Piedmont,  and  after  the  battle  of  Marengo,  in
1800,  became  a  member  of  the  commission  ap-
pointed to  reorganize  and  administer  the  govern-
ment of  Piedmont,  and  retained  as  one  of  the
three  commissioners  charged  with  the  administra-
tion of  the  new  government.  After  the  annexa-
tion to  France,  in  1802,  he  became  a  member  of
the  council  of  general  administration.  In  that
year  he  published  his  "Precis  historique  de  la
niaison  de  Savoie  et  du  Piemont."  In  1804  he
went  to  Paris  as  a  representative  of  the  department
of  the  Dora  in  the  legislative  body,  and  in  1808--'9
was  vice-president  of  the  assembly.  In  1809-'10
he  issued  in  Paris  the  first  edition  of  the*'Storia
della  guerra  dell'  independenza  degli  Stati  Uniti
d'America,"  which  was  long  esteemed  the  best  his-
tory of  our  struggle,  for  independence.  It  was
translated  into  English  by  George  Alexander  Otis
(Boston,  1826).  From  1817  till  1822  he  was  rector
of  the  university  at  Rouen,  and  while  there  he
wrote  his  "Storia  d'ltalia  del  1789  al  1814"  (1824).
In  1815  he  published  an  epic  poem  entitled  "  Ca-
millo  o  Vejo  conquistata."  His  last  work  was  a
large  history  of  Italy  connecting  Guicciardnii  s
work,  which  came  down  to  1532,  with  his  own  his-
tory of  Italy  during  the  epoch  of  the  French  revo-
lution. This  work,  entitled  "  Storia  d'ltalia  con-
tinuata  da  quella  del  Guicciardini  sino  al  1789,
appeared  in  Paris  in  1832.  See  Tipaldo's  "13.io-
grafia  degli  Italiani  illustri"  ;  also  "Elogio  storico
di  C.  Botta,"  by  F.  Becchi.


BOTTA


BOTTS


325


BOTTA,  Tincenzo,  author,  b.  in  Cavalier  Mag-
giore,  Piedmont,  11  Nov.,  1818.  He  was  educated
at  the  university  of  Turin,  and  became  professor
of  philosophy  in  that  institution.  In  1849  he  was
elected  to  the  Sardinian  parliament,  and  in  1850
commissioned,  in  association  with  Dr.  Parola,  an-
other deputy,  to  examine  the  educational  system
of  Germany.  Their  report  on  the  German  uni-
versities and  schools  was  published  at  the  expense
of  the  government.  In  1853  he  came  to  the  United
States  for  the  purpose  of  investigating  the  pub-
lic-school system,  settled  here,  became  natural-
ized, and  for  many  years  filled  the  chair  of  Italian
language  and  literature  in  the  university  of  the
city  of  New  York.  He  married,  in  1855,  Anne
Charlotte  Lynch,  the  author.  He  published  an
"Account  of  the  System  of  Education  in  Pied-
mont"; "Discourse  on  the  Life,  Character,  and
Policy  of  Cavour  "  (1802) ;  "  Dante  as  Philosopher,
Patriot,  and  Poet,"  with  an  analysis  of  the  "  Di-
vina  Commedia"  (New  York,  1865);  and  "An  His-
torical Account  of  Modern  Philosophy  in  Italy." —
His  wife,  Anne  Charlotte  Lynch,  author,  b.  in
Bennington,  Vt.,  11  Nov.,  1815;  d.  in  New  York
city,  23  March,  1891.  Her  father  was  a  native  of
Ireland,  who  joined  the  rebels  under  Lord  Edward
Fitzgerald.  He  was  captured,  and  remained  a
prisoner  four  years,  when,  still  refusing  to  take

the  oath  of  alle-
giance, he  .  was
banished,  and
came  to  the  Uni-
ted States,  where
he  married  and
died  a  few  years
later.  His  daugh-
ter was  educated
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
and  began  early
to  write"  for  liter-
ary periodicals.
She  removed  to
Providence,  R.  I.,
and  there  edited
the  "Rhode  Isl-
and Book,"  con-
taining selections
from  the  authors
of  that  state  (Providence,  1841).  Soon  afterward
she  returned  to  New  York,  where  she  has  since
resided,  and  in  1855  married  Prof.  Botta.  Their
house  has  been  for  many  years  open  to  a  wide  range
of  literary  and  artistic  people,  and  Mrs.  Botta's  re-
ceptions have  been  attended  by  many  of  the  most
famous  authors,  painters,  and  musicians  of  Europe
and  America.  During  the  Franco- Prussian  war
(1870-'l)  an  effort  was  made  in  New  York  citv  to
collect  funds  for  the  suffering  women  and  children
of  Paris.  Mrs.  Botta  prepared  as  her  contribution
an  album  of  autographs,  photographs,  and  original
sketches  by  celebrated  artists,  which  was  sold  for
$5,000.  As  the  war  had  closed  before  the  collec-
tion was  complete,  this  sum  was  appropriated
to  found  a  prize  at  the  French  academy, -to  be
awarded  every  five  vears,  when  the  interest  of  this
sum  reached  $1,000,  for  the  best  essay  on  the
Condition  of  Woman."  Mrs.  Botta's  style  is
musical,  elegant,  and  finished.  Among  her  best
poms  are  "  Paul  at  Athens,"  "  Webster,"  "  Books,"
and  "  Wasted  Fountains."  Her  sonnets  are  espe-
cially successful.  She  published  in  periodicals
innumerable  stories,  essays,  and  criticisms.  The
VqIo  ^^'^l^cted  edition  of  her  poems  (New  York,
1«48;  new  ed.,  1884)  was  illustrated  by  Brown,
i^arley,  Durand, Huntington,  and  other  artists.


Her  "Leaves  from  the  Diary  of  a  Recluse"  ap-
peared in  "The  Gift"  for  1845.  She  also  pub-
lished a  "  Handbook  of  Universal  Literature "
(New  York,  1860),  containing  concise  accounts  of
great  authors  of  all  ages  and  their  works,  which
has  been  adopted  as  a  text-book  in  many  educa-
tional institutions.

BOTTS,  John  Minor,  statesman,  b.  in  Dum-
fries, Prince  William  co.,  Va.,  16  Sept.,  1802 ;  d.  in
Culpepper,  Va.,  7  Jan.,  1869.  Soon  after  his  birth
his  parents  removed  to  Fredericksburg,  and
thence  to  Richmond,  where  they  perished  in  the
great  theatre  fire  in  1811.  Young  Botts  received  a
good  education,  began  early  to  read  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  the  age  of  eighteen.  After
he  had  practised  for  six  years  he  retired  to  a  farm
in  Henrico  co.,  and  established  himself  as  a  gentle-
man farmer.  In  1833  he  was  elected  as  a  whig  to
represent  his  county  in  the  legislature,  where  he
at  once  became  prominent,  and  several  times  re-
elected. In  1839  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and
there  stood  earnestly  and  ably  by  Henry  Clay,
zealously  advocating  most  of  the  points  of  the
great  leader's  programme,  including  a  national
bank,  a  protective  tariff,  and  the  distribution
among  the  states  of  the  proceeds  of  the  public
lands.  He  was  one  of  the  few  southern  members
that  supported  John  Quincy  Adams  in  his  contest
against  the  regulations  of  the  house  infringing
the  right  of  petition,  adopted  by  the  majority  in
order  to  exclude  appeals  from  the  abolitionists.
After  serving  two  terms,  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3
March,  1843,  he  was  defeated  by  Mr.  Seddon,  but  in
1847  re-elected,  and  sat  from  6  Dec,  1847,  till  3
March,  1849.  In  1839  he  was  a  delegate  to  the
national  wiiig  convention,  which  nominated  Har-
rison and  Tyler.  He  had  been  a  warm  personal
friend  of  John  Tyler,  elected  vice-president  in
November,  1840,  and  who,  by  the  death  of  Gen.
Harrison,  in  April,  1841,  became  president  of  the
United  States ;  but,  soon  after  Mr.  Tyler's  acces-
sion to  office,  Mr.  Botts,  in  a  conversation  with  him,
learned  his  intention  of  seceding  from  the  party
that  had  elected  him,  and  he  at  once  denounced
him,  and  opposed  him  as  long  as  he  was  president.
In  the  presidential  campaign  of  1844  he  labored
eai-nestly  for  the  election  of  Mr.  Clay.  In  1852  Mr.
Botts  resumed  the  practice  of  his  profession  in
Richmond.  He  earnestly  opposed  the  repeal  of  the
Missouri  compromise  in  1854,  and  was  in  sym-
pathy with  those  southern  representatives  who  re-
sisted the  passage,  in  1858,  of  the  bill  admitting
Kansas  as  a  state  under  the  Lecompton  constitu-
tion. On  the  disruption  of  the  whig  party,  he
joined  the  American  party,  and  in  1859  an  attempt
was  made  by  that  political  organization  to  nomi-
nate him  for  the  presidency.  He  continued  his
practice,  and  remained  in  Richmond  till  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war;  but.  being  devoted  to
the  union,  and  having  used  all  his  efforts,  without
avail,  to  prevent  Virginia  from  seceding,  he  retired
to  his  farm  near  Culpepper  Court-House,  where  he
remained  most  of  the  time  during  the  war,  re-
spected by  the  secessionists  yet  subjected  to  a  great
deal  of  trial  and  inconvenience.  One  night,  in
March,  1862,  a  squad  of  a  hundred  men,  under
the  orders  of  Gen.  Winder,  came  to  his  house,  took
him  from  his  bed,  and  carried  hira  to  prison,
where  he  was  held  in  solitary  confinement  for  eight
weeks.  His  arrest  was  caused  by  the  well-founded
suspicion  that  he  was  writing  a  secret  history  of
the  war.  Search  was  made  for  the  manuscript,  but
nothing  was  found.  After  the  close  of  the  war,
this  missing  manuscript,  of  which  a  portion  had
been,  in  1862,  confided  to  the  Count  de  Mercier,


326


BOUCHER


BOUCHETTE


French  minister  at  Washington,  formed  the  basis
of  a  volume  prepared  by  Mr.  Botts,  "  The  Great
Rebellion,  its  Secret  History,  Rise,  Progress,  and
Disastrous  Failure  ! "  (New  York,  1866).  After  his
release  from  prison  Mr.  Botts  returned  to  his  home
at  Culpepper,  where  he  was  continually  persecuted
by  the  enemy.  His  farm  was  repeatedly  overrun
by  both  armies,  and  dug  over  at  various  times  for
military  operations.  When  the  war  had  closed,  Mr.
Botts  again  took  a  deep  interest  in  political  mat-
ters. He  labored  earnestly  for  the  early  restoration
of  his  state  to  the  union,  but  without  success.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  national  convention  of  south-
ern loyalists  in  Philadelphia  in  1866,  and  in  1867
signed  his  name  on  the  bail-bond  of  Jefferson
Davis. — His  brother,  Charles  T.,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1809 ;  d.  in  California  in  1884,  was  a  Californian
pioneer  and  politician.  He  went  to  the  territory  as
naval  store-keeper  at  Monterey  in  1848,  and  was  a
member  of  the  constitutional  convention  of  1849,
taking  part  prominently  in  the  discussions  upon
the  right  of  the  people  of  the  territory  to  form  a
state  without  the  previous  sanction  of  congress,
and  in  the  discussion  concerning  the  proposed
boundary  of  the  new  state.  Later  he  was  a  lawyer
in  San  Francisco,  then  a  journalist,  and  for  some
time  a  district  judge  in  Sacramento,  and  afterward
a  lawyer  in  San  Francisco  until  his  death.

BOUCHER,  Jonathan,  clergyman,  b.  in  Blen-
cow,  Cumberland,  England,  12  March,  1738 ;  d.  in
Epsom,  England,  27  April,  1804.  He  came  to
America  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  and  was  for  some
time  a  private  teacher,  afterward  took  orders  in  the
Anglican  church,  and  was  appointed  rector  of
Hanover,  and  then  of  St.  Mary's  parish,  Va.  Gov.
Eden  gave  him  also  the  rectory  of  St.  Anne,  An-
napolis, and  that  of  Queen  Anne  in  St.  George's
CO.  He  took  a  firm  stand  in  opposition  to  the
prevalent  doctrines  of  independence,  and  gave  such
offence  to  his  congregation  that  he  was  obliged  to
return  to  England  in  1785.  He  was  appointed
vicar  of  Epsom,  and  employed  himself  during  the
last  fourteen  years  in  compiling  a  glossary  of  pro-
vincial and  obsolete  words,  which  was  purchased
from  his  family  in  1831  by  the  proprietors  of  the
English  edition  of  Webster's  "Dictionary,"  with
the  intention  of  making  it  an  appendix  to  that
work.  He  published  in  1799  "A  View  of  the
Causes  and  Consequences  of  the  American  Revo-
lution," dedicated  to  Gen.  Washington,  consisting
of  fifteen  discourses  delivered  in  North  America
between  1763  and  1775,  and  containing  many  an-
ecdotes illustrating  the  political  condition  of  the
colonies  at  that  time.

BOUCHER,  Pierre,  Sieur  de  Boucherville,
Canadian  pioneer,  b.  in  Perche,  France,  in  1622;  d.
in  Boucherville,  Canada,  20  April,  1717.  In  1635
he  came  to  America  with  his  father.  He  was  en-
gaged in  the  wars  with  the  Iroquois,  whom  he  fre-
quently defeated,  and  was  also  for  many  years  an
interpreter  of  the  Huron  dialect.  He  was  sent  as
a  deputy  by  the  colony  to  France  in  1661,  to  lay
the  condition  of  the  country  before  the  court,
and  this  led  to  the  publication  of  his  little  work  en-
titled "  Histoire  veritable  et  naturelle  des  mceurs
et  des  productions  de  la  nouvelle  France  "  (Paris,
1663).  He  was  ennobled  for  his  services,  made
governor  of  Three  Rivers  in  1663,  and,  receiving
a  grant  of  the  seigneurie  of  Boucherville,  settled
there  in  1668.  He  was  esteemed  as  a  man  of  cour-
age, intelligence,  piety,  and  integrity.  From  him
are  descended  many  prominent  families  of  Canada.
"  The  Adieux  of  Grandfather  Boucher,"  addressed
to  his  children  shortly  before  his  death,  is  charac-
teristic of  the  man  and  the  times.


I  BOUCHERVILLE,  Charles  Eugene  Bou-
cher de,  Canadian  senator,  b.  in  Boucherville,  Que-
bec, in  1820.  Pie  was  educated  at  St.  Sulpice  col-
lege, Montreal,  and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
Paris,  He  entered  Lower  Canada  house  of  assem-
bly in  1861  as  a  conservative,  was  appointed  to
the  Quebec  legislative  council  in  1867,  and  elected
speaker  of  that  house.  In  1873,  when  the  premier,
Mr.  Chauveau,  disagreed  with  his  cabinet  and  re-
signed, Mr.  De  Boucherville  became  premier,
secretary  and  registrar,  and  minister  of  public  in-
struction. In  1876  he  left  the  department  of  pub-
lic instruction  for  that  of  agriculture  and  public
works.  In  December  of  the  same  year  the  Hon.
Luc  Letellier  de  St.  Just,  a  liberal  senator,  was  ap-
pointed lieutenant-governor  of  Quebec  on  the
recommendation  of  Mr.  Mackenzie's  dominion
government.  On  1  March,  1878,  Mr.  Letellier  dis-
missed the  De  Boucherville  cabinet,  although  it
was  sustained  in  the  legislative  assembly  by  a
majority  of  twenty  or  more,  and  in  the  legislative
council  by  more  than  two  to  one.  The  lieutenant-
governor  attempted  to  justify  himself  by  preferring
various  charges  against  the  De  Boucherville  ad-
ministration, most  of  which  were  baseless,  or  triv-
ial. The  premier  met  one  charge  with  a  denial
that  the  province  was  in  a  state  of  penury.  A  much
graver  accusation  was  to  the  effect  that  the  premier
had  acknowledged  that  certain  railway  grants
had  been  necessitated  by  political  considerations  ;
that  without  them  the  support  of  the  members  of
the  legislature  whose  counties  were  traversed  by
those  railways  could  no  longer  be  secured  by  the
government ;  that  there  would  be  no  means  of
having  a  majority ;  that  the  members  formed
"  rings "  to  control  the  house.  Mr.  Letellier
claimed  that  in  consequence  of  this  admission  he
was  justified  in  assuming  that  Mr.  De  Boucherville
did  not  possess  a  constitutional  majority  in  the
legislative  assembly.  Mr.  De  Boucherville,  in  his
explanations  to  the  governor-general  with  refer-
ence to  this  particular  charge,  claimed  that  the  rail-
way subsidy  legislation,  whether  good  or  bad,  had
been  sustained  by  a  large  majority  of  the  people  at
the  subsequent  general  elections,  and  was  therefore
no  longer  a  proper  subject  for  discussion  in  the  con-
nection in  which  it  had  been  introduced :  he  also
denied  that  he  had  been  controlled  by  "  rings."
Both  houses  of  the  Quebec  legislature  passed  a  vote
of  censure  on  the  lieutenant-governor.  The  follow-
ing year  Mr.  De  Boucherville  was  called  to  the  sen-
ate. When  the  conservatives  came  into  power,  Sir
John  A,  Macdonald's  cabinet  advised  the  dismissal
of  the  lieutenant-governor  of  Quebec;  but  the  gov-
ernor-general. Lord  Lome,  referred  the  whole
matter  to  the  colonial  secretary  at  London.  The
latter  requested  the  governor-general  to  take  the
advice  of  his  ministers,  and  the  consequence  was
that  Lieut.-Gov.  Letellier  was  dismissed.

BOUCHERVILLE,  George  Boucher  de,  Ca-
nadian author,  b.  in  the  province  of  Quebec  about
1812.  He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1837;  was  one  of  the
commissioners  to  consolidate  the  public  general
statutes  of  Lower  Canada  and  Canada  respectively
in  1856 ;  was  appointed  secretary  to  the  first  lieu-
tenant-governor of  Quebec,  6  July,  1867,  which
office  he  resigned  on  being  made  clerk  of  the  legis-
lative council  on  30  Oct.  of  the  same  year.  ^  His
published  works  include  "Programme  de  etude
pour  la  formation  d'une  banque  agricole  nation-
ale  pour  le  Bas  Canada  "  (1862).

BOUCHETTE,  Joseph,  Canadian  topographer,
b.  in  1774;  d.  in  Montreal,  9  April,  1841.  He  was
a  son  of  Com.  Bouchctte,  Avho  distinguished  hun-


BOUCICAULT


BOUDINOT


327


self  in  the  early  period  of  the  revolutionary  war
on  the  northern  frontier  of  the  United  States.
In  1790  he  entered  the  office  of  his  uncle,  Maj.
Holland,  surveyor-general  of  British  North  Amer-
ica, and  in  1814  succeeded  to  this  office  himself.
While  connected  with  the  surveyor-general's  de-
partment in  a  subordinate  capacity,  he  served  in
the  colonial  navy  on  the  lakes,  and  in  the  royal
Canadian  volunteers  until  1803.  He  was  actively
employed  in  the  campaigns  of  1813-4,  and  in
August,  1814,  went  to  England  to  publish  his  top-
ographical and  geographical  description  of  Can-
ada, which  was  issued  in  1816.  During  1817  and
1818  he  was  engaged  in  establishing  the  boundary-
line  between  the  United  States  and  the  British
K)Ssessions.  In  1881  he  published  "The  British
ominions  in  North  America,"  containing  the  re-
sult of  fifteen  years'  labor  on  the  topography,  ge-
ography, and  statistics  of  Canada,  and  in  1832
the  '•  Topographical  Dictionary  of  Lower  Canada."
BOUCICAULT,  Dion,  British  dramatist,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  26  Dec,  1822;  d.  in  New  York
city,  18  Sept.,  1890.  Boucicault  was  educated  for
a  civil  engineer  under  his  guardian.  Dr.  Dionysius
Lardner,  of  the  university  of  London,  but  devoted
himself  to  the  drama.  In  March,  1841,  he  pro-
duced the  comedy  "  London  Assurance,"  which
was  brought  out  in  Covent  Garden  theatre,  and
met  with  great  success.  He  married  Agnes  Rob-
ertson, and  in  September,  1853,  came  to  the  United
States,  delivered  lectures  in  New  York,  and  then
returned  to  the  stage.  In  1860  he  went  to  London
and  brought  out,  at  the  Adelphi  theatre,  his  fa-
mous Irish  play  of  "  Colleen  Bawn,"  founded  on
Gerald  Griffin's  novel  of  "  The  Collegians."  In  1861
was  produced,  in  the  same  theatre,  a  drama  illus-
trating the  evils  of  American  slavery,  called  "  The
Octoroon."  After  that  he  wrote,  in  rapid  succes-
sion, more  than  100  dramas,  some  of  them  original,
and  others  adaptations  from  the  French.  In  1862
he  brought  out  "  Dot "  and  "  The  Relief  of  Luck-
now";  in  1863,  "The  Trial  of  Effie  Deans";  in
1864,  "  The  Streets  of  London  " ;  in  1865,  "  Arrah-
Na-Pogue,"  "Rip  Van  Winkle,"  which  was  ren-
dered famous  by  the  acting  of  Joseph  Jefferson,
and  "The  Parish  Clerk,"  which  last  piece  was
written  for  Mr.  Jefferson:  in  1868,  "The  Flying
Scud,"  "  Hunted  Down,"  and  "  The  Long  Strike  " ;
in  1867,  "  How  She  Loves  Him  "  and  "  Foul  Play,"
the  latter  written  in  collaboration  with  Charles
Reade;  in  1868,  "After  Dark";  in  1869,  "Lost  at
Sea "  and  " Formosa " ;  in  1870,  "The  Rapparee,"
or  the  "  Treaty  of  Limerick,"  and  "  Jezebel " ;  in
1872,  "  Babil  and  Bijou."  In  the  autumn  of  1874
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  where,  since  1873,
he  has  resided  most  of  the  time.  In  1873  he  pro-
duced, at  Booth's  theatre,  New  York,  the  Irish
play  of  "Daddy  O'Dowd";  at  Wallack's  theatre,
"  Mora  "  and  "  Mimi,"  and  at  the  Union  square
theatre,  "Led  Astray."  In  December,  1873,  he
openel  the  New  Park  theatre  in  partnership  with
William  Stuart.  During  his  former  residence  in
the  United  States  he  had  established  a  theatre  in
Washington  in  1858,  and  reconstructed  the  Metro-
politan theatre  in  New  York,  changed  it  into  the
Winter  Garden  in  1859,  and  in  1862,  after  his  re-
turn to  England,  he  built  over  Astley's  theatre
and  altered  its  name  to  the  Westminster,  a  specula-
tion that  proved  a  failure.  Of  his  other  plavs  the
best-known  are  "  Janet's  Pride  " ;  "  Louis  XL  " ;
"  Faust  and  Marguerite  " :  "  Paul  Lafarge  "  (1870) ;
•'  A  Dark  Night's  Work  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Dead  Se-
cret" (1878);  "Andy  Blake,"  and  "The  Shau-
ghrann."  Mr.  Boucicault  exf;el]ed  as  a  dramatist
in  brightness  of  dialogue,  dramatic  action,  and  the


treatment  of  incidents.  His  melodramas  are  more
natural  than  those  that  preceded  them.  He  ele-
vated and  improved  the  character  of  the  Irish
drama.  The  plots  of  his  plays  are  seldom  original ;
but  in  the  drawing  of  character,  the  introduction
and  handling  of  dramatic  incidents,  and  the  com-
position of  scenes  of  pathos,  passion,  or  humor,  he
displayed  originality,  knowledge  of  human  nature,
and  dramatic  judgment.  He  has  elevated  the
status  of  the  dramatic  author  by  insisting  on
higher  rates  of  compensation  than  were  usual,  and
by  making  the  play  itself  the  leading  attraction.

BOUCK,  William  C,  governor  of  New  York,
b.  in  Schoharie  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1786;  d.  there,  19
April,  1859.  After  filling  several  town  offices  he.
was  appointed  sheriff  of  the  county  in  1812.  was  a
member  of  the  state  assembly  in  1813,  1815,  and
1817,  state  senator  in  1820,  canal  commissioner
from  1821  till  1840,  and  governor  of  the  state  from
1843  till  1845.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  con-
stitutional convention  in  1846,  and  from  that  year
till  1849  was  assistant  treasurer  in  New  York  city.
His  last  ten  years  were  spent  on  his  farm.

BOUDINOT,  Elias,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  2  May,  1740;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,
24  Oct.,  1821.  His  great-grandfather,  Elias,  was  a
French  Huguenot,  who  fled  to  this  country  after
the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes.  After  re-
ceiving a  classical  education,  he  studied  law  with
Richard  Stockton,  and  became  eminent  in  his  pro-
fession, practis-
ing in  New  Jer-
sey. He  was
devoted  to  the
patriot  cause,
in  1777  appoint-
ed commissary-
general  of  pris-
oners, and  in
the  same  year
elected  a  dele-
gate to  con-
gress from  New
Jersey,  serving
from  1778  till
1779,  and  again
from  1781  till
1784.  He  was
chosen  presi-
dent of  con-
gress on  4  Nov.,
1782,  and  in
that  capacity
signed  the  trea-
ty of  peace  with  England.  He  then  resumed  the
practice  of  law,  but,  after  the  adoption  of  the
constitution,  was  elected  to  the  1st,  2d,  and  3d
congresses,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,  till  3
March,  1795.  He  was  appointed  by  Washington
in  1795  to  succeed  Rittenhouse  as  director  of  the
mint  at  Philadelphia,  and  held  the  office  till  July,
1805,  when  he  resigned,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his
life  at  Burlington,  N.  J.,  devoted  to  the  study  of
biblical  literature.  He  had  an  ample  fortune,  and
gave  liberally.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Princeton  col-
lege, and  in  1805  endowed  it  with  a  cabinet  of  nat-
ural history,  valued  at  $3,000.  In  1812  he  was
chosen  a  member  of  the  American  board  of  com-
missioners for  foreign  missions,  to  which  he  gave
£100  in  1813.  He  assisted  in  founding  the  Ameri-
can Bible  society  in  1816,  was  its  first  president,
and  gave  it  $10,000.  He  was  interested  in  at-
tempts to  educate  the  Indians,  and  when  three
Cherokee  youth  were  brought  to  the  foreign  mis-
sion school  in  1818,  he  allowed  one  of  them  to  take


/^^5'^*<5/;ZA</^


328


BOUGAINVILLE


BOUILLE


his  name.  This  boy  became  afterward  a  man  of
influence  in  his  tribe,  and  was  murdered  on  10
June,  1839,  by  Indians  west  of  the  Mississippi.  Dr.
Boudinot  was  also  interested  in  the  instruction  of
deaf-mutes,  the  education  of  young  men  for  the
ministry,  and  efforts  for  the  relief  of  the  poor.  He
bequeathed  his  property  to  his  only  daughter,  Mrs.
Bradford,  and  to  charitable  uses.  Among  his  be-
quests were  one  of  |200  to  buy  spectacles  for  the
aged  poor,  another  of  13,000  acres  of  land  to  the
mayor  and  corporation  of  Philadelphia,  that  the
poor  might  be  supplied  with  wood  at  low  prices,
and  another  of  3,000  acres  to  the  Philadelphia  hos-
pital for  the  benefit  of  foreigners.  Dr.  Boudinot
published  "  The  Age  of  Revelation,"  a  reply  to
Paine  (1790) ;  an  oration  before  the  Society  of  the
Cincinnati  (1793);  "Second  Advent  of  the  Mes-
siah "  (Trenton,  1815) ;  and  "  Star  in  the  West,  or
An  Attempt  to  Discover  the  Long-lost  Tribes  of
Israel"  (1816),  in  which  he  concurs  with  James
Adair  in  the  opinion  that  the  Indians  are  the  lost
tribes.  He  also  wrote,  in  '*  The  Evangelical  Intel-
ligencer" of  1806,  an  anonymous  memoir  of  the
Rev.  William  Tennent,  D.  D.

BOUGAINVILLE,  Louis  Antoine  de,  navi-
gator, b.  in  Paris,  11  Nov.,  1729;  d.  31  Aug.,  1811.
He  studied  law  and  was  admitted  a  counsellor  of
the  parliament  of  Paris.  He  was  proficient  in
mathematics,  and  in  1752  published  a  work  on  the
integral  calculus.  In  1753  he  became  an  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Chevert,  and  m  1754  was  secretary
of  the  French  embassy  in  London,  and  while
there  made  a  fellow  of  the  royal  society.  Subse-
quently he  served  as  aide-de-camp  to  the  Marquis
de  Montcalm,  in  Canada,  whence  he  was  sent  for
re-enforcements  to  France,  in  1758,  and  there  made
a  colonel  and  a  knight  of  St.  Louis.  He  re-
turned to  Canada  in  1759,  and  distinguished  him-
self at  the  capture  of  Quebec.  In  1760  he  was
appointed  aide-de-camp  of  Choiseul  Stainville  in
Germany,  and  in  1761  displayed  such  courage  in
the  campaign  on  the  Rhine  that  he  received  from
the  king  two  guns  he  had  taken  from  the  enemy.
After  peace  had  been  declared,  he  engaged  in  the
naval  service,  and  founded  a  colony  on  one  of  the
Falkland  islands,  he  being  a  large  proprietor  joint-
ly with  merchants  of  St.  Malo.  In  1766  this  colo-
ny was  purchased  by  Spain  for  500,000  crowns,
and  Bougainville  was  sent,  Nov.  15,  to  make  the
final  transfer,  and  with  instructions  to  circumnavi-
gate the  globe.  He  had  two  ships — the  "  Bou-
deuse,"  26  guns  and  214  men,  and  the  "  Etoile,"  a
store-ship — and  was  accompanied  by  f*rince  Sie-
ghen,  of  Nassau,  and  the  naturalist  Commercon,
and  after  a  cruise  of  over  two  years,  during  which
he  made  some  important  discoveries,  returned  to
St.  Malo  in  March,  1769.  He  published  "  Voyage
autour  du  monde"  (2  vols.,  Paris,  1771-'2),  which
was  at  once  translated  into  English  and  subse-
quently into  German.  In  1778,  when  France  took
part  in  the  American  war,  Bougainville  command-
ed ships  of  the  line,  and  gained  distinction  in  the
engagements  between  the  British  and  the  French
fleets.  In  1779  he  became  a  commodore,  and  in
1780  a  field-marshal  in  the  army.  When  Admiral
Rodney  defeated  De  Grasse,  12  April,  1778,  Bou-
gainville commanded  the  ''  Auguste,"  and,  though
she  suffered  severely,  he  succeeded  in  maintaining
her  position  in  line,  and  by  judicious  manoeuvring
rescued  eight  sail  of  his  own  division,  which  he
conducted  safely  to  St.  Eustace.  He  attempted,
without  avail,  to  allay  the  disturbance  in  Brest  in
1790,  and  soon  afterward  retired  from  professional
employment.  In  1796  he  was  elected  a  member  of
the  geographical  section  of  the  institute,  and  after-


ward of  the  bureau  des  longitudes.  On  the  crea-
tion of  the  senate  he  was  made  a  member  of  that
body,  and  subsequently  he  was  created  a  count  of
the  empire  by  Napoleon.

BOUGHTON,  George  Henry,  artist,  b.  in  Nor-
folk, England,  in  1836.  His  family  came  to  this
country  about  1839,  and  he  passed  his  youth  ia
Albany,  N.  Y.  Here  he  entered  business,  but
spent  his  spare  moments  in  making  pen-and-ink
sketches.  Once,  when  he  was  intending  to  buy
fish-hooks,  his  eye  was  attracted  by  some  tubes  of
oil-colors,  and,  spending  his  money  for  these  in-
stead, he  soon  produced  a  painting  on  an  old  piece
of  capvas.  From  this  time  he  continued  to  paint.
In  1853  he  sold  several  of  his  pictures,  and,  with
the  money  thus  obtained,  went  to  London  for
study.  After  a  few  months  he  returned  to  Albany,
and  subsequently  moved  to  New  York,  where  he
remained  two  years,  and  soon  made  himself  known
as  a  landscape  painter.  In  1858  he  exhibited  his
first  picture  at  the  national  academy,  "Winter
Twilight."  Another  picture  produced  during  this
period  was  "The  Lake  of  the  Dismal  Swamp."
His  paintings  at  this  time  indicate  a  transition
from  landscape  to  genre,  and  to  fit  himself  for  the
latter  he  studied  two  years  in  Paris.  In  1861  he
removed  to  London,  where  he  has  since  passed  the
greater  part  of  his  time,  contributing  annually  to
the  exhibitions  of  the  royal  academy,  of  which  he
is  an  associate.  He  has  also  exhibited  frequently
at  the  national  academy  in  New  York,  and  was
made  an  academician  in  1871.  His  works  are
popular  and  meet  with  a  ready  sale.  They  are
marked  by  simplicity,  tenderness,  and  subdued,
but  not  weak,  coloring.  Pie  excels  in  delineating
Puritan  life  in  New  England.  Among  his  pictures
on  American  subjects  are  "  The  Scarlet  Letter,"
"  Return  of  the  Mayflower,"  "  Puritans  Going  to
Church,"  and  "  Rose  Standish."  He  has  also  been
successful  in  painting  pictures  of  French  peasant-
life,  as  "  Passing  into  the  Shade  "  (1863) ;  "  A  Bre-
ton Haymaker  "  (Royal  academy,  1864) :  "  Wavside
Devotion"  (1867);  "Breton  Pastoral"  (1869);
"Coming  from  Church,"  "Cold  Without,"  and
"  Morning  Prayer."  To  the  American  fine-art  de-
partment at  the  Philadelphia  exhibition  of  1876
he  sent,  among  other  paintings,  "  Normandy  Girl
in  a  Shower,"  "  By  the  Sea,"  and  "  Going  to  Seek
his  Fortune  " ;  and  to  the  British  department  at
Paris,  in  1878,  "  Snow  in  Spring  "  and  "  A  Surrey
Pastoral."  Among  his  other  works  are  the  "  Can-
terbury Pilgrims"  (1874);  "A  Ruffling  Breeze"
(1877);  the  "Waning  of  the  Honeymoon"  (1878);
and  "The  Idyl  of  the  Birds,"  a  composition  in
three  parts.  "  The  Testy  Governor "  (1877)  is  in
the  Corcoran  gallery  at  Washington.  D.  C.  Mr.
Boughton  has  been  especially  successful  in  paint-
ing female  figures.

BOUILLE,  Francis  Claude  Amour,  Marquis
de,  French  soldier,  b.  in  Auvergne,  19  Nov.,  1739;
d.  in  London,  14  Nov.,  1800.  He  entered  the  army
at  an  early  age,  and  distinguished  himself  in  the
seven-years'  war.  He  was  appointed  governor  of
Guadaloupe  in  1768,  and  during  the  American  war
of  independence,  while  defending  the  French  An-
tilles against  the  British,  he  also  succeeded  in  con-
quering Dominica,  St.  Eustatia,  Tobago,  St.  Chris-
topher, Nevis,  and  Montserrat.  He  returned  to
Paris  after  the  peace  of  1783,  and  was  made  a
lieutenant-general  and  subsequently  chief  of  the
province  of  Trois-Eveches.  He  supported  the  pro-
posed reforms  of  Calonne  in  the  assembly  of  nota-
bles, to  which  he  had  been  nominated  by  Louis
XVI.,  and  displayed  great  courage  and  talent  m
suppressing  the  revolt  of  the  garrisons  of  Metz  and


BOULBON


BOURGEOIS


329


Nancy.  In  1790  he  was  made  commander-in-chief
of  the  army  of  the  Meuse,  the  Saar,  and  the  Mo-
selle. He  was  a  devoted  royalist,  and  promoted
the  escape  of  Louis  XVI.  from  Paris,  which  project
would  probably  have  succeeded  but  for  the  king's
prohibition  of  bloodshed.  On  its  failure,  by  the
arrest  of  the  king  at  Varennes,  Bouille  went  to
Russia  to  invoke  assistance  of  the  Empress  Cath-
erine, who  promised  him  an  army  of  30,000  men
with  which  to  invade  France,  but  her  promise  was
never  fulfilled.  He  enlisted  under  the  banners  of
Coude,  after  serving  for  a  time  under  Gustavus
III.  of  Sweden,  and  went  to  England  in  1796.
There  he  wrote  his  "  Memoirs  of  the  Revolution  "
(London,  1797;  German  ed.,  1798;  French,  1801).

BOULBON,  or  RAOUSSET-BOULBON,  Gas=
ton  Raoulx,  Comte  de,  French  adventurer,  b.  in
Avignon  in  1817 ;  d.  near  Guayamas,  12  Aug.,  1854.
Having  squandered  his  estates,  he  went  in  1852  to
California,  and  there  induced  other  adventurers  to
join  him  in  an  expedition  to  Sonora.  The  Mexi-
cans, who  opposed  his  designs  upon  the  gold  mines,
were  beaten  back  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.
Flushed  with  victory,  he  then  rallied  round  him
500  men,  and  seizing  Arispe,  the  capital  of  Sonora,
proclaimed  a  republic.  He  was  defeated  by  the
Mexicans  on  4  Jan.,  1853 ;  then  returned  to  Cali-
fornia, where  he  planned  a  new  expedition  in  April,
1854,  and,  returning  to  Sonora,  was  defeated  by
the  Mexicans  on  13  July,  was  captured,  and  on  12
Aug.  was  executed.  An  account  of  his  life  was
published  by  Jules  de  la  Madelene  (Paris,  1855).

BOULIGNY,  Dominique,  senator,  b.  in  Louis-
iana in  1773 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  5  March,
1833.  He  received  a  public-school  education  and
studied  law.  After  admission  to  the  bar  he  prac-
tised in  New  Orleans,  and  subsequently  was  elect-
ed U.  S.  senator,  succeeding  Henry  Johnson,  and
serving  from  21  Dec,  1834,  until  3  March,  1829.
Mr.  Bouligny  was  in  command  of  a  regiment  dur-
ing 1795.— liis  nephew,  John  Edward,  congress-
man, b.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  17  Feb.,  1824 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  20  Feb.,  1864.  He  received  a
public-school  education,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  New  Orleans,
where  he  afterward  held  several  important  offices.
Subsequently  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  "  na-
tional American,"  serving  from  5  Dec,  1859,  till  3
March,  1861.  Mr.  Bouligny  was  opposed  to  the
doctrine  of  secession,  and  was  the  only  representa-
tive from  a  seceding  state  who  did  not  leave  his
seat.  During  the  civil  war  he  remained  in  the
north,  dying  in  Washington  before  its  close.

BOUQUET,  Henry,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Rolle,
Switzerland,  in  1719 ;  d.  in  Pensacola,  Fla.,  in  Feb-
ruary, 1766.  Pie  first  entered  the  Dutch  service,
afterward  that  of  Sardinia,  and  in  1748  was  again
in  the  service  of  Holland,  as  lieutenant-colonel  of
Swiss  guards.  He  entered  the  English  army  with
the  same  rank  in  1756,  became  colonel  of  the  60th
foot  19  Feb.,  1762,  and  brigadier-general  in  1765.
He  co-operated  with  Gen.  Forbes  in  the  expedi-
tion against  Fort  Duquesne  in  1758,  and  it  was
by  his  advice  that  the  army  constructed  a  new
road  through  Pennsylvania,  instead  of  using  the
old  one  made  by  Braddock,  and  approved  by  Wash-
ington. On  12  Oct.,  Bouquet  was  attacked  by  a
body  of  French  and  Indians  at  Loyal  Hanna,  but
repelled  them,  and  was  present  at  "the  capture  of
the  fort  on  24  Nov.  In  1763  Bouquet,  then  in
command  at  Philadelphia,  was  ordered  to  the  re-
lief of  the  same  fort,  then  called  Fort  Pitt  (now
Pittsburg).  He  set  out  with  500  men,  mostly
Highlanders,  and  found  the  frontier  settlements
in  a  state  of  terror,  many  of  the  inhabitants  flee-


ing eastward  to  escape  the  fate  of  their  neighbors,
who  had  been  murdered  by  savages.  The  expedi-
tion relieved  Forts  Ligonier  and  Bedford,  and  by
noon  of  5  Aug.  had  nearly  reached  Bushy  Run,  a
small  stream  on  which  Bouquet  intended  to  camp.
Suddenly  a  furious  attack  was  made  by  Indians  on
the  advance  guard.  Re-enforcements  were  sent
forward,  the  cattle  and  baggage-trains  parked,
and  a  firm  stand  made  against  the  assailants,  who
appeared  on  all  sides  in  increased  numbers,  and
the  plunging  of  400  frightened  and  wounded
horses,  in  the  square,  added  to  the  confusion.
The  contest  continued  until  night  and  was  re-
newed on  the  following  morning.  The  troops
were  on  a  hill  where  no  water  could  be  obtained,
and  Bouquet,  seeing  that  a  change  of  plan  was
necessary,  feigned  retreat  to  bring  the  enemy  to-
gether in  a  compact  body.  The  ruse  was  success-
ful ;  the  Indians,  seeing  that  the  advance  guard
fell  back,  left  their  ambush  and  rushed  to  the  at-
tack in  a  mass,  when  Bouquet's  men  easily  sur-
rounded them  and,  by  volleys  of  musketry  and  a
determined  bayonet-charge,  utterly  routed  them.
Bouquet  lost  8  officers  and  115  men.  The  rest  of
his  march  was  unmolested,  and  he  reached  Fort
Pitt  with  supplies  four  days  later.  In  October,
1764,  he  led  an  expedition  against  the  Ohio  In-
dians and  compelled  the  Shawnees,  Delawares,  and
other  tribes  to  make  peace  at  Tuscarawas.  An  ac-
count of  the  expedition  by  William  Smith,  D.  D.,
was  published  in  Philadelphia  in  1765,  and  after-
ward translated  into  French  (new  edition,  with
preface  by  Francis  Parkman,  Cincinnati,  1885).

BOURGABE,  P.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  France  in
1845.  He  was  educated  in  the  college  of  Billom
and  in  the  grand  seminaire  of  Puy-de-Dome.  The
present  archbishop  of  Santa  Fe.  when  vicar-apos-
tolic of  Arizona,  visited  France  in  search  of  mis-
sionaries, and  young  Bourgade,  who  was  then  in
deacon's  orders,  volunteered.  He  reached  Tucson
in  1870,  and  in  the  same  year  was  ordained  and
began  mission  work  at  Yuma.  His  devotion  to
his  duties  enfeebled  his  constitution  so  much  that
in  1873  he  was  obliged  to  return  to  France.  He
resumed  his  ecclesiastical  labors  in  the  United
States  in  1875,  and  during  the  next  six  years  was
pastor  at  San  Elzaario,  Texas.  He  then  went  to
Silver  City,  Colorado,  and  in  1885  was  consecrated
vicar-apostolic  of  Arizona,  with  the  titular  rank  of
bishop  of  Taumaco.

BOURGEOIS,  Sister  Margaret,  b.  in  Troyes,
France,  in  1620 ;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  in  1700.
Although  her  parents  were  poor,  she  received  a
good  education.  She  lost  her  mother  at  an  early
age,  and  was  obliged  to  take  charge  of  her  father's
household.  When  her  brothers  and  sisters  were
settled,  she  applied  for  admission  into  the  Carme-
lite order,  but  was  refused,  and  a  similar  refusal
attended  her  petition  to  be  received  among  the
"  Poor  Clares  "  of  her  native  city.  She  accompa-
nied M.  de  Maisonneuve  to  Canada  in  1653,  and
after  a  perilous  voyage  landed  at  Quebec  and  set
out  for  Montreal,  where  she  opened  a  school.  Re-
turning to  France  in  1658,  she  secured  several
zealous  assistants,  and  obtained  ecclesiastical  per-
mission to  form  them  into  a  religious  society,  which
received  the  name  of  the  congregation  of  Notre
Dame.  She  again  returned  to  France  to  obtain
letters-patent  from  Louis  XIV.  for  the  confirma-
tion of  her  institute,  and  the  French  monarch
granted  her  request,  accompanied  with  promises  of
protection.  In  1672  she  returned  to  Montreal,  and
enthusiastically  set  to  work  to  perfect  her  insti-
tute. Although  she  founded  many  prosperous
missions,  she  did  not  obtain  a  confirmation  of  the


330


BOURGET


BOURNE


rules  of  her  order  till  1G89,  two  years  before  her
death.  The  bishop  of  Quebec  hesitated  many
years  before  he  could  determine  on  giving  his  final
approbation ;  but  he  yielded  at  last,  having  become
persuaded  that  Sister  Bourgeois  was  a  saint.  For
twenty  years  she  had  begged  her  sisters  to  elect
another  superioress  in  her  place;  her  resignation
was  finally  accepted  in  1G93,  and  for  the  rest  of
her  life  she  performed  the  humblest  offices  in  the
convent  she  had  founded.

BOURGET,  Ignatius,  Canadian  bishop,  b.  in
Point  Levis,  Quebec,  30  Oct.,  1799  ;  d.  in  Sault  aux
Recollet,  near  Montreal,  8  June,  1885.  He  went
to  Montreal  in  1821,  and  was  ordained  9  Nov.,
1822,  by  Bishop  Lartique,  first  Roman  Catholic
bishop  of  that  diocese.  This  prelate,  struck  by
Bourget's  abilities,  appointed  him  his  secretary.  In
1836  he  was  named  vicar-general  of  Montreal,  and
on  25  July,  1837,  was  created  coadjutor  bishop  of
the  diocese,  being  consecrated  bishop  of  Telmessa,
171  partibus  infidelium.  lie  succeeded  Mgr.  Lar-
tique as  bishop  of  Montreal  on  the  latter's  death
in  1840,  and  in  1876  resigned,  to  become,  on  10
July  of  that  year,  archbishop  of  Martianopolis,  in
partibus.  A  history  of  his  work  would  be  a  record
of  the  progress  made  by  the  French  people  in  that
part  of  Canada  during  the  past  fifty  years.  In
1838  he  established  the  society  for  the  propagation
of  the  faith.  He  created  in  1840  the  first  cathe-
dral chapter  of  Montreal.  The  arch-confraternity
of  Mary  Immaculate,  a  charitable  association  that
has  since  spread  over  North  America,  was  founded
by  him  in  1844.  Previous  to  this  he  had  intro-
duced the  Jesuit  and  Oblate  orders,  and  placed
them  in  charge  of  colleges  he  had  erected.  He  or-
ganized the  first  temperance  society  in  Canada.
In  1844  he  established  the  asylum  of  providence
for  the  aged,  and  also  several  houses  of  the  ladies
of  charity;  and  in  the  same  year  he  founded  the
community  of  nuns  of  "  Our  Lady  of  Charity  of  the
Good  Shepherd,"  which  has  three  houses  in  Mon-
treal. In  1847  he  founded  four  religious  orders :
the  priests  of  the  congregation  of  holy-cross,  who
have  three  colleges  in  Canada ;  the  Josephist  broth-
ers ;  the  clerks  of  St.  Viateur ;  and  the  Marianist
nuns,  who  direct  several  colleges  and  schools  in
Canada.  A  society  for  helping  servant-girls,  an
asylum  for  Irish  orphans,  and  the  hospice  of  the
holy  child  Jesus,  for  the  education  of  the  deaf  and
dumb,  were  among  the  charitable  works  that  he
originated  between  1846  and  1850.  In  1864  he
erected  another  immense  institution  for  the  deaf
and  dumb  in  the  rue  St.  Denis,  and  in  1874  found-
ed the  celebrated  asylum  of  St.  John  of  God,  for
the  care  of  the  insane.  The  same  year  witnessed
the  establishment  through  his  agency  of  the  Catho-
lic union,  and  the  school  of  medicine  and  surgery
of  Montreal,  Archbishop  Bourget  was  the  recog-
nized leader  of  the  ultramontane  party  in  Canada,
and  Was  a  prolific  writer,  his  best-known  work,
which  is  accepted  as  a  standard,  being  "  Le  cere-
moniae  des  eveques,  commente  et  explique,  par  le
usages  et  les  traditions  de  I'eglise  Romaine."

BOURINOT,  John  George,  Canadian  author,
b.  in  Sydney,  Nova  Scotia,  24  Oct.,  1837.  He  was
educated  first  by  a  tutor  at  Sydney,  and  subse-
quently at  Trinity  college,  Toronto.  After  leav-
ing college  he  became  a  journalist,  subsequently
studied  law  for  a  short  time,  and  in  1860  estab-
lished the  Halifax  "  Reporter,"  of  which  he  was
chief  editor  for  several  years.  From  1861  till  the
year  of  confederation,  1867,  he  was  chief  official  re-
porter to  the  Nova  Scotia  assembly,  and,  after  pass-
ing through  various  subordinate  gi-ades,  he  was
appointed  chief  clerk  of  the  dominion  house  of


commons  on  18  Dec,  1880.  He  has  contribut-
ed largely  to  British  and  American  periodicals,
and  has  published  "  The  Intellectual  Development
of  the  Canadian  People  "  and  *'  The  Practice  and
Procedure  of  Parliament,  with  a  Review  of  the
Origin  and  Growth  of  Parliamentary  Institutions
in  the  Dominion  of  Canada."  Mr.  Bourinot  is
honorary  secretary  of  the  royal  society  of  Canada,
fellow  of  the  statistical  society  of  London,  and
honorary  corresponding  secretary  of  the  royal  colo-
nial institute.

BOURLAMARQUE,  M.  de,  French  soldier,  d.
in  July,  1764.  He  was  governor  of  the  island  of
Guadaloupe,  and  accompanied  Montcalm  to  Cana-
da in  May,  1756,  as  colonel  of  engineers.  He  con-
trolled the  operations  at  the  capture  of  Forts  Oswe-
go and  George,  where  he  was  wounded,  14  Aug.,
1756.  He  directed  the  siege  of  Fort  William
Henry,  commanded  the  left  column,  and  risked
his  life  to  save  the  English  from  massacre  after
the  capitulation.  On  9  July,  1757,  he  commanded
the  left  of  the  defences  of  Ticonderoga  against  the
assault  of  Gen.  Abercrombie,  and  was  dangerously-
wounded.  He  was  promoted  to  brigadier-general,
19  Feb.,  1759,  and  was  in  command  at  Ticonderoga,
which  he  blew  up  and  abandoned  in  July,  1759.
He  then  retired  to  Isle  aux  Noix,  in  Richelieu  river,
and  distinguished  himself,  and  was  again  wounded
in  the  battle  of  Sillery,  28  April,  1760.  He  re-
turned to  France  after  the  close  of  the  war,  and  on
1  Aug.,  1762,  addressed  a  memoir  on  Canada  to
the  French  government.

BOURNE,  Edward  Emerson,  jurist,  b.  in
Kennebunk,  Me.,  19  March,  1797 ;  d.  there,  23  Sept.,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1816,  and,
after  studying  law  at  home  and  in  Philadelphia,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1819.  He  first  prac-
tised his  profession  in  Albion,  but  returned  to
KennebunK,  where,  with  the  exception  of  a  brief
residence  in  York,  he  continued  to  the  close  of  his
life.  He  was  first  selectman  of  the  town  from
1828  till  1833,  and  represented  it  in  the  legislature
from  1826  till  1831,  when,  dissatisfied  with  the
policy  of  his  party,  he  declined  a  renomination
and  devoted  himself  to  his  profession,  delivering
an  occasional  lecture.  He  was  state's  attorney  for
York  CO.  in  1838  and  1841,  and  judge  of  the
probate  court  from  1857  till  1872.  He  was  also
for  several  years  president  of  the  Maine  historical
society,  and  from  1866  till  his  death  was  a  trustee
of  Bowdoin  college,  which  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1872.  Judge  Bourne  was  the  father  of
Lizzie  Bourne,  whose  death  in  an  attempt  to  as-
cend Mount  Washington  with  him  on  14  Sept.,
1855,  has  made  her  name  familiar.  Besides  con-
tributing to  the  transactions  of  the  state  historical
society,  and  to  various  periodicals,  he  published
an  historical  discourse,  delivered  at  Bath,  Me.,  on
the  257th  anniversary  of  the  Topsham  settlement,
and  wrote  an  extensive  history  of  the  towns  of
Wells  and  Kennebunk,  which  was  published  by
his  son  (1875).  See  a  sketch  of  his  life  by  E.  B.
Smith  in  the  "  New  England  Historical  and  Genea-
logical Register  "  (vol.  xxviii.).

BOURNE,  George,  author,  b.  in  England  about
1760 ;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1845.  He  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  country,  emigrated  to  the
United  States,  and  became  a  minister  of  the  re-
formed Dutch  church  in  1833.  He  held  no  pastor-
ate, but  engaged  in  literary  work  in  New  York
city.  He  was  an  ardent  and  learned  controversial-
ist, and  wrote  works  on  Romanism  and  slavery.

BOURNE,  Nehemiah,  British  admiral,  b.  m
London  about  1611:  d.  there  in  1691.  He  was  a
son  of  Robert  Bourne,  a  Wapping  shipwright. H^


BOURNE


BOUTWELL


331


hemiah  came  to  New  England  in  1638,  and  settled
as  a  ship-builder  first  in  Charlestown  and  afterward
in  Dorchester,  Mass.  He  became  a  freeman  of
Boston,  2  June,  1641,  and  in  the  same  year  finished
the  "  Trial,"  the  first  vessel  built  there.  In  1644-'5
he  was  a  major  in  the  parliamentary  army,  but
returned  to  this  country  in  June,  1645,  and  on  12
Aug.  was  appointed  sergeant-major  of  the  Suffolk
regiment.  He  returned  to  England  in  December,
1646,  and  commanded  the  "Speaker,"  a  ship  of
the  second  rate.  In  September,  1651,  he  carried
to  London  the  Scottish  records  and  regalia  taken
in  Stirling  castle,  and  for  his  services  was  given  a
gold  medal  valued  at  £60.  In  May,  1652,  he  was
captain  of  the  "  Andrew "  and  senior  officer  of
the  Downs,  and  commanded  the  division  in  the
fleet  that  had  so  important  a  share  in  the  battle  of
19  May,  1652,  with  the  Dutch.  Without  knowledge
of  the  battle  the  council  had  already  made  Bourne
a  rear  admiral,  and  he  commanded  in  the  third
post  in  the  battle  of  28  Sept.,  when  his  ship  was
"  very  much  maimed."  He  was  appointed,  in  the
latter  part  of  1652,  to  superintend  the  equipment
and  manning  of  fleets,  and  continued  in  this  office
until  the  end  of  the  protectorate.  After  the  res-
toration he  received  a  pass  permitting  him  "to
transport  himself  and  family  into  any  of  the  plan-
tations," and  passed  several  years  in  exile.

BOURNE,  Richard,  missionary,  b.  in  England ;
d.  in  Sandwich,  Mass.,  in  1682.  He  was  one  of  the
first  settlers  at  Sandwich,  and,  as  there  was  no
minister  there,  took  charge  of  the  religious  services
until  the  settlement  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Smith.  Bourne
then  resolved  to  devote  himself  to  the  conversion
of  the  Indians,  and  went  to  Marshpee  as  early  as
1658,  where  he  is  spoken  of  as  assisting  in  the  set-
tlement of  a  boundary  between  the  property  of  the
Indians  and  that  of  the  settlers  at  Barnstable.  He
acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  Indian  tongue,  and
on  17  Aug.,  1670,  was  ordained  pastor  of  an  Indian
church  at  Marshpee,  consisting  of  his  converts,  the
ceremony  being  performed  by  the  celebrated  "  apos-
tle to  the  Indians,"  John  Eliot.  In  1660  he  ob-
tained at  his  own  expense  a  deed  securing  to  those
under  his  charge  the  possession  of  Marshpee.  His
son  Shearjashub,  his  grandson  Ezra,  and  his  great-
grandson  Joseph,  had  charge  after  him  of  the  set-
tlement at  Marshpee. — His  great-great-grandson,
Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  9  Sept.,
1755:  d.  17  Sept.,  1808,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1775,  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  where  he  filled  several  public  offices.
He  was  quartermaster  of  the  2d  Rhode  Island
regiment  in  1776,  and  in  1789  was  a  member  of
a  committee  sent  to  the  continental  congress  with
a  petition  from  Rhode  Island.  He  was  often  a
member  of  the  state  legislature,  and  was  elected
the  first  representative  to  congress  from  Rhode
Island  after  the  adoption  of  the  constitution.  He
was  re-elected  three  times  successively,  serving  from
17  Dec,  1790,  till  1796,  when  he  resigned.  In  1801
he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court
in  Rhode  Island.

BOUSSINGAULT,  Jean  Baptiste  Josepli
Dieudonne,  French  chemist,  b.  in  Paris,  2  Feb.,
1802.,^  He  was  educated  in  the  school  of  mines  at
St.  Etienne,  and  sent  by  an  English  company  to
work  mines  in  South  America.  In  the  Colombian
war  for  independence  he  joined  the  patriot  army
and  attained  the  rank  of  colonel  under  Bolivar.
He  explored  the  region  between  Carthagena  and
the  mouths  of  the  Orinoco,  as  well  as  other  parts
of  Venezuela,  Peru,  and  Ecuador,  and  after  re-
turning to  France  became  professor  of  chemistry
and  published  important  works  on  rural  economy


and  agricultural  chemistry,  containing  the  results
of  experiments  on  the  value  of  manures  and  on
fattening  cattle.

BOUTELLE,  Be  Witt  Clinton,  artist,  b.  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  6  April,  1820 ;  d.  5  Nov.,  1884.  Al-
though a  self-taught  artist,  he  came  early  under
the  influence  of  Cole  and  Durand.  His  first  pic-
ture, painted  in  1839,  was  sold  for  $5.  After  paint-
ing in  New  York  and  Philadelphia  he  removed  his
studio  to  Bethlehem,  Pa.,  where  he  lived  for  many
years.  Among  his  works  are  "  Trout  Brook  Show-
er "  (1851) ;  "  Morning  in  the  Valley  of  the  Batter-
kill,"  which  has  been  engraved  ;  "  Niagara,"  "  Ter-
rapin Tower,  Niagara  " ;  and  a  life-size  portrait  of
Asa  Packer,  presented  by  his  sons  to  Lehigh  uni-
versity. He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  na-
tional academy  in  1853,  and  member  of  the  Penn-
sylvania academy  in  1862,  but  seldom  exhibited  in
public.  He  was  a  close  student  of  nature,  and  a
hard  and  conscientious  worker.

BOUTON,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Nor-
walk,  Conn.,  29  June,  1797;  d.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,
6  June,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1821,
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1824.  On
May  23,  1825,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  1st
Congregational  church  in  Concord,  N.  H.  He  was
president  of  the  New  Hampshire  historical  society
from  1842  till  1844,  trustee  of  Dartmouth  college
from  1840  till  1877,  secretary  of  the  board  of  trus-
tees from  1845  till  1873,  and  president  of  the  New
Hampshire  missionary  society  from  1852  till  1858,
He  also  served  as  vice-president  of  the  American
home  missionary  society  and  director  of  the  New
Hampshire  Bible  society,  and  was  a  corporate  mem-
ber of  the  New  England  historical  and  genealogi-
cal society,  and  of  the  Maine,  the  Wisconsin,  and
the  Pennsylvania  historical  societies.  In  1867  he
gave  up  his  pastorate  and  became  editor  of  the
provincial  records  of  the  state  of  New  Hampshire,
receiving  the  honorary  appointment  of  state  his-
torian. Besides  numerous  sermons,  addresses,  and
articles  in  periodicals,  he  published  "Help  to
Prayer  "  (1832) ;  "  Sinners  Directed,"  abridged  from
Baxter  (1832):  "History  of  Education  in  New
Hampshire,"  a  discourse  (12  June,  1833) ;  "  Memoir
of  Mrs.  Elizabeth  Macfarland"  (1839);  "The  Fa-
thers of  the  New  Hampshire  Ministry,"  a  discourse
(22  Aug.,  1848) ;  "  Historical  Discourse  on  the  200th
Anniversary  of  the  Settlement  of  Norwalk,  Conn."
(9  July,  1851) ;  "  History  of  Concord,  N.  H."  (1856) ;
"  Collections  of  New  Hampshire  Historical  Socie-
ty," vols.  vii.  and  viii.  (1850-6) ;  an  annotated  edi-
tion of  Rev.  Thomas  Symmes's  "  Account  of  Capt.
John  Lovewell's  Great  Fight  with  the  Indians
at  Pequawket,  May  8,  1725"  (1861);  "Discourse
Commemorative  of  a  Forty  Years'  Ministry  "  (Con-
cord, 23  March,  1865);  and  ten  volumes  of  the
"  Provincial  Records." — His  son,  John  Bell,  au-
thor, b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  15  March,  1830.  After
he  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1849  he  studied
law  and  became  editor  of  the  Cleveland  "Plain-
Dealer  "  in  1851.  He  removed  to  New  York  city  in
1857,  and  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Journal
of  Commerce"  until  1864,  when  he  entered  into
business.  He  has  published  "  Loved  and  Lost,"  a
series  of  essays  (1857) ;  "  Round  the  Block,"  a  novel
(1864) ;  "  Treasury  of  Travel  and  Adventure "
(1865) ;  and  "  Memoir  of  General  Bell "  (1865).

BOUTWELL,  George  Sewall,  statesman,  b.  in
Brookline,  Mass.,  28  Jan.,  1818.  His  early  life  was
spent  on  his  father's  farm  until,  in  1835,  he  be-
came a  merchant's  clerk  in  Groton,  Mass.  He  was
afterward  admitted  to  partnership,  and  remained
in  business  there  until  1855.  In  1836  he  began  by
himself  to  study  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,


332


BOUTWELL


BOVES


but  did  not  enter  into  active  practice  for  many
years.  He  also  began  a  course  of  reading,  by
which  he  hoped  to  make  up  for  his  want  of  a  col-
lege education.  He  entered  politics  as  a  supporter
of  Van  Buren  in  1840,  and  between  1842  and  1851
was  seven  times  chosen  as  a  democrat  to  the  state
legislature,  where  he  soon  became  recognized  as
the  leader  of  his  party.  In  1844,  1846,  and  1848
he  was  defeated  as  a  candidate  for  congress,  and  in
1849  and  1850  he  was  the  democratic  nominee  for
governor  with  no  better  success ;  but  he  was  final-
ly elected  in  1851  and  again  in  1852  by  a  coalition
with  the  free-soil  party, in  1849-'50  "he  was  state

bank  commis-
sioner ;  in  1853
a  member  of
the  state  con-
stitutional con-
vention. After
the  repeal  of the
Missouri com-

Eromise  in  1854
e  assisted  in
organizing  the
republican  par-
ty, with  which
he  has  since  act-
ed. In  1800  he
was  a  member
^  of  the  Chica-
7j7^^  '  yjy^/f  go  convention
^^^^  which  nomi-
nated  Lincoln,
and  in  Febru-
ary, 1861,  was  a  delegate  to  the  Washington
peace  conference.  President  Lincoln  invited  him
to  organize  the  new  department  of  internal  reve-
nue in  1862,  and  he  was  its  first  commissioner,
serving  from  July,  1862,  till  March,  1863.  In  1862
he  was  chosen  a  member  of  congress  from  Massa-
chusetts, and  twice  re-elected.  In  February,  1868,
he  made  a  speech  advocating  the  impeachment  of
President  Johnson,  was  chosen  chairman  of  the
committee  appointed  to  report  articles  of  impeach-
ment, and  became  one  of  the  seven  managers  of
the  trial.  In  March,  1869,  he  entered  President
Grant's  cabinet  as  secretary  of  the  treasury,  where
he  opposed  diminution  of  taxation  and  favored  a
large  reduction  of  the  national  debt.  In  1870  con-
gress, at  his  recommendation,  passed  an  act  pro-
viding for  the  funding  of  the  nati.onal  debt  and
authorizing  the  selling  of  certain  bonds,  but  not
an  increase  of  the  debt.  Secretary  Boutwell  at-
tempted to  do  this  by  means  of  a  syndicate,  but
expended  more  than  half  of  one  per  cent.,  in  which
he  was  accused  of  violating  the  law.  The  house
committee  of  ways  and  means  afterward  absolved
him  from  this  charge.  In  March,  1873,  he  resigned
and  took  his  seat  as  a  U.  S.  senator  from  Massa-
chusetts, having  been  chosen  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  election  of  Henry  Wilson  to  the  vice-
presidency.  In  1877  he  was  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Hayes  to  codify  and  edit  the  statutes  at  large.
Mr.  Boutwell  was  for  six  years  an  overseer  of  Har-
vard, and  for  five  years  secretary  of  the  Massachu-
setts state  board  of  education,  preparing  the  elab-
orate reports  of  that  body.  He  afterward  opened
a  law  office  in  Washington,  D.  C.  He  is  the  au-
thor of  "Educational  Topics  and  Institutions"
(Boston,  1859);  a  "Manual  of  the  United  States
Direct  and  Revenue  Tax  "  (1863) ;  "  Decisions  on
the  Tax  Law"  (New  York,  1863);  "Tax-Payer's
Manual"  (Boston,  1865);  a  volume  of  "Speeches
and  Papers  "  (1867) ;  and  "  Why  I  am  a  Republi-
can "  (Hartford,  Conn.,  1884).


BOUVE,  Thomas  Tracy,  merchant,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  14  Jan.,  1815.  He  received  his  educa-
tion in  the  Boston  public  schools,  and  at  the  age  of
twelve  began  his  business  career,  m  which  he  was
eminently  successful,  and  amassed  a  large  fortune.
His  leisure  has  been  devoted  to  the  study  of  natu-
ral history,  and  for  many  years  he  filled  the  offices
of  curator  and  councillor  to  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history,  becoming  its  president  in  1870,
and  continuing  as  such  until  1880.  Mr.  Bouve  has
contributed  many  scientific  papers  to  the  proceed-
ings of  that  society,  and  is  the  author  of  a  "  History
of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural  History  for  the
First  Half  Century  of  its  Existence,  ending  in
1880  "  (Boston).

BOUVIER,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Codogno,  Italy,
in  1787;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  18  Nov.,  1851.
His  family,  who  were  Quakers,  settled  in  Philadel-
phia in  1802.  He  was  employed  for  several  years
in  a  book-store,  and  then  went  to  Brownsville,  Pa.,
where  he  published  in  1814  a  newspaper  called  the
"American  Telegraph."  He  afterward  studied
law,  and  during  his  studies  made  a  complete  an-
alysis of  Blackstone's  "Commentaries."  He  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1818  at  Unionville,  Fayette
CO.,  Pa.,  where  he  published,  from  April,  1818,  till
July,  1820,  "  The  (jrenius  of  Liberty  and  American
Telegraph."  In  1823  he  began  practice  in  Phila-
delphia, was  recorder  of  that  city  in  1836,  and  in
1838  became  associate  judge  of  the  court  of  crimi-
nal sessions.  He  published  a  "  Law  Dictionary
adapted  to  the  Constitution  and  Laws  of  the
United  States  of  America  "  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1839 ;  15th  ed.,  revised,  1886).  On  this  work  he  had
spent  ten  years  of  labor,  and  it  was  highly  praised
by  Chief  Justice  Story,  Judge  Greenleaf,  and  other
noted  lawyers.  In  1841  he  began  a  new  edition  of
Bacon's  "Abridgment  of  the  Law,"  consisting  of
ten  octavo  volumes,  and  finished  it  in  four  years.
Two  months  before  his  death  he  publishell  his
greatest  work,  the  "Institutes  of  American  Law"
(4  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1851 ;  new  edition  by  D,  A.
Gleason,  2  vols.,  1870).  This  is  a  compendium  of
American  law,  based  on  Pothier's  system,  for  wliich
Judge  Bouvier  had  a  great  admiration.

BOYEE,  Christian  Nestell,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  22  Feb.,  1820.  His  early  instniction
was  obtained  at  private  schools,  and  included  some
tim.e  spent  under  the  teaching  of  Goold  Brown,  the
grammarian.  Pie  served  for  six  years  in  a  flour
store,  but  subsequently  was  admitted  to  the  bar
and  followed  law  for  many  years  with  success,
gaining  thereby  a  fortune,  which  in  later  years  was
lost.  At  one  time  he  was  the  law  partner  of  Clark-
son  N.  Potter,  and  later  was  associated  with  other
firms.  He  was  associated  in  the  founding  of  the
Athenaeum  club  of  New  York,  and  was  for  some
time  in  its  management,  and  was  also  for  mnny
years  a  regent  of  the  Long  Island  College  Hosjiital.
He  devoted  his  leisure  to  literature,  and  has  pub-
lished "Thoughts,  Feelings,  and  Fancies"  (New
York,  1857),  and  "  Intuitions  and  Summaries  of
Thought "  (Boston,  1862).  Many  of  his  epigram-
matic sayings,  extracted  from  these  volumes,  have
had  a  wide  circulation.  "  Thoughts  and  Events,
a  j)aper  for  the  poorer  classes,  was  edited  by  hnn
during  its  short-lived  career.

BOVES,  Jos6  Tomas  (bo'-vess),  Spanish-Air.v^ri-
can  adventurer,  b,  in  Spain;  d.  at  Urica,  Vene-
zuela, 5  Dec,  1814.  While  employed  as  a  naval
officer  on  the  northern  coast  of  South  America
he  was  tried  and  imprisoned  for  bribery.  After
his  release  he  acted  with  the  revolutionists  on  the  [
outbreak  of  the  war  of  independence  in  Venezuela,  •
but  subsequently  joined  the  royalists  and  served


BOWDEN


BOWDITCH


333


as  captain  under  Cagigal,  after  whose  defeat  he
took  up  a  position  at  El  Calabozo,  and  with  500
men  defeated  Marino,  dictator  of  the  eastern  prov-
inces. His  band  being  increased  by  vagabonds
and  fugitives  from  justice,  he  worsted  the  inde-
pendents twice,  slaughtered  all  his  prisoners,  and
gained  for  his  force  the  name  of  the  infernal  di-
vision. He  was  routed  by  Rivas,  when  many  of
his  men  were  captured  and  put  to  death ;  but  in
1814  he  defeated  Bolivar  and  Marino  at  La  Puerta,
and  captured  Valencia  after  a  blockade,  and,  in
violation  of  a  solemn  pledge,  ordered  the  republi-
can officers  and  many  of  the  soldiers  to  be  shot.
Boves,  co-operating  with  Morales,  was  again  victo-
rious at  Angiiita,  obliged  Bolivar  to  retreat  to  Car-
tagena, and  entered  Caracas.  He  fell  in  the  bat-
tle of  Urica,  and  was  buried  while  his  victorious
troops  were  massacring  their  captives.

BOWDEN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ireland,  7
Jan.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Ballston  Spa,  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1817.
He  came  to  America  early  in  life,  studied  at  Prince-
ton for  two  years,  returned  to  Ireland  with  his
father  (who  was  in  the  army),  and  came  back  to
America  in  1770.  He  was  "graduated  at  King's
college  in  1772,  studied  for  orders,  went  to  Eng-
land, and  was  ordained  in  London  in  1774,  and  on
coming  back  to  New  York  the  same  year  was  ap-
pointed an  assistant  minister  in  Trinity  church.
At  the  beginning  of  the  revolution  he  retired  to
Norwalk,  Conn.  While  here  he  was  warned  by
some  patriots  of  that  place  to  leave  the  town,  and,
escaping  to  Long  Island  in  a  boat,  he  returned  to
New  York,  then  occupied  by  the  British.  Trouble
with  his  voice  prevented  his  resuming  his  charge
in  that  city,  so  he  removed  to  Jamaica,  L.  I.,
where  he  ofliciated  occasionally.  In  December,
1784.  he  accepted  the  rectorship  of  the  church  in
Norwalk,  and  in  1789  went  to  St.  Croix,  W.  I.
Not  obtaining  the  benefit  to  his  health  which  he
sought,  he  returned  in  about  two  years  and  settled
at  Stratford,  Conn.  Soon  afterward  he  took  charge
of  the  Episcopal  academy  at  Cheshire,  Conn.,  and
held  that  place  for  six  years.  In  October,  1796,  he
was  unanimously  chosen  bishop  of  Connecticut,
but,  on  account  of  physical  disability,  he  declined
undertaking  so  arduous  a  work.  In  April,  1802,
he  became  professor  of  moral  philosophy,  belles-
lettres,  and  logic  in  Columbia  college,  the  duties
of  which  chair  he  discharged  during  the  remainder
of  his  life.  He  received  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from
Columbia  in  1797.  Ur.  Bowden's  works  include
two  letters  to  Ezra  Stiles,  president  of  Yale  col-
lege, "  Concerning  Church  Government"  (1788),  and
"An  Address  to  the  Episcopal  Church  in  Strat-
ford" (1792),  successfully  urging  the  adoption  of
the  altered  "  Book  of  Common  Prayer,"  to  which
the  rector  of  Stratford,  Rev.  James  Sayre,  was  vio-
lently opposed.  He  was  also  the  author  of  "A
Full-Length  Portrait  of  Calvinism,"  "  The  Essen-
tials of  Ordination,"  "The  Apostolic  Origin  of
Episcopacy  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1808),  "  Observa-
tions on  the  Catholic  Controversy,"  and  other  con-
troversial letters  and  writings.

BOWDEN,  Lemuel  Jackson,  senator,  b.  in
Williamsburg,  Va.,  16  Jan.,  1815 :  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  2  Jan.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
William  and  Mary,  was  admitted  to  the  Virginia
bar,  and  became  prominent  in  his  profession.  He
was  three  times  chosen  to  the  state  legislature,  was
a  member  of  the  state  constitutional  conventions
of  1849  and  1851,  and  was  a  presidential  elector  in
1860.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  remained  true
to  the  union,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  war  his
estate  suffered  much  at  the  hands  of  the  confeder-
ate army. When  the  national  troops  were  at  Will-


iamsburg he  did  a  great  deal  for  their  comfort,
and  when  a  state  government  was  organized  for
eastern  Virginia,  in  1863,  Mr.  Bowden  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator.

BOWDITCH,  Nathaniel,  mathematician,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  26  March,  1773 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
16  March,  1838.  When  only  ten  years  old  he  left
school  to  work  in  the  shop  of  his  father,  who  was
a  cooper,  and  soon  afterward  he  became  clerk  in  a
ship-chandlery.  In  his  school-days  he  had  shown
aptness  for  mathematics,  and  now,  in  the  intervals
of  work,  he  continued  his  studies.  After  master-
ing arithmetic  and  elementary  algebra  he  was
taught  the  elements  of  navigation  by  a  retired
sailor.  Wishing  to  read  the  "  Principia  "  of  New-
ton, he  began  in  1790  to  study  Latin  without  an
instructor.  He  afterward  learned  to  read  French
for  a  similar  reason,  and  shocked  his  teacher,  for
some  time,  by  altogether  neglecting  the  pronun-
ciation. Anxious  to  pursue  a  course  of  reading,
and  having  no  one  to  guide  him,  he  read  Ephraim
Chambers's  "  Cyclopai'dia  "  (2  vols.,  folio)  from  be-
ginning to  end.  Although  so  fond  of  mathemat-
ics, he  did  not  neglect  other  subjects ;  from  youth
he  was  an  ar-
dent admirer  of
Shakespeare,was
familiar  with  the
Bible,  and  in
later  life  stud-
ied Spanish,  Ital-
ian, and  German,
that  he  might
enjoy  the  liter-
ature of  those
languages.  He
made  a  rule  nev-
er to  let  his
studies  interfere
with  business,
and  early  formed
the  methodical
habits  that  dis-
tinguished him
through  life.  On
11  Jan.,  1795,
Bowditch  sailed

from  Salem  as  clerk  to  Capt.  Prince,  of  the  ship
"Henry,"  and  before  1804  had  made  five  long
voyages  to  the  East  Indies,  Portugal,  and  Medi-
terranean ports,  serving  as  supercargo  and  after-
ward as  master.  During  this  time  he  industri-
ously continued  his  studies,  and  it  is  related
that  during  his  third  voyage,  when  the  vessel
was  chased  by  a  French  privateer,  Bowditch,  who
had  been  ordered  to  hand  powder  on  deck,  was
seen  quietly  seated  on  a  powder-keg,  working
out  a  problem  with  slate  and  pencil.  He  became
proficient  in  navigation,  and  on  his  last  voyage
distinguished  himself  by  bringing  his  vessel  into
Salem  harbor  in  the  midst  of  a  snow-storm,  with
no  guide  but  his  reckoning  and  a  single  glimpse
of  Baker's  island  light.  He  undertook  to  correct
Moore's  work  on  navigation,  but  found  so  many
errors  that  he  concluded  to  publish  one  of  his
own,  and  the  result  was  his  "  New  American  Prac-
tical Navigator "  (1802),  which  became  the  stand-
ard work  on  the  subject  in  this  country  and  also,
to  a  large  extent,  in  England  and  France.  During
this  year,  chancing  to  be  present  at  the  annual
commencement  of  Harvard,  he  was  astonished  to
hear  that  the  degree  of  master  of  arts  had  been
conferred  upon  him,  which  pleased  him  more  than
any  of  his  subsequent  honors.  After  giving  up
the  sea,  he  became  president  of  the  Essex  fire  and


JfoM^ J?)6U/JU('X


334


BOWDITCH


BOWDITCH


marine  insurance  company  of  Salem,  IMass.  He
declined  professorships  in  Harvard  in  1808,  in  the
university  of  Virginia  in  1818,  and  in  West  Point
academy  in  1820.  While  at  Salem  he  made  a  beau-
tiful chart  of  the  harbor  of  that  place  and  those  of
Beverly,  Marblehead,  and  Manchester,  and  con-
tributed twenty-three  papers,  mostly  on  astronomy,
to  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  American  academy.
He  also  wrote  during  this  time  many  articles  in  the
American  edition  of  "  Rees's  Cyclopaedia."  In  1814
he  undertook  his  greatest  work,  a  translation  of
Laplace's  "  Mecanique  celeste,"  accompanied  by  a
commentary  elucidating  obscure  passages,  giving
interesting  historical  information,  and  bringing
the  whole  subject  down  to  the  latest  date,  'l  his
commentary  forms  more  than  half  the  work,  as
produced  by  Dr.  Bowditch.  It  is  said  that  there
were  at  this  time  only  two  or  three  persons  in  the
country  capable  of  reading  the  original  work  criti-
cally. The  greater  part  of  this  gigantic  under-
taking was  finished  in  1817;  but  publication  would
cost  at  least  $12,000,  a  sum  beyond  the  mathema-
tician's means.  In  1823,  however,  he  was  given
the  place  of  actuary  to  the  Massachusetts  hospital
life  insurance  company  of  Boston,  with  a  liberal
salary,  which  enabled  him  to  give  his  work  to  the
world.  Bowditch  refused  to  publish  the  book  by
subscription,  saying  that  he  would  rather  spend
$1,000  a  year  for  such  an  object  than  in  keeping  a
carriage.  His  wife  and  family  promised  to  make
any  sacrifice  necessary  to  its  accomplishment,  and
he  dedicated  his  translation  to  the  former,  stating
that  "without  her  approbation  the  work  would
not  have  been  undertaken."  The  first  volume  ap-
peared in  1829,  the  second  in  1882,  the  third  in
1834,  and  the  fourth  just  after  his  death.  The
fifth,  which  Laplace  had  added  to  his  work  many
years  after  the  others,  was  subsequently  issued
rmder  the  care  of  Prof.  Benjamin  Peirce.  During
the  latter  years  of  his  life  Dr.  Bowditch  was  a
trustee  of  the  Boston  athenaeum,  president  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  a
member  of  the  corporation  of  Harvard  college,
which  had  given  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1816.
He  was  at  his  death  a  member  of  the  royal  socie-
ties of  Ijondon  and  Edinburgh,  the  royal  acade-
mies of  Palermo  and  Berlin,  the  royal  Irish  socie-
ty, the  royal  astronomical  society  of  London,  and
the  British  association.  He  also  twice  held  a  seat
in  the  state  executive  council  of  Massachusetts.
Like  many  other  mathematicians,.  Dr.  Bowditch
was  fond  of  poetry.  Bryant  was  his  favorite
American  poet,  and  he  considered  the  ''  Old  Man's
Funeral "  one  of  the  most  beautiful  pieces  in  the
English  language.  His  tomb  and  statue  are  in
Mount  Auburn  cemetery,  Cambridge,  and  his  sci-
entific library  is  still  preserved  in  Boston.  Prof.
Pickering  delivered  a  eulogy  of  him,  including  an
analysis  of  his  scientific  publications,  before  the
American  academy,  on  29  May,  1838  (Boston,
1838):  and  another  was  delivered  in  Salem,  by
Judge  Daniel  A.  White,  at  the  request  of  the  cor-
poration of  that  city  (Salem,  1838).  See  also
"  Memoir  of  Nathaniel  Bowditch,"  by  his  son,  Na-
thaniel I.  Bowditch  (Boston,  1839) ;  and  "  Discourse
on  the  Life  and  Character  of  Nathaniel  Bowditch,"
by  Alexander  Young  (Boston,  1838).  A  full  list  of
his  mathematical  papers  may  be  found  in  the
"  Mathematical  Monthly "  (vol.  ii.,  Cambridge,
Mass.).— His  son,  Nathaniel  Ingersoll,  author,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1805;  d.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  16  April,  1861,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1822,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1825,  but  soon  left  his  practice
and devoted himself to business  as  a  convey-


ancer. He  became  noted  for  accuracy  and  indus-
try, and  it  is  said  that  scarcely  a  transfer  of  real
estate  was  made  in  Boston  without  his  exami-
nation and  approval  of  the  title.  He  wrote  alto-
gether fifty-five  folio  volumes  of  land-titles,  con-
taining 30,000  pages,  besides  plans  and  maps.  He
gave  much  attention  to  public  institutions  in  Bos-
ton, particularly  to  the  Massachusetts  general  hos-
pital, of  which  he  published,  at  his  own  expense,  a
comprehensive  history  (1857).  He  had  previously
issued  a  memoir  of  his  father  (1839),  which  was
also  prefixed  to  the  hitter's  translation  of  Laplace's
"  Mecanique  celeste."  He  also  published  "  Suffolk
Surnames  "  (1857 ;  enlarged  editions,  1858  and  1861).
This  work  contains  curious  surnames  met  with  by
Mr.  Bowditch  in  his  business.  Its  peculiarity  is  in
the  author's  system  of  classification  by  the  deriva-
tion of  the  names.  Mr.  Bowditch  bestowed  much
of  his  large  income  upon  charitable  objects,  in-
cluding a  gift  of  $70,000  to  Harvard  for  founding
scholarships,  and  a  bequest  of  $2,000  to  that  college
for  the  purchase  of  books. — Another  son,  Henry
Ingersoll,  physician,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  9  Aiig..
1808,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1828,  took  his
medical  degree  there  in  1832,  and  studied  in  Paris
from  1833  to  1835,  He  was  professor  of  clinical
medicine  at  Harvard  from  1859  till  1867,  chairman
of  the  state  board  of  health  (1869-79),  and  member
of  the  national  board  in  the  latter  year,  surgeon
of  enrollment  during  the  civil  war,  president  of  the
American  medical  association  in  1877,  and  physi-
cian at  the  Massachusetts  general  hospital  and  the
Boston  city  hospital,  where  he  served  from  1808  to
1872.  To  Dr.  Bowditch  is  due  the  discovery  of  the
law  of  soil  moisture  as  a  potent  cause  of  consump-
tion in  New  England.  He  has  also  proved  to  the
medical  profession  of  this  country  and  Europe  that
thoracentesis,  in  pleural  effusions,  if  performed
with  Wyman's  fine  trocars  and  suction-pumj),  is
not  only  innocuous,  but  at  times  saves  life  or  gives
great  relief.  Dr.  Bowditch  was  made  an  abolition-
ist by  the  mobbing  of  Garrison  in  1835,  and  worked
earnestly  in  the  anti-slavery  cause.  "  He  was  the
first  in  Boston,"  says  Frederick  Douglas,  "to
treat  me  as  a  man."  He  is  the  author  of  "  Life
of  Nathaniel  Bowditch,  for  the  Young"  (1841);
"  The  Young  Stethoscopist  "  (Boston,  1846 ;  2d
ed.,  New  York,  1848) ;  "  Life  of  Lieutenant  Na-
thaniel Bowditch"  (50  copies,  printed  privately,
1865) ;  "  Public  Hygiene  in  America,"  a  centennial
address  at  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  many  articles
in  medical  journals  and  papers  read  before  the
State  board  of  health  (1870-'8).  He  has  trans-
lated "  Louis  on  Typhoid  "  (2  vols..  Boston,  1886);
"  Louis  on  Phthisis  "  (1836) ;  and  "  Maunoir  on
Cataract "  (1837).— Nathaniel  Bowditch's  grandson,
Henry  Pickering,  physician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
4  April,  1840,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1861,
began  the  study  of  chemistry  at  Lawrence  Scientific
School,  and  in  1868  received  the  degree  of  M.  D.
from  Harvard  Medical  School.  Soon  after  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  commissioned
second  lieutenant  in  the  1st  Massachusetts  cavalry,
and  rose  gradually  until  he  attained  the  rank  of
major  in  the  5th  Massachusetts  cavalry,  which
office  he  resigned  3  June,  1865.  He  then  continued
his  studies  under  Jeffries  Wyman  at  Lawrence  Sci-
entific School,  but  his  attention  was  attractea  to
medicine,  which  he  has  since  followed.  Irom
1868  to  1871  he  studied  physiology  in  France  ana
Germanv,  principally  at  Leipsic,  under  Prof.  L""-
wig.  In  1871  he  became  assistant  professor  oi
physiology  at  Harvard  Medical  College,  ami  m
1876  was  elected  to  the  full  chair.  Dr.  Bowditch
is  a  member  of  the  American  Academy  of  Artsanu


BOWDOIN


BOWEN


335


Sciences,  and  of  numerous  medical  societies.  In
1876  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Boston  school
board.  He  has  published  many  papers  on  physio-
logical subjects,  which  have  appeared  in  the  vari-
ous medical  journals,  notably  in  the  "  Boston  Med-
ical and  Surgical  Journal."

BOWDOIN,  James,  statesman,  b.  in  Boston,  8
Aug.,  1727;  d.  there,  6  Nov.,  1790.  He  was  a
grandson  of  Pierre  Baudouin,  a  French  Huguenot
who  fled  to  Ireland  on  the  revocation  of  the  edict
of  Nantes,  came  to  Portland  in  1687,  and  removed
to  Boston  in  1690.  James  Bowdoin  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1745,  and  on  8  Sept.,  1747,  the  death
of  his  father,  an  eminent  merchant,  left  liim  with
a  large  fortune.  When  twenty-four  years  old,  he
visited  Benjamin  li'ranklin,  who  communicated  to
him  his  papers  on  electricity,  and  with  whom  Bow-
doin frequently  corresponded  after  this.  In  one
of  his  letters  Bowdoin  suggested  the  theory,  since
generally  accepted,  that  the  phosphorescence  of
the  sea,  under  certain  conditions,  is  due  to  the
presence  of  minute  animals.  Afterward,  Franklin
read  Bowdoin's  letters  before  the  royal  society  of
London,  and  they  were  published  with  some  of  his
own  researches.  From  1753  till  1756  Bowdoin  was
a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  general  court,  and
in  1756  became  councillor.  In  this  position  he
was  prominent  in  opposing  the  royal  governors  by
his  writings  and  otherwise.  In  1769,  when  he  was
again  chosen  to  the  council,  he  was  negatived  by
Gov.  Bernard,  and  was  immediately  elected  by  the
Bostonians  to  the  assembly.  Hutchinson,  however,
on  becoming  governor  in  1770,  permitted  him  to
sit  in  the  council,  thinking  that  his  opposition
would  be  less  dangerous  there  than  in  the  house
of  representatives.  Failing  health  prevented  him
from  attending  the  continental  congress,  to  which
he  was  elected  in  1774;  but  in  1775  he  was  chosen
president  of  the  Massachusetts  council,  and  in  1779

f resided  over  the  state  constitutional  convention.
n  1785  and  1786  he  was  governor  of  his  state,  and
by  his  decisive  measures  put  down  Shays's  rebellion,
ordering  out  4,000  militia  and  heading  a  subscrip-
tion to  pay  their  expenses,  which  the  public  treas-
ury could  not  meet.  His  vigor  in  suppressing  this
rebellion  was  probably  the  cause  of  his  defeat  in
1787,  when  he  was  succeeded  by  Hancock.  In
1788  he  was  a  member  of  the  convention  that
adopted  the  federal  constitution.  Although  Bow-
doin suffered  many  years  from  consumption,  which
was  finally  the  cause  of  his  death,  he  was  always
vigorous  in  public  affairs.  He  was  one  of  the
founders,  and  first  president,  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  and  left  it  his  valu-
able library.  He  also  aided  in  founding  the  Massa-
chusetts humane  society,  and  in  1779  was  made  a
fellow  of  Harvard  college,  to  which  he  left  £400.
He  was  given  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  by  the  univer-
sity of  Edinburgh,  and  was  a  fellow  of  the  royal
societies  of  London  and  Edinburgh.  He  published
a  poetical  paraphrase  of  Dodsley's  "Economy  of
Human  Life  "  (1759)  and  an  address  delivered  be-
fore the  American  academy,  when  he  became  its
president  (1780).  Several  of  his  papers  appear  in
the  memoirs  of  the  society,  among  which  is  one
whose  object  is  to  prove  that  the  sky  is  a  real  con-
cave body  enclosing  our  system,  and  that  the
Milky  Way  is  an  opening  in  this,  through  which
the  light  of  other  systems  reaches  us.  Bowdoin
also  wrote  two  Latin  epigrams  and  an  English  poem
for  the  "  Pietas  et  Gratulatio,"  a  volume  of  poems
published  by  Harvard  college  on  the  accession  of
George  III.  Bowdoin  college  was  named  in  his
honor.  See  Robert  C.  Winthrop's  addresses  (Boston,
1852).— His  son,  James,  philanthropist,  b.  22  Sept.,


1752  ;  d.  on  Naushon  island.  Buzzard's  bay,  Mass.,
11  Oct.,  1811.  After  his  graduation  at  Harvard  in
1771  he  spent  a  year  in  the  university  of  Oxford,
studying  law.  and  travelled  in  Italy,  Holland,  and
England.  He  returned  to  this  country  when  the
news  of  the  battle  of  Lexington  reached  him,  and
wished  to  enter  the  army,  but  was  dissuaded  by
his  father.  He  became  successively  a  member  of
the  assembly,  the  state  senate,  and  the  state  coun-
cil, and  in  1789  was  a  delegate  to  the  state  consti-
tutional convention.  During  this  time  he  also
devoted  much  time  to  literary  pursuits.  He  was
appointed  minister  to  Spain  in  November,  1804,
and  went  to  Madrid  in  May^  1805.  In  March,
1806,  with  Gen.  John  Armstrong,  of  New  York,
he  was  appointed  commissioner  to  treat  with
Spain  concerning  "  territories,  wrongful  cap-
tures, condemnations,  and  other  injuries."  The
negotiations,  which  were  carried  on  in  Paris,  were
broken  off  in  1808.  On  the  foundation  of  Bow-
doin college,  he  gave  it  6,000  acres  of  land  and
£1,100,  and  at  his  death  left  the  institution  an  ex-
tensive library,  and  collections  of  minerals,  philo-
sophical apparatus,  and  paintings,  all  of  which  he
had  purchased  during  his  stay  in  Paris.  He  also
bequeathed  to  the  college  the  reversion  of  Naushon
island,  which  had  been  his  favorite  residence.  He
published  a  translation  of  Daubenton's  "  Advice
to  Shepherds,"  and  anonymously,  "  Opinions  re-
specting the  Commercial  Intercourse  between  the
United  States  and  Great  Britain."  Part  of  his
estate  was  left  to  his  nephew,  James  Bowdoin
WiNTHROP  (b.  in  1795 ;  d.  in  1833),  who  afterward
dropped  the  "  Winthrop  "  from  his  name.  He  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1814,  and  did  valuable
work  in  connection  with  the  Massachusetts  histori-
cal society.

BOWELL,  Mackenzie,  Canadian  journalist,  b.
at  Rickinghall,  Suffolk,  England,  27  Dec,  1823.
He  came  to  Canada  with  his  family  in  1833,  was
educated  at  a  common  school  and  in  the  printing-
office  of  the  Belleville  "  Intelligencer,"  of  which
he  subsequently  became  editor  and  proprietor.
He  was  first  returned  to  parliament  for  the  county
of  North  Hastings  in  1867,  was  re-elected  in  1872,
in  1874,  and  at  the  last  general  election  in  1878,  and
sworn  in  of  the  privy  council,  and  as  minister  of
customs,  19  Oct.,  1878.  Mr.  Bowell  was  a  major,
49th  battalion  of  volunteer  rifles,  and  served  upon
the  frontier  during  the  American  civil  war,  1864,
and  during  the  Fenian  troubles.  He  was  a  presi-
dent of  the  Grand  Junction  railway,  vice-president
of  the  agricultural  and  arts  association  of  Onta-
rio, and  chairman  of  the  government  school-board
for  a  number  of  years.  He  is  a  conservative  in
politics,  and  in  April,  1874,  moved  the  resolution
for  the  expulsion  of  Louis  Kiel  from  the  house  of
commons,  to  which  he  had  been  elected,  which
resolution  was  carried.

BOWEN,  EH,  author,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa,,  in
1824 ;  d.  before  1886.  He  published  "  Coal  Regions
of  Pennsylvania  "  (Pottsville,  1848) ;  "  U.  S.  Postal
System  "  ;  "  Pictorial  Sketch-Book  of  Pennsylva-
nia "  (8th  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1854) ;  "  Rambles  in  the
Path  of  the  Iron  Horse " ;  "  The  Creation  of  the
Earth  "  (1862) ;  and  "  Coal  and  Coal  Oil "  (1865).

BOWEN,  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1811 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Jan.,
1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard,  and  was
instructor  there  in  intellectual  philosophy  and
political  economy.  In  1839  he  went  to  Europe,
and,  while  living  in  Paris,  met  Sismondi,  De  Ge-
rando,  and  other  scholars.  He  returned  to  Cam-
bridge in  1841  and  devoted  himself  to  literature.
In  January,  1843,  he  became  editor  and  proprietor


336


BOWEN


BOWEN


of  the  "  North  American  Review,"  which  he  con-
ducted nearly  eleven  years,  writing,  during  this
time,  about  one  fourth  of  the  articles  in  it.  In
1848  and  1849  he  delivered  lectures  before  the
Lowell  institute,  on  the  application  of  metaphys-
ical and  ethical  science  to  the  evidences  of  religion.
During  the  latter  part  of  Mr.  Bowen's  connection
with  the  "  North  American  Review  "  attention  was
attracted  by  his  articles  on  the  Hungarian  ques-
tion, of  which  he  did  not  take  the  popular  side,
and  on  account  of  these,  together  with  his  views
on  other  political  subjects,  the  Harvard  overseers
failed  to  confirm  his  appointment  as  McLean  pro-
fessor of  history,  made  by  the  corporation  in  1850.
(See  Carter,  Robert.)  '  In  the  winter  of  this  year
he  lectured  again  before  the  Lowell  institute  on

Solitical  economy,  and  in  1852  on  the  origin  and
evelopraent  of  the  English  and  American  consti-
tutions. In  1858,  on  the  election  of  Dr.  Walker  to
the  presidency  of  Harvard,  Mr.  Bowen  was  ap-
pointed his  successor  in  the  Alford  professorship
of  natural  religion,  moral  philosophy,  and  civil
[)olity,  and  was  this  time  almost  unanimously
confirmed  by  the  overseers.  Since  1858  he  lect-
ured before  the  Lowell  institute  on  the  English
metaphysicians  and  philosophers  from  Bacon  to
Sir  William  Hamilton.  Prof,  Bowen  opposed  in
his  philosophical  works  the  systems  of  Kant,
Fichte,  Cousin,  Comte,  and  John  Stuart  Mill,  who
has  replied  to  his  critic  in  the  third  edition  of  his
"  Logic."  In  political  economy  he  opposed  the
doctrines  of  Adam  Smith  on  free-trade,  Malthus
on  population,  and  Ricardo  on  rent.  He  took
pains  to  trace  the  influence  of  our  form  of  govern-
ment and  condition  of  society  upon  economical
questions.  Prof.  Bowen  {published  "Virgil,  with
English  Notes,"  and  "  Critical  Essays  on  the  His-
tory and  Present  Condition  of  Speculative  Philos-
ophy "  (Boston,  1842) ;  "  Lowell  Institute  Lectures  "
(1849 ;  revised  ed.,  1855) ;  an  abridged  edition  of  Du-
gald  Stewart's  "  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind  "
(1854) ;  "  Documents  of  the  Constitution  of  England
and  America,  from  Magna  Charta  to  the  Federal
Constitution  of  1789  "  (Cambridge,  1854) ;  the  lives
of  Steuben,  Otis,  and  Benjamin  Lincoln,  in  Sparks's
"  American  Biography  " ;  "  Principles  of  Political
Economy,  applied  to  the  Condition,  Resources,  and
Institutions  of  the  American  People"  (Boston,
1856) ;  a  revised  edition  of  Reeve's  translation  of
De  Tocqueville's  "  Democracy  in  America  "  (2  vols.,
Cambridge,  1862) ;  a  "  Treatise  on  Logic  "  (1864) ;
"  American  Political  Economy,"  with  remarks  on
the  finances  since  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war
(New  York,  1870) ;  "  Modern  Philosophy,  from  Des-
cartes to  Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann"  (1877);
"Gleanings  from  a  Literary  Life,  1838-1880"
(1880);  and  "A  Layman's  Study  of  the  English
Bible,  considered  in  its  Literary  and  Secular  As-
pect "  (1886).

BOWEN,  Georg-e  Thomas,  chemist,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  19  March,  1803;  d.  in  Nashville,
Tenn.,  25  Oct.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1822,  studied  medicine  in  Philadelphia,  and  in
1825  was  elected  professor  of  chemistry  in  the  Uni-
versity of  Nashville,  where  he  continued  until  his
death.  While  an  undergraduate  in  college,  he
showed  such  interest  in  chemistry  that  he  was  per-
mitted to  devote  all  the  time  he  could  spare  from
his  other  studies  to  laboratory  work  under  Prof.
Silliman.  The  results  of  his  investigations  were
published  in  1822  under  the  titles  "  On  the  Electro-
magnetic Effects  of  Hare's  Calorimeter  "  and  "  On
a  Mode  of  Preserving  in  a  Permanent  Form  the
Coloring-Matter  of  Purple  Cabbage  as  a  Test  for
Acids  and  Alkalies." Analyses  and  descriptions  of


several  minerals  prepared  by  him  date  from  this
time.  In  Philadelphia  he  was  a  devoted  follower
of  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,  and  contrib-
uted to  its  memoirs  and  discussions.

BOWEN,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1808 :  d.  in  Hastings-on-Hudson,  N.  Y.,  29  Sept.,
1886.  His  father,  a  successful  merchant,  left  hiin
an  ample  fortune.  He  was  the  first  president  of
the  Erie  railway,  and  held  that  office  for  several
years.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in
1848  and  1849,  and  president  of  the  first  board  of
police  commissioners  under  the  law  of  1855,  estab-
lishing the  present  metropolitan  police  force.  At
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  raised  six  or  seven
regiments,  which  were  formed  into  a  brigade,  and
took  command  of  them,  receiving  his  commission
as  brigadier-general  of  vohmteers,  11  Oct.,  1802.
After  Gen.  Butler  had  left  New  Orleans.  Gen.
Bowen  went  there,  and  served  as  provost-marshal
general  of  the  department  of  the  gulf.  He  resigned
on  27  July,  1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  bre-
vetted  major-general  of  volunteers.  His  last  public
office  was  that  of  commissioner  of  charities,  to
which  he  was  appointed  by  Mayor  Havemeyer,  and
continued  to  fill  most  acceptably  for  many  years.
Gen.  Bowen  was  a  member  of  the  union  club,  and
of  the  Kent  club,  where  he  was  an  associate  of  Moses
H.  Grinnell,  Richard  M.  Blatchford,  James  Watson
Webb,  and  Thurlow  Weed,  and  was  valued  for  his
sound  views  on  literature.  These  gentlemen  were
all  intimate  friends  of  Daniel  Webster.  It  is  related
that  while  Mr.  Webster  was  secretary  of  state.  Gen.
Bowen,  at  one  of  his  dinner-parties,  said:  'I  want
you  to  do  me  a  favor,  Mr.  Webster,"  to  which  Web-
ster replied,  "  To  the  half  of  my  kingdom."  Gen.
Bowen  was  also  an  intimate  friend  of  William  II.
Seward,  and  a  pall-bearer  at  his  funeral.

BOWEN,  John  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Georgia  in
1829;  d.  in  Raymond,  Miss.,  13  July,  1868.  lie
was  graduated  at  West  Point  in  1853,  and  became
lieutenant  of  mounted  rifles,  serving  at  the  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  cavalry  school,  and  on  the  frontier.  On
1  May,  1856,  he  resigned  and  became  an  architect
in  Savannah,  Ga.,  where  he  was  also  lieutenant-
colonel  of  state  militia.  He  removed  his  office  to
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  in  1857,  where  he  was  captain  in
the  Missouri  militia  from  1859  till  1861.  He  was
adjutant  to  Gen.  Frost  during  the  expedition  to
the  border  in  search  of  Montgomery,  and,  when  the
civil  war  began,  commanded  the  second  regiment
of  Frost's  brigade.  He  was  acting  chief  of  staff  to
Gen.  Frost  when  Camp  Jackson  was  captured  by
Gen.  Lyon,  and  afterward,  disregarding  his  parole,
raised  at  Memphis  the  1st  Missouri  infantry.  He
was  severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,
where  he  commanded  a  brigade  in  Breckinridge's
corps,  and  stubbornly  resisted  Grant's  advance
near  Port  Gibson  in  May,  1863.  He  was  in  all  the
battles  around  Vicksburg,  and  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  negotiations  for  its  surrender,  and  his
death  is  said  to  have  been  hastened  by  mortifica-
tion at  that  event.

BOWEN,  Nathaniel,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  29  June,  1779;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  25
Aug.,  1839.  His  father  removed  to  South  Carolma
in  1787,  and  died  there  very  soon  afterward.  Tlie
boy's  education  was  chiefly  cared  for  by  Rev.  Dr.
R.  Smith  (afterward  bishop  of  South  Carolina),  he
was  graduated  at  Charleston  in  1794,  and  served
some  time  as  a  tutor  in  the  college,  and  then  went
north  for  preparation  for  the  ministry.  He  studied
under  Rev.  Dr.  Parker,  in  Boston  (afterward  bishop
of  the  eastern  diocese),  and  was  ordained  deacon  in
June,  1800,  priest  by  Bishop  Bass  in  October,  180^,
and became assistant minister  in St.  Michaels


BOWEN


BOWERS


337


church,  Charleston.  In  December,  1804,  he  ac-
cepted the  rectorship  of  St.  Michael's.  His  labors
during  the  five  following  years  were  very  arduous,
but  proved  to  be  of  the  highest  value  for  the  inter-
ests of  the  Episcopal  church  in  South  Carolina.
In  1809  he  became  the  rector  of  Grace  church.
New  York  city,  and  discharged  the  duties  of  that
office  with  great  acceptance  until  1818.  Early
in  1818  Dr.  Bowen  was  elected  bishop  of  South
Carolina,  and  also  rector  of  St.  Michael's  church,
Charleston.  He  was  consecrated  in  Philadelphia,
8  Oct.,  1818,  and  for  the  last  twenty  years  of  his
life  gave  himself  to  his  work  with  untiring  fidelity.
Bishop  Bowen  published  occasional  sermons,  ad-
dresses, etc.,  together  with  six  sermons  on  "  Chris-
tian Consolation"  (1881).  Two  volumes  of  his
"  Sermons  "  were  published  after  his  death.

BOWEN,  Oliver,  naval  officer,  b.  in  the  last
century ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  August,  1800.
He  was  a  revolutionary  patriot  of  Augusta,  Ga.,
and  was  successful,  in  the  early  days  of  the  war,  in
seizing  a  large  quantity  of  powder  stored  on  Tybee
island,  near  Savannah,  10  July,  1775.  He  joined
the  unsuccessful  expedition  against  Wilmington
in  1778.  He  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  con-
gress of  1775,  and  of  the  council  of  safety.

BOWEN,  Thomas  M.,  senator,  b.  in  Iowa,  near
the  present  site  of  Burlington,  26  Oct.,  1835.  He
was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and
began  practice  in  Wayne  co.,  where  he  was  elected
to  the  legislature  in  1856.  In  1858  he  removed  to
Kansas.  In  June,  1861,  he  joined  the  volunteer
army  as  captain,  and  subsequently  he  raised  the
13th  Kansas  infantry  and  commanded  it  until  the
end  of  the  war,  receiving  the  brevet  of  brigadier-
general,  and  having  command  of  a  brigade  during
the  last  two  years  of  hostilities  on  the  frontier,  and
afterward  with  the  7th  army  corps.  He  was  a
delegate  from  Kansas  to  the  national  republican
convention  of  1864.  After  the  war  he  settled  in
Arkansas  and  was  president  of  the  constitutional
convention  of  that  state,  and  for  four  years  a  jus-
tice of  the  state  supreme  court.  In  1871  he  ac-
cepted the  appointment  of  governor  of  Idaho  ter-
ritory, but  resigned,  returned  to  Arkansas,  and
was  a  candidate  for  U.  S.  senator  in  opposition  to
S.  W.  Dorsey,  of  the  same  party,  who  defeated  him
in  an  open  contest  before  the  legislature.  In
January,  1870,  he  removed  to  Colorado,  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  the  law.  When  the  state
government  was  organized  in  1876,  he  was  elected
&  district  judge,  and  was  four  years  on  the  bench.
He  afterward  engaged  largely  in  mining  opera-
tions. In  1882  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legis-
lature, and  served  as  chairman  of  the  committee
of  ways  and  means,  until  he  was  elected  to  the  U.
S.  senate,  where  he  took  his  seat  on  3  Dec,  1883.

BOWERS,  Elizabeth  Crocker,  actress,  b.  in
Stamford,  Conn.,  12  March,  1830.  She  was  the
•daughter  of  an  E?jiscopal  clergyman,  who  died  in
her  early  childhood.  When  sixteen  years  old  she
appeared  in  the  character  of  Amanthis  at  the
Park  theatre,  New  York.  On  4  March,  1847,  she
married  David  P.  Bowers,  an  actor  on  the  same
stage.  A  week  later  she  appeared  in  the  Walnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  as  Donna  Victoria  in
"  A  Bold  Stroke  for  a  Husband."  Afterward  she  be-
came very  popular  at  the  Arch  street  theatre  in  the
same  city,  and  remained  there  until  her  husband's
death  in  June,  1857.  In  December  of  that  year,
-after  a  period  of  retirement  from  the  stage,  she
leased  the  Walnut  street  theatre  and  retained  its
management  until  1859.  She  then  leased  the  Phila-
delphia academy  of  music  for  a  short  dramatic
reason.  Soon  after  this  she  married  Dr.  Brown,  of
VOL.  I. — 22


Baltimore,  who  died  in  1867,  and  in  September,

1861,  she  went  to  England  and  made  her  appearance
at  Sadler's  Wells  theatre,  London,  as  Julia,  in
"The  Hunchback."  She  soon  became  a  favorite
with  the  English,  and  played  as  Geraldine  d'Arcy,
in  "  Woman,"  at  the  Lyceum  theatre.  In  1863  she
returned  to  this  country  and  acted  at  the  Winter
Garden,  New  York.  After  a  few  years  she  retired
from  the  stage,  and  lived  quietly  in  the  neighbor-
hood of  Philadelphia  until  October,  1886,  when  she
organized  a  new  dramatic  company,  and  visited  the
principal  cities  of  the  United  States,  playing  many
of  her  old  and  favorite  characters.

BOWERS,  Theodore  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania, 10  Oct.,  1832 ;  killed  at  Garrison's  Station,
N.  Y.,  6  March,  1866.  When  very  young  he  re-
moved to  Mount  Carmel,  111.,  and  there  learned
the  printer's  trade.  When  the  civil  war  began  he
was  editor  of  the  "Register,"  a  local  democratic
journal.  After  the  defeat  of  the  national  forces  in
the  first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  he  raised  a  company
of  volunteers  for  the  48th  Illinois  infantry,  declined
its  captaincy  because  of  the  taunts  of  his  former
political  associates,  and  went  to  the  front  as  a
private.  He  was  soon  sent  home  on  recruiting
service,  and  on  his  return  to  his  regiment  was  de-
tailed as  a  clerical  assistant  at  Brig.-Gen.  Grant's
headquarters  (25  Jan.,  1862).  In  this  capacity  he
went  through  the  campaigns  of  Forts  Henry  and
Donelson.  He  was  again  offered  the  captaincy  of
his  old  company,  but  declined  on  the  ground  that
the  first  lieutenant  deserved  the  place.  He  was,
however,  commissioned  first  lieutenant,  24  March,

1862,  and  on  26  April  following  was  detached  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Grant.  He  acted  as  Maj.
Rawlins's  assistant  in  the  adjutant's  office.  On
1  Nov.,  1862,  he  received  the  regular  staff  appoint-
ment of  captain  and  aide-de-camp,  and  was  left  in
charge  of  department  headquarters  while  the  army
was  absent  on  the  Tallahatchie  expedition.  The
confederates  imder  Van  Dorn  seized  the  opportu-
nity to  make  a  raid  to  the  rear  of  the  federal  ad-
vance, and  captured  the  department  headquarters
at  Holly  Springs  at  early  dawn  of  20  Dec,  1862.
Capt.  Bowers  had  but  a  few  moments'  warning;
but,  acting  with  great  presence  of  mind,  he  made
a  bonfire  of  all  the  department  records,  and  when
the  raiders  burst  into  his  quarters  everything  of
value  to  them  was  destroyed.  Capt.  Bowers  re-
fused to  give  his  parole,  and  succeeded  in  making
his  escape  the  same  evening.  The  officer  com-
manding the  rear-guard  was  severely  censured  by
Gen.  Grant,  while  Capt.  Bowers  was  highly  com-
plimented, and  was  presented  with  a  sword  in  ac-
knowledgment of  his  services.  He  was  appointed
judge  advocate  for  the  department  of  Tennessee,
with  rank  of  major,  19  Feb.,  1863.  After  the  fall
of  Vicksbtirg  he  was  assistant  adjutant-general  in
place  of  Col.  Rawlins,  promoted.  His  services  had
become  so  valuable  that  Gen.  Grant  procured  his
appointment  as  captain  and  quartermaster  on  the
regular  staff  (29  July,  1864),  and  assistant  adjutant-
general,  with  the  rank  of  major,  U.  S.  army,  6  Jan.,
1865.  His  final  promotions  as  brevet  lieutenant-
colonel  and  colonel,  U.  S.  army,  are  dated  13  March,
1865.  He  was  with  Gen.  Grant  in  the  field  until
the  surrender  of  the  confederate  forces,  and  was
retained  on  his  personal  staff  after  the  close  of  the
war.  He  was  instantly  killed  while  attempting  to
board  a  moving  train  on  the  Hudson  river  railroad.
His  military  career  is  remarkable  since  he  rose  by
sheer  force  of  character,  having  no  family  influ-
ence or  special  training,  from  a  private  of  volun-
teers to  one  of  the  highest  staff  appointments
within  the  gift  of  the  commanding  general.


338


BOWIE


BOWLES


BOWIE,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Burke  co.,  Ga.,
about  1790;  d.  in  Alamo,  Texas,  6  March,  1836.
He  settled  in  1802  in  Cliatalioula  parish,  Louisiana,
with  his  parents,  and  became  notorious  from  his
participation  in  a  severe  contest  that  took  place
opposite  Natchez,  on  the  Mississippi,  in  August,
1827.  A  duel  having  been  arranged  between  Dr.
Maddox  and  Samuel  Wells,  they  met  on  a  low
sand-bar  near  the  city,  outside  the  state  limits.
After  the  difficulty  had  been  adjusted  by  the  ex-
change of  two  shots  without  effect,  the  principals
were  Joined  by  parties  of  friends,  and  a  general
melee  took  place,  in  which  fifteen  of  the  number
were  wounded  and  six  killed.  Bowie,  who  had
been  shot  early  in  the  engagement,  drew  his  knife,
which  had  been  made  from  a  blacksmith's  rasp  or
large  file,  and  killed  Maj.  Norris  Wright  with  it.
After  the  conflict,  the  weapon  was  sent  to  Phila-
delphia, where  it  was  fashioned  by  a  cutler  into
the  form  of  a  knife,  which  style  of  weapon  has
since  become  famous  as  the  "  Bowie  knife."  When
the  original  was  received  by  Bowie,  he  was  told  :
"  It  is  more  trustworthy  in  the  hands  of  a  strong
man  than  a  pistol,  for  it  will  not  snap."  Later  he
emigrated  to  Texas  with  his  brother,  and  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  Texan  revolution.  He
fought  in  the  engagement  near  San  Saba,  2  Nov.,
1881,  and  in  the  battles  with  the  Mexicans  near
Nacogdoches  and  at  Concepcion  during  1835.  He
attained  the  grade  of  colonel  and  commanded  at
Grass  Fight,  25  Oct.,  1835.  In  January,  1836,  he
was  ordered  to  Bexar ;  later  he  joined  Cols.  Travis
and  Crockett,  and  was  killed  with  them  at  the
taking  of  the  Alamo.

BOWIE,  Robert,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.  in
Prince  George's  co.,  Md.,  about  1750;  d.  in  Not-
tingham, Md.,  8  Jan.,  1818.  He  received  an  excel-
lent education,  and  in  1776  was  a  captain  of  flying
artillery.  Later  he  became  prominent  in  political
affairs,  and  was  governor  of  the  state  in  1803-'6,
and  in  1811-2,  and  presidential  elector  in  1808.

BOWLER,  Metcalf,  patriot,  b.  about  1730.  He
was  speaker  of  the  Rhode  Island  assembly  in  1774,
when  the  obnoxious  royal  decree  reached  Boston,
closing  the  port  and  transferring  the  board  of  cus-
toms to  Marblehead,  and  the  seat  of  government
to  Salem.  A  conference  was  called  to  meet  in
Faneuil  Hall,  and  on  12  May,  at  noon,  Bowler
came  before  the  meeting  with  the  official  an-
nouncement, received  in  answer  to  a  circular  letter
from  the  Rhode  Island  assembly,  that  all  the  thir-
teen colonies  had  pledged  themselves  to  union  in
opposing  the  decree.  He  was  thus  the  first  to  an-
nounce, in  a  public  and  official  way,  the  first  united
action  toward  resistance  to  royal  authority.

BOWLES,  Samuel,  journalist,  b.  in  Spring-
field, Mass.,  9  Feb.,  1826 ;  d.  there,  16  Jan.,  1878.
His  education  was  of  the  usual  public-school  char-
acter, and,  after  some  time  spent  at  the  high  school,
was  finished  at  the  private  institution  of  George
Eaton,  in  Springfield.  At  the  age  of  seventeen
years  he  began  his  work  in  the  printing-office  of
the  Springfield  "Republican,"  a  weekly  paper,
which  his  father  had  established  in  1824,  and  of
which  he  was  the  proprietor.  For  a  year  his  work
consisted  in  the  miscellaneous  duties  of  office-boy,
and  included  everything  except  the  writing  of  lead-
ing editorials.  In  1844  he  persuaded  his  father  to
publish  the  paper  daily,  and  on  27  March  of  that
year  the  first  daily  issue  appeared.  The  princi-
pal duties  of  the  management  ot  the  new  journal
fell  on  young  Bowles,  but  early  as  the  winter  of
1844-'5  his  health  gave  out,  and  he  was  obliged
to  spend  some  time  in  the  south.  A  series  of  fif-
teen letters,  descriptive  of  southern  experiences.


contributed  to  the  paper  at  this  time,  were  widely
read.  In  December,  1845,  the  "Republican"  be-
came a  morning  paper,  and  with  the  change  fol-
lowed the  severe  night-work  for  the  editors.  The
father  meanwhile  devoted  more  attention  to  the
counting-room,  and  the  son  occupied  himself  more
exclusively  with  the  editorial  duties,  in  which  he
was  ably  assisted  by  Dr.  J.  G.  Holland,  who  con-
tinued with  the  paper  as  editor  until  1857,  and  as
a  contributor  until  1864.  By  1850  the  "  Repub-
lican "  had  acquired  the  largest  circulation  of  any
daily  paper  in  New  England,  outside  of  Boston,
and  as  fast  as  the  money  came  in  it  was  expended
in  increasing  the  plant.  In  1851  the  father  died,
and  the  entire  management  devolved  on  the  young
Bowles,  who  was  then  twenty-five  years  old.  Dur-
ing the  years  that  followed  the  time  was  occupied
with  incessant  work  and  hard  struggles.  The
paper  was  steadily  growing  in  reputation  and  cir-
culation, and  its  editor  becoming  known  as  an  in-
dustrious, bold,  and  fearless  journalist.  He  was
frequently  in  opposition  to  public  sentiment.  Dur-
ing 1856  he  supported  Fremont  for  the  presidency,
and  early  in  1857  he  accepted  the  editorship  of  the
Boston  "  Traveller,"  with  which  he  continued  for
but  a  few  months.  In  the  autumn  of  1857,  after  a
brief  rest,  he  returned  to  Springfield,  and,  buying
Dr.  Holland's  interest,  resumed  editorial  control  of
the  "  Republican."  From  1857  till  1865  the  influ-
ence of  Mr.  Bowles  made  itself  felt,  not  only  dur-
ing the  warm  political  discussions  of  Buchanan's
administration,  but  also  during  the  civil  war  itself,
when  his  journal  had  acquired  a  national  reputa-
tion. In  1865  he  made  a  journey  to  the  Pacific
coast  with  a  large  company,  and  in  1868  travelled
as  far  as  Colorado.  In  1869  he  again  crossed  the
continent.  He  visited  Europe  in  1862,  and  again
in  1870,  1871,  and  1874;  indeed,  frequent  trips
were  a  necessity  to  him  on  account  of  ill  health,
his  constitution  having  long  since  been  impaired
by  over-work.  In  1872  the  "  Republican '  sup-
ported Mr.  Greeley  in  his  campaign  for  the  presi-
dency, and  it  has  since  continued  independent  in
politics.  Mr.  Bowles's  letters,  sent  to  the  paper
during  his  western  trips,  were  collected  and  pub-
lished under  the  titles  of  "  Across  the  Continent "
(Springfield,  1865)  and  "The  Switzerland  of
America"  (1869).  These  were  afterward  con-
densed and  sold  by  subscription  as  "Our  New
West"  (Hartford,  1869).  "The  Pacific  Railroad
Open,  How  to  Go,  W^hat  to  See,"  was  a  small  col-
lection of  papers  that  originally  appeared  in  the
"Atlantic  Monthlv"  (Boston,  1869).  See  "The
Life  and  Times  of  Samuel  Bowles,"  by  George  S.
Merriam  (New  York,  1885).

BOWLES,  WilHam  Augustus,  adventurer,  b.
in  Frederick  co.,  Md.,  in  1763  ;  d.  in  Havana,  Cuba,
23  Dec,  1805.  He  was  the  son  of  an  English
school-master,  and  when  thirteen  years  of  age  ran
away  from  home,  and,  joining  the  British  array  at
Philadelphia,  soon  obtained  a  commission,  but  at
Pensacola  was,  for  some  neglect,  dismissed  from
the  service.  Afterward  he  entered  the  service  of
the  Creek  Indians,  and  married  an  Indian  woman.
He  instigated  many  of  their  excesses,  for  which  he
was  rewarded  by  the  British.  On  9  May,  1<»1,
w^hen  Pensacola  surrendered  to  the  Spaniards,
Bowles  commanded  the  Indians,  whom  he  had
brought  there  to  assist  the  English,  and  for  this
service  he  was  reinstated  in  the  British  army.
After  the  war  he  joined  a  company  of  players  m
New  York,  and  performed  in  the  Bahamas,  where
he  also  painted  portraits.  Gov.  Dunmore  appomt-  ,
ed  him  trading-agent  for  the  Creeks,  and  he  estao-  i
lished  a  house  on  the  Chattahoochie,  but  was  driven


BOWLIN


BOWNE


339


away  by  MeGillivray.  He  then  went  to  England.
On  his  "return,  his  influence  with  the  Indians,  who
had  chosen  him  commander-in-chief,  was  so  dis-
astrous to  the  Spaniards  that  they  offered  |6,000
for  his  apprehension.  Bowles  assumed  to  act
among  the  Indians  under  aiithority  of  the  British
government ;  but,  on  inquiry  by  the  president,  the
ministry  promptly  and  explicitly  denied  that  they
had  afforded  him  countenance,  assistance,  or  pro-
tection. For  a  long  time  he  did  all  in  his  power
to  annoy  Georgia  and  prevent  the  settlement  of
her  difficulties  with  the  liidians.  He  was  en-
trapped in  February,  1792,  sent  a  prisoner  to  Mad-
rid, and  thence  to"^  Manila,  in  1795.  Obtaining
leave  to  go  to  Europe,  he  returned  to  the  Creeks
and  renewed  his  depredations,  but,  being  again  be-
trayed into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards  in  1804,  he
was  confined  in  the  Moro  Castle,  Havana,  where
he  died.  A  memoir  of  him  was  published  in  Lon-
don in  1791,  in  which  he  is  called  "  Ambassador  of
the  United  Xations  of  Creeks  and  Cherokees."

BOWLIN,  James  Butler,  lawyer,  b.  in  Spott-
sylvania  co.,  Va.,  in  1804.  He  was  early  appren-
ticed to  a  trade,  but  afterward  abandoned  it  and
taught  school  while  acquiring  a  classical  educa-
tion. In  1825  he  settled  in  Greenbrier  co.,  where
he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began
practice.  He  removed  to  St.  Louis  in  1833,  and
there  followed  his  profession,  also  establishing  the
"  Farmers'  and  Mechanics'  Advocate."  In  1836  he
was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature  and  for  some
time  its  chief  clerk.  A  year  later  he  became  dis-
trict attorney  for  St.  Louis,  and  in  1839  was  elected
judge  of  the  criminal  court.  Afterward  he  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat,  and  served  from
1  Dec.,  1843,  to  3  March,  1851.  From  1854  till
1857  he  was  minister  resident  in  Colombia,  and
from  1858  till  1859  commissioner  to  Paraguay.

BOWMAN,  Alexander  Hamilton,  soldier,  b.
in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  15  May,  1803 ;  d.  there,  11
Nov.,  1865.  He  was  a  son  of  Capt.  Samuel  Bow-
man, of  the  Massachusetts  line,  who  served  with
distinction  in  the  revolutionary  war.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1825,
standing  third  in  his  class,  Avas  promoted  to  second
lieutenant  in  the  corps  of  engineers,  and  became
assistant  professor  of  geography,  history,  and  ethics.
In  1826  he  was  appointed  assistant  engineer  in  the
construction  of  the  defences  and  in  the  improve-
ment of  harbors  and  rivers  on  the  gulf  of  Mexico.
He  was  ordered,  in  1834,  to  superintend  the  con-
struction of  a  military  road  from  Memphis,  Tenn.,
into  Arkansas,  and  further  charged  with  improv-
ing the  navigation  of  Cumberland  and  Tennessee
rivers  until  1838.  He  was  promoted  first  lieutenant,
21  Jan.,  1835,  and  later  was  assigned  to  the  charge
of  the  fortifications  for  the  defences  of  Charleston
harbor,  S.  C,  where  he  remained  until  1853.  Mean-
while he  had  been  made  captain,  7  July,  1838.
During  1851-2  he  was  at  West  Point  as  instructor
of  practical  military  engineering,  and  subsequently
was  chief  engineer  of  the  construction  bureau  of
the  U.  S.  treasury  department,  and  was  employed
in  locating  and  constructing  custom-honses,  post-
offices,  marine  hospitals,  and  similar  buildings.
On  5  Jan.,  1857,  he  was  made  major  of  engineers,
and  during  the  civil  war  he  was  superintendent  of
the  U.  S.  military  academy,  with  the  local  rank  of
colonel,  serving  as  such  from  1  March,  1861,  until
o  July,  1864.  He  then  became  a  member  of  the
naval  and  engineering  commission  for  selecting
sites  for  naval  establishments  on  the  western  riv-
ers, and  from  20  June,  1865,  until  his  death,  was  a
member  of  the  board  of  engineers  to  improve  and
preserve  the  New  England  sea-coast  defences. His


regular  promotion  as  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
corps  of  engineers  was  received  3  jMarch,  1863.

BOWMAN,  Francis  Caswell,  lawyer,  b.  in
New  York  city,  26  Dec,  1831 ;  d.  there,  29  Oct.,
1884.  He  graduated  at  Brown  in  1852,  after  which
he  studied  law  and  entered  upon  practice  in  New
York.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined
the  7th  New  York  regiment,  and  subsequently  be-
came engaged  in  the  organization  and  service  of
the  U.  S.  Sanitary  Commission  at  Washington.  Mr.
Bowman  was  an  accomplished  musician,  founded
the  Mendelssohn  Glee  Club,  of  New  York,  and  was
its  president  for  five  years.  He  contributed  fre-
quently to  periodicals,  and  for  seventeen  years  was
musical  editor  of  the  New  York  "  Sun."  Many  of
the  articles  on  musical  topics  in  the  "American
Cyclopjedia  "  were  written  bv  him.

BOWMAN,  Samuel,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Wilkes-
barre, Pa.,  21  May,  1800;  d.  near  Butler,  Pa.,  3
Aug.,  1861.  He  was  educated  in  private,  and
studied  theology  under  Bishop  White,  by  whom
he  was  ordained  deacon,  in  Philadelphia,  14  Aug.,
1823,  and  priest,  19  Dec,  1824.  His  first  post  of
duty  was  in  Lancaster  co.,  where  he  remained  un-
til 1^25,  when  he  was  made  rector  of  Trinity
church,  Easton.  In  1827  he  became  assistant  in
St.  James's  church,  Lancaster,  and  in  1830  rector.
In  1847  he  was  elected  bishop  of  Indiana,  but  de-
clined. He  was  chosen  assistant  bishop  of  Penn-
sylvania, and  consecrated  in  Christ  church,  Phila-
delphia, 25  Aug.,  1858.  His  death  occurred  while
on  a  visitation  in  Butler  co.  Bishop  Bowman,
though  an  able  Avriter,  published  no  contribution
to  church  or  secular  literature.

BOWMAN,  Tliomas,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  near  Ber-
wick, Columbia  co..  Pa.,  15  July,  1817.  He  was
educated  at  Wilbraham  academy,  Mass.,  at  Caze-
novia  seminary,  N.  Y.,  and  at  Dickinson  college,
Carlisle,  Pa.,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1837.
After  studying
law  at  Carlisle
for  a  year,  he
entered  the  min-
istry in  the  Bal-
timore confer-
ence of  the  Meth-
odist Episcopal
church  in  1839.
From  1840  to
1843  he  taught
in  the  grammar
school  of  Dick-
inson college,
and  in  1848  or-
ganized Dick-
inson seminary
at  Williamsport,
Pa.,  over  which
he  presided  for
ten  years,  and
became  distinguished  as  a  pulpit  orator.  In  1858
he  was  elected  president  of  Indiana  Asbury  uni-
versity at  Greencastle.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  U.
S.  senate  in  1864-'5,  and  continued  to  preside  over
the  Indiana  Asbury  university  till  May,  1872,  when
he  became  a  bishop.  In  1878  he  visited,  officially,
the  missions  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in
Europe. and  India.

BOWNE,  Borden  Parker,  educator,  b.  in
Leonardville,  N.  J.,  14  Jan.,  1847.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  New  York  in  1870,  and
studied  for  two  yearsat  the  universities  of  Halle
and  Gottingen,  Germany.  Since  1876  he  has  been
professor  of  philosophy  in  the  Boston  University.
His  published  works  include  "  The  Philosophy  of


^-..  x^


340


BOYCE


BOYD


Herbert  Spencer"  (New  York,  1874);  "Stvidies  in
Theism  "  (1879) :  "  Metaphysics  "  (1882) :  and  "  In-
troduction to  Psychological  Theory  "  (1886).

BOYCE,  James  Petigru,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1847,  and  studied  theology  at  Princeton
from  1849  till  April,  1851.  He  was  ordained  to
the  ministry  in  December  of  the  same  year,  and
settled  over  the  Baptist  church  at  Columbia,  S.  C.
In  1855  he  became  professor  of  theology  in  Fur-
man  university.  He  was  elected  a  professor  in  the
southern  Baptist  theological  seminary  at  Green-
ville, S.  C,  in  February,  1858,  and  entered  upon
the  duties  of  that  office  on  1  Oct.,  1859.  The  op-
erations of  the  seminary  having  been  practically
suspended  during  the  war,  he  entered  the  confed-
erate army  as  a  chaplain,  and  served  in  that  ca-
pacity for  six  months.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  of  South  Carolina  in  1862,  and  re-
elected in  1864.  In  1863  he  devised  a  plan  for  ex-
tinguishing the  confederate  debt,  and  was  ap-
pointed a  special  commissioner  to  secure  its  adop-
tion. After  the  war  he  gave  his  attention  to  the
resuscitating  and  re-establishing  the  southern  Bap-
tist theological  seminary  in  Kentucky,  and  in  1874
secured  pledges  to  the  amount  of  $90,000  for  the
support  of  the  seminary.  He  has  for  several  suc-
cessive years  been  chosen  president  of  the  south-
ern Baptist  convention.  Dr.  Boyce  received  the
degree  of  S.  T.  D.  from  Columbian  university,
Washington,  D.  C,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Union
university,  Tennessee,  in  1872.  He  has  contrib-
uted liberally  to  the  current  literature,  and  through
his  sermons  and  addresses,  many  of  them  pub-
lished in  book-form,  has  attained  an  influential
position  at  the  south.

BOYD,  Andrew  Hunter  Holmes,  clergyman,
b.  in  Boydsville,  Va.,  in  1814 :  d.  there,  16  Dec,
1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson  college  in
1830,  studied  theology  in  Scotland,  was  ordained
by  the  presbytery  of  Winchester,  and  passed  his  life
in  the  pastorate  of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  that
section.  He  was  connected  with  the  new-school
Presbyterian  body  until  1859 ;  but  at  the  session
of  the  general  assembly  at  Cleveland,  in  that  year,
the  discussion  of  the  slavery  question  developed
irreconcilable  differences,  and  Dr.  Boyd,  with  other
commissioners  from  the  slave-holding  states,  se-
ceded from  the  assembly  and  organized  the
"  United  Synod  of  the  Presbyterian  Church,"  com-
posed of  those  presbyteries  in  the*  slave-holding
states  which  had  belonged  to  the  new-school  gen-
eral assembly,  but  were  dissatisfied  with  its  course
on  the  subject  of  slavery.  At  the  beginning  of
the  war  he  took  decided  ground  in  favor  of  seces-
sion, but  was  far  less  bitter  in  his  hostility  to  the
north  than  most  of  the  clergy  of  that  section.

BOYD,  James  R.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Hunter,
Greene  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1804;  d.  in  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  19
Feb.,  1890.  He  was  prepared  for  college,  and  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1822.  After  completing
the  theological  course  at  Princeton  in  1826,  he
spent  a  few  weeks  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, and  in  the  winter  of  1832  attended  the  lec-
tures of  Dr.  Chalmers  in  the  university  of  Edin-
burgh, Scotland.  Returning  to  this  country,  he  de-
voted several  years  to  pastoral  labors  in  the  Pres-
byterian connection,  but  ill  health  compelled  him
to  relinquish  the  work.  He  occupied  for  a  time
the  chair  of  moral  philosophy,  and  discharged  the
duties  of  pastor  at  Hamilton  college,  but  soon  re-
signed this  place  and  made  his  home  in  Geneva,
K  Y.,  devoting  himself  to  literary  work.  His
"  Elements  of  Ehetoric  and  Literary  Criticism,"
"  Eclectic  Moral  Philosophy,"  and  annotated  and


critical  editions  of  standard  works,  have  filled
an  important  place  among  college  and  academio
text-books  in  the  United  States.

BOYD,  John  A.,  Canadian  jurist,  b.  in  Toron-
to, 23  April,  1837.  He  was  graduated  at  Toronto
university,  where  he  took  the  prize  for  English
verse,  and  became  a  master  in  chancery  in  1870
queen's  counsel  in  1880,  and  chancellor  of  Ontario
in  1881,  and  in  1882  was  elected  president  of  the
Baptist  union  of  Canada.  He  is  the  author  of  "  A
Summary  of  Canadian  History  "  (1860).

BOYD,  John  Parker,  soldier,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  21  Dec,  1764;  d.  in  Boston,  4  Oct.,
1830.  He  is  best  described  as  a  free-lance  or  sol-
dier of  fortune.  Too  young  to  take  part  in  the
war  for  independence,  he  entered  the  service  as  en-
sign soon  after  he  was  of  age  (1786) ;  but  the  period
of  military  inanition  immediately  succeeding  the
revolution  proved  too  dull  for  his  adventurous
taste,  and  he  set  out  in  search  of  a  career.  In  1789
he  was  at  the  head  of  a  small  army  of  mercenaries
in  Hindustan.  He  had  sufficient  capital  to  equip
three  battalions  of  about  500  men  eacli,  ancl  to
engage  some  English  officers.  This  command  he
held  ready  for  the  service  of  any  native  prince  that
had  a  war  on  his  hands.  Strifes  between  princi-
palities were  then  of  frequent  occurrence,  and  he
was  at  different  times  in  the  service  of  Holkar,
rajah  of  Indore,  of  the  Peishwa  chief  of  the  Mah-
rattas,  and  of  Nizam  Ali  Khan.  Under  this  last-
named  prince  he  was  given  an  important  com-
mand in  Madras,  having  at  one  time  an  army  of
10,000  men  at  his  disposal.  About  1806  it  became
evident  that  British  conquest  must  put  an  end  to
mdependent  soldiering  as  a  remunerative  profes-
sion, so  he  sold  his  entire  outfit  to  Col.  Felose,  a
Neapolitan,  and  went  to  Paris.  Eeturning  to  the
United  States,  he  was  made  colonel  of  the  4th  U.
S.  infantry,  7  July,  1808,  and  in  the  autumn  of
1811  was  ordered  to .  join  Gen.  Harrison  in  his  ex-
pedition up  the  Wabash  river  against  Tecumseh,
the  Indian  chief,  and  was  present  with  his  regi-
ment in  the  severe  fight  at  Tippecanoe  (7  Nov.,
1811).  He  was  commissioned  brigadier-general,  26
Aug.,  1812,  and  participated  in  the  capture  of  Fort
George,  near  the  mouth  of  Niagara  river,  27  May,
1813.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  commanded
a  brigade  in  Gen.  Wilkinson's  expedition  down  the
St.  Lawrence,  and  at  the  battle  of  Chrysler's  Field,
near  Montreal  (11  Nov.),  his  brigade  bore  the  brunt
of  the  fighting,  forcing  the  British  back  as  long  as
the  ammunition  lasted,  and  holding  its  ground
until  re-enforced.  After  nightfall  the  U.  S.  forces
were  withdrawn,  and  the  British  claimed  the  vic-
tory, although  their  antagonists  claimed  to  have
had  the  best  of  the  actual  fighting.  After  the  war
Boyd  was  appointed  naval  officer  for  the  port  of
Boston,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.

BOYD,  Linn,  statesman,  b.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,
28  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Paducah,  Ky.,  16  Dec,  1859.
While  he  was  a  boy  his  parents  removed  to  Trigg
CO.,  Ky.,  where  he  was  brought  up  to  work  on  the
farm,  and  could  only  attend  school  in  winter.  At
twenty-six  years  of  age  he  had  a  farm  of  his  own
in  Calloway  co.,  and,  notwithstanding  his  slender
education,  was  elected  to  represent  that  county  m
the  legislature  for  successive  terms  from  1837  till
1830.  Returning  to  Trigg  co.,  he  was  again  sent
to  the  legislature  (1831-'2).  He  was  a  democrat
in  politics,  and,  after  a  defeat  by  a  whig  _candi-
date  in  1833,  was  elected  to  congress  in  1835.  He
was  defeated  for  the  25th  congress,  but  elected  .
for  the  26th,  and  from  1839  till  1855  regularly  re-
elected to  the  national  house  of  representatives.
His  native  abilities  soon  made  him  promment  in


BOYD


BOYESEN


341


g^^^^,.^ /^^


the  house,  and  he  became  chairman  of  the  com-
mittee on  territories,  and  on  81  Dec,  1851,  was
chosen  speaker,  which  office  he  held  until  1855.

He  was  lieuten-
ant-governor of
Kentucky  for  a
year  before  with-
drawing from  po-
litical life,  and
when  he  finally
retired  it  was
with  a  high  rep-
utation for  faith-
fulness in  every
public  trust.

BOYD,  Sem-
proni us  Hamil-
ton, lawyer,  b.  in
Williamson  co.,
Tenn.,  28  May,
1828.  He  re-
ceived an  aca-
c^^  demic  education
at  Springfield,
Mo.,  after  which
he  studied  law.  In  1855  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar  and  practised  in  Springfield,  where  he  be-
came clerk,  attorney,  and  twice  mayor.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of  the  24th  Missouri
volunteers,  a  regiment  which  he  raised,  and  which
was  known  as  the  "Lyon  Legion."  In  1863  he
was  elected  ffe  representative  in  congress  from
Missouri.  Afterward,  resuming  his  profession,  he
was  appointed  judge  of  the  14th  judicial  circuit  of
Missouri.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Baltimore  con-
vention in  1864,  and  in  1868  elected  to  congress,
serving  until  3  March,  1871.  Since  then  he  has
spent  a  quiet  life  in  Missouri,  devoting  his  time
partly  to  the  practice  of  his  profession  and  partly
to  stock-raising.  The  Springfield  wagon  factory
and  the  first  national  bank  of  Springfield  were
founded  by  him.

BOYDEN,  Setli,  inventor,  b.  in  Foxborough,
Mass.,  17  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Middleville,  N.  J.,  31
March,  1870.  His  boyhood  was  spent  in  aiding
his  father  in  farm  work,  or  in  attending  the  com-
mon school.  Such  leisure  as  he  could  obtain  was
devoted  to  the  blacksmith's  shop,  and  at  the  age
of  twenty-one  years  he  engaged  in  manufacturing
nails  and  cutting  files  with  improved  machines  of
his  own  construction.  He  then  improved  the  ma-
chine originally  devised  by  his  father  for  leather-
splitting,  which  he  adapted  to  the  splitting  of
sheep-skins  and  thin  leather  for  bookbinders'  use.
About  1813,  with  his  brother,  he  established  a
leather-splitting  business  in  Newark,  and  in  1816
he  still  further  improved  his  nail  machine.  He
then  experimented  on  the  manufacture  of  patent
leather,  and  in  1819  produced  a  superior  article,
which  he  manufactured  and  sold  until  1831.
Meanwhile  he  had  experimented  in  the  production
of  malleable  iron  castings,  and,  succeeding  in  that,
he  engaged  in  their  manufacture  from  1831  till
1835.  During  the  latter  year  he  became  interested
in  the  manufacture  of  steam-engines.  Fitting  up
a  shop  for  himself,  he  introduced  the  cast-iron
prome  or  bed  used  in  stationary  steam-engines,
and  substituted  the  straight  axle  in  place  of  the
crank  in  locomotives.  His  most  important  inven-
tion was  the  cut-off  in  place  of  the  throttle- valve,
and  he  connected  the  same  with  the  governor.  In
1849  he  closed  out  his  business  and  sailed  for  Cali-
fornia, but  after  two  years,  unsuccessful  in  gaining
a  fortune,  he  returned  east,  and  began  experiment-
ing in  agriculture. He  succeeded  in  raising  new


varieties  of  strawberries  of  a  size  and  quality  hith-
erto unequalled.  The  principal  invention  of  his  later
years  was  a  "hat-body  doming  machine,"  which
is  now  extensively  used.  Other  inventions  have
been  attributed  to  him,  but  they  failed  of  commer-
cial success.  As  with  many  inventors,  the  just
compensation  of  his  labors  was  secured  by  others,
and  his  life  was  laborious  to  the  end. — His  brother,
Uriah  Athertoii,  inventor,  was  b.  in  Foxborough,
Mass.,  17  Feb.,  1804;  d.  in  Boston,  17  Oct.,  1879.
In  early  life  he  worked  at  a  blacksmith's  forge,
and  acquired  considerable  mechanical  skill  and  a
thorough  knowledge  of  materials.  Later  he  be-
came an  engineer,  and  was  employed  in  the  con-
struction of  a  railroad  from  Boston  to  Nashua.
He  then  turned  his  attention  to  hydraulic  engineer-
ing, and  was  employed  in  Lowell  and  in  Manches-
ter, where  he  found  time  to  make  a  comprehensive
study  of  the  theory  of  the  turbine  water-wheel.
Mr.  Boyden  succeeded  in  improving  the  construc-
tion of  turbines  so  that  95  per  cent,  of  the  total
power  of  the  water  expended  was  utilized,  thereby
gaining  fully  20  per  cent.  In  1850  he  settled  in
Boston  and  devoted  himself  thenceforward  to  the
study  of  physics  and  chemistry.  He  gave  $1,000
to  the  Boyden  library  of  Foxborough,  where  he
also  established  the  soldiers'  memorial  building.
In  1874  he  placed  $1,000  with  the  Franklin  Insti-
tute, to  be  awarded  to  any  resident  of  North
America  who  should  determine  by  experiment
whether  all  rays  of  light  and  other  physical  rays
were  or  were  not  transmitted  with  the  same  ve-
locity. The  "  Foxborough  Official  Centennial
Record  "  (1878)  contains  a  full  account  of  his  life
and  inventions.

BOYER,  Jean  Pierre,  president  of  Hayti,b.  in
Port  au  Prince,  28  Feb.,  1776 ;  d.  in  Paris,  9  July,
1850.  He  was  a  mulatto,  and  first  became  known
in  the  revolution  of  1792,  fighting  against  the  plant-
ers and  then  against  the  negroes.  He  fied  to  France,
but  returned  to  Hayti  with  Gen.  Victor  Leclerc  to
fight  for  the  restoration  of  the  colony  to  France.
Afterward  he  took  an  active  part  in  other  civil
contests,  including  one  caused  by  Cristophe  when
he  proclaimed  himself  emperor.  In  1818  Boyer
succeeded  Petion  as  president  of  the  republic,
which  office  he  held  for  twenty-four  years,  until
his  tyranny  and  maladministration  produced  his
fall.  He  emigrated  to  Jamaica,  and  thence  to
France,  some  time  after  the  revolution  of  1848.

BOYESEN,  Hialinar  Hjorth,  author,  b.  in
Fredericksvoern,  Norway,  23  Sept.,  1848.  He  re-
ceived his  preliminary  education  at  the  gymnasium
in  Christiania,  and,  after  a  course  of  study  at  Leip-
sic,  Germany,  was  graduated  in  1868  at  the  uni-
versity of  Norway.  He  came  at  once  to  the  United
States,  and  in  1869  became  editor  of  the  "  Fremad,"
a  Scandinavian  paper  published  in  Chicago.  He
was  appointed  professor  of  German  at  Cornell  in
1874,  remaining  until  1880,  when  he  accepted  the
corresponding  chair  at  Columbia.  Soon  after
reaching  this  country  Prof.  Boyesen  evinced  a  re-
markable facility  in  writing  English.  His  contri-
butions to  the  periodicals  of  the  day  soon  attracted
attention,  and  he  became  popular  as  a  story-teller
in  prose  and  verse.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of
the  authors'  club  in  New  York.  The  titles  of  his
published  books  are  as  follows :  "  Gunnar :  A  Norse
Romance  "  (New  York,  1874) ;  "  A  Norseman's  Pil-
grimage "  (1875) ;  "  Tales  from  Two  Hemispheres  "
(Boston,  1876 ;  4th  ed.,  1884) ;  "  Falconberg  "  (1878) ;
"Goethe  and  Schiller:  Their  Lives  and  Works"
(1878) ;  "  Ilka  on  the  Hill-Top  and  other  Stories  "
(1881) ;  "  Queen  Titania  "  (1882) ;  "  A  Daughter  of
the Philistines"  (Boston,  1883); "The Story  of


342


BOYLAND


BOYNTON


Norway  "  (1886).  "  Ilka  on  the  Hill-Top  "  was  dra-
matized in  1884,  and  successfully  played  for  three
months  in  New  York  and  for  ftve  months  in  other
cities  of  the  United  States.  Many  of  his  books  and
short  stories  have  been  translated  into  German  and
Norwegian,  and  one  of  them  into  Russian.

BOYLAND,  Greorge  Halsted,  physician,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  19  Jan.,  1845.  He  was  graduated
at  Andover  academy  in  1862,  and  then  spent  some
time  at  Yale.  Later  he  studied  medicine  in  Paris,
and  received,  in  1874,  his  degree  from  the  univer-
sity in  Leipsic  for  investigations  conducted  in  the
Wagner  laboratory.  During  the  Franco-Prussian
war  of  1870-1  he  served  in  the  surgical  corps  of
the  French  army,  and  was  decorated  for  his  ser-
vices. He  was  the  first  tO  introduce  salicylic  acid
made  from  carbolic  acid,  as  an  antiseptic,  in  the
United  States.  Dr.  Boyland  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  medical  and  scientific  press  of
this  country,  and  is  the  author  of  "  Six  Months
under  the  Red  Cross  with  the  French  Army  "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1875).

BOYLE,  Jeremiah  Tilford,  soldier,  b.  22  May,
1818;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  28  July,  1871.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1838,  and,  after
qualifying  himself  for  the  law,  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar  and  began  practice  in  Kentucky.  When
the  slave-states  seceded  from  the  union, 'and  Ken-
tucky was  in  doubt  which  side  to  join,  he  declared
in  favor  of  the  union,  and  was  appointed  a  briga-
dier-general of  U.  S.  volunteers,  9  Nov.,  1861.
After  distinguished  and  patriotic  services  in  organ-
izing for  defence  against  the  confederate  invasion
that  was  threatened  from  the  south,  he  was  ap-
pointed military  governor  of  Kentucky,  and  re-
tained that  office  from  1862  till  1864,  when  he  re-
signed his  commission.  From  1864  till  1866  he
was  president  of  the  Louisville  city  railway  com-
pany, and  from  1866  till  his  death  was  president
of  the  Evansville,  Henderson,  and  Nashville  rail-
road company.

BOYLE,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Botetourt  co.,  Ya.,
28  Oct.,  1774 ;  d.  in  Kentucky,  28  Jan.,  1834.  His
parents  removed  to  Kentucky  when  he  was  five
years  old.  He  received  a  good  education,  studied
law,  and  began  to  practise  his  profession  in  Lan-
caster in  1797.  Elected  to  congress  in  1803,  he
served  three  successive  terms  until  3  March,  1809.
He  was  appointed  governor  of  Illinois,  then  a  ter-
ritory, after  leaving  congress,  but  declined  to  serve,
preferring  the  bench  of  the  court  of  appeals  of
Kentucky.  Of  this  court  he  became  chief  justice
in  April,  1810,  and  retained  the  place  until  8  Nov.,
1826,  when  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district  judge
for  Kentucky,  an  office  which  he  held  during  the
remainder  of  his  life.

BOYLE,  John  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  13  May,  1816;  d.  near  Chattanooga,
Tenn.,  29  Oct.,  1863.  He  became  a  Methodist
preacher  in  1839,  his  station  being  in  Philadelphia
and  vicinity,  where  he  had  received  his  education.
After  repeated  and  prolonged  trials  he  was  obliged
to  give  up  the  ministry  because  of  failing  health.
Removing  to  Elk  co.,  Pa.,  he  became  a  lawyer  and
afterward  an  editor.  He  volunteered  in  a  Penn-
sylvania regiment  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  and  soon  rose  to  the  rank  of  major,  serving
with  zeal  and  honor  in  Virginia  and  Tennessee,
and  was  killed  in  the  battle  of  Wauhatchie.

BOYLE,  Junius  J.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mary-
land about  1802 ;  d.  in  Norfolk,  Ya.,  11  Aug.,  1870.
He  was  appointed  midshipman  in  the  navy  from
the  District  of  Columbia  in  1823,  cruised  in  the
sloop-of-war  "  Peacock  "  in  the  Pacific  in  1827,  and
joined  the  Mediterranean squadron  as  ;


midshipman  in  1829.  He  was  commissioned  lieu-
tenant, 21  June,  1832.  After  nine  years  of  sea
duty  on  board  the  frigates  "  Delaware  "  and  "  Con-
gress," most  of  the  time  in  the  Mediterranean,  he
served  from  1843  till  1855  on  different  store-ships
and  in  the  schooner  "  Bonito  "  of  the  home  squad-
ron. He  was  commissioned  commodore,  16  July,
1862,  and  was  in  command  of  the  naval  asylum  at
Philadelphia  in  1863-'5.

BOYLSTON,  Nicholas,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston
in  1716 ;  d.  there  18  Aug.,  1771.  At  his  decease
he  bequeathed  £1,500  to  found  a  professorship  of
rhetoric  and  oratory  at  Harvard,  John  Quincy
Adams  being  installed  as  the  first  professor,  12
June,  1806. — His  nephew.  Ward  Nicholas,  was  b.
in  Boston  22  Nov.,  1749;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  7
Jan.,  1828.  After  completing  his  education  in  1773,
he  passed  the  next  two  years  in  travelling.  He
was  a  member  of  the  loyalist  association  formed
in  London  in  1779,  returned  to  Boston  in  1800,
and  presented  Harvard  university  with  a  valuable
collection  of  medical  and  anatomical  works  and
engravings  in  1810.

BOYLSTON,  Zabdiel,  physician,  b.  in  Brook-
line,  Mass.,  in  1680;  d.  in  Boston,  1  March,  1TG6.
After  a  good  private  education  he  studied  medi-
cine under  his  father  and  Dr.  John  Cutter.  He
then  settled  in  Boston,  where  he  soon  acquired
considerable  reputation  and  fortune.  In  1721,  on
the  reappearance  of  the  small-pox  in  Boston,  Cot-
ton Mather  directed  the  attention  of  the  physicians
to  the  practice  of  inoculation  as  carried  on  in  east-
ern countries.  Boylston  at  once  became  a  believer
in  the  system,  and  inoculated  his  son  and  two  of
his  servants  with  complete  success.  His  fellow-
practitioners  were  unanimously  opposed  to  the  in-
novation and  protested  against  it.  The  citizens
also  objected,  and  an  ordinance  from  the  select-
men was  obtained  prohibiting  it.  Dr.  Boylston
persevered,  and  was  encouraged  and  justified  in
his  course  by  the  clergy.  Out  of  286  persons  in-
oculated during  the  years  1721-2,  only  six  died.
The  practice  became  general  throughout  New  Eng-
land long  before  it  did  so  in  England,  much  to  his
satisfaction.  He  was  also  a  naturalist  of  consid-
erable reputation,  sparing  no  labor  or  expense  in
obtaining  rare  plants,  animals,  and  insects,  many
of  which,  being  then  unknown  abroad,  were  sent
to  England.  In  1725  he  visited  England  and  was
made  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  to  whose  trans-
actions he  contributed  several  papers.  He  also
published  a  paper  on  inoculation  (Boston,  1721),
and  an  account  of  the  small-pox  inoculation  in  New
England  and  London  (1726).  See  "Zabdiel  and
John  Boylston,"  in  the  "  New  England  Historical
and  Genealogical  Register  "  (vol.  xxxv.,  1881).

BOYNTON,  Charles  Brandon,  clergyman,  b.
in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  12  June,  1806 ;  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio,  27  April,  1883.  He  entered  Williams
in  the  class  of  1827,  but,  owing  to  illness,  was
obliged  to  leave  college  during  his  senior  year.  He
took  up  the  study  of  law,  and,  after  filling  one  or
two  local  offices,  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts
legislature.  While  studying  law  he  became  inter-
ested in  religion,  qualified  himself  for  the  minis-
try, and  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  at  Housatonic,  Conn.,  in  1840.  Thence,
after  a  stay  of  three  years,  he  removed  successive-
ly to  Lansihgburg,  Pi'ttsfield,  and  in  1846  to  Cin-
cinnati, and  remained  there  until  1877,  with  the
exception  of  his  terms  of  service  as  chaplain  ot  the
house  of  representatives  in  the  39th  and  4()th  con-
gresses. For  a  time  he  was  pastor  of  the  Congre-
gational church  at  Washington,  D.  C.  He  bore  an
important part in the  anti-slavery  cont rovers) ,


BOYNTON


BOZMAN


343


which  was  fiercely  waged  in  Cincinnati  during  the
early  years  of  his  pastorate.  His  published  books
are  "Journey  through  Kansas,  with  Sketch  of
Nebraska  "  (Cincinnati,  1855) ;  "  The  Russian  Em-
pire "  (1856) ;  "  The  Four  Great  Powers— England,
France,  Russia,  and  America;  their  Policy,  Re-
sources, and  Probable  Future"  (1866);  "History
of  the  Navy  during  the  Rebellion"  (New  York,
1868).  He  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Mari-
etta college  in  recognition  of  his  acquirements  as
a  biblical  scholar.— His  son,  Henry  Tan  Ness,
soldier,  b.  in  West  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  22  July,
1835,  removed  to  Ohio  when  a  young  man,  and
was  graduated  at  the  Woodward  high  school,  Cin-
cinnati, in  June,  1855.  Thence  he  went  to  the
Kentucky  military  institute,  where  he  passed
through  a  semi-military  course  of  training  that
prepared  him  for  subsequent  service  in  the  field,
and  became  a  civil  engineer.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  was  commissioned  major  of  the
35th  Ohio  volunteer  infantry  (27  July,  1861).  He
was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  19  July,  1863,
commanded  the  regiment  during  the  Tennessee
campaigns,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier  for  good
conduct  at  the  battles  of  Chickamauga  and  Mission-
ary Ridge.  He  is  the  author  of  the  most  notable  of
the  criticisms  called  out  by  Gen.  William  T.  Sher-
man's "  Memoirs,"  namely,  "  Sherman's  Historical
Raid ;  the  Memoirs  in  the  Light  of  the  Record ;  a
Review  based  upon  Compilations  from  the  Files  of
the  War  Office  "  (Cincinnati,  1875).

BOYNTON,  Edward  Carlisle,  soldier,  b.  in
Vermont  about  1825.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Point  in  1846,  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery  as  brevet
second  lieutenant,  and  ordered  at  once  to  Join  the
army  in  Mexico.  He  was  with  Gen.  Taylor  at  the
front  of  the  invading  force,  and  participated  in
the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz  and  the  battles  of  Contreras
and  Churubusco,  in  which  last  engagement  he  was
severely  wounded.  He  was  promoted  second  lieu-
tenant 16  Feb.,  and  first  lieutenant  20  Aug.,  1847,
and  was  brevetted  captain  at  the  same  time.  He
was  an  instructor  at  West  Point  in  1848-'55.  In
1855-6  he  accompanied  the  expedition  against  the
remnant  of  the  Seminole  Indians  in  Florida.  He
resigned  16  Feb.,  1856,  and  accepted  the  professor-
ship of  chemistry  in  the  university  of  Mississippi,
which  he  held  until  dismissed  in  1861  for  "  evin-
cing a  want  of  attachment  to  the  government  of
the  confederate  states."  He  declined  the  colonelcy
of  a  volunteer  regiment,  and  was  reappointed  to
the  U,  S.  army  as  captain  in  the  11th  infantry,  23
Sept.,  1861.  He  was  at  once  assigned  to  duty  at
the  military  academy,  first  as  adjutant  and  after-
ward as  quartermaster,  remaining  at  that  post
throughout  the  war,  and  receiving  at  its  close  the
brevet  of  major  for  faithful  services.  He  was
transferred  to  the  29th  infantry,  21  Sept.,  1866.
Maj.  Boynton  is  the  author  of  "  History  of  West
Point  and  its  Military  Importance  during  the
Revolution,  and  the  Origin  and  Progress  of  the
Military  Academy  "  (New  York,  1863) ;  a  "  Guide  to
West  Point  and  the  U.  S.  Military  Academy"
(1863) ;  "  Register  of  Cadets  admitted  to  the  Mili-
tary Academy,  from  its  Origin  to  June  30,  1870  "
(1870);  "Several  Orders  of  George  Washington,
Commander-in-Chief,  etc.,  issued  at  Newburg"
(Newburg,  1883) ;  and  of  the  military  and  naval
vocabulary  in  Webster's  "Army  and  Navy  Dic-
tionary "  (Springfield,  1886).

BOYTON,  Paul,  nautical  adventurer,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  29  June,  1848.  From  his  earliest
youth  he  showed  a  groat  fondness  for  aquatic
sports,  and  after  a  desultory  education  entered  the
navy  in  1864,  serving  until  the  close  of  the  civil


war.  He  then  followed  the  business  of  submarine
diving  for  several  years,  and  during  the  revolution
in  Sonora,  Mexico,  he  served  under  Gen,  Pedro
Martinez.  From  1867  till  1869  he  was  connected
with  the  life-saving  service  on  the  Atlantic  coast,
where  he  distinguished  himself  by  saving  seventy-
one  lives.  In  1870-'l  he  served  in  the  Franco-
Prussian  war  with  the  Franc-tireurs,  after  which
he  visited  the  diamond-fields  of  South  Africa.  He
then  re-entered  the  life-saving  service,  where  he  re-
mained until  after  his  famous  leap  from  a  vessel
off  the  coast  of  Ireland  in  1874.  This  feat  was  ac-
complished, in  a  rubber  suit  of  his  own  invention,
during  a  furious  gale.  After  remaining  nearly
seven  hours  in  the  water,  traversing  a  distance  of
forty  miles,  he  reached  the  land.  His  dress,  which
is  manufactured  from  the  finest  vulcanized  rubber,
is  divided  into  two  parts,  the  junction  being  at  the
waist.  The  lower  half  terminates  in  a  steel  band,
over  which  the  bottom  of  the  tunic  fits,  with  a  strap
over  all,  making  a  perfectly  water-tight  joint.  On
each  thigh,  on  the  breasts,  on  the  back,  and  at  the
back  of  the  head,  are  five  internal  compartments,
each  having  a  tube  for  the  purpose  of  inflating
with  air  from  the  mouth.  The  only  part  of  the
body  exposed  is  the  face.  His  position  in  the
water  is  on  his  back,  and  he  drives  himself,  feet
foremost,  with  a  double-bladed  paddle,  at  the  rate
of  about  one  hundred  strokes  a  minute,  sometimes
using  a  sail.  He  has  achieved  a  world-wide  repu-
tation for  his  exploits,  among  which  are  his  cross-
ing the  English  channel  in  twenty-four  hours,  on
28  May,  1875.  In  October,  1875,  he  i^addled  on  the
Rhine  from  Basel,  Switzerland,  to  Cologne,  Ger-
many, 430  miles.  Early  in  1876  he  made  the  run
from  Alton,  111.,  to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  on  the  Missis-
sippi, and  from  the  Bayou  Goula  to  New  Orleans,
La.,  100  miles,  in  twenty-four  hours.  In  May,  1876,
he  was  again  in  Europe,  and  made  the  descent
of  the  Danube  from  Lintz,  Austria,  to  Budapest,
Hungary,  460  miles,  in  six  days.  He  remained  in
Europe  until  November,  1878,  navigated  the  im-
portant rivers  of  the  continent,  passed  through  the
canals  of  Venice,  and  crossed  the  straits  of  Gibral-
tar. Among  his  important  American  trips  is  the
voyage  from  Oil  City,  Pa.,  to  the  gulf  of  Mexico,
2,342  miles,  made  in  eighty  days.  During  the  first
portion  of  this  expedition  the  weather  was  ex-
tremely cold,  while  toward  the  end  Capt.  Boyton
suffered  severely  from  the  heat.  In  August,  1879,
he  crossed  from'  Long  Branch  to  Manhattan  beach,
and  in  November  he  made  the  descent  of  Connecti-
cut river  from  Canada  to  Long  Island  sound.  Dur-
ing 1880-1  he  was  commander  of  the  Peruvian
torpedo  service.  He  was  captured  by  the  Chilians,
and  his  execution  ordered;  but  managed  to  es-
cape to  the  coast,  and  was  picked  up  by  a  vessel
bound  north.  His  longest  voyage,  over  3,580  miles,
was  made  from  the  mou.th  of  Cedar  creek,  Mon-
tana territory,  starting  on  17  Sept.,  1881,  to
St.  Louis,  Mo.,  reaching  there  on  20  Nov.  He  has
travelled  through  the  United  States,  giving  ex-
hibitions of  his  feats.  An  account  of  his  adven-
tures has  been  published  under  the  title  of
"Roughing  it  in  Rubber"  (1886).

BOZMAN,  John  Leeds,  lawyer  and  author,  b.
in  Oxford,  on  the  eastern  shore  of  Maryland,  in
1757;  d.  in  1823.  He  was  educated  at  the  univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania,  afterward  read  law  in  the
Middle  Temple,  London,  became  an  eminent  law-
yer, and  for  several  years  was  deputy  attorney-
general  of  Maryland.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Ob-
servations on  the  Statute  of  Jac.  I.,  ch.  16,  in  Re-
lation to  Estates  Tail " ;  "  A  New  Arrangement  of
the  Courts  of  Justice  of  the  State  of  Maryland "


344


BRACE


BRACE


(1802) ;  "  Essay  on  the  Colonization  Society  "  (Wash-
ington, 1832);  and  "History  of  Maryland,  from
1633-'60,''  the  introduction '  of  Avhich  was  pub-
lished in  1811,  and  the  complete  work  in  Baltimore
in  1837.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  of  prose
and verse to Dennie's "Port-Folio" and  other

i'ournals ;  and  he  wrote  also  "  An  Historical  and
Philosophical  Sketch  of  the  Prime  Causes  of  the
Revolutionary  "War,"  which  was  suppressed  be-
cause of  its  partisanship,  praising  Washington  at
the  expense  of  Franklin.

BRACE,  John  Pierce,  educator,  b.  in  Litch-
field, Conn.,  10  Feb..  1793;  d.  there,  18  Oct.,  1872.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1812,  and,  after
several  years  of  study,  took  charge  of  the  Litchfield
academy,  where  he  remained  until  1832,  when  he
became  principal  of  the  Hartford  female  seminary,
in  which  his  niece,  Catharine  E.  Beecher,  had  al-
ready become  distinguished.  In  these  two  institu-
tions Mr.  Brace  trained  many  young  ladies  who
became  prominent  in  the  different  walks  of  life;
among  them,  Mrs.  H.  B.  Stowe,  Mrs.  Cyi-us  W.
Field,  Mrs.  Cornelius  Du  Bois,  Mrs.  M.  0.  Roberts,
the  missionaries  Mrs.  Bliss  and  Mrs.  Van  Lennep,
of  Hartford,  and  Mrs.  McCuUoch,  wife  of  the  U.  S.
secretary  of  the  treasury.  After  teaching  for  many
years,  Mr.  Brace  became  editor  of  the  Hartford
"  Courant,"  one  of  the  oldest  and  best  of  New  Eng-
land journals,  which,  under  his  management,  at-
tained a  higher  literary  reputation  than  it  had  pre-
viously enjoyed.  He  was  thoroughly  equipped  in
law,  medicine,  and  theology,  and  his  knowledge  of
ancient  and  modern  history  was  wide  and  minute.
In  mineralogy  and  botany  he  made  extensive  re-
searches and  collections,  and  was  in  correspond-
ence with  eminent  botanists  at  home  and  abroad
during  most  of  his  life.  Even  in  unusual  sub-
jects of  investigation,  such  as  heraldry,  astrology,
cryptography,  and  musical  composition,  he  was
singularly  well  versed.  These  varied  acquirements
were  all  willingly  consecrated  to  the  service  of  his
pupils.  For  the  last  nine  years  of  his  life  he  re-
mained in  his  old  homestead  in  Litchfield,  pursu-
ing his  favorite  studies.  Mr.  Brace  published
several  monographs  on  mineralogy  and  botany;
"  Lectures  to  Young  Converts  " ;  a  learned  and  hu-
morous work  entitled  "  Tales  of  the  Devil" ;  and  two
novels,  "  The  Fawn  of  the  Pale-Faces,"  and  another
story  of  early  New  England  life.  Few  men  of  the
time  have  exerted  a  wider  influence  than  he  in  the
direction  of  all  that  is  best  in  the  lives  of  American
women. — His  son,  Charles  Loring",  philanthropist,
b.  in  Litchfield,  Conn.,  19  June,  1826;  d.  in  Camp-
fer,  Switzerland.  11  Aug.,  1890.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  and  at  Union  theological  seminary  in  New
York.  He  was  afterward  a  frequent  preacher,  but
was  never  permanently  connected  with  any  church.
In  1850  he  made  a  pedestrian  journey  in  Great  Brit-
ain and  Ireland,  also  visiting  the  Rhine,  Belgium,
and  Paris.  An  account  of  this  journey  was  pub-
lished by  his  companion,  Frederick  Law  Olmsted,
under  tlie  title  of  '*  Walks  and  Talks  of  an  Ameri-
can Farmer  in  England  "  (New  York,  1852).  After
spending  a  winter  in  study  at  Berlin,  he  visited
Hungary  in  1851,  and  was*  the  first  American  to
visit  the  interior  of  the  country.  While  in  Gros
Wardein  he  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of  being  a
secret  agent  of  the  Hungarian  revolutionists  in
America,  imprisoned  in  the  castle  of  Gros  War-
dein, and,  without  information  being  given  to  the
American  minister,  was  tried  in  twelve  different
sessions  before  a  court-martial.  An  opportunity,
seemingly  accidental,  enabled  him  to  communi-
cate the  fact  of  his  arrest  to  Charles  J.  McCurdy,
U.  S.  charge  d'affaires  at  Vienna,  who  instituted


vigorous  efforts  for  his  release,  and,  after  a  bitter
diplomatic  correspondence  with  the  Austrian  min-
istry, he  was  discharged  with  an  apology,  after  an
imprisonment  of  a  month.  But  no  compensation
for  his  detention  was  offered  by  the  Austrian  gov-
ernment. He  afterward  visited  Switzerland,  Italy,
England,  and  Ireland,  giving  special  attention  to
schools,  prisons,  reformatory  institutions,  and  the
condition  of  the  masses  in  European  countries.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States,  in  1852,  his  at-
tention being  especially  called  to  the  miserable
condition  of  the  foreign  emigrants  and  the  poorest
classes  in  the  city  of  New  York,  he  associated  him-
self with  the  Rev.  Mr.  Pease  in  missionary  work  at
the  Five  Points,  then  the  most  degraded  district
of  the  city,  and  also  labored  on  Blackwell's  island
among  the  prisons,  hospitals,  and  almshouses.  It
soon  became  evident  to  him  and  the  gentlemen
associated  with  him  that  nothing  could  be  done
of  permanent  benefit  to  New  York  which  did  not
especially  include  the  children  of  the  poor.  In
1853  Mr.  Brace,  with  others,  formed  the  children's
aid  society,  and  in  1854  he  founded,  outside  of  the
society,  the  first  newsboys'  lodging-house  in  this
country.  From  that  time  forward  he  devoted  the
greater  part  of  his  time  for  many  years  to  writing
for  the  journals,  delivering  public  addresses  de-
signed to  enlist  the  fortunate  classes  in  the  move-
ment in  behalf  of  the  children  of  the  poor,  and  in
managing  this  association.  In  1856  Mr.  Brace  wjis
a  delegate  to  the  international  convention  for
children's  charities  in  London,  when  he  also  made
a  journey  in  Norway  and  Sweden.  In  1865  he
carried  out  a  special  sanitary  investigation  in  the
cities  of  Great  Britain,  and  subsequently  made  a
pedestrian  journey  through  Tyrol.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  international  prison  convention  in
London  in  1872,  and  afterward  revisited  Hungary
and  Transylvania,  where  he  was  received  with
marked  attention.  He  was  a  constant  contributor
to  the  press  of  New  York  city.  The  following  list
includes  his  published  books,  which  have  nearly
all  been  reprinted  in  England :  "  Hungary  in  1851  '
(New  York,  1852);  "Home  Life  in  Germany"
(1853) ;  "  Norse  Folk,"  a  description  of  the  relig-
ious, social,  and  political  condition  of  the  people
of  Norwav  and  Sweden  (1857) ;  "  Races  of  the  Old
World  "  (1863) ;  "  The  New  West "  (1869) ;  "  Short.
Sermons  for  Newsboys";  and  "The  Dangerous
Classes  of  New  York  "  (1872 ;  3d  ed.,  enlarged,  1880);
"Free  Trade  as  promoting  Peace  and  Good-will
among  Men  "  (1879) ;  and  "  Gesta  Christi "  (1883),

BRACE,  Julia,  a  blind  deaf-mute,  b.  in  New-
ington,  Conn.,  13  June,  1807 ;  d.  in  Bloomington,
Conn.,  12  Aug.,  1884.  At  the  age  of  four  years  and
five  months  she  lost  sight  and  hearing,  and  soon
forgot  the  few  words  she  had  learned  to  speak.  No
intelligent  attempt  was  made  to  educate  her  until
she  was  eighteen,  when  she  was  sent  to  the  Ameri-
can asylum  for  the  deaf  and  dumb.  Here  she  re-
mained for  about  thirty  years,  when  she  went  to
live  with  her  sister  in  "Bloomington,  Conn.  She
was  paralyzed  and  bedridden  the  last  year  of  her
life.  Her  case  is  peculiarly  interesting  because  her
natural  intellectual  endowment  was  not  of  a  high
order,  and  as  she  had  reached  adult  years  before
any  attempt  at  education  was  made.  She  was  very
irascible  and  sullen,  owing  probably  to  over-indui-
gence  when  she  first  came  to  the  asylum,  but  un-
der judicious  treatment  became  more'  amiable.
She  attained  considerable  skill  in  sewing,  readily
threading  her  own  needle,  and  in  the  laundry,
where  she  selected  and  ironed  her  own  clothes.
She  made  her  own  dresses,  being  particular  to  have
them  "  in  the  fashion,"  and  did  much  sewing  for


BRACKEN


others.  Her  memory  of  tangible  facts  was  very
tenacious,  but  it  had  no  grasp  of  abstractions,  and
it  was  never  apparent  that  she  comprehended  the
idea  of  a  Deity.  She  had  a  decided  aversion  to  men
in  general,  and  did  not  hesitate  to  show  it.  Some
of  the  older  male  teachers,  however,  succeeded  at
the  last  in  gaining  her  confidence.  Her  moral
sense  was  wonderfully  strong.  She  was  tenacious
of  her  own  rights,  but  never  intentionally  invaded
those  of  others,  and  she  was  never  known  to  de-
ceive. So  kind  and  gentle  was  she  that  she  was
intrusted  with  the  care  of  the  sick,  and  made  an
excellent  nurse.  A  full  account  of  her  case  is
given  in  Dunglison's  "  Physiology  "  (vol.  ii.).

BRACKEN,  John,  clergyman,  d.  in  Williams-
burg, Va.,  15  July,  1818.  He  was  president  of
William  and  Mary'^college  in  1813,  and  professor  of
humanities  there  "from  1773  till  his  death.

BRACKENRIDOE,  Hii^li  Henry,  jurist,  b.
near  Campbelton,  Scotland,  in  1748;  d.  in  Car-
lisle, Pa.,  25  June,  1816.  When  five  years  old  he
accompanied  his  father,  a  poor  farmer,  to  this  coun-
try, and  settled  in  York  co..  Pa.,  near  the  Mary-
land border.  He  supported  himself  by  farming
and  teaching  while  preparing  for  college,  and  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1771,  in  the  same  class
with  James  Madison.  In  conjunction  with  Philip
Freneau,  he  wrote  a  poetical  dialogue  entitled
"The  Rising  Glory  of  America,"  which  formed
part  of  the  graduating  exercises,  and  was  after-
ward published  (1772).  After  graduation  he  was
for  some  time  a  tutor  at  Princeton,  and  then
i  taught  school  in  Maryland  for  several  years.  Dur-
ing this  time  he  wrote  for  his  pupils  a  drama  called
"Bunker  Hill"  (Philadelphia,  1776).  In  1776
Brackenridge  went  to  Philadelphia  and  became
editor  of  the  "  United  States  Magazine."  Some
strictures  on  Gen.  Charles  Lee,  published  in  this
magazine,  so  enraged  that  ofRcer  that  he  called  at
Brackenridge's  office  for  the  purpose  of  horsewhip-
ping him,  but  the  editor  prudently  refused  to  ap-
pear. Brackenridge  had  studied  divinity,  and  was
for  some  time  chaplain  in  the  revolutionary  army.
Six  of  his  political  sermons,  delivered  in  camp,
were  afterward  published.  He  was  never  regular-
ly ordained,  however,  and  his  tastes  lay  in  a  differ-
ent direction.  After  studying  law  at  Annapolis,
Md.,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  removed  in  1781
to  Pittsburg,  then  a  small  frontier  town,  and  soon
became  prominent  in  his  profession.  In  1786  he
was  sent  to  the  legislature  to  secure  the  establish-
ment of  Alleghany  co.  In  1794  he  was  prominent
in  the  "•  Whiskey  Insurrection  "  but  used  his  influ-
ence in  bringing  about  a  settlement  between  the
government  and  the  malcontents.  He  vindicated
his  course  in  "  Incidents  of  the  Insurrection  in
Western  Pennsylvania  "  (Philadelphia,  1795).  Af-
ter the  democratic  victory  in  1799  the  new  gov-
ernor of  Pennsylvania,  Mr.  Kean,  appointed
Brackenridge  to  the  supreme  bench  of  the  state,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Besides  works
already  mentioned,  he  wrote  a  "  Eulogium  of  the
Brave  who  fell  in  the  Contest  with  Great  Britain,"
an  oration,  delivered  at  Philadelphia.  4  Julv,  1778 ;
another  oration,  delivered  4  July,  1793;  ""Gazette
Publications  Collected"  (1806);  "Law  Miscel-
lanies "  (1814) ;  and  "  Modern  Chivalry,  or  the  Ad-
ventures of  Capt.  Farrago  and  Teague  O'Regan,
his  Servant."  The  last  named,  a  political  satire,  is
his  best  work,  the  materials  of  the  story  being
drawn  from  the  author's  own  experience.  The
first  part  was  published  in  Pittsburg  in  1796  and
republished  in  Philadelphia  in  1846,  with  illustra-
tions by  Darley.  The  second  portion  appeared  in
1806,  and  both  were issued together  in 1819.


BRACKETT


345


Brackenridge  wrote  also  many  miscellaneous  es-
says and  poems. — His  son,  Henry  Marie,  author,
b.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  11  May,  1786;  d.  there,  18
Jan.,  1871.  When  seven  years  old  he  was  sent
to  a  school  at  St.  Genevieve,  in  upper  Louisiana,
to  learn  French,  and  remained  there  three  years,
after  whicli  his  father  took  personal  charge  of
his  education.  He  began  the  study  of  law  at
the  age  of  fifteen,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1806.  After  a  year  or  two  more  of  special
study  with  his  father,  he  began  practice  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  but  soon  removed  to  Somerset,  where
in  the  intervals  of  business  he  read  history  and
studied  Italian  and  German.  He  revisited  Louisi-
ana in  1810,  and,  after  practising  law  a  short  time,
went  to  St.  Louis.  Here  he  began  to  collect  mate-
rials for  a  work  on  Louisiana  (Pittsburg,  1812),  and
also  began  the  study  of  Spanish.  In  1811  he  de-
scended the  river  in  a  "  keel-boat "  to  New  Or-
leans, and  in  a  month  or  two  was  appointed  depu-
ty attorney-general  for  the  territory  of  Orleans,  as
it  was  then  called.  He  became  district  judge  in
1812,  though  only  twenty-three  years  old,  and
gave  his  attention  for  several  years  to  the  study
of  Spanish  law.  During  the  war  of  1812  he  gave
important  information  to  the  government,  and
afterward  published  a  popular  history  of  the  war,
which  was  translated  into  French  and  Italian.
This  was  undertaken  at  the  instance  of  a  book-
seller in  Baltimore,  where  Judge  Brackenridge  took
up  his  residence  in  1814.  He  joined  with  Henry
Clay  in  urging  the  acknowledgment  of  the  South
American  republics,  and  wrote  much  on  the  subject,
his  principal  publication  being  a  pamphlet  of  100
pages,  addressed  to  President  Monroe,  and  signed
"  An  American."  This  was  republished  in  Eng-
land and  France,  and,  as  it  was  supposed  to  repre-
sent the  views  of  the  American  government,  was
answered  by  the  Spanish  minister,  the  duke  of  San
Carlos.  About  the  same  time  Judge  Bracken-
ridge published,  in  "  Walsh's  Register,"  an  elabo-
rate paper  on  the  Louisiana  boundary  question.
In  1817  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  commis-
sion sent  to  the  South  American  republics,  and
after  his  return  published  a  "  Vovage  to  South
America  "  (2  vols.,  Baltimore,  1818 ;  "'London,  1820),
which  was  highly  praised  by  Humboldt.  In  1821
he  went  to  Florida,  which  had  just  come  into  the
possession  of  the  American  government,  and,  by
his  knowledge  of  French  and  Spanish,  rendered
valuable  service  to  Gen.  Jackson.  In  May  of  that
year  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  the  western
district  of  Florida,  and  held  this  office  till  1832,
when  he  removed  to  Pittsburg.  He  was  elected  to
congress  in  1840,  but  did  not  take  his  seat,  and  in
1841  was  named  a  commissioner  under  the  treaty
with  Mexico.  After  this  he  remained  in  private
life,  devoting  himself  to  literature.  Besides  works
already  mentioned,  he  published  "  Recollections
of  Persons  and  Places  in  the  West "  (Philadelphia,
1834;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  1868);  "Essay  on  Trusts
and  Trustees  "  (Washington,  1G42) ;  and  "  History
of  the  Western  Insurrection  "  (1859),  a  vindication
of  his  father's  course  at  that  time.  He  also  wrote
numerous  pamphlets  and  articles  in  journals,  in-
cluding a  "  Eulogy  on  Adams  and  Jefferson,"  de-
livered at  Pensacola,  Fla.,  in  August,  1820,  and  a
series  of  letters  in  favor  of  the  Mexican  war  (1847).
BRACKETT,  Albert  Gallatin,  soldier,  b.  in
Cherry  Valley,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Feb.,  1829.
He  removed  to  Indiana  in  1846,  and,  during  the
war  with  Mexico,  was  first  lieutenant  in  the  4th
Indiana  volunteers,  attached  to  Lane's  brigade,
being  present  at  Huamantla,  Puebla,  and  Atlixco.
On  16  July,  1848,  he  was  honorably  discharged.


346


BRACKETT


BRADBURY


On  3  March,  1855,  he  became  captain  in  the  2d
U.  S.  cavahy,  and,  after  raising  a  company  in  Indi-
ana and  Illinois,  served  on  the  Texas  frontier,  dis-
tinguishing himself  in  actions  against  the  Co-
manche Indians.  He  was  the  first  U.  S.  officer  that
crossed  into  Mexico  in  pursuit  of  hostile  Indians.
When  Gen.  Twiggs  surrendered  to  the  confeder-
ates in  1861,  Capt.  Brackett  escaped.  He  com-
manded the  cavalry  at  Blackburn's  Ford  and  the
first  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and  in  August,  1861,  be-
came colonel  of  the  9th  Illinois  cavalry,  serving
with  credit  through  the  Arkansas  campaign,  and
being  severely  wounded  at  Stewart's  Plantation,
where  he  saved  a  valuable  train  from  falling  into
the  hands  of  the  confederates.  On  28  June,  1862,
he  was  brevetted  major  in  the  regular  army  for
services  in  the  Arkansas  campaign,  and  on  17  July
received  his  full  commission  as  major  in  the  1st
cavalry.  In  1863  he  was  chief  of  cavalry  in  the
department  of  the  Missouri,  and  in  1864  assistant
inspector-general  of  cavalry,  in  the  department  of
the  Cumberland.  He  was  engaged  in  the  battles
around  Atlanta,  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel
on  1  Sept.,  1864,  for  his  services  there,  and  at  the
close  of  the  war  was  brevetted  colonel.  After  that
time  he  served  principally  against  hostile  Indians
in  Nevada,  Wyoming,  and  Arizona.  He  received
his  full  commission  as  lieutenant-colonel,  2d  cav-
alry, on  9  June,  1868,  and  on  20  March,  1879,  when
commanding  the  district  of  the  Yellowstone,  was
made  colonel  of  the  3d  cavalry.  He  was  afterward
assigned  to  the  command  of  Fort  Davis,  Texas,
and  in  March,  1886,  was  recommended  by  the  con-
gressional delegation  of  Indiana  and  Texas  for
promotion  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  He
has  published  "  General  Lane's  Brigade  in  Central
Mexico"  (Cincinnati,  1854);  "History  of  the
United  States  Cavalry  "  (New  York,  1865) ;  and  has
written  many  magazine  and  newspaper  articles,
especially  in  regard  to  military  affairs  and  the  de-
velopment of  the  country.

BRACKETT,  Anthony,  soldier,  d.  21  Sept.,
1689.  He  was  a  son  of  Anthony  Brackett,  of
Greenland,  N.  H.,  and  as  early  as  1662  settled  in
Portland  (then  Casco),  Me.,  where  he  had  a  farm
of  400  acres.  On  11  Aug.,  1676,  the  Indians  made
an  attack  on  Casco,  and  captured  or  killed  thirty-
four  persons,  Brackett,  his  wife  and  five  children,
and  a  negro  servant,  being  among  the  prisoners.
They  were  taken  to  Arrousic  island,  and  in  Novem-
ber managed  to  escape  in  a  leaky  birch-bark  canoe,
which  Mrs.  Brackett  had  mended  with  needle  and
thread.  They  boarded  a  vessel  bound  to  Piscata-
qua,  and,  after  peace  had  been  made,  returned  to
Casco,  12  April,  1678.  In  1682  Brackett  was  given
the  command  of  Fort  Loyall,  and  in  1688  held  the
command  of  the  three  forts  erected  by  Gov.  An-
dros. He  met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  the  Indians.

BRACKETT,  Edward  Augustus,  sculptor,  b.
in  Vassalborough,  Me.,  1  Oct.,  1819.  He  began  his
career  in  1838,  and  has  produced  portrait  busts  of
Washington  Allston,  Richard  Henry  Dana,  Bry-
ant, Longfellow,  Rufus  Choate,  Charles  Sumner,
John  Brown,  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  Wendell
Phillips,  Gen.  Butler,  and  others.  His  marble
group  of  the  "  Shipwrecked  Mother  and  Child  "  is
now  the  property  of  the  Boston  athenaeum. — His
brother,  Walter  M.,  painter,  b.  in  Unity,  Me.,
14  June,  1823,  began  painting  in  1843,  giving  his
attention  to  portraits  and  ideal  heads,  and  exe-
cuted likenesses  of  Charles  Sunmer,  Edward  Ever-
ett, and  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.  He  also  painted
portraits  of  the  first  four  secretaries  of  war,  for  the
war  department  at  Washington.  For  some  years
he  has  devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  the


painting  of  game  fish,  especially  of  salmon  and
trout.  A  series  of  four  of  his  pictures,  representing
the  capture  of  a  salmon  with  a  fly,  was  exliibited
at  the  Crystal  Palace,  London.  He  now  lives  in
Boston,  Mass.,  where  he  has  for  some  time  been
president  of  the  art  club,  of  which  he  was  one  of
the  original  members.

BRACKETT,  Joshua,  phvsician,  b.  in  Green-
land, N.  H.,  5  May,  1733;  d.'  17  July,  1802.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1752.  At  the  desire
of  his  parents  he  studied  theology  and  began  to
preach,  but  afterward  studied  medicine  with  Dr.
Jackson,  of  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  and  became  a
physician  in  that  town.  He  was  a  zealous  patriot,
a  member  of  the  state  committee  of  safety,  and
during  the  revolution  was  judge  of  the  New  Hamp-
shire maritime  court.  He  was  a  founder  of  the
state  medical  society,  and  its  president  from  1793
till  1799.  He  gave  it  143  volumes  of  medical  works
at  its  establishment,  and  his  wife,  Hannah  Whip-
ple, of  Kitterv,  Me.,  left  the  society  at  her  death,
23  April,  1805,  a  bequest  of  $500.  Dr.  Brackett
bequeathed  $1,500  to  Harvard  toward  founding
a  professorship  of  natural  history.  See  Adams's
"  Annals  of  Portsmouth  "  and  Thacher's  "  Medical
Biography"  (Boston,  1828).

BRADBURY,  James  Ware,  senator,  b.  in  York
CO.,  Me.,  in  1805.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin
in  1825,  and,  after  teaching  in  the  Hallowell,  Me.,
academy  for  a  year,  began  the  study  of  law.  He
settled  in  Augusta,  Me.,  in  1830,  where  he  was  for
a  time  editor  of  the  "  Maine  Patriot,"  and  was
county  attorney  from  1834  till  1838.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Baltimore  convention  of  1844,
which  nominated  Polk  for  the  presidency,  and  in
1847  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  democrat.
He  was  chairman  of  a  select  commitee  on  French
spoliations.  Declining  to  be  a  candidate  for  re-
election, he  returned,  at  the  close  of  his  terra,  to
the  practice  of  his  profession.  He  has  been  corre-
sponding secretary,  and  also  president,  of  the  Maine
historical  society.

BRADBURY,  Theophilus,  jurist,  b.  in  New-
bury, Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1739;  d.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  6  Sept.,  1803.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1757,  and  studied  law  while  teaching  at  Fal-
mouth (now  Portland),  Me.  Having  been  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  he  practised  there  from  May,
1761,  till  1779,  when  he  returned  to  Newbury.
Here  he  filled  several  local  offices,  and  was  at  dif-
ferent times  a  member  of  both  houses  of  the  state
legislature.  He  was  elected  to  congress,  took  his
seat  7  Dec,  1795,  and  was  re-elected,  but  resigned
in  1797,  having  been  appointed  a  judge  of  the
Massachusetts  supreme  court.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1801,  and  was  a  member  of  the
American  academy  of  arts  and  sciences.

BRADBURY,  William  Batchelder,  musi-
cian, b.  in  York,  Me.,  6  Oct.,  1816;  d.  in  Montclau-,
N.  J.,  7  Jan.,  1868.  He  inherited  a  taste  for  music
from  his  parents,  who  were  excellent  singers,  his
father  being  the  leader  of  a  choir.  Before  he  was
fourteen  years  old  he  had  become  a  skillful  me-
chanic, and  mastered  every  instrument  that  came
in  his  way,  but  never  saw  an  organ  or  a  piano  until
1830,  when  he  removed  to  Boston.  Here  he  met
Dr.  Lowell  Mason,  and  in  1834  was  known  as  an
organist.  In  1840  he  began  teaching  in  New  1  oik  |
and  Brooklyn,  where  he  gained  popularity  bv  his
free  singing-schools,  and  by  his  concerts,  at  which
the  performers,  all  children,  sometimes  numbered
1,000.  In  1847  he  went  to  Germany,  where  he
studied  harmony,  composition,  and  vocal  ^^^ J^l
strumental  music  with  the  best  masters.  In  Iwo*
he  began  in  New  York  city,  in  connection  with  nis


BRADBURY


BRADDOCK


347


brother,  E.  G.  Bradbury,  the  manufacture  of  pia-
nos, in  which  he  was  very  successful.  Mr.  Brad-
bury is  best  known  as  a  composer  and  publisher  of
a  series  of  musical  collections  for  choirs  and  schools.
He  was  the  author  and  compiler  of  fifty-nine  sep-
arate books,  besides  contributing  largely  to  the
periodical  musical  literature,  and  writing  letters
from  Europe  to  the  New  York  "  Evangelist."  The
first  of  his  books  was  published  in  1841,  and  they
continued  to  appear  during  nearly  thirty  years.
They  include  "  The  Golden  Chain  "  (1861) ;  "  The
Key-Note  "  and  "  Pilgrim  Song  "  (1868) ;  "  Golden
Trio  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Shawm  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Jubi-
lee" (1865);  and  "Temple  Choir"  and  "Fresh
Laurels"  (1867).  This  was  his  last  new  book,
though  "  Clarina,"  a  compilation  from  his  works,
appeared  in  his  name  in  Oct.,  1867.  In  the  com-
pilation of  some  of  his  books  he  was  assisted  by
the  composer  Thomas  Hastings.  Among  Mr.  Brad-
bury's compositions  was  a  cantata  entitled  "  Esther,
or  the  Beautiful  Queen  "  (New  York,  1857).  Over
5,000,000  copies  of  his  works  have  been  sold.

BRADBURY,  William  Frothin^ham,  edu-
cator, b.  in  Westminster,  Mass.,  17  May,  1829.  He
was  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1856,  and  was  vale-
dictorian. He  taught  school  every  winter  from  1848
till  his  graduation,  and  then  became  a  teacher  in
the  Cambridge,  Mass.,  high  school,  of  which  he  be-
came head  master  in  1878.  He  has  published  a
series  of  nine  mathematical  text-books,  and  "  Cam-
bridge High  School  History  and  Catalogue."  He
has  patented  devices  for  teaching  the  metric  sys-
tem, and  assisted  to  organize  the  American  metric
bureau.  Mr.  Bradbury  in  1883-4  was  a  member
of  the  Cambridge  common  council.

BRADDOCK,  Edward,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Perthshire,  Scotland,  about  1695 ;  d.  near  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  13  July,  1755.  He  had  attained  the
grade  of  major-general  after  more  than  forty
years'  service  in  the  British  guards,  when  on  the
eve  of  the  French  war  he  was  sent  here  as  general-
issimo of  all  the  British  forces  in  the  colonies.  He
landed,  20  Feb.,  1755,  at  Hampton,  Ya.,  and  de-
barked his  troops  at  Alexandria,  to  which  point
the  Virginia  levies  had  also  been  directed.  The
house  t-hat  was  his  headquarters  in  Alexandria,
shown  in  the  engraving,  is  still  standing.  The
general  was  a  good  tactician,  but  a  very  martinet.


proud,  prejudiced,  and  conceited.  Horace  Walpole
describes  him  as  "  a  very  Iroquois  in  disposition,"
and  tells  an  anecdote  that  sheds  light  on  his  char-
acter. "  He  once  had  a  duel  with  Col.  Glumley,
who  had  been  his  great  friend.  As  they  were  going
to  engage,  Glumley,  who  had  good  humor  and  wit
(Braddock  had  the  latter),  said :  '  Braddock,  you  are
a  poor  dog !  here,  take  my  purse ;  if  you  kill  me,
you  will  be  forced  to  run  away,  and  then  you  will
lot  have  a  shilling  to  support'you.' Braddock  re-


fused the  purse,  insisted  on  the  duel,  was  disarmed,
and  would  not  even  ask  for  his  life."  When  Brad-
dock heard  that  not  more  than  twenty-five  wagons
could  be  procured  for  the  use  of  the  army,  he  de-
clared that  the  expedition  should  not  start.  Wash-
ington was  made  his  aide-de-camp.  At  Frederick-
town,  Benjamin  Franklin,  then  postmaster-general,
with  his  usual  sagacity  and  energy,  undertook  to
provide  the  necessary  conveyances,  and  records  the
conversation  with  Braddock  in  which  he  unfolded
his  intentions.  "After  taking  Fort  Duquesne,"
said  the  general,  "  1  am  to  proceed  to  Niagara ;
and,  having  taken  that,  to  Frontenac  if  the  season
will  allow  time,  and  I  suppose  it  will,  for  Duquesne
can  hardly  detain  me  above  three  or  four  days;
and  then  I  can  see  nothing  that  can  obstruct  my
march  to  Niagara."  Franklin  thought  the  plan
excellent,  provided  he  could  take  his  fine  troops
safely  to  Fort  Duquesne,  but  apprehended  danger
from  the  ambuscades  of  the  Indians,  who  might
destroy  his  army  in  detail.  The  intimation  struck
Braddock  as  absurd,  and  he  said :  "  These  savages
may  indeed  be  a  formidable  enemy  to  raw  Amer-
ican military,  but  upon  the  king's  regular  and  dis-
ciplined troops,  sir,  it  is  impossible  they  should
make  an  impression."  Similar  warnings  by  Wash-
ington met  with  similar  replies.  The  expedition
made  slow  progress,  but  at  last  drew  near  the  fort,
and  crossed  the  Monongahela  in  regular  order ;  the
drums  were  beating,  tlie  fifes  playing,  the  colors
flying,  and  their  bayonets  glittered  in  the  sun.
Suddenly,  as  the  van  was  ascending  a  slope  with
underbrush  and  ravines  on  both  sides,  it  was  ex-
posed to  a  murderous  fire  from  an  invisible  foe.
Braddock  ordered  the  main  body  to  halt,  the  firing
continued,  and  the  British  for  the  first  time  heard
the  terrible  war-whoop.  The  effect  of  the  Indian
rifles,  directed  by  the  French,  was  deadly ;  most  of
the  grenadiers  and  many  of  the  pioneers  were  shot
down,  and  those  who  escaped  the  bullets  were  com-
pelled to  fall  back.  The  British  were  ordered  to
form  in  line,  but  the  men  were  so  frightened  by
the  demoniac  yells  of  the  hidden  savages  that  they
refused  to  follow  their  officers  in  small  divisions.
The  Virginians,  familiar  with  Indian  warfare,  sep-
arated, and  from  behind  sheltering  rocks  or  trees
picked  off  the  enemy.  Washington  suggested  to
the  general  to  pursue  the  same  course  with  the
regulars ;  but  he  scorned  to  receive  advice,  and  is
reported  to  have  said  that  a  British  general  might
dispense  with  the  military  instruction  of  a  Vir-
ginia colonel.  He  insisted  that  his  men  should  be
formed  in  regular  platoons ;  they  fired  by  platoons
at  random  at  the  rocks,  into  the  ravines  and  the
bushes,  and  killed  a  number  of  Americans — as
many  as  fifty  by  one  volley — while  they  them-
selves fell  with  alarming  rapidity.  The  officers
behaved  splendidly,  and  Braddock's  personal  bra-
very was  conspicuous ;  five  horses  had  been  killed
under  him,  when  at  last  a  bullet  passed  through
his  right  arm  and  lodged  in  his  lungs.  He  fell
from  his  horse,  and  was  with  difficulty  removed
from  the  ground.  The  defeat  was  total,  and  the
rout  complete.  Washington's  escape  was  almost
miraculous;  sixty-four  out  of  eighty-five  oiHcers
were  killed  or  wounded.  There  is  little  doubt  that,
but  for  the  obstinacy  and  self-sufficiency  of  Brad-
dock, the  disaster  might  have  been  averted ;  for
the  crushing  and  sanguinary  defeat  of  9  July  was
inflicted  by  a  handful  of  men,  who  intended  only
to  molest  his  advance.  The  retreat  was  covered  by
Washington,  and  the  remnant  of  the  army  went
into  camp  at  the  Great  Meadows  four  days  later.
Braddock  said  nothing,  but  exclaimed  in  the
evening  after  the  engagement,  "  Who  would  have


348


BRADFORD


BRADFORD


thought  it!"  Then  he  relapsed  into  silence,  un-
broken until  a  few  minutes  before  his  death  at  the
Great  Meadows  on  the  evening  of  13  July,  when
he  said :  "  We  shall  better  know  how  to  deal  with
them  another  time."  He  was  buried  before  break
of  day,  Washington  reading  the  burial  service,
for  the  chaplain  had  been  wounded.  His  grave
(though  now  well  known,  and  pointed  out  seven
miles  east  of  Uniontown)  was  at  the  time  levelled
with  the  ground  to  prevent  Indian  outrage.  See
"  The  History  of  an  Expedition  against  Fort  Du-
quesne  in  1755,  under  Major-General  Edward
Braddock.  Edited  from  the  Original  Manuscripts
by  Winthrop  Sargent,  M.  A."  (Philadelphia,  1855).

BRADFORD,  Alexander  Warfleld,  jurist,  b.
in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5
November,  1867.  He  was  a  son  of  John  M.  Brad-
ford, D.  D.,  of  Albany,  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1832,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  soon
achieved  a  high  reputation  for  extensive  knowledge
of  law.  In  1848  he  entered  upon  political  life,  and
was  elected  surrogate,  was  twice  re-elected,  and  was
connected,  either  as  judge  or  advocate,  with  many
prominent  cases,  among  them  the  Parish  will,  the
Seguin  will,  the  Burdell-Cunningham  trial,  and
the  Gardiner  and  Tyler  will.  He  prepared  ten
volumes  of  legal  reports,  four  of  "  Reports  of  Sur-
rogates' Cases,"  and  six  of  "  Bradford's  Reports^"
the  latter  of  which  became  a  standard  authority.
He  also  edited  a  work  on  "  American  Antiquities,"
and,  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Anthon,  edited  "  The
Protestant  Churchman."  He  was  one  of  the  com-
missioners designated  by  the  legislature  to  codify
the  laws  of  the  state.  In  1846  he  published  a  dis-
course delivered  in  1845  before  the  New  York  his-
torical society,  and  in  1863  a  semi-centennial  ad-
dress to  the  Albany  academy.

BRADFORD,  Augustus  W.,  governor  of  Mary-
land, b.  in  Maryland  about  1805 ;  d.  1  March,  188*^1.
He  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  be-
came an  active  whig  politician.  He  was  an  earnest
unionist  during  the  civil  war.  In  1861  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  peace  congress,  and  in  1862  was
elected  governor  of  the  state,  serving  until  1866.
In  July,  1864,  confederate  raiders  burned  his  house.
In  1864  he  was  influential  in  securing  the  adop-
tion of  the  new  constitution  of  Maryland,  by  which
slavery  was  abolished,  and  under  President  John-
son was  surveyor  of  the  port  of  Baltimore.

BRADFORD,  GramaHel,  revolutionary  soldier,
b.  in  Duxbury,  Mass.,  2  Sept.,  1731;  d.' there,  9
Jan.,  1807.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Gov.  William
Bradford  and  son  of  Judge  Gamaliel  Bradford,
who  was  a  councillor  under  Govs.  Bernard  and
Hutchinson,  and  who  died  24  April,  1778,  aged
seventy-three  years.  The  son  served  in  the  French
war  as  captain  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  major.
During  the  revolutionary  war  he  commanded  the
14th  Massachusetts  regiment  of  continentals.  After
the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  and  a
judge. — His  son,  Alden,  author,  b.  in  Duxbury,
Mass.,  19  Nov.,  1765 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  26  Oct.,
1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,  and
was  a  tutor  in  the  college  in  1791-'3,  then  pastor
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Wiscasset,  Me.,
till  1801,  afterward  for  some  time  clerk  of  the  su-
preme court  of  Massachusetts,  next  a  bookseller  in
Boston,  and  then,  from  1812  to  1824,  he  held  the
office  of  secretary  of  state  for  the  commonwealth,
and  in  1826  edited  the  Boston  "Gazette."  He  was
the  author  of  "Eulogy  on  Washington"  (1804);
"  On  the  Death  of  Gen.  Knox  "  (1806) ;  "  Life  of  C.
Strong"  (1820);  "History  of  Massachusetts  from
1764  till  1789,"  subsequently  continued  down  to
1820  (Boston,  1822-'9) ; "  Life  of  Jonathan  May-


hew  "  (1838) ;  "  History  of  the  Federal  Government "
(Boston,  1840) ;  "  Biographical  Notices  of  Distin-
guished Men  of  Massachusetts"  (1842);  "New
England  Chronology,  1497-1800  "  (1843) ;  and  ac-
counts of  Wiscasset  and  Duxbury. — His  great-
grandson,  Oamaliel,  political  writer,  b.  in  Boston,
15  Jan.,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1849!
He  is  the  principal  advocate  for  the  admission  of
cabinet  officers  to  a  seat  and  a  voice  in  congress,
without  the  right  of  voting.

BRADFORD,  Joseph,  journalist,  b.  near  Nash-
ville, Tenn.,  24  Oct.,  1843 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  13
April,  1886.  His  real  name  was  William  Randolph
Hunter.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  naval
academy  in  1859,  but  did  not  take  a  full  course.
In  1862  he  entered  the  navy,  and  served  with  dis-
tinction until  1864,  when  he  resigned  on  account
of  illness.  He  turned  to  the  stage,  making  his  first
appearance  in  Baltimore,  and  at  that  time  assumed
the  name  of  Joseph  Bradford,  Bradford  having  been
his  mother's  maiden  name.  He  remained  upon
the  stage  several  years,  during  which  time  he  was
connected  with  stock  companies  in  Philadelphia,
Baltimore,  and  Boston.  But,  although  he  achieved
a  fair  measure  of  success  in  the  profession,  espe-
cially in  a  certain  type  of  eccentric  light  comedy,
which  he  played  with  great  delicacy  and  beauty,
his  natural  bent  was  toward  literature.  The  last
fifteen  years  of  his  life  were  mainly  passed  in  Bos-
ton, and  were  devoted  to  dramatic,  journalistic,
and  general  literary  w^ork.  Among  his  most  suc-
cessful plays  were  "  Our  Bachelors,"  "  One  of  the
Finest,"  and  "  The  Cherubs."  All  of  these  had  long
runs,  and  the  first  two  are  still  popular.  His  humor
was  exemplified  in  a  series  of  satirical  verses,  mostly
political,  published  in  the  Boston  dailies.  Some  of
his  serious  poems,  notably  those  on  the  deaths  of
Victor  Hugo,  Vice-President  Hendricks,  and  Gen.
Grant,  were  widely  copied.  A  collection  of  his
poems,  edited  by  his  widow,  is  now  (1886)  in  press.

BRADFORD,  Joseph  M.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Sumner  co.,  Tenn.,  4  Nov.,  1824;  d.  in  Norfolk,
Va.,  14  April,  1872.  He  entered  the  navy  as  mid-
shipman, 10  Jan.,  1840;  became  a  lieutenant,  16
Sept.,  1855;  a  commander,  25  July,  1866;  retired
5  Feb.,  1872,  and  was  made  a  captain  on  the  re-
tired list,  16  March,  1872.  He  was  fleet-captain  of
the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron  from  No-
vember, 1863,  till  June,  1865,  during  which  period
he  saw  severe  service  and  performed  his  difficult
duties  to  the  satisfaction  of  his  superior  officers.

BRADFORD,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Plvmouth,
Mass.,  in  1750;  d.  in  Belpre,  Ohio,  in  1823.  He
served  through  the  revolutionary  war,  from  Bunker
Hill  to  Yorktown,  and  was  present  at  many  im-
portant engagements.  He  held  the  rank  of  major
and  was  presented  by  Lafayette  with  a  sword  for
gallantry.  As  a  member  of  the  Ohio  company  he
removed  to  Marietta  in  1788,  and  in  the  following
year  with  a  number  of  associates  settled  Belpre.
He  was  a  descendant  of  the  sixth  generation  from
Gov.  Bradford.

BRADFORD,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.
in  Austerfield,  Yorkshire,  England,  in  March,  1588 ;
d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  9  May,  1657.  He  inherited
a  yeoman's  freehold,  was  seriously  and  religiously
inclined  from  childhood,  and  joined  the  Buritan
separatist,  or  Brownist,  church  established  in  loab
by  William  Brewster  at  Scrooby  Manor,  near  by
in  Nottinghamshire,  thereby  drawing  upon  him-
self the  hostility  and  contempt  of  his  relatives  ami
neighbors.  The  company,  being  threatened  with
persecution,  resolved  to  emigrate  to  Holland,  in
the  autumn  of  1607,  Bradford  and  the  other  prin-
cipal members  of  the  society  made  an  agreement


BRADFORD


BRADFORD


349


with  a  Dutch  captain  to  embark  at  Boston ;  but
the  skipper  betrayed  them  to  the  magistrates,  who
committed  some  of  them  to  prison,  and  sent  the
rest  to  their  homes.  After  several  months  of  con-
finement, Bradford  escaped  in  the  spring  of  1608
and  joined  his  companions  in  Amsterdam,  where
he  apprenticed  himself  to  a  silk-weaver,  a  French
Protestant.  When  he  came  of  age  he  sold  his  land
in  England  and  engaged  in  business  on  his  own
account,  in  which  he  incurred  losses.  Removing
with  the  rest  of  the  company  to  Leyden  about
1609,  he  was  eager  and  active  in  promoting  the
scheme  of  emigrating  to  an  English  colony.  A
patent  was  obtained  for  a  tract  of  land  in  Virginia,
with  the  assistance  of  Sir  Edwin  Sandys,  then
treasurer  of  that  colony.  On  5  Sept.,  1620,  Brad-
ford embarked  at  Southampton  in  the  "May-
flower "  with  the  first  hundred  pilgrims  that  left
for  America.  Obliged  by  stress  of  weather  to  put
in  at  Plymouth  harbor,  they  signed  a  compact  of
government  before  landing,  according  to  which
Carver  became  governor.  On  the  death  of  the
first  governor,  21  April,  1621,  Bradford  was  elected
in  his  place,  and  was  continued  in  the  office  each
year  thereafter  by  the  suffrage  of  the  colonists.
His  authority  was  restricted  at  his  request,  in  1624,
by  a  council  of  five,  and  in  1633  by  one  of  seven
members.  In  the  council  he  had  a  double  vote.
One  of  his  first  acts  on  assuming  the  executive  was


to  send  an  embassy,  in  July,  1621,  to  confirm  the
league  entered  into  with  the  Indian  sachem  Mas-
sasoit,  the  most  influential  and  powerful  of  the
native  chiefs.  His  friendly  relations  with  the  In-
dians, who  had  known  the  English  only  as  kidnap-
pers, were  essential  to  the  continued  existence  of
the  colony  and  to  its  future  prosperity.  He  under-
stood the  native  character,  and  exhibited  the  com-
bination of  firmness  and  energy  with  patience  and
gentleness  that  is  most  successful  in  dealing  with
savages.  In  1622  Canonicus,  sachem  of  the  Narra-
gansetts,  to  whom  the  governor  returned  a  skin
filled  with  powder  and  shot  in  reply  to  the  snake-
skin  of  arrows  sent  to  him  as  a  challenge,  sued  for
peace.  When  William  Bradford  was  chosen  gov-
ernor, because  of  his  precarious  health,  William
AUerton  was  given  him  as  an  assistant.  In  1622
the  emigrants  were  reduced  to  famine,  owing  part-
ly to  the  communistic  system  adopted  at  first,  and
partly  to  the  arrival  of  new  comers  without  provi-
sions, and  Gov.  Bradford  made  several  excursions
among  the  Indians,  procuring  corn  and  beans.
The  fur-trading  colony  established  beside  Plym-
outh plantation  in  Boston  harbor  provoked  by
their  oppressions  a  conspiracy  among  the  In-
dians to  exterminate  all  the  English,  which  was
revealed  by  Massasoit ;  and,  on  the  advice  of  that
chief,  Capt.  Standish  was  sent  bv  the  governor  to
put  the  ringleaders  to  death. In  1624  the  English


adventurers  who  had  supplied  the  capital  for  the
establishment  of  the  colony,  relying  on  the  profits
of  the  fur-trade  for  their  returns,  were  bought
out,  and  eight  of  the  most  enterprising  of  the  emi-
grants, for  a  six  years'  monopoly  of  trade,  assumed
all  the  engagements  of  the  colony.  In  1629  a  pat-
ent was  olDtained  from  the  New  England  council —
a  band  of  noblemen  who  in  1620  received  from
King  James  absolute  property  in  the  country  lying
between  40°  and  48°  of  north  latitude — conferring
upon  William  Bradford,  his  heirs,  associates,  and
assigns,  the  title  to  the  tract  on  which  Plymouth
plantation  was  situated.  In  1634  the  governor  and
his  assistants  were  constituted  a  judicial  court,  and
afterward  the  supreme  tribunal  of  the  colony ;  in
1639  legislation,  in  which  up  to  that  date  all  the
freemen  took  part,  was  vested  in  a  general  court,
to  which  all  the  towns  sent  representatives;  in
1640,  at  the  request  of  the  general  court,  Grov.
Bradford  conveyed  to  it  his  title  to  the  territory  of
the  colony,  reserving  to  himself  only  his  propor-
tion as  a  settler,  previously  agreed  upon.  For  one
period  of  two  and  one  of  three  years  he  declined
re-election  as  governor,  but  was  returned  to  the
office  every  other  year  until  his  death.  Gov.  Brad-
ford married  in  Leyden,  on  20  Nov.,  1613,  Dorothy
May,  who  was  drowned  in  Cape  Cod  harbor  on  7
Dec,  1620,  while  exploring  in  a  small  boat  in
search  of  a  place  to  establish  a  settlement.  On  14
Aug.,  1623,  he  married  Alice  Carpenter,  widow  of
Edward  Southworth,  a  lady  whom  he  had  known
in  England,  and  who  came  out  to  be  married  to
him.  He  left  one  son  by  his  first,  and  two  sons
and  a  daughter  by  his  second  marriage.  His
house  in  Plymouth,  shown  in  the  engraving,  is
still  standing.  Gov.  Bradford  possessed  a  higher
degree  of  literary  culture  than  was  usual  among
persons  similarly  circumstanced.  He  had  some
acquaintance  with  Latin  and  Greek,  and  a  slight
knowledge  of  Hebrew,  was  well  read  in  history
and  philosophy,  and  much  of  his  leisure  time  was
spent  in  literary  composition.  "  A  Diary  of  Oc-
currences," covering  the  first  year  of  the  coloni^
from  the  landing  at  Cape  Cod  on  9  Nov.,  1620,  till
18  Dec,  1621,  was  written  by  him  in  conjunction
with  Edward  Winslow  (London,  1622).  No  other
production  of  his  pen  was  published  during  his
lifetime;  but  he  left  some  manuscript  books  in
verse,  which  he  mentioned  in  his  will.  One,  enti-
tled "  Some  Observations  of  God's  Merciful  Deal-
ings with  Us  in  this  Wilderness,"  was  published  in
a  fragmentary  form  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society  in  1794,  and  ia
the  " Proceedings "  of  the  society  for  1869-70  was
printed  entire.  "  A  Word  to  Plymouth  "  was  first
published  in  the  same  volume.  "  A  Word  to  New
England  "  and  "  Of  Boston  in  New  England  "  ap-
peared in  1838  in  the  "  Collections  "  of  the  society.
"  Epitaphium  Meum  "  was  issued  in  Morton's  "  New
England's  Memorial "  (Cambridge,  1669).  A  long
piece  in  verse  on  the  religious  sects  in  New  Eng-
land, preserved  with  the  other  manuscripts  in  the
cabinet  of  the  historical  society  of  Massachusetts,
has  never  been  printed.  The  "Diary  of  Occur-
rences "  was  reprinted  in  an  abridged  form  in  Pur-
chas's  "Pilgrims"  in  1625.  The  8th  volume  of
the  "  Collections  "  of  the  Massachusetts  historical
society  contains  a  reprint  of  this  abridgment,  and
the  19th  volume  the  omitted  portions  and  correc-
tions of  the  errors  in  Purchas.  "  A  Dialogue,  or  the
Sum  of  a  Conference  between  some  Young  Men
born  in  New  England,  and  sundry  Ancient  Men
that  came  out  of  Holland  and  Old  England,"  was
printed  in  1648.  A  "Memoir  of  Elder  Brewster"
was  copied  with  the  above  and  others  of  William


350


BRADFORD


BRADFORD


Bradford's  writings  in  the  records  of  the  first
church,  Plymouth,  by  secretary  Morton.  In  the
same  place  is  a  fragment  of  Bradford's  "  History
of  the  Plymouth  Plantation."  All  these  prose  writ-
ings were  reprinted  in  Alexander  Young's  "  Chron-
icles of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  of  the  Colony  of  Ply-
mouth from  1002  to  1036  "  (Boston,  1841-'6),  which
contains  also  the  fragments  still  extant  of  Brad-
ford's letter-book,  comprising  letters  addressed  to
him.  These  letters  were  rescued  in  a  grocer's
shop  in  Halifax,  but  only  after  the  earlier  and
more  yaluable  portion  had  been  destroyed.  Brad-
ford wrote  two  dialogues  besides  the  one  mentioned
above.  One  of  these,  "  Concerninj^  the  Church  and
the  Government  thereof,"  dated  1652,  was  discov-
ered in  1820,  and  published  in  the  "  Proceedings  "
of  the  historical  society  for  1869-'70 ;  the  other  is
lost.  Copies  of  several  of  his  letters  were  printed
in  the  third  volume  of  the  1st  series  of  the  so-
ciety's "  Collections,"  and  his  letters  to  John  Win-
throp  in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  fourth  series.
The  most  valuable  of  Bradford's  writings  was  a
"  History  of  the  Plymouth  Plantation,"  including
the  history  of  the  society  from  its  inception  in
1602  till  the  time  when  it  departed  for  America
in  1620,  and  its  history  in  Plymouth  down  to  1647.
This  manuscript  folio  volume  of  270  pages  disap-
peared during  the  American  revolution  and  was
supposed  to  have  been  taken  by  the  British  sol-
diers who  used  the  old  South  church  of  Boston,
where  it  was  deposited,  for  a  riding-school,  or  to
have  been  carried  away  by  Gov.  Hutchinson  in
1774.  In  1855  Samuel  G.  Drake  identified  passages
from  a  manuscript  "  History  of  Plymouth  "  in  the
Fulham  library,  quoted  by  Samuel  Wilberforce
in  his  "History  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
Church  in  America "  (1846),  with  portions  of  the
fragmentary  history  printed  from  the  records  of
the  first  church,  Plymouth.  The  work  was  found
complete  in  Gov.  Bradford's  handwriting  in  the
Fulham  library.  On  a  blank  page  was  the  book-
plate of  the  New  England  library,  from  the  cabi-
net of  which,  in  the  Old  South  church,  the  volume
had  disappeared.  A  copy  was  taken,  and  the  work
was  printed  in  full  in  1856  in  the  "  Collections  "
of  the  Massachusetts  historical  society.  Nathaniel
Morton,  Prince,  and  Gov.  Hutchinson,  in  the
preparation  of  their  histories  of  Massachusetts
colony,  had  access  to  this  work  and  to  the  letters
and  other  writings  of  Gov.  Bradford,  and  drew
mainly  from  those  sources  in  narrating  the  story
of  the  initial  period  of  the  colony.  See  Belknap's
"  American  Biography  "  ;  Mather's  "  Magnalia  " ;
Thacher's  "  Plymouth  " ;  "  New  England  Regis-
ter "  for  1850 ;  Davis's  edition  of  Morton's  "  Me-
morial"; ShurtlefE's  -'Recollections  of  the  Pil-
grims "  in  Russell's  "  Guide  to  Plymouth  "  ;  Hunt-
er's "  Collections  concerning  the  Early  History  of
the  Founders  of  New  Plymouth " ;  Young's
"  Chronicles  of  the  Pilgrims '' ;  Fessenden's  "  Gene-
alogy of  the  Bradford  Family " ;  Hutchinson's
"  History  of  Massachusetts  " ;  Winsor's  "  Governor
Bradford's  '  History  of  Plymouth  Plantation,'  and
its  Transmission  to  our  Times  "  ;  and  Dean's  "  Who
Identified  Bradford's  Manuscript  ?  "

BRADFORD,  William,  printer,  b.  in  Leicester,
England,  in  1658 ;  d.  in  New  York,  23  May,  1752.
He  was  one  of  the  Quakers  brought  over  by  Penn
in  1682,  who  founded  in  the  midst  of  the  forest  the
town  of  Philadelphia.  In  1685  he  set  up  his  print-
ing-press, the  first  one  south  of  New  England,  and
the  third  one  in  the  colonies.  The  same  year  he
issued  the  "  Kalendarium  Pennsilvaniense "  for
1686.  In  1690  he  joined  with  two  others  in  build-
ing a  paper-mill  on  the  Schuylkill. Among  his


earliest  publications  were  Keith's  polemical  tracts
against  the  New  England  churches.  In  1691,  hav-
ing sided  with  Keith  in  his  quarrel  with  the  au-
thorities, and  printed  his  "  Appeal  to  the  People,"
and  other  tracts  on  his  side  of  the  controversy,
Bradford  was  arrested  for  seditious  libel,  and  his
press,  forms,  materials,  and  publications  were  con-
fiscated. He  was  tried  on  the  charge  of  having
printed  a  paper  tending  to  weaken  the  hands  of
the  magistrates,  but,  conducting  his  own  case  with
shrewdness  and  skill,  escaped  punishment  through
the  disagreement  of  the  jury.  In  his  defence  he
contended,  in  opposition  to  the  ruling  of  the  court
directing  the  jury  to  find  only  as  to  the  facts  of
the  printing,  that  the  jurors  were  judges  of  the
law  as  well  as  of  the  fact,  and  competent  to  deter-
mine whether  the  subject-matter  was  seditious,  a
point  that,  in  after  times,  was  much  controverted
m  similar  cases.  Having  incurred  the  displeasure
of  the  dominant  party  in  Philadelphia,  and  re-
ceiving an  invitation  to  establish  a  printing-press
in  New  York,  he  settled  there  in  1693,  set  up  the
first  press  in  the  province,  and  the  same  year
printed  the  laws  of  the  colony.  He  was  appointed
public  printer  with  an  allowance  of  £50  per  an-
num, and  also  received  the  appointment  of  printer
to  the  government  of  New  Jersey.  He  retained  an
interest  in  the  press  in  Philadelphia,  which  was
managed  by  a  Dutchman  named  Jansen  until
Bradford's  eldest  son,  Andrew,  took  charge  of  it
in  1712,  and  obtained  the  appointment  of  -public
printer.  On  16  Oct.,  1725,  William  Bradford  be-
gan the  publication  of  the  "  New  York  Gazette,"
the  fourth  newspaper  in  the  colonies,  and  in  1728
he  established  a  paper-mill  at  Elizabethtown,  N.
J.  He  was  the  only  printer  in  the  colony  for
thirty  years,  and  retained  the  office  of  public
printer  for  more  than  fifty  years.  He  is  buried  in
Trinitv  church-yard.— His  son,  Andrew  Sowles,
b.  in  l»hiladelphia  in  1686 ;  d.  23  Nov.,  1742,  was
the  only  printer  in  Pennsylvania  from  1712  to  1723.
On  22  Dec,  1719,  he  began  the  publication  of  the
first  newspaper  printed  in  the  middle  colonies,  the
"American  Weekly  Mercury."  Benjamin  Frank-
lin, upon  arriving 'in  Philadelphia  in  1723,  found
employment  as  a  compositor  in  his  printing-office.
Andrew  Bradford  was  postmaster  of  Philadelphia
in  1732.  Pie  kept  a  book-store  at  the  sign  of  the
Bible  in  Second  street  in  1735,  and  in  1738  removed
to  South  Front  street.  In  1741  he  started  a  period-
ical called  the  "American  Magazine." — Willisim,
printer,  and  soldier  of  the  revolution,  b.  in  New
York  in  1719 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  25  Sept.,  1791,
was  a  grandson  of  William  Bradford,  and  became
a  partner  of  his  uncle  Andrew ;  but  a  love-affair
of  the  younger  Bradford  led  to  a  breach  of  this  re-
lation. In  1741  he  went  to  England,  and  the  next
year  he  returned  to  Philadelphia  with  printing
material  and  a  library,  and  on  2  Dec,  1742,  issued
the  first  number  of  the  "  Pennsylvania  Journal.'
In  1754  he  established  the  London  coffee-house  m
Philadelphia ;  and  in  1762,  in  association  with  Mr.
Rydd,  he  opened  a  marine-insurance  office.  He
was  a  spirited  writer,  and  in  his  journal  assailed
the  pretensions  of  the  British  government,  and  in-
veighed against  the  stamp  act.  When  the  revolu-
tionary war  began  he  joined  the  Pennsylvania
militia.  As  a  major,  and  afterward  a  colonel,  nc
fought  in  the  battles  of  Trenton  and  Princeton,
being  wounded  in  the  latter  action,  and  was  at
Fort  Mifflin  when  it  was  bombarded  by  the  Bntisti
fleet  on  16  Nov.,  1777.  After  the  withdrawal  ot
the  British  troops  from  Philadelphia  he  returned
from  the  army,  broken  down  in  health  and  ruinecl
in  purse. His  son,  Thomas,  continued  the  pubJi-


BRADFORD


BRADISH


351


cation  of  the  "  Pennsylvania  Journal,"  which  was
transformed  into  the  "True  American"  in  1801,

Thomas,  printer,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  May,

1745;  d.  there,  7  May,  1888,  was  a  son. of  Col.
William,  and,  after  leaving  the  college  of  Phila-
delphia, entered  his  father's  printing-ofRce,  and
became  his  partner  and  associate  editor  of  the
"Pennsylvania  Journal,"  which  he  transformed
into  the" "  True  American  "  in  1801.  It  was  printed
in  the  same  building  occupied  by  his  great-uncle,
Andrew,  at  No.  8  Front  street.  In  1775  he  became
captain  of  a  military  company  in  Philadelphia,
and  later  was  commissary-general  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania division  of  the  continental  army.  After  the
establishment  of  the  federal  government  he  be-
came printer  to  congress.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  philosophical  society.  His  son,
Thomas,  was  a  philanthropic  lawyer  of  Philadel-

Shia,  b.  in  that  city,  11  Sept.,  1781 ;  d.  there,  25
let,,  1851.— William,  jurist,  another  son  of  Col.
William,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  14  Sept.,  1755 ;  d,
23  Aug,,  1795. He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in

1772,  studied  law  with  Edward  Shippen,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  the  supreme  court  in  1779.
His  legal  studies  were  interrupted  by  the  events  of
the  revolution.  When  the  Philadelphia  militia
was  called  out  and  formed  a  flying  camp,  he
served  as  major  of  brigade  to  Gen,  Roberdeau,  and
after  his  term  expired  accepted  the  command  of  a
company  in  Col,  Hampton's  regiment  of  regular
troops.  Soon  afterward  he  was  given  the  place  of
deputy  muster  master-general,  with  the  rank  of
lieutenant-colonel,  in  which  capacity  he  served  for
two  years,  until  failing  health  impelled  him  to  re-
sign his  commission  and  return  home.  In  1780  he
was  appointed  attorney-general  of  Pennsylvania.
He  married  in  1784  a  daughter  of  Elias  Boudinot,
of  New  Jersey,  When  the  judiciary  was  reorgan-
ized under  the  new  constitution  of  Pennsylvania,
he  was  appointed,  on  23  Aug..  1791,  a  judge  of  the
supreme  court.  On  8  Jan.,  1794,  he  succeeded  Ed-
mund Randolph  as  attorney-general  of  the  United
States  by  the  appointment  of  President  Washing-
ton, which  office  he  held  until  his  death.  In  early
life  he  wrote  pastoral  poems  in  imitation  of  Shen-
stone,  which  were  published  in  the  "  Philadelphia
Magazine."  In  1793  he  published  "An  Inquiry
how  far  the  Punishment  of  Death  is  Necessary  in
Pennsylvania,"  an  essay  in  the  form  of  a  report  for
the  use  of  the  legislature,  prepared  at  the  request
of  Gov.  Mifflin,  which  brought  about  a  mitigation
of  the  penal  laws  of  Pennsylvania,  a  reform  that
was  followed  bv  other  states.

BRADFORD,  William,  physician,  b,  in  Plymp-
ton.  Mass,,  4  Nov.,  1729  ;  d,  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  6  July,
1808.  He  was  a  descendant  of  Gov.  Bradford,
studied  medicine  and  practised  in  Warren,  R.  I.,
removed  to  Bristol,  where  he  built  a  fine  residence,
and  there  studied  and  practised  law,  attaining  a
high  rank  in  the  profession.  He  was  a  member  of
the  Rhode  Island  committee  of  correspondence  in

1773,  was  chosen  deputy  governor  of  Rhode  Island
the  same  year,  and  was  elected  a  delegate  from
Rhode  Island  to  the  continental  congress,  but
never  took  his  seat.  When  Bristol  was  bom-
barded by  Capt.  Wallace  on  7  Oct.,  1775,  in  re-
venge for  the  removal  of  the  cattle.  Gov,  Bradford
went  on  board  "  The  Rose,"  and  treated  with  the
British  commander  for  the  cessation  of  the  can-
nonade. His  own  house,  among  others,  was  ig-
nUed  by  the  fire  of  the  enemy  and  destroyed.  In
1793  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Rhode  Isl-
and, On  6  July,  1797,  he  was  chosen  president  of
the  senate  pro  'tempore,  and  later  in  that  year  he
resigned  his  seat.


BRADFORD,  William,  painter,  b.  in  New  Bed-
ford, Mass.,  in  1827.  He  is  of  Quaker  parentage,
and  was  brought  up  to  mercantile  business,  biit
practised  painting  in  his  leisure  hours,  and  in  mid-
dle life,  after  failing  in  business,  adopted  it  as  a
profession.  He  began  by  painting  ships  at  Lynn
and  in  other  harbors,  and  became  known  as  a  care-
ful and  accurate  portrayer  of  all  varieties  of  ves-
sels. He  then  made  extensive  studies  of  the  coast
scenery  of  New  England  and  British  North  Ameri-
ca as  far  as  Labrador,  and  with  the  same  fidelity
to  detail  that  characterized  his  delineations  of
shipping  painted  picturesque  sketches  of  coast
not  before  visited  by  artists.  In  depicting  the
forms  and  motions  of  waves  and  the  aspect  of  the
sea  in  storms,  he  produced  realistic  effects  not  ob-
tained by  previous  painters.  His  accuracy  of  ob-
servation and  drawing  are  best  seen  in  his  studies
in  colors  and  India  ink ;  for  his  painted  canvases
have  not  the  variety  of  his  sketches,  and  are  some-
what hard  in  manner,  although  he  improved  in  his
handling  of  the  brush  and  the  use  of  pigments
through  two  years'  association  with  Van  Beest,
with  whom  he  occupied  the  same  studio  in  Fair-
haven,  Subsequently  Mr,  Bradford  extended  his
studies  to  the  Arctic  regions.  With  Dr.  Hayes  and
others  he  made  excursions  to  the  ice-fields  of  the
North  Atlantic,  in  a  vessel  chartered  by  him,  and
sketched  floes  and  bergs  and  the  coast  scenery  of
the  frozen  regions.  The  ice-scenes  that  he  painted
from  these  studies  attracted  attention  both  in  Eng-
land and  America.  His  "  Steamer  Panther  among
Icebergs  and  Field-Ice  in  Melville  Bay,  under  the
Light  of  the  Midnight  Sun,"  was  purchased  by
Queen  Victoria,  and  was  exhibited  with  her  per-
mission at  the  royal  academy  in  1875.  Among
his  other  notable  works  are  "  Fishing-Boats  in  the
Bay  of  Fundy  "  ;  "  Shipwreck  off  Nantucket " ;
"  Lighthouse  in  St.  John  Harbor  " ;  "  Fishing-
Boats  getting  under  Way  " ;  "  The  Island  of  Grand
Menan  " ;  "  Fishing-Boats  at  Anchor  " ;  "  Sudden
Squall  in  the  Bay  of  Fundy  "  ;  "A  Stiff  Breeze  in
the  Harbor  of  Eastport " ;  "  The  Coast  of  Labra-
dor "  ;  "  Crushed  by  Icebergs "  ;  "  Boarding  the
Sloop  " ;  and  "  Sunset  in  the  North  "  and  "  Arctic
Scene,"  exhibited  in  the  national  academy,  New
York,  in  1886.

BRADISH,  Luther,  statesman,  b.  in  Cumming-
ton,  Mass.,  15  Sept.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  30
Aug.,  1863.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1804,
and  studied  law
in  New  York.
After  a  tour  in
Europe,  he  em-
barked, in  1820,
on  board  the  U.
S.  ship-of-war
"Columbus"  for
the  Mediterra-
nean, for  the
purpose  of  col-
lecting informa-
tion respecting
the  commerce  of
the  Levant,  pre-
liminary to  the
establishment  of
diplomatic  rela-
tions with  the
porte.  At  the
conclusion  of  his
mission  he  trav-
elled over  Europe  and  the  east,  and  in  1826  re-
turned to  New  York.  About  the  same  time  he  re-
moved to  Franklin  co,,  N.  Y. He  was  a  member


352


BRADLEE


BRADLEY


of  the  assembly  in  1827-'30,  an  unsuccessful  can-
didate of  the  anti-masonic  party  for  congress  in
1880,  and  again  a  member  of  the  assembly  in
183o-'8,  serving  during  his  last  term  as  speaker.
From  1839  till  1843  he  was  lieutenant-governor  of
the  state,  and  in  1842  he  was  the  unsuccessful
whig  candidate  for  governor.  Subsequently  to  that
period  he  lived  in  retirement,  except  during  the
administration  of  President  Fillmore,  when  he  filled
the  office  of  assistant  U.  S.  treasurer  in  New  York.
During  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  which  he  passed
in  New  York,  he  was  much  occupied  with  educa-
tional, charitable,  and  reformatory  projects,  and  at
his  death  was  president  of  the  New  York  histori-
cal society,  and  of  the  American  Bible  society.

BRADLEE,  Caleb  Davis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1852,  and  in  December,  1854,  became
pastor  of  the  Allen  street  church,  Cambridge,
where  he  remained  for  three  years.  In  April,  18G4,
he  took  charge  of  the  Church  of  the  Redeemer,
Boston,  where  he  has  since  remained.  He  has  pub-
lished sermons,  notably  one  on  the  death  of  Abra-
ham Lincoln,  and  has  also  contributed  prose  and
verse  to  newspapers  and  periodicals,  especially  the
"  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Regis-
ter." He  is  a  member  of  historical  and  literary
societies,  and  for  some  time  was  recording  and  cor-
responding secretary  of  the  New  England  histor-
ical and  genealogical  society.

BRADLEY,  Denis,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Ireland
in  1846.  His  family  emigrated  to  the  United  States,
and  settled  in  Manchester,  N.  H.,  in  1854.  After
finishing  his  classical  studies  at  Holy  Cross  college,
Worcester,  he  entered  St.  Joseph's  seminary,  Troy,
in  1867.  He  was  ordained  in  1871,  and  stationed
at  the  cathedral  in  Portland,  Me.,  where  he  re-
mained nine  years,  filling  the  offices  of  chancellor
of  the  diocese  and  rector  of  the  cathedral.  He  was
then  appointed  pastor  of  St.  Joseph's  church,  Man-
chester, N.  H.,  and  in  1884  was  consecrated  bishop
of  Manchester.

BRADLEY,  Joseph  P.,  jurist,  b.  in  Berne,  Al-
bany CO.,  N.  Y.,  14  March,  1813.  He  is  of  English
descent.  His  earliest  ancestor  in  the  United  States
was  Francis  Bradley,  who  was  a  member  of  Gov.
Eaton's  family  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  in  1650,  and
removed  to  Fairfield  in  the  same  state  in  1660.
From  Francis  Bradley  the  judge  is  the  sixth  in
line.  In  1791  the  family  removed  to  Berne.  His
father  was  Philo  Bradley,  and  his  mother  was
Mercy  Gardiner,  of  a  Newport,  R.  I.,  family.  The
father  was  a  farmer,  and  had  a  library  containing
historical  and  mathematical  works.  Joseph  was  the
eldest  of  eleven  children,  and  worked  on  the  farm
until  he  reached  the  age  of  sixteen.  His  oppor-
tunities for  obtaining  an  education  consisted  prin-
cipally in  his  attendance,  three  or  four  months  in
each  vear,  at  a  country  school  when  he  was  be-
tween the  ages  of  five  and  fourteen ;  but  he  made
constant  use  of  his  father's  library,  and  his  attain-
ments must  have  been  very  considerable.  He
taught  a  country  school  every  winter  from  his  six-
teenth year  till  his  twenty-first.  During  this  period
he  also  practised  surveying  occasionally  for  the
neighboring  farmers.  His  love  of  study  attracted
the  attention  of  the  clergyman  of  the  village,  who
offered  to  prepare  him  for  college.  This  invitation
he  accepted,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  Mr,  Brad-
ley entered  Rutgers,  where  he  was  graduated  with
honor  in  1836,  unusually  distinguished  as  a  mathe-
matician. After  devoting  six  months  to  teaching,
he  began  the  study  of  law  with  Arthur  Gifford  at
Newark,  N.  J.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  No-
vember, 1839o In  May,  1840,  he  opened  an  office


in  Newark,  where  he  continued  in  practice  thirty
years,  until  his  appointment  to  be  a  justice  of  the
supreme  court. He  was  engaged  in  many  of  the
most  important  and  difficult  cases  that  arose  in
the  New  Jersey  courts  and  in  the  courts  of  the
United  States  for  that  district,  and  his  services  as
a  counsellor  were  sought  in  a  multitude  of  other
business  transactions. His  professional  career  was
attended  throughout  with  great  success. In  1860
he  argued  the  celebrated  New  Jersey  bridge  case  in
the  supreme  court  of  the  United  States  with  a  power
and  cogency  that  were  long  remembered. During
many  years  he  was  a  director  and  principal  coun-
sellor of  the  New  Jersey,  Trenton,  and  Philadel-
phia, and  of  the  Camden  and  Amboy  railroad  com-
panies, and  his  influence  was  exerted  to  induce
those  companies  to  yield,  in  favor  of  the  public,
monopolies  granted  to  them  by  the  legislature,  but
odious  to  the  community  at  large. From  1857  till
1863  he  was  the  actuary  of  the  mutual  benefit  in-
surance company  of  Newark,  and  from  1865  till
1869  was  president  of  the  New  Jersey  mutual  life
insurance  company. He  was  also a  director  of
various  other  financial  institutions. In  1849  he  ad-
dressed the  literary  societies  of  Rutgers  college  on
the  subject  of  "  progress,"  and  he  has  delivered  lec-
tures to  the  classes  on  political  economy  and  con-
stitutional law. In  1851  he  delivered  the  annual
address  before  the  historical  society  of  New  Jersey
on  "  The  Perils  through  which  the  Federal  Consti-
tution has  passed,  and  which  still  threaten  it,"  and
in  1865  he  delivered  an  admirable  address  on  the
life  and  character  of  the  Hon.  William  L.  Dayton.
In  June,  1870,  he  delivered  the  centennial  address
at  Rutgers  college. Pie  has  contributed  valuable
articles  to  several  cyclopaedias. In  1859  Lafayette
college  conferred  upon  him  the  degree  of  LL,  I).
In  March,  1870,  he  was  appointed  by  Pi-esident
Grant  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the  United
States,  and  was  designated  circuit  justice  for  the
large  southern  circuit. Subsequently,  on  the  resig-
nation of  Justice  Strong,  he  was  assigned  to  the
third  circuit,  embracing  the  states  of  Pennsylvania,
New  Jersey,  and  Delaware. During  his  member-
ship of  the  supreme  court  a  very  large  number  of
cases  have  been  brought  into  it,  involving  ques-
tions arising  out  of  the  civil  war,  the  reconstruc-
tion and  other  acts  of  congress,  the  constitutional
amendments,  the  difficulties  and  controversies  of
railroad companies,  and  other subjects. In  no
former  equal  period  have  as  many  cases  of  supreme
importance  been  decided  by  that  court. Many  of
them  were  not  only  novel,  but  intricate  and  diffi-
cult of  solution. In  the  investigation  and  decision
of  all  of  them  Judge  Bradley  has  borne  a  distin-
guished part. His  mind  is  remarkably  analytical,
capable  of discovering  and  appreciating  occult
though  important  distinctions. Added  to  this,  his
legal  learning  is  so  large  and  accurate,  his  acquaint-
ance with  English  and  American  decisions  so  exten-
sive, and  his  habit  of  looking  beyond  the  rule  for
the  reason  or  principle  upon  which  it  is  founded  so
constant,  that  his  opinions  have  been  of  high  value.
Those  opinions  appear  in  more  than  forty  volumes
of  the  supreme  court  reports,  beginning  with  9th
Wallace. Many  of  them  are  notable  alike  for  the
importance  of  the  subject  discussed  and  for  the
manner  of  the  discussion. In  patent  cases  Jud^e
Bradley  has  exhibited  marked  ability,  his  natural
aptitude  for  comprehending  mechanical  devices
qualifying him unusually  for such cases. His
o{)inions  in  maritime  cases,  in  cases  relating  to
civil  rights  and  habeas  corpus,  in  suits  upon  poli-
cies of  insurance,  and  in  cases  in  which  statutory
or  constitutional  construction  has  been  required,


BRADLEY


BRADSTREET


353


are  specially  noteworthy  as  able  and  instructive.
When  in  January,  1877,  in  pursuance  of  an  act  of
congress,  an  electoral  commission  was  constituted
to  consider  and  report  upon  the  controversies  that
had  arisen  over  the  counting  of  the  votes  of  presi-
dential electors,  Judge  Bradley  was  a  member,  and,
as  such,  concurred  in  the  conclusions  reached  by
the  majority  of  the  commissioners,  supporting
those  conclusions  by  elaborate  arguments,  which
were  published  with  the  other  proceedings  of  the
commission.  Judge  Bradley  was  never  what  is
called  a  politician,  though  always  holding  decided
opinions  respecting  constitutional  and  other  public
questions,  and  occasionally  giving  those  opinions
to  the  press.  In  his  earlier  years  he  was  attached
to  the  whig  party,  and  later  became  a  republican.
To  the  government  he  has  uniformly  given  a  steady
and  efficient  support.  When  the  southern  states
attempted  secession,  he  devoted  his  power  and  in-
fluence to  sustaining  the  government  against  dis-
union, and,  as  counsel  and  director  of  the  New
Jersey  railroad  companies,  he  assisted  very  mate-
rially in  forwarding  troops  and  military  supplies.
On  several  occasions  he  accompanied  new  regi-
ments to  the  field,  and  addressed  them  on  the
pending  issues.  In  1862,  with  much  reluctance,  he
accepted  the  republican  nomination  for  congress
in  the  sixth  congressional  district  of  New  Jersey ;
but  so  strongly  democratic  was  the  district  that  he
was  defeated.  In  1868  he  headed  the  New  Jersey
republican  electoral  ticket.  He  is  an  accomplished
mathematician,  familiar  with  the  higher  and  more
abstruse  processes  of  mathematical  investigation,
and  not  infrequently  amuses  himself  by  indulgence
in  such  pursuits.  In  1844  he  married  Mary,  daugh-
ter of  Chief  Justice  Hornblower,  of  New  Jersey,  by
whom  he  has  two  sons  and  two  daughters.

BRADLEY,  Luther  Prentice,  soldier,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  8  Dee.,  1822.  He  was  educated
in  the  common  schools  of  his  native  city.  Enter-
ing the  army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  51st  Illi-
nois volunteers,  on  15  Oct.,  1861,  he  was  on  recruit-
ing duty  until  February,  1862,  and  was  afterward
•engaged  at  the  capture  of  Island  No.  10,  New
Madrid,  Farmington,  and  Nashville,  Tenn.  He
became  colonel  of  his  regiment  15  Oct.,  1862,  com-
manded a  brigade,  and  was  in  the  battles  of  Stone
River,  Chickamauga,  where  he  was  wounded,  Resa-
•ca,  New  Hope  Church,  Kenesaw  Mountain,  Peach
Tree  Creek,  Atlanta,  and  Jonesboro,  Ga.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  30  July,  1864,
and  was  in  the  campaign  against  Gen.  Hood,  being
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Franklin,  Tenn.  He  re-
signed on  30  June,  1865,  and  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  27th  U.  S.  infantry,  28  July,
1866.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the  regular  army
on  3  March,  1867,  for  services  at  Chickamauga,  and
brigadier-general  for  services  at  Resaca.  He  be-
came colonel  of  the  3d  infantry,  20  March,  1879,
and  on  14  June  was  transferred  "to  the  13th.

BRADLEY,  Stephen  Row,  senator,  b.  in  Wal-
lingford  (now  Cheshire),  Conn.,  20  Oct.,  1754 ;  d.  in
Walpole,  N.  H.,  16  Dec,  1830.  He  was  graduated
At  Yale  in  1775,  studied  law  under  Judge  Reeve,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1779.  During  the
revolutionary  war  he  commanded  a  company  of
the  Cheshire  volunteers,  and  was  the  aide  of  Gen.
Wooster  when  that  officer  was  killed  at  Danbury.
In  1779  he  settled  in  Vermont  and  became  active
in  the  organization  of  the  state.  He  was  one  of
its  first  senators,  being  elected  as  a  democrat  to
the  2d,  3d,  and  7th.  to  12th  congresses,  and  was
president  pro  tern,  during  portions  of  the  7th  and
10th  congresses.  He  was  the  author  of  "Ver-
mont's Appeal"  (1779),  which  has  been  ascribed
VOL.  I. — 23


to  Ira  Allen. — His  son,  William  Czar,  lawyer,
b.  in  Westminster,  Vt.,  23  March,  1783 ;  d.  there,
3  March,  1867.  He  entered  Yale,  but  left  at  the
end  of  his  freshman  year  in  1796,  and  began  the
study  of  law  with  his  father.  After  being  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1802,  he  began  practice  in
Westminster.  From  1800  till  1803  he  was  secre-
tary of  the  commissioners  of  bankruptcy,  and  from
1804  till  1811  he  was  prosecuting  attorney  for
Windham  co.  He  was  elected  to  the  lower  branch
of  the  legislature,  and  in  1812  was  made  a  state
counsellor.  In  1813  he  became  a  representative  in
congress  from  Vermont.  From  1817  till  1822  he
was  the  agent  of  the  United  States  under  the  treaty
of  Ghent,  and  was  again  a  member  of  congress  dur-
ing 1823-'7.  In  1850  he  was  elected  to  the  state
senate,  in  1856  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  in
1857  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional  conven-
tion. He  took  a  formal  farewell  of  the  bar  in
1858,  after  fifty-six  years  of  practice.

BRADLEY,  Warren  Ives,  author,  b.  in  For-
restville,  Bristol,  Conn.,  20  March,  1847;  d.  there,
15  June,  1868.  He  was  educated  by  his  uncle,
Prof.  Newton  Manross,  under  whose  tuition  he
made  rapid  progress  in  literature  and  science.  Be-
fore he  was  twenty-one  years  of  age  he  wrote  nu-
merous articles  for  papers  and  magazines,  and  pub-
lished, under  the  pen-name  of  Glance  Gaylord,
books  for  children.  These  include  "Boys  at  Dr.
Murray's  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  Gilbert  Starr  and  his
Lessons  "  (1866) ;  "  Uncle  Donnie's  Home  "  (1866) ;
"  Culm  Rock,  the  Story  of  a  Year,"  for  which  he
received  a  prize  of  $350  over  seventy-two  competi-
tors (1867);  "Gay  Cottage"  (1867);  "Gilbert's
Last  Summer  at  Rainsford,  and  what  it  Taught "
(1867) ;  "  Will  Rood's  Friendship  "  (1867) ;  "  After
Years"  (1868);  "Donald  Deane  and  his  Cross"
(1868);  "Jack  Arcombe;  the  Story  of  a  Waif"
(1868);  "Miss  Patience  Hathaway"  (1868);  and
"  Mr.  Pendleton's  Cup  "  (1869).

BRADSTREET,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Horbling,
England,  in  1711 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  Sept.,
1774.  When  a  young  officer  he  was  sent  to  join
the  British  forces  in  America,  where  he  remained
for  the  rest  of  his  life.  In  1745  he  served  with  the
expedition  against  Louisburg  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  Pepperell's  (York,  Me.)  regiment,  and  contrib-
uted largely  to  its  success  by  his  zeal,  activity,  and
judgment,  and  by  his  particular  knowledge  of  the
circumstances  of  the  place.  On  5  Sept.,  1745,  he
was  made  a  captain,  and  on  16  Sept.,  1746,  was  ap-
pointed to  the  lieutenant-governorship  of  St.  John  s,
Newfoundland,  a  sinecure.  In  1755  he  was  ordered
by  Gen.  Braddock  to  Oswego,  and  became  the  ad-
jutant-general to  Gov.  Shirley.  During  the  fol-
lowing summer  he  conveyed  from  Albany  a  great
quantity  of  stores,  with  six  months'  provisions,  to
Oswego,  and  on  his  return  from  the  fort  was  at-
tacked by  a  strong  party  of  French,  whom  he  de-
feated. In  March,  1757,  he  was  appointed  to  a  com-
pany in  the  60th  regiment  royal  American,  and  in
December  was  made  lieutenant-colonel  and  deputy
quartermaster-general.  He  participated  in  the  at-
tack on  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  after  which  he  was
made  full  quartermaster-general  with  the  rank  of
colonel.  On  27  Aug.,  1758,  he  captured  Fort  Fron-
tenac,  which  he  razed  to  the  ground,  and  destroyed
such  stores  as  could  not  be  removed.  He  served
under  Amherst  in  his  expedition  against  Ticon-
deroga and  Crown  Point  in  1759,  received  his
colonelcy  in  February,  1762,  and  was  advanced  to
the  rank  of  major-general  on  25  May,  1772.  Dur-
ing Pontiac's  war  he  commanded  an  expedition
against  the  western  Indians,  with  whom  he  nego-
tiated a  treaty  of  peace  in  Detroit,  7  Sept.,  1764.


354


BRADSTREET


BRADY


BRADSTREET,  Simon,  colonial  governor,  b.
in  Horbling,  Lincolnshire,  England,  in  JNIarch,
1603 ;  (1.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  27  March,  1697.  He  was
educated  at  Emanuel  college,  Cambridge,  and  be-
came steward  of  the  countess  of  Warwick.  Hav-
ing been  persuaded  to  join  the  colony  of  Massa-
chusetts, he  was  chosen  assistant  judge  of  the  court
to  be  established  there,  and  arrived  in  Salem  dur-
ing 1630.  He  was  associated  in  the  proceedings  of
the  first  court  held  in  Charlestown  on  23  Aug.,  1630,
and  later  became  agent  and  secretary  of  Massachu-
setts and  commissioner  of  the  united  colonies.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  Cambridge  in  1631,  and
also  connected  with  the  settling  of  Andover.  He
resided  at  Ipswich,  Salem,  and  Boston. In  1653  h&

was  among  those
who  vigorously
and  successfully
opposed  making
war  on  the  Dutch
in  New  York,  and
on  the  Indians,
although  that
course  was  strong-
ly urged  by  the
commissioners  of
the  other  colonies.
Pie  was  sent  to
England  in  1660
to  congratulate
Charles  II.  on  his
restoration,  and
y^C '■^  to  act  as  agent  for

(_-. U r\ f / the  colony. From
^  ^^UxMinHh 1630  till  1679  he
^  was  assistant,  and

then  until  1686
(when  the  charter  was  annulled)  governor  of  the  col-
ony. He  was  opposed  to  the  arbitrary  measures  of
Andros,  subsequent  to  whose  imprisonment  he  again
became  governor,  and  continued  as  such  until  1692,
when  Sir  William  Phipps  arrived  with  a  new  char-
ter, after  which  he  was  first  councillor.  For  sixty-
two  years  he  was  in  the  service  of  the  government,
and  was  not  only  a  popular  magistrate,  but  also  a
man  of  great  integrity,  piety,  and  prudence.  He
opposed  the  witchcraft  delusion  of  1692,  and  ad-
vised the  surrender  of  the  charter  of  Massachu-
setts to  Charles  II.,  distrusting  the  ability  of  the
colonists  to  resist. — His  wife,  Anne,  poet,  b.  in
Northampton,  England,  about  1612;  d.  16  Sept.,
1672,  was  a  daughter  of  Gov.  Thomas  Dudley,
married  Gov.  Bradstreet  in  1628,  and  went  to  New
England  with  him  in  1630.  Mrs.  Bradstreet  was
the  mother  of  eight  children.  In  the  intervals
of  household  duties  she  wrote  poems,  which  were
published  under  the  title  "  Several  Poems  com-
piled with  great  Variety  of  Wit  and  Learning,
full  of  Delight,  wherein  especially  is  contained
a  Complete  Discourse  and  Description  of  the  Four
Elements,  Constitutions,  Ages  of  Men,  Seasons
of  the  Year,  together  with  an  Exact  Epitome  of
the  Three  First  Monarchies,  viz.,  the  Assyrian,
Persian,  and  Grecian,  and  the  Beginning  of  the
Roman  Commonwealth  to  the  End  of  their  last
King ;  with  Divers  other  Pleasant  and  Serious  Po-
ems, by  a  Gentlewoman  of  New  England"  (Bos-
ton, 1640).  This  was  also  issued  in  London  in  1650,
under  a  slightly  different  title,  beginning,  "  The
Tenth  Muse  lately  sprung  up  in  America."  A
second  American  edition  (Boston,  1678)  contains
her  best  poem,  "  Contemplations."  A  third  ap-
peared in  1758.  Her  complete  works,  prose  and
verse,  have  been  edited  by  John  Harvard  Ellis
(Charlestown, Mass., 1868). Mrs. Bradstreet's


poems  contain  much  curious  learning,  and  show
that  she  had  a  large'  fund  of  information.  Her
verses  are  quaint,  and  tlie  descriptions  are  some-
times more  literal  than  would  be  thought  neces-
sary at  the  present  day.  Her  contemporaries  gave-
her  the  most  extravagant  praise ;  John  Norton
said  that  if  Virgil  could  hear  her  poems  he  would
throw  his  own  into  the  flames.  In  1666,  bv  the
burning  of  her  house,  Mrs.  Bradstreet  lost  her  en-
tire library. — Their  grandson,  Simon,  clergyman,,
b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  7  March,  1671 ;  d.  in
Charlestown,  Mass.,  31  Dec,  1741.  His  father,  the
Rev.  Simon  I3radstreet  (1640-'83),  was  a  son  of  Gov.
Simon  Bradstreet.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1693.  On  26  Oct.,  1698,  he  was  ordained,  and
succeeded  the  Rev.  Charles  Morton  as  minister  of
Charlestown.  He  was  very  learned,  with  a  tena-
cious memory  and  lively  imagination,  but  of  mel-
ancholy disposition.  He  was  considered  one  of
the  first  literary  characters  •  and  best  preachers  in
America.  For  some  years  prior  to  his  death  he
was  afraid  to  preach  from  his  pulpit,  and  delivered
his  sermons  from  the  deacon's  seat,  using  no  notes.
— His  son,  Simon,  clergyman  (1709-71),  wa&
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1728  and  ordained,  4
Jan.,  1738,  as  minister  of  the  second  Congrega-
tional church  of  Marblehead,  where  he  remained
until  his  death.

BRADY,  Hugh,  soldier,  b.  in  Northumberland
county.  Pa.,  in  July,  1768;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,
15  April,  1851.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  an
ensign  7  March,  1792,  and  served  in  the  western
expedition  under  Gen.  Wajne  after  the  defeat  of
Gen.  St.  Clair.  In  February,  1794,  he  was  made
lieutenant,  and  on  8  Jan.,  1799,  captain.  Later  he
resigned,  but  was  reappointed  in  1808  by  President
Jefferson,  who  at  that  time  had  undertaken  to  re-
form the  army.  On  6  July,  1812,  he  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  22d  infantry,  and  led  his  troops  in
the  hard-fought  battle  of  Chippewa,  displaying  the
greatest  bravery.  He  also  distinguished  himself
at  the  battles  of  Lundy's  Lane  and  Niagara,  and
was  wounded  in  each  of  these  engagements.  ^  On
the  reduction  of  the  army  in  1815  he  was  retained,
and  became  colonel  of  the  2d  infantry.  In  1835  he
was  placed  in  command  of  the  department  of  which
Detroit  was  the  headquarters,  and  during  the  Cana-
dian troubles  he  contributed  greatly  to  the  preser-
vation of  peace  on  the  frontier.  On  6  July,  1822,
he  received  the  brevet  rank  of  brigadier-general,
and  on  30  May,  1848,  that  of  major-general  for
long  and  faithful  service.

BRADY,  James  Topliam,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  9  April,  1815 ;  d.  there,  9  Feb.,  1869.
His  education  was  obtained  under  the  direction  of
his  father,  Thomas  S.  Brady,  subsequently  an  emi-
nent lawyer  and  jurist,  who  at  that  time  was  en-
gaged in  preparing  students  for  college.  At  the
age  of  sixteen  Brady  had  acquired  a  good  knowl-
edge of  law,  and  frequently  acted  the  part  of  junior
counsel  to  his  father.  In  November,  1836,  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  New  York,  where  he  imme-
diately opened  an  office  for  himself.  Early  in  his
practice  he  was  called  upon  to  secure  the  release
of  Sarah  Coppin,  a  young  English  girl,  whose
parents  had  died  on  the  vovage  to  this  country.
After  her  arrival  in  New  Y'ork  she  was  robbed  of
her  money,  turned  into  the  street,  and  afterward
bound  out  by  the  authorities.  Her  brother  ob-
tained the  legal  services  of  Mr.  Brady,  who  was
successful  in  liberating  the  girl.  The  great  skill
with  which  he  conducted  this  case,  his  eloquence,
his  success,  and  the  ability  of  the  opposing  coun-
sel, brought  him  reputation  at  once.  He  was  con-
spicuous for  his  knowledge  in  all  departments  of  the


BRAGDON"


BRAGG


355


law,  winning  verdicts  from  Judges  and  jurors  alike
in  great  patent  cases,  like that of  Goodyear  v.
Day;  cases  involving  questions  of  medical  juris-
prudence, like  the  Allaire  and  Parish  will  cases,
and  the  moral  insanity  plea in  the case  of the
forger  Huntington  or  the  homicide  Cole ;  divorce
cases,  like  that  of  Mrs.  Edwin  Forrest,  and  also
in  civil  cases  of  all  sorts. But  his  special  power
was  seen  to  the  best  advantage  in  criminal  cases,
where  he  usually  undertook  the  defence. At  one
time  he  successfully  defended  four  clients  charged
with  murder  in  a  single  week,  and  all  without  fee
or  reward. In 1848 he  was  appointed district
attorney  of  New  York  during  the  temporary  ab-
sence of  Matthew  C.  Patterson,  and  two  years  later
he  became  corporation  attorney  for  the  city. In
1859  he  was  selected  by  Daniel  E.  Sickles  to  be
one  of  the  counsel  in  his  trial  for  the  assassination
of  Philip  Barton  Key,  and  made  the  opening  ad-
dress for  the  defence  to  the  jury,  which  was  one  of
his  most  notable  efforts  as  a  criminal  lawyer. Mr.
Brady  was  retained  as  counsel,  on  one  side  or  the
other,  in  many  of  the  important  criminal  and  civil
cases  of  his  time. His  success  as  an  advocate
was  due  to  a  clear  statement  of  the  case and  a
skilful  and  courteous  cross-examination  of  wit-
nesses. Plis  arguments  were  put  with  such  tact,
his  statements  of  facts  so  lucid  and  candid,  and
his  appeals  were^  so  eloquent  and  impressive,  that
he  almost  invariably  carried  judge  and  jury  with
him. It  has  been  said  that  he  never  lost  a  case  in
j  which  he  was  before  a  jury  for  more  than  a  week  ;
I  in  that  time  they  saw  everything  through  his  eyes.
He  was  naturally  a  political  leader,  and  was  fre-
quently urged  to  accept  office,  but  invariably  re-
fused unless  the  place  was  in  the  line  of  his  pro-
fession. Prior  to  the  civil  war  he  was  an  ultra
state-rights  man,  and  supported  Breckinridge  in
the  canvass  of  1860,  in  which  year  he  was  candi-
date for  governor  on  the "  hard-shell " or  pro-
slavery  democratic  ticket. During  Mr.  Lincoln's
administrations  he  supported  the  war  measures
generally  and  made  speeches  on  national  questions,
some  of  which  produced  a  strong  impression. In
his  address  before  the  Seymour  association  of  New
York  in  October,  1802,  he  said :  "  The  south,  in  leav-
ng  us  at  the  particular  time  she  did,  did  so  without
the  slightest  pretext  of  justification  or  excuse."
N^oar  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  appointed  a  mem-
3er  of  a  commission  to  inquire  into  the  administra-
;ion  of  the  department  of  the  gulf  under  Generals
Butler  and  Banks;  but  the  report,  notwithstand-
ng  the  public  interest  in  the  subject  at  that  time,
las  not  been  published. Mr.  Brady  was  never  mar-
led.  In  the  days  of  the  old  "  Knickerbocker  Maga-
zine "  he  was  one  of  its  frequent  contributors. "  A
rhristmas  Dream,"  published  originally  in  "The
iew  World  "  in  1846,  was  subsequently  put  into  a
mall  volume,  exquisitely  illustrated.
BRAGDON,  Edmund  Erastus  Eastman,  edu-
ator,  b.  in  Acton,  Me.,  8  Dec,  1812 ;  d.  in  Lima,  N.  Y.,
0  March,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  uni-
ersity  in  1841,  and  taught  in  the  Mexicoville  acad-
my  until  1842,  when  he  became  principal  of  Ful-
3n  academy. During  the  same  year  he  joined  the
•lack  river  conference  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal
hurch,  and  was  stationed  at  Wolcott,  N.  Y. He
ecame  principal  of  the  Mexicoville academy  in
340,  and  was  stationed  at  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  during
^47. From  1848  till  1852  he  was principal of
alley  seminary,  and  in  1853  he  joined  the  New
ork  conference  and  was  stationed  at  the  Yestry
;reet  church  in  New  York. Later  in  the  same
ar  he  accepted  the  professorship  of  ancient  lan-
^ages  in  Ohio  university,  Athens,  Ohio,  and  in


1854  the  chair  of  Latin  in  Indiana  university.
From  1858  until  his  death  he  was  professor  of
ancient  languages  in  Genesee  college,  Lima,  N.  Y.

BRAGG,  Braxton,  soldier,  b.  in  Warren  co.,  N.
C,  22  March,  1817;  d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  27  Sept.,
1876.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1837,  standing  5th  in  a  class  of  fifty.  Among
his  classmates  were  Gens.  Benham,  Townsend,
Sedgwick,  and  Hooker  on  the  national  side,  and
Early  and  Pemberton  on  the  confederate  side.  He
was  appointed  lieutenant  of  artillery,  and  served
mainly  in  Florida  until  1843,  during  the  war  with
the  Seminoles ;  from  1843  till  1845  he  was  stationed
at  Fort  Moultrie,  in  Charleston  harbor,  and  just
before  the  war  with  Mexico  was  ordered  to  Texas.
In  May,  1846,  he  was  made  captain  by  brevet  for
gallant  conduct  in  the  defence  of  Fort  Brown,
Texas,  and  in  June  was  promoted  captain  of  artil-
lery. He  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Monterey,
21-23  Sept.,  and  was  brevetted  major  for  gallant
conduct  there.  In
1847  he  was  bre-
vetted lieutenant-
colonel  for  gal-
lantry at  the  bat-
tle of  Buena  Vis-
ta. From  1848  till

1855  he  was  en-
gaged in  frontier
service  at  Jef-
ferson Barracks,
Mo.,  Fort  Gib-
son, and  Washita.
In  March,  1855,
he  was  appointed
major  of  caval-
ry, but  declined
and  received  leave
of  absence.  In
January,  1856,  he
resigned  his  com-
mission and  re-
tired to  his  plan-
tation at  Thibodeaux,  La.  In  1859-61  he  was  com-
missioner of  the  board  of  public  works  of  the  state
of  Louisiana.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general  in  the  confederate  army
in  1861,  and  placed  in  command  at  Pensacola,  Fla.
In  February,  1862,  he  was  promoted  major-general
and  ordered  to  join  the  army  of  the  Mississippi.
He  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  6-7  April,
and  was  promoted  general  in  place  of  A.  S.  John-
ston, killed.  After  the  evacuation  of  Corinth  he
succeeded  Gen.  Beauregard  in  command  of  the  de-
partment. In  August  he  led  a  formidable  force,
45,000  strong,  into  Kentucky,  but,  after  the  battle
of  Perryville,  8  Oct.,  he  retreated,  carrying  with
him  a  vast  quantity  of  supplies.  He  was  removed
from  his  command  and  placed  under  arrest,  but
was  soon  restored,  and  resumed  command  of  the
force  opposed  to  the  national  army  under  Rose-
crans.  He  was  worsted  by  Rosecrans  in  the  pro-
tracted contest  of  Stone  river  or  Murfreesboro,  31
Dec,  1862,  and  2  Jan.,  1863;  again  encountered
and  defeated  him  at  Chickamauga,  19  and  20
Sept.,  1863;  but  was  decisively  defeated  by  Gen.
Grant  at  Chattanooga,  23-25  Nov.  About  2  Dec.
he  was  relieved  from  command  and  called  to  Rich-
mond, where  for  a  time  he  acted  as  military  ad-
viser to  Mr.  Davis,  with  whom  he  was  a  favorite.
In  the  autumn  of  1864  he  led  a  small  force  from
North  Carolina  to  Georgia  to  operate  against  Sher-
man, but  without  success.  After  the  war  he  be-
came chief  engineer  for  the  state  of  Alabama,  and
superintended  the improvements  in  Mobile  bay,


356


BRAGG


BRAINARD


but  with  these  exceptions  his  life  was  passed  in
comparative  retirement. — His  brother,  Thomas,
governor  of  North  Carolina,  b.  in  Warrenton,  War-
ren CO.,  N.  C,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,  21  Jan.,  1872.
He  was  educated  at  the  military  academy  at  Mid-
dletown,  Conn.,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1831,  and  began  practice  at  Jackson,  N.  C.
He  was  chosen  to  the  state  legislature  in  1842,  and
in  1854  was  elected  governor  of  North  Carolina,
holding  that  office  until  1858.  He  was  elected  U.
S.  senator  in  1859,  but  withdrew  in  1861  after  the
secession  of  his  state.  Jefferson  Davis  made  him
attorney-general  in  his  cabinet,  22  Feb.,  1861,  and
he  acted  in  that  capacity  two  years.  Having  lost
all  his  means  by  the  war.  Gov.  Bragg  resumed  the
practice  of  his  profession  and  also  re-entered  politi-
cal life,  becoming  chairman  of  the  state  democratic
committee.  He  was  active  in  the  impeachment
proceedings  against  Gov.  Holden.

BRAGG,  Edward  Stuyvesant,  soldier,  b.  in
Unadilla,  N.  Y.,  20  Feb.,  1827.  He  studied  three
years  at  Geneva,  now  Hobart,  college,  left  at  the
end  of  the  junior  year,  and  studied  law  in  the  office
of  Judge  Noble,  in  Unadilla.  He  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1848,  and  soon  after  removed  to  Fond
du  Lac,  Wis.  In  1854  he  was  elected  district  at-
torney for  Fond  du  Lac  co.,  and  served  two  years.
He  was  a  Douglas  democrat,  and  a  delegate  to  the
Charleston  convention  in  1860.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  military  service  of
the  United  States  as  captain,  5  May,  1861,  and
held  all  the  intermediate  grades  to  and  including
that  of  brigadier-general,  with  which  rank  he  was
mustered  out,  8  Oct.,  1865.  He  participated  in  all
the  campaigns  of  the  army  of  the  Potomac  except
the  Peninsular,  Gettysburg,  and  Five  Forks.  In
1866  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  union
convention.  In  1867  he  was  elected  to  the  state
senate,  and  served  one  term.  In  1868  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  soldiers'  and  sailors'  convention  in
New  York,  which  nominated  Horatio  Seymour  for
president.  In  1872  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  na-
tional democratic  convention  in  Baltimore,  which
nominated  Horace  Greeley  for  president.  He  was
elected  to  congress  for  three  successive  terms,  be-
ginning with  the  45th  congress.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  democratic  national  convention  in  1884,
and,  as  chairman  of  his  delegation,  seconded  the
nomination  of  Grover  Cleveland  for  the  presi-
dency. The  same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  49th
congress.  During  his  congressional  career  he  was
regarded  as  one  of  the  most  dangerous  antagonists
in  debate  in  the  whole  house.  Small  of  stature
and  belligerent  in  bearing,  he  was  perpetually  in
the  thick  of  the  fight,  and  had  few  equals  in  his
power  of  acrimonious  retort  and  invective.  Al-
though he  was  intensely  a  democrat  in  a  partisan
sense,  he  never  could  be  counted  upon  to  vote
steadily  with  his  party.

BRAINARD,  David  Legg,  explorer,  b.  in  Nor-
way, Herkimer  co.,  N.  Y.,  21  Dec,  1856.  He  at-
tended a  district  school  until  his  eleventh  year,  when
his  father's  family  removed  to  Freetown,  where  he
was  sent  to  the  state  normal  school.  On  18  Sept.,
1876,  he  enlisted  in  the  regular  army,  and  was  as-
signed to  the  2d  cavalry,  then  stationed  at  Fort
Ellis,  Montana.  He  participated  in  the  Indian
campaigns  under  Gen.  Miles,  and  was  wounded  in
the  face  in  action  with  the  Sioux  at  Muddy  Creek,
Montana,  7  May,  1877.  In  the  following  August
he  was  one  of  the  four  men  selected  to  act  as  es-
cort to  Gen.  Sherman  and  party  in  their  tour
through  the  National  park.  In  July,  1879,  he
was  promoted  sergeant,  and  in  May,  1880,  recom-
mended for  detail  on  the  Howgate  polar  expedi-


tion ;  but,  the  enterprise  having  been  abandoned
he  returned  to  his  regiment  at  Fort  Assiniboine!
Early  in  the  spring  of  the  following  year  he  was
again  ordered  to  Washington  and  made  first  ser-
geant (chief  of  the  enlisted  men)  of  the  Lady
Franklin  bay  expedition  under  Lieut.  Greely,
which  place  he  held  during  three  years  of  Arctic
service,  being  in  command  of  many  important
boat  and  sledge  expeditions.  He  was  associated
with  Lieut.  Lockwood  in  all  the  important  geo-
graphical work,  and  was  one  of  the  three  who,  on
15  May,  1882,  attained  the  highest  northern  point
on  the  globe  ever  reached  by  man,  taking  observa-
tions in  lat.  83°  24i',  long.  40°  46^'  W.  While  the
party  were  in  camp  at  Cape  Sabine,  undergoing
terrible  privations.  Sergeant  Brainard  fished  for
shrimps,  and  prolonged  the  lives  of  the  party  for
about  seventy  days.  Brainard  received  from  the
Royal  geographical  society  of  Great  Britain  a  tes-
timonial consisting  of  an  elegant  gold  watch,  with
accompanying  diploma  ;  and  the  U.  S.  government
attached  him  to  the  signal  service  (lepartment,
and  in  October,  1886,  commissioned  him  2d  Heu-
tenant  of  cavalry.

BRAINARD,  Daniel,  surgeon,  b.  in  Whites-
borough,  Oneida  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  May,  1812 ;  d.  in
Chicago,  111.,  10  Oct.,  1866.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  and  studied  medicine,  first  at
Fairfield  medical  college  and  afterward  at  Jeffer-
son medical  college,  where  he  was  graduated  in  the
spring  of  1834.  He  delivered  a  course  of  lectures
on  anatomy  and  physiologv  at  Oneida  institute  in
1836,  studied  in  Europe  in  1839-41,  and  in  1842  be-
came professor  of  anatomy  in  the  university  of  St.
Louis.  He  was  the  founder  of  Rush  medical  col-
lege, Chicago,  and  occupied  its  chair  of  surgery
from  1843  till  his  death.  Under  Presidents  Pierce
and  Buchanan  he  was  surgeon  of  the  marine  hos-
pital, Chicago.  He  was  a  corresponding  member
of  the  societies  of  surgery  of  Paris  and  Geneva,
and  published  a  work  on  rattlesnake  bites;  "Un-
united Fractures  and  Deformities,"  the  American
medical  association  prize  essay  for  1854;  and  many
articles  in  the  "Chicago  Medical  Journal."  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  had  been  for  several  years
engaged  on  an  extensive  surgical  work,  which  re-
mains unfinished.  Dr.  Brainard  was  one  of  the
most  prominent  surgeons  of  the  northwest.  His
reputation  rests  largely  on  his  advocacy  of  subcu-
taneous perforation  of  ununited  bones  for  the  cure
of  false  joint,  and  the  treatment  of  poisoned
wounds  bv  means  of  alterative  injections.

BRAINARD,  John  Gardiner  Calls  ins,  poet,
b.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  21  Oct.,  1796 ;  d.  there,
26  Sept.,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  m  1815,
and  studied  law,  but,  after  practising  a  short  tmie
at  Middletown,  Conn.,  went  to  Hartford,  and  took
charge  there,  in  1822,  of  the  "  Connecticut  MuTor.
He  paid  little  attention  to  politics,  but  devoted
himself  to  the  literary  part  of  the  paper,  publishmg
in  it  many  poems,  mostlv  ballads,  which  soon
brought  him  into  notice.  He  had  previously  writ-
ten a  few  pieces  for  a  New  Haven  paper  called  the
"Microscope."  Brainard  had  always  been  deli-
cate, and  in  1827  consumption  forced  him  to  give
up  his  editorship  and  retire  to  the  east  end  ol
Long  Island,  where  he  remained  until  he  returnea
to  his  father's  house  in  New  London,  to  die.  Al-
though he  suffered  much,  he  continued  to  write
until  iust  before  his  death.  He  published  a  collec-
tion of  his  poems  (New  York,  1825);  and  a  seconcl
edition  enlarged,  entitled  "Literary  Keinaius,  <
with  a  sketch  of  the  author,  bv  John  G.  Whittier,j
his  successor  as  editor  of  the  "  Mirror,"  was  pui>
lished  after  Brainard's  death  (1832 ;  3d  ed


with


BRAINE


BRAINERD


357


portrait,  Hartford,  1842).  — His  brother,  Dyar
Tliroop,  a  well-known  physician  of  New  London,
also  eminent  as  a  botanist  and  chemist,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1810,  and  died  in  New  London,  6
Feb.,  1863,  aged  seventy-three  years.

BRAINE,  Daniel  Lawrence,  naval  officer,  b.
in  New  York  city,  18  May,  1839.  He  was  appointed
to  the  navy  from  Texas  as  a  midshipman,  30  May,
1846,  and  during  the  Mexican  war  was  in  the  ac-
tions at  Alvarado,  Tabasco,  Laguna,  Tuspan,  Tam-
pico,  and  Vera  Cruz.  He  was  made  passed  mid-
shipman, 8  June,  1852,  master  in  1855,  and  lieu-
tenant, 15  Sept.,  1858.  At  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  he  was  selected  by  the  union  defence  com-
mittee to  command  the  steamer  "  Monticello,"
fitted  out  in  forty-eight  hours  to  provision  Fortress
Monroe.  The  "Monticello"  was  afterward  at-
tached to  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron, and  on  19  May,  1861,  participated  in  the  first
naval  engagement  of  the  war,  with  a  battery  of
five  guns,  at  Sewall's  Point,  Va.  In  October,  1861,
he  attacked  the  confederate  gun-boats  above  Cape
Hatteras  and  dispersed  two  regiments  of  infantry,
sinking  two  barges  filled  with  soldiers,  and  rescu-
ing the  20th  Indiana  regiment,  who  were  cut  off
from  Hatteras  inlet  by  the  enemy.  On  15  July,
1862,  he  received  his  commission  as  lieutenant-
commander,  and  from  that  time  till  1864  was  in
numerous  engagements,  commanding  the  "Pe-
quot "  in  the  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  Fort  Ander-
son, and  the  forts  on  Cape  Fear  river.  For  "  cool
performance  of  his  duty "  in  these  fights  he  was
recommended  for  promotion  by  Rear-Adrairal
Porter  in  his  despatch  of  28  Jan.,  1865,  and  on  25
July,  1866,  was  commissioned  as  commander.  He
hsbd  charge  of  the  equipment  department  of
the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  from  1869  till  1872,
and  commanded  the  "Juniata,"  of  the  Polaris
search  expedition,  in  1873.  In  the  latter  part  of
that  year  he  demanded  and  received  the  "  Virgini-
us"  prisoners  at  Santiago  de  Cuba,  and  brought
them  to  New  York.  He  became  captain  on  11
Dec,  1874,  commodore,  2  March,  1885,  and  presi-
dent of  the  naval  board  of  inspection  at  New  York
on  1  July,  1885.  He  was  appointed  acting  rear-
admiral  on  12  Aug.,  1886,  and  ordered  to  the  com-
mand of  the  South  Atlantic  squadron.

BRAINERD,  David,  missionary,  b.  in  Had-
dam,  Conn.,  20  April,  1718;  d.  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1747.  From  early  childhood  he  had
strong  religious  feeling,  and  after  entering  Yale
college  in  1739,  at  the  time  of  the  great  revival
under  Whitefield,  his  zeal  led  him  into  indiscre-
tions. The  attitude  of  the  college  toward  the
"  New  Lights "  was  cold,  and  students  had  been
forbidden  to  attend  their  meetings.  Brainerd,
then  in  his  junior  year,  disobeyed  this  rule,  and
was  also  heard  to  say  of  one  of  the  tutors  that  he
had  "  no  more  religion  than  the  chair  on  which  he
sat."  Refusing  to  make  public  confession  of  these
offences  in  chapel,  Brainerd  was  expelled.  He
never  ceased  to  regard  this  action  as  unjust,
though  acknowledging  that  he  had  been  at  fault.
After  leaving  college  he  began  to  study  theology,
and  on  20  July,  1742,  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  Banbury  association  of  ministers.  He  had  for
some  time  been  interested  in  missions,  and  in  the
autumn  after  he  was  licensed  received  an  appoint-
ii|iPnt  from  the  society  for  the  propagation  of
Christian  knowledge  as  missionary  at  the  Indian
village  of  Kaunameek,  twenty  miles  from  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.  He  arrived  at  his  post  on  1  April,
1743,  and  labored  there  for  a  year,  living  in  a  wig-
wam and  enduring  many  hardships.  After  he
had  persuaded  the  Indians  to  move  to  Stockbridge


and  place  themselves  in  charge  of  the  minister
there,  Mr.  Brainerd  was  ordained  by  the  New  York
presbytery  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  went  to  the  forks
of  the  Delaware,  where  he  remained  for  about  a
year,  making  two  visits  to  the  Indians  of  the  Sus-
quehanna, but  meeting  with  little  success.  He
next  went  to  Crossweeksung,  near  Freehold,  N.  J.,
where  his  labor  had  a  wonderful  result.  In  less
than  a  year  he  had  baptized  seventy-seven  persons,
of  whom  thirty-eight  were  adults,  and  the  lives  of
most  of  these  were  permanently  reformed.  In
1747  Brainerd's  health,  exhausted  by  his  labors,
broke  down  completely.  He  had  never  been
strong;  while  he  was  in  college  a  severe  illness
had  almost  ended  his  life,  and  after  that  he  suf-
fered from  consumption.  By  advice  of  his  phy-
sician, he  determined  to  visit  his  friends  in  New
England.  July,  1747,  found  him  in  Northampton,
Mass.,  at  the  house  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  to  whose
daughter  he  was  betrothed,  and  here  he  remained
till  his  death.  Brainerd  wrote  an  account  of  his
labors  at  Kaunameek,  which  was  published  with
the  sermon  delivered  at  his  ordination.  His  jour-
nals, under  the  titles  "  Mirabilia  Dei  apud  Indicos  "
and  "  Divine  Grace  Displayed,"  appeared  in  1746.
His  life,  compiled  chiefly  from  his  diary,  was  writ-
ten by  Jonathan  Edwards  (1749),  and  a  second
edition,  including  the  journals  mentioned  above,
was  edited  by  Sereno  Edwards  Dwight  (New  Haven,
Conn.,  1822).  A  third  edition  was  edited  by  J.  M.
Sherwood,  with  an  introductory  essay  on  Brain-
erd's life  and  character  (New  York,  1884).  An
abridgment,  by  John  Wesley,  of  Edwards's  life,
was  also  published  in  England  (2d  American  ed.,
Boston,  1821).  See  also  Sparks's  "  American  Biog-
raphies "  and  Sprague's  "  Annals  of  the  American
Pulpit." — His  brother,  John,  missionarv,  b.  in
Haddam,  Conn.,  28  Feb.,  1720 ;  d.  in  Deerfield,  N.
J.,  18  March,  1781,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1746,
and  in  April,  1747,  became  his  brother's  successor
at  the  settlement  of  Bethel,  near  Cranberry,  N.
J.,  whither  the  Indians  under  his  charge  had  re-
moved from  Crossweeksung.  He  encountered  great
difficulties,  owing  to  troubles  about  the  ownership
of  the  land,  the  enlistment  of  many  of  his  flock  in
the  army,  the  breaking  out  of  hostilities  on  the
border,  and  the  opposition  of  the  Quakers  to  his
work.  He  was  obliged  to  move  twice  with  his  con-
gregation, and  paid  nearly  $2,000  out  of  his  own
pocket  for  various  expenses.  The  society  in  who§e
employ  he  was,  dissatisfied  with  the  state  of  affairs,
twice  dismissed  him,  and  as  many  times  asked  him
to  undertake  the  work  again.  He  preached  for
some  time  at  Newark,  N.  J.,  and  also  at  Mount
Holly,  N.  J.,  and  from  1760  till  1777  preached
about  five  hundred  times  in  filling  vacancies  near
Egg  Harbor,  N.  J.  In  1777  he  removed  to  Deer-
field,  N.  J,,  and  remained  there  until  his  death. —
Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Leyden,  N.  Y.,  17  June,
1804 ;  d.  in  Scranton,  Pa.,  21  Aug.,  1866.  He  passed
most  of  his  childhood  in  Rome,  N.  Y.,  and  after
his  graduation  at  Hamilton  college  began  the  study
of  law,  but  left  it  to  enter  Andover  theological
seminary,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1831.  After
studying  under  the  Rev.  Dr.  Patterson,  of  Phila-
delphia, he  was  ordained  as  a  Presbyterian  on  7
Oct.  of  that  year,  and  went  to  Cincinnati,  where
he  took  charge  of  the  4th  Presbyterian  church
until  1833.  From  1833  till  1836  he  edited  the
"  Cincinnati  Journal "  and  the  "  Youth's  Maga-
zine," and  also  assisted  in  editing  the  "  Presbyte-
rian Quarterly  Review."  He  espoused  the  cause  of
Dr.  Lyman  Beecher,  who  was  then  the  head  of  the
newly  established  Lane  theological  seminary,  and
was  encountering  much  opposition  because  of  his


358


BRAINERD


BRANDT


*'  new-school "  theology.  From  1837  until  his
death  Dr.  Brainerd  was  pastor  of  the  old  Pine
street  church  in  Philadelphia,  During  the  civil
war  he  was  earnest  in  his  support  of  the  govern-
ment, both  in  the  pulpit  and  in  conversation,  and
so  great  was  his  influence  that  130  young  men
of  his  congregation  volunteered  either  in  the  army
or  the  navy.  He  published  a  "  Life  of  John  Brain-
erd, the  Brother  of  David  Brainerd,  and  his  Suc-
cessor as  Missionary  to  the  Indians  of  New  Jersey"
(Philadelphia,  1866),  and  numerous  sermons  and
tracts.  He  was  also  a  frequent  contributor  to  the
magazines.  See  "Memoir  of  Thomas  Brainerd,"
by  Mary  Brainerd  (Philadelphia,  1870).

BRAINERD,  Lawrence,  senator,  b.  in  1794;
d.  in  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  9  May,  1870.  He  was  active
in  forwarding  the  political,  commercial,  and  rail-
road interests  of  Vermont,  and  was  for  several
years  candidate  for  governor.  After  the  death  of
Senator  Upham,  Mr.  Brainerd  was  chosen  to  the
senate  as  a  free-soiler  for  the  remainder  of  the  term,
serving  from  5  Dec,  1854,  till  3  March,  1855.

BRAMAN,  Benjamin,  microscopist,  b.  in  Nor-
ton, Mass.,  23  Nov.,  1831.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1854,  and  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary in  1859,  after  which  he  was  acting  pastor  at
Shutesbury,  Mass.,  and  in  1862-'3  principal  of  an
academy  in  Westport,  Mass.  During  1863-4  he
was  teaching  at  Astoria,  and  after  that  date  taught
drawing  in  the  Cooper  Union  and  elsewhere  in
New  York.  He  is  a  skilful  microscopist,  and  from
its  first  issue  has  edited  the  "  Journal  of  the  New
York  Microscopical  Society,"  of  which  organiza-
tion he  has  some  time  been  president.

BRAMLETTE,  Thomas  E.,  governor  of  Ken-
tucky, b.  in  Cumberland  co.,  Ky.,  3  Jan.,  1817 ;  d.
in  Louisville,  Ky.,  12  Jan.,  1875.  He  was  educated
in  the  schools  of  his  native  county,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1837,  became  attorney  for  the  state  in
1848,  and  in  1850  resigned,  to  devote  himself  to
his  private  practice.  In  1856  he  was  chosen  judge
of  the  sixth  judicial  district,  and  in  1861  resigned
and  entered  the  national  army.  He  raised  the
3d  Kentucky  infantry,  and  became  its  colonel.
He  was  elected  governor  of  his  state,  as  a  union
man,  in  1863,  and,  by  re-election,  remained  in  office
until  1867,  and  afterward  was  a  successful  lawyer
in  Louisville.  He  was  also  U.  S.  district  attorney
for  some  time.

BRANCH,  Charles  James,  clergyman,  b.  in
Barbadoes  in  1834.  He  was  educat'ed  at  Codring-
ton  college,  of  that  place ;  was  appointed  curate  of
St.  Simon's,  Barbadoes,  in  1857 ;  rector  of  St.  An-
drew's, Grenada,  in  1864 ;  rector  of  St.  John's,  St.
Croix,  in  1866 ;  and  archdeacon  of  Antigua  in  1879.
On  25  July,  1882,  he  was  consecrated  bishop-coad-
jutor of  Antigua,  in  the  chapel  of  Lambeth  palace.

BRANCH,  John,  secretary  of  the  navy,  b.  in
Halifax,  N.  C,  4  Nov.,  1782;  d.  in  Enfield,  N.  C,
4  Jan.,  1863.  After  graduation  at  the  university
of  North  Carolina  in  1801,  he  studied  law,  became
judge  of  the  superior  court,  and  was  a  state  sena-
tor from  1811  till  1817,  in  1822,  and  again  in  1834.
He  was  elected  governor  of  his  state  in  1817,  and
from  1823  till  1829  was  U.  S.  senator,  resigning  in
the  latter  year,  when  he  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  navy  by  President  Jackson.  He  held  this
office  till  1831,  when  the  cabinet  broke  up,  more
on  account  of  social  than  political  dissensions,  as
was  commonly  thought.  A  letter  from  Sec.
Branch  on  the  subject  is  published  in  Niles's
"  Register  "  (vol,  xli,).  Judge  Branch  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  democrat  in  1831.  In  1838  he
was  defeated  as  democratic  candidate  for  governor
of  his  state,  and  in  1844-'5  was  governor  of  the


territory  of  Florida,  serving  until  the  election  of  a
governor  under  the  state  Constitution, — His  son,
Lawrence  O'Brien,  soldier,  b.  in  Halifax  co.,  n!
C,  7  July,  1820 ;  killed  at  Antietam,  17  Sept.,  18G2J
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1838,  studied  law'
and  began  practice  at  Raleigh.  He  was  chosen  to
congress  for  three  successive  terms,  serving  from
3  Dec,  1855,  till  3  March,  1861.  After  the  seces-
sion of  his  state  in  May,  1861,  he  entered  the  con-
federate army,  and  became  a  brigadier-general  in
November  of  that  year.  He  commanded  at  New-
bern,  N.  C,  when  it  was  captured  by  Burnside,
and  afterward  took  part  in  several  battles  in  that
state  and  on  the  peninsula.

BRANCH,  Mary  Lydia  Bolles,  author,  b.  in
New  London,  Conn.,  13  June,  1840.  Her  maiden
name  was  Bolles.  She  was  educated  at  the  New
London  high  school  and  at  L.  F.  Emerson's  school
in  Boston,  where  she  was  graduated  in  1860.  She
was  assistant  editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Saturday
Evening  Post "  for  a  short  time  in  1865,  and  has
written  much  for  periodicals,  principally  stories
and  poems  for  young  people.  Her  best-known
poem  is  "  The  Petrified  Fern."  She  married  John
S.  Branch,  a  lawyer  in  New  York  citv,

BRANCIFORTE,  Miguel  de  la  Grua  Tala-
manca  (bran-the-for'tay),  marquis  of,  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  Sicily,  Italy,  about  the  middle  of  the
18th  century.  He  belonged  to  the  family  of  the
Sicilian  princes  Carini,  and  served  in  the  body-
guards of  both  Charles  III.  and  Charles  IV.  After
he  had  reached  the  rank  of  lieutenant-general  in
the  Spanish  army  he  was  appointed  governor  of
the  Canary  islands,  and  subsequently  viceroy  of
New  Spain,  and  as  such  was  received  in  Mexico
in  July,  1794.  He  promoted  public  works  and  in-
dustries, but  was  not  liked  by  the  people  on  ac-
count of  his  intrigues  against  his  predecessor,  the
count  of  Revillagigedo,  a  very  popular  man  in
Mexico.  He  was  finally  replaced  by  Azanza  on  31
May,  1798.  During  the  French  invasion  (1808-'14)
he  joined  the  Napoleonic  party,  and  for  this  cause
his  property  in  Mexico  was  confiscated  by  order  of
the  viceroy.  Archbishop  Lizana.

BRANBRETH,  Benjamin,  physician,  b.  in
Leeds,  England,  9  Jan.,  1807 ;  d,  in  Sing  Sing,  N.Y.,
19  Feb.,  1880,  He  was  a  grandson  of  Dr,  William
Brandreth,  introducer  of  Brandreth's  pills.  Com-
ing to  the  United  States  in  1835,  he  established  a
laboratory  in  Sing  Sing,  N.  Y.  In  1874  he  presented
to  Dr.  Robert  S.  Newton  and  his  associates  the  build-
ing used  by  the  eclectic  medical  college  of  New  York.
BRANDT,  Carl  Ludwig,  artist,  b.  near  Ham-
burg, in  Holstein,  Germany,  22  Sept.,  1831.  His
father  and  grandfather  were  eminent  physicians  in
Hamburg.  His  father  taught  him  drawing  at  the
age  of  seven,  and  he  subsequently  studied  in  the
principal  galleries  of  Europe.  He  served  in  the  war
of  1848-50,  between  Germany  and  Denmark,  and
came  to  the  United  States  in  1852,  He  painted
several  portraits  previous  to  1864,  and  in  that  year
built  his  studio  in  Hastings-on-Hudson,  N.  Y.,  but
lived  in  Europe  from  1865  till  1869.  He  was  chosen
a  national  academician  in  1872,  and  in  1883  was
elected  director  of  the  "  Telfair  Academy  of  Arts
and  Sciences,"  Savannah,  Ga.,  where  he  resides  m
winter.  Among  his  works  are  "  A  Dish  of  Alpme
Strawberries  " ;  " The  Fortune-Teller  "  (1869) ;  "lie-
turn  from  the  Alps  "  (1874) ;  "  Monte  Rosa  at  bun-
rise  " ;  "  Bay  of  Naples  during  Eruption  of  v  esu-
vius  in  1867";  "Etna  from  Taurinino,  Sicily  ;
"Resignation";  and  "The  Golden  Treasiu-es  of
Mexico."  The  numerous  portraits  painted  smee
his  return  from  Europe  include  likenesses  of  Jobn
Jacob  Astor  the  elder ;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  William  li.


BRANNAN


BRANT


359


Astor;  Dr.  John  W.  Draper:  Greorge  S.  Appleton;
Gen.  Henry  R.  Jackson ;  and  a  full-length  figure
of  his  wife.  The  last  was  shown  at  the  academy
•exhibition  of  1882  and  the  international  exposition
at  Munich  in  1883.  Dr.  F.  Pecht,  in  his  "  Modern
Art  at  the  International  Exhibition,"  says  of  it :
■"  The  most  skilful  of  all  these  ladies'  portraits  is
the  one  in  full  figure  by  Carl  L.  Brandt,  in  fact,  a
most  charming  picture,  a  masterpiece  good  enough
for  a  Netcher."  Mr.  Brandt  has  also  done  some
work  as  a  sculptor,  and  has  nearly  ready  (1886)  a
colossal  bust  of  Humboldt.

BRANNAN,  John  Milton,  soldier,  b.  in  the
District  of  Columbia  in  1819.  He  was  graduated
«,t  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841,  and  served
at  Plattsburg,  N.  Y.,  during  the  border  disturb-
ances of  1841-2,  and  in  the  Mexican  war  as  first
lieutenant  of  the  1st  artillery.  He  was  at  Vera
€ruz,  Cerro  Gordo,  La  Hoya,  Contreras,  and  Churu-
busco,  and  for  his  conduct  in  the  two  actions  last
named  was  brevetted  captain,  20  Aug.,  1847.  On
13  Sept.  he  was  severely  wounded  at  the  Belen
gate  in  the  assault  on  the  city  of  Mexico.  After
this  he  served  on  garrison  duty  in  various  forts,
and  against  the  Seminoles  in  1856-'8.  On  28
Sept.,  1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, commanded  the  department  of  Key  West,
Fla.,  in  1862,  and  served  in  the  department  of  the
South  from  June,  1862,  till  24  Jan.,  1863.  During
this  time  he  commanded  the  St.  John's  river  expe-
dition of  25  Sept.,  1862,  receiving  the  brevet  of
lieutenant-colonel  for  his  services  at  the  battle  of
Jacksonville,  was  engaged  at  Pocotaligo,  S.  C,  24
Oct.,  1862,  and  twice  temporarily  commanded  the
department.  In  the  Tennessee  campaign  of  1863
he  was  engaged  at  Hoover's  Gap,  Tullahoma,  Elk
River,  and  Chickamauga,  winning  two  brevets.
From  10  Oct.,  1863,  till  25  June,  1865,  he  was  chief
of  artillery  of  the  department  of  the  Cumberland,
and  was  engaged  at  Chattanooga  until  May,  1864,
in  arranging  the  armament  of  its  defences.  He
-was  in  the  battle  of  Missionary  Ridge,  23-25  Nov.,
1863,  and  from  4  May  till  1  Oct.,  1864,  took  part
in  the  Georgia  campaign,  being  engaged  at  Resa-
<3a,  Dallas,  Kenesaw  Mountain,  and  the  siege  and
surrender  of  Atlanta.  On  23  Jan.,  1865,  he  was
brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  on  13
March,  1865,  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  regular  army  for  his  services  at  Atlanta,
and  that  of  major-general  for  his  services  during  the
war.  In  1870  he  commanded  the  troops  at  Ogdens-
burg  at  the  time  of  the  threatened  Fenian  raids
into  Canada,  and  in  1877  at  Philadelphia  during
the  railroad  riots.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the
4th  artillery,  15  March,  1881,  and  was  retired  from
active  service  on  19  April,  1882.

BRANNAN,  Samuel,  pioneer,  b.  in  Saco,  Me.,
in  1819.  In  his  youth  he  was  an  editor  and  printer,
and  gained  some  notoriety  as  editor  of  Mormon
journals.  He  was  an  elder  in  that  church,  and
arrived  in  San  Francisco  in  July,  1846,  as  leader
of  the  Mormon  colony  sent  out  in  the  ship  "  Brook-
lyn "  from  New  York.  The  colonists  were  disap-
pointed on  their  arrival  to  find  the  country  already
a,  part  of  the  United  States,  by  virtue  of  Sloat's
proclamation  of  7  July,  1846 ;  but  they  soon  forgot
their  vexation  and  entered  enthusiastically  upon
the  business  of  the  new  American  community.  Mr.
Brannan  began  the  publication  of  a  newspaper,
the  "  Star,"  the  second  in  California  and  the  first
published  in  the  San  Francisco  district.  Mean-
^yhile  he  preached  every  Sunday,  took  part  in  po-
litical controversies,  and  did  whatever  he  could  as
editor  to  bring  California  into  notice  at  the  east.
The  gold  discovery  in  1848  brought him  great


wealth,  but  led  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Mormon
community  in  California,  and  thus  a  little  later  to
Brannan's  apostasy  from  the  Mormon  church,  an
event  that  followed  directly  upon  a  quarrel  with
Brigham  Young  and  the  other  Utah  leaders.  In
San  Francisco  Mr.  Brannan  owned  large  tracts  of
land,  and  so  had  much  influence  upon  the  early
development  of  the  city.  In  Sacramento  he  was
also  a  large  land-owner  and  a  partner  in  several
great  mercantile  enterprises.  He  was  prominent
in  1850  in  the  efforts  to  suppress  the  squatter
movement  at  that  place,  and  he  took  part  on  the
side  of  the  law  during  the  squatter  riots  of  that  year.
In  1851,  however,  he  was  prominent  in  the  extra-
legal popular  movement  against  crime  in  San  Fran-
cisco, publicly  advocating,  as  was  his  wont  when
excited,  the  most  violent  measures  against  male-
factors. He  offered  the  use  of  his  own  place
of  business  as  the  headquarters  of  the  vigilance
committee  of  June,  1851,  and  was  one  of  the  ex-
ecutive leaders  of  the  committee  itself,  being  es-
pecially forward  in  addressing  public  assemblages
and  in  assisting  to  conduct  the  few  public  execu-
tions that  the  committee  ordered.  In  1859  Mr.
Brannan  purchased  a  great  estate  at  Calistoga,
north  of  San  Francisco  bay,  and  acquired  an  ex-
tensive reputation  in  connection  with  the  further
development  of  that  region.  Later  he  aided  the
Mexicans  with  money  and  supplies  in  their  strug-
gle against  Maximilian,  and  in  1880  he  received  a
grant  of  lands  in  Sonora.  A  colonization  scheme
resulting  from  this  grant  has  not  succeeded.

BRANNAN,  William  Penn,  painter,  d.  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio.  9  Aug.,  1866.  He  settled  in  Cincinnati
about  1840,  and  became  known  as  a  portrait-painter
of  ability,  but  through  indolence  failed  to  turn  his
talents  to  account.  About  1860  he  began  to  con-
tribute to  the  daily  press,  writing  under  various
assumed  names,  but  most  commonly  under  that
of  "  Vandyke  Brown."  His  published  works  are
"  Vagaries  of  Vandyke  Brown  "  (Cincinnati,  1865),
and  "  The  Harp  of  a  Thousand  Strings,  or  Laughter
for  a  Lifetime."

BRANT,  Joseph  (Thayendanegea),  Mohawk
chief,  b.  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio  in  1742  ;  d.  at
the  old  Brant  mansion,  Wellington  square,  Canada,
24  Nov.,  1807.  His  father  was  a  full-blooded  Mo-
hawk of  the  Wolf  tribe  and  a  son  of  one  of  the  five
sachems  that  excited  so  much  attention  at  the
court  of  Queen  Anne  in  1710.  Brant  was  a  favorite
of  Sir  William  Johnson's,  by  whom  he  Avas  sent  for
a  year  to  the  "  Moor  charity  school,"  then  under
the  charge  of  Dr.  Eleazar  Wheelock,  and  which
subsequently  became  Dartmouth  college.  He  was
present  at  the  battle  of  Lake  George  in  1755  when
but  thirteen  years  of  age,  accompanied  Sir  William
Johnson  during  the  Niagara  campaign  in  1759,
and  acquitted  himself  with  distinguished  bravery.
He  was  in  Pontiac's  war  in  1763,  and  when,  in
1774,  Guy  Johnson  succeeded  to  the  superintend-
ency  of  Indian  affairs  on  the  death  of  his  uncle,
Sir  William,  the  former  pupil  of  Dr.  Wheelock  was
made  his  secretary.  During  the  revolutionary  war,
under  a  colonel's  commission,  he  was  constantly
employed  by  Gov.  Carleton  in  fierce  raids  against
the  colonists,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  mas-
sacre at  Cherry  Valley  and  in  the  one  that  deso-
lated Minisink  in  July,  1779.  He  also  led  a  clan
of  the  Hurons  and  a  few  of  the  Six  Nations  in  the
expedition  of  Col.  St.  Leger  against  Fort  Stanwix,
and  bore  a  prominent  part  in  the  battle  of  Oriska-
ny,  6  Aug.,  1779.  After  the  war  his  great  influ-
ence with  the  different  Indian  tribes  was  thrown
on  the  side  of  peace,  and  in  July,  1793,  at  the  so-
licitation of  Washington  and  Clinton,  he  visited


360


BRASHER


BRATTON


J^i/./^r^^^^^


the  Miarais  and  materially  assisted  the  Indian
commissioners  in  securing  a  treaty  of  peace  be-
tween that  tribe  and  the  United  States.  During
the  latter  years  of  his  life  he  was  a  consistent  be-
liever in  evangel-
ical Christianity.
He  visited  Eng-
land in  1786  and
raised  the  funds
with  which  the  1st
Episcopal  church
in  Upper  Canada
was  built.  He
translated  the  gos-
pel of  St.  Mark
into  the  Mohawk
language,  and,  to-
gether with  Col.
Daniel  Claus,  ren-
dered into  the
same  tongue  the
"  Book  of  Com-
mon Prayer."  Asa
warrior  he  was  cau-
tious, sagacious,
and  brave;  as  a  dip-
lomat and  courtier,
adroit  and  accom-
^  ^ plished ;  and  as  a

fy  ) friend, chivalrous

and  faithful.  His
humanity  toward  a  captive  or  a  fallen  foe  is  too
well  established  to  admit  of  doubt,  nor  has  the
purity  of  his  private  morals  ever  been  questioned.
A  monument  to  his  memory,  the  main  feature  of
which  is  a  statue  of  heroic  size,  was  unveiled  at
Brantford,  Canada,  13  Oct.,  1886. — His  son,  John,
b.  27  Sept.,  1794 ;  d.  in  September,  1832,  served  on
the  British  side  with  distinction  in  the  war  of  1812,
and  was  a  member  of  the  Canadian  parliament  in
1832.— Catherine  Brant  Johns,  b.  in  1800 ;  d.  in
Wellington  square,  Canada,  in  1867,  was  the  last
survivor  of  Brant's  children. — The  Canadian  gov-
ernment in  1886  gave  to  an  association  thirteen
bronze  cannon  for  a  statue  to  Brant's  memory.
See  "  Life  of  Joseph  Brant,"  by  William  L.  Stone
(1838 ;  new  ed.,  Albany,  1865).

BRASHER,  Abraham,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  2  Dec,  1734;  d.  in  exile  in  1782.  He  was  one
of  the  most  active  associates  of  the  "  liberty  boys  "
of  his  native  city,  and  wrote  many  of  the  popular
ballads  of  the  revolutionary  period.  Among  his
poetical  productions  were  "Another  New  Year's
Address  "  and  the  "  General's  Trip  to  Morristown,"
which  were  favorites  in  the  American  camp.

BRASSEUR  1)E  BOURBOURG,  Charles  ^ti-
enne,  French  explorer,  b.  in  Bourbourg,  8  Sept.,
1814 ;  d.  in  Nice,  in  January,  1874.  He  studied  for
the  priesthood  at  Ghent,  was  ordained  at  Rome  in
1845,  and  became  professor  of  ecclesiastical  history
in  the  seminary  at  Quebec.  In  1846  he  was  ap-
pointed vicar-general  at  Boston.  From  1848  till
1863  he  was  engaged  in  explorations  in  the  United
States,  and  in  Mexico  and  Central  America. A

f)art  of  the  time  he  acted  as  chaplani  to  the  French
egation  in  Mexico,  and  for  a  time  devoted  himself
to  teaching  the  Indians  in  Guatemala.  In  1864  he
returned  to  Mexico  as  archaeologist  to  the  French
scientific  expedition.  During  his  self-sacrificing
labors  as  a  missionary  among  the  Central  Amer-
ican races  he  studied  for  years  their  various  dia-
lects, and  applied  his  mind  to  the  problem  of  the
ancient  Aztec  hieroglyphics.  In  November,  1863,
he  wrote  a  letter  from  Spain  to  M.  de  Quatrefages,
published  in  the  "Bulletin"  of  the  French  geo-


graphical society  for  March,  1864,  announcing  his
discovery,  in  the  archives  of  Madrid,  of  the  alpha-
bets of  the  inscriptions  on  the  Aztec  monuments
of  Central  America. These  alphabets,  which  are

Shonetic,  enabled  him,  with  the  aid  of  the  "  Codex
[exicanus ''  and  documents  contained  in  the  Dres-
den library,  to  decipher  several  words.  His  dis-
covery of  a  key  to  the  picture-writing  is  still  a
matter  of  doubt,  although  no  one  has  acquired  a
sufficient  acquaintance  with  the  Indian  languages
to  test  it  critically.  In  1857-9  he  published  an
account  of  Aztec  civilization  under  the  title  of
"  Histoire  des  nations  civilisees  du  Mexique  et  de
I'Amerique  Centrale  avant  Christophe  Colomb.'*
His  philological  researches  into  Central  American
languages  are  contained  in  "  Collection  de  docu-
n\ents  dans  les  langues  indigenes  pour  servir  k
I'etude  de  I'histoire  et  de  la  philologie  de  I'Ame-
rique ancienne"  (4  vols.,  1861-8).  In  the  third
volume,  which  relates  to  Yucatan,  is  an  inquiry  as
to  whether  there  are  sources  of  the  primitive  his-
tory of  Mexico  in  the  Egyptian  monuments,  and
of  the  primitive  history  of  the  Old  World  in  the
American  monuments.  His  illustrated  "  Monu-
ments anciens  du  Mexique"  was  published  in
1864-'6  under  the  auspices  of  the  French  govern-
ment. He  has  also  published  "  Histoire  du  Canada,
de  son  eglise,"  etc.  (1852),  and  two  novels,  "  La
derniere  vestale"  (1839)  and  "Le  khalife  de  Bag-
dad "  (1853).  His  later  works  include  "  Voyage
sur  I'isthme  de  Tehuantepec  "  (1860) ;  "  Manuserit
Troano,  etude  sur  le  systeme  graphique  et  la  langue
des  Indiens  Mayas  "  (2  vols.,  1869-70) ;  and  "  Bib-
liotheque  Mexico-Guatemalienne  "  (1871).

BRATTLE,  Thomas,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  5  Sept.,  1657 ;  d.  there,  18  May,  1713.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1676,  and  became
treasurer  of  the  college.  He  wrote  "  Eclipse  of  the
Sun  and  Moon  observed  in  New  England,"  pub-
lished in  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions "  for
1704;  "Lunar  Eclipse,  New  England,  1707";  and
a  private  letter  giving  an  account  of  the  witch-
craft delusion  in  1692,  which  is  preserved  in
the  "  Massachusetts  Historical  Collections." — His
brother,  William,  was  pastor  of  the  church  in
Cambridge,  having  been  previously  a  tutor  in  Har-
vard college.  He  published  a  treatise  on  logic  enti-
tled "  Compendium  logicae  secundum  Principia  D.
Renati  Cartesii,"  which  was  long  used  as  a  reci-
tation-book in  the  college.  His  death,  at  the  age
of  fifty-four,  occurred  on  15  Feb.,  1717.— William,
son  of  William,  loyalist,  b.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,
about  1702 ;  d.  in  Halifax,  Nova  Scotia,  in  October,
1776.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1722,  stud-
ied theology,  and  preached  acceptably ;  then  became
a  lawyer,  and  was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the
legislature  and  of  the  governor's  council.  He  also
practised  medicine  extensively,  and  was  besides  a
military  man,  becoming  captain  of  the  artillery
company  in  1733,  and  afterward  major-general  of
militia.  His  talents  and  attractive  manners  made
him  a  favorite  with  the  governor,  and  popular
among  the  people.  When  the  revolutionary  war
began,  his  attachment  to  Gen.  Gage  impelled  him
to  side  with  the  British.  He  withdrew  to  Boston,
and,  when  the  troops  evacuated  that  city,  accom-
panied them  to  Halifax.  The  family  is  commemo-
rated by  a  well-known  street  in  Boston.

BRATTON,  Martlia,  patriot,  b.  in  Rowan  cc,
N.  C. ;  d.  near  Yorkville,  S.  C,  in  1816.  Her  hus-
band, William  Bratton,  was  a  colonel  in  the  revo-
lutionary army.  In  June,  1780,  a  party  of  British
cavalry  under  Capt.  Huck  called  at  her  house,  and
vainly,  though  with  threats  of  death,  tried  to  ob-
tain information  as  to  her  husband's  whereabouts.


BRAVO


BRAXTON


361


Even  when  a  reaping-hook  was  held  to  her  throat
her  mien  was  bold  and  fearless.  On  that  same
evening  Col.  Bratton  arrived  with  seventy-five
men,  and,  taking  the  royalists  by  surprise,  totally
defeated  them.  Mrs.  Bratton  received  the  wounded
of  both  sides,  and  showed  them  impartial  atten-
tion. Just  before  the  fall  of  Charleston,  Grov.  Rut-
ledge  intrusted  to  Mrs.  Bratton's  care  a  quantity
of  powder,  and  she  blew  it  up  when  it  was  in
danger  of  being  captured  by  the  British.

BRAVO,  Nicolas  (brah'-vo),  Mexican  soldier,  b.
in  Chilpancingo  about  1790 ;  d.  there,  23  April,  1854.
He  took  part  in  the  first  revolution  in  1810,  served
in  all  the  actions  till  1814,  and  fought  under  Father
Morelos  at  Acapulco.  Having  joined  Mina's  party
in  1817,  he  was  imprisoned  in  Mexico  till  1820.  He
was  a  zealous  supporter  of  the  emperor  Iturbide,
and  became  a  member  of  the  regency  that  exer-
cised the  supreme  power  for  forty  days  in  1822;
but  he  contributed  to  the  deposition  of  the  em-
peror in  1823,  and  was  a  member  of  the  provisional
government  with  Gens.  Victoria  and  Negrete  till
1824.  In  December,  1827,  he  headed  a  revolt
against  President  Bustamante,  being  at  the  time
vice-president,  which  office  he  held  till  April,  1829.
In  1830  he  commanded  against  the  insurgents
under  Gruerrero,  who  was  captured  and  executed
by  Bravo's  order,  17  Feb.,  1831.  In  1839  he  be-
came president  of  the  council,  and  in  1842-3  held
the  supreme  power  for  a  few  months  as  substitute
of  Santa  Anna,  who  was  absent  with  the  army ;
and  he  was  again  temporary  president  from  29
July  till  4  Aug.,  1846,  when  he  was  deposed  by  a
revolution.  During  the  war  with  the  United  States
he  participated  in  the  battle  of  Cerro  Gordo  ;  and
toward  the  end  of  1853,  being  accused  by  Santa
Anna's  ministry  of  having  secretly  joined  the  in-
surrection headed  by  Juan  Alvarez,  he  denied  the
accusation  and  retired  from  public  life.  His
death  was  sudden  and  suspicious.

BRAXTON,  Carter,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Newington,  King  and  Queen
CO.,  Va.,  10  Sept.,  1736 ;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  10
Oct.,  1797.  He  inherited  a  large  estate  in  land  and
slaves  from  his  father  and  grandfather,  was  edu-
cated at  William
and  Mary  col-
lege, and  mar-
ried, at  the  age
of  nineteen,  a
wealthy  heiress
named  Judith
Robinson,  who
died  two  years
later,  leaving  two
daughters.  Af-
ter spending  two
or  three  years  in
England,  he  mar-
ried Elizabeth
Corbin, daugh-

of  customs,  and
lived  in  great  splendor  in  richly  furnished  man-
sions on  two  of  his  plantations.  He  entered  the
house  of  burgesses  about  1761,  and  in  1765  sup-
ported Patrick  Henry's  stamp-act  resolutions  with
vigor.  He  was  a  member  of  the  subsequent  legis-
latures that  were  dissolved  by  the  governor,  and  of
the  Virginia  convention  of  1769.  In  the  assembly
elected  in  place  of  the  one  dissolved  by  Lord
Botetourt  in  1769,  Mr.  Braxton  was  appointed  on
three  of  the  six  standing  committees.  After  its
dissolution  by  Lord  Dunmore,  12  Oct.,  1771,  he


was  not  elected  to  the  next  assembly  because  the
office  that  he  held  of  high  sheriff  of  the  county
made  him  ineligible.  But  he  was  the  representa-
tive from  King  William  co.  in  the  convention  that
met  in  Williamsburg  in  Aug.,  1774,  after  Lord
Dunmore's  dissolution  of  the  new  assembly,  and  in
that  body  he  recommended  a  general  congress  of
the  colonies.  The  convention  agreed  to  make
common  cause  with  Boston,  and  to  break  off  com-
mercial intercourse  with  the  mother  country.  On
reassembling,  20  March,  1775,  it  adopted  measures
for  the  defence  of  the  country,  and  for  the  encour-
agement of  the  domestic  production  of  textiles,
iron,  and  gunpowder.  When  Lord  Dunmore,  on
20  April,  1775,  caused  the  powder  belonging  to  the
colony  to  be  removed  to  a  British  vessel  in  James
river,  and  when  Patrick  Henry  alone,  of  the  lead-
ers of  the  militia  who  flew  to  arms  in  consequence
of  this  act,  refused  to  disband  his  troops  and  in-
sisted upon  making  reprisals  on  the  king's  property
sufficient  to  cover  the  value  of  the  powder,  Mr,
Braxton  interceded  and  obtained  from  his  father-
in-law,  the  receiver-general,  a  bill  on  Philadelphia
for  the  amount  of  Henry's  demand,  whereupon  the
latter  dismissed  his  men,  and  bloodshed  was  for
the  time  averted.  Braxton  was  chosen  a  member
of  the  last  house  of  burgesses,  which  was  elected
immediately  after  the  dissolution  in  May,  1774,
and  convened  on  1  June,  1775.  He  was  a  member
of  the  general  convention  that,  after  the  flight  of
the  governor  on  7  June,  was  convened  in  Rich-
mond on  17  July,  1775,  and,  assuming  the  powers  of
the  executive  and  the  legislature,  passed  acts  for
the  organization  of  the  militia  and  minute-men.
He  was  one  of  the  eleven  members  of  the  commit-
tee of  safety  appointed  by  that  body.  Peyton
Randolph,  delegate  to  the  continental  congress
from  Virginia,  and  the  first  president  of  that  body,
died  in  Oct.,  1775,  and  when  the  convention  reas-
sembled, on  1  Dec,  in  Richmond,  and  afterward
in  Williamsburg,  Mr.  Braxton  was  chosen,  on  15
Dec,  1775,  to  succeed  the  deceased  representative.
He  affixed  his  name  to  the  Declaration  of  Inde-
pendence on  4  July,  1776,  but,  in  consequence  of  a
resolve  passed  by  the  Virginia  convention  on  20
June,  1776,  reducing  the  number  of  delegates  from
Virginia  in  the  general  congress  from  seven  to
five,  he  ceased,  on  11  Aug.,  1776,  to  be  a  member  of
the  congress.  His  "  Address  to  the  Convention  of
Virginia  on  the  Subject  of  Government "  (Phila-
delphia, 1776)  contained  sentiments  not  relished  by
the  more  eager  patriots.  His  popularity  was,  how-
ever, not  so  much  impaired  but  that  he  was  elected
to  succeed  William  Aylett  (who  resigned  to  join
the  army)  in  the  general  convention,  and  in  virtue
of  that  election  he  became  a  member  of  the  first
house  of  delegates  under  the  constitution.  He
was  chairman  of  the  committee  of  religion,  made
the  reports  of  the  committee  of  grievances  and
propositions,  and  was  a  member  of  the  committee
of  trade,  and  of  important  special  committees.  He
was  a  member  of  the  house  of  delegates  in  1777,
1779,  1780,  1781,  1783,  and  1785.  In  the  latter
year  he  supported  Jefferson's  act  for  the  freedom
of  religion.  In  January,  1786,  he  was  appointed  a
member  of  the  privy  council,  or  council  of  state,
and  remained  in  that  office  till  30  March,  1791.
He  then  returned  to  the  legislature  as  member
for  Henrico  co.,  having  removed  to  Richmond  in
1786.  In  1793  he  was  again  appointed  by  the  gen-
eral assembly  a  member  of  the  executive  council,
and  continued  to  serve  until  his  death.  The  great
fortune  that  he  inherited  he  risked  in  extensive
commercial  enterprises,  and  during  the  revolu-
tionary  war his  vessels  were captured by  the


362


BRAY


BRAYMAN


enemy,  the  debts  due  him  became  worthless  on  ac-
count of  the  depreciation  of  the  currency,  and  he
was  involved  in  endless  litigation  and  intermina-
ble pecuniary  embarrassments,  into  which  his  sons-
in-law  and  other  friends  were  also  drawn.

BRAY,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Marton,
Shropshire,  England,  in  1656;  d.  in  London,  15
Feb,,  1730.  He  took  his  bachelor's  degree  at  Ox-
ford in  1678,  and  through  the  patronage  of  Lord
Digby,  who  heard  him  preach  an  assize  sermon,
was  given  the  vicarage  of  Over-Whiteacre,  and  in
1690  the  rectory  of  Sheldon.  He  published  a  vol-
ume of  "  Catechetical  Lectures "  that  made  him
well  known.  About  1691  the  colonial  government
of  Maryland  determined  to  divide  the  province
into  parishes,  and  to  maintain  regular  ministers  in
each  parish.  In  1695  the  governor  requested  Dr.
Compton,  bishop  of  London,  to  send  over  a  clergy-
man to  fill  the  Judicial  office  of  commissary-gen-
eral. Bishop  Compton  recommended  Bray,  who
accepted  the  post,  but  remained  in  England  in  or-
der to  facilitate  the  enactment  of  a  law  establish-
ing the  English  church  in  Maryland.  Meanwhile
he  sought  for  missionaries  to  take  over  with  him ;
and  as  only  poor  men,  unable  to  buy  books,  vol-
unteered, he  made  it  a  condition  of  his  own  going
that  the  bishops  should  assist  in  supplying  pa-
rochial libraries.  He  projected  a  scheme  for  sup-
plying parish  libraries  in  England  as  well  as  in
America,  which  was  eventually  so  far  successful
that  he  saw  eighty  established  before  he  died,  be-
sides the  American  libraries  and  others  in  foreign
countries.  In  J^Torth  America  thirty-nine  were  es-
tablished through  his  efforts.  The  first  one  was
founded  in  Annapolis  with  the  aid  of  a  liberal  con-
tribution from  Princess  Anne,  in  return  for  the
compliment  of  naming  after  her  the  new  capital
of  Maryland.  He  afterward  proposed  a  plan  for  a
Protestant  congreg&tion pro  propaganda  Jide,  which
resulted  in  1698  in  the  formation  of  the  society  for
promoting  Christian  knowledge.  Successive  acts
of  parliament  for  the  establishment  of  the  church
of  England  in  Maryland  were  passed  in  1692  and
1694 ;  but  in  1695  they  were  repealed  because  they
met  with  strong  opposition  from  Roman  Catholics
and  Quakers.  In  1696  a  new  law  was  passed ;  but,
owing  to  opposition,  it  was  not  signed  by  the  king,
and  in  1699  was  annulled  by  an  order  in  council,
on  the  ground  that  it  declared  all  the  laws  of  Eng-
land to  be  in  force  in  the  province  of  Maryland.
Dr.  Bray  then  determined  to  go  to  Maryland  and
effect  the  passage  of  a  new  law  by  the  legislature.
On  20  Dec,  1699,  he  set  sail  and  arrived  in  Mary-
land on  12  March,  1700.  He  called  a  convention
of  the  clergy  of  the  western  shore,  and  made  his

Sarochial  visitation.  When  the  assembly  met  in
[ay  the  desired  act  of  religion  was  passed.  It  was
thought  advisable  for  him  to  return  with  the  bill
to  England,  in  order  to  resist  the  opposition  to  it,
and  secure,  if  possible,  the  royal  sanction.  He
reached  England  again  early  in  1701,  and  there
found  a  powerful  Quaker  interest  enlisted  to  de-
feat the  establishment  of  the  state  church  in  the
colony ;  but  he  was  successful  in  overcoming  the
opposition  and  obtaining  the  king's  approval  for
an  established  maintenance  of  the  Maryland
clergy.  In  June,  1701,  he  obtained  a  charter  for
the  incorporation  of  a  separate  society  for  propa-

fating  the  gospel  in  British  plantations.  In  1706
e  accepted  the  living  of  St.  Bartolph,  Aldgate,
which  he  had  before  refused  in  order  to  go  to
America.  In  1709  an  act  was  passed  by  parlia-
ment providing  for  the  better  preservation  of  pa-
rochial libraries  in  England.  When  attacked  by
a  dangerous  illness  in  1723,  Dr.  Bray  named  sev-


eral persons  who  should  carry  on  his  work  after
him.  They  were  called  Dr.  Bray's  associates  for
founding  clerical  libraries  and  supporting  negro
schools,  which  association,  with  its  fund,  still  ex-
ists, and  publishes  annual  reports,  each  of  which  is
accompanied  by  a  memoir  of  Bray.  He  was  as
active  and  original  in  his  parish  ministrations
as  in  his  other  undertakings.  He  became  inter-
ested in  the  prisoners  in  Whitechapel  prison,  and,
coming  into  relations  with  Gov.  Oglethorpe,  he
added,  at  the  latter's  suggestion,  to  the  two  ob-
jects of  his  society  the  third  one  of  establishing  a
colony  in  America  to  provide  homes  for  the  needy
and  unemployed.  Of  Dr.  Bray's  "  Course  of  Lec-
tures upon  the  Church  Catechism,"  intended  to
be  in  four  volumes,  only  one,  "  Upon  the  Pre-
liminary Questions  and  Answers,"  was  published
(Oxford,  1696).  In  1697  he  issued  "An  Essay
toward  promoting  all  Necessary  and  Useful
Knowledge,  both  Divine  and  Human,  in  all  Parts
of  his  Majesty's  Dominions,"  and  another  book,
relating  to  his  library  project,  entitled  "Biblio-
theca  Parochialis,  or  a  Scheme  of  such  Theological
Heads  as  are  Requisite  to  be  studied  by  every
Pastor  of  a  Parish."  In  1700  and  1701  he  pub-
lished two  circular  letters  to  the  clergy  of  Mary-
land :  "  A  Memorial  on  the  Present  State  of  Relig-
ion on  the  Continent  of  North  America "  and
"■  Acts  of  Visitation  at  Annapolis."  In  1702  ap-
peared "Bibliotheca  Catechetica,  or  the  Country
Curate's  Library."  In  1708  he  issued  a  sermon  en-
titled "  For  God  or  Satan,"  and  in  1712  an  anti-
papal  publication  entitled  "A  Martyrology,  or
History  of  the  Papal  Usurpation,"  consisting  of
treatises  of  celebrated  authors  digested  into  a  regu-
lar history,  only  one  volume  of  which  was  pub-
lished during  his  lifetime.  In  1726  he  issued  the
"  Directorium  Missionarium,"  followed  by  "  Pri-
mordia  Bibliothecaria,"  containing  lists  for  pa-
rochial libraries  and  a  plan  for  their  gradual  en-
largement. He  published  also  a  "Life  of  Mr.
John  Rawlet."  Dr.  Bray,  in  prosecuting  his  phil-
anthropic schemes,  sacrificed  his  private  interests,
refusing  valuable  livings  in  order  to  carry  them
out;  but  he  was  aided  in  the  execution  of  the
projects  by  munificent  donations.  See  "Public
Spirit  illustrated  in  the  Life  and  Designs  of  Dr.
Bray  "  (1746) ;  "  An  Account  of  the  Designs  of  the
Associates  of  the  late  Dr.  Bray"  (1769);  Ander-
son's "  History  of  the  Colonial  Church  " ;  and  the
annual  reports  of  the  association  of  the  late  Rev.
Dr.  Bray  and  his  associates.

BRAYMAN,  Mason,  soldier,  b.  in  Buffalo,  N.
Y.,  23  May,  1813.  He  was  brought  up  as  a  fanner,
but  became  a  printer,  edited  the  Buffalo  "  Bulle-
tin "  in  1834-'5,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1836.  In  1837  he  removed  to  the  west,
was  city  attorney  in  Monroe,  Mich.,  in  1838,  and
became  editor  of  the  Louisville  "Advertiser,"  in
1841.  In  1842  he  opened  a  law-office  in  Spring-
field, 111.  The  year  following  he  was  appointed  a
special  commissioner  to  adjust  Mormon  troubles,
and  in  1845-'6  acted  as  special  attorney  to  prose-
cute offences  growing  out  of  the  Mormon  difficul-
ties, and  to  negotiate  a  peace  between  the  followers
of  Joseph  Smith  and  their  enemies  in  Nauvoo.  In
1844-'5  he  revised  and  published  the  statutes  of
Illinois  under  the  appointment  of  the  governor
and  the  authority  of  the  legislature.  He  afterward
became  interested  in  railroad  enterprises.  He  was
attorney  of  the  Illinois  Central  railroad  in  18ol-'5,
and  then  president  and  organizer  of  railroads  ni
Missouri  and  Arkansas  till  the  beginning  of  the
war.  In  1861  he  joined  the  volunteer  army  as
major  of  the  29th  Illinois  regiment,  of  which  he


BRAYTON


BRECK


363


became  colonel  in  May,  1862,  having  been  pro-
moted for  meritorious  conduct  at  Pittsburg,  Tenn.
He  acted  for  some  time  as  chief  of  staff  and  assist-
ant adjutant-general  to  Gen.  McClernand,  and  was
engaged  at  the  battles  of  Belmont,  Fort  Donelson,
and  Shiloh.  On  24  Sept.,  1862,  he  was  promoted
brigadier-general  of  vokmteers  for  bravery  in  ac-
tion, and  at  the  close  of  the  war  received  the  brevet
of  major-general.  He  commanded  the  U.  S.  forces
at  Bolivar,  Tenn.,  from  November,  1862,  to  June,
1868,  and  repelled  Van  Dorn's  attack  on  that  place.
He  afterward  reorganized  about  sixty  Ohio  regi-
ments at  Camp  Dennison,  Ohio,  was  president  of  a
court  of  inquiry  to  investigate  Gen.  Sturgis's  con-
duct, commanded  at  Natchez,  Mississippi,  from
July,  1864,  to  the  spring  of  1865,  and  then  presided
over  a  commission  in  New  Orleans  to  examine  and
report  upon  southern  claims  against  the  govern-
ment. After  the  war  he  was  engaged  for  several
years  in  reviving  railroad  enterprises  in  the  south,
edited  the  "Illinois  State  Journal"  in  1872-'3,
removed  to  Wisconsin  in  the  latter  year,  was  ap-
pointed governor  of  the  territory  of  Idaho  in  1876,
served  a  term  of  four  years,  and  then  returned
to  Wisconsin  and  practised  law  in  Ripon.

BRAYTON,  Samuel  Nelson,  physician,  b.  in
Queensbury,  Warren  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  Jan.,  1839.  Af-
ter graduation  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York  city,  in  1861,  he  entered  the
navy  as  an  assistant  surgeon,  served  on  board  the
monitor  "Montauk"  during  her  numerous  con-
tests with  the  enemy,  and  was  afterward  for  two
years  in  the  Pacific.  He  then  resigned  from  the
navy  and  engaged  in  business  in  New  York  city.
He  partly  adopted  the  homoeopathic  system  of
medicine  in  1868,  but  continued  to  use  the  meth-
ods of  practice  of  the  old  school  to  a  considerable
extent.  He  engaged  in  practice  in  Honeoye  Falls,
N.  Y.,  removed  to  Buffalo  in  1877,  and  became
professor  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine
in  the  Buffalo  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons
upon  its  establishment,  and  dean  of  the  faculty  in
1881.  He  is  also  editor  of  the  "  Eclectic  Physicians'
and  Surgeons'  Investigator,"  a  monthly  homoeo-
pathic journal,  published  in  Buffalo.

BREARLEY,  David,  jurist,  b.  near  Trenton,
N.  J.,  11  June,  1745;  d.  in  Trenton.  16  Aug.,  1790.
He  studied  law,  and  practised  in  Allentown,  N.  J.,
early  took  part  in  the  controversy  of  the  colo-
nies with  Great  Britain,  and  was  arrested  for  high
treason,  but  was  set  free  by  a  mob  of  his  fellov/-
citizens.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  convention
to  frame  a  constitution  prior  to  1781,  and  an  offi-
cer in  the  revolutionary  army,  being  lieutenant-
colonel,  at  first  in  the  4th  battalion  of  the  2d
establishment,  and,  subsequent  to  January,  1777,
in^the  1st  New  Jersey  regiment.  On  1*0  June,
1779,  he  was  elected  chief  justice  of  New  Jersey,
resigning  in  1789,  when  he  was  appointed  U.  S.
district  judge.  In  the  constitutional  convention
of  1787  he  protested  vehemently  against  an  un-
equal representation  of  the  states,  and  opposed  the
joint  ballot  of  the  two  houses  of  congress,  on  the
ground  that  it  impaired  the  power  of  the  small
states.  He  presided  over  the  state  convention  that
ratified  the  federal  constitution,  and  was  one  of
the  presidential  electors  in  1788.  In  the  federal
convention  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of
eleven  selected  to  decide  on  the  length  of  tenure
and  powers  of  the  president.  Judge  Brearley  was
one  of  the  compilers  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
prayer-book  of  1785.— His  brother,  Joseph,  was  a
soldiCT  of  the  revolution,  who  was  promoted  major
in  1777,  and  served  through  the  war  without  com-
pensation as  aide  to  Gen.  Washington.


BREATHITT,  John,  governor  of  Kentucky,
b.  near  New  London,  Va.,  9  Sept.,  1786 ;  d.  in  Frank-
fort, Ky.,  21  Feb.,  1834.  He  removed  with  his
father  to  Kentucky  in  1800,  was  a  surveyor  and
teacher,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1810.  He  was  an  earnest  Jacksonian  democrat,
and  for  several  years  was  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture. He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Kentucky  in
1828-'32,  and  governor  in  1832-'4.

BR^BEUF,  Jean  de,  French  missionary,  b.  in
Bayeux,  25  March,  1593  ;  killed  in  the  Huron
country,  16  March,  1649.  He  accompanied  Cham-
plain  as  a  Jesuit  missionary  to  Canada  in  1626,
and  established  himself  among  the  Hurons,  ac-
quiring their  language,  and  exercising  a  paternal
influence  over  them.  He  was  carried  as  a  prisoner
to  England  in  1629,  but  returned  in  1632  to  the
Huron  country,  and  extended  his  missionary  labors
to  the  Neuter  Indians  on  Niagara  river.  In  1634
he  penetrated,  with  Daniel,  another  Jesuit,  to  the
vicinity  of  Lake  Huron.  The  two  Christian  vil-
lages of  St.  Louis  and  St.  Ignatius  were  founded,
followed  by  St.  Mary's  on  the  Wye  river  and  other
stations.  In  the  war  between  the  Hurons  and  the
Iroquois  the  town  of  St.  Louis,  where  Father  Br6-
beuf  resided,  was  captured  by  the  Iroquois  in  1649.
He  and  his  companion  Lallemand  might  have  es-
caped, but  remained  with  their  converts  and  were
tortured  to  death.  They  were  covered  with  pine
bark  full  of  pitch,  and  burned  on  a  scaffold.  Bt6-
beuf  s  skull  is  said  to  be  preserved  at  the  convent
of  the  hospital  nuns  in  Montreal,  in  the  pedestal
of  a  silver  bust.  His  translation  into  the  Huron
tongue  of  Ledesma's  catechism  was  printed  at  the
end  of  Champlain's  "  Voyages,"  and  is  the  earliest
specimen  of  the  Indian  idioms  of  Canada.  His
account  of  the  Hurons  in  the  Jesuit  "  Relations  "
of  1635  and  1636,  embracing  a  treatise  on  their
language,  was  translated  by  Albert  Gallatin  and
published  in  the  memoirs  of  the  American  anti-
quarian society.  Some  of  the  letters  of  Pere  Bre-
beuf  were  issued  by  Carayon  (Paris,  1870).

BRECK,  James  Lloyd,  clergyman,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 27  June,  1818;  d.  in  Benicia,  Cal.,  30
March,  1876.  His  early  education  was  received  in
the  public  schools.  He  studied  for  three  years  un-
der the  tuition  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Muhlenberg  at
Flushing,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1838,  and  at  the  general  theological
seminary.  New  York,  in  1841,  joining  the  same
year  with  two  of  his  classmates,  William  Adams
and  John  H.  Hobart,  in  the  formation  of  an  asso-
ciate mission  for  work  in  the  west.  A  visit  from
Bishop  Kemper  decided  the  young  men  to  go  to
Wisconsin,  and  soon  after  their  arrival  at  Nasho-
tah  in  September  the  associate  mission  was  fully
organized  by  the  choice  of  the  Rev.  Richard  F.
Cadle,  an  army  chaplain  stationed  at  Fort  Craw-
ford, Wis.,  as  prior,  a  designation  somewhat  for-
eign to  the  tenets  and  discipline  of  the  Episcopal
church.  At  the  end  of  the  year,  however.  Prior
Cadle,  who  -was  also  called  "father,"  severed  his
connection  with  the  mission,  and  Mr.  Breck  was
left  with  his  original  associates  to  prosecute  the
work.  In  the  summer  of  1842  a  tract  of  460  acres
on  the  borders  of  Nashotah  lakes  was  purchased
and  the  foundation  for  Nashotah  theological  semi-
nary laid  by  receiving  students  in  divinity.  The
seminary  did  not  prove  altogether  a  success,  vari-
ous causes  contributing  to  this  result,  probably  not
the  least  important  being  the  strictness  of  the  regu-
lations and  their  rigorous  application  to  the  stu-
dents. In  1850  Mr.  Breck  left  Nashotah,  and  in
1851  went  to  Minnesota,  where  he  founded,  at
Crow  Wing  and  elsewhere,  the  mission  work  among


364


BRECK


BRECKENRIDGE


the  Chippewa  Indians  which  has  since  assumed  im-
portance in  the  church.  In  1858  he  established  at
Faribault,  Minn,  (since  the  centre  of  church  work
in  that  diocese),  its  schools  for  both  sexes  and  its
divinity  school.  He  next  turned  his  attention  to
California,  and  in  1867  went  there  with  the  inten-
tion of  founding  similar  institutions.  At  the  head
of  an  associate  mission  he  landed  in  that  state  in
May,  and,  locating  at  Benicia,  founded  St.  Augus-
tine's college  and  grammar  school  with  a  divinity
school  attached.  This  having  been  established  and
given  over  to  a  board  of  trustees,  he  next  founded  a
school  for  young  ladies,  St.  Mary's  hall ;  but  while
in  the  midst  of  this  successful  work  he  died.

BRECK,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  25  July,  1713;
d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  23  April,  1784.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1730,  and  was  minister  of
Springfield  from  26  July,  1736,  till  his  death.  His
learning  was  extensive,  and  his  views  on  the  doc-
trine of  the  atonement  so  liberal  that  a  contro-
versy arose  over  his  settlement.  A  narrative  re-
lating to  his  ordination  was  published,  followed  by
an  "  Answer  to  the  Hampshire  Narrative,"  and  a
"Letter  to- the  Author  of  the  Narrative."  He
published  funeral  sermons  on  the  Rev.  D.  Parsons
(1781)  and  the  Rev.  S.  Williams  (1782),  and  a  cen-
tury sermon  on  the  burning  of  Springfield  by  the
Indians,  16  Oct.,  1675. — His  father,  the  Rev.
Robert  Breck,  who  died  6  Jan.,  1731,  at  the  age
of  forty-eight,  was  minister  of  Marlborough,  and
was  a  man  of  great  learning.  Before  his  settlement
in  Marlborough,  on  25  Oct.,  1704,  he  preached  on
Long  Island  and  asserted  the  rights  of  the  non-con-
formists during  the  administration  of  Gov.  Corn-
bury  with  such  boldness  as  to  provoke  serious
threats  and  ill-treatment.

BRECK,  Samuel,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston,  17
July,  1771 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  1  Sept.,  1862.  The
family  removed  to  Pennsylvania  in  1792.  He  was
educated  at  a  military  college  in  France,  and  after
his  return  became  a  merchant  in  Philadelphia.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature
for  many  years,  and  was  elected  as  a  federalist  to
the  18th  congress,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1823,  till
3  March,  1825.  He  published  a  historical  sketch  of
continental  paper-money  in  1843,  and  several  his-
torical addresses.  See  "  Memoir  of  Samuel  Breck,"
by  J.  F.  Fisher  (Philadelphia,  1863).— His  brother,
Daniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Topsfield,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,  1788 ;
d.  in  1871.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1812,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  Richmond,  Ky.,  in  1814.  He
became  Judge  of  the  Richmond  co.  court,  was
a  member  of  the  Kentucky  house  of  representa-
tives in  1824-'9;  president  of  the  Richmond  branch
of  the  state  bank,  1835-43 ;  a  judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  Kentucky,  1843-9 ;  and  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative from  Kentucky  in  the  31st  congress,
serving  from  3  Dec,  1849,  till  3  March,  1851,  after
which  he  again  became  president  of  the  Richmond
bank. — Their  father,  the  Rev.  Daniel  Breck  (who
died  in  Rutland,  Vt.,  at  the  age  of  ninety-seven,
in  December,  1845),  accompanied  Porter's  regiment
to  Canada  as  chaplain,  and  was  present  at  the  at-
tack on  Quebec

BRECK,  Samuel,  soldier,  b,  in  Middleborough,
Plymouth  co..  Mass.,  25  Feb.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,  and
served  in  the  Florida  war  of  1855-6,  was  assistant
professor  of  geography,  history,  and  ethics  in  the
military  academy  in  1860-'l,  and  served  in  the
civil  war  as  assistant  adjutant-general  of  Gen.
McDowell's  division  in  the  beginning  of  1862,  and
afterward  of  the  1st  army  corps,  and  of  the  depart-
ment of  the  Rappahannock,  being  engaged  in  the


occupation  of  Fredericksburg  and  the  Shenandoah
valley  expedition,  and  from  2  July,  1862,  till  5  June
1870,  was  assistant  in  the  adjutant-general's  depart-
ment at  Washington,  in  charge  of  rolls,  returns
and  the  preparation  of  the  "  Volunteer  Army  Reg-
ister." He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  for
faithful  services,  on  13  March,  1865.  From  1870  till
1877  he  was  stationed  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and
from  24  Dec,  1877,  served  as  assistant  in  the  adju-
tant-general's office  at  Washington,  and  at  depart-
mental headquarters  in  California,  New  York,
Minnesota,  and  Nebraska.

BRECKEN,  Frederick  de  St.  Croix,  Canadi-
an statesman,  b.  in  Charlottetown,  Prince  Edward
Island,  9  Dec,  1828.  He  was  educated  at  the  cen-
tral academy  in  Charlottetown,  was  attorney-gen-
eral and  advocate-general.  Prince  Edward  Island,
from  April,  1859,  till  January,  1863,  and  from  Sep-
tember, 1870,  till  1872  was  a  member  of  the  execu-
tive council  and  attorney-general.  He  was  reap-
pointed in  April,  1873,  and  held  office  until  Au-
gust, 1876.  He  was  first  elected  to  the  legislature
of  Prince  Edward  Island,  for  the  city  of  Charlotte-
town, in  1863,  and  was  returned  for  the  dominion
parliament  in  1878. He  is  a  conservative.

BRECKENRIDGE,  James,  lawyer,  b.  near
Fincastle,  Botetourt  co.,  Va.,  7  March,  1763;  d.  in
Fincastle,  9  Aug.,  1846.  He  was  a  grandson  of  a
Scottish  covenanter,  who  escaped  to  America  on
the  restoration  of  the  Stuarts.  James  served,  in
1781,  in  Col.  Preston's  rifle  regiment  under  Greene,
was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  college  in
1785,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the*  bar  in  1787,
and  began  practice  in  Fincastle.  He  was  for  sev-
eral years  a  member  of  the  general  assembly  of
Virginia,  and  a  leader  of  the  old  federal  party  in
that  body,  and  from  22  May,  1809,  till  3  March,
1817,  represented  the  Botetourt  district  in  congress.
He  was  a  candidate  for  governor  against  James
Monroe.  He  co-operated  with  Thomas  Jefferson  in
founding  the  university  of  Virginia,  and  was  one
of  the  most  active  promoters  of  the  Chesapeake
and  Ohio  canal. — His  brother,  John,  statesman,
b.  in  Augusta  CO.,  Va.,  2  Dec,  1760;  d.  in  Lexing-
ton, Ky.,  14  Dec,  1806,  while  a  student  in  the
college  of  William  and  Mary,  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen, he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  house  of  dele-
gates in  1780.  The  house  set  aside  the  election,  as
well  as  the  next  election,  when  he  was  again  re-
turned ;  but  after  he  was  chosen  a  third  time  he
took  his  seat.  He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1785,  then  removed  to  Albemarle
CO.,  and  began  practice  in  Charlottesville,  where
he  became  intimate  with  Jefferson,  Monroe,  and
Madison.  In  December,  1793,  he  was  elected  to  the
3d  congress,  but  did  not  take  his  se^t.  The  same
year  he  removed  to  Kentucky,  settled  on  the  farm
called  Cabell's  Dale,  near  Lexington,  and  opened
a  law-office  in  that  city,  devoting  himself  for  many
years  to  the  adjustment  of  the  conflicting  land-
titles  in  Kentucky,  growing  out  of  the  careless
methods  of  making  surveys  and  land-grants  pur-
sued by  Virginia.  On  19  Dec,  1795,  he  was  ap-
pointed attorney-general  of  the  new  state,  and
from  1797  till  1800  he  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature, serving  as  speaker  in  his  third  and  last
term.  In  1794  he  was  the  democratic  candidate
for  senator ;  but  Humphrey  Marshall  was  elected
by  a  narrow  federalist  majority.  In  the  summer
of  1798,  after  the  passage  of  the  alien  and  sedition
laws,  he  met  Jefferson  and  Nicholas  at  Monticello,
and  there  the  famous  Kentucky  resolutions  ot
1798  were  drafted  bv  Breckenridge,  as  is  asserted
bv  his  friends,  although  Jefferson  claimed  the  au-
thorship in  a  letter  written  in  1821. The  reso-


BRECKENRIDGE


BRECKENRIDGE


365


lutions  were  brought  forward  in  the  Kentucky-
legislature  by  Breckenridge,  and  were  carried  with
only  one  dissenting  voice,  10  Nov.,  1798.  These
resolutions,  clearly  formulating  the  principles  of
the  strict  constructionists,  were  condemned  and
declared  to  be  fraught  with  danger  by  the  legis-
latures of  the  federalist  states  to  which  they  were
sent.  In  reply  to  this  action,  Breckenridge  drew
up  the  resolutions  adopted  by  the  Kentucky  legis-
lature in  1799,  in  which  the  doctrines  of  state
sovereignity  and  nullification  were  more  boldly
enunciated.  In  1801  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.
senate,  and  served  from  7  Dec,  1801,  till  25  Dec,
1805.  when  he  resigned  to  accept  the  office  of
attorney-general  conferred  upon  him  by  Jefterson
in  August.  In  the  senate  he  at  once  took  the  place
of  leader  on  the  democratic  side  and  chief  spokes-
man for  the  administration.  He  introduced  the
act  of  1802,  by  which  the  judiciary  law  of  1801,
creating  new  circuit  judges,  was  repealed,  and  in
the  brilliant  debate  over  this  measure  he  took  a
distinguished  part.  He  led  the  senate  in  the  busi-
ness relating  to  the  acquisition  of  Louisiana,  and
moved  the  ratification  of  the  treaty,  the  enabling
act  giving  authority  to  the  president  to  occupy
the  ceded  territory,  and  the  bills  connected  with
the  occupation.  Mr.  Jefferson  was  of  opinion  that
an  amendment  to  the  constitution  was  necessary
before  the  government  could  acquire  territory,  and
wished  Breckenridge  to  move  an  amendment  for
the  annexation  of  Louisiana;  but  the  latter  de-
clined. He  took  his  seat  in  the  cabinet  as  attor-
ney-general on  25  Dec,  1805,  but  died  of  typhus
fever  while  in  office.  A  collection  of  his  speeches
has  been  published. — John,  clergyman,  son  of
John,  b.  at  Cabell's  Dale,  near  Lexington,  Ky.,
4  July,  1797;  d.  there,  4  Aug.,  1841,  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1818,  united  with  the  Pres-
byterian church  while  in  college,  and  chose  the
clerical  profession,  although  his  father  had  intend-
ed him  for  the  law.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1822  by  the  presbytery  of  New  Brunswick,  and
in  1822-3  served  as  chaplain  to  congress.  On  10
Sept.,  1823,  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  church  in
Lexington,  Ky.,  over  which  he  presided  four  years.
While  there  he  founded  a  religious  newspaper
called  the  "  Western  Luminary."  In  1826  he  was
called  to  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  of  Balti-
more as  colleague  of  Dr.  Glendy,  and  in  1831  he
removed  to  Philadelphia,  having  been  appointed
secretary  and  general  agent  of  the  Presbyterian
board  of  education.  This  place  he  resigned  in  1836,
to  become  professor  of  theology  in  the  Princeton
seminary.  While  occupying  that  chair  he  engaged
in  a  public  controversy  with  Archbishop  Hughes,
of  New  York,  on  the  subject  of  the  doctrines  of
their  respective  churches,  and  their  arguments
have  been  published  in  a  volume  entitled  "  A  Dis-
cussion of  the  Question,  '  Is  the  Roman  Catholic
Religion,  in  any  or  in  all  its  Principles  or  Doc-
trines, inimical  to  Civil  or  Religious  Liberty  f ' —
and  of  the  Question, '  Is  the  Presbyterian  Religion,
in  any  or  all  its  Principles  or  Doctrines,  inimical  to
Civil  or  Religious  Liberty?'"  (Philadelphia,  1836).
Mr.  Breckenridge  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
controversies  in  the  Presbyterian  church,  uphold-
ing, in  the  discussions  in  presbyteries,  synods,  and
general  assemblies,  the  principles  of  old-school
Presbyterianism,  and  published  a  number  of  po-
lemical writings.  He  was  a  keen  debater,  and  was
noted  for  his  concise,  accurate,  and  logical  extem-
pore speeches  and  sermons.  He  became  secretary
and  general  agent  of  the  Presbyterian  board  of
foreign  missions  upon  its  organization  in  1838,  and
devoted  his  energies  to  superintending  its  opera-


tions until  he  broke  down  under  his  exhaustive
labors,  and  died  while  on  a  visit  to  his  early  home.
Just  before  his  death  he  received  a  call  to  the  presi-
dency of  Oglethorpe  university  in  Georgia.  In
1839  he  published  a  "  Memorial  of  Mrs.  Brecken-
ridge."— Another  son,  Robert  Jefferson,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Cabell's  Dale,  Ky.,  8  March,  1800;  d.
in  Danville,  27  Dec,  1871,  studied  at  Princeton,
Yale,  and  Union  colleges  successively,  graduat-
ing at  Union  in  1819,  read  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  his  native  state  in  1823,  and  practised
eight  years.  For  four  successive  years  he  was  a
member  of  the  legislature.  In  1829  he  made  a
profession  of  religion,  and  determined  to  be  a
preacher.  As  a  politician  he  had  advocated  the
emancipation  of  the  slaves,  and  when  the  public
sentiment  of  his  state  turned  in  favor  of  slavery,
he  was  the  more  inclined  to  abandon  the  political
career.  After  studying  theology  privately,  he  was
licensed  to  preach  in  1832,  and  soon  afterward  be-
came pastor  of  the  2d  Presbyterian  church  of  Bal-
timore, in  which  place  he  remained  thirteen  years.
In  1845  he  was  elected  president  of  Jefferson  col-
lege, Pa.,  and  at  the  same  time  took  charge  of  a
Presbyterian  church  in  a  neighboring  village.  After
two  years  in  the  presidency  of  the  college,  he  re-
moved to  Lexington,  Ky.,  where  he  became  pastor
of  the  1st  Presbyterian  church,  and  also  superin-
tendent of  public  instruction  for  the  state.  He  was
the  principal  author  of  the  public-school  system  of
Kentucky.  In  1853  he  was  elected  professor  of  di-
dactic and  polemic  theology  in  the  new  theological
seminary  at  Danville,  which  chair  he  held  until  his
death.  He  published  "  Travels  in  France,  Germany,"
etc.  (Philadelphia,  1839) ;  a  volume  on  "  Popery,"
in  1841 ;  "  Memoranda  of  Foreign  Travel "  (Balti-
more, 1845) ;  the  "  Internal  Evidence  of  Christian-
ity," in  1852 ;  and  "  The  Knowledge  of  God  Ob-
jectively Considered  "  (New  York,  1857),  followed
by  "  The  Knowledge  of  God  Subjectively  Con-
sidered," two  parts  of  an  elaborate  work  on  theol-
ogy as  a  science  of  positive  truth.  While  in
Baltimore  he  edited  a  "Literary  and  Religious
Magazine  "  and  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Nineteenth  Cen-
tury," in  which  he  carried  on  discussions  with  the
Roman  Catholics  on  questions  of  theology  and  his-
tory. He  also  edited  at  Danville,  Ky.,  while  pro-
fessor there,  the  "  Danville  Review,"  in  which  he
not  only  defended  his  theological  views,  but  gave
utterance  to  his  patriotic  sentiments  during  the
war.  In  the  discussions  and  controversies  that
preceded  the  disruption  of  the  Presbyterian  church
he  was  the  champion  of  the  old-school  party.  He
was  largely  instrumental  in  actuating  the  mana-
gers of  the  American  Bible  society  to  recede  from
their  resolution  to  adopt  the  revised  version  of  the
Bible.  Previous  to  the  civil  war  he  had  been  in-
clined to  conservatism,  though  disposed  to  depre-
cate slavery ;  but  when  the  war  came  he  was  from
the  first  intensely  loyal,  though  one  of  his  sons,
and  his  nephew,  John  C.  Breckinridge,  went  over
to  the  confederacy.  He  presided  over  the  National
republican  convention  at  Baltimore  in  1864,  which
renominated  Mr.  Lincoln  for  the  presidency. — His
son,  William  Campbell  Preston,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  28  Aug.,  1837,  was  graduated  at  Centre
college,  Danville,  Ky.,  in  1855,  entered  the  con-
federate army  as  a  captain  in  1861,  became  colonel
of  the  9th  Kentucky  cavalry,  commanded  the  Ken-
tucky cavalry  brigade  when  it  surrendered,  was  an
editor  for  two  years,  afterward  professor  of  equity
jurisprudence  in  Cumberland  university,  Tennes-
see, and  in  1884  was  elected  as  a  democrat,  with-
out opposition,  to  the  U.  S.  house  of  representa-
tives from  Kentucky. — Another  son,  Joseph  Ca-


366


BRECKINRIDGE


■ BREESE


bell,  soldier,  b.  in  Baltimore,  14  Jan.,  1843,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1860,
and  volunteered  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  August,  1861.
He  was  engaged  in  the  campaigns  in  Kentucky  and
Tennessee,  ending  with  the  advance  on  Corinth,
was  appointed  second  lieutenant  in  the  2d  artillery
in  April,  1862,  for  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Mill
Spring,  promoted  first  lieutenant  in  August,  1863,
and  served  in  Florida,  and  then  through  the  At-
lanta campaign  with  his  battery  until  July,  1864,
when  he  was  taken  prisoner  before  Atlanta,  Ga.
In  September  following  he  was  released,  and  was
on  mustering,  staff,  and  recruiting  duty  during
the  remainder  of  the  civil  war.  He  was  promoted
captain,  17  June,  1874.  On  19  Jan.,  1881,  he  was
transferred  to  the  inspector-general's  department
with  the  rank  of  major,  promoted  lieutenant-colo-
nel in  that  department,  5  Feb.,  1885,  and  colonel
22  Sept.  the  same  year.

BRECKINRIDGE,  John  Cabell,  vice-presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  b.  near  Lexington,  Ky.,
21  Jan.,  1821 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  17  May,  1875.
He  was  a  grandson  of  John  Breckenridge,  U.  S.
senator  and  attorney-general,  was  educated  at
Centre  college,  Danville,  studied  law  at  the  Tran-
sylvania institute,  and,  after  a  short  residence  in
Burlington,  Iowa,  settled  at  Lexington,  where  he

practised  his
profession  with
success.  At  the
beginning  of
the  war  with
Mexico,  in  1847,
he  was  elect-
ed major  in
a  regiment  of
Kentucky  vol-
unteers, and
while  on  duty
in  Mexico  he
was  employed
by  Gen.  Pillow
as  his  counsel
in  his  litigation
with  his  asso-
ciates and  su-
periors. On  his
return,  he  was
elected  to  the  Kentucky  house  of  representatives.
In  1851  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and  was  re-
elected in  1853.  He  declined  the  Spanish  mis-
sion tendered  him  by  President  Pierce.  In  the
presidential  election  of  1856  he  was  chosen  vice-
president  of  the  United  States,  with  Mr.  Bu-
chanan as  president.  In  1860  he  was  the  candi-
date for  president  as  the  representative  of  the
slave-holding  interest,  nominated  by  the  southern
delegates  of  the  democratic  convention  who  sep-
arated, from  those  that  supported  Stephen  A.
Douglas.  In  the  electoral  college  he  received  72
votes,  to  180  cast  for  Lincoln,  39  for  Bell,  and  12
for  Douglas,  all  the  southern  states  voting  for
him  excepting  Virginia,  Kentucky,  Tennessee,  and
Missouri.  In  the  same  year  he  was  elected  U.  S.
senator  as  the  successor  of  John  J.  Crittenden,
and  took  his  seat  in  March,  1861.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war  he  defended  the  southern
confederacy  in  the  senate,  soon  afterward  went
south,  entered  the  Confederate  army,  and  was  ex-
pelled from  the  senate  on  4  Dec,  1861.  On  5
Aug.  of  the  following  summer  he  was  appointed  a
major-general.  He  commanded  the  Confederate
reserve  at  Shiloh,  6  April,  1862 ;  was  repelled  in
the  attack  on  Baton  Rouge  in  August,  1862 ;  com-
manded the  right  wing  of  Bragg's  army  at  Mur-


^y//^n.  C-y^^:-^^^'^^^<-


freesboro,  31  Dec,  1862 ;  was  at  Chickamauga,  19
and  20  Sept.,  1863 ;  and  Chattanooga,  25  Nov.,
1863 ;  defeated  Gen.  Sigel  near  Newmarket,  13
May,  1864 ;  then  joined  Gen.  Lee's  army,  and  was
at  the  battle  of  Cold  Harboi-,  3  June,  1864 ;  com-
manded a  corps  under  Early,  and  was  defeated  by
Gen.  Sheridan  in  the  Shenandoah  valley  in  Sep'-
tember,  1864;  defeated  Gen.  Gillem  in  east  Ten-
nessee, 12  Nov.,  1864 ;  and.  was  in  the  battle  near
Nashville,  15  Dec,  1864.  He  was  secretary  of
war  in  Jefferson  Davis's  cabinet  from  January,
1865,  till  the  surrender  of  Gen.  Joseph  E.  John-
ston in  April.  He  left  Richmond  for  Charlotte,
N.  C,  with  Mr.  Davis  and  the  other  officers  of  the
Confederate  government,  and,  after  it  was  decided
to  abandon  the  contest,  left  the  party  at  Washing-
ton, Ga.,  made  his  escape  to  the  Florida  Keys,  and
thence  embarked  for  Cuba,  and  sailed  from  Havana
for  Europe.  He  returned  in  1868  determined  to
take  no  further  part  in  politics,  and  to  devote  him-
self to  his  profession.  As  vice-president  he  was
the  youngest  man  that  had  ever  held  that  office.

BREE,  Herbert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Keswick,
Cumberland,  England,  in  January,  1828.  He  was
educated  at  Bury  school,  and  Cains  college,  Cam-
bridge, from  which  he  was  graduated  in  1853.
After  serving  the  curacies  of  Drinkstone  and  Wol-
verstone,  he  was  collated  to  the  rectory  of  Hark-
stead  in  1858.  He  was  curate  of  Long  Melford
from  1865  till  1870.  when  he  was  appointed  to  the
rectory  of  Brampton,  Huntingdonshire,  which
charge  he  retained  until  1  May,  1882,  when  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Barbadoes.

BREEN,  Henry  Heg-art,  author,  b.  in  Kerry,
Ireland,  in  1805.  He  was  educated  in  Paris,  settled
in  the  West  Indies  in  1829,  and  in  1833  was  ap-
pointed secretary  of  the  courts  of  justice  in  St.
Lucia,  where  French  was  the  official  language.  In
1857-'61  he  was  administrator  of  the  government
of  St.  Lucia.  He  has  published  "  St.  Lucia,  His-
torical, Statistical,  and  Descriptive  "  (1844) ;  "  The
Diamond  Rock,  and  other  Poems  "  (1849) ;  "  Mod-
em English  Literature,  its  Blemishes  and  Defects  "
(1857) ;  and  "  Warrawarra,  the  Carib  Chief,  a  Tale
of  1770  "  (1876).

BREEN,  Patrick,  pioneer,  b.  in  Ireland ;  d.,
at  an  advanced  age,  in  California,  in  1868.  He  is
especially  noted  in  connection  with  the  Donner
party,  who,  during  the  winter  of  1846-7,  were
snowed  in  in  the  Sierras.  Breen  himself  finally
escaped  with  all  his  family,  after  great  suffering.
He  kept  a  diary  during  the  time  of  the  imprison-
ment of  the  party  in  the  mountains,  and  this  is  the
only  contemporary  record  of  their  remarkable  and
tragic  experiences.  The  manuscript  of  the  diary
is  still  extant,  and  more  or  less  extensive  extracts
from  it  are  to  be  found  in  all  the  published  ac-
counts of  the  Donner  party.

BREESE,  Kidder  Randolph,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  14  April,  1831 ;  d.  13  Sept.,  1881.
He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  from  Rhode
Island  in  1846,  and  served  during  the  Mexican
war  in  the  "  Saratoga,"  Commander  Farragut,  on
the  coast  of  Mexico.  As  passed  midshipman  he
served  in  Com.  Perry's  Japan  expedition  and  was
on  the  "  Macedonian,"  which  visited  the  northern
end  of  Formosa  to  search  for  coal  and  inquire  into
the  captivity  of  Americans  on  that  island.  He  also
served  in  Preble's  Paraguay  expedition,  from
which  he  returned  in  September,  1859,  with  isth-
mus fever.  He  next  served  on  the  "  San  Jacinto,"
which  captured  1,500  slaves  on  the  coast  of  Africa,
and  took  Mason  and  Slidell  from  on  board  the
"  Trent "  in  November,  1861.  He  was  ordered  to
Porter's  mortar  flotilla  in  December, 1861,  and


BREESE


BRENT


367


took  part  in  the  attacks  on  New  Orleans  and
Vicksburg  in  1862.  Promoted  lieutenant  -  com-
mander, on  16  July,  1862,  at  the  time  of  the  estab-
lishment of  that  grade,  he  joined  Porter's  Mississippi
squadron  in  October,  1862,  took  command  of  the
flag-ship  "  Black  Hawk,"  and  participated  in  the
important  operations  in  the  Mississippi  and  the
Red  river.  When  Admiral  Porter  was  placed  in
command  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron in  September,  1864,  he  selected  Breese  as  his
fleet-captain,  in  which  capacity  he  served  until
hostilities  came  to  an  end  in  May,  1865.  Pie  was
engaged  at  the  Eort  Fisher  fights  and  in  the  at-
tack on  Fort  Anderson ;  and  in  the  naval  assault
on  Fort  Fisher,  on  15  Jan.,  1865,  he  commanded
the  storming  party,  which  gained  the  parapet,  but
was  unable  to  maintain  the  position,  owing  to  lack
of  support  from  the  marines.  He  was  recom-
mended for  promotion  for  services  on  that  oc-
casion, promoted  commander  25  July,  1866,  and
captain,  9  Aug.,  1874.  After  the  war  he  was  em-
ployed in  the  testing  of  breech-loading  arms,  and
in  other  ordnance  duties,  and  commanded  the
"  Plymouth,"  of  the  European  squadron,  and  after-
ward the  "  Pensacola."

IIREESE,  Samuel  Living'ston,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  in  1794;  d.  at  Mount  Airy,  Pa.,
17  Dec,  1870.  He  was  appointed  a  midshipman,
10  Sept.,  1810,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of
Lake  Charaplain,  received  his  commission  as  lieu-
tenant, 27  April,  1816,  as  captain,  8  Sept.,  1841,
and  commanded  the  frigate  "  Cumberland,"  of  the
Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1845.  He  was  in  the
Pacific  during  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  present
at  the  capture  of  Tuspan  and  Tobasco,  and  of
Vera  Cruz.  In  1853-'5  he  was  commandant  of
the  Norfolk  navy -yard,  in  1856-'8  command-
ed the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  in  1859-61
the  Brooklyn  navyryard.  On  16  July,  1862,  he
was  commissioned  as  commodore  and  placed  on
the  retired  list,  and  on  3  Sept.,  1862,  was  made  a
rear-admiral  on  the  retired  list.  He  served  in
1862  as  light-house  inspector,  and  in  1869  was
port-admiral  at  Philadelphia.

BREESE,  Sidney,  jurist,  b.  in  Whitesboro,  N.
Y.,  15  July,  1800;  d.  in  Pinckneyville,  111.,  27
June,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in  1818,
removed  to  Illinois,  and  in  1821  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  became  assistant  secretary  of  state,
and  was  state  attorney  from  1822  till  1827,  when
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  attorney  for  Illinois.  In
1829  he  published  the  first  volume  of  supreme
court  reports  in  that  state.  He  served  in  the
Black  Hawk  war  as  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  volun-
teers. In  1835  he  was  elected  a  circuit  judge,  and
in  1841  to  the  supreme  court.  From  1843  to  1849
he  was  a  senator  of  the  United  States,  having  been
elected  as  a  democrat  to  succeed  Richard  M.
Young.  He  was  a  regent  of  the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution during  the  administration  of  President
Polk,  and  served  as  chairman  of  the  senate  com-
mittee on  public  lands,  in  which  capacity  he  made
a  report  in  favor  of  a  transcontinental  railroad  to
the  Pacific.  In  1850  he  was  speaker  of  the  Illi-
nois house  of  representatives.  He  was  one  of  the
originators  of  the  Illinois  central  railroad.  He
again  became  a  circuit  judge  in  1855,  and  was
made  chief  of  the  court.  In  1857  he  was  elected
a  justice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  in  1873  he  be-
came chief  justice,  in  which  office  he  continued
till  the  time  of  his  death.  In  1869  he  published  a
work  on  Illinois  and  one  treating  of  the  "  Origin
and  History  of  the  Pacific  Railroad."
.  BREIDENBAUGH,  Edward  Swoyer,  chem-
ist, b.  in  Newville,  Cumberland  co.,  Pa.,  13  Jan.,


1849.  He  was  educated  at  Pennsylvania  college,
graduating  in  1868,  and  studied  chemistry  at  Shef-
field scientific  school  from  1871  till  1873,  being  in-
structor in  chemistry  during  the  latter  year.  From
1873  till  1874  he  was  professor  of  natural  sciences
at  Carthage  college.  111.,  but  in  1874  he  was  elect-
ed professor  of  chemistry  and  mineralogy  in  Penn-
sylvania college,  where  he  has  since  remained.
During  the  years  1880-4  he  was  mineralogist  of
the  Pennsylvania  state  board  of  agriculture.  Prof.
Breidenbaugh  has  written  numerous  papers  on
scientific  subjects,  of  which  the  more  important
are  "Analysis  of  Connecticut  Tobacco  Ash"
(1872) ;  "  The  Minerals  of  the  Tilly  Foster  Mine  "
(1873) ;  "  Fermentation  and  Germ  Theory  "  (1877) ;
"  Concerning  Certain  Misconceptions  in  Consider-
ing the  Relations  between  Science  and  Religion  "
(1880) ;  "  The  Nitrogenous  Element  of  Plant  Food  "
(1880);  and  "Mineralogy  on  the  Farm"  (1881).
He  is  also  the  author  of  "  Lecture  Notes  on  Inor-
ganic Chemistry  "  (Gettysburg,  1876)  and  "  Penn-
sylvania College  Book  "  (Philadelphia,  1882).

BRENAN,  Joseph,  poet,  b.  in  the  north  of  Ire-
land in  1829;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  in  May.
1857.  He  joined  the  young  Ireland  party  in  1848,
and  was  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Irish  Felon."
He  was  imprisoned  for  nine  months  for  political
ofiiences,  and  after  his  release  edited  the  "  Irish-
man." In  October,  1849,  he  was  implicated  in  a
revolutionary  movement  in  Tipperary,  and  fled  to
the  United  States.  For  several  years  he  was  on
the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  Orleans  "Delta."
His  best-known  poem  is  "  The  Exile  to  his  Wife."

BRENDON,  Saint,  b.  in  Ireland  in  the  mid-
dle of  the  5th  century.  Among  the  legendary
events  of  his  life  was  his  voyage  to  Hy  Brassail,  in
company  with  some  holy  people.  This  story  was
very  popular  in  the  middle  ages,  and  undoubtedhr
kept  alive  the  notion  of  a  western  continent.  It
is  said  that  he  sailed  from  a  harbor  in  Kerry,  and
after  a  long  voyage  reached  a  shore  where  he
found  a  charming  climate  and  beautiful  birds.
He  travelled  into  the  interior  for  fifteen  days,  but
when  about  to  cross  a  great  river  he  was  warned
back  by  an  angel,  who  told  him  he  had  gone  far
enough  and  that  it  was  reserved  for  other  persons
and  other  times  to  Christianize  the  land.  On  maps
made  prior  to  Columbus,  St.  Brendon's  country  is
placed  to  the  south  of  the  island  of  Antilia  and
west  of  the  Cape  Verde  islands.  St.  Brendon's
manuscript  is  mentioned  in  Dicuil's  collection  "  De
mensura  Orbis."  It  is  in  the  Burgundian  library
in  Brussels,  and  has  not  yet  been  translated.

BRENEMAN,  Abram  Adam,  chemist,  b.  in
Lancaster,  Pa.,  28  April,  1847.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Pennsylvania  state  college  in  1866,  and  was
during  1867-8  instructor  in  chemistry  at  that
institution,  and  full  professor  from  1869  till  1872.
In  1875  he  was  appointed  assistant  professor  and
lecturer  on  chemistry  at  Cornell,  where  from  1879
till  1882  he  was  professor  of  industrial  chemistry.
Since  then  he  has  resided  in  New  York,  where  he
has  been  actively  engaged  in  professional  work  as
a  writer,  an  analyst,  and  a  chemical  expert.  Prof.
Breneman  has  published  papers  on  chemical  and
sanitary  subjects  for  the  scientific  and  daily  pa-
pers, devoting  his  attention  largely  to  the  subject
of  water  and  its  contaminations.  He  has  also
written  on  the  chemistry  of  ceramic  manufactures
and  delivered  a  course  of  lectures  on  that  subject
in  New  York.  With  Prof.  G.  C.  Caldwell  he  has
published  "  A  Manual  of  Introductory  Laboratory
Practice  "  (Ithaca,  1875).

BRENT,  Henry  Johnson,  author,  b.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  New  Y^ork  city,  3


368


BRENT


BREVARD


Aug.,  1880.  He  was  descended  from  a  Roman
Catholic  family,  early  settlers  of  Maryland,  and
was  a  grand-nephew  of  Archbishop  Carroll,  He
contributed  to  Porter's  "  Spirit  of  the  Times,"  over
the  well-known  signature  of  "Stirrup,"  and  was
the  associate  of  Lewis  Gaylord  Clark  in  founding
and  editing  the  "Knickerbocker,"  a  magazine
that  enjoyed  great  popularity  from  1833  until
1864.  Mr.  Brent  was  also  a  painter.  His  best  lit-
erary work  was  "  Life  Almost  Alone,"  published
as  a  serial  in  the  "Knickerbocker,"  and  "Was  it  a
Ghost  f  "  a  theory  and  discussion  of  the  celebrated
murder  of  the  Joyce  children  (Boston,  1868).

BRENT,  Richard,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia ;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  30  Dec,  1814.  He  was  a
representative  in  congress  from  7  Dec,  1795,  till
3  March,  1799,  and  again  from  7  Dec,  1801,  till  3
March,  1803.  He  was  elected  a  senator  from  Vir-
ginia, and  served  from  22  May,  1809,  till  his  death.

BRENTANO,  Lorenzo,  journalist,  b.  in  Mann-
heim, grand  duchy  of  Baden,  Germany,  4  Nov.,
1813.  He  received  a  thorough  classical  training,
and  studied  jurisprudence  at  Heidelberg  and  Frei-
burg. He  was  admitted  to  practice  in  Baden,  and
after  attaining  the  legal  age  was  elected  to  the
chamber  of  deputies.  He  took  part  in  the  revolu-
tion of  1848,  being  a  member  of  the  Frankfort
parliament,  and  subsequently  president  of  the  pro-
visional republican  government  established  in  1849,
by  the  then  hopeful  revolutionists.  The  power  of
Prussia  intervened  in  July  of  that  year,  and  the
grand  duke  was  re-established.  Brentano  effected
his  escape,  and  only  knew  that  he  had  been  sen-
tenced to  imprisonment  for  life  after  reaching  the
United  States.  He  settled  as  a  farmer  in  Kala-
mazoo CO.,  Mich.,  and  remained  there  until  1859,
when  he  removed  to  Chicago  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar.  He  soon  became  editor  of  the  "  Illinois
Staats-Zeitung,"  and  in  1862  was  a  member  of  the
state  legislature.  For  five  years  he  was  president
of  the  Chicago  board  of  education.  In  1868  he
was  presidential  elector  on  the  Grant  and  Colfax
ticket.  In  1869,  a  general  amnesty  having  been
granted  to  the  revolutionists  of  1849,  he  revisited
his  native  land.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  consul
at  Dresden  in  1872,  and  served  until  1876,  when
he  was  elected  to  congress,  where  he  served  until
3  March,  1879.  After  leaving  congress  he  devoted
much  time  to  historical  and  literary  researches  de-
signed to  compare  and  contrast  the  American  and
European  codes  of  criminal  procedure.  In  this
line  of  work  he  has  published  a  report  of  the  trial
of  the  assassin  of  President  Garfield,  and  a  history
of  the  celebrated  case  of  King  v.  Missouri  (U.  S.
Supreme  Court  Reports,  107).  This  last  was  re-
published in  Leipsic  In  1884  Mr.  Brentano  gave
up  active  work,  owing  to  partial  paralysis.

BRENTON,  Jahleel,  sailor,  b.  in  Rhode  Island,
22  Aug.,  1770;  d.  in  Elford,  England,  3  April,
1844.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Rear-Admiral
Jahleel  Brenton,  who,  with  his  family,  came  to
America  early  in  the  17th  century.  The  father
held  a  lieutenant's  commission  in  the  royal  navy
when  the  war  for  independence  began,  and  re-
mained loyal  to  the  crown,  as  did  nearly  all  the
Americans  who  were  in  the  navy  at  that  time.
Young  Jahleel  was  appointed  midshipman  on  his
father's  ship  in  1781.  In  1802  he  married  Isabella
Stewart,  an  American  lady,  to  whom  he  had  long
been  engaged.  She  died  "in  1817,  and  in  1822  he
married  a  cousin,  Harriet  Brenton,  who  survived
him.  Pie  rose  to  eminence  in  his  profession,  at-
taining the  rank  of  rear-admiral  of  the  blue  in
1830,  having  rendered  gallant  and  distinguished
services  wherever  he met  the  enemies  of  Great


Britain,  Fortunately  he  was  not  called  upon  to
encounter  the  navy  of  his  native  land  during  the
war  of  1812.  He  was  very  devout,  and  gave  a
great  part  of  his  time  and  energy  to  religious  and
charitable  work,  especially  among  sailors.  He
wrote  "  The  Hope  of  the  Navy  "  (London,  1839) ;
"  An  Appeal  to  the  British  Nation  on  Behalf  of
her  Sailors"  (1841);  "Memoir  of  Capt.  E.  P.
Brenton  "  (1842) ;  and  "  Coast  Fisheries  "  (1843).  A
memoir  of  his  life  and  services  was  published
in  1846  by  the  Rev.  Henry  Raikes  (new  ed.
abridged,  and  edited  by  Sir  Launcelot  Charles  Lee
Brenton,  only  son  of  the  admiral,  1855).

BRENTON,  Saiuiiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Gallatin
CO.,  Ky.,  22  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Fort  Wayne,  Ind.,
29  March,  1857.  He  received  an  English  educa-
tion, and  at  the  age  of  twenty  entered  the  Methodist
ministry  and  served  as  a  preacher  until  1848,  when
he  suffered  a  stroke  of  paralysis.  During  his  min-
istry he  had  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  He  served  for  a  year  as  registrar  in  the  land-
office  at  Fort  Wayne,  and  in  1851  was  elected  as  a
whig  to  congress.  He  was  defeated  for  the  next
congress,  but  in  the  mean  time  had  been  chosen
president  of  Fort  Wayne  college  and  filled  the
office  acceptably  until  1854,  when  he  was  re-elected
as  a  republican  to  the  34th  and  35th  congresses.

BRENTON,  William,  governor  of  Rhode  Isl-
and, b.  in  England  early  in  the  17th  century;  d.in
Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1674.  The  family  came  from
Hammersmith,  England,  where  they  were  persons
of  wealth  and  high  social  standing  during  the
reign  of  Charles  I.  William  Brenton  represented
the  colony  at  Boston  for  several  years,  beginning
in  1635,  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Rhode  Island
prior  to  1660,  president  of  the  colony  between
1660  and  1661,  and  governor  under  the  charter  ob-
tained from  Charles  II.  from  1666  till  1669.  His
original  grant  gave  him  a  certain  number  of  acres
for  every  mile  of  land  surveyed,  and  on  the  strength
of  this  lie  secured  much  valuable  property.  He
was  one  of  the  nine  original  proprietaries  of  Rhode
Island.  He  selected  and  surveyed  the  site  of  New-
port, built  a  large  brick  house  where  Fort  Adams
now  stands,  and  laid  out  handsome  walks  around
it.  His  name  is  preserved  in  Brenton's  Point  and
Brenton's  Reef,  Narragansett  bay.

BRESSANI,  Francesco  Gfiiiseppe,  Italian
Jesuit  missionary,  b.  in  Rome  in  1612 ;  d.  in  Flor-
ence, 9  Sept.,  1672.  After  spending  two  years  with
the  Indians  near  Quebec  he  was  sent  on  a  mission
to  the  Hurons  in  1644,  was  captured  on  the  way
by  the  Iroquois  and  tortured,  but  was  afterward
made  over  to  an  old  squaw  to  take  the  place  of  a
deceased  relative.  She  sent  him  to  Fort  Orange
(now  Albany,  N.  Y.),  where  the  Dutch  paid  a  large
ransom  for  him,  and  on  his  recovery  sent  him  to
France.  He  came  again  to  this  country  in  the
spring  of  1645,  maimed  and  disfigured,  and  lived
with  the  Hurons  until  1650,  when  he  returned  to
Italy,  in  broken  health.  He  published  "  Relazione
dei  Missionarii  della  Compagnia  de  Gesu  nella
Nuova-Francia "  (Macerata,  1653;  English  trans-
lation, Montreal,  1852).

BRETON,  Raymond  (bray-tong ),  French  mis-
sionary, b.  in  1609 ;  d.  in  1679.  He  entered  the  Do-
minican order,  and  for  twenty  years  devoted  him-
self to  preaching  and  studv  in  Santo  Domingo  and
other  parts  of  the  West  Indies,  He  published  a
French-and-Caribbean  dictionary,  a  Caribbean
grammar,  and  a  Caribbean  catechism,

BREVARD,  Ephraim,  patriot,  b.  about  1750;
d.  in  Charlotte,  N.  C,  about  1783.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1768,  studied  medicine,  and
settled  at  Chariotte  to  practise. He  sympathized


BREVOORT


BREWER


with  the  movement  for  independence,  and  was
secretary  of  the  famous  Mecklenburg  conven-
tion of  81  May,  1775.  lie  was  one  of  the  com-
mittee appointed  to  draft  resolutions,  and,  in  fact,
the  actual  author  of  the  "  declaration,"  which  an-
ticipates by  more  than  a  year  the  formal  Declara-
tion of  Independence  by  congress,  though  it  was
itself  anticipated  by  several  others  that  have  not
become  so  celebrated,  notably  that  of  Mendon,
Mass.,  in  1773.  When  the  JBritish  invaded  the
southern  states,  Dr.  Brevard  and  his  six  brothers
entered  the  continental  service.  He  was  taken
prisoner  at  Charleston  in  1780,  and  when  set  at
liberty  was  so  broken  by  disease,  incurred  during
confinement,  that  he  died  soon  afterward.  It  is
known  that  he  was  buried  at  Hopewell,  but  in  the
confusion  of  the  time  the  grave  was  not  marked,
and  it  has  never  been  identified.  He  was  one  of
the  most  accomplished  men  of  his.time,  and  exerted
a  powerful  influence  in  behalf  of  independence.

BREVOORT,  Henry,  b.  in  1791 ;  d.  in  Rye,
N.  Y.,  11  April,  1874. He  was  descended  from  the
old  Holland  Dutch  stock,  and  inherited  a  large
landed  estate  on  Manhattan  island,  which  became
extremely  valuable  as  the  city  increased  in  popula-
tion. He  was  a  gentleman  of  literary  taste  and
the  life-long  friend  of  Washington  Irving,  with
whom  he  travelled  in  Europe  and  corresponded
for  half  a  century. He  removed,  in  early  life,  to
Yonkers,  but  returned  to  New  York  and  was  a
member  of  the  common  council for  many  years.
In  1852  he  removed  to  Rye,  where  he  resided  until
jhis  death. One  of  his  daughters  married  Charles
jAstor  Bristed.— His  son,  James  Carson, b.  in
New  York  city, 10  July,  1818; d.  in  Brookl.p,
JN.  Y.,  7  Dec.  1887,  received  his  early  education
jilt  home,  in  France,  and  at  Hofwyl,  near  Berne,
[Switzerland. He  then  studied  at  the  Ecole  Cen-
trale  des  Arts  et  Manufactures  in  Paris,  and  was
2:raduated  with  the  diploma  of  a  civil  engineer.
)n  returning  to  the  United  States,  he  accompanied
lis  uncle,  James  Renwick,  one  of  the  commission-
rs  on  the  northeastern  boundary  survey. In  1838
16  went  abroad  as  private  secretary  to  Washington
'rving,  U.  S.  minister  to  Spain. After  serving  a
'^ear  in  this  capacity,  he  spent  several  years  in  Eu-
opean  travel,  and  returned  home  in  1843. Two
ears  later  he  married  the  daughter  of  Judge  Lef-
ert  Lefferts,  of  Brooklyn,  where  he  has  since  re-
ided,  serving  on  the  board  of  education,  and  as
ne  of  the  constructing  board  of  water  commission-
rs. For  ten  years,  beginning  in  1863,  he  was  presi-
ent  of  the  Long  Island  historical  society,  and  for
ivo  years  superintendent  of  the  Astor  library  in
ew  Yoj-k  city,  of  which  he  had  been  a  trustee
nee  1853. He  became  a  regent  of  the  university
I  New  York  in  1861,  and  the  same  year  receivetl
le  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Williams. He  is  a  mem-
r  of  the  New  York  historical  society,  the  acad-
ny  of  natural  sciences,  the  American  geographi-
il  society,  the  Massachusetts  and  Pennsylvania
storical  societies,  and  numerous  other  scientific,
erary,  and  artistic  associations,  in  which  he  has
ways  taken  active interest. As  a  collector  of
re  books  and  coins  he  has  been  very  successful,
roni  his  father  he  inherited  about  6,000  volumes,
ostly  Americana,  which  were  collected  in  Europe
irmg  the  turbulent  years  from  1810  till  1832. To
is  library  Mr.  Brevoort  made  large  and  valuable
ditions,  until  in  1875  it  comprised  about  10,000
luines,  many  of  them  very  rare  and  costly. He
s  also  made  valuable  collections  of  medals  and
inuscripts. About  1875  he  began  wisely  to  an-
ipate  the  usual  fate  of  such  collections,  and  has
stowed  many  of  his  treasures  upon  institutions
I  VOL.  I. — 24


where  they  will  be  carefully  preserved  for  the  bene-
fit of  students  and  connoisseurs.  His  collections
also  embrace  entomology  and  ichthyology  (books
and  specimens),  and  for  the  preservation  of  these
also  he  has  judiciously  provicled.  He  contributed
to  the  "American  Journal  of  Numismatics"  a
series  of  illustrated  papers  on  "  Early  Spanish  and
Portuguese  Coinage  in  America."  In  the  "  His-
torical Magazine  "  he  published  a  paper  on  the  dis-
covery of  the  remains  of  Columbus,  and  in  1874
prepared  a  volume,  printed  privately,  entitled
"  Verrazano  the  Navigator,  or  Notes  on  Giovanni
de  Verrazano,  and  on  a  Planisphere  of  1529,  illus-
trating his  American  Voyage  in  1524,"  this  being  a
revision  and  expansion  of  a  paper  read  before  the
American  geographical  society,  28  Nov.,  1871.

BREVOORT,  James  Renwick,  painter,  b.  in
Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  July,  1832.  After
studying  with  Thomas  Cummings  in  this  country
he  spent  several  years  in  European  schools,  and
sketched  in  the  picturesque  districts  of  England,
Holland,  and  Italy.  He  was  elected  an  associate
of  the  national  academy  in  1861,  and  a  full  mem-
ber in  1863.  He  has  made  special  study  of  per-
spective, and  was  professor  of  that  branch  of
drawing  at  the  national  academy  in  1872.  He  is
very  successful  in  the  treatmxcnt  of  American  land-
scape in  a  low  tone  of  color,  this  being  his  favorite
line  of  work.  Among  his  pictures  are  "  Scene  in
Holland  "  ;  "  Lake  of  Como  "  (1878) ;  "  Storm  on
English  Moor  "  (1882) ;  "  May  Morning,  Lake  Co-
mo '  (1883) ;  "  New  England  Scene  " ;  "  Morning
in  Early  Winter "  (1884) ;  "  The  Wild  November
Comes  at  Last " ;  "  Windy  Evening  on  the  Moors  "
(1885) ;  and  "  Windv  Day  on  a  Moor  "  (1886).

BREWER,  David  Josiah,  jurist,  b.  in  Smyr-
na, Asia  Minor,  20  June,  1837.  He  studied  at
Wesleyan  university  and  at  Yale,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1856,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  his
uncle,  David  Dudley  Field,  in  New  York  city,  was
graduated  at  Albany  law-school  in  1858,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  New  York  city,  engaged  in
farming  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  in  1858-'9.  removed
to  the  west,  and  practised  his  profession  in  Kan-
sas City,  Mo,,  and  afterward  in  Leavenworth,  Kan-
sas. In  1861-'4  he  was  a  U.  S.  commissioner,  in
1862-5  judge  of  probate  and  judge  of  the  Leaven-
worth county  criminal  court,  in  1865-'9  judge  of  the
first  judicial  court  of  the  state,  and  at  the  same  time
superintendent  of  public  schools,  in  1869-'70  city
attorney,  and  in  1870-'81  judge  of  the  Kansas  su-
preme court.  He  filled  the  office  also  of  vice-presi-
dent, and  subsequently  that  of  president,  of  the
board  of  education.  In  1884  he  was  appointed  U.
S.  judge  for  the  eighth  circuit.

BREWER,  Gardner,  merchant,  b.  in  Boston
in  1806;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  30  Sept.,  1874,  He
was  one  of  the  wealthiest  and  most  liberal  of  Bos-
ton merchants.  After  attaining  his  majority  he
was  for  some  time  a  distiller,  but  afterward  en-
gaged in  the  dry-goods  trade,  and  founded  the
house  of  Gardner  Brewer  &  Co.,  which  represented
some  of  the  largest  mills  in  New  England,  and
had  branches  in  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  In
this  business,  by  accurate  method  combined  with
great  sagacity,  he  accumulated  a  fortune  which,  at
his  death,  was  estimated  at  several  millions  of  dol-
lars. Mr.  Brewer  at  one  time  took  an  active  part
in  politics  as  a  republican.  He  was  also  a  strong
protectionist,  and  took  great  interest  in  the  indus-
trial development  of  the  country.  He  used  his
large  wealth  liberally  for  the  public  good,  and
shortly  before  his  death  gave  to  the  city  of  Boston
a  beautiful  fountain,  which  stands  on  an  angle  of
the  common. His  residence,  on  the  site  of  the


370


BREWER


BREWERTON


house  of  John  Hancock,  is  one  of  the  finest  private
dwellings  in  the  city.  The  "  great  fire  "  in  Boston
(November,  1872)  destroyed  the  old  warehouse  of
the  firm  ;  but  before  the  end  of  1873  a  new  build-
ing, one  of  the  costliest  in  Boston,  was  erected  on
its  site. Mr.  Brewer  died  at  his  seaside  villa.

BREWER,  Josiali,  missionary,  b.  in  Berkshire
CO.,  Mass.,  in  179G;  d.  in  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  19
Nov.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1821,
and  became  a  tutor  in  the  college  after  post-grad-
uate study.  He  was  one  of  the  first  to  volunteer
as  a  missionary  to  Turkey  for  the  American  board,
and  in  1830  sailed  for  the  east,  beginning  his  la-
bors at  Smyrna,  orxly  three  years  after  the  Greek
revolution.  The  battle  of  Navarino  had  destroyed
the  Turkish  navy,  and  had  opened  the  door  for  in-
fluences from  abroad.  Mr.  Brewer  was  the  first  to
introduce  schools  and  the  printing-press.  He  es-
tablished the  first  paper  in  Smyrna,  where  several
Journals  are  now  published  in  diiTerent  languages.
The  schools  he  founded  have  served  as  models  for
others,  and  have  done  much  to  introduce  European
education  into  the  Turkish  empire.  After  a  few
years  he  returned  home.  He  published  "  Resi-
dence in  Constantinople "  (New  Haven,  1827)  and
"  Patmos  and  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia  "  (1851).

BREWER,  Leigh  Richmond,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Berkshire,  Vt.,  29  Jan.,  1839.  He  entered  Ho-
bart  college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  and  was  graduated
with  honors  in  18G3,  and  at  the  general  theological
seminary,  New  York,  in  18G6.  He  was  ordained
deacon  in  New  York  city,  1  July,  1866,  and  priest
in  Oswego,  N.  Y,,  16  Juiie,  1867.  Mr.  Brewer  was
rector  of  Grace  church,  Carthage,  N.  Y.,  for  six
years,  when  he  became  rector  of  Trinity  church,
Watertown.  N.  Y.  While  in  this  place  he  was
elected  missionary  bishop  of  Montana,  and  conse-
crated in  Watertown,  8  Dec,  1880.  In  his  trien-
nial report  made  to  the  board  of  missions  in  1883,
Bishop  Brewer  gives  an  interesting  and  encour-
aging account  of  his  missionary  labors  in  Montana.

BREWER,  Thomas  Mayo,  naturalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  21  Nov.,  1814;  d.  there,  24  Jan.,
1880.  After  graduation  at  Harvard  in  1835,  and
at  the  Massachusetts  medical  school  in  1838,  he
became  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Atlas  "  (1840).  This
engagement  lasted  until  1857,  when  he  joined  the
publishing-house  of  Brewer  &  Tileston.  He  edited
Wilson's  "  Birds  of  North  America  "  (1839),  adding
a  list  of  all  the  newly  classified  -birds  known  at
that  date.  Several  years  were  devoted,  in  company
with  Messrs.  Baird  and  Ridgeway,  to  the  prepara-
tion of  "  A  History  of  North  American  Birds "
(Boston,  1874).  This  work,  in  three  volumes,  was
the  first  attempt  made  on  a  large  scale,  for  nearly
thirty  years  subsequent  to  Audubon's  great  work,
to  complete  the  study  of  American  ornithology.
Abundant  material  existed  in  government  reports
and  in  the  archives  of  the  Smithsonian  institution,
and  this  was  edited  with  great  skill  and  Judgment,
the  accounts  of  the  habits  of  the  different  species
being  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Brewer,  while  the  tech-
nical descriptions  were  furnished  by  his  associates.
There  was  also  published  by  the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution in  1859  a  volume  on  the  "  Oology  of
North  America."  During  1875  and  1876  he  visited
nearly  all  the  great  oological  collections  of  Europe
and  Great  Britain.  An  account  of  this  trip  may
be  found  in  the  "  Popular  Science  Monthly,"  vol.  xi.

BREWER,  William  Henry,  chemist,  b.  in
Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  14  Sept.,  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  (now  Sheffield)  scientific  school
in  1852,  and  spent  some  time  in  Germany,  study-
mg  at  the  universities  of  Heidelberg  and  Munich,
In  1858  he  became professor  of  chemistry  and


geology  in  Washington  college,  Pa.  From  18G0
till  1864  he  was  first  assistant  on  the  geological
survey  of  California,  and  during  1863-4  profes-
sor of  chemistry  in  the  university  of  California.
In  1864  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  agriculture
at  Yale.  Prof.  Brewer  is  a  member  of  numerous
scientific  societies,  and  in  1880  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  For
some  years  he  has  been  a  member  of  the  Connecti-
cut state  board  of  health,  and  has  contributed
papers  to  its  reports.  He  has  also  contributed
analyses  of  minerals  to  Dana's  "  Mineralogy  " ;  but
his  scientific  papers  are  devoted  principally  to
chemical  agriculture.  He  has  edited  the  "Botany
of  California  "  (vol.  i.,  1886)  and  "  Cereal  Produc-
tion in  the  United  States  "("  Reports  of  the  Tenth
Census,"  vol.  iii.).

BREWERTON,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city ;  d.  in  Washington,  1).  C,  17  April,  1879.  He
was  at  the  head  oi'  the  2d  class  in  the  U.  S.  military
academy  when  the  1st  class  was  about  to  graduate
in  1819.  He  obtained  leave  to  essay  the  examina-
tion with  the  advanced  class,  and  was  graduated
fifth  from  its  head,  thus  completing  the  usual  four
years'  course  in  three  years.  At  the  same  time
three  of  his  classmates  obtained  similar  permits
and  passed  the  ordeal  successfully,  though  not
with  so  high  grade.  But  these  irregularities  of
administration  were  found  to  be  detrimental  to
the  general  good  of  the  cadets,  and  were  not  per-
mitted under  the  stricter  discipline  established
soon  after  this  time.  Brewerton  was  at  once  com-
missioned second  lieutenant  of  engineers,  and,  after
a  temporary  detail  to  aid  in  determining  the  45th
parallel  of  latitude  at  Rouse's  Point,  N.  Y.,  he  was
in  September,  1819,  assigned  to  duty  as  an  instruc-
tor at  the  military  academy.  He  was  promoted
first  lieutenant  of  engineers,  1  Jan.,  1825  f  captain,
21  Sept.,  1826;  major,  23  Aug.,  1856;  and  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 6  Aug.,  1861.  During  these  yeare  he
was  continuously  engaged  on  important  engineer-
ing works,  such  as  Fort  Adams,  Newport,  Fort
Jackson,  La.,  the  defences  of  Charleston  harbor,
on  the  light-house  board,  and  as  a  member  of
various  boards  and  commissions  appointed  to  im-
prove the  defences  of  the  United  States.  In  1847
he  received  the  degree  of  LIj.  D.  from  Dickinson
college.  During  the  early  years  of  the  civil  war,
from  1861  till  5  Nov.,  1864,  he  was  superintending
engineer  of  the  fortifications  and  improvements  of
Baltimore  harbor,  Md.  On  22  April,  1864,  he  was
promoted  colonel  of  engineers.  The  winter  of
1864-'5  he  passed  in  the  neighborhood  of  Hampton
Roads,  superintending  the  construction  of  defen-
sive works,  and  thence  he  was  transferred  to  the
defences  of  New  York.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general,  "  for  long,  faithful,  and  meritorious  ser-
vices," 13  March,  1865,  and  retired  7  March,  18G7,
in  compliance  with  the  law,  "  having  been  borne  on
the  army  register  more  than  forty-five  years."— His
son,  George  Doug-las,  soldier,  b.  about  1820.  He
Joined  Stephenson's  regiment  of  "  California  volun-
teers," in  1846,  as  second  lieutenant,  became  second
lieutenant,  1st  U.  S.  infantrv,  22  May,  18/.7,  ancl
first  lieutenant  in  June,  1850.  He  is  the  author  ot
"  The  War  in  Kansas :  A  Rough  Trip  to  the  Border
among  New  Homes  and  a  Strange  People  "  (>ieAV
York,  1856) ;  "  Fitzpoodle  at  Newport "  ;  and  '^h  a
Lewis,  the  Pleroine  of  Lime  Rock  "  (Newport.  1801)).  ;
He  has  published  also,  through  a  New  York  hnn,  j
"  The  Automaton  Regiment "  (1862),  "  The  Autom-
aton Companv,"  and  "The  Automaton  Batterv
(1863).  These  devices  for  the  instruction  of  mili-
tary recruits  were  brought  out  when  hundreds  oi  |
thousands  of  untrained  soldiers  were  eagerly  study-


BREWSTER


BREWSTER


371


ing  the  rudiments  of  tlie  art  of  war.  and  were
extensively  used  in  connection  with  the  regular
books  of  tactics.

BREWSTER,  Benjamin  Harris,  lawyer,  b.  in
Salem  co.,  N.  J.,  13  Oct.,  1816;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  4  April.  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton and  admitted  to  the  bar,  of  which  he  became
a  distinguished  member.  He  was  appointed  by-
President  Polk  in  1846  a  commissioner  to  examine
into  the  claims  of  the  Cherokee  Indians  against
the  government.  From  1867  till  1869  he  was  attor-
ney-general for  Pennsylvania.  He  acquired  a  high
reputation  as  a  prosecutor  during  his  Philadelphi-
an  experience,  was  made  attorney-general  of  the
United  States  by  President  Arthur  in  December,
1881,  and  served  in  that  capacity  until  1885,  a
period  covering  the  conclusion  of  the  famous  Star
Route  trials,  to  the  prosecution  of  which  he
brought  to  bear  all  his  energy  and  experience.
When  a  young  man,  he  risked  his  life  in  the  effort
to  save  his  sister  from  death  by  fire,  and  was  him-
self terribly  burned  and  disfigured  for  life.

BREWSTER,  Charles  Warren,  journalist,  b.
m  Portsmouth.  N.  H.,  13  Sept.,  1812 ;  d.  there,  3
Aug.,  1868.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, and  began  to  work  for  his  living  as  an  appren-
tice in  the  office  of  the  Portsmouth  "Journal."
In  fifteen  years  he  had  become  its  proprietor,  and
when  he  died  had  been  connected  with  his  journal
for  more  than  fifty  years.  He  served  several  terms
in  the  legislature,  and  was  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  of  1850-'l.  He  is  the
author  of  "  Fifty  Years  in  a  Printing-Office  "  and
"Rambles  about  Portsmouth."

BREWSTER,  James,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Pres-
ton, Conn.,  6  Aug.,  1788 :  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,
22  Nov.,  1866.  He  was  the  seventh  in  direct  de-
scent from  Elder  Brewster,  who  came  over  in  the
"  Mayflower."  The  early  death  of  his  father,  leav-
ing the  family  with  but  limited  means,  made  it
necessary  for  James  to  follow  a  trade,  and  after  a
district-school  education  he  was  apprenticed,  in
1804,  to  Charles  Chapman,  of  Northampton,  Mass.,
to  learn  carriage-making.  On  attaining  his  ma-
jority, he  was  offered  an  interest  in  his  employ-
er's business,  but  this  he  refused,  preferring  to
go  into  business  by  himself,  and  circumstances  led
him  to  New  Haven.  At  that  time,  1810,  few  car-
riages were  in  use,  one-horse  wagons  being  gener-
ally employed,  and  even  Gov.  Strong,  of  Massachu-
setts, rode  into  Boston  on  election-day  in  such  a
vehicle.  Mr.  Brewster  undertook  the  improvement
of  the  styles,  and  soon  became  known  as  the  manu-
facturer of  "  Brewster  wagons,"  which  then  came
into  extended  use.  He  made  a  specialty  of  the
better  class  of  vehicles,  and  was  the  first  maker  in
the  United  States  to  send  a  panelled  carriage  to  the
south.  In  time  he  established  a  very  large  busi-
ness in  the  improved  forms  of  buggies,  phaetons,
victorias,  coaches,  and  similar  modern  vehicles.
Mr.  Brewster  early  adopted  the  custom  of  paying
his  workmen  every  Saturday  evening,  instead  of
continuing  the  old  practice  of  giving  orders  for
goods.  His  respect  for  religion  co-npelled  him  to
realize  his  responsibility  to'  those  in  his  employ,
and  he  insisted  that  his  workmen  should  attend
divine  service.  Drinking  habits  prevailed  among
the  journeymen  to  an  unfortunate  extent,  and  he
strongly  advocated  temperance.  In  many  ways  he
endeavored  to  educate  his  employees,  and  he  de-
livered evening  addresses  to  his  men  on  moral  and
practical  subjects.  Later  he  instituted  and  sus-
tamed  a  course  of  scientific  lectures  by  such  men
IS  Professors  Olmsted,  Shepard,  and  Silliman,  of
Yale. These  lectures  cost  him  over  $5,000  annual-


ly, and  he  built  a  hall  for  them,  all  of  which  at-
tracted to  New  Haven  a  superior  class  of  workmen.
In  1827  he  opened  a  .branch  of  his  business  on
Broad  street.  New  York,  near  the  present  stock  ex-
change. In  1833  he  became  interested  in  railroad-
building,  and  with  a  number  of  citizens  of  New
Haven  obtained  a  charter  for  the  construction  of  a
road  between  New  Haven  and  Hartford.  The  great
fire  in  New  York,  which  occurred  in  1835,  made  it
impossible  to  collect  a  portion  of  the  funds  sub-
scribed, and  Mr.  Brewster  gave  up  a  fine  business
in  order  to  devote  his  entire  energies  to  the  build-
ing of  the  road,  giving  his  time  and  services  for
four  years  to  the  accomplishment  of  this  enterprise.
He  was  president  of  the  company,  giving  without
remuneration  such  land  belonging  to  him  over
which  the  road  passed.  The  rails  with  which  this
line  was  built  were  imported  from  England  at  an
expense  of  $250,000,  and  he  became  responsible  for
them  as  the  importers  refused  otherwise  to  deliver
them.  In  1838  he  again  established  a  carriage
business,  associating  with  him  his  son,  James  B.
Brewster,  who  afterward  became  head  of  the  New
York  house,  now  known  as  "J.  B.  Brewster,  of
25th  Street."  The  public  spirit  of  Mr.  Brewster  is
further  attested  by  the  almshouse  and  orphan  asy-
lum that  he  built  in  New  Haven.

BREWSTER,  William,  pilgrim,  b.  in  Eng-
land in  1560;  d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  10  April,
1644.  There  is  a  conflict  of  authorities  as  to  the
dates  of  his  birth  and  death.  Those  here  given
agree  with  the  official  records  of  the  colony  as  kept
by  Nathaniel  Morton.  Nottinghamshire  was  the
county  of  his  birth ;  but  whether  his  father  was
William  Brewster  of  Scrooby,  or  Henry  or  James
Brewster,  vicar  of  Sutton-cum-Lound,  has  never
been  positively  determined.  Gov.  Bradford  says
that  Brewster  entered  Cambridge  university  and
remained  there  for  a  short  time,  but  his  college  is
not  named.  He  was  of  good  family,  and  his  coat-
of-arms  is  identical  with  that  of  the  ancient  Suffolk
branch.  After  leaving  Cambridge,  probably  in
1584,  he  entered  the  service  of  William  Davison,
ambassador,  and  afterward  secretary  of  state  to
Queen  Elizabeth,  and  with  him  visited  the  Nether-
lands, remaining  in  his  service  two  years.  Then,
having  become  an  earnest  devotee  of  the  Christian
religion  as  taught  by  Hooker  and  his  followers,  he
went  to  Scrooby,  and  so  zealously  interested  him-
self in  advancing  the  cause, that  he  fell  eventually
under  the  ban  of  the  church.  First,  however,  he
became  postmaster  at  Scrooby,  an  office  of  much
more  consequence  then  than  now,  as  it  involved
the  supplying  of  relays  of  horses  and  the  entertain-
ment of  travellers.  Such  offices  were  in  that  day
often  filled  by  persons  of  high  social  station.
While  holding  this  office,  Mr.  Brewster  occupied
Scrooby  Manor,  a  possession  of  the  archbishop  of
York,  where  royalty  had  often  been  entertained,
and  where  Cardinal  Wolsey  passed  several  weeks
after  his  deposition.  His  salary  was  20d.  a  day
until  July,  1603,  when  it  was  raised  to  2s.  a  day.
By  this  time  he  and  his.associate  "  separatists  "  had
become  obnoxious  to  the  "  establishment,"  and  in
1607  they  embarked  in  a  sloop  at  Boston,  bound
for  Holland,  intending  to  flee  the  country;  but  the
skipper  betrayed  them,  and  they  were  arrested.
Brewster  was  imprisoned  and  bound  over  for  trial.
In  the  summer  of  1608  he  was  more  successful,
sailed  from  Hull,  and  reached  Amsterdam  in  safety.
Having  spent  most  of  his  property  in  effecting  his
own  escape  and  aiding  his  poorer  associates,  he  was
obliged  to  teach  English  for  a  living.  With  the
aid  of  friends  he  set  up  a  printing-press,  and  did
very  well  in  a  business  point  of  view  by  printing


372


BREWSTER


BRIDGE


religious  books  that  were  contraband  in  England.
Through  the  assistance  of  his  friend,  Sir  Edwin
Sandys,  treasurer  of  the  Virginia  company,  he  ob-
tained a  grant  of  land  in  North  America,  and  in
September,  1620,  the  first  company  of  pilgrims  set
sail  in  the  "  Mayflower,"  landing  where  Plymouth,
Mass.,  now  stands,  oh  21  Dec,  1620.  Brewster  was
ruling  elder  of  the  church,  and  until  1629  acted  as
teacher  and  minister,  enduring  the  hardships  of
the  memorable  first  winter  with  wonderful  courage
and  cheerfulness.  He  left  four  sons  and  a  daugh-
ter, and  his  descendants  are  among  the  most  hon-
ored New  England  families.  His  sword  and  many
relics  of  his  personal  pi'operty  are  still  preserved
in  the  museum  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety in  Boston,  and  at  Plymouth,  Mass.  See  "  Life
and  Times  of  William  Brewster,  Chief  of  the  Pil-
grims" (Philadelphia,  1857).

BREWSTER,  William,  ornithologist,  b.  in
South  Reading  (now  Wakefield),  Mass.,  5  July,
1851.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Cambridge  high
school  in  1869,  but  was  prevented  by  a  difficulty
with  his  eyes  from  entering  Harvard.  Subse-
quently he  devoted  his  attention  exclusively  to  the
study  of  ornithology,  becoming  in  1880  assistant
in  charge  of  the  collection  of  birds  and  mammals  in
the  Boston  society  of  natural  history,  and  in  1885
curator  of  ornithology  at  the  museum  of  compar-
ative zoology,  Cambridge.  Mr.  Brewster  is  a
fellow  of  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  in  1876  became  presi-
dent of  the  Nuttall  ornithological  club  of  Cam-
bridge. He  has  published  articles  in  the  "  Bulletin
of  the  Nuttall  Ornithological  Club,"  in  the  "  An-
nals of  the  New  York  Lyceum  of  Natural  History,"
"Proceedings  of  the  Boston  Society  of  Natural
History."  "  The  Auk,"  and  other  periodicals.

BREWSTER,  William  R.,  soldier,  d.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  13  Dec,  1869.  Pie  was  a  colonel
in  the  Excelsior  brigade,  organized  by  Daniel  E.
Sickles  in  1861,  and  after  the  promotion  of  that
officer  was  made  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.
At  the  time  of  his  death  he  held  a  place  in  the  U.
S.  internal  revenue  department.

BRICE,  Benjamin  W.,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1809.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  Ohio,  was  graduated  in  1829,  served
as  a  lieutenant  of  infantry  in  an  expedition  against
the  Sac  Indians  in  1831,  and  on  13  Feb.,  1831,  re-
signed from  the  army.  He  was  brigade  major  in
the  Ohio  militia  in  1835-9,  became  a  lawyer,  and
was  a  judge  of  common  pleas  in  1845,  and  adju-
tant-general of  the  state  in  1846.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  Mexican  war  he  re-entered  the  army
with  the  rank  of  major  on  the  staff,  on  3  March,
1847,  and  served  as  paymaster  at  Cincinnati  and  in
the  field.  He  was  discharged  on  4  March,  1849,
but  was  reappointed  on  9  Feb.,  1852,  and  served  in
the  pay  department.  He  had  charge  of  the  pay
district  of  Kansas  and  the  territories  in  1861-'2,
and  of  that  of  New  Jersey,  Pennsylvania,  Mary-
land, and  Delaware  in  1862-'4,  and  on  29  Nov.,
1864,  was  appointed  paymaster-general  v>^ith  the
rank  of  colonel.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  was  bre-
vetted  major-general  in  the  U.  S.  army  for  faithful,
meritorious,  and  distinguished  services.  He  was
continued  in  charge  of  the  pay  department  at
AYashington,  was  promoted  brigadier-general  on
2S  July,  1866,  and  on  1  Jan.,  1872,  was  retired
from  active  service.

BBICENO,  Alonso  (bre-thayn'-yo),  South
American  theologian,  b.  in  Santiago  de  Chili.  He
entered  the  Franciscan  order  in  Lima,  Peru,  30
Jan.,  1605,  and  was  soon  promoted  to  the  office  of
definer  and  inspector  of  the  convents  of  his  order


in  Chili,  Charcas,  and  Cajamarca.  BrieeBo  pre-
sided over  a  literary  assembly  in  Rome  and  dis-
tinguished himself  so  much  that  he  was  appointed
geneml  of  his  order  and  judge  of  appeals  of  the
Spanish  provinces.  He  was  proposed  by  King
Philip  IV.  for  the  bishopric  of  Nicaragua,  conse-
crated at  Panama,  and  then  translated  to  the  see
of  Caracas,3^enezuela,  where  he  died.

BRICENO,  Antonio  Nicolas,  a  revolutionai7
chief  of  Venezuela,  and  one  of  the  signers  of  the
act  of  independence  of  that  republic,  d.  in  1813.
He  was  called  "  the  devil "  on  account  of  his  fiery
and  violent  temper.  He  was  the  first  chief  who
made  war  to  the  death  against  the  Spanish  troops,
as  Bolivar  did  afterward.  Briceno  did  not  follow
Bolivar's  orders  and  separated  from  him.  Being
routed  by  the  Spaniards  and  taken  prisoner,  he
was  executed  with  others  in  Barinas.

BRICHER,  Alfred  Thompson,  painter,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  10  April,  1837.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Newburyport  (Mass.)  academy,  and  en-
tered upon  a  mercantile  career  in  Boston,  devoting
his  leisure  to  drawing  and  painting  without  pro-
fessional instruction.  In  a  few  years  he  attained
noteworthy  skill  in  making  landscape  studies  from
nature,  and  after  1858  devoted  himself  to  the  art
as  a  profession.  He  opened  a  studio  in  Boston,
and  met  with  some  success  there,  but  in  18G8
sought  a  wider  field  in  New  York.  At  the  na-
tional academy  of  that  year  he  exhibited  "Mill-
Stream  at  Newburyport."  Soon  afterward  he  be-
gan to  use  water-colors  in  preference  to  oils,  and
in  1873  was  chosen  a  member  of  the  American
water-color  society.  Since  then  he  has  devoted
himself  mainly  to  water-color  painting  of  land-
scape, marine,  and  coastwise  scenery.  His  color-
ing is  brilliant,  harmonious,  and  singularly  trans-
parent. His  attention  to  detail  bars  him  from  the
ranks  of  modern  "  impressionists,"  but  he  has
many  admirers  among  lovers  of  natural  scenery.
Among  his  more  notalble  drawings  are  "  Sunset  in
October  "  (1869) :  "  The  Maiden's  Rock,  Lake  Pe-
pin "  (1870) ;  "  Mt.  Adams  "  (1871) ;  "  On  the  Eso-
pus"  (1874);  "Off  Halifax  Harbor"  (1875);  "A
Lift  in  the  Fog "(1876);  "St.  Michael's  Mount"
(1877) ;  and  "  What  the  Tide  Left "  (1878).

BRICKETT,  James,  soldier,  b.  m  1737;  d.  in
Haverhill,  Mass.,  9  Dec,  1818.  He  practised
medicine  successfully  in  Haverhill  until  the  French
war  offered  him  an  opportunity  for  service  in  the
field.  He  was  a  surgeon  at  Ticonderoga  in  1759-
'60,  when  the  French  abandoned  the  vicinity  of
Lake  Champlain.  At  the  beginning  of  the  revo-
lutionary war  he  w^as  made  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  Essex  co.,  Mass.,  regiment,  20  May,  1775,  was
wounded  at  Bunker  Hill,  17  June,  and  in  the  fol-
lowing year  was  made  brigadier  in  the  expedition
preparing  for  Canada.  After  Burgoyne's  surren-
der at  Saratoga  (17  Oct.,  1777),  Gen.  Brickett  was
placed  in  command  of  the  escort,  and  marched  the
prisoners,  about  6,000  in  number,  from  the  battle-
field on  Hudson  river  to  Cambridge,  Mass.

BRIDGE,  Horatio,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Augusta,
Me.,  8  April,  1806.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdom
in  1825.  Among  his  classmates  were  Nathaniel
Hawthorne,  George  B.  Cheever,  John  S.  C.  Abbott,
and  Henry  W.  Longfellow.  After  the  usual  three
years'  course  of  study  he  was  admitted  to  the  t)ar
in  1828,  and  practised  for  ten  years,  at  first  m
Showhegan,  and  afterward  in  Augusta.  In  1838  he
was  appointed  a  paymaster  in  the  U.  S.  navy.  Be
was  assigned  to  the  "  Cyane,"  and  cruised  in  her
until  1841,  when,  after  aii  interval  of  shore  duty,
he  was  ordered  to  the  "  Saratoga,"  and  in  her  vis-
ited the  African  coast. After  his  return  he  puD-


BRIDGES


BRIDGMAN


373


lished  "  The  Journal  of  an  African  Cruiser  "  (New
York,  1845),  the  authorship  of  which  is  usually
accredited  to  his  classmate,  Nathaniel  Hawthorne.
The  book  was,  in  fact,  edited  by  Hawthorne  from
Bridge's  notes.  In  1846-'8  he  cruised  in  the
Mediterranean  and  off  the  African  coast  in  the
frigate  "  United  States."  From  1849  till  1851  he
was  stationed  at  Portsmouth  navy-yard.  Near  the
close  of  1851  he  sailed  for  the  Pacific  in  the
"  Portsmouth,"  and  while  on  this  cruise  was  ordered
home  and  assigned  to  duty  as  chief  of  the  bureau
of  provisions  and  clothing,  the  duties  of  which  he
faithfully  performed  for  nearly  fifteen  years,  cov-
ering the  whole  period  of  the  civil  war,  and  involv-
ing transactions  and  disbursements  to  the  amount
of  many  millions  of  dollars.  In  July,  18G9,  he  re-
signed this  pla«e,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  as
chief  inspector  of  provisions  and  clothing  until  he
reached  the  legal  limit  of  age  for  active  duty,  when
he  was  retired  with  the  rank  of  commodore.

BRIDGES,  Fidelia,  artist,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
19  May,  1885.  She  removed  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
1854,  and  in  1859  went  to  Philadelphia,  where  she
was  a  pupil  of  W.  T.  Richards.  In  1865-'6  she
spent  eighteen  months  studying  art  in  Italy,  Swit-
zerland, and  France.  She  sent  to  the  national
academy,  in  oil,  "  Winter  Sunshine  "  and  "  Wild
Flowers  in  Wheat "  (18G9) ;  "  Blackberry  Bushes  "
and  "Views  on  the  Ausable"  (1870);  "Thistles
and  Yellow-Birds  "  (1873) ;  and  "  Cornfield  "  and
"Salt  Marshes"  (1874).  She  began  painting  in
water-colors  in  1871,  and  has  been  very  successful.
Some  of  her  water-color  pictures  are  "  Daisies  and
Clover  "  (1874) ;  "  Lily  Pond  "  (1875) ;  "  Mouth  of
a  River  "  (1876) ;  "  Rye-Field  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Morn-
ing-Glories  "  (1878).  In  1876  she  sent  to  the  cen-
tennial exhibition  at  Philadelphia  "A  Flock  of
Snow-Birds,"  "  Kingfisher  and  Catkins,"  and
"  Corner  of  a  Rye-Field,"  all  in  water-colors.  She
was  elected  an  associate  of  the  national  academy
of  design  in  1873,  and  member  of  the  water-color
society  in  1874.  In  1878-'9  she  spent  a  year  in
England.  Among  her  later  pictures  are  "East
Hampton  Meadows  "  (1884)  and  "  Pastures  by  the
Sea  "  (1885).

BRIDGES,  George  Washington,  lawyer,  b.
in  Athens,  McMinn  co.,  Tenn.,  9  Oct.,  1821 ;  d.
there,  16  March,  1873.  After  working  several
years  at  the  tailor's  trade,  he  made  enough  money
to  educate  himself,  and,  having  graduated  at  the
university  of  Tennessee,  Knoxville,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  became  attor-
ney-general of  the  state  in  1848,  and  held  the
office  until  1859,  when  he  resigned  it.  He  held
also  the  places  of  bank  attorney  and  railroad  di-
rector, and  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Doug-
las ticket  of  1860.  In  August,  1861,  he  was  elected
to  congress  as  a  unionist,  but  was  arrested  by  the
confederate  authorities  while  on  his  way  to  Wash-
ington, and  taken  back  to  Tennessee,  where  he
was  kept  a  prisoner  for  over  a  year.  Finally  es-
caping, he  took  his  seat  in  the  house,  25  Feb.,  1868,
and  served  until  8  March.  He  was  commissioned
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  10th  Tennessee  cavalry
in  1864,  and  in  1865  was  elected  judge  of  the
fourth  judicial  circuit  of  Tennessee.

BRIDGES,  Robert,  colonial  iron-factor,  lived
in  the  17th  century.  Little  is  known  of  him  per-
sonally, save  that,  according  to  Edward  Johnson,
of  Woburn,  author  of  "The  Wonder- Working
Providence  "  (Boston,  1651),  "  he  was  endued  with
able  parts,  and  forward  to  improve  them  to  the
glory  of  God  and  his  people's  good."  In  1645  he
was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  confer  with  the
governors  of  the  French  provinces  to  the  north  of


New  England.  He  appears  as  a  member  of  the
general  court  in  the  colonial  records,  and  in  1646
was  elected  a  speaker  of  that  body.  He  settled  at
Lynn,  Mass.,  and  in  1643  formed  a  company  to
work  the  large  deposits  of  "bog  iron-ore"  found
in  the  vicinity.  He  went  to  London  and  organ-
ized "  The  Company  of  Undertakers  for  the  Iron
Works,"  consisting  of  eleven  wealthy  Englishmen
who  advanced  £1,000  to  begin  work.  A  foundry
was  established  on  the  western  bank  of  Saugus
river,  and  expert  foundrymen  and  iron-workers
came  from  England  and  Scotland  to  develop  the
industry.  These  works  furnished  most  of  the  iron
used  in'the  country  for  several  years,  and,  but  for
the  scarcity  of  money  in  the  colony  and  the  conse-
quent difficulty  of  making  collections,  gave  every
indication  of  success.  The  enterprise  ultimately
failed,  though  on  a  small  scale  the  works  were  con-
tinued for  more  than  a  century.  Capt.  Robert
Bridges  was  probably  the  first  American  promoter
of  an  American  mining  scheme  involving  the  in-
vestment of  British  capital.

BRIDGMAN,  Frederick  Arthur,  painter,  b.
in  Tuskogee,  Ala.,  10  Nov.,  1847.  His  parents
were  from  Massachusetts.  At  the  age  of  five  years
he  declared  he  would  be  an  artist,  and  at  sixteen
he  removed  to  New  York  and  became  an  appren-
tice in  the  engraving  department  of  the  American
Bank-Note  Company.  He  remained  there  two
years,  studying  meanwhile  at  the  Brooklyn  art
school  and  at  the  school  of  the  national  academy
of  design  in  New  York.  He  went  to  Paris  in  1866,
and  was  one  of  the  first  American  students  to  en-
ter the  studio  of  Gerome  as  a  pupil.  He  studied
at  the  ecole  des  beaux  arts  in  Paris  for  five  years,
the  interval  of  study  being  devoted  to  diligent
outside  work  at  Pont  Aven  and  elsewhere  in  Brit-
tany. He  first  sent  a  picture  to  the  Paris  salon  in
1868 ;  it  was  entitled  "  Jeu  Breton,"  and,  like  its
almost  yearly  successors  in  that  exhibition,  had  the
good  fortune  to  be  hung  "  on  the  line."  During  this
period  he  contributed  to  the  salon  of  1869  "  The  Bre-
ton Children  in  Carnival  Time,"  of  which  an  engrav-
ing was  published  in  the  illustrated  papers.  In  1870
he  sent  "  The  American  Circus  in  Brittany."  In
1871  there  was  no  salon  because  of  the  Franco-
Prussian  war.  His  contribution  in  1872  was
"Apollo  carrying  away  Cyrene."  The  winter  of
1872-'8  he  passed  in  Algiers,  and  returned  to  the
Pyrenees  in  the  summer  of  1873  and  painted  "  The
Diligence."  An  excursion  through  the  Pyrenees
in  1872  furnished  the  suggestion  of  "  Bringing  in
the  Maize "  (near  Bayonne),  which  was  exhibited
that  year,  and  is  one  of  his  most  successful  works.
Later,  in  1873,  he  went  to  Egypt,  and,  after
working  for  a  time  at  Cairo,  went  with  friends  as
far  up  the  Nile  as  the  second  cataract.  His
sketches  taken  at  this  time  furnished  the  theme  of
his  contributions  to  the  salon  on  his  return  to
Franco:  "The  Funeral  of  a  Mummy"  (1877);
"  Pastimes  of  an  Assyrian  King "  (1878) ;  and
"  Procession  of  the  bull  Apis  "  (1879).  The  last  of
these  is  now  in  the  Corcoran  art  gallery,  Washing-
ton. "  The  Funeral  of  a  Mummy  "  was  one  of  the
successful  pictures  of  the  Paris  international  exhi-
bition of  1878,  where  it  was  awarded  a  medal  of
the  second  class,  and  at  the  same  time  the  artist
was  "  decore  "  by  the  "  legion  of  honor."  Many
oriental  and  archasological  pictures  were  produced
during  these  years,  several  of  which  were  engraved
in  "  Harper's '  Monthly  Magazine,"  October,  1881.
In  1871  he  began  to  exhibit  pictures  in  the  New
York  national  academy,  sending  for  that  year's  ex-
hibition "Illusions  in  High  Life."  In  1874  he
exhibited  the  salon  picture  of  the  preceding  year,


374


BRIDGMAN


BRIGGS


"  Bringing  in  the  Maize,"  and  in  1875  three :  "  The
American  Circus  in  Paris,"  "  Tete  a  Tete  in  Cairo,"
and  "  In  the  Pyrenees."  The  same  year  he  was
made  an  associate  of  the  national  academy.  In
1876  he  exhibited  "A  Moorish  Interior"  and
"  Chapel-Noon,  Brittany,"  and  sent  to  the  centen-
nial exhibition  at  Philadelphia  •'  A  Kybelian
Woman,"  "  Flower  of  the  Harem,"  and  "  The  Nu-
bian Story-Teller."  Many  of  his  finest  paintings
are  owned  in  this  country.  In  1880  Mr.  Bridgman
came  to  America  and  gave  a  collective  exhibition
of  his  works  in  New  York.  He  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  Academy  of  Design  in  1881,
and  the  same  year  returned  to  Paris,  where  he  re-
sides and  has  his  studio.  His  latest  paintings  are
"  Caid's  Escort  at  Rest " ;  "  F'amily  Bath  at  Cairo  " ;
"■  My  Last  Price "  (1884) ;  and  "  Summer  on  the
Bosphorus  "  (1885).

BRIDGMAN,  Laura  Dewey,  blind  deaf-mute,
b.  in  Hanover,  N.  H.,  21  Dec,  1829 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  24  May,  1889.  When  she  was  two  years  old
a  severe  illness  deprived  her  of  sight  and  hear-
ing. Her  sense  of  smell  was  also  destroyed,  and
that  of  taste  impaired.  At  the  age  of  eight  she  was
placed  in  the  Perkins  institution  for  the  blind,  at
Boston,  Mass.,  where  the  superintendent,  Dr.
Samuel  G.  Howe,  undertook  the  difficult  task  of
instructing  her.  The  first  step  was  to  teach  her
the  names  of  objects,  and  this  was  done  by  putting
into  her  hands  some  familiar  article,  together  with
its  name  in  raised  letters.  When  she  had  begun  to
realize  that  the  words  bore  some  relation  to  the
objects,  the  former  were  given  her  alone,  and  it
was  found  that  she  recognized  them.  The  letters
were  then  taken  apart,  and  she  was  taught  how  to
put  them  together  to  form  the  words.  After  she  had
learned  many  names  in  this  way,  type  with  raised
letters  were  given  her,  with  a  board  containing  holes
for  their  reception,  and  it  afforded  her  great  amuse-
ment to  form  with  these  materials  the  names  of  ob-
jects that  were  presented.  She  was  also  taught
the  manual  alphabet  and  its  connection  with  the
raised  letters,  so  that  when  the  name  of  a  new  ob-
ject was  spelled  on  her  teacher's  hands  she  would
compose  the  same  with  her  type.  All  this  was
done  in  three  months.  Laura  never  grew  tired  of
learning,  and  Dr.  Howe,  after  continuing  for  two
years  to  teach  her  the  names  of  objects,  next  tried  to
instruct  her  in  their  qualities  and  relations.  The
difficulties  connected  with  each  step  having  been
surmounted  by  patience  and  perseverance,  she  was
next  taught  to  write  with  a  lead-pencil.  After
this  her  studies  were  various.  She  acquired  a
knowledge  of  arithmetic,  of  geography,  which  was
taught  by  means  of  maps  and  globes  in  relief,  and
also  learned  to  sew  and  to  do  household  work.
The  statement  that  she  learned  to  play  on  the
piano  is  incorrect.  She  constantly  thought,  and
asked  questions  about  what  she  had  learned.  One
day  Dr.  Howe,  when  asked  who  it  was  that  had
made  land  and  sea,  explained  to  her  the  character
of  God,  and  from  this  time  her  religious  feel-
ings became  strongly  developed.  Miss  Bridgman
taught  in  the  Perkins  institution  with  great  suc-
cess, and  made  it  her  home  during  the  school  ses-
sion, spending  the  summers  with  her  mother  at
Hanover,  N.  H.  The  facts  in  her  life  have  been
referred  to  by  theologians,  philosophers,  and  medi-
cal men  all  over  the  world,  and  her  physical  and
mental  condition  is  still  of  great  interest.  It  is
probable  that  when  she  came  to  Dr.  Howe  she  was
not  quite  so  completely  in  the  state  of  one  blind
from  birth  as  he  supposed.  The  modesty  of  her
demeanor,  which  surprised  him  so,  and  the  facility
with  which  she  learned,  were  doubtless  due  to  the


influence  of  the  twenty-six  months  when  she  had
full  possession  of  her  senses,  though  she  was  total-
ly unable  to  remember  anything  that  happened  in
that  period.  She  was  so  deaf  that  her  hand  was
more  sensitive  to  sonorous  vibrations  than  her
head,  yet  she  was  easily  made  dizzy  by  whirling,  a
fact  that  has  been  thought  to  contradict  the  hy-
pothesis  that  the  semicircular  canal  of  the  ear  is
the  seat  of  giddiness.  Her  left  eye  was  sensitive
to  a  strong  beam  of  light,  which,  however,  only
caused  her  pain.  She  was  with  difficulty  able  to
form  a  mental  picture  involving  space  relations,
and  it  required  effort  for  her  to  tell,  for  instance,
how  many  sides  of  an  object  were  visible  from  one
point.  An  interesting  peculiarity  was  her  Homer-
ic use  of  epithets.  Her  bed  was  always  "easy"  or
"  soft,"  her  room  "  cosey,"  and  the  fire  "  nice  "  or
"  warm."  She  was  very  neat  in  her  dress  and  in
the  arrangement  of  her  room,  and,  while  regard-
ing the  rights  of  others,  was  tenacious  of  her
own.  She  was  very  fond  of  "  talking,"  and  often
soliloquized  in  finger-language.  Dr.  Howe  wrote,
in  1873 :  "  She  enjoys  life  quite  as  much,  probably
more,  than  most  persons  do.  She  reads  whatever
book  she  finds  in  raised  print,  but  especially  the
Bible.  She  makes  much  of  her  own  clothing,  and
can  run  a  sewing-machine.  She  seems  happiest
when  she  can  find  some  person  who  knows  the
finger  alphabet,  and  can  sit  and  gossip  with  her
about  acquaintances,  the  news,  and  general  mat-
ters. Her  moral  sense  is  well  developed."  See
"  Life  and  Education  of  Laura  Dewey  Bridgman,"
by  her  instructor,  Mary  S.  Lamson  (Boston,  1878).

BRIGGS,  Amos,  manufacturer,  b.  in  East
Greenwich,  R.  I.,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  8
Aug.,  1874.  He  removed  to  Schaghticoke,  N.  Y.,
in  1820,  and  was  engaged  in  manufacturing  there
for  more  than  fifty  years.  He  held  many  local
offices,  was  several  times  state  senator,  and  did
much  by  his  energy  and  public  spirit  to  increase
the  prosperity  of  the  town.  He  was  also  promi-
nent in  religious  matters.

BRIGGS,  Caleb,  geologist,  b.  in  North  Roches-
ter, Mass.,  24  May,  1812 ;  d.  there,  28  Sept.,  1884.
He  was  educated  as  a  physician,  but  devoted  him-
self to  the  study  of  geology  and  its  allied  sciences,
and  was  engaged  in  the  first  survey  of  the  coal  and
iron  regions  of  Ohio.  He  entered  upon  the  work
in  June,  1837,  explored  Scioto,  Lawrence,  Gallia,
Athens,  Jackson,  Hocking,  and  afterward  Wood,
Crawford,  and  Tuscarawas  cos.,  and,  after  the  sur-
vey terminated  in  1839,  was  employed  in  survey-
ing the  western  coimties  of  Virginia.  He  then
settled  at  Ironton,  Ohio,  where  he  engaged  in  min-
ing, and  gave  |25,000  to  found  a  public  library.

BRIGGS,  Charles  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  citv,  15  Jan.,  1841.  He  studied  in  the
university  of  Virginia  from  1857  till  1860,  in  the
union  theological  seminary.  New  York  city,  from
1861  till  1863,  and  in  the  university  of  Berlin  from
1866  till  1869.  Returning  to  this  country,  he  be-
came pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church  at  Roselle,
N.  J.,  and  in  1874  was  appointed  to  the  chair  of
Hebrew  in  Union  theological  seminary.  He  is
one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Presbyterian  Review,


and  has  published  "  Biblical  Study "  (New  York,
1883);  '-American  Presbyterianism "  (1885);  and
"  Messianic  Prophecy  "  (1886).


BRIGGS,  Charles  Frederick,  author,  b.in
Nantucket,  Mass.,  in  1804;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  M.  \-,
20  June,  1877.  He  removed  to  New  York  early  ni
life,  and  was  there  connected  with  the  press  many
years.  He  began  the  publication  of  the  "  Broad-
way Journal "  in  1844,  and  in  the  following  year
Edgar  A.  Poe  became  his  associate  editor, trow


BRIGGS


BRIGHAM


375


1853  till  1856,  in  connection  with  George  William
Curtis  and  Parke  Godwin,  he  was  an  editor  of
«  Putnam's  Magazine,"  and  was  also  an  editor  of  the
new  series  begun  in  1869.  He  was  also  connected
with  the  "New  York  Times"  and  the  "Evening

Mirror,"  in  which
he  published  a
series  of  humor-
ous letters  signed
"  Fernando  Men-
dez  Pinto."  He
was  afterward  em-
ployed in  the  cus-
tom-house, and
in  1870  joined
the  editorial  staff
of  the  Brooklyn
"Union,"  of  which
he  was  chief  ed-
itor in  1874.  In
the  latter  part  of
1874  he  became
an  attache  of  the
New  York  "  Inde-
pendent," where
he  continued  till
his  '  death.  He
published  "  Harry
Franco ;  a  Tale  of  the  Great  Panic  "  (1839) ;  "  The
Haunted  Merchant "  (1848) ;  "  Working  a  Passage,
or  Life  on  a  Liner "  (1844) ;  "  Trippings  of  Tom
Pepper"  (1847);  and,  in  connection  with  A.  Mav-
erick, "  History  of  the  Atlantic  Telegraph  Cable  "
(1858).  These  works  are  largely  humorous,  and
deal  with  life  in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Briggs  also
wrote  a  few  pieces  of  poetry,  some  of  which  ap-
peared in  "  Putnam's  Magazine,"  and  others  in  a
volume  of  selections  entitled  "  Seaweeds  from  the
Shores  of  Nantucket "  (Boston,  1853).

BRIGGS,  George  Nixon,  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, b.  in  Adams,  Mass.,  13  April,  1796;  d.  in
Pittsfield,  Mass.,  12  Sept.,  1861.  His  father  served
under  Stark  and  Allen  at  Bennington.  In  1809  he
was  apprenticed  to  a  hatter  at  White  Creek,  N.  Y.,
but  was  taken  from  the  shop  in  1811  by  an  elder
brother  and  given  a  year's  schooling.  He  then  be-
gan the  study  of  law,  and  in  October,  1818,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  where
he  soon  became  prominent,  practising  in  Adams,
Lanesborough,  and  Pittsfield.  In  1827,  by  his  de-
fence of  a  Stockbridge  Indian,  who  was  tried  for
murder  at  Lenox,  he  established  his  reputation  as
one  of  the  best  criminal  lawyers  in  the  state.
From  1824  till  1831  he  was  register  of  deeds  for  his
county,  and  in  1830  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
whig,  serving  six  successive  terms,  and  being  at  one
time  chairman  of  the  post-office  conmiittee.  He
was  known  as  an  eloquent  debater.  From  1843  till'
1851  he  was  governor  of  Massachusetts.  During
his  administration  the  murder  of  Dr  Parkman  by
Prof.  Webster  occurred,  and  the  most  extraor-
dinary efforts  were  made  to  induce  the  governor
either  to  pardon  the  offender  or  to  commute  his
sentence ;  but,  believing  that  the  good  of  the  com-
nmnity  required  the  execution  of  the  murderer,  he
refused  to  interpose.  Gov.  Briggs  was  appointed
one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
1851.  which  office  he  continued  to  fill  till  the  reor-
ganization of  the  courts  of  the  state  in  1856.  In
1853  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional
convention.  In  1861  he  was  one  of  a  commission
to  adjust  the  claims  between  the  United  States  and
New  Granada ;  but  his  death,  which  resulted  from
the  accidental  discharge  of  a  fowling-piece,  oc-
curred before  he  had  entered  upon  his  duties. He


had  taken  a  deep  interest  in  the  great  struggle
upon  which  the  nation  had  just  entered,  and  one
of  his  last  public  acts  was  to  address  a  regiment  of
Massachusetts  volunteers,  of  which  his  son  was  the
colonel.  Gov.  Briggs  had  taken  through  life  an
active  interest  in  religious  and  benevolent  enter-
prises, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  president
of  the  American  Baptist  missionary  union,  of  the
American  tract  society  at  Boston,' the  American
temperance  union,  and  the  Massachusetts  Sabbath-
school  union,  and  director  in  several  other  benevo-
lent societies.  He  was  also,  for  sixteen  years,  a
trustee  of  Williams  college.  A  memoir  of  him,  with
the  title  "  Great  in  Goodness,"  was  published  by
the  Rev.  William  C.  Richards  (Boston,  1866).— His
son,  Henry  Shaw,  soldier,  b.  1  Aug.,  1824,  was
graduated  at  Williams  in  1844,  and  became  a  law-
yer. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined
the  army  as  colonel  of  the  10th  Massachusetts  vol-
unteers, and  distinguished  himself  at  the  battle  of
Fair  Oaks,  where  he  was  wounded.  On  17  July,
1862,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  general
court-martial  in  Washington,  D.  C- — Joseph  Will-
iam, postal  reformer,  nephew  of  George  Nixon,  b.
in  Clermont,  N".  Y.,  5  July,  1813 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,
Ohio,  23  Feb.,  1872.  He  was  left  an  orphan  in
infancy,  was  brought  up  in  the  family  of  his  uncle,
received  a  common-school  education,  and  followed
the  trade  of  a  harness-maker.  In  1864,  having  be-
come an  enthusiastic  advocate  of  the  free-delivery
letter  system,  he  received  from  Postmaster-General
Blair  the  appointment  of  superintendent  of  the
system  throughout  the  country.  He  organized  it
in  fifty-two  cities,  and  literally  wore  himself  out  in
the  service.  Mr.  Briggs  was  a  man  of  more  than
ordinary  mechanical  genius.  In  1838  he  patented
a  stitching-machine,  and  claimed  that  he  was  the
first  to  use  a  grooved-eye  pointed  needle  that  made
a  lock-stitch.

BRIGHAM,  Amariah,  physician,  b.  in  New
Marlborough,  Berkshire  co.,  Mass.,  26  Dec,  1798 ;
d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  8  Sept.,  1849.  He  lost  his  father
early  in  life,  and  was  taken  in  charge  by  his  uncle,
a  physician  in  Schoharie,  N.  Y.,  who  intended  to
educate  the  boy  for  his  own  profession.  But  his
uncle's  death  forced  young  Brigham,  then  about
fourteen  years  old,  to  rely  upon  himself,  and,  mak-
ing his  way  alone  to  Albany,  he  obtained  a  place
in  a  book-store,  where  he  remained  three  years,  ac-
quiring a  great  fondness  for  books.  Returning  to
New  Marlborough,  he  spent  nearly  five  years,  first
in  preparation  for  the  study  of  medicine,  and  then
in  its  prosecution,  teaching  school,  meanwhile,  dur-
ing the  winter  months.  Beginning  practice  about
1821,  he  lived  two  years  in  I^nfield,  Mass.,  and  then
removed  to  Greenfield,  where  he  became  widely
known  as  a  surgeon.  In  June,  1828,  he  visited
Europe,  where  ho  spent  a  year  in  Great  Britain,
France,  Italy,  and  Spain,  attending  occasional  lec-
tures and  studying  in  hospitals  and  other  public
institutions.  Returning  to  Greenfield,  he  remained
until  April,  1831,  when  he  removed  to  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  soon  became  eminent.  At  this  time  in-
fant schools  were  in  high  favor  in  Hartford,  and
frequent  revivals  were  in  progress  there.  Dr.  Brig-
ham,  deeming  both  injurious,  published  his  views  on
the  former  in  a  work  entitled  "  Influence  of  Mental
Cultivation  on  the  Health  "  (1832 ;  3d  ed.,  Phila-
delphia, 1845),  and  on  the  latter  in  "  Influence  of
Religion  upon  the  Health  and  Physical  Welfare  of
Mankind  "  (Boston,  1835).  These  outspoken  opin-
ions of  Dr.  Brigham's,  together  with  his  politics,
which  were  strongly  democratic,  prejudiced  many
worthy  people  against  him. In  1837  he  delivered


376


BRIGHAM


BRIGNOLI


a  course  of  lectures  before  the  College  of  physicians
and  surgeons  in  New  York,  and  in  1840  was  ap-
pointed superintendent  of  the  Hartford  retreat  for
the  insane,  notwithstanding  strong  opposition  from
many  of  the  directors  on  grounds  stated  above.  In
1842,  having  accepted  a  similar  place  in  the  state
lunatic  asylum  at  Utica,  N.  Y.,  he  removed  to  that
place,  and  remained  there  until  his  death.  Here,
as  at  Hartford,  he  was  successful,  both  as  a  busi-
ness manager  and  in  his  care  for  his  patients.  Be-
sides having  personal  supervision  of  about  500  in-
sane persons,  he  delivered  popular  lectures,  was
often  called  to  testify  in  the  courts  as  an  expert,
and  established,  in  1844,  the  quarterly  "  Journal  of
Insanity."  This  strain  upon  him  was  one  of  the
causes  of  his  death,  which  a  trip  through  the
southern  states,  in  the  spring  of  1848,  was  unable
long  to  postpone.  Dr.  Brigham  published,  besides
the  works  already  mentioned,  a  "  Treatise  on  Epi-
demic Cholera  "  (1832) ;  "  Diseases  of  the  Brain  "
(Utica,  1836);  and  "Asylum  Souvenir,"  a  small
volume  of  maxims  for  the  use  of  those  who  had
been  under  his  care  (Utica,  1849).

BRIGHAM,  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  27  July,  1820 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.
Y.,  19  Feb.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1839,  and  on  27  March,  1844,  was  ordained  pas-
tor of  the  first  Congregational  church  in  Taunton,
Mass.  He  became  pastor  of  a  Unitarian  church  in
Ann  Arbor,  Mich.,  in  1866,  and  in  the  same  year
was  chosen  professor  of  biblical  archaeology  and
ecclesiastical  hist/ory  at  Meadville  (Pa.)  theological
school,  where  he  lectured  twice  a  year  for  ten  years.
He  also  organized  in  Ann  Arbor  a  Bible-class  espe-
cially for  the  students  of  Michigan  university.  In
1877  ill  health  forced  him  to  give  up  his  work.  He
was  a  member  of  the  State  board  of  health,  of  the
American  oriental  society,  the  Philological  society,
and  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science,  contributed  much  to  periodical  litera-
ture, and  published  "  Letters  of  Foreign  Travel "
(2  vols.)  and  "  Life  of  Rev.  Simeon  Daggett."  A
collection  of  his  papers,  with  a  memoir  by  Rev.  E.
B.  Willson,  appeared  after  his  death  (Boston,  1881).

BRIGHAM,  Paul,  soldier,  b.  in  1745;  d.  in
Norwich,  Vt.,  16  June,  1824.  He  was  four  years  a
captain  in  the  Revolutionary  army,  was  high  sheriff
of  Windsor  county,  Vt.,  for  five  years,  major-gen-
eral of  mili'tia,  and  chief  judge  of  the  county  court
for  five  years.  He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  the
state  from  1796  till  1813,  and  again  from  1815  till
1820.  From  25  Aug.  till  16  Oct.,  1797,  he  was  act-
ing governor,  by  reason  of  the  death  of  Gov.
Thomas  Chittenden.

BRIGHT,  Jesse  D.,  senator,  b.  in  Norwich,
Chenango  co.,  K  Y.,  18  Dec,  1812 ;  d.  in  Balti-
more, Md..  20  May,  1875.  He  was  taken  to  In-
diana by  his  parents  in  1820,  received  an  academic
education  there,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1831.  and  began  practice  in  Madison,
Ind.  He  was  elected  judge  of  the  probate  court
of  Jefferson  co.  in  1834,  was  sent  to  the  legis-
lature in  1836,  and  in  1841  became  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  state.  He  had  also  served  as  cir-
cuit judge  and  U.  S.  marshal.  He  was  sent  to  the
U.  S.  senate  as  a  democrat  in  1845,  and  was  twice
re-elected,  serving  several  times  as  its  president  pro
tempore.  While  in  congress  he  voted  persistently
with  the  southern  democrats  on  all  questions  in-
volving the  restriction  of  slavery.  In  1857  it
was  claimed  by  the  republicans  that  his  election
was  fraudulent,  and  his  seat  was  contested.  He
was  victorious,  however,  and  held  it  until  1862,
when  a  charge  of  disloyalty  was  brought  against
him,  the  chief  evidence  being  a  letter  addressed  to


"  His  Excellency,  Jefferson  Davis,  President  of  the
Confederation  of  States,"  recommending  a  friend
who  had  an  "  improvement  in  fire-arms  "  of  which
he  wished  to  dispose.  The  senate  committee  on  the
judiciary  reported,  five  to  two,  that  this  did  not
constitute  sufficient  evidence  against  Mr.  Bright.
In  a  speech  in  his  own  behalf,  he  said  that  in  March,
1861  (the  date  of  the  letter),  he  had  no  idea  that  there
would  be  war,  and  that  he  wrote  it  to  rid  himself  of
the  inventor's  importunities.  Nevertheless,  strong
speeches  against  him  were  made  by  Charles  Sum-
ner and  others,  and  on  5  Feb.,  1862,  he  was  for-
mally expelled  from  the  senate,  by  a  vote  of  32  to
14.  He  afterward  removed,  with  his  family,  to
CarroUton,  Ky.,  and  then  to  Covington,  where  he
was  elected  to  the  Kentucky  legislature  in  1866.
In  1874  he  removed  to  Baltimore,  where  he  re-
mained till  his  death.

BRIGHT,  Jonathan  Brown,  author,  b.  in
Waltham,  Mass.,  23  April,  1800 ;  d.  there,  17  Dec.,
1879.  He  was  educated  in  the  Waltham  common
schools  and  in  Westford  (Mass.)  academy,  and  at
sixteen  years  of  age  removed  to  Missouri.  Five
years  later  he  engaged  in  business  in  Alabama,
and  in  1823  went  to  New  York,  where  he  became  a
cotton-broker.  In  1849  he  left  business  and  re-
tired to  his  native  place,  where  he  was  known  as  a
public-spirited  citizen.  Mr.  Bright  became  inter-
ested in  genealogy,  and  made  many  researches  into
his  family  history  both  here  and  in  England,  the
results  of  which  were  published  in  a  volume  in-
tended for  private  distribution,  which  has  been
pronounced  a  model  for  works  of  its  kind.  It  is
entitled  "  The  Brights  of  Suffolk,  England,  repre-
sented in  America  by  the  Descendants  of  Henry
Bright.  Jr.,  who  settled  at  Watertown,  Mass.,  about
1630"  (1858).  Mr.  Bright  left  to  Harvard  college
$50,000,  the  income  to  be  divided  between  the  pur-
chase of  books  and  the  support  of  scholarships,
to  which  Brights  lineally  descended  from  Henry
Bright,  Jr.,  should  have  priority  of  claim.

BRIGHT,  Marshal  H.,  journalist,  b.  in  Hud
son,  N.  Y.,  18  Aug.,  1834.  He  received  an  aca-
demic education,  and  took  a  course  at  the  Law-
rence scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1852-'3.  In
1854  he  became  assistant  editor  of  the  Albany
"  Argus,"  and  was  a  reporter  in  the  New  York
state  senate.  He  was  appointed  on  the  staff  of
Gen.  Robert  Anderson  in  October,  1861,  and  after-
ward served  on  the  staffs  of  Gens.  W.  T.  Sher-
man, D.  C.  Buell,  W.  S.  Rosecrans,  and  George  H.
Thomas.  He  was  brevetted  major  for  his  services
during  the  war,  and,  after  resigning  his  commis-
sion at  its  close,  engaged  in  silver-mining  in  Ne-
vada. In  1873  he  became  managing  editor  of  the
"  Christian  at  Work,"  New  York,  and  in  1880  its
editor-in-chief.  He  has  contributed  to  periodicals
on  theological,  scientific,  and  philosophical  sub-
jects, and  has  delivered  public  addresses.

BRIGNOLI,  Pasquale,  singer,  b.  in  Naples,
Italy,  m  1824 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30  Oct.,  1884.
He  received  a  fine  musical  education,  and  became
a  pianist  of  some  ability.  It  is  said  that  at  the
age  of  fifteen  he  wrote  an  opera,  and,  disgusted  a*,
the  way  in  which  the  finest  aria  was  sung,  rushed
upon  the  stage  and  sang  it  himself,  to  the  delight
of  all.  He  paid  little  attention,  however,  to  the  cul-
tivation of  his  voice  until  after  he  was  twenty-one.
Success  in  the  concert-room  encouraged  him  to
appear  in  opera,  in  Paris  and  London.  He  came
to  the  United  States  with  Strakosch  in  1855,  and
soon  attained  a  popularity  that  lasted  almost  to
the  end  of  his  life.  His  voice  in  his  best  days  was
a  tenor  of  great  volume  and  sweetness,  and  even
in  his  sixtieth  year  he  was  still  heard  with  delight


BRILLAT-SAVARIN


BRINTON


377


in  concert  and  English  opera.  He  was  unrivalled
in  grace  of  execution  and  facility  in  phrasing.  He
supported  Madame  Patti  on  her  first  appearance
in  the  United  States,  and  afterward  sang  with  La
Grange,  Pare  pa,  Nilsson,  Titiens,  and  many  other
celebrated  artists.  Brignoli  made  three  trips  to
Europe;  but  this  country  became  his  adopted
home.  Notwithstanding  the  large  sums  of  money
that  he  made  by  his  singing,  he  died  in  poverty.

BRILLAT-SAVARIN,  Anthelme,  French  au-
thor, b.  in  Bellay,  1  April,  1755;  d.  in  Paris,  2
Feb.,  1826.  He  was  a  deputy  in  the  states-general
in  1789,  judge  of  the  court' of  cassation  in  1792,
and  in  1793  mayor  of  Bellay,  but  fled  to  Switzer-
land, and  thence  to  the  United  States  in  that  year
to  escape  the  revolutionary  tribunal.  He  resided
three  years  in  New  York,  where  he  taught  French
and  played  an  instrument  in  the  orchestra  of  a
theatre.'  After  his  return  to  France  in  1796  he
was  a  judge  in  the  court  of  cassation.  Besides
anonymous  writings  on  political  economy  and
archaaology,  and  a  volume  on  duelling,  he  pub-
lished a  famous  work  entitled  "  Physiologie  du
gout"  (1825),  interspersed  with  anecdotes  of  his
sojourn  in  the  United  States.

BRINDIS,  Claudio  J.,  Cuban  negro  violinist,
b.  in  Havana  in  1852.  His  first  studies,  begun  un-
der his  father,  were  completed  in  the  conservatory
of  Paris,  where  he  won  the  first  prize.  He  has
played  with  great  success  in  all  the  principal  cities
of  JEurope,  and  received  many  decorations  from
European  monarchs.

BRINKERHOFF,  Jacob,  jurist,  b.  in  New
York  in  1810:  d.  in  Mansfield,  Ohio,  19  July,  1880.
He  removed  early  to  Plymouth.  Ohio,  and  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat,  serving  from  4
Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,  1847.  While  in  congress
he  was  the  author  of  the  original  draft  of  the  cele-
brated Wilmot  proviso.  From  1856  till  1871  he
was  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio.

BRINLEY,  Francis,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  Nov.,  1800.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1818,  studied  law  with  the  Hon.  William
Sullivan,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  before  he  came
of  age.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Boston  com-
mon council  for  several  years,  and  its  president
in  1850  and  1851.  He  was  a  member  of  the  lower
house  of  the  legislature  in  1832,  1850,  and  1854,
and  in  1852, 1853,  and  1863  of  the  state  senate.  In
1853  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  state  constitutional
convention.  In  1857  he  removed  to  Tyngsborough,
and  afterward  to  Newport,  R.  I.  Mr.  Brinley  took
great  interest  in  railways  and  other  internal  im-
provements, and  advocated  the  abolition  of  im-
prisonment for  debt,  and  the  maintenance  of  a
well-regulated  militia.  He  was  three  times  cap-
tain of  the  "  Ancient  and  Honorable  Artillery
Company  "  of  Boston,  and  for  several  years  presi-
dent of  the  Redwood  library,  Newport.  He  has
contributed  frequently  to  "  Hunt's  Merchant's
Magazine  "  and  to  the  "  American  Jurist,"  and  his
articles  on  dower  are  quoted  by  Chancellor  Kent
in  his  commentaries.  He  also  wrote  much  for  the
newspapers,  and  was  successful  as  a  lecturer.  He
has  published  an  "  Address  before  the  Franklin
Debating  Society  of  Boston  "  (1830),  and  a  life  of
his  brother-in-law,  William  T.  Porter,  founder  of
the  "  Spirit  of  the  Times  "  (1860).

BRINLEY,  George,  book-collector,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, 15  May,  1817 ;  d.  in  Bermuda,  14  May,  1875.
He  was  educated  at  the  best  schools  in  Boston.
For  a  short  time  he  engaged  in  business ;  but  his
health  admonished  him  to  adopt  a  different  mode
of  life,  and,  having  inherited  a  suflicient  estate,  he
Was  able  to  indulge  his  taste  for  rare  and  curious


books.  He  employed  agents  and  purchasers  wher-
ever books  were  to  be  bought,  and  made  a  collec-
tion of  Americana  that  was  only  surpassed  by  those
of  John  Carter  Brown  and  James  Lenox.  It  com-
prised more  than  12,000  volumes,  a  large  propor-
tion of  them  very  rare,  and  all  of  them  valuable.
Such  of  the  books  as  required  binding  were  placed
in  the  hands  of  the  most  skilled  workmen  of  mod-
ern times.  In  his  will  Mr.  Brinley  gave  books  to
the  value  of  $25,000  to  the  libraries  of  Yale  and
other  colleges ;  representatives  from  each  to  attend
the  sale  and  bid  with  other  intending  buyers,  but
not  being  required  to  pay  for  their  purchases  un-
less the  pro-rata  amount  was  exceeded.  During
most  of  his  life  Mr.  Brinley  resided  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  where  his  collection  was  jealously  guarded
from  the  sight  of  all  save  the  most  appreciative
and  trusted  of  his  book  -  loving  acquaintances.
The  library  was  catalogued  by  Dr.  J.  Hammond
Trumbull,  of  Hartford,  and  its  three  parts  com-
prise a  nearly  exhaustive  bibliography  of  the  rarest
American  books.  In  1868  Mr.  Brinley  received
the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Yale. — His  son,  Charles
j  A.,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  23  Aug.,  1847,  was  at-
tached in  1864-'5  to  the  field  party  of  the  Califor-
nia statevgeological  survey,  and  was  with  the  engi-
neers employed  by  the  U.  S.  government  to  survey
a  wagon-road  to  Colorado  river.  Returning  to  the
east,  he  entered  Sheffield  scientific  school  at  Yale,
and  was  graduated  in  1869,  spending  three  years
in  a  post-graduate  course  of  chemistry  and  metal-
lurgy. In  these  branches  of  science  he  became  a
recognized  expert,  and  since  1872  has  been  super-
intendent of  large  steel  works  near  Philadelphia,
and  of  a  sugar-refinery  in  that  citv.

BRINTON,  Daniel  tJarrison,  ethnologist,  b.
in  Chester  co..  Pa.,  13  May,  1837.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1858  and  at  the  Jefferson  medical
college  in  1861.  After  which  he  spent  a  year  in
Europe  in  study  and  in  travel.  On  his  return  he
entered  the  army,  in  August,  1862,  as  acting  assist-
ant surgeon.  In  February  of  the  following  year
he  was  commissioned  surgeon,  and  served  as  sur-
geon-in-chief of  the  second  division,  11th  corps.
He  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Chancellorsville,
Gettysburg,  and  other  engagements,  and  was  ap-
pointed medical  director  of  his  corps  in  October,
1863.  In  consequence  of  a  sunstroke  received  soon
after  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,  he  was  disqualified
for  active  service,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year
he  became  superintendent  of  hospitals  at  Quincy
and  Springfield,  111.,  until  August.  1865,  when,  the
civil  war  having  closed,  he  was  brevetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel and  discharged.  He  then  settled  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  became  editor  of  "  The
Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter,"  and  also  of  the
quarterly  "  Compendium  of  Medical  Science."  Dr.
Brinton  has  likewise  been  a  constant  contributor
to  other  medical  journals,  chiefly  on  questions  of
public  medicine  and  hygiene,  and  has  edited  sev-
eral volumes  on  therapeutics  and  diagnosis,  espe-
cially the  popular  series  known  as  "  Napheys's
Modern  Therapeutics,"  which  has  passed  through
many  editions.  In  the  medical  controversies  of
the  day,  he  has  always  taken  the  position  that
medical  science  should  be  based  on  the  results
of  clinical  observation,  rather  than  on  physiologi-
cal experiments.  He  has  become  prominent  as  a
student  and  a  writer  on  American  ethnology,  his
work  in  this  direction  beginning  while  he  was  a
student  in  college.  The  winter  of  1856-7,  spent  in
Florida,  supplied  him  with  material  for  his  first
published  book  on  the  subject.  In  1884  he  was
appointed  professor  of  ethnology  and  archaeology
in  the  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,  Philadelphia.


378


BRION


BRISSOT  DE WARVILLE


For  some  years  he  has  been  president  of  the  Nu-
mismatic and  Antiquarian  Society  of  Philadelphia,
and  in  1886  he  was  elected  vice-president  of  the
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science,  to  preside  over  the  section  on  anthro-
pology. During  the  same  year  he  was  awarded
the  medal  of  the  "  Societe  Americaine  de  France  "
for  his  "  numerous  and  learned  works  on  American
ethnology,"  being  the  first  native  of  the  United
States  that  has  been  so  honored.  In  1885  the
American  publishers  of  the  "  Iconographic  Ency-
clopaedia "  requested  him  to  edit  the  first  volume,
to  contribute  to  it  the  articles  on  "  Anthropology ' '
and  "  Ethnology,"  and  to  revise  that  on  "  Ethnog-
raphy," by  Prof.  Gerland,  of  Strasburg.  He  also
contributed  to  the  second  volume  of  the  same  work
an  essay  on  the  "  Prehistoric  Archaeology  of  both
Hemispheres,"  Dr.  Brinton  has  established  a  li-
brary and  publishing-house  of  aboriginal  Ameri-
can literature,  for  the  purpose  of  placing  within
the  reach  of  scholars  authentic  materials  for  the
study  of  the  languages  and  culture  of  the  native
races  of  America.  Each  work  is  the  production  of
native  minds,  and  is  printed  in  the  original.  The
series,  most  of  which  were  edited  by  Dr.  Brinton
himself,  include  "The  Maya  Chronicles"  (Phila-
delphia, 1882);  "The  Iroquois  Book  of  Rites"
(1883);  "The  Gueguence:  A  Comedy  Ballet  in  the
Nahuatt  Spanish  Dialect  of  Nicaragua"  (1883);  "  A
Migration  Legend  of  the  Creek  Indians "  (1884) ;
"  The  Lenape  and  their  Legends "  (1885) ;  "  The
Annals  of  the  Cakchiquels  "  (1885).  Besides  pub-
lishing numerous  papers,  he  has  contributed  valu-
able reports  on  his  examinations  of  mounds,  shell-
heaps,  rock  inscriptions,  and  other  antiquities.  He
is  the  author  of  "  The  Floridian  Peninsula :  Its
Literarv  Ilistorv,  Indian  Tribes,  and  Antiquities  "
(Philadelphia,  1859);  "The  Myths  of  the  New
World :  A  Treatise  on  the  Symbolism  and  Mythol-
ogy of  the  Red  Race  of  America"  (New  York,
1868) ;  "  The  Religious  Sentiment :  A  Contribution
to  the  Science  and  Philosophy  of  Religion  "  (1876) ;
"American  Hero  Myths:  A  Study  in  the  Native
Religions  of  the  Western  Continent "  (Philadel-
phia, 1882);  "Aboriginal  American  Authors  and
their  Productions,  especially  those  in  the  Native
Languages  "  (1883) ;  and  "  A  Grammar  of  the  Cak-
chiquel  Language  of  Guatemala"  (1884).

BRION,  Luis  (bree-awn'),  ('olombian  naval  ofii-
cer,  b.  in  Curagoa,  6  July,  1782 ;  d.  20  Sept.,  1831.
He  was  sent  to  Holland  to  receive  his  education,
his  father  being  a  native  of  that  country,  entered
the  Dutch  army,  and  afterward  visited  the  United
States,  where  he  studied  navigation.  On  the  death
of  his  father  he  bought  a  vessel,  made  several  voy-
ages, established  a  mercantile  house  at  Curagoa,
and  in  1811  was  appointed  captain  of  a  frigate  in
the  service  of  the  republic  and  state  of  Caracas.
At  his  own  expense  he  fitted  out  a  fleet,  and  at-
tacked the  Spanish  forces  at  the  island  of  Marga-
rita, where  he  gained  a  signal  victory.  Brion  dis-
tinguished himself  at  the  conquest  of  Guiana,  and
also  at  Santa  Marta  and  Cartagena.  The  latter
part  of  his  life  was  rendered  unhappy  by  a  misun-
derstanding with  Bolivar,  which  so  preyed  upon
his  mind  that  he  became  ill,  and  returned  to  Cura-
goa,  dving  soon  afterward  in  poverty.

BRISBANE,  Abbott  Hall,  military  engineer,
b.  in  South  Carolina ;  d.  in  Summerville,  S.  C,  28
Sept.,  1861.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1825,  and  appointed  second  lieuten-
ant of  the  3d  artillery,  serving  on  topographical
duty  in  the  city  of  Washington,  and  afterward
with  the  engineer,  Bernard,  on  the  South  Atlantic
coast  until  the  close  of  the  year  1827,  when  he  re-


signed. He  served  in  the  Florida  war  against  the
Seminole  Indians  in  1835-'6  as  colonel  of  South
Carolina  volunteers,  and  was  engaged  in  the  skir-
mish of  Tomoka,  10  March,  1836.  After  the  war
he  turned  his  attention,  as  engineer,  to  a  projected
railroad  from  Charleston,  S.  C,  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio
having  especially  intrusted  to  him  the  examina-
tion of  the  mountain-passes  through  which  it  was
to  run.  He  received  the  appointment  of  construct-
ing engineer  of  the  projected  road,  which  place  he
held  from  1836  till  1840.  He  was  also  chief  engi-
neer of  the  Ocmulgee  and  Flint  railroad,  Ga.,  in
1840-4.  In  1847-8  he  was  superintending  en-
gineer of  an  artesian  well  for  the  supply  of  water
to  the  city  of  Charleston,  and  he  then  accepted  the
chair  of  belles-lettres  and  ethics  in  the  South  Caro-
lina military  academy,  occupying  the  place  from
1848  till  1853,  after  which  he  retired  to  his  planta-
tion near  Charleston.  He  was  the  author  of  a
political  romance,  "  Ralphton,  or  the  Young  Caro-
linian of  1776."

BRISBANE,  William  H.,  clergyman,  b.  about
1803 ;  d.  in  Arena,  Wis.,  in  1878.  He  inherited  a
large  number  of  slaves,  but  became  convinced  that
slavery  was  wrong,  and  in  1835  brouglit  thirty-
three  of  them  to  the  north,  manumitting  them  and
aiding  them  to  settle  in  life.  In  consequence  of
this,  he  was  obliged  to  take  rank  among  the  poor
men  of  the  country.  Making  his  home  in  Cincin-
nati, he  became  the  associate  of  prominent  aboli-
tionists, and  a  constant  worker  in  their  cause.  In
the  early  days  of  the  anti-slavery  agitation  he  was
among  its  foremost  advocates.  In  1855  he  removed
to  Wisconsin,  was  chief  clerk  of  the  state  senate  in
1857,  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in  Madi-
son, and  early  in  the  civil  war  was  tax  commis-
sioner of  South  Carolina.  In  June,  1874,  he  took
an  active  part  in  the  reunion  of  the  old  abolition
guards  in  Chicago.

BRISBIN,  James  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Boalsburg,
Pa.,  about  1838.  He  received  a  liberal  education,
taught  school,  became  known  as  an  anti-slavery
orator,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  en-
listed as  a  private  in  a  Pennsylvania  regiment,  and
in  April,  1861,  he  was  appointed  second  lieutenant
of  the  1st  dragoons.  At  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  21
July,  1861,  he  was  twice  wounded.  He  was  pro-
moted captain  in  the  6th  cavalry,  5  Aug.,  served
with  his  regiment  in  the  peninsular  campaign  of
the  army  of  the  Potomac  (1862),  and,  under  Gen.  Al-
fred Pleasanton,  accompanied  the  expedition  to  the
Blue  Ridge  mountains  in  1863.  He  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  5th  U.  S.  colored  cavalry,  1  March,
1864,  and  was  engaged  in  the  Red  river  expedition
in  the  department  of  the  Gulf  in  April  and  May.
1864.  Later  in  the  same  year  he  was  on  recruiting
service  in  Kentucky,  and  chief  of  staff  to  Gen.
Burbridge.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  13  March,  1865,  for  gallant  conduct  at
the  battle  of  Marion,  Va.,  16-19  Dec,  1864,  and
was  promoted  to  the  full  rank  of  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  1  May,  1865.  Pie  received  the  brevet
of  major-general  of  volunteers,  15  Dec,  1865.  In
the  mean  time  he  had  received  brevets  of  major
and  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  regular  service  or
gallantry  at  Beverly  Ford,  9  June,  1863,  and  at
Marion,  Va.  He  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the  reg-
ular army,  13  March,  1865,  for  "  meritorious  services
during  the  war."  He  was  transferred  to  the  Jtn
U.  S.  colored  cavalry  in  July,  1866,  and  was  pro-
moted major,  2d  cavalry,  1  Jan.,  1868,  and  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 9th  cavalrv,  6  June,  1885.

BRISSOT  DE  WARVILLE,  Jean  Piem*
French  author,  b.  in  Chartres,  14  Jan.,  17o4:  d.  rfi
Oct.,  1793. He  was  the  thirteenth  son  of  an  inn- ,


BRISTED


BRISTED


379


keeper,  and  was  brought  up  in  the  village  of  Ouar-
ville,  or  Warville,  from  which  he  took  his  name,
studied  law  in  Paris,  and  after  the  completion  of  his
studies  was  employed  by  a  procurator,  for  whom
Robespierre  also  worked.  His  first  book,  "  Theorie
des  lois  criminelles,"  brought  him  to  the  notice  of
Voltaire  and  D'Alembert,  and  his  "Bibliotheque
des  lois  criminelles"  gave  him  a  wide  reputation.
In  1784  he  was  imprisoned  for  four  months  in  the
bastile  as  the  supposed  author  of  a  pamphlet  re-
flecting on  the  queen,  which  was  really  written  by
the  marquis  Pelleport.  Going  to  London  upon  his
release,  he  there  edited  a  learned  periodical  called
the  "  Lyceum."  On  returning  to  Paris,  he  founded,
in  1788,  the  society  of  friends  of  the  blacks,  and
came  to  the  United  States  in  its  commission  to
inquire  into  the  condition  of  the  negroes.  He  re-
turned to  France  at  the  beginning  of  the  revo-
lution of  1789,  and  edited  "  Le  patriote  Fran^ais,"
was  elected  to  the  legislative  assembly,  and  became
the  leader  of  the  girondists,  and  the  most  influen-
tial opponent  of  the  court  and  the  aristocracy.
After  the  king's  flight  he  became  leader  of  the
party  that  demanded  his  deposition,  but  in  the
convention,  in  which  he  sat  as  the  representative
of  the  department  of  Eure-et-Loire,  he  opposed  the
execution  of  the  king,  and  antagonized  the  men
of  September.  He  was  instrumental  in  bringing
about  the  declaration  of  war  against  England,
Holland,  and  Austria.  Incurring  the  hostility  of
Robespierre  and  the  montagnards,  he  was  accused
of  royalism  and  federalism.  After  the  defeat  of
his  party,  the  girondists,  on  31  May.  1793,  he  fled,
but  was  arrested  at  Moulins,  and,  after  a  long  im-
prisonment, during  which  he  wrote  his  memoirs,
was  guillotined.  The  nickname  "  Brissotins,"
originally  invented  by  the  royalists  to  designate
the  revolutionists,  came  to  be  applied  to  the  giron-
dists. While  in  America,  Brissot  adopted  the
habits  of  the  Quakers,  and,  on  his  return  to  France,
introduced  the  fashion  of  wearing  the  hair  with-
out powder.  His  eloquence  and  literary  ability
contributed  materially  to  the  success  of  the  French
revolution.  He  published,  among  other  works,
"Examination  of  the  Travels  of  Chastellux  in
America  " ;  "  The  Commerce  of  America  with  Eu-
rope" (London,  1793);  "Letters  on  the  History  of
England  " ;  and  "  To  his  Constituents  on  the  Situ-
ation of  the  National  Convention."  See  his  "  Me-
moires  pour  servir  a  I'histoire  de  la  revolution,"
published  by  his  son  (Paris,  1830-2);  also  La-
martine's  "History  of  the  Girondists"  and  "Yie
prive  et  politique  de  Brissot "  (Paris,  1792).

BRISTED,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Dorsetshire,
England,  in  1778;  d.  in  Bristol,  R.  L,  23  Feb.,
1855.  He  was  the  son  of  a  clergyman  of  the  estab-
lished church.  After  being  graduated  at  Win-
chester college,  he  studied  medicine  in  Edinburgh,
and  took  a  two  years'  course  of  law  in  the  oiflce  of
the  celebrated  Chitty.  He  removed  to  the  United
States  in  1806,  practised  law  in  New  York  city  for
several  years  with  success,  and  married,  in  1820,  a
daughter  of  John  Jacob  Astor.  He  studied  divin-
ity under  Dr.  (afterward  Bishop)  Griswold,  then
rector  of  St.  Michael's,  Bristol,  R.  I.,  and  in  1828
was  ordained  and  made  the  rector's  assistant.  In
1829  Dr.  Griswold  removed  to  Massachusetts,  and
Mr.  Bristed  became  his  successor  as  rector  of  the
parish,  where  he  remained  until  1843.  In  1807  he
conducted  the  "  Monthly  Magazine,"  and  in  1814
delivered  an  oration  on  "  The  Utility  of  Literary
Establishments."  His  publications*  include  "A
Pedestrian  Tour  through  Part  of  the  Highlands  in
Scotland  in  1801 "  (2  vols.,  1804) ;  "  The  Adviser,
or  the  Moral  and  Literary  Tribunal "  (4  vols.,  Lon-


don, 1802);  "Critical  and  Philosophical  Essays"
(1804);  "The  System  of  the  Society  of  Friends
Examined  "  (1805) ;  "  Edward  and  Anna,"  a  novel
(1805);  "Hints  on  the  National  Bankruptcy  of
Great  Britain  "  (New  York,  1809) ;  "  Resources  of
the  British  Empire"  (1811);  "Resources  of  the
United  States "  (New  York,  1818 ;  reprinted  in
London,  under  the  title  of  "  America  and  her  Re-
sources," 1818) ;  and  "  Thoughts  on  the  Anglican
and  Anglo-American  Churc'lies,"  a  reply  to  Mr.
Wilkes's  work  on  "  Correlative  Claims  and  Duties  "
(New  York  and  London,  1823).  An  English  re-
viewer of  his  "Resources  of  the  United  States,"
which  was  published  about  the  same  time  that
Sydney  Smith  asked  his  famous  question,  "  Who
reads  an  American  book  ? "  referred  to  the  "  un-
substantial prospect  with  which  the  prophetic
folly  that  ever  accompanies  democracy  had  im-
pressed his  mind  to  a  degree  almost  equalling  that
of  the  vain  people  with  whom  he  had  domiciled."
—His  son,  Charles  Astor,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  6  Oct.,  1820 ;  d  in  Washington,  D.  C,  15  Jan.,
1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  with  honors  in
1839,  and  afterward  spent  five  years  in  Trinity  col-
lege, Cambridge,  England,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1845,  tak-
ing  numerous
prizes  and  being
made  a  founda-
tion scholar  of
the  college.  In
1847  he  mar-
ried the  daugh-
ter of  Henry
Brevoort,  and
travelled  exten-
sively in  Eu-
rope, amusing
himself  by  writ-
ing for  newspa-
pers and  period-
icals, on  social
and  ephemeral
topics,  general-
ly over  the  pen- y^ ^^ _y;^ • ^ ^

name  of  "Carl  L^  ^^  ^A.,^  ^^1:^7-
Benson."  There

was  a  cynical  tone  in  many  of  his  writings,
which  increased  as  he  grew  older.  Classical  sub-
jects, poetical  themes,  and  social  sketches  were
treated  with  equal  ease;  he  did  not  hesitate  to
discuss  any  topic,  great  or  small,  that  struck  his
fancy,  and  his  wide  culture  and  profound  schol-
arship made  his  essays  attractive  to  readers  of
light  literature.  Mr.  Bristed  was  one  of  the  trus-
tees of  the  Astor  library  from  its  origin.  After
spending  many  years  in  Europe,  at  its  gayest
capitals  and  resorts,  where  he  was  the  associate
of  many  eminent  men  of  the  time,  he  returned  to
this  country,  and  made  his  home  in  Washington.
His  second  wife,  who  survives  him,  is  a  member  of
the  Sedgwick  family.  Bristed's  published  works
comprise  "  Selections  from  Catullus,"  by  an  Eton
assistant  master,  which  he  revised,  adding  notes  of
his  own  (1849) ;  "  Letters  to  Horace  Mann,"  being
a  reply  to  some  strictures  on  the  characters  of  Gi-
rard  and  Astor,  entitled  "  Thoughts  for  a  Young
Man  "  (1850) ;  "  The  Upper  Ten  Thousand,"  a  series
of  sketches  of  New  York  society  life,  first  printed
in  "  Eraser's  Magazine  "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  Five
Years  in  an  English  University  "  (1852).  _  To  this
last  volume  were  added  in  an  appendix  his  college
orations  and  essays,  together  with  specimen
examination-papers  (new  ed.,  enlarged.  New  York,
1872). He  also  published  the  "  Interference  Theory


380


BRISTOL


BROADDUS


of  Government "  (New  York,  1867),  and  "  Pieces  of
a  Broken-down  Critic  "  (New  York,  1874).

BRISTOL,  Augusta  Cooper,  educator,  b.  in
Croydon,  N.  II.,  17  April,  1835.  She  was  the  young-
est of  ten  children,  and  early  developed  a  fondness
for  poetry,  music,  and  mathematics.  At  nine  years
of  age  she  began  writing  poetry,  and  at  fourteen
studied  from  the  same  mathematical  text-books
used  by  her  brothers  at  Dartmouth.  Her  educa-
tion was  acquired  at  Kimball  Union  Academy,  and
in  1850  she  became  a  teacher.  In  18G6  she  married
Louis  Bristol,  and  meanwhile  she  had  gained  some
reputation  as  a  writer  of  poetry.  Later  her  arti-
cles and  lectures  on  moral  and  social  topics  at-
tracted attention,  and  during  the  summer  of  1880
she  was  sent  to  study  the  Equitable  Association  of
Labor  and  Capital  at  Guise,  in  France.  For  three
months  she  resided  in  the  "Social  Palace,"  and
very  thoroughly  investigated  the  subject.  In  Sep-
tember, 1880,  she  was  delegated  to  represent  the
constructive  liberal  thought  of  America  at  an  In-
ternational Convention  of  Freethinkers  held  in
Brussels,  On  her  return  to  the  United  States  she
was  elected  state  lecturer  by  the  order  of  the  Pa-
trons of  Husbandry  in  New  Jersey.  This  office
she  filled  until  1884,  when,  the  work  having  be-
come national,  she  was  sent  by  a  bureau  to  visit
Illinois.  Indiana,  Michigan,  New  Hampshire,  and
Ohio.  Besides  a  volume  of  "  Poems "  (Boston,
1868),  she  has  published  "  The  Relation  of  the  Ma-
ternal Function  to  the  Woman's  Intellect "  (Wash-
ington, 1876) ;  "  The  Philosophy  of  Art "  (New
York,  1878) ;  "  Science  and  its  Relations  to  Human
Character"  (1878;  translated  into  French,  Ant-
werp, 1881);  and  "The  Present  Phase  of  Woman's
Advancement "  (1880) ;  and  also  edited  and  assisted
in  the  translation  of  the  "  Laws  and  Regulations
of  the  Mutual  Assurance  of  the  Institution  at
Guise  "  (1881).

BRISTOL,  John  Biinyan,  landscape-painter,
b.  in  Hillsdale,  N.  Y.,  14  March,  1826.  His  early
life  was  a  struggle  without  aid,  instruction,  or
sympathy.  At  the  beginning  of  his  career  he
painted  figures  and  portraits,  but  afterward  turned
his  attention  exclusively  to  landscapes.  His  stud-
ies were  from  nature.  The  season  of  1859  was  de-
voted to  tropical  pictures,  which  attracted  much
attention.  He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the
national  academy,  and  also  a  member  of  the
artists'  fund  society  in  1861,  and  an  academician
in  1875,  exhibiting  regularly  in  the  gallery.
Among  his  works  are  "  Autumn  Afternoon,  Bol-
ton, Lake  George  " ;  "  Sunrise,  Mount  Mansfield  " :
"  Adirondacks,  from  Lake  Champlain  '* ;  "  On  the
St.  John's  River,  Florida  "  (1863) ;  "  Ascutney  Moun-
tain " ;  "  In  the  Housatonic  Valley  "  (1875) :  "  Monu-
ment Mountain,  Berkshire  Co."  (1875);  "Mount
Equinox,  Vermont "  (1878) ;  "  Evening  by  the
Housatonic  "  (1878) ;  "  Lake  Memphremagog  "
(1878) ;  "  Lake  Dunraore,  Vt."  (1883) ;  and  "  Hay-
ing-Time near  Middlebury,  Vt."  (1886).

BRISTOW,  Benjamin  Helm,  statesman,  b.  in
Elkton,  Todd  co.,  Ky.,  30  June,  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  college,  Pa.,  in  1851,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Kentucky  in
1853.  He  began  practice  at  Elkton,  whence'  he
removed  to  Hopklnsville  in  1858.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war,  at  a  time  when  the  state  was
wavering  between  loyalty  and  secession,  he  en-
tered the  union  army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
25th  Kentucky  infantry,  and  was  engaged  at  the
capture  of  Fort  Donelson  and  at  the  battle  of
Shiloh,  where  he  was  wounded.  He  afterward
became  colonel  of  the  8th  Kentucky  cavalry,  and
served  throughout  the  war  with  distinction. While


still  in  the  field  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate
for  four  years,  but  resigned  at  the  end  of  two
years,  serving  only  from  1863  until  1865.  He  was
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the  Louisville  district
from  1865  until  1870.  The  ability  with  which  he
filled  these  offices  led  to  his  appointment  as  solici-
tor-general of  the  United  States  on  the  organiza-
tion of  the  department  of  justice  in  October,  1870.
In  1873  he  resigned  to  become  attorney  of  the
Texas  Pacific  railroad,  but  soon  returned  to  the
practice  of  law  at  Louisville.  He  was  nominated
attorney-general  of  the  United  States  in  Decem-
ber, 1873,  but  not  confirmed.  President  Grant
appointed  him  secretary  of  the  treasury  on  3  June.
1874,  and  this  office  he  filled  acceptably  until  the
end  of  June,  1876,  when  he  resigned,  owing  to  the
demands  of  his  private  business.  At  the  republican
national  convention  of  that  year,  held  in  Cincin-
nati, Ohio,  he  was  a  leading  candidate  for  the
presidential  nomination,  receiving  113  votes  on
the  first  ballot.  Since  1876  he  has  practised  his
profession  in  New  York  city.

BRISTOW,  George  F.,  musician,  b.  in  New
York,  19  Dec,  1835.  He  is  an  organist  and  violin-
ist, and  the  composer  of  the  opera  "  Rip  Van
Winkle,"  and  various  services  for  church  use.

BRITO  FREIRE,  Francisco  (bree  -to),  Por-
tuguese historian,  b.  in  Alentejo ;  d.  in  1692,  He
commanded  several  naval  expeditions,  and  ex-
pelled the  Dutch  from  Brazil.  He  was  the  author
of  "  Rela9ao  de  um  Viage  ao  Brazil "  and  "  Historia
de  la  Guerra  Brazileira."

BRITTAN,  Natlian,  inventor,  b.  in  Spencer,
Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Adrian,  Mich,,  3  Jan.,
1873.  He  received  his  early  education  at  the  acad-
emy in  Hawley,  Mass.,  and  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1837.  He  was  associated  as  a  teacher
with  Dr.  Chester  Dewey,  at  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  in
1837-'45,  removed  to  Lyons,  N.  Y.,  and  taught
with  success  for  five  years,  and  then  established
himself  in  Adrian,  Mich.  In  1851  his  attention
was  directed  to  the  inadequacy  of  the  lightning-
rods  in  use  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  he  im-
mediately devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  laws
of  atmospheric  electricity,  and  invented  a  new
conductor,  known  as  the  "continuous  copper-
strip,"  which  was  patented  and  received  with  gen-
eral favor.  He  spent  the  remaining  years  of  his
life  in  the  business  arising  from  his  invention,
residing  at  different  periods  in  Lock  port  and
Rochester,  in  Detroit  and  Chicago,  and  returning
in  1868  to  Adrian,  in  each  of  which  places  he  was
actively  engaged  in  religious  efforts  and  in  enter-
prises for  social  improvement.

BRITTON,  Natlianiel  Lord,  botanist,  b.  on
Staten  Island,  N.  Y„  15  Jan.,  1858.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Columbia  College  School  of  Mines  in
1879  with  the  degree  of  E.  M,,  and  in  1881  received
the  degree  of  Ph,  D.  in  course.  In  1879  he  became
assistant  in  the  department  of  geology  and  paleon-
tology, and  now  lectures  on  botany  in  the  school  ot
mines.  For  some  years  he  has  been  botanist  and
assistant  geologist  to  the  New  Jersey  geological
survey,  spending  his  summers  in  field-work.  Ine
"  Bulletin  of  the  Torrey  Botanical  Club  "  is  under
his  editorial  supervision,  and,  besides  scattered
papers  on  technicalities  in  scientific  journals,  ne
has  published  "  Catalogue  of  the  Flora  ot  Kich-
mond  Countv  (Staten  Island),  N.  Y,"  (1879);  Ihe
Geology  of  Staten  Island"  (1880);  and  '  Cata-
logue of  the  Flora  of  New  Jersey  "  (1882).  ^

BROADDUS,  Andrew,  clergyman,  b.  m  Caro-
line CO.,  Va.,  4  Nov.,  1770 ;  d,  in  Salem,  Va.,  1  J^ec.,
1848,  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  united  with  a  Jf-ap-
tist  church,  and  began  exhortations  and  preach  ing.


I


BROADHEAD


BROCKEN  BOROUGH


381


His  education  had  been  limited,  but  he  had  a  mind
of  more  than  ordinary  capacity  and  an  impressive
and  graceful  elocution,  which,  added  to  his  youth-
ful appearance,  made  him  a  favorite  as  a  preacher.
In  1821  he  became  assistant  pastor  of  a  church  in
Richmond,  and  in  1882  he  was  moderator  of  the
Dover  association  of  Baptist  churches.  He  de-
clined the  pastorate  of  leading  Baptist  churches  in
Boston,  New  York,  Philadelphia,  and  various
southern  cities,  and  lived  and  died  a  country  pas-
tor. In  1848  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  by
the  Columbian  college,  Washington,  D.  C,  but  de-
chned.  He  wrote  extensively  for  the  press,  and
published  in  the  early  part  of  his  ministry  a  "  His-
tory of  the  Bible."  This  was  followed  by  a  "  Cate-
chism," "A  Form  of  Church  Discipline,"  the
"Dover"  and  "Virginia  Selections  of  Hymns,"
both  of  which  were  long  popular  in  several  states,
and  "  Letters  and  Sermons."  Some  of  his  sermons,
with  a  memoir  by  J.  B.  Jeter,  D.  D.,  were  published
in  New  York  in  1852.

BROADHEAD,  Garland  Carr,  geologist,  b.
near  Charlottesville,  Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  30  Oct.,
1827.  Pie  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Mis-
souri. In  1857-'G1  and  1871-2  he  was  assistant  state
geologist  of  Missouri,  and  in  1873-'5  state  geolo-
gist. He  was  assistant  in  tlie  Illinois  geological
survey  in  1868,  and  a  member  of  the  Missouri  river
commission  in  1884-'G.  He  has  made  extensive
scientific  tours  in  the  west.  As  special  agent  of
the  10th  census,  he  reported  on  the  quarry  indus-
tries of  Missouri  and  Kansas  in  1881.  In  1875  he
was  employed  by  the  Smithsonian  institution  to
make  collections  in  Missouri  for  the  centennial
exhibition,  and  in  1884  collected  objects  for  the
New  Orleans  exhibition.  The  results  of  his  geo-
logical investigations  in  Missouri  are  published  in
" Missouri  Geological  Reports,  1855-71  "  (Jeffer-
son Citv,  1873)  and  "  Missouri  Geological  Survey,
1873-'4'"  (1874).

BROADUS,  John  Albert,  clergyman,  b.  in
Culpepper  co.,  Va.,  24  Jan.,  1827.  He  was  educated
at  the  University  of  Virginia,  and  from  1851  till
1853  was  assistant  professor  of  ancient  languages
there.  He  then  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist
church  in  Charlottesville,  and  in  1859  professor  of
New  Testament  interpretation  and  homiletics  in
the  Southern  Baptist  theological  seminary  at
Greenville,  S.  C,  now  in  Louisville,  Ky.  As  a  Greek
scholar  and  New  Testament  critic  Dr.  Broadus
stands  at  the  head  of  the  Baptists  of  the  south ;
but  his  only  publication  in  this  department  is  an
elaborate  review  (in  the  "  Religious  Herald,"  1866
and  1808)  of  the  American  Bible  union's  revised
version  of  the  New  Testament.  In  1870  he  pub-
lished "The  Preparation  and  Delivery  of  Ser-
mons," which  has  been  adopted  as  a  text-book  in
several  theological  seminaries.  His  other  publica-
tions consist  of  sermons  and  review  articles,  and
a  series  of  papers,  "  Recollections  of  Travel,"  in
the  "  Religious  Herald,"  1872-3,  describing  a  tour
in  Europe  and  the  east;  "  Lectures  on  the  History
of  Preaching"  (1877) ;  "  Three  Questions  as  to  the
Bible"  (1884);  " Commentary  on  Matthew"  (1886);
and  "  Sermons  and  Addresses  "  (1886).

BROBST,  Samuel  B.  Kistler,  clergyman,  b.  in
Lynn  township.  Pa.,  16  Nov.,  1822.  He  studied
theology,  and  founded  in  1847  the  "Jugend-
freund,"  the  first  juvenile  magazine  published  in
the  United  States  in  the  German  language,  which
was  subsequently  transformed  into  the  "  Luther-
ische  Zeitschrift."  He  also  founded  a  German
teacher's  seminary,  which  became  Muhlenberg  col-
lege. He  has  written  on  the  subject  of  Sunday-
schools,  published  a  book  entitled '"Ein  Wort  fiir


das  Deutsche  und  die  Deutschen,"  and  an  annual
Lutheran  church  almanac  in  German  and  English.
He  is  pastor  of  a  church  in  Allentown,  Pa.

BROCK,  Sir  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  the  island  of
Guernsey,  6  Oct.,  1769;  killed  at  the  battle  of
Queenstown,  Canada,  13  Oct.,  1812.  He  entered
the  British  army  as  an  ensign  at  the  age  of  fifteen,
purchased  a  lieutenancy  in  1790,  served  in  Jamaica
and  Barbadoes  until  1798,  rose  by  successive  steps
until  he  had  reached  the  senior  lieutenant-colonelcy
with  less  than  thirteen  years'  total  service,  was
with  the  expedition  to  North  Holland  in  1799,
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Copenhagen,  also  in
the  operations  in  the  Baltic  in  1801.  In  1802  he
embarked  for  Canada,  and  in  the  following  year,
single-handed,  suppressed  a  dangerous  conspiracy
instigated  by  deserters,  and  caused  the  execution
of  the  leaders.  Obtaining  leave  of  absence  in
1805,  he  returned  to  England,  but  rejoined  his
regiment  in  1806.  In  1810  he  was  sent  to  Upper
Canada  to  take  command  of  the  troops,  and  was
also  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  the  province.
His  first  effort  was  to  put  the  province  in  a  con-
dition to  meet  the  impending  conflict  with  the
United  States.  On  the  declaration  of  hostilities,
Brock  advanced  upon  Detroit,  to  which  Gen.  Hull
had  retired,  and  on  16  Aug.,  1812,  received  the
surrender  of  the  entire  army,  with  all  its  cannon,
arms,  and  stores,  as  well  as  the  armed  brig  "  John
Adams."  For  this  he  was  made  a  Knight  of  the
Bath.  After  the  capture  of  Detroit,  an  American
force  of  6,000  was  gathered  on  the  Niagara  fron-
tier, and,  in  the  battle  that  followed.  Gen.  Brock
fell  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  pierced  by  three  balls.
His  last  words  were:  "Never  mind  me;  push  on
the  York  volunteers."  Brock  died  where  he  fell.
After  lying  in  state  at  Government  House,  his  re-
mains were  interred  in  one  of  the  bastions  of  Fort
George.  During  his  funeral  the  Americans  fired
minute-guns  "as  a  mark  of  respect  to  a  brave
enemy,"  forgetting  that  when  Brock  demanded  the
surrender  of  Detroit  the  year  before,  he  had  threat-
ened to  let  loose  his  savage  allies  upon  the  inhabi-
tants if  he  were  compelled  to  take  it  by  assault.  He
was  in  his  forty-fourth  year,  and  unmarried.  He
was  six  feet  two  inches  in  height,  erect,  and  ath-
letic. He  had  attained  the  rank  of  major-general.
The  house  of  commons  voted  £1,575  for  a  public
monument,  which  was  erected  in  St.  Paul's.  Pen-
sions of  £200  were  awarded  to  each  of  the  mem-
bers of  his  family,  consisting  of  four  brothers,
together  with  a  grant  of  12,000  acres  of  land  in
Canada.  A  monument  in  the  form  of  an  Etruscan
column,  with  a  winding  stair  within,  standing  on
a  rustic  pedestal,  was  erected  on  the  heights  of
Queenstown  at  a  cost  of  £3,000 ;  and  on  18  Oct.,
1824,  the  twelfth  anniversary  of  his  fall,  his  remains
were  placed  in  the  vault  beneath.  The  monument
was  blown  up  by  a  fanatic  on  Good  Friday,  1840.  Its
ruins  were  seen  and  described  by  Charles  Dickens
in  his  "  American  Notes."  On  30  July,  1841,  a
mass-meeting  of  more  than  8,000  persons,  presided
over  by  the  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Canada,
was  held,  and  £5,000  voted  for  the  immediate  res-
toration of  the  monument.  As  restored,  it  stands
on  the  original  site,  and  is  a  tall  column  sur-
mounted by  a  statue  of  the  general.  The  spot  on
the  field  of  battle  where  he  fell  is  also  marked  by
a  small  monument.  A  memorial  church  was
erected  in  Queenstown  by  the  York  rifles,  to  whom
his  last  order  was  given,  and  Brockville,  with  other
names  in  Canada,  perpetuates  his  memory.

BROCKENBOROUGH,  William,  jurist,  b.  10
July,  1778;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  10  Dec,  1838.
He  represented  Essex  co.  in  the  legislature,  and


382


BROCKENBROITGH


BRODHEAD


was  subsequently  a  councillor.  He  became  judge
of  the  general  court  in  1809,  and  retained  that
office  until  1884,  when  he  was  appointed  one  of  the
judges  of  the  court  of  appeals,  an  office  that  he
retained  until  his  death.

BROCKENBROUGH,  William  H.,  jurist,  b.
about  1813 ;  d.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  in  June,  1850.
He  received  a  classical  education,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  settled  in  Tallahassee.
Although  struggling  against  pulmonary  consump-
tion, which  eventually  caused  his  death,  he  held  a
distinguished  position  as  a  citizen.  Under  the  ter-
ritorial government  he  was  a  senator  from  the
western  district  and  at  one  time  president  of  the
senate,  U.  S.  attorney  for  the  western  district  of
the  territory,  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court,  and
representative  in  congress,  successfully  contesting
his  seat  with  Edward  C.  Cabell,  and  serving  from
24  Jan.,  1846,  till  3  March,  1847.  On  several  occa-
sions he  was  a  presidential  elector.

BROCKETT,  Linus  Pierpont,  author,  b.  in
Canton,  Conn.,  16  Oct.,  1820.  He  studied  at  Brown,
but  left,  on  account  of  delicate  health,  before  grad-
uation, taught  for  some  time,  studied  medicine  in
Washington,  D.  C,  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  New  York,  and  Yale  medical  college,
and  was  graduated  as  M.  U.  at  the  last  in  1843.
After  practising  his  profession  for  several  years  he
devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits  in  Hartford,
Conn.  From  1847  till  1857  he  was  engaged  in  the
publishing  business  in  that  city.  In  1854  he  was
appointed  by  the  legislature  a  commissioner  to  in-
vestigate idiocy  in  Connecticut,  in  which  task  he
spent  two  years.  Since  1856  he  has  been  connected
with  several  religious  papers,  and  has  contributed
to  cyclopedias,  magazines,  and  reviews.  He  has
been  at  different  times  editor  of  the  magazines
called  the  "  Brooklyn  Monthly,"  the  "  Brooklyn
Advance,"  and  "Descriptive  America."  Besides
these  labors  he  has  published  forty-six  distinct
works  on  geographical,  biographical,  historical,  re-
ligious, professional,  social,  and  literary  subjects.
His  works  include  a  "  History  of  Education "
(1859) ;  "  Philanthropic  Results  of  the  Civil  War  "
(1864) ,  "  Our  Great  Captains  "  (1865) ;  with  S.  M.
Schmucker,  a  "  History  of  the  Civil  War  "  (1866) ;
in  collaboration  with  Mrs.  M.  C.  Vaughan,  "  Wom-
an's Work  in  the  Civil  War  "  (Philadelphia,  1867) ;
"Men  of  Our  Day"  (Philadelphia,  1868;  revised
ed.,  1872) ;  "  Woman :  Her  Rights,  Wrongs,  Privi-
leges, and  Responsibilities  "  (Hartford,  1869) ;  "  The
Year  of  Battles,  a  History  of  the  Franco-German
War  of  1870-'l"  (1871);  "Epidemic  and  Conta-
gious Diseases"  (1873);  and  "The  Silk  Industry
in  America"  (1876).  '

BROCKLESBY,  John,  educator,  b.  in  West
Bromwich,  England,  8  Oct.,  1811.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1820,  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1.885,  a  tutor  there  from  1838  till  1840,  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Trinity
college,  Hartford,  from  1842  till  1873,  and  pro-
fessor of  natural  philosophy  and  astronomy  from
1873  till  1882.  He  was  acting  president  of  the
college  in  1860,  1864,  1866,  1867,  and  1874.  In
1868  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Hobart
college.  His  works  include  "  Elements  of  Meteor-
ology "  (New  York,  1848) ;  "  Views  of  the  Micro-
scopic World  "  (1850) ;  "  Elements  of  Astronomy  "
(1855) ;  and  "  Elements  of  Physical  Geography  "
(Philadelphia,  1868).  He  has  contributed  articles
to  scientific  periodicals,  notably  that  of  the  Ameri-
can association  for  the  advancement  of  science.

BROCKWAY,  John  Hall,  lawyer,  b.  in  Elling-
ton, Conn.,  81  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  there,  29  July,  1870.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,  taught  school


for  a  short  time,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  of  New  Haven  in  1823,  and  opened  an  office  in
his  native  town.  In  1832  and  in  1838  he  was  a
member  of  the  lower  branch  of  the  state  legisla-
ture, and  in  1834  a  state  senator.  From  2  Dec.
1839,  till  3  March,  1843,  he  was  a  representative
from  Cormecticut  in  congress.  He  was  appointed
district  attorney  for  the  county  of  Tolland  in  1849,
and  held  that  office  by  successive  reappointments
until  April,  1867,  when  he  resigned.

BROBERICK,  Bavid  Colbreth,  senator,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  4  Feb.,  1820;  d.  near  Lake
Merced,  California,  16  Sept.,  1859.  His  father,  who
had  emigrated  from  Ireland,  was  employed  in  cut-
ting stone  for  the  capitol.  In  1823  the  family  re-
moved to  New  York,  where  young  Broderick  re-
ceived a  public-school  education,  after  which  he
was  apprenticed  to  learn  the  stone-cutter's  trade.
He  became  actively  connected  with  the  volunteer
fire  department  of  New  York,  and  at  the  same
time  acquired  considerable  political  influence.  In
1846  he  was  defeated  as  a  democratic  candidate
for  congress  from  New  York.  Three  years  later
he  went  to  California,  where  he  at  once  became
prominent  in  politics.  In  1849  he  was  a  member
of  the  California  constitutional  convention.  He
was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1850  and  again
in  1851,  when  he  became  the  presiding  officer  of
that  body.  In  1856  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  California,  serving  from  4  March,  1857,  until
his  death.  He  was  eminent  as  a  debater,  opposed
the  admission  of  Kansas  as  a  state  under  the  Le-
compton  constitution,  and  became  separated  from
the  democratic  party  on  the  slavery  question  in
1858.  His  death  resulted  from  a  wound  received
in  a  duel  fought  with  David  S.  Terry,  chief  justice
of  the  supreme  court  of  California.  Political  dif-
ferences and  personal  abuse  in  public  speeches,  of
which  Terry  and  Broderick  were  about  equally
guilty,  led  to  the  duel.  Judge  Terry  was  the  chal-
lenger. Mr.  Broderick  fell  at  the  first  fire,  his  own
pistol  being  discharged  before  he  could  level  it.

BROBHEAB,  Baniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1736;  d.  in  Milford,  Pa.,  15  Nov.,  1809.  He
raised  in  1775  a  company  of  riflemen  who  served
in  the  battle  of  Long  Island.  He  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  8th  Pennsylvania  regiment,  and  in
April,  1778,  led  a  successful  expedition  against  the
Muskingum  Indians.  He  made  two  important
treaties  with  the  Indians,  one  of  them  22  July,
1779,  with  the  Cherokees,  and  received  the  thanks
of  congress  for  his  success.  He  was  for  many  years
surveyor-general  of  Pennsylvania.

BROBHEAB,  Jacob,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ulster
CO.,  N.  Y.,  14  May,  1782 ;  d.  in  Springfield,  Mass.,
6  June,  1855.  He  was  a  tutor  in  Union  college
for  two  years  after  his  graduation  in  1801,  became
pastor  of  the  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  Rhine-
beck  in  1804,  was  settled  in  New  York  as  one  ot
the  pastors  of  the  Collegiate  church  in  1809,  and  in
1813  established  the  1st  Reformed  Dutch  church  in
Philadelphia.  In  1826  he  took  charge  of  a  church
in  New  York.  From  1841  till  his  retirement  in  mi
he  was  pastor  of  a  church  in  Brooklyn.  He  pub-
lished a  number  of  discourses.  See  "  Memorial  ot
Rev.  Dr.  Jacob  Brodhead,"  by  George  W.  Bethune,
D.  D.— His  son,  John  Romeyn,  historian,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  2  Jan.,  1814;  d.  in  New  York  cuy  0
May,  1873,  was  graduated  at  Rutgers  in  l»rfi,
studied  law  in  the  office  of  Hugh  MaxweU,  ana
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835.  After  two  years
of  practice  in  New  York  he  retired  to  »augerties
and  devoted  himself  to  literary  pursuits.  In  l»i5»
he  went  to  Holland  and  was  attached  to  the  Ameri-
can  legation, of  which his relative, Harmanus


BRODHEAD


BROMFIELD


383


Bleecker,  was  charge  d'affaires.  There  he  conceived
the  intention  of  writing  the  history  of  New  York.
The  New  York  legislature,  on  2  May,  1839,  passed
an  act,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  New  York  histori-
cal society,  to  {j^ppoint  an  agent  to  procure  or
transcribe  documents  in  Europe  relating  to  the
history  of  New  York,  and  in  the  spring  of  1841  he
was  commissioned  by  Gov.  Seward  to  investigate
the  colonial  records  and  land-grants.  Pursuant  to
this  act  he  spent  three  years  in  the  archives  of
Holland,  England,  and  France,  and  procured  many
valuable  documents  relating  to  the  early  history
of  the  state.  Among  them  were  sixteen  volumes
of  manuscript  from^  Holland,  mainly  the  records  of
the  colonial  secretaries  under  the  Dutch  suprem-
acy, lG09-'74,  with  separate  records  also  of  New
Amsterdam  (New  York)  and  Beaverwyck  (Albany) ;
forty-seven  volumes  from  England  and  seventeen
from  France,  comprising  in  all  more  than  5,000
important  papers.  These  documents  were  trans-
lated and  edited  by  E.  B.  O'Callaghan,  and  pub-
lished in  eleven  quarto  volumes  by  act  of  the  legis-
lature. In  1846  Mr.  Brodhead  was  appointed  sec-
retary of  legation  in  England,  where  Mr.  Bancroft
was  then  minister.  He  returned  to  this  country
in  1849,  and  was  naval  officer  of  the  port  of  New
York  during  Pierce's  administration.  In  the  spring
of  1855  he  was  appointed  consul-general  to  Japan,
but  declined.  For  many  years  he  continued  his
researches  relating  to  the  rule  of  the  Dutch,  and
the  knowledge  tlius  acquired  was  embodied  in  his
"History  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (3  vols..  New
York,  1853-71).  He  intended  to  add  a  third  vol-
ume and  to  bring  the  narrative  down  to  the  pres-
ent day,  but  had  to  abandon  the  intention  on  ac-
count of  declining  health.  He  delivered  an  address
before  the  New  York  historical  society  in  1844,
and  one,  on  the  commercial  history  of  New  York,
before  the  mercantile  library  association,  at  the
opening  of  Clinton  hall,  8  June,  1854.  He  pub-
lished also  an  "  Oration  on  the  Conquest  of  New
Netherland,"  delivered  before  the  historical  socie-
ty, 12  Oct.,  1864,  and  "  Government  of  Sir  Edmund
Andros  over  New  England  "  (1867).

BRODHEAD,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Monroe
CO.,  Pa.,  22  Oct.,  1770;  d.  in  Newmarket,  N.  H.,  7
April,  1838.  In  1794-'6  he  travelled  as  a  Metho-
dist preacher  in  New  Jersey  and  Maryland,  and
then  went  to  New  England,  and  became  a  founder
of  Methodism  there  and  in  Canada.  In  1811  he
settled  in  Newmarket,  N.  H.  From  1829  till  1833
he  was  a  representative  from  New  Hampshire  in
congress.— His  son,  John  M.,  b.  in  Canaan,  N.  H.,
was  educated  as  a  physician  at  Dartmouth,  was
appointed  second  comptroller  of  the  treasury,  held
the  office  until  1856,  in  1863  was  reappointed,  and
retained  it  until  he  resigned  in  January,  1876.— An-
other son,  Thornton  F.,  soldier,  b.  iii  New  Hamp-
shire in  1822 ;  d.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  31  Aug.,  1862.
He  studied  law  at  Harvard,  and  practised  in  De-
troit, Mich.  He  served  through  the  Mexican  war
as  an  officer  in  the  15th  infantry,  and  was  twice
brevetted  for  bravery.  Resuming  the  practice  of
his  profession  after  the  war,  he  was  elected  to  the
state  senate,  and  in  1852  appointed  postmaster  of
Detroit.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
raised  the  1st  Michigan  cavalry  regiment,  at  the
head  of  which  he  served  under  Gens.  Banks,  Fre-
mont, and  Pope.  He  died  of  wounds  received  at
the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run.

BRODHEAD,  Richard,  senator,  b.  in  Lehman
township.  Pike  co..  Pa.,  5  Jan.,  1811 :  d.  in  Easton,
Pa..  16  Sept.,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  Lafayette
college,  studied  law  with  James  M.  Porter,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1836,  and  was  elected  a  mem-


ber of  the  Pennsylvania  legislature  in  1837,  in
which  he  sat  during  three  sessions.  In  1841  he
was  treasurer  of  Northampton  co.,  and  in  1842  was
elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,  and,  being  twice
re-elected,  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  3  March,
1849.  In  1849  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
serving  from  1  Dec,  1851,  till  3  March,  1857.

BROGDEN,  Curtis  H.,  governor  of  North
Carolina,  b.  in  Wayne  co.,  N.  C,  about  1815.  He
was  brought  up  as  a  farmer,  became  prominent  in
the  militia,  in  which  he  attained  the  rank  of  gen-
eral, was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1838,  and
was  for  nearly  twenty  years  a  member  of  one  or
the  other  house;  was  comptroller  of  the  state
from  1857  till  1867,  a  presidential  elector  in  1868,
and  in  1869  was  appointed  collector  of  internal
revenue.  After  serving  four  years  longer  in  the
state  senate,  he  was  elected  lieutenant-governor  in
1872,  and,  upon  the  death  of  Gov.  Caldwell  in  1874,
succeeded  to  the  office  of  governor.  In  1876  he
was  elected  as  a  republican  to  congress,  and  served
from  15  Oct.,  1877.  till  3  March,  1879.

BROOLIE,  Claude  Victor  Marie,  Prince
de,  French  soldier,  b,  in  Paris  in  1757;  executed
27  June,  1794.  He  was  the  son  of  the  Marshal  de
Broglie,  entered  the  French  army,  volunteered  his
services  in  the  cause  of  American  independence,
was  transferred  to  the  regiment  Saintonge,  com-
manded by  Custine,  and  served  until  the  surren-
der at  Yorktown.  After  returning  to  France  he
was  elected  to  the  states-general,  and  espoused  the
cause  of  popular  liberty.  He  was  president  of  the
constituent  assembly  in  1790,  but  preferred  mili-
tary service,  and  was  appointed  a  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  army  of  the  Rhine.  In  1792  he  was  re-
moved for  refusing  to  recognize  the  decree  of  the
national  assembly  suspending  the  prerogative  of
the  king,  was  afterward  arraigned  before  the  revo-
lutionary tribunal,  condemned,  and  guillotined.

BROKE,  Sir  Philip  Bowes  Tere,  British
naval  officer,  b.  at  Broke  Hall,  near  Ipswich,  Eng-'
land,  9  Sept.,  1776;  d.  in  London,  2  Jan.,  1841.
He  was  bred  to  the  sea  from  the  age  of  twelve,
promoted  captain  in  1801,  placed  in  command
of  the  frigate  "  Shannon  "  in  1806,  and  sailed  for
Halifax  in  August,  1811.  On  1  June,  1813,  while
the  "  Shannon "  was  cruising  off  Boston,  the
Americau  frigate  "Chesapeake,"  ranging  along-
side at  a  distance  of  fifty  yards,  received  a  broadside
which  struck  down  Capt.  Lawrence  and  more  than
a  hundred  men.  The  Americans  returned  the  fire,
but  their  execution  fell  far  short  of  that  of  the
British  seamen,  trained  in  Broke's  novel  system  of
gunnery  drill.  A  second  broadside  from  the
"  Shannon  "  was  as  effective  as  the  first,  and  Broke,
at  the  head  of  fifty  or  sixty  men,  boarded  the  Ameri-
can and  succeeded  in  driving  the  survivors  of  the
crew  below,  but  was  himself  disabled  for  life  by  a
blow  on  the  head  from  a  rtiusket- stock.  See
Brighton's  "Memoir  of  Admiral  Sir  P.  B.  V.
Broke,"  and  Roosevelt's  "  Naval  War  of  1812."

BROMFIELD,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  11  April,  1779;  d.  in  Boston,  8
Dec,  1849.  He  acquired  a  fortune  as  an  agent  in
Europe  for  American  houses,  and  as  a  merchant
in  Canton,  which  he  increased  by  investments  in
Boston.  He  was  a  benefactor  of  various  charita-
ble institutions  and  of  the  Boston  athena?um,  to
which  he  made  a  gift  of  $25,000.  A  volume  of
"  Reminiscences  of  John  Bromfield  "  was  published
at  Salem  in  1852.— His  ancestor,  Edward,  came
from  England  in  1675  and  was  a  member  of  the
council. — Edward  (b.  in  1695;  d.  10  April,  1756),
son  of  the  latter,  was  an  eminent  citizen  and  mem-
ber of  the  general  court ;  and  Edward,  his  son  (b.


384


BROMLEY


BROOKE


in  1723 ;  d.  18  Aug.,  1746),  was  a  young  man  of  re-
markable mechanical  and  scientific  genius,  who
constructed  an  organ  and  made  microscopes  of
improved  magnifying  powers.

BROMLEY,  Isaac  Hill,  journalist,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Conn.,  6  March,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1853,  studied  law,  was  clerk  of  the  Con-
necticut house  of  representatives  in  1857  and  of
the  senate  in  1858,  and  in  1858  began  the  publi-
cation of  the  Norwich  "  Morning  Bulletin."  He
served  as  captain  in  1862,  and  afterward  was  pro-
vost marshal.  In  1866  ho  was  a  member  of  the
legislature.  In  1868-72  he  was  editor  and  part
proprietor  of  the  Hartford  "  Evening  Post,"  in  1872
a  writer  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New  York
*'  Sun,"  and  editorial  writer  on  the  New  York
"  Tribune  "  from  1873  till  1883,  when  he  was  for  a
few  months  editor  of  the  "  Commercial  Adver-
tiser." He  was  appointed  a  government  director
of  tlie  Union  Pacific  railroad  in  the  spring  of  1882,
and  held  the  office  until  the  spring  of  1884.  Dur-
ing the  presidential  canvass  of  1884  ho  edited  the
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  "  Post-Express,"  and  subsequent-
ly entered  the  service  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad
company,  and  was  appointed  assistant  to  the  presi-
dent in  March,  1885.

BROMME,  Traiigott,  German  traveller,  b.  in
Anger,  near  Leipsic,  in  1802 ;  d.  4  Dec,  1865.  He
settled  in  the  United  States  in  1820,  and  afterward
travelled  extensively  in  Texas  and  Mexico,  became
surgeon  on  a  Columbian  war-schooner  cruising  in
the  West  Indies,  and  was  detained  for  a  year  as  a
prisoner  in  Hayti,  during  which  time  he  explored
that  island.  After  his  return  to  Germany  he  be-
came a  publisher,  and  wrote  books  on  his  travels
in  America.  His  hand-book  for  North,  Central,
and  South  America  passed  through  many  editions.

BRONDEL,  John  B.,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Bruges,
Belgium,  in  1842.  He  studied  in  the  American
college  of  the  university  of  Louvain,  and  was  or-
"  dained  at  Mechlin  in  1864.  In  1866  he  volunteered
for  the  American  mission,  went  to  Washington
territory,  and  in  1867  was  appointed  rector  of
Ileilacoom.  He  was  transferred  to  Walla  Walla
in  1877,  but  returned  to  Ileilacoom  in  1878.  He
was  consecrated  bishop  of  Vancouver  island  in
1879,  appointed  administrator  of  the  vicariate
apostolic  of  Montana  in  1883,  and  in  1884  conse-
crated bishop  of  Helena  in  the  same  territory.  He
has  been  very  successful  in  civilizing  the  Indians
of  his  diocese,  and  his  popularity  among  the  tribes
has  often  enabled  him  to  render  important  services
to  the  U.  S.  government.

BRONSON,  Greene  Carrier,  lawyer,  b.  in
Oneida,  N.  Y,  in  1789;  d.  at  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  3
Sept.,  1863.  He  spent  the  greater  portion  of  his
life  at  Utica,  where  he  obtained  an  extensive  prac-
tice. In  April,  1819,  he  was  chosen  surrogate
of  Oneida  co.,  in  1822  was  a  member  of  assem-
bly, and  in  1829  elected  attorney-general,  which
office  he  held  up  to  January,  1836,  at  which  time
he  became  one  of  the  puisne  judges  of  the  supreme
court  of  judicature.  He  was  next  appointed  chief
justice  of  the  supreme  court  in  1845,  and  two  years
subsequently  one  of  the  judges  of  the  court  of  ap-
peals, then  just  organized.  After  leaving  the  bench
he  removed  to  New  York  and  practised  law.  Hav-
ing become  involved  in  unfortunate  speculations,
he  lost  nearly  the  whole  of  his  property.  In  1853
he  was  appointed  collector  of  the  port  of  New
York,  but  removed  in  1854.  In  December,  1859,
he  was  elected  corporation  counsel,  which  office  he
held  until  January,  1863.  In  politics  he  was  a
democrat,  leader  of  the  "  hard-shell "  faction  in
New  York,  and  its  candidate  for  governor  in  1855.


BRONSON,  Isaac  H.,  jurist,  b.  in  Rutland
N.  Y.,  16  Oct.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Pilatka,  Fla.,  13  Aug.'
1855.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1822,  began
practice  at  Watertown,  N.  Y.,  became  eminent  as
a  lawyer,  and  elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat
from  New  York  in  1836,  serving  as  chairman  of
the  committee  on  territories.  He  was  defeated  in
1838,  received  the  appointment  of  judge  of  the
fifth  judicial  district  of  New  York,  and  later  that
of  territorial  judge  for  Florida,  and  after  the  or-
ganization of  the  state,  in  1845,  of  U.  S.  district
judge  for  the  northern  district  of  Florida,  which
office  he  held  until  his  death.

BRONSON,  Silas,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Middle-
bury,  Conn. ;  d.  in  New  York,  25  Nov.,  1867.  He
acquired  a  fortune,  and,  among  other  bequests,
left  $200,000  to  found  a  public  library  in  Water-
bury,  Conn.

BROOKE,  Ayonia  Stanhope  Jones,  actress,
b.  in  New  York,  12  July,  1839 ;  d.  there,  4  Oct.,
1867.  She  was  the  daughter  of  George  Jones,
known  as  "  Count  Johannes,"  and  made  her  first  ap-
pearance on  18  x\pril,  1856,  at  the  People's  theatre,
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  as  Parthenia  in  "  Ingomar."  In
1859  she  acted  in  San  Francisco,  and  then,  after
returning  to  New  York,  sailed  f  oi;  Australia,  where
she  was  very  successful.  In  1861  she  appeared  in
London,  at  Drury  lane  theatre,  and,  while  in
England,  married  Gustavus  Brooke,  the  tragedian.
After  returning  to  this  country  and  acting  in  Phil-
adelphia, she  visited  England  again,  in  1865,  and,
contracting  a  cold  there,  died  of  consumption.

BROOKE,  Francis  J.,  jurist,  b.  in  Smithfield,
Va.,  27  Aug.,  1763 ;  d.  3  March,  1851.  In  1780  he
joined  Harrison's  regiment  of  artillery  as  lieuten-
ant— his  twin  brother,  John,  obtaining  a  similar
commission  in  the  same  regiment — and  his  first
campaign  was  imder  Lafayette,  in  1781.  He  after-
ward joined  Greene's  army,  and  served  until  the
end  of  the  war.  On  his  return  to  Virginia,  after
studying  medicine  for  a  year  with  his  elder  brother,
Lawrence,  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1788.  He  practised  in
the  counties  of  Monongahela  and  Harrison,  was
appointed  commonwealth's  attorney  in  the  district
court,  and  then  practised  in  Essex  co.,  and  in
the  Northern  Neck.  He  was  elected  to  the  state
house  of  delegates  in  1794,  removed  to  Fredericks-
burg in  1796,  and  in  1800  was  chosen  to  the  state
senate,  becoming  its  speaker.  In  1804  he  was
elected  a  judge  of  the  general  court,  and  in  1811
a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals,  of  which  he  was
president  for  eight  years.  In  1831  he  was  re-elected
judge  of  the  same  court,  and  retained  the  office
until  his  death.  Judge  Brooke  was  an  intimate
friend  of  George  Washington. — His  son,  Francis
J.,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1802,  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1826,  served  as  second
lieutenant  in  the  Black  Hawk  war,  became  first
lieutenant  of  the  6th  infantry,  6  May,  1835,  and
was  killed  at  the  battle  of  Okeechobee,  25  Dec,
1837,  where  he  had  distinguished  himself  by  his
bravery.  —  George  Mercer,  soldier,  brother  of
Francis  J.,  the  elder,  b.  in  Virginia ;  d.  in  San  An-
tonio, Texas,  9  March,  1851.  He  entered  the  array
3  May,  1808,  as  first  lieutenant  in  the  5th  infantry,
was  made  captain  1  May,  1810,  and  became  major
in  the  23d  infantry  in  1814.  On  15  Aug.  of  that
year  he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant
conduct  in  defence  of  Fort  Erie,  and  on  17  Sept.
was  brevetted  colonel  for  his  services  in  the  sortie
from  the  same  fort.  He  was  made  a  brevet  briga-
dier-general 17  Sept.,  1824,  and  in  July,  1831,  served
as  colonel  of  the  5th  infantry.  Daring  the  war
with  Mexico  he  fought  with  distinction,  and  was


BROOKE


BROOKS


385


brevetted  major-general  for  his  services,  30  May,
1848.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  8th  military  department.  Fort
Brooke,  at  the  head  of  Tampa  bay,  Florida,  re-
ceived its  name'  from  him.

BROOKE,  John  R.,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania.
He  enlisted  in  the  4th  Pennsylvania  infantry  in
April,  1861,  became  captain  at  the  organization  of
the  regiment,  and  on  7  Nov.  was  made  colonel  of
the  58d  Pennsylvania  infantry.  He  was  promoted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  12  May,  1864,  and
brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  1  Aug.,
1864.  In  the  regular  service  he  takes  rank  from
28  July,  1866,  wlien  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  37th  U.  S.  infantry,  one  of  the  new
regiments  created  by  congress  at  that  time.  He
was  transferred  to  the  3d  infantry  15  March,  1869
—the  37th  infantry  being  consolidated  with  that
corps  and  discontinued  by  act  of  congress.  He
was  promoted  colonel,  13th  infantry,  20  March,
1879,  and  re-transferred  to  the  3d  infantry  14  June,
1879.  In  the  regular  army  he  received  brevets  as
colonel  and  brigadier-general  for  gallantry  in  sev-
eral battles— Cold  Plarbor  (27  June,  1862) ;  Gettys-
burg (1-3  July,  1863) ;  Spottsylvania  Court-House ;
and  Tolopotomy  (May,  1864).

BROOKE,  Walker,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia,  13
Dec,  1813 ;  d.  in  Vicksburg,  Miss.,  19  Feb.,  1869.
He  was  graduated  at  the  university  of  Virginia  in
1835,  studied  law,  emigrated  to  Kentucky,  where
he  taught  school  two  years,  and  then  began  to
practise  law  in  Lexington,  Miss.  He  was  elected
a  senator  in  congress  in  place  of  Henry  S.  Foote,
who  had  resigned  in  order  to  accept  the  governor-
ship, and  served  from  11  March,  1852,  till  3  March,
1853.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Mississippi  seced-
ing convention  of  1861,  elected  a  Member  of  the
provisional  Confederate  congress,  in  which  he  sat
from  18  Feb.,  1861,  till  18  Feb.,  1862,  and  was  a
candidate  for  the  Confederate  senate,  but  defeated
by  James  Phelan,

BROOKS,  Caroline  Sliawk,  sculptor,  b.  in
Cincinnati,  Ohio,  28  April,  1840,  Her  father,  Abel
Shawk,  was  the  inventor  and  builder  of  the  first
successful  steam  jfire-engine.  She  studied  drawing
and  painting,  was  graduated  at  the  St.  Louis  nor-
mal school  in  1862,  married  Samuel  H.  Brooks  the
same  year,  and  first  became  known  as  an  artist
through  an  alto-relievo  head  of  the  "Dreaming
lolanthe,"  executed  in  butter  at  the  centennial  ex-
hibition. Subsequently  she  gave  public  exhibi-
tions of  modelling  in  the  new  material.  In  1877
she  secured  a  patent  for  improvements  in  the
methods  of  producing  lubricated  moulds  in  plas-
ter. In  May,  1878,  she  executed  in  butter  at
Washington  a  life-size  statue  of  the  "  Dreaming
lolanthe,"  which  was  successfully  transported  to
Paris  and  exhibited  at  the  world's  fair  of  1878.
^he  subsequently  opened  a  studio  in  ISTew  York,
md  executed  portrait  marbles  of  Emanuel  Swe-
lenborg  (1883),  James  A.  Garfield  (1884),  Thurlow
Weed  (1884),  George  Eliot  (1886),  and  Thomas
IJarlyle  (1886),  and  a  portrait  group  of  five  figures,
epresenting  Mrs.  Alicia  Vanderbilt  La  Bau  and
ler  family  (1886).

BROOKS,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Medford,
^ass.,  30  Oct.,  1795;  d.  7  July,  1872.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1816,  and,  after  officiating
IS  lay-reader  in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
)ecame  pastor  of  the  3d  Congregational  church
n  Ilmgham,  Mass.,  17  Jan.,  1821.  In  1838  he  was
nosen  professor  of  natural  history  in  the  univer-
ity  of  New  York,  and  in  November,  1839,  sailed
or  Europe,  where  he  passed  four  years  in  the  study
f  animals.  Shortly  after  his  return  failing  eye-
voL.  I. — 25


sight  compelled  him  to  resign  his  professorship.
He  was  an  advocate  of  the  Prussian  educational
system,  and  was  the  means  of  improving  the  New
England  public  schools.  He  also  aided  in  the  es-
tablishment of  normal  schools,  a  work  completed
by  Horace  Mann.  He  was  a  member  of  the  peace
society,  and  an  advocate  of  the  temperance  reform
and  the  African  colonization  scheme.  He  pub-
lished "  History  of  Medford  "  (1855) ;  "  The  Chris-
tian in  his  Closet " ;  "  Daily  Monitor  " ;  "  Family
Prayer-Book  " ;  "  Elements  of  Ornithology  " ;  "  In-
troduction to  Ornithology  " ;  ten  volumes  of  biog-
raphies ;  a  paper  on  the  state  sanitary  survey ;  a  re-
port on  the  Middlesex  co.  tornado  of  August,  1851 ;
a  treatise  on  "Peace,  Labor,  and  Education  in
Europe  "  ;  and  several  pamphlets  and  sermons.  He
also  contributed  to  periodical  literature.

BROOKS,  Charles  Timothy,  author,  b.  in
Salem,  Mass.,  20  June,  1813 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,
14  June,  1883,  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1832,  After  studying  theology  he  began  to  preach
in  Nahant,  Mass,,  in  1835,  and,  after  otficiating  in
various  New  England  towns,  became,  4  June,  1837,
pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in  Newport,  R,  I.,
Dr,  Channing  preaching  the  ordination  sermon.
Mr,  Brooks  was  noted  for  his  translations  from  the
German,  among  which  were  Schiller's  "  William
Tell"  (Providence,  1838);  "Songs  and  Ballads
from  the  German,"  forming  one  volume  of  George
Ripley's  "  Specimens  of  Foreign  Standard  Litera-
ture "  (Boston,  1842) ;  Schiller's  "  Homage  of  the
Arts"  (Boston,  1847;  2d  ed,.  New  York,  1870);
"  German  Lyrics "  (Boston,  1853) ;  Goethe's
"  Faust "  in  the  original  metres  (1856) ;  "  Life,
Opinions,  Actions,  and  Fate  of  Hieronymus  Jobs,
the  Candidate,"  a  satirical  poem,  popular  in  Ger-
many (Philadelphia,  1863) ;  Richter's  "  Titan  "  and
"  Hesperus  "  (1865) ;  Schefer's  "  Layman's  Brevi-
ary" (1867)  and  "World-Priest"  (1873);  Riickert's
"  Wisdom  of  the  Brahmin "  (Boston,  1882) ;  and
several  children's  books.  Mr.  Brooks  also  wrote
"  Aquidneck,"  a  poem  delivered  at  the  hundredth
anniversary  of  the  Redwood  library  (Newport,
1848) ;  "  The  Controversy  touching  the  Old  Stone
Mill,"  opposing  the  theory  that  it  was  built  by  the
Northmen  (Newport,  1851) ;  "  Songs  of  Field  and
Flood,"  a  volume  of  poems  (Boston,  1854) ;  "  Will-
iam Ellery  Channing,  A  Centennial  Memory"  (Bos-
ton, 1880) ;  a  volume  of  sermons,  and  numerous
occasional  verses.  Among  his  unpublished  trans-
lations are  Schiller's  "  Mary  Stuart "  and  "  Joan
of  Arc"  (1840);  the  "Autobiography  of  Klaus
Harms  " ;  Richter's  "  Selina  " ;  Grillparzer's  "  Ahn-
frau  "  ;  Immermann's  "  Der  letzte  Tulifant,"  and
Hans  Sachs's  play,  "  The  Unlike  Children  of  Eve,"
first  acted  in  1553,  In  1853,  after  a  voyage  to
India  for  his  health,  Mr.  Brooks  wrote  a  narrative
entitled  "  Eight  Months  on  the  Ocean  and  Eight
Weeks  in  India,"  which  is  also  still  in  manuscript.
A  collection  of  his  poems,  original  and  translated,
with  a  memoir  by  Charles  W,  Wendte,  was  pub-
lished in  Boston  after  his  death,

BROOKS,  David,  soldier,  b,  in  1756;  d,  in
Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y.,  30  Aug.,  1838.  He  joined  the
army  in  1776,  as  lieutenant  in  the  Pennsylvania
line,  was  captured  at  Fort  Washington,  16  Nov.,
1776,  and  remained  a  prisoner  two  years.  When
exchanged,  he  was  made  assistant  clothier-general,
in  which  responsible  position  he  became  a  friend
of  Gen,  Washington.  After  the  war  he  settled  in
New  York  city,  and  later  in  Dutchess  co„  repre-
senting both  places  in  the  legislature,  where  he
served  six  years.  From  May  till  July,  1797,  he
was  a  representative  in  congress,  and  afterward
commissioner  for  making  a  treaty  with  the  Seneca


386


BROOKS


BROOKS


Indians,  which  was  signed  on  the  site  of  the  pres-
ent city  of  Utica.  He  was  for  sixteen  years  first
judge  of  Dutchess  co.,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  an  officer  of  the  customs. — His  son,  James
Gordon,  author,  b.  in  Claverack,  N.  Y.,  3  Sept.,
1801 ;  d.  in  Albany,  K  Y.,  20  Feb.,  1841,  was
graduated  at  Union  in  1819,  and  studied  law  ir;
Poughkeepsie,  but  was  never  in  active  practice.
While  there  he  published,  under  the  signature  of
*'  Florio,"  a  few  poems  which  attracted  much  at-
tention. Removing  to  New  York  city,  in  1823,
Mr.  Brooks  became  the  literary  editor  of  the
"  Minerva,"  and  in  1825  established  the  "  Literary
Gazette,"  which,  after  a  few  months,  was  united
with  the  "AthenfBum."  He  was  connected  with
this  paper  about  two  years,  and  then  with  the
"  Morning  Courier "  for  about  the  same  period.
In  all  these  journals  he  published  poems,  which
were  much  admired.  In  1828  Mr.  Brooks  married
Miss  Mary  Elizabeth  Aiken,  who  had  written  many

f)oems  over  the  signature  of  "  Noma."  They  pub-
ished,  together,  a  volume  entitled  ''  The  Rivals  of
Este,  and  other  Poems"  (New  York,  1829),  the
piece  that  gave  the  book  its  title  being  by  Mrs.
Brooks.  Among  Mr.  Brooks's  contributions  to
this  volume  was  a  poem  on  "  Genius,"  delivered
before  the  Yale  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  in  1827.
In  1830  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brooks  removed  to  Winches-
ter, Va.,  where  the  former  edited  a  newspaper,  in
1838  to  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  and  afterward  to  Albany.
Mrs.  Brooks,  in  addition  to  her  talent  as  a  writer,
was  a  skilful  designer.  The  plates  in  the  "  Natu-
ral History  of  the  State  of  New  York,"  by  her
brother-in-law,  Mr.  James  Hall,  are  from  drawings
made  by  her  from  nature.

BROOKS,  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Stony  Point,
Rockland  co.,  N.  Y.,  16  Jan..  1831.  When  fifteen
years  old  he  removed,  with  his  father,  to  Sullivan
CO.,  N.  Y.,  where  he  learned  a  trade,  but  occupied
his  leisure  moments  in  study.  At  this  time  he
formed  the  habit  of  noting  down  and  classifying
important  facts  or  thoughts,  in  which  way  he  not
only  mastered  the  common-school  branches,  but
many  of  the  higher  ones,  becoming  also  expert  in
composition.  His  career  as  a  teacher  began  with
a  singing-school  held  in  a  barn.  He  afterward
taught  a  common  school  for  six  months,  studied
for  one  session  in  the  normal  institute  at  Liberty,
N.  Y.,  and  then  entered  the  University  of  North-
ern Pennsylvania,  but  was  not  graduated.  He  was
teacher  there  in  1852-3,  taught  mathematics  in
the  Monticello,  N.  Y.,  academy,  in  1854,  and  in
1855  accepted  the  professorship  of  mathematics  in
the  State  normal  school  at  Millersville,  Pa.,  of
which  he  was  principal  from  1866  to  1886.  Prof.
Brooks  is  the  author  of  a  series  of  mathematical
text-books  (Philadelphia,  1858-77) ;  "  Philosophy
of  Arithmetic  "  (1876) ;  "  Normal  Methods  of  Teach-
ing "  (Lancaster,  Pa.,  1879) ;  "  Elocution  and  Read-
ing" (Philadelphia,  1882);  and  "Mental  Science
and  Culture  "  (1883).

BROOKS,  Edward  Toole,  Canadian  member
of  parliament,  b.  in  Sherbrooke  about  1828.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1850,  admitted
to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  in  1854,  first  returned
to  parliament  as  a  conservative  for  Sherbrooke  in
1872,  re-elected  by  acclamation  in  1874,  and  again
at  the  last  general  election  in  1878.  He  is  vice-
president  of  the  International  railway,  and  also  of
the  Waterloo  and  Magog  railway,  and  is  one  of
the  trustees  of  Bishop's  college,  and  president  of
the  Sherbrooke  rifle  association.

BROOKS,  Eleazer,  soldier,  b.  in  Concord,
Mass.,  10  Sept.,  1727;  d.  in  Lincoln,  Mass.,  9  Nov.,
1806. Without  schooling  he  acquired  a  valuable


fund  of  knowledge,  his  practice  being  to  read  the
best  books,  and  then  talk  about  them  to  inteUigent
men.  He  became  captain  of  militia  in  1773,  and
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  war  for  independence,
rising  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-general.  At  the
battle  of  White  Plains  he  commanded  a  regiment
and  distinguished  himself  by  his  bravery.  Enter-
ing the  general  court  in  1774,  he  had  a  public  ca-
reer of  thirty-seven  years,  becoming  successively  a
representative,  a  member  of  the  senate,  and  a  coun-
cillor. In  1801  he  withdrew  from  public  life.

BROOKS,  James,  journalist,  b.  in  Portland
Me.,  10  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  30
April,  1873. His  father,  a  sea-captain,  was  lost  at
sea  while  James  was  yet  a  child,  and  the  family
were  left destitute. He  was  sent to  a  public-
school  in  Portland,  and  at  eleven  years  of  age  be-
came a  clerk  in  Lewiston, Me.,  then  a  frontier
town. His  employer,  observing  the  eageniess  of
the  boy  for  learning,  offered  to  release  him  from
his  apprenticeship  and  to  aid  him  in  obtaining  an
education. He  at  once  entered  the  academy  at
Monmouth,  taught  school  at  ten  dollars  a  month
and  board,  and  was  graduated  at  Watei-ville  in
1831. Returning  to  Portland,  he  began  to  study
law,  teaching  meanwhile  a  Latin  school  in  that
city. He  contributed  to  the  Portland  "Adver-
tiser," and  in  1832  went  to  Washington  as  its  cor-
respondent, thus  introducing  the  fashion  of  regular
Washington  letters.  After  that  he  travelled  through
the  south,  writing  letters  from  the  Creek,  Chero-
kee, and  Choctaw  country  in  Georgia  and  Alabama,
at  the  time  when  those  tribes  were  compelled  tO'
move  west. His  correspondence  at  this  period
was  a  revelation  in  journalism. In  1835  he  was  a
member  of  the  Maine  legislature,  and  introduced
the  first  proposition  for  a  railroad  from  Portland
to  Montreal  and  Quebec. After  the  adjournment
he  sailed  for  Europe,  and  travelled  on  foot  over
Great  Britain  and  the  continent,  writing  letters
descriptive  of  his  travels. In 1836  he  came  to
New  York  and  established  the  "  Express,"  of  which,
for  a  time,  both  a  morning  and  an  evening  edition
were  published,  and,  although  he  met  with  discour-
agements at  first,  the  paper  soon  became  a  success.
Mr.  Brooks  made  political  speeches  in  Indiana  for
Harrison  in  1840. In  1841  he  married  Mrs.  Mary
Randolph,  a  widow,  of  Richmond,  Va.,  whom  he
required  to  manumit  three  or  four  slaves  before
the  wedding. In  1847  he  was  elected  to  the  New
York  legislature,  and  two  years  later  to  congress,
where  he  remained  two  terms,  1849-'53. He  took
ground  in  1850  in  favor  of  the  compromise  meas-
ures, in  1854  became  identified  with  the  American
party,  and  after  1861  with  the  democratic  party.
He  was  elected  to  congress  again  in  1865,  and,  by
repeated  re-elections,  served  till  1873. He  made
two  later  trips  to  Europe,  and  acquired  four  lan-
guages. In  1867  he  was  a  member  of  the  state
constitutional  convention,  and  in  1869  was  one  of
the  government  directors  of  the  Union  Pacific  rail-
wav. In  February,  1873,  the  house  censured  3Ir.
Brooks  "for  the  use  of  his  position  of  government
director  of  the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  and  a  mem-
ber of  this  house,  to  procure  the  assignment  to
himself  or  family  of  stock  in  the  Credit  Mobilier.^
Mr.  Brooks  believed  that  this  was  undeserved,  anil
the  mortification  it  caused  him  probably  hastenc
his  death. In  1871-2  Mr Brooks,  in  pursuit  ol
health,  made  a  voyage  around  the  world,  and  gave
the  results  of  his  observations  first  in  letters  to  tiie
"  Express,"  and  afterward  in  "  A  Seven  Months
Run,  Up  and  Down  and  Around  the  World  "  (^ew
York,  1872). His  valuable  librarv  was  sold  at  auc-
tion in  New  York  in  June,  1886.— His  brother.


BROOKS


BROOKS


387


Erastus,  Journalist,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,  31  Jan.,
I8I0.  When  eight  years  old  he  was  clerk  for  a
Boston  grocer,  who  taught  him  to  sand  the  sugar
and  water  the  milk,  attending  an  evening  school
at  the  same  time.  He  afterward  became  a  printer,
and  edited  and  published  a  newspaper,  called  the
"Yankee,"  at  Wiscasset,  Me.,  acting  as  his  own
compositor,  press-boy,  and  carrier.  Leading  arti-
cles, essays,  and  stories  were  composed  as  he  set
the  types,  without  the  intervention  of  manuscript.
In  addition  to  this  work  he  began  to  prepare  him-
self for  college,  teaching  school  at  the  same  time.
After  studying  for  some  time  at  Brown,  he  took
charge  of  a  grammar  school  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,
and  at  the  same  time  became  editor  and  part  pro-
prietor of  the  Haverhill  "  Gazette,"  which  he  final-
fy  sold  to  John  Gr.  Whittier. In  1886  he  was  en-

faged  as  Washington  correspondent  of  the  New
'ork  "  Daily  Advertiser,"  and  of  several  New  Eng-
land papers,  and  in  the  same  year  became  joint
editor  and  proprietor,  with  his  brother,  of  the  New
York  "  Express,"  retaining  ,the  place  until  1877.
He  acted  as  Washington  correspondent  of  the
"Express"  during  sixteen  successive  sessions  of
congress,  and  in  1843  went  abroad  as  one  of  its
foreign  correspondents.  He  was  elected  to  the
New  York  state  senate  in  1853,  and  again  in  1855.
His  support  of  the  bill  divesting  Roman  Catholic
bishops  of  the  title  to  church  property  in  real  es-
tate involved  him  in  a  controversy  with  Arch-
bishop Hughes,  which  was  afterward  published  in
two  rival  volumes  (New  York,  1855).  In  1856  he
was  nominated  for  governor  of  New  York  by  the
American  party,  but  was  not  elected,  though  lead-
ing his  party  vote  by  several  thousand.  He  sub-
sequently joined  the  democratic  party.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1867,  and  in  1871  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
constitutional  commission.  In  1878,  1879,  and
1881  he  was  elected  to  the  assembly,  and  in  each
of  these  years  was  the  democratic  candidate  for
speaker,  and  the  leading  democratic  member  on
the  committee  of  ways  and  means.  In  May,  1880,
Mr.  Brooks  became  a  member  of  the  State  board
of  health.  In  April,  1886,  he  delivered  before  the
New  York  legislature,  by  its  invitation,  a  eulogy
on  his  friend  Horatio  Seymour.

BROOKS,  John,  governor  of  Massachusetts,  b.
in  Medford,  Mass.,  31  May,  1752 ;  d.  1  March,  1825.
His  early  life  was  spent  on  his  father's  farm,  and
at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  was  apprenticed  to  Dr.
Simon  Tufts,  under  whose  tuition  he  remained
seven  years.  At  this  time  he  formed  an  intimacy
with  his  fellow-student  Benjamin  Thompson,
afterward  Count  Rumford,  and  they  continued
friends  through  life.  After  settling  at  Reading  as
a  physician,  he  undertook  to  drill  a  company  of
minute-men,  was  present  with  them  at  the  battle
of  Lexington,  and  received,  soon  afterward,  the
commission  of  major.  He  assisted  in  fortifying
Breed's  Hill  on  the  evening  of  16  June,  1775,  but
was  not  present  at  the  battle  on  the  17th,  being
sent  on  foot  with  a  despatch  from  Col.  Prescott  to
(xen.  Ward.  In  1777  he  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  8th  Massachusetts  regiment,  which
was  chiefly  raised  by  himself,  and  in  the  expedition
for  the  relief  of  Fort  Stanwix,  in  August  of  that
year,  suggested  a  successful  stratagem  for  dispers-
ing the  Indians.  In  the  battle  of  Saratoga  he
stormed  and  carried  the  German  intrenchments  at
the  head  of  his  regiment.  Becoming  colonel  in
1778,  he  was  associated  with  Baron  Steuben  in  the
mtroduction  of  a  svstem  of  tactics,  and  acted  as
adjutant-general  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth.
During  the Newburg conspiracy of 1783 Col.


Brooks  was  a  faithful  adherent  of  Washington,
After  the  war  he  returned  to  the  practice  of  his
profession  in  Medford,  and  was  for  many  years
major-general  of  militia.  In  1788  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state
convention  that
ratified  the  fed-
eral constitution.
Washington  ap-
pointed him  mar-
shal of  the  district
and  inspector  of
the  revenue  in
1795,  and  from
1812  till  1815  he
was  adjutant-gen-
eral of  the  state.
He  was  elected
governor  in  1816,
and  re-elected  sev-
en years  in  suc-
cession, finally  de-
clining to  be  again
a  candidate.  In
1816  Harvard  gave
him  the  degrees  of
LL.  D,  and  M.  D.

He  bequeathed  his  library  to  the  State  medical  so-
ciety, of  which  he  was  president  from  1817  till  his
death.  Gov.  Brooks  published  an  oration  deliv-
ered before  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  (1787),  a
discourse  before  the  humane  society  (1795),  a
eulogy  on  Washington  (1800),  and  a  discourse  on
pneumonia  (1808).

BROOKS,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Buthr  co.,
Ohio,  1  Nov.,  1821;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  30
April,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at  Indiana  Asbury
university,  and  in  1840  entered  the  Methodist  min-
istry. He  removed  to  Iowa  in  1846,  and  in  1856
became  editor  of  the  St.  Louis  *'  Central  Christian
Advocate,"  the  only  anti-slavery  paper  published
on  slave  soil  west  of  the  Mississippi.  When  the
civil  war  began,  he  became  chaplain  of  the  1st
Missouri  artillery,  Col.  Frank  P.  Blair's  regiment.
He  afterward  aided  in  raising  the  11th  and  33d
Missouri  regiments,  and  was  transferred  to  the
latter  as  chaplain.  Early  in  the  war  Mr.  Brooks
urged  the  enlistment  of  colored  troops,  and,  when
it  was  decided  to  employ  them,  he  was  offered  a
major-general's  commission  if  he  would  raise  a
division,  but  he  declined.  He  afterward  became
chaplain  of  the  3d  Arkansas  colored  infantry.
After  the  war  Mr.  Brooks  became  a  planter  in  Ar-
kansas, and  was  a  leader  in  the  State  constitutional
convention  of  1868.  During  the  presidential  can-
vass of  that  year  an  attempt  was  made  to  assas-
sinate Mr.  Brooks  and  Congressman  C.  C.  Ilines,
which  resulted  in  the  death  of  the  latter  and  the
wounding  of  Mr.  ^ferooks.  He  removed  to  Little
Rock  in  the  autumn  of  1868,  and  was  elected  state
senator  in  1870.  In  1872  he  was  a  candidate  for
governor,  and,  when  his  opponent  was  declared  to
be  elected  by  the  legislature,  he  claimed  that  the
election  was  fraudulent,  and,  relying  on  the  de-
cision of  a  state  court  in  his  favor,  took  forcible
possession  of  the  state-house,  13  April,  1874,  and
held  it  till  dispossessed  by  proclamation  of  Presi-
dent Grant,  23  May,  1874.  (See  Baxter,  Elisha.)
Mr.  Brooks  was  appointed  postmaster  at  Little
Rock  in  ]\Iarch,  1875,  and  held  the  office  till  his
death. He  was  a  man  of  great  will-power  and  a

BROOKS,  Kendall,  educator,  b.  in  Roxbury,
Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1821.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1841,  and  was  tutor  in  Columbian  university,


388


BROOKS


BROOKS


Washington,  D.  C,  in  1841-'3.  He  was  graduated
at  Newton  theological  institute  in  1845,  and  in
the  same  year  became  pastor  of  a  Baptist  church  in
Eastport,  Me.,  where  he  remained  till  1852.  He  was
then  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  and  natu-
ral philosophy  at  Waterville,  and  in  1855  became
pastor  of  a  church  in  Fitchburg,  Mass.  He"  edited
the  "  National  Baptist,"  in  Philadelphia,  from  1865
till  1868,  and  then  became  president  of  Kalamazoo
college,  Michigan,

BROOKS,  Lewis,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
Milford,  Conn.,  in  17i)3;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  9
Aug.,  1877.  He  received  a  common-school  educa-
tion, settled  in  Rochester  when  he  was  twenty-
nine  years  old,  and  first  engaged  in  the  manu-
facture of  woollen  cloth,  and  later  in  mercantile
business.  In  1837  he  retired,  and  devoted  his  time
chiefly  to  investing  his  money  and  looking  after  his
real  estate.  He  made  various  charitable  bequests,
among  which  was  f  10,000  to  the  Rochester  city
hospital,  a  like  sum  to  St.  Mary's  hospital,  and
$5,000  each  to  the  industrial  school  and  the  female
charitable  society.  He  also  bequeathed  $120,000
to  the  University  of  Virginia,  $31,000  alone  being
expended  on  the  work  of  collecting  a  cabinet.  Nu-
merous other  gifts  were  made  to  several  societies,
and  in  no  case  was  the  name  of  the  giver  known.

BROOKS,  Mcaria  Gowen,  poet,  b.  in  Medford,
Mass.,  about  1795;  d.  in  Matanzas,  Cuba,  11  Nov.,
1845.  She  was  descended  from  a  Welsh  family
that  settled  in  Charlestown  before  the  revolution.
Her  father  was  a  man  of  literary  tastes,  numbering
among  his  friends  several  of  the  Harvard  profes-
sors, and  before  she  was  nine  years  old  his  daughter
had  committed  much  poetry  to  memory,  and  was
noted  for  the  elegance  of  her  conversation.  Before
she  was  fourteen  her  father  died  bankrupt,  and
Mr.  Brooks,  a  Boston  merchant,  to  whom  she  was
already  betrothed,  completed  her  education  and
then  married  her.  At  first  she  lived  in  affluence,
but  in  a  few  years  heavy  losses  reduced  her  hus-
band to  comparative  poverty,  and  she  began  to
write  verses  for  consolation.  At  nineteen  she  had
finished  a  metrical  romance,  which  was  never  pub-
lished, and  in  1820,  after  several  anonymous  lyrics,
she  published  "Judith,  Esther,  and  other  Poems,
by  a  Lover  of  the  Fine  Arts."  Mr.  Brooks  died  in
1823,  and  his  widow  went  to  live  with  an  uncle

in  Cuba,  whose
death  soon  after-
ward gave  her  a
settled  income.
The  greater  part
of  her  principal
work,  a  poem  en-
titled "  Zophiel,
or  the  Bride  of
Seven,"  was  writ-
ten here,  and  the
^'^ ""^m Jf'^^  ^^^^ canto was

jT '^^^  m  ^^  published  in  Bos-

ton  in  1825,  After
her  uncle's  death
she  returned  to
this  country,  and
in  1830  visited
France  and  Eng-
land. She  passed
the  spring  of  1831
at  Keswick,  the
home  of  Robert  Southey,  the  poet,  where  the  latter
part  of  **  Zophiel "  was  written.  Southey  admired
her  work,  and  gave  her  the  name  of  "  Maria  del  Oc-
cidente."  In  "  The  Doctor  "  he  speaks  of  her  as  "  the
most  impassioned  and  imaginative  of  all  poetesses,"


^M^a^^^c-^^^^l^inr^


^^


and  under  his  care  the  completed  poem  was  pub-
lished (London,  1833).  "  Zophiel "  has  for  its  subject
the  love  of  a  fallen  angel  for  a  beautiful  Hebrew
maiden,  and  is  founded  on  the  story  of  Sara,  in
the  apocryphal  book  of  Tobit.  Returning  to  this
country,  Mrs.  Brooks  lived  for  some  time  near
West  Point,  where  her  son  was  first  a  student  and
afterward  assistant  professor,  and  her  house  was  a
favorite  resort  of  the  officers  of  the  academv.  In
1834  she  published  in  Boston  an  edition  of '"  Zo-
phiel "  for  the  benefit  of  the  Polish  exiles  in  this
country;  but  at  the  end  of  a  month  only  twenty
copies  had  been  sold,  and  Mrs.  Brooks  withdrew
the  rest  of  the  edition  from  the  market.  While
living  on  Governor's  island,  New  York  harbor,
where  her  son  was  then  stationed,  Mrs.  Brooks
published  "  Idomen,  or  the  Vale  of  Yumuri "
(1843),  a  work  partaking  of  the  nature  of  an  auto-
biography. In  December  of  the  same  year  she
returned  to  her  Cuban  estate,  where  she  remained
till  she  died.  One  of  her  latest  poems  was  an
"  Ode  to  the  Departed,"  written  in  1843.  At  the
time  of  her  death  she  had  planned  an  epic  entitled
"  Beatriz,  the  Beloved  of  Columbus."  A  new  edi-
tion of  "  Zophiel,"  edited  by  Zadel  Barnes  Gustaf-
son,  was  published  in  Boston  in  1879. — Her  son,
Horace,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,  i\Iass,,  14  Aug.,
1814;  d,  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  26  March,  1890,  was  ap-
pointed to  the  U.  S,  military  academy,  through  the
influence  of  Lafayette,  and  was  graduated  there  in
1835.  He  served  in  the  Seminole  war  of  1835-6,
receiving,  31  Dec,  1835,  the  brevet  of  first  lieu-
tenant for  gallantry  and  good  conduct.  He  was
assistant  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  U.  S.
military  academy  from  November,  1836,  till  Au-
gust, 1839,  and  'served  on  garrison  and  recruit-
ing duty  at  various  places  till  the  Mexican  war.
On  18  June,  1846,  he  became  captain  in  the  2d
artillery,  and  served  through  Scott's  campaign.
For  his  services  during  the  war  he  received  two
brevets— that  of  major,  20  Aug,,  1847,  for  Churu-
busco  and  Contreras,  and  that  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  8  Sept,,  1847,  for  Molino  del  Rey.  From
this  time  until  the  civil  war  he  was  stationed  in
varioiis  forts,  taking  part  in  the  Utah  ex])edition
of  1855  and  in  quelling  the  Kansas  disturbances
of  1860-1.  On  28  April,  1861,  he  became  major
in  the  second  artillery,  and  on  1  Aug.,  lieutenant-
colonel.  He  served  in  defence  of  Washington
from  February  till  March,  1861,  at  Fort  Pickens,
Fla.,  until  October,  and  at  Fort  Jefferson,  Fla.,
until  March,  1862.  From  September,  1862,  till
September,  1863,  at  the  time  of  the  Morgan  raid,
he  was  chief  mustering  and  pay  officer  for  the
state  of  Ohio,  under  Gov.  Todd,  and  during  the
year  $1,000,000  passed  through  his  hands  without
an  error  in  his  accounts.  After  this  he  served  on
various  military  boards  at  Washington  and  else-
where, becoming  colonel  on  1  Aug,,  1863,  and
brevet  brigadier-general  at  the  close  of  the  w;ii'
From  1866  till  1868,  and  from  1869  till  1872,  li
commanded  a  regiment  at  Fort  McHenry,  Md..
being  at  the  head  of  the  department  of  Washmg-
ton  in  the  interim.  From  18  Nov,,  1872,  till  10
Jan,,  1877,  he  commanded  the  presidio  at  San
Francisco,  and  on  the  latter  date  was  retired  from
active  service,  being  over  sixty-two  years  of  age,
He  became  a  resident  of  Baltimore,  Md,

BROOKS,  Nathan  Covington,  educator,  b,  in
Cecil  CO,,  Md,,  12  Aug,,  1819,  He  w\as  graduated
at  St,  John's  college,  Annapolis,  Md.,  and  began
teaching  when  onlv  eighteen  vears  old.  He  was
chosen  first  principal  of  the  Baltimore  high  school
in  1839,  and  in  1848  organized  the  Baltimore  te-
male  college,  of  which  he  became  president. Mr,


BROOKS


BROOKS


389


Brooks  has  written  much  occasional  poetry.  Among
his  best  pieces  are  "  Shelley's  Obsequies  "  and  "  The
Fall  of  Superstition."  A  prize  offered  by  the
"Southern  Churchman"  for  the  best  poem  was
awarded  to  Mr.  Brooks  for  "  The  South  Sea  Isl-
ander," over  such  competitors  a«  Mrs.  Sigourney,
George  W.  Bethune,  George  P.  Morris,  and  N.  P.
Willis.  He  has  published  "  Scripture  Anthology  "
(Philadelphia,  1837) ;  "  The  Literary  Amaranth,"  a
collection  of  prose  and  poetry  (1840) ;  a  poetical
"History  of  the  Church,"  delivered  before  the
Diagnothian  society  of  Marshall  college  (1841) ;
and  a  "  Complete  History  of  the  Mexican  War,"
considered  a  standard  work  (1849 ;  new  ed.,
1865 ;  German  translation  by  Joseph  Koch,  1849).
He  has  ready  for  publication  (1886),  "  Passion
Week,  with  an  Horology  of  the  Passions."  Prof.
Brooks  has  also  prepared  a  large  number  of  Latin
and  Greek  text-books,  among  which  is  a  series  of
Uves  of  eminent  Amxcricans,  in  Latin,  entitled
"  Viri  Americae  "  (New  York,  1864).  His  editions
of  Ovid  (Philadelphia,  1848)  and  Virgil  (1869)
have  been  highly  praised.

BROOKS,  Noah,  author,  b.  in  Castine,  Me.,  30
Oct.,  1830.  He  was  educated  for  an  artistic  career,
but  in  1850  began  work  as  a  journalist,  in  Boston.
He  went  west  in  1854,  and,  after  unsuccessful  ex-
periences as  a  merchant  in  Illinois  and  as  a  farmer
in  Kansas,  removed  to  California  at  the  close  of
the  "•  free-state  "  conflict.  Here,  in  company  with
Benjamin  P.  Avery,  afterward  minister  to  China,
he  founded  the  "  Appeal,"  published  in  Marysville,
Yuba  CO.,  but  in  1862  established  himself  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  as  correspondent  of  the  Sacramento
"  Union."  His  letters,  over  the  signature  of  "  Cas-
tine," made  him  widely  known  in  the  west.  From
1  July,  1865,  till  October,  1866,  Mr.  Brooks  was
naval  officer  of  the  port  of  San  Francisco,  and  then
became  managing  editor  of  the  "  Alta  California."
He  subsequently  removed  to  New  York,  and  after
serving  on  the  staff  of  the  "  Tribune  "  from  1871
tiU  1875,  and  of  the  "  Times  "  from  1875  till  1884,
became  editor  of  the  Newark  (N.  J.)  "  Advertiser."
Mr.  Brooks  has  written  many  short  stories  for  the
magazines,  but  is  best  known  by  his  books  for  young
people.  He  has  published  "  The  Bov  Emigrants  "
(New  York,  1876);  "The  Fairport  Nine"  (1881);
and  "  Our  Base-Ball  Club  "  (1883) ;  and  has  in  prep-
aration (1886)  a  "  Life  of  Lincoln."

BROOKS,  Peter  Chardou,  merchant,  b.  in
North  Yarmouth,  Me.,  6  Jan.,  1767;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1849.  His  father,  the  Rev.  Edward
Brooks,  moved  to  Medford,  Mass.,  his  native  town,
in  1769,  and  here  the  boyhood  of  young  Brooks
was  passed  in  farm  work.  After  his  father's
death,  in  1781,  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  trade  in
Boston,  walking  to  the  city,  seven  miles  distant,
every  day.  In  1789  he  engaged  in  the  business  of
marine  insurance,  and  accumulated  a  large  for-
tune. He  kept  with  his  own  hand  very  accurate
accounts,  a  rare  thing  in  those  days,  and  made  it  a
rule  never  to  borrow  money,  never  to  engage  in
speculation  of  any  kind,  and  never  to  take  more
than  the  legal  rate  of  interest.  He  retired  from
busmess  in  1803,  and,  until  1806,  devoted  himself
to  the  settlement  of  all  the  risks  in  which  he  was
interested.  He  then  accepted  the  presidency  of
the  New  England  insurance  company,  the  first
chartered  company  of  the  kind  in  the  state,  and
tilled  the  office  for  several  years.  In  his  retire-
ment at  Medford  he  took  special  pleasure  in  the
cultivation  of  trees,  planting  many  thousands  of
them  about  his  farm.  He  was  at  different  times  a
meniber  of  both  branches  of  the  legislature,  of  the
nrst  Boston  city  council,  and  of  the  constitutional


convention  of  1820.  While  in  the  legislature  he
took  a  prominent  part  in  suppressing  lotteries,
which  at  that  time  were  flourishing  in  the  state.
Mr.  Brooks  gave  liberally,  and  without  parade,  to
many  benevolent  objects,' and,  besides  this,  his  pri-
vate donations  for  many  years  exceeded  his  domes-
tic expenses.  He  had  for  sons-in-law,  Edward
Everett,  Charles  Francis  Adams,  and  Rev.  N.  L.
Frothingham,  who  delivered  his  funeral  sermon
on  7  Jan.,  1849.  A  biography  of  Mr.  Brooks,  by
Mr.  Everett,  may  be  found  in  Hunt's  "  Lives  of
American  Merchants  "  (New  York,  1856).

BROOKS,  PhiHips,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  13  Dec,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1855,  studied  theology  at  the  seminary  in
Alexandria,  Va..  was  ordained  in  1859,  and  became
rector  of  the  church  of  the  Advent,  Philadelphia.
In  1862  he  took  charge  of  the  church  of  the  Holy
Trinity  in  that  city,  and  in  1869  became  rector  of
Trinity  church,  Boston,  which  was  erected  for  him
at  a  cost  of  more  than  $1,000,000,  and  where  he
exerted  a  powerful  influence  for  good,  especially
among  young  men.  After  declining  a  professor-
ship in  Harvard  and,  in  1886,  the  office  of  assist-
ant bishop  of  Pennsylvania,  he,  in  April,  1891,  ac-
cepted the  bishopric  of  Massachusetts,  to  which  ho
was  elected  at  that  time.  Bishop  Brooks  is  one  of
the  most  brilliant  pulpit  orators  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  and  is  noted  for  his  rapid  deliv-
ery. He  has  published  "  Lectures  on  Preaching,"
delivered  before  the  Yale  divinitv  school  (New
York,  1877);  "Sermons"  (1878  and  1881);  "The
Influence  of  Jesus,"  Bohlen  lectures  delivered  in
Philadelphia  in  1879  (1879) ;  "  Baptism  and  Con-
firmation "  (1880) ;  "  Sermons  preached  in  English
Churches"  (1883);  "Oldest  School  in  America"
(Boston,  1885) ;  "  Twenty  Sermons "  (New  York,
1886) ;  "  The  Light  of  the  World  and  Other  Ser-
mons" (1890);  and  "An  Easter  Carol"  (1891).

BROOKS,  Preston  Smith,  congressman,  b.
in  Edgefield  District,  S.  C,  4  Aug.,  1819 ;  d.  in
Washington,  D,  C,  27  Jan.,  1857.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  South  Carolina  college  in  1839,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  May,  1843.
In  1844  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature.
During  the  Mexican  war  he  served  as  captain  in
the  Palmetto  regiment  of  South  Carolina  volun-
teers, and  on  his  return  he  gave  his  exclusive
attention  to  planting.  He  was  elected  a  repre-
sentative from  South  Carolina  to  congress,  as  a
state-rights  democrat,  in  1853,  and  was  re-elected
twice.  On  22  May,  1856,  Senator  Sumner  having
incensed  the  memlDers  from  South  Carolina  by  ex-
pressions in  his  speech  on  "  the  crime  against  Kan-
sas," Mr.  Brooks  entered  the  senate-chamber  after
that  body  had  adjourned,  approached  Mr.  Sumner
from  behind,  while  the  senator  was  still  seated  at
his  desk,  and  struck  him  repeatedly  on  the  head
with  a  cane,  till  Mr.  Sumner  fell  insensible  to  the
floor.  Friends  of  Mr.  Brooks,  among  them  Mr.
Barksdale,  of  Mississippi,  accompanied  him,  and
with  drawn  revolvers  prevented  any  interference.
Subsequently  a  committee  of  the  house  reported  in
favor  of  Mr.  Brooks's  expulsion ;  but  in  the  final
action  on  the  report  there  were  121  votes  in  favor
and  95  opposing  it,  which,  being  less  than  the
requisite  two  thirds,  prevented  the  house  from
agreeing  to  the  resolution.  Afterward,  during  a
debate  in  the  house,  words  were  passed  between
Anson  Burlingame,  then  a  member  from  Massa-
chusetts, and  Mr.  Brooks,  in  consequence  of  which
the  former  was  challenged  to  a  duel.  The  chal-
lenge was  accepted,  Canada  chosen  as  the  place  of
meeting,  and  rifies  as  the  weapons ;  but  Mr.  Brooks
failed  to  appear,  giving  as  his  reason  that  he  would


390


BROOKS


BROPHY


have  to  "pass  through  the  enemy's  country"  to
get  there.  The  poet  Bryant  celebrated  the  event
by  some  verses  in  the  "  Evening  Post,"  in  which
the  refrain  was,  "Bully  Brooks  is  afraid."  Mr.
Brooks  resigned  his  seat,  and  was  unanimously  re-
elected by  his  constituents.  He  also  received  nu-
merous costly  canes  and  other  testimonials  from
different  parts  of  the  south.

BROOKS,  Thomas  Benton,  engineer,  b.  in
Monroe,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  15  June,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  the  engineering  department  of  Union
in  1858.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  captain
in  the  1st  New  York  volunteer  engineers,  after-
ward becoming  major  and  aide  on  the  general
staff  of  the  army.  As  such  he  served  under  Gren.
Gillmore  in  the  reduction  of  Fort  Pulaski  and  Fort
Wagner  and  before  Charleston.  His  reports  are
given  in  full  in  Gen.  Gillmore's  "Siege  and  Re-
duction of  Fort  Pulaski  "  (New  York,  1863),  and  in
his  "  Operations  against  the  Defences  of  Charles-
ton Harbor "  (1863).  At  the  time  of  his  resigna-
tion he  held  the  brevet  rank  of  colonel.  From
1869  till  1879  he  was  assistant  geologist  in  charge
of  the  surveys  of  the  Lake  Superior  iron  regions.
In  this  connection  he  was  associated  with  Raphael
Pumpelly,  and  prepared  "  Geological  Survey  of
Michigan  "  (vols.  i.  and  ii..  New  York,  1873\  also
"  Geology  of  Wisconsin  "  (part  of  vol.  iii.,  Madison,
1879).  His  health  having  failed,  in  1879  he  turned
his  attention  to  farming,  and  now- resides  at  New-
burg,  N.  Y.

BROOKS,  William  Keith,  naturalist,  b.  in
Cleveland,  Ohio,  25  March,  1848.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1870,  and  at  Harvard  as  Ph.
D.  in  1875,  after  which  he  became  assistant  in  the
Boston  society  of  natural  history.  In  1876  he  was
elected  a  fellow  of  Johns  Hopkins  university,  then
an  associate,  and  since  1883  he  has  been  professor
of  morphology.  Under  his  direction  the  Chesa-
peake zoological  laboratory  of  Johns  Hopkins  uni-
versity was  organized  in  1878,  and  it  has  been  un-
der his  supervision  since  its  beginning.  In  con-
nection with  this  work  he  has  edited  "  Studies
from  the  Biological  Laboratory  "  (Baltimore,  1879,
et  seq.).  He  has  also  published  "  Hand-Book  of  In-
vertebrate Zoology  "  (Boston,  1882)  and  "  Heredi-
ty "  (Baltimore,  1884).  The  artificial  development
of  the  American  oyster  is  largely  due  to  his  efforts,
and  in  that  connection  he  wrote  "The  Develop-
ment and  Protection  of  the  Oyster  in  Maryland  "
(Baltimore,  1884).  He  has  contributed  many  valu-
able scientific  papers  and  reports  to  periodicals,
among  which  are  "  Conifer,  a  Study  in  Morpholo-
gy," published  in  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society  "  (London,  1881),  and  "  Re-
port on  the  Stomatopoda  collected  by  H.  M.  S.
Challenger"  (1886).  Dr.  Brooks  is  a  member  of
the  Maryland  academy  of  sciences  and  other  scien-
tific, societies,  and  in  1884  was  elected  a  member  of
the  National  academv  of  sciences.

BROOKS,  William  Thomas  Harhau^h,  sol-
dier, b.  in  New  Lisbon,  Ohio,  28  Jan.,  1821 ;  d.  in
Huntsville,  Ala.,  19  July,  1870.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841  and  served
in  Florida  in  1841-2.  In  1843-5  he  was  on
frontier  duty  in  Kansas,  and  in  1845-6  served
in  the  military  occupation  of  Texas,  becoming
first  lieutenant  in  the  3d  infantry,  21  Sept.,  1846.
He  was  in  nearly  all  the  battles  in  the  Mexican
Avar,  was  brevetted  captain,  23  Sept.,  1846,  for  his
conduct  at  Monterey,  and  major,  20  Aug.,  1847,
for  services  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco.  In
1848-'51  he  was  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Twiggs,  and
on  10  Nov.,  1851,  became  captain  in  the  3d  in-
fantry. From  this  time  until  the  civil  war  he


served  in  various  forts.  In  1854  and  again  in  1858
he  was  on  scouting  duty,  and  from  1858  till  I860
was  given  sick  leave.  On  28  Sept.,  1861,  he  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and  served
in  the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,  being  engaged
at  Yorktown,  Lee's  Mills.  Golden's  Farm,  Glen-
dale,  and  Savage  Station,  where  he  was  wouuded.
In  September,  1862,  durmg  the  Maryland  cam-
paign, he  was  in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain
and  Antietam,  being  wounded  again  at  the  lattt  i
place.  In  October  and  November,  1862,  on  tli'
march  to  Falmouth,  Va.,  he  commanded  a  divi-
sion, and  again  in  the  Rappahannock  campaign
December,  1862,  to  May,  1863.  From  11  Jun(
1863,  till  6  April,  1864,  he  commanded  the  de[)ari
ment  of  the  Monongahela,  and  in  the  operation
before  Richmond  in  1864  was  at  the  head  of  th.
10th  army  corps,  being  engaged  at  Swift's  Creek.
Drury's  Bluff,  Bermuda  Hundred,  Cold  Harbor,
and  Petersburg.  His  health  failing  on  account  of
wounds  and  exposure,  he  resigned  on  14  July,  1864,
and  in  1866  went  to  a  farm  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.

BROOM,  Jacob,  statesman,  b.  in  1752;  d.  in
Philadelphia  in  April,  1810.  He  was  one  of  the
delegates  from  Delaware  to  the  convention  that
met  in  Philadelphia,  14  May,  1787,  pursuant  to  ;i
resolution  of  congress,  to  adopt  a  federal  constitu-
tion. His  signature  appears  among  those  who
subscribed  to  the  document,  17  Sept.  He  held
many  offices  of  public  honor  and  trust.

BROOM,  Jacob,  statesman,  b.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  25  July,  1808 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  in
November,  1864.  After  receiving  a  classical  edu-
cation he  removed  to  Pennsylvania,  and  was  ap-
pointed deputy  auditor  of  the  state  in  1840.  In
1849  he  was  appointed  clerk  of  the  orphans'  court
in  Philadelphia.  In  politics  he  -was  what  was  then
known  as  an  American  whig,  and  as  such  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  from  3  March,  1855,
till  3  March,  1857.

BROOM,  James  M.,  statesman,  b.  in  Delaware
in  1778.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1794,
and  was  a  member  of  congress  from  Delaware  from
2  Dec,  1805,  till  3  March,  1807.

BROOME,  John,  merchant,  b.  in  1738;  d.  8
Aug.,  1810.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York
state  constitutional  convention  of  1777  and  lieu-
tenant-governor of  the  state  in  1804.  During  the
whole  of  his  public  career  he  was  prominent  in
New  York,  and  was  for  many  years  at  the  head  of
some  of  the  most  important  charitable  and  com-
mercial institutions  of  the  city.  An  important
thoroughfare  bears  his  name.

BROOME,  John  L.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
city,  8  March,  1824,  He  was  appointed  second
lieutenant  in  the  U.  S.  marine  corps,  12  Jan.,  1848;
promoted  first  lieutenant,  28  Sept.,  1857 ;  captam,
26  Julv,  1861 ;  major,  8  Dec,  1864;  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  16  March,  1879.  During  the  war  with
Mexico  he  served  with  his  corps.  In  1862  he  com-
manded the  marine  guard  of  the  "  Hartford,"  Far-
ragut's  flag-ship,  and  was  present  at  the  passage  ot
Forts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip  (24  April),  and  in  the
various  engagements  at  Vicksburg  and  Port  Hud-
son, which  resulted  in  wresting  the  Mississippi  nyer
from  the  confederate  forces.  He  was  twice  wounded
during  the  war,  and  at  its  close  received  the  ore-
vets  of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant
and  meritorious  services.

BROPHY,  George  R.,  clergyman,  b.  near  Kii-
kennv,  Ireland,  in  August,  1775;  d.  in  Daven-
port,'Iowa,  16  Oct.,  1880.  He  was  the  son  of  an
Irish  patriot  who,  after  the  battle  of  Vinegar  Hiu
in  the  rebellion  of  1798,  was  captured  and  exe-


BROSS


BROUGHAM


391


cuted.  Young  Brophy  was  early  intended  for  the
priesthood,  and,  after  graduating  at  Carlow  col-
lege, completed  his  theological  studies  in  Paris  and
was  ordained  priest  in  1798.  In  1888  he  assisted
at  the  obsequies  of  Napoleon  I.  when  he  was  in-
terred at  the  Hotel  des  Invalides ;  soon  afterward
he  witnessed  the  attempt  made  upon  the  life  of
Louis  Phillippe  by  Fieschi;  and  still  later,  with
Arciibishop  Dupontin,  he  was  at  the  death-bed  of
Lafayette  as  his  spiritual  adviser.  In  1843  he  was
settled  in  New  York  as  pastor  of  St.  Paul's  church.
Througli  his  efforts  several  churches  were  built
and  many  converts  were  made  to  the  Catholic  re-
ligion. He  was  a  ripe  scholar  and  a  man  of  wide  ac-
quaintance, numbering  among  his  personal  friends
Presidents  Tyler,  Polk,  Fillmore,  Pierce,  Buchanan,
and  Lincoln.  In  18G5  he  removed  to  Iowa,  and,
with  a  view  of  establishing  a  Catholic  college,  pur-
chased a  large  tract  near  Boone ;  but  the  project
was  never  executed.  His  later  years  were  spent  at
the  Mercy  hospital  in  Davenport,  Iowa.

BROSS,  WilHain,  journalist,  b.  in  Montague,
Sussex  CO.,  N.  J.,  4  Nov.,  1818.  He  was  fitted  for
college  at  Milford  academy.  Pa.,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Williams  in  1888,  after  which  he  taught
school  for  ten  years.  He  then  went  to  Chicago,
where,  from  1849  till  1851,  he  was  a  dealer  in
books,  and  published  the  '"  Prairie  Herald."  He
formed  a  partnership  with  J.  L.  Scripps  in  1852,
and  established  the  "  Daily  Democratic  Press,"
which  was  consolidated  with  the  Chicago  "  Trib-
une," 1  July,  1858.  For  several  years  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  "  Tribune  "  company.  During  1855  and
1856  he  was  a  member  of  the  Chicago  city  council.
He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Illinois  from  18G5
till  1869.  He  has  travelled  extensively  in  America
and  Europe,  and  has  published  in  the  "•  Tribune  "
many  letters  from  abroad,  and  from  almost  every
part  of  this  country.  He  laecame  a  member  of  the
American  society  for  the  advancement  of  science
in  1853,  and  has  read  papers  before  that  associa-
tion, as  well  as  before  the  Chicago  historical  society
and  the  academy  of  sciences.  He  was  identified
with  the  republican  party  from  the  first,  and  took
a  prominent  part  in  its  campaigns  as  a  pu])lic
speaker.  He  is  the  author  of  several  publications
in  book  or  pamphlet  form,  including  "  A  History
of  Chicago  "  (Chicago,  1876) ;  "  A  Compilation  of
Editorials  from  the  Chicago  Tribune "  and  "  Im-
mortality "  (1877) ;  "  A  History  of  Camp  Douglas  "
(1878);  "Punishment"  and  "Chicago  and  the
Sources  of  her  Future  Growth  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Win-
field  Family  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Illinois  and  the  Thir-
teenth Amendment "  (1884).

BROUGH,  John  (bruff),  governor  of  Ohio,  b.  in
Marietta,  Ohio,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Cleveland,  29  Aug.,
1865.  At  the  age  of  twelve,  and  with  only  the
rudiments  of  a  common-school  training,  he  be-
came an  apprentice  in  the  office  of  the  Marietta
"  Gazette."  Here  he  stayed  for  two  years,  but  all
the  time  sought  opportunities  for  education,  and
in  1825  secured  a  place  in  the  office  of  the  Athens
"Mirror,"  within  reach  of  the  Ohio  university,
then  in  its  infancy.  He  entered  at  once  as  a  stu-
dent, and  so  improved  his  time  that  he  more  than
made  good  his  lack  of  early  advantages.  At  the
same  period  he  was  so  successful  in  business  that
in  1831  he  became  proprietor  of  the  "  Washington
younty  Republican,"  a  democratic  paper  published
m  Marietta.  This  journal  he  sold  in  1833,  and,  in
company  with  his  brother,  Charles  Henry  Brough,
purchased  the  Lancaster  "  Eagle,"  and  soon  made
its  mfluence  felt  as  a  democratic  organ  through-
out the  state.  In  1835  Mr.  Brough  was  elected
clerk  of  the  Ohio  senate,  which  office  he  held  un-


til 1838,  when  he  was  elected  to  the  state  legis-
lature from  Fairfield  and  Hocking  counties.  l)ur-
ing  this  period  (1835-'6)  he  was  member  of  a
joint  commission  to  adjust  the  boundary  between
Virginia  and  Ohio.  He  was  elected  state  auditor
in  1839,  and  entered  upon  the  duties  of  his  office
at  a  time  when  the  whole  country  still  felt  the
effects  of  the  panic  of  1837,  and  when  the  state
of  Ohio  was  peculiarly  burdened  with  liabilities
for  which  there  appeared  to  be  no  adequate  relict
Mr.  Brough  devoted  himself  to  reconstructing  the
whole  financial  system  of  the  state,  and  retired
from  office  in  1846  with  a  high  reputation  as  a
puljlic  officer.  In  partnership  with  his  brother
Charles  he  undertook  the  management  of  the  Cin-
cinnati "Enquirer,"  which  was  soon  one  of  the
most  powerful  democratic  journals  in  the  west.
At  the  same  time  he  opened  a  law  office  in  Cincin-
nati. Personally,  Mr.  Brough  took  an  active  part
in  politics,  and  became  the  most  popular  demo-
cratic orator  in  the  state.  He  retired  from  active
political  life  in  1848,  and  in  1853  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Madison  and  Indianapolis  railway,
then  one  of  the  great  lines  of  the  west.  He  removed
his  residence  to  Cleveland,  and,  when  the  civil  war
began  in  1861,  he  was  urged  to  become  a  candidate
of  the  republican  union  party  for  governor.  This
honor  he  declined,  although  his  position  as  a  "  war
democrat "  was  always  distinctly  understood.  The
canvass  of  1863  was  held  under  very  difficult  con-
ditions. The  civil  war  was  at  its  height,  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  loyal  voters  were  in  the  army,  and
southern  sympathizers,  led  by  Clement  L.  Vallan-
digham,  were  openly  defiant.  Vallandigham  was
arrested  for  disloyal  utterances,  tried  by  court-mar-
tial, and  banished  from  the  United  States.  He  was
sent  within  the  confederate  lines,  and  subsequently
received  the  regular  democratic  nomination  for
governor  of  Ohio.  There  was  apparently  some
danger  that  he  would  actually  be  elected  by  the
"  peace  "  faction  of  the  party.  At  this  crisis  Mr.
Brough  made  a  patriotic  speech  at  Marietta,  declar-
ing slavery  destroyed  by  the  act  of  rebellion,  and
earnestly  appealing  to  all  patriots,  of  whatever  pre-
vious political  affiliations,  to  unite  against  the
southern  rebels.  He  was  immediately  put  before
the  people  by  the  republican  union  party  as  a  can-
didate for  governor,  and  the  majority  that  elected
him  (101,099)  was  the  largest  ever  given  for  a
governor  in  any  state  up  to  that  time.  In  the  dis-
charge of  his  duties  as  chief  magistrate  he  was  la-
borious, patriotic,  far-sighted,  clear  in  his  convic-
tions of  duty,  firm  in  their  maintenance,  and  fear-
less in  their  execution.  He  was  distinctly  the  "  war
governor  "  of  Ohio,— His  brother,  Charles  Henry,
b.  in  Marietta,  Ohio,  17  Nov.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Cincin-
nati, 10  May,  1849,  was  a  member  of  the  Ohio
legislature  in  1840-'l ;  commanded  the  4th  Ohio
regiment  during  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  was
presiding  judge  of  the  Hamilton  county  court  of
common  pleas  at  the  time  of  his  death.  He  was
associated  with  his  brother  in  many  of  his  busi-
ness enterprises.

BROUGHAM,  John,  actor,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ire-
land, 9  May,  1810 ;  d.  in  New  York,  7  June,  1880.
His  father,  an  Irishman  of  good  family,  was  an
amateur  painter,  a  person  of  exceptional  talent
and  gay  disposition,  and  died  young.  His  mother
was  the  daughter  of  a  Huguenot,  whom  political
adversity  had  forced  into  exile,  and  who  took  ref-
uge in  the  Irish  capital.  John  Avas  the  eldest  of
three  children.  The  other  two  died  in  youth,  and,
the  father  being  dead  and  the  widowed  mother  left
penniless,  the  surviving,  boy  was  reared  in  the  fam-
ily and  home  of  an  eccentric  uncle. He  was  pre-


392


BROUGHAM


BROUGHTON


pared  for  college  at  an  academy  at  Trim,  in  the
county  *  Meath,  twenty  miles  from  Dublin,  and
subsequently  was  sent  to  Dublin  university.  There
he  acquired  classical  learning,  and  formed  interest-
ing and  useful  associations  and  acquaintances ;  and
there  also  he  became  interested  in  private  theat-
ricals. He  was  a  frequent  attendant,  moreover,  at
the  Theatre  Royal  in  Hawkins  street.  The  im-
petus toward  his  theatrical  career  was,  doubtless,
received  by  him  at  this  time  and  in  this  way.  Be-
fore leaving  the  university  he,  by  chance,  became
acquainted  with  the  fascinating  actress,  Mme.  Ves-
tris,  afterward  the  first  wife  of  Charles  Mathews,
the  comedian ;  and  when,  at  a  later  period,  he  went
up  to  London,  this  acquaintance  led  to  his  being
engaged,  first  at  the  Tottenham,  and  then  at  the
Olympic,  of  both  of  which  houses  she  was  the
manager.  He  had  been  studying  surgery,  and
walked  the  Peth  street  hospital  for  eight  months ;
but  misfortune  came  upon  his  opulent  uncle,  and
so  the  youth  was  obliged  to  provide  for  himself.
He  went  to  London  in  1830,  and,  after  a  brief  ex-
perience of  poverty,  suddenly  determined  to  become
an  actor.  He  was  destitute  of  everything  except
fine  apparel,  and  he  had  actually  taken  the  ex-
treme step  of  offering  himself  as  a  cadet  in  the
service  of  the  East  India  company ;  but,  being  dis-
suaded by  the  enrolling  officer,  who  lent  him  a
guinea  and  advised  him  to  seek  for  other  employ-
ment, and  happening  to  meet  with  a  festive  ac-
quaintance, he  sought  recreation  at  the  Totten-
ham theatre  (afterward  the  Prince  of  Wales's)
where  Mme.  Vestris  was  acting ;  and  there,  present-
ly, he  was  engaged.  His  first  regular  appearance
on  the  stage  was  made  at  that  house  in  July,  1830,
when  he  acted  several  minor  parts  in  "  Tom  and
Jerry";  and  from  that  time  till  his  death,  fifty
years  later,  he  remained  an  actor.  His  first  hit  was
made  as  O'Slash  in  "  The  Invincibles,"  a  part  which
in  its  name  is  typical  of  his  individual  line  of  dra-
matic art.  The  first  twenty  years  of  Brougham's
life  were  passed  in  and  around  Dublin.  The  rest
of  it  was  divided  between  London  and  New  York.
In  1831  he  followed  Mme.  Vestris  to  the  Olympic
theatre,  and  his  name  ("  Mars — Mr.  Brougham")  ap-
pears in  the  cast  of  "  Olympic  Revels,"  in  the  first
full  bill  that  she  issued  there.  He  early  began  to
write  for  the  stage,  his  first  play  being  a  burlesque
written  for  William  E.  Burton,  who  was  then  act-
ing, obscurely,  at  the  Pavilion  theatre  in  London.
From  the  Olympic,  which  Mme.  Vestris  quitted  in
1839,  Brougham  followed  her  to  Covent  Garden,
and  he  there  remained  during  the  brief  period  of
her  management  of  that  house.  About  this  time
he  co-labored  with  Dion  Boucicault  in  writing  the
comedy  of  "  London  Assurance,"  the  authorship  of
which,  however,  has  always  been  claimed  exclusive-
ly by  Mr.  Boucicault.  In  the  summer  of  1840
Brougham  was  director  of  the  Lyceum,  and  for  that
theatre  he  wrote  "Life  in  the  Clouds,"  "Love's
Livery,"  "  Enthusiasm,"  and  "  Tom  Thumb  II."

In  1843  he  came  to  New  York,  under  engage-
ment to  Stephen  Price,  and  on  4  Oct.  in  that
year,  at  the  old  Park  theatre,  he  made  his  first  ap-
pearance on  the  American  stage,  enacting  O'Cal-
laghan  in  "  His  Last  Legs."  He  was  accompanied
by  his  first  wife,  Emma  Williams,  a  beauty  of  the
Juno  type,  whom  he  had  met  and  married  in  Lon-
don. This  lady  subsequently  was  separated  from


him,  became  Mrs.  Robertson,  and  died  in  New
York,  30  June,  1865.  His  second  wife,  Annette
Nelson  (Mrs.  Hughes),  whom  he  married  in  1847,
was  a  singing  actress  and  a  dancer,  and  at  one
time  (1836)  manager  of  the  Richmond  Hill  theatre,
a  play-house  just  opened,  in  1831,  on  the  corner  of


Varick  and  Charlton  streets.  New  York,  in  what
had  been  the  country  house  of  Aaron  Burr.  This
lady  died  in  New  York,  4  May,  1870.  In  the  time
of  Brougham's  first  visit  to  America  the  Park,  the
Bowery,  the  Chatham,  and  the  National  were  the
only  theatres  thought  to  be  within  the  city  limits.
Niblo's  Garden  was  deemed  "  out  of  town."  The
city,  indeed,  was  but  thinly  settled  from  Canal
street  northward  to  Union  square ;  the  Third  ave-
nue was  a  race-track,  and  all  the  present  Fifth
avenue  hotel  region  was  the  resort  of  sportsmen.
Brougham  was  received  with  kindness  at  the  old
Park,  and  subsequently  he  made  a  professional
tour  of  other  cities,  but  ultimately  settled  in
New  York.  He  was  for  a  time  connected  with  the
stock  company  at  Burton's  theatre  in  Chambers
street,  and  made  many  brilliant  hits  there,  both  as
actor  and  manager.  On  23  Dec,  1850,  he  opened
Brougham's  Lyceum  in  Broadway,  near  the  souMi-
west  corner  of  Broome  street,  and  on  17  March
1852,  closed  it.  This  house  became  "Wallack'^
Theatre,"  the  first  bearing  that  name,  which  has
since  become  a  household  word  in  New  York,
though  not  the  first  Wallack's  in  fact,  for  James
William  Wallack  had  previously  managed  the
National  in  Leonard  street.  After  the  collapse  of
his  Lyceum,  Brougham  Joined  Wallack's  stock  com-
pany. In  1856  he  managed  the  Bowery  theatre,
and  there  accomplished  a  splendid  revival  of
Shakespeare's  "  King  John."  In  1860  he  went  to
London,  where  he  remained  for  four  years.  He  was
connected  with  the  Lyceum  under  Charles  Fech-
ter's  management,  and  there  he  produced  the  popu-
lar English  plays  of  "  The  Duke's  Motto "  and
"Bel  Demonio,"  based  on  French  originals.  He
acted  at  the  Princess's,  also,  in  his  own  comedy  of
"Playing  with  Fire."  His  reappearance  in  the
United  States  was  effected,  in  this  latter  piece,  on
30  Oct.,  1865,  at  the  Winter  Garden  theatre,  situ-
ated in  Broadway,  opposite  the  end  of  Bond  street ;
and  he  never  again  left  this  country.  On  25  Jan.,
1869,  he  opened  "  Brougham's  Theatre  "  in  Twenty-
fourth  street,  but  this  was  taken  from  him  by  its
owner  on  the  following  3  April.  From  this  time
to  the  end  he  led  the  life  of  a  stock-actor,  a  wan-
dering star,  and  a  playwright.  Plis  last  profes-
sional tour  of  the  United  States  was  made  in  1877,
and  his  last  appearance  on  the  stage  occurred  on
25  Oct.,  1879,  at  Booth's  theatre.  New  York,  where
he  enacted  Felix  O'Reilley,  a  detective,  in  Bouei-
cault's  drama  of  "  Rescued."  Brougham  was  the
proprietor  and  editor  of  "  The  Lantern,"  a  comic
paper  published  in  New  York  in  1852,  and  he
brought  out  two  collections  of  his  miscellaneous
writings,  entitled  "  A  Basket  of  Chips  "  and  "  The
Bunsby  Papers."  Toward  the  last  he  became  very
poor,  and  on  17  Jan.,  1878,  a  performance  was
given  at  the  New  York  academv  of  music  for  his
benefit,  which  yielded  $10,279,  and  with  this  his
friends  bought  an  annuity  for  him.  He  was  buried
in  Greenwood  cemetery.  Brougham  wrote  about
one  hundred  plays,  chief  among  which  were  "  Play-
ing with  Fire,"  "  The  Game  of  Love,"  "  The  Game
of  Life,"  "  Romance  and  Reality,"  "  The  Ruhng
Passion,"  "O'Donnell's  Mission,"  "The  Emerald
Ring,"  "  The  Lily  of  France,"  and  the  burlesques
of  "  Pocahontas  "  and  "  Columbus."  His  last  play,
finished  at  Easter,  1880,  but  never  acted,  was  en-
titled "  Home  Rule,"  and  it  was  designed  to  suggest
expedients  for  improving  the  condition  of  the
people  of  Ireland.  ^

BROUGHTON,  Thomas,  colonial  governor,  d.
in  1738.  He  first  appears  in  the  history  of  SoutH
Carolina  as  a  councillor  and  collector  of  the  cus-
toms revenue  in  1708. Afterward  he  was  lieuten-


BROUGHTON


BROWN


393


ant-governor.  He  succeeded  Robert  Johnson  in  the
governorship  in  May,  1735,  and  died  while  still  in
office.  Hewitt  describes  him  as  "  a  plain,  honest
man,  but  little  distinguished  either  for  his  knowl-
edge or  valor."  He  was  easily  accessible  to  de-
signing men,  and  was  persuaded  to  sign  land-war-
rants by  planters,  who  saw  their  opportunity  to
gain  great  possessions.  Some  of  the  largest  estates
in  South  Carolina  were  acquired  through  his  oblig-
ing wav  of  signing  official  papers.

BROUGHTON,  William  Robert,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Gloucestershire,  England,  in  1763;  d.  in
Florence,  Italy,  12  March,  1821.  He  entered  the
royal  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1774,  and  was  at-
tached to  the  sloop  "  Falcon."  He  participated  in
the  naval  attack  on  Bunker  Hill  (17  June,  1775),
and  was  soon  afterward  captured  in  an  attempt  to
bring  oif  a  schooner  that  had  run  aground  at  Cape
Ann.  He  was  exchanged  in  December,  1776,  and
served  on  the  American  station  until  1778.  After
several  years  of  service  in  East  Indian  waters,  he
was  appointed,  in  1790,  to  the  command  of  the
"Chatham,"  a  brig  attached  to  Vancouver's  voy-
age of  discovery  on  the  northwest  coast  of  Amer-
ica. With  this  vessel  he  was  engaged  in  a  sur-
vey of  Columbia  river  and  the  coasts  adjacent.
Vancouver  named  a  group  of  islands  in  the  Pacific
"  Broughton's  Archipelago,"  but  the  title  has  not
survived.  In  1793  he  was  sent  home  with  de-
spatches, and  travelled  over-land  from  San  Bias  to
\  era  Cruz,  a  distance  of  about  six  hundred  miles
in  a  straight  line.  The  original  journal  kept
during  this  journey  is  preserved  in  the  library  of
the  royal  united  service  institution  in  London.  He
reached  England  in  the  autumn  of  1793,  and  on
3  Oct.  was  placed  in  command  of  the  "Provi-
dence," a  vessel  of  four  hundred  tons,  in  which  he
again  sailed  for  the  northwest  coast  of  America ;
but  he  found  the  place  of  rendezvous  deserted,
Vancouver  having  sailed  some  time  before.  This
voyage  terminated  his  American  record.  He
crossed  the  Pacific,  and  subsequently  rendered  dis-
tinguished service  in  the  British  navy,  rising  to
the  rank  of  captain.  In  1804  he  published  "A
Voyage  of  Discovery  to  the  North  Pacific  Ocean,"
confined  mainly  to  the  Asiatic  coasts.

BROUSE,  William  Henry,  Canadian  physi-
cian, b.  in  Matilda,  Dundas,  Ontario,  in  1824.  He
was  educated  at  McGill  college,  Montreal,  and
Victoria  college,  Cobourg,  receiving  the  degree  of
M.  D.  from  the  former  in  1847,  and  that  of  M.  A.
from  the  latter  in  1849.  He  is  surgeon  of  the
56th  battalion  of  volunteer  infantry,  a  member  of
the  senate  of  Victoria  college,  and  appointed
member  of  the  medical  examining  board,  Upper
Canada,  in  1850.  Pie  was  elected  to  the  Dominion
parliament  for  South  Grenville  in  1872,  re-elected
in  1874,  and  called  to  the  senate  in  1878.

BROUSSEAU,  Jean  Baptist,  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  at  Beloeil,  county  Vercheres,  province  of
Quebec,  1  Jan.,  1841.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Hya-
cinthe  and  L'Assomption  colleges  in  his  native
province,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Lower  Canada  in  Julv,  1863.  He  was  editor  of
"  Le  Messager  de  Sorel "  from  1874  till  1876,  and
co-editor  of  "  La  Gazette  de  Sorel "  from  1874  to
1876.  He  was  elected  to  the  provincial  legislature
in  1878,  and  took  part  in  the  famous  debate  on
the  constitutionality  of  the  dismissal  of  the  De
Boucherville  cabinet  by  Lieut.-Gov.  Letellier.

BROWN,  Aaron  Venable,  statesman,  b.  in
Brunswick  co.,  Va.,  15  Aug..  1795;  d.  in  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  8  March,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at
Chapel  Hill  university  (N.  C.)  in  1814,  removed  with
his  parents  to  Tennessee  in  1815,  studied  law,  and


when  admitted  to  practice  became  the  partner  of
James  K.  Polk.  From  1821  till  1832  he  was  al-
most continuously  a  member  of  the  state  legisla-
ture. He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1839,  and  re-
elected in  1841  and  1843.  On  retiring  from  con-
gress, in  1845,  he  was  chosen  governor  of  Tennes-
see, serving  until
1847,  He  was  a
delegate  to  the
southern  conven-
tion at  Nash-
ville in  1850,  and
is  the  author  of
"  The  Tennes-
see Platform,"
brought  forward
at  that  time,  a
document  that
aroused  much
comment.  In
1852  he  was  a
delegate  to  the
democratic  con-
vention in  Balti-
more, and  re-
ported the  plat-
form that  was
adopted.  The  last  office  held  by  Mr.  Brown  was
that  of  postmaster-general  in  President  Buchan-
an's cabinet.  Among  the  measures  adopted  dur-
ing his  administration  of  this  office  was  the  estab-
lishment of  a  new  and  shorter  oceanic  mail-route
to  California  by  way  of  Tehuantepec,  and  of  the
transcontinental  mail-routes  from  St.  Louis  west-
ward, prior  to  the  construction  of  the  railroads.
He  was  for  twenty  years  one  of  the  most  trusted
leaders  of  the  democratic  party.  A  volume  of  his
speeches  was  published  in  Nashville  in  1854.

BROWN,  Adam,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in  Ed-
inburgh, Scotland,  3  April,  1826.  He  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  city  and  in  Montreal,  to  which
place  the  family  had  emigrated  in  1833.  After
passing  through  various  grades  in  the  mercantile
service  he  accepted,  in  1850,  a  place  in  the  firm  of
Donald  Mclnnes,  in  Hamilton,  Ontario.  Subse-
quently he  became  a  partner  in  the  wholesale
grocery  house  of  W.  P.  McLaren,  m  the  same  city,
and  still  later  principal  of  the  firm  of  Brown,  Gil-
lespie &  Co.  Mr.  Brown  has  been  president  of  the
dominion  board  of  trade,  and  is  also  president  or
director  of  various  railways,  besides  holding  many
other  offices  of  honor  and  responsibility.

BROWN,  Albert  Gallatin,  statesman,  b.  in
Chester  District,  S.  C,  31  May,  1813;  d.  near  Jack-
sonville, Miss.,  12  June,  1880.  His  parents  re-
moved to  Mississippi  while  he  was  a  child.  He
took  a  boyish  interest  in  military  affairs,  and  was
made  a  brigadier-general  in  the  state  militia  when
only  nineteen  years  of  age.  He  adopted  the  law
as  a  profession,  gaining  admission  to  the  bar  in
1834,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state  legislature
from  1835  till  1839,  and  member  of  congress  from
Mississippi  in  1840-'l.  He  was  also  a  judge  of
the  circuit  superior  court  in  1841-3 ;  governor  of
Mississippi  on  successive  re-elections  from  1843  till
1848;  again  member  of  congress  from  1848  till
1854 ;  and  U.  S.  senator  from  1854  till  1858.  He
was  re-elected  for  six  years,  beginning  4  March,
1859,  but  resigned  in  1861  to  join  in  the  rebellion.
His  colleague  in  the  U.  S.  senate  at  the  time  was
Jefferson  Davis,  and  they  both  attended  the  caucus
of  seceding  senators,  held  in  Washington  6  Jan.,
1861.  He  was  an  uncompromising  adherent  of
the  democratic  party  in  the  south.  A  volume  of
his  speeches  was  published  in  1859.


394


BROWN


BROWX


BROWN,  Alexander,  b,  in  Ballymena.  county
Antrim,  Ireland,  17  Xov.,  17(54:  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  6  April.  1834.  He  came  to  the  United  States
in  1800,  settling  as  a  general  merchant  in  Balti-
more, and  subsequently  associated  his  four  sons
with  him  under  the  firm-name  of  Alexander  Brovm
&  Sons. — His  eldest  son,  "William,  b.  in  Ballymena,
30  May,  1784;  d.  in  Liverpool,  England.  3  March,
18G4,  accompanied  the  family  to  Baltimore  in
1800,  received  his  commercial  education  in  his
father's  counting-room,  and  early  in  life  became  a
member  of  the  firm.  In  1809  he"  returned  to  Eng-
land and  established  a  branch  house  in  Liverpool,
where  he  extended  the  business,  which  gradually
became  general,  and  ultimately  developed  into  the
transmission  of  money  on  public  account  between
the  two  hemispheres.  The  firm  became  known
later  as  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.  Mr.  Brown  was
prominent  in  public  affairs,  and  represented  South
Lancashire  in  parliament  from  184G  till  1859.  He
erected  the  free  public  library  and  Derljy  museum
in  Liverpool  at  a  cost  of  £40,000,  and  in  1863  was
created  a  baronet. — The  second  son,  GrCorg'e,  b.  in
Ballymena,  17  April,  1787:  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
26  Aug.,  1859,  continued  his  residence  in  Balti-
more, and  later  succeeded  to  the  head  of  that
branch  of  the  business  which  was  carried  on  under
the  old  firm-name  of  Alexander  Brown  &  Sons.
Having  amassed  a  large  fortune,  he  withdrew
from  active  connection  with  the  firm  in  1838. — The
third  son,  John  Alexander,  b.  in  Ballvmena.  21
May,  1788;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  31  Dec,  1872,
was  educated  in  Baltimore,  and  became  associated
in  business  with  his  brother.  In  1818  a  branch
house  was  opened  in  Philadelphia,  which  John  A.
Brown  managed  until  1838,  when  he  gave  up
his  active  interest  in  the  firm.  He  attained  a  lead-
ing position  in  the  business  community,  and  was
elected  a  director  of  the  old  U.  S.  bank  under  the

E residency  of  Nicholas  Biddle.  He  acquired  a
irge  fortune,  and  gave  more  than  $500,000  to  be-
nevolent objects.  The  Presbyterian  hospital  of
Philadelphia  received  a  donation  of  $300,000.—
The  fourth  son.  James,  b.  in  Ballvmena,  4  Feb.,
1791 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1  Nov.,  1877,  estab-
lished the  New  York  branch  of  the  banking-house
in  1825.  Later  he  became  the  head  of  the  great
banking  firm  of  Brown  Brothers  &  Co.,  and  was
the  American  representative  of  the  Liverpool
house.  Like  his  brother  John,  he  contributed
large  sums  to  various  charities  connected  with  the
Presbyterian  church.

BROWN,  Andrew,  soldier,  b.  in  the  north  of
Ireland,  about  1744;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  Feb.,
1797.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,
and  came  to  America  in  1773  as  an  officer  in  the  Brit-
ish army,  but  left  that  service  and  settled  in  Mas-
sachusetts. He  fought  on  the  patriot  side  at  Lex-
ington and  Bunker  Hill,  was  made  general  muster-
ing officer  in  1777,  and  served  under  Gates  and
Greene,  with  the  rank  of  major.  After  the  peace
he  established  an  academy  for  young  ladies,  first  at
Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  afterward  at  Philadelphia.  He
relinquished  this  occupation,  for  which  his  irrita-
ble temper  unfitted  him,  and,  in  October,  1788,
established  the  "Federal  Gazette,"  the  title  of
which  was  changed,  in  1793,  to  the  "Philadelphia
Gazette."  This  was  the  main  channel  through
which  the  friends  of  the  federal  constitution  ad-
dressed the  public,  and  it  was  the  fii-st  journal  to
publish  regular  reports  of  the  debates  in  congress.
He  achieved  financial  success  after  many  discour-
agements, through  remaining  at  his  post' and  pub-
lishing his  paper  during  the  yellow-fever  epidemic
of  1793,  when  the  contemporary  journals  were  sus-


pended. His  death  was  caused  by  injuries  received
while  fruitlessly  endeavoring  to"  save  his  wife  and
children  from  a  fire  that  destroyed  his  establish-
ment on  the  night  of  27  Jan.,  1797. — His  son,  Ax-
drew,  b.  in  1774,  carried  on  the  "Gazette"  until
1802,  but,  taking  the  English  side  in  politics,  be-
came unpopular,  and  went  to  England,  where  he
died.  7  Dec,  1847.

BROWN,  Antoinette  L.  See  Blackwell,
AxTOiXETTE  Brown.

BROWN,  Bartholomew,  musical  composer,  b.
in  Sterling,  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1772;  d.  in  Boston,  14
April,  1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1799,  studied  law,  and  established  himself  in  prac-
tice in  the  neighboring  towns  of  Sterling  and  East
Bridgewater.  He  was  one  of  the  most  accom-
plished musicians  of  his  day,  and  was  for  twenty
\  years  associated  with  Nahuiii  Mitchell  in  the  edi-
torship of  "  Templi  Carmina,"  better  kno^vn  as  the
"  Bridgewater  Collection  of  Sacred  Music  "  (Bridge-
water,  1812).  This  collection,  though  received  at
first  with  caution  by  the  churches,  soon  made  its
way  into  general  favor.  It  contains  many  of  Mr.
Brown's  musical  compositions.  He  wrote  the  cal-
endars in  the  "American  Farmer's  Almanac"  for
nearly  sixty  years.

BROWN,"  Bedford,  senator,  b.  in  Caswell  cc,
N.  C,  in  1795;  d.  there.  6  Dec,  1870.  He  was  a
member  of  the  house  of  commons  of  North  Caro-
lina in  1815-7,  and  in  1823,  and  of  the  senate  in
1828-'9.  On  the  resignation  of  John  Branch  he
was  elected  as  a  democrat  to  the  U.  8.  senate,
and  re-elected  for  a  fidl  term  in  1835,  serving  from
I  28  Dec,  1829.  till  1840,  when  he  resigned  because
■■  he  was  unwilling  to  follow  the  instructions  of  the
state  assembly.  In  1842  he  was  again  elected  to
the  state  senate,  and  was  a  candidate  for  U.  S.
senator,  but  was  defeated  by  W.  H.  Haywood,  Jr.,
and  retired  from  public  life.  He  removed  to  Mis-
souri, but  returned  to  his  home  in  Caswell  co.

BROWN,  Bnekminster,  surgeon,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass..  13  July,  1819.  His  father  and  giandfather
were  physicians,  as  was  also  his  mothers  father,
who  was  the  first  professor  of  surgery  at  Harvard.
Dr.  Brown  was  graduated  at  Harvard  medical
I  school  in  1844.  and,  after  extended  travels  and  sup-

Elementary  studies  abroad  under  Di-s.  Little,  of
london,  Guerin  and  Bouvier,  of  Paris,  and  Prof.
Strohmeyer,  of  Germany,  returned  to  Boston.  De-
:  voting  himself  to  orthopaedic  surgeiy,  he  has  at-
I  tained  experience  and  skill  that  places  him  among
I  the  foremost  living  specialists  in  that  line.  One  of
his  most  noteworthy  cases  was  double  congenital
displacement  of  the  hips  in  a  girl  four  years  old.
No  cotyloid  cavities  existed,  but,  after  two  years  of
treatment,  cavities  were  formed,  and  the  child's
walk  and  bearing  became  normal.  He  has  operated
successfully  upon  diseased  and  angular  hips,  spinal
deformities,  and  kindred  malformations.  In  1856
he  married  Sarah  A.  Newcomb,  great-granddaugh-
ter of  Gen.  Warren,  of  revolutionary  fame.  He  is
a  member  of  the  Boston  medical  association,  of  the
Massachusetts  medical  society,  and  of  the  Suffolk
district  medical  society.  For  many  years  he  was
surgeon  of  the  house  of  the  good  Samaritan.  He
is  the  author  of  many  technical  treatises,  includuig
a  full  account  of  the  instance  of  the  jlouble-hip
displacement  referred  to  above.  In  1856  he  pr40-
lished.  in  the  "  North  American  Review,"  a  paper
on  "  The  Poetry  of  Anatomy."  and  he  has  contrib-
uted largelv  tomedical  and"  surgical  journals.

BROWN,  Chad  or  Chadd.  elder  in  the  Baptist
church.  The  dates  of  his  birth  and  death  have
not  been  definitely  ascertained.  He  died,  proba-
bly, in  1665 ;  but  the  colonial  records  were  large.y


BROWN


BROWN


395


destroyed  during  King  Philip's  war,  ten  years
later,  and  it  can  not  be  verified.  Concerning  the
trans-Atlantic  origin  of  the  Rhode  Island  Browns
or  Brovt  nes  (for  the  final  vowel  was  in  early  times
used  or  omitted  indiscriminately)  little  is  known.
In  Burke's  "  Encyclopaedia  "  more  than  150  heral-
dic escutcheons  are  described  as  the  property  of  as
many  families  bearing  the  name.  The  dilficulty  is
obvious  of  identifying  the  particular  one  from
which  sprung  the  founder  of  the  first  American
branch.  Chad  Brown  came  over  in  the  ship  "  Mar-
tin "  in  July,  1638.  His  name  appears  as  a  witness
to  the  nuncupative  will  of  a  passenger  who  died
on  the  voyage.  About  this  time  occurred  the
"  anabaptist  heresy,"  and  many  of  the  Boston  colo-
ny removed  to  the  Providence  plantations.  It  is
probable  that  Mr.  Brown  was  among  these,  for  his
tombstone,  erected  by  the  town,  bears  record  that
he  was  "  exiled  from  ]Massachusetts  for  conscience'
sake."  The  date  of  his  arrival  can  not  be  exactly
fixed,  although  some  authorities  erroneously  place  it
as  early  as  1636 ;  but  the  most  probable  date  is  the
autumn  of  1638,  when  Roger  Williams  and  twelve
others  executed  what  is  known  as  the  ''initial
deed,"  assigning  the  lands  acquired  by  purchase
from  the  Indians.  Mr.  Brown  at  once'  became  a
leader  in  the  affairs  of  the  colony,  and  when,  after
a  few  months,  the  restless  Williams,  finding  that
the  church  would  not  implicitly  accept  his  teaching,
again  seceded,  Mr.  Brown  was  chosen  as  his  succes-
sor. He  was  formally  ordained  elder  in  England  in
1642,  assumed  the  pastoral  office  on  his  return,  and
was  in  reality  the  first  elder  of  the  oldest  Baptist
church  in  America.  Prior  to  his  ordination  serious
dissensions  had  arisen  in  the  colony,  involving  a
quarrel  with  Massachusetts,  and  Air.  Brown  was
one  of  a  committee  appointed  to  make  peace.  He
served  also  as  town  surveyor,  and  with  two  others
compiled  a  list  of  the  original  divisions  or  grants
of  land.  The  original  of  this  list  (1660)  is  still  on
file  in  the  clerk's  office  of  Providence.  During  his
pastorate  arose  the  controversy  respecting  "  the  lay-
ing on  of  hands,"  which  resulted  in  the  secession
of  the  "Five-principle  Baptists"  from  the  origi-
nal society,  a  schism  that  lasted  until  long  after
Elder  Brown  was  laid  to  rest  in  his  own  home
lot.  His  infiuence  in  shaping  the  early  tendencies
of  the  colony  was  marked,  and  it  is  probable
that,  but  for  his  resolute  character  and  judicious
management,  the  daring  and  refractory  spirits  that
composed  the  colony  would  have  come  to  blows  on
a  dozen  different  questions  of  civil  and  religious
import.  So  successful  was  he  in  adjusting  the
quarrels  of  his  flock  that  the  honorable  title  of
"Peacemaker"  was  popularly  accorded  him,  and
more  than  a  century  after  his  death  (1792)  the  town
of  Providence  voted  a  modest  sum  of  money  to
erect  a  stone  over  his  grave  in  the  north  burying-
ground,  whither  his  remains  were  moved  at  that
date.  He  was  married  before  coming  to  this  coun-
tr\',  and  had  five  sons.— John,  eldest  son  of  Chad,
b.  in  England  about  1630.  He  came  to  America
at  the  age  of  eight  years  and  settled  with  his
parents  in  Providence. '  He  appears  to  have  been  a
man  of  influence  in  the  colonv,  and  was  appointed,
m  1662,  with  Roger  Williams' and  Thomas  Harris,
to  make  up  the  town  council.  The  date  of  his
death  is  not  known, — James,  second  son  of  John,
b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  in  1666;  d.  there,  28
Oct.,  1732.  He  became  the  colleague,  and  after-
ward the  successor,  of  the  Rev.  Pardon  Tilling-
hast,  in  charge  of  the  Baptist  church.  He  mar-
ried :Mary,  the  granddaughter  of  William  Harris,
who  came  to  Providence  with  Roger  Williams,
and  had  ten  children,  of  whom  James  was  b.  in


I  Providence,  R.  L,  22  March,  1698;  d.  there,  27
]  April,  1739.  He  engaged  in  active  business  and
became  a  successful  merchant  of  Providence.  In
1723  he  married  Hope  Power,  the  granddaughter
of  Rev,  Pardon  Tillinghast,  and  had  one  daughter,
Mary,  and  five  sons — James,  Nicholas,  Joseph,
John,  and  Moses,  of  whom  the  last  four  are  known
in  Providence  annals  as  the  "Four  Brothers." —
Nicholas,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  28  July,  1729;
d,  there,  29  May,  1791.  He  was  left  an  orphan  at
the  age  of  ten  years,  and  the  early  death  of  his
elder  brother,  James,  made  him  the  senior  repre-
sentative of  the  family.  On  coming  of  age  he
could  readily  have  claimed  a  double  portion  of  his
father's  property,  as,  under  the  existing  colonial
laws,  he  was  entitled  to  the  inheritance  of  his
brother  James.  Setting  aside  all  legal  rights  in
the  matter,  he  divided  that  portion  equally  among
his  brothers  and  sister.  He  followed  mercantile
pursuits,  and  thereby  acquired  a  very  ample  for-
tune. His  success  was  largely  due  to  habits  of  in-
dustry and  punctuality  which  he  assiduously  ob-
served throughout  his'  career.  Mr.  Brown  was  a
believer  in  the  Baptist  faith,  and  a  careful  observer
of  its  forms,  although  he  never  made  a  public  pro-
fession of  that  religion.  He  was  liberal  with  his
wealth,  and  a  constant  benefactor  of  the  college
and  other  public  buildings  devoted  to  religion  or
science  in  Providence.  He  was  twice  married,  and
his  son  of  the  same  name  survived  him. — Joseph,
b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  3  Dec,  1733 ;  d.  there,  3
Dec,  1785.  He  was  likewise  engaged  in  business,
and  in  manufacturing,  and  acquired  sufficient
wealth  to  permit  him  to  follow  his  natural  taste
for  science.  He  was  greatly  interested  in  the  sci-
ence of  electricity,  and  his  knowledge  of  that  sub-
ject was  remarkable  for  the  time.  At  his  death  he
left  an  electric  machine  of  his  own  construction,
then  unsurpassed  by  any  other  in  the  country.
He  devoted  considerable  study  to  mechanics  and
was  proficient  in  astronomy.  His  attention  hav-
ing been  directed  to  the  arrangements  in  course  of
preparation  for  the  proper  observation  of  the  tran-
sit of  Venus  in  1769,  he  sent  to  England  for  suita-
ble instruments,  and  subsequently  an  account  of
the  observations  made  in  Providence  was  published
by  Prof.  Benjamin  West,  later  professor  of  natu-
ral philosophy  in  the  college.  Mr.  Brown  was  a
warm  friend  of  the  college,  and  was  one  of  its


trustees  from  1769  till  1785.  In  1770  he  received
i  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  ]M.  from  the  college,  and
I  from  1784  until  his  death  held  the  chair  of  natural
j  philosophy,  giving  his  services  to  the  institution
!  without  compensation.  He  was  a  consistent  mem-
I  ber  of  the  Baptist  church,  and  he  was  the  only  one
i  of  the  four  brothers  who  ever  made  a  public  pro-
i  fession  of  religion. — John,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
I  27  Jan.,  1736 :  d.  there,  20  Sept.,  1803.  The  most
)  energetic  of  the  four  brothers,  he  became  a  very


396


BROWN


BROWN


wealthy  merchant,  and  was,  it  is  said,  the  first  in
Rhode  Island  to  carry  trade  to  China  and  the  East
Indies,  He  was  the  leader  of  the  party  that  de-
stroyed the  British  sloop-of-war  "  Gaspee  "  in  Nar-
ragansett  bay  on  17  June,  1772.  and  was  sent  in  irons
to  Boston  on  suspicion  of  having  been  concerned
in  that  affair,  but  released  through  the  efforts  of
his  brother  Moses.  Anticipating  the  war  of  the
revolution,  he  instructed  the  captains  of  his  ships
to  freight  their  vessels  on  their  return  voyages  with
powder,  and  he  furnished  the  army  at  Cambridge
with  a  supply  when  it  had  not  four  rounds.  He
was  chosen  delegate  to  the  continental  congress  in
1784,  but  did  not  take  his  seat.  Later  he  was
elected  to  congress,  serving  from  2  Dec,  1799,  till
3  March,  1801.  Mr.  Brown  laid  the  corner-stone
of  the  first  building  of  Rhode  Island  college,  now
Brown  university,  to  the  endowment  of  which  he
was  one  of  the  largest  contributors,  and  was  for
twenty  years  its  treasurer.  A  view  of  some  of
the  buildings  is  given  on  page  395. — Moses,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  23  Sept.,  1738 ;  d.  there,  6  Sept.,
1836.  He  was  brought  up  in  the  family  of  his
uncle,  Obadiah  Brown,  whose  daughter  he  mar-
ried, and  a  portion  of  whose  estate  he  inherited
by  will.  In  1763  he  became  engaged  in  business
with  his  three  brothers,  but,  after  ten  years'  ac-
tive experience,  withdrew  to  follow  more  conge-
nial interests.  Although  brought  up  in  the  Bap-
tist faith,  he  became,  subsequent  to  severe  do-
mestic affliction,  a  member  of  the  Society  of
Friends,  and  remained  until  his  death  a  firm  ad-
herent to  the  doctrines  of  that  society.  He  exerted
a  strong  influence  in  all  its  concerns,  and  filled
many  of  its  important  offices  with  dignity  and  use-
fulness. The  Friends'  boarding-school  in  Provi-
dence was  founded  by  him,  and  his  donations  to
its  support  were  frequent  and  liberal.  In  1773  he
manumitted  his  slaves,  and  was  one  of  the  found-
ers of  the  abolition  society  of  Rhode  Island.  He
was  also  an  active  member  and  liberal  supporter
of  the  Rhode  Island  Peace  and  Bible  societies. —
Nicholas,  philanthropist,  son  of  Nicholas,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  4  April,  1769 ;  d.  there,  27  Sept.,
1841,  was  graduated  at  Rhode  Island  college  in
1786,  and  in  1791  the  death  of  his  father  left  him
with  a  handsome  fortune.  Forming  a  partnership
with  his  brother-in-law,  Thomas  P.  Ives,  he  be-
came a  mer-
chant, and,  by
his  wisdom  and
honorable  deal-
ing, made  the
firm  of  Brown  &
Ives  one  of  the
most  successful
in  the  country,
notwithstanding
the  dangers  with
which  commerce
was  threatened
by  the  French
revolution  and
the  war  of  1812.
For  many  years
he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  Rhode
Island  legisla-
ture, and  was  a
delegate  to  the
Harrisburg  convention  of  1840,  which  nominated
Harrison  to  the  presidency.  He  was  one  of  the
most  munificent  patrons  of  Rhode  Island  college,
which,  in  1804,  changed  its  name  to  Brown  univer-
sity in  his  honor. His  donations  to the  college


amounted  in  all  to  nearly  $100,000.  In  1804  he
gave  $5,000  to  found  a  professorship  of  oratory
and  belles-lettres.  In  1822  he  erected  the  second
college  building,  which  he  presented  to  the  corpo-
ration in  a  letter  dated  13  Jan.,  1823.  At  his  sug-
gestion it  was  named  Hope  college  in  honor  of  his
only  surviving  sister,  Mrs.  Hope  Ives.  In  1835  he
erected  the  third  building,  requesting  that  it  be
named  Manning  hall,  after  Dr.  Manning,  who  was
president  of  the  college  during  his  undergraduate
days.  He  also  gave  $10,000  toward  building
Rhode  Island  hall  and  the  president's  house.  Mr.
Brown  was  officially  connected  with  the  college
for  fifty  years,  during  twenty-nine  of  Avhich  he
was  its  treasurer.  He  was  chosen  a  trustee  in  1791,
and  was  a  member  of  its  board  of  fellows  from
1825  till  his  death.  Besides  his  donations  to  the
university,  he  gave  nearly  $10,000  to  the  Provi-
dence Athenaeum,  liberally  aided  in  the  building  of
churches  and  the  endowment  of  colleges  and  acade-
mies, and  bequeathed  $30,000  for  an  insane  asylum,
to  be  established  at  Providence.  See  llunt's
"  Lives  of  American  Merchants  "  (New  York,  1856).
— Obadiah,  merchant,  the  only  son  of  Moses,  b.
in  Providence,  R.-  I.,  15  July,  1771 ;  d.  there,  15
Oct.,  1822.  He  engaged  in  business  with  William
Almy,  and  they  associated  with  them  Samuel
slater,  who  introduced  into  this  country  the  spin-
ning of  cotton  by  machinery  on  Arkwright's  prin-
ciple, under  the  firm-name  of  Almy,  Brown  &
Slater.  The  business  developed  very  largely  under
their  management,  they  became  very  wealthy,  and
the  source  of  support  to  a  large  population.  Mr.
Brown  continued  in  the  religious  faith  of  his  fa-
ther, and,  as  he  had  no  children  of  his  own,  distrib-
uted his  wealth  among  deserving  objects  of  public
and  private  charity.  His  benefactions  were  extend-
ed to  worthy  enterprises  in  all  Christian  bodies^  al-
though his  principal  donations  were  to  the  Friends'
boarding-school,  founded  by  his  father,  to  which
he  left  $100,000  by  his  will,  to  form  a  permanent
charitable  fund.— John  Carter,  merchant,  son  of
the  second  Nicholas,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  28
Aug.,  1797 ;  d.  there,  10  June,  1874,  was  graduated
at  Brown  university  in  1816,  and  at  once  entered
his  father's  counting-room,  becoming,  in  1832,  a
partner  in  the  business.  Mr.  Brown  was  part
owner  in  several  cotton-factories,  and  was  inter-
ested in  business  enterprises  in  Rhode  Island,  New
York,  and  elsewhere.  Although  an  active  mer-
chant, he  continued  his  interest  in  literary  topics,
and  gathered  a  fine  library  of  Americana  prior  to
1800,  which  was  considered  the  most  complete  in
the  world,  and  its  treasures  were  freely  placed  at
the  service  of  scholars.  On  several  occasions  he
sent  to  eminent  historians  in  Europe  books  that,  if
they  had  been  lost,  could  not  have  been  replaced.
The  library  contained  the  most  complete  known  col-
lection of  the  "  Jesuit  Relations  "  ;  the  letters  and
journals  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries  in  North  Ameri-
ca, embracing  forty-eight  volumes ;  books  relating
to  the  settlement  and  history  of  New  England,
scarcely  an  important  work  being  wanting;  vol-
umes relating  to  Spanish  and  Portuguese  America,
the  north  polar  district,  and  other  regions  of  ^^m
and  South  America.  It  comprised  in  all  6,235
separate  works  or  titles,  of  which  an  elaborate
catalogue  was  prepared  by  John  Russell  Bart.«itt,
and  printed  (4  vols.,  8vo,  1865-'71).  Mr.  Brown
was  liberal  in  his  gifts  for  educational  P^^^T'l^^'
and  gave  to  Brown  university  more  than  $160,000,
which  was  devoted  principally  to  the  erection  of  a
fire-proof  library  building.  He  was  a  trustee  ot
the  university  from  1828  till  1842,  and  a  fellow
from  1842  till  1874. On  his  death  he  left  about


BROWN


BROWN


397


$50,000  to  charitable  institutions  in  Rhode  Island.
A  full  account  of  this  family  is  given  in  the  "  Life,
Times,  and  Correspondence  of  James  Manning,
and  the  Early  History  of  Brown  University,"  by
Reuben  Aldri'dge  Guild  (Boston,  1864).  See',  also,
"  Historical  Sketch  of  the  Library  of  Brown  Uni-
versity," by  the  same  author  (New  Haven,  1861).

BROWN,  Charles  Brockden,  author,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  17  Jan.,  1771 ;  d.  22  Feb.,  1810.  His
ancestors  were  Quakers,  who  came  over  in  the  same
ship  with  William  Penn.  Before  he  was  ten  years
old  he  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  geography,
his  favorite  study,  and  had  read  every  book  he
could  obtain.  From
his  eleventh  till  his
sixteenth  year  he
was  at  the  school
of  Robert  Proud,
the  historian,  then
a  noted  teacher,
and  studied  so  as-
siduously that  he
was  often  obliged
to  leave  his  books
for  a  walking  trip
through  the  coun-
try. He  was  always
physically  weak,
and,  in  "  a  letter
written  just  before
his  death,  said  that
/^ y*n .5^-7  ^®  never  had  been

^ .  /j.  ^^.^Tty^  i"  perfect  healtJi
for  more  than  hall
an  hour  at  a  time.
On  leaving  school.  Brown  took  to  verse-writing,
and  planned  three  epics  on  subjects  connected
with  American  history,  but  no  fragments  of  these
remain.  At  this  time  he  sent  to  a  periodical
a  poetical  "  Address  to  Franklin,"  throughout
which  the  editor  substituted  the  name  of  Wash-
ington for  that  of  the  philosopher,  without  regard
to  the  context.  Brown  began  with  his  usual  ardor
the  study  of  law,  but  determined  to  abandon  it  for
literature.  Although  this  change  was  contrary  to
the  wishes  of  his  family,  it  was  the  result  of  care-
ful thought.  He  had  tested  his  powers  as  a  writer
by  contributing  to  the  "  Columbus  Magazine,"  by
a  carefully  kept  diary,  and  by  numerous  essays
read  before  a  "  Belles-Lettres  Club,"  of  which  he
had  been  the  leader.  He  was  the  first  American
to  adopt  literature  as  a  profession.  Soon  after
making  this  decision  he  visited  his  friend.  Dr.
Smith,  of  New  York,  and,  becoming  acquainted
with  many  literary  and  scientific  men  of  that  city,
virtually  made  it  his  residence  after  that  time.  In
1797  he  wrote  a  work  entitled  "The  Dialogue  of
Alcuin,"  discussing  with  some  boldness  the  topic
of  divorce,  but  it  attracted  little  attention.  Soon
after  this  he  projected  a  new  magazine,  which  never
appeared,  and  in  1798  he  contributed  to  the  "  Week-
ly Magazine  "  a  series  of  reflections  on  men  and  so-
ciety, entitled  "  The  Man  at  Home."  In  this  year  he
also  began  the  publication  of  his  novels,  which  are
his  best-known  works.  He  had  already  made  two
abortive  attempts  at  novel-writing.  The  first  was
never  finished,  and  the  death  of  his  printer  put  a
stop  to  the  publication  of  the  second.  This  was
^ntitled  '^' Sky  Walk;  or,  the  Man  Unknown  to
iiunself,"  and  portions  of  it  were  incorporated  in
"Edgar  Huntley,"  a  later  work.  Between  1798
and  1801  he  published  six  novels,  which  attained
immediate  success,  and  were  the  finest  American
nctions  until  the  appearance  of  Cooper's  novels,
in  April,  1799,  Mr.  Brown  established,  in  New


York,  the  "  Monthly  Magazine  and  American  Re-
view," but  it  lasted  only  until  the  close  of  1800.
In  1803  he  made  a  second  attempt,  issuing,  in
Philadelphia,  the  "  Literary  Magazine  and  Ameri-
can Register,"  which  continued  about  five  years.
In  1806  he  began  publishing  semi-annually  "  The
American  Register,"  the  first  publication  of  the
kind  in  the  country,  and  it  was  brought  to  a  close
only  by  his  death.  In  person,  Mr.  Brown  was
tall,  thin,  and  pale,  had  black  hair,  and  a  melan-
choly expression  of  countenance.  He  intensely  en-
joyed the  society  of  intimate  friends,  but  was  re-
served with  all  others.  His  death  was  caused  by
consumption,  against  which  he  had  been  struggling
from  early  boyhood.  His  novels  are  "  Wieland,  or
the  Transformation,"  an  improbable  though  fasci-
nating tale  of  a  ventriloquist,  who,  by  personating
a  supernatural  being,  persuades  the  hero  to  kill  his
wife  and  children  (1798 ;  London,  1811) ;  "  Ormund,
or  the  Secret  Witness"  (New  York,  1799;  London,
1811) ;  "  Arthur  Mervyn,"  containing  a  graphic
description  of  Philadelphia  as  it  was  during  the
yellow-fever  plague  of  1793  (Philadelphia,  1799-'80 ;
London,  1803);  "Jane  Talbot"  (1801);  "Edgar
Huntley,  or  the  Memoirs  of  a  Sleep-Walker  "  (1801 ;
London,  1804) ;  and  "  Clara  Howard "  (1801),  re-
published as  "Philip  Stanley"  (London,  1806).
These  were  published  collectively  (7  vols.,  Boston,
1827;  new  ed.,  6  vols.,  Philadelphia,  1857).  Mr.
Brown  also  published  several  political  pamphlets
(1803-'9),  including  an  "  Address  to  Congress  on
the  Utility  and  Justice  of  Restrictions  on  Foreign
Commerce";  a  translation  of  Volney's  "Travels
in  the  United  States "  (1804) ;  a  memoir  of  his
brother-in-law.  Dr.  John  B.  Linn,  prefixed  to  the
latter's  poem  "  Valerian "  (1805) ;  "  Memoirs  of
Stephen  Calvert,"  and  edited,  with  a  life,  C.  H.
Wilson's  "  Beauties  of  Tom  Brown."  At  the  time
of  his  death  he  had  nearly  completed  a  system  of
general  geography,  which  has  not  been  published ;
and  he  also  left  an  unfinished  work  on  "  Rome  dur-
ing the  Age  of  the  Antonines,"  and  several  elabo-
rate architectural  drawings,  made  as  a  recreation
in  the  midst  of  his  literary  labors.  His  life  has
been  written  by  William  Dunlap  (Philadelphia,
1815;  also  prefixed  to  the  1827  edition  of  his
novels),  and  by  William  H.  Prescott,  in  the  first
series  of  Sparks's  "  American  Biographies  "  (1834 ;
reprinted  in  Prescott's  "  Miscellanies,"  1855) ;  and
a  new  life  by  Charles  I.  Stevenson,  of  New  York,
is  in  preparation  (1886).

BROWN,  David,  "the  hermit  of  Newfane,  Yt.,"
d.  there,  31  Jan.,  1873.  He  was  a  noted  book-col-
lector, and  left  one  of  the  largest  and  most  costly
libraries  in  the  state.

BROWN,  David,  Cherokee  preacher,  b.  about
1806 ;  d.  in  Creek  Path,  Miss.,  14  Sept.,  1829.  He
was  educated,  with  his  sister  Catharine,  at  the
school  of  Rev.  Cyrus  Kingsbury,  in  what  was  then
the  Cherokee  territory,  in  northern  Alabama  and
Mississippi,  and  engaged  with  her  in  educating
and  Christianizing  their  native  tribe.  He  was  a
preacher  and  interpreter,  and  also  acted  as  secre-
tary of  the  Indian  government.  In  November,
1819,  he  assisted  John  Arch  in  the  preparation  of
a  Cherokee  spelling-book,  which  was  printed.
Through  his  agency  a  mission  was  established  at
Creek  Path  town  in  1820.  David  Brown  united
with  the  church  at  this  time,  and  in  the  spring  of
the  same  year  went  to  Cornwall,  Conn.,  to  attend
school.  After  two  years  there  he  spent  a  year  at
Andover,  fitting  himself  for  the  ministry.  Re-
turning to  his  birth-place,  he  began  his  missionary
work,  and  made  many  converts  to  Christianity
among  the  Cherokees. According  to  a  letter  writ-


BROWN


BROWN


ten  by  him  in  1825,  the  Christian  religion  was  gen-
erally adopted  by  the  tribe,  and  an  advanced
standard  of  prosperous  civilization  had  been  at-
tained by  them.  He  died  before  the  Cherokees
were  dispossessed  by  the  United  States  in  defiance
of  treaty  obligations. — His  sister,  Catharine,
teacher,  b.  near  Wills  Valley,  Ala.,  about  1800 ;
d.  18  July,  1823,  was  a  Cherokee  Indian,  but  not
full-blooded,  her  parents  being  half-breeds.  They
were  prosperous  and  influential  members  of  the
then  wealthy  and  largely  civilized  Cherokee  na-
tion of  Alabama  and  Tennessee.  Through  the
agency  of  the  Moravians,  a  school  was  established
in  Tennessee,  a  hundred  miles  from  Wills  Valley,
and  to  this  Catharine  went  with  her  brother  David
when  she  was  seventeen  years  old.  She  had  some
slight  acquaintance  with  English,  and  could  read
words  of  one  syllable.  In  three  months  she  had
learned  to  read  and  write.  She  united  with  the
church  29  March,  1818,  and  in  June,  1820,  began
to  teach  at  Creek  Path,  near  her  home.  She  was
one  of  the  most  promising  of  the  early  Indian  con-
verts to  Protestantism,  and  her  death  terminated
a  career  that  bade  fair  to  be  exceedingly  useful  to
her  tribe.  Her  amiable  disposition,  bright  intel-
lect, and  remarkable  personal  beauty  gave  her  un-
usual power  and  influence  among  her  people.  A
history  of  her  life,  prepared  by  Rufus  Anderson,
was  published  in  New  York  in  1825.

BROWN,  David  Paul,  lawyer,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 28  Sept.,  1795;  d.  there,  11  July,  1872.  Pie
was  the  only  son  of  Paul  Brown,  a  Quaker  de-
scended from  one  of  the  first  settlers  of  New  Jer-
sey. He  pursued  classical  studies  for  two  years  in
Massachusetts,  and  began  the  study  of  medicine,
but  turned  to  the  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar  at  the  age  of  twenty-one.  His  first  case  was  a
suit  against  a  prominent  citizen  for  severely  beat-
ing a  child — a  bound  "  redemptioner  " — and  his  ve-
hement pleading  won  the  case.  He  was  soon  busy
in  the  courts,  where  he  had  abundant  opportunity
for  his  masterly  examination  of  witnesses  and  ap-

Jeals  to  juries.  In  1824  he  successfully  defended
udge  Robert  Porter,  who  was  impeached  before
the  senate  of  Pennsylvania.  Within  fifteen  years
his  professional  income  amounted  to  $100,000,  but
his  generous  living  had  absorbed  it  all.  His  pow-
ers and  gifts  as  an  orator  were  frequently  called
forth  by  societies  of  various  kinds,  and  on  public
occasions.  On  the  hundredth  anniversary  of  the
birthday  of  Washington  he  delivered  the  address
at  the  laying  of  the  corner-stone  of  a  monument
to  be  erected  in  Washington  square,  Philadelphia.
Mr.  Brown  had  excellent  physical  qualifications
for  an  orator,  was  of  medium  height,  with  full
chest  and  a  voice  of  remarkable  compass  and
sweetness.  He  carefully  cultivated  his  style  and
manner.  He  was  a  lover  of  the  drama,  and  as-
pired to  be  a  dramatist.  His  tragedy  "  Sertorius,
or  the  Roman  Patriot,"  was  written  in  1830,  dur-
ing his  evening  horseback  rides  from  Philadelphia
to  Yellow  Springs,  in  Chester  co.  Though  the
elder  Booth  took  the  title  role,  the  play  was  acted
but  nine  times.  Another  tragedy,  "  The  Trial,"
had  even  less  success.  A  melodrama,  "  The  Prophet
of  St.  Paul's,"  and  a  farce,  "  Love  and  Honor,"  com-
plete the  list  of  his  dramatic  attempts.  Mr.  Brown
was  courteous  to  his  opponents,  and  expert  in
questioning  witnesses.  He  resolutely  declined
ofiice,  and  rarely  practised  in  other  states  than
Pennsylvania.  Though  less  prominent  in  the
courts  during  his  latter  days,  he  continued  the

Eractice  of  his  profession  till  the  closing  year  of
is  life. In  1856  he  published  "The  Forum,  or
Forty  Years'  Full Practice  at  the  Philadelphia


Bar"  (2  vols.).  This  work  contains  sketches  not
only  of  the  judges  and  eminent  practitioners  of  his
own  time,  but  also  of  their  predecessors.  It  has
also  chapters  on  forensic  eloquence,  legal  ethics,
and  professional  etiquette,  and  "  Golden  Rules  for
Examination  of  Witnesses  "  and  "  Capital  Hints
in  Capital  Cases."  In  1859  Mr.  Brown  published
in  pamphlet  form  several  of  his  earlv  speeches
(each  separately),  and  in  1869  a  pamphlet  on  "  The
Press,  the  Politician,  the  People,  and  the  Judi-
ciary." His  son,  Robert  Eden,  edited  and  pub-
lished "The  Forensic  Speeches  of  David  Paul
Brown"  (Philadelphia,  1873).

BROWN,  Egbert  Benson,  soldier,  b.  in  Browns-
ville, Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y,  24  Oct.,  1816.  He  ob-
tained the  rudiments  of  education  in  a  log  school-
house  in  Tecumseh,  Mich. ;  but  when  he  was  thir-
teen years  old  he  began  work  with  such  diligence
and  success  that  in  twenty  years  (1849)  he  was
chosen  mayor  of  Toledo,  Ohio.  In  the  mean-
while he  had  been  half  round  the  world  on  a  whal-
ing voyage,  spending  nearly  four  years  in  the
Pacific  ocean.  From  1852  till  1861  he  was  a  rail-
way manager,  but  resigned  his  place  when  civil
war  was  imminent,  and  organized  a  regiment  of
infantry  at  St.  Louis  in  May,  1861.  He  was  in-
strumental in  saving  that  city  from  falling  into  the
hands  of  the  secessionists,  and  was  appointed
brigadier  of  Missouri  volunteers  in  May,  18G2.
After  the  battle  of  Springfield,  8  Jan.,  1863.  where
he  was  severely  wounded,  he  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  U.  S.  volunteers.  He  served
through  the  civil  war,  mainly  in  Missouri,  Arkan-
sas, and  Texas,  and  left  the  army  with  one  shoul-
der almost  wholly  disabled  and  a  bullet  in  his  hip.
The  legislature  of  Missouri  officially  complimented
the  troops  of  his  command  for  their  conduct  at  the
battle  of  Springfield.  From  1866  till  1868  he  was
U.  S.  pension-agent  at  St.  Louis.  He  retired  to  a
farm  at  Hastings,  Calhoun  co..  111.,  in  1869,  and
has  since  resided  there,  serving,  however,  on  the
state  board  of  equalization  from  1881  till  1884.

BROWN,  Ethan  Allen,  jurist  and  statesman,
b.  in  Darien,  Conn.,  4  July,  1776;  d.  in  Indianapo-
lis, Ind.,  24  Feb.,  1852.  He  was  educated  by  an
Irish  scholar,  and  acquired  a  critical  knowledge  of
languages.  He  read  law  in  the  office  of  Alexander
Hamilton,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1802,  and
removed  to  the  west  with  his  cousin,  Capt.  John
Brown,  in  1804.  He  settled  at  Cincinnati,  and
soon  acquired  an  extensive  practice.  He  was  a
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Ohio  from  10  Feb.,
1810,  till  1818;  and  governor  of  the  state  from
that  time  until  1822.  Resigning  the  governor-
ship to  accept  a  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate,  he  was  a
member  of  that  body  until  1825,  acting  with  the
democrats.  From  1825  till  1830  he  was  canal  com-
missioner for  the  state  of  Ohio.  President  Jack-
son appointed  him  minister  to  Brazil  in  1830,  and
he  served  until  1834.  He  was  commissioner  of
the  land-office  from  24  July,  1835,  till  31  Oct.,  1830,
when  he  removed  to  Rising  Sun,  Ind.  In  1842  he
was  a  member  of  the  Indiana  state  assembly.

BROWN,  Francis,  president  of  Dartmouth
college,  b.  in  Chester,  N.  H.,  11  Jan.,  1784;  d.  27
July,  1820.  In  1805  he  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth, and  from  1806  till  1809  held  a  tutorsh'-i)
there.  He  became  pastor  of  the  Congregationai
church  in  North  Yarmouth,  Me.,  in  January,  1810,
and  married  the  daughter  of  Tristram  Oilman,  his
predecessor  in  the  pastorate.  In  1815  Dr.  Whee-
lock  was  removed  from  the  presidency  of  Dart-
mouth by  the  board  of  trustees,  and  Mr.  Brown
was  elected  to  the  place.  This  action  was  the  re-
sult of  a  local  religious  controversy  of  long  stanti-


BROWN


BROWN


399


ing,  and  provoked  great  indignation  throughout
the  state.  The  legishiture  passed  an  act  amend-
ing the  charter  of  the  college,  changing  it  to  a
university,  and  increasing  the  number  of  trustees.
By  the  new  board,  Dr.  Wheeloek  was  reinstated ;
but  Dr.  Brown  and  the  former  trustees  began  a
suit  for  the  recovery  of  the  property.  This  was
decided  against  them  by  the  state  courts,  but  was
carried  up  to  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  where  Judg-
ment was  reversed,  and  the  principle  of  the  invio-
lability of  chartered  property  was  affirmed,  Chief-
Justice  Marshall  presiding.  Dr.  Brown  rendered
valuable  assistance  -to  the  counsel  for  the  college,
of  whom  Daniel  Webster  was  one.  This  decision
was  reached  in  1819,  and  Dr.  Brown  was  reinstated
in  the  presidency,  but  died  of  consumption  shortly
afterward.  Several  of  his  sermons  were  published,
two  of  which,  bearing  date  of  1812  and  1814,  are  on
the  evils  of  war,  and  had  for  their  motive  the  then
existing  war  with  England. — His  son,  Saniuel
Oilman,  educator,  b.  in  North  Yarmouth,  Me.,
4  Jan.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  4  Nov.,  1885.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1831,  was  for  a
while  principal  of  the  high  school  in  Ellington,
Conn.,  and  then  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, where  he  was  graduated  in  1837.  He  was
two  years  principal  of  Abbot  academy  at  Andover
(1835-7),  after  which  he  spent  two  years  in  travel
abroad.  On  his  return  he  was  appointed  professor
of  oratory  and  belles-lettres  in  Dartmouth,  which
chair  he  held  till  1863,  when  he  was  appointed
to  that  of  intellectual  philosophy  and  political
economy.  On  6  Oct.,  1852,  he  was  ordained  a  Con-
gregational minister  at  Woodstock,  Vt.  He  left
Dartmouth  in  1867  to  become  president  of  Hamil-
ton college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.  Plis  health  becoming
impaired,  he  resigned  in  1881,  after  which  he  only
gave  occasional  instruction  at  Dartmouth  and
Bowdoin,  residing  chiefly  at  Ctica,  N.  Y.  He  pub-
lished '•  Life  of  Ruf us  Choate  "  (Boston,  1870),  and
lectured  on  "  The  Earlier  English  Literature  "  and
"British  Orators."  On  21  July,  1869,  he  delivered
before  the  alumni  of  Dartmouth  college  the  his-
torical discourse  commemorating  the  one  hun-
dredth anniversary  of  the  institution.

BROWN,  (ieor^e,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Indiana,
19  June,  1835.  He  was  appointed  midshipman
from  his  native  state,  5  Feb.,  1849,  was  attached  to
the  frigate  "  Cumberland,"  and  in  1851  to  the  "  St.
Lawrence,"  cruising  in  both  vessels.  He  was  pro-
moted to  passed  midshipman,  and  afterward  to
master,  in  1856.  On  2  June,  1856,  he  became  lieu-
tenant, and  served  in  the  Brazilian  and  African
sc[uadrons  until  1860,  when  he  was  ordered  to  spe-
cial service  on  the  steam  sloop  "  Powhatan,"  and
in  1861  transferred  to  the  "  Octorora "  gun-boat,
which  was  attached,  as  flag-ship,  to  Com.  Porter's
mortar-boat  flotilla.  He  participated  in  the  haz-
ardous ascent  of  the  Mississippi  river  under  Far-
ragut,  and  in  the  first  attack  on  Vicksburg  in  June,

1862,  and  for  his  conduct  on  this  occasion  was
commended  in  the  official  report.  The  fleet  dropped
down  the  river  to  avoid  the  season  of  low  water,
and  the  "  Octorora "  was  ordered  to  blockading
duty  off  Wilmington,  N.  C.  Lieut.  Brown  was
promoted  lieutenant-commander  16  July,  1862,  and
shortlv  afterward  placed  in  charge  of"the"Indi-
anola  "  iron-clad,  of  the  Mississippi  squadron.  The
batteries  at  Vicksburg  and  Warrenton  were  suc-
cessfully passed  14  Feb.,  1863.  An  engagement
took  place  near  upper  Palmyra  island,  on  24  Feb.,

1863,  between  the  "  Indianola  "  and  four  confeder-
ate gun-boats,  manned  by  more  than  a  thousand
men.  The  fight  lasted  an  hour  and  twenty-seven
mmutes,  and  Lieut.-Commander  Brown,  severely


wounded,  surrendered,  with  his  ship  in  a  sinking
condition.  The  officers  and  crew  were  exchanged
a  few  months  afterward,  and  Lieut.  Brown  was  as-
signed to  the  steam  gun-boat  "  Itasca,"  of  the  west-
ern gulf  blockading  squadron,  which  he  command-
ed in  the  action  of  5  Aug.,  1864,  in  Mobile  bay,
and  in  the  naval  operations  against  Spanish  Fort
and  the  defences  of  Mobile,  in  March  and  April,
1865.  He  was  promoted  commander,  25  July,.  1866,
and  stationed  at  the  Washington  navy-yard  until
1867,  when  he  was  granted  leave  of  absence  to
serve  as  agent  for  the  Japanese  government  in
command  of  an  iron-clad  man-of-war  purchased
from  the  United  States.  He  was  promoted  captain
25  April,  1877,  and  placed  in  command  of  the  U.  S.
navy-yard  at  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1886.

BROWN,  Georg-e  Lorin^,  painter,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  2  Feb..  1814 ;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  25
June,  1889.  He  began  to  draw  when  but  eight
years  old.  He  went  to  the  Franklin  school,  won
there  the  silver  medal,  and  at  twelve  years  of  age
was  apprenticed  to  a  wood-engraver.  Experiment-
ing with  colors,  his  efforts  attracted  the  attention
of  an  artist,  and  he  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Cush-
man,  a  wealthy  merchant.  Young  Brown  modestly
asked  for  $100,  with  which  to  go  to  Europe,  which
sum  Mr.  Cushman  advanced,  and  he  set  sail.  On
reaching  Antwerp  he  had  but  |25  left,  but  bor-
rowed $15  more  from  the  captain  of  the  brig,  and
worked  his  way  to  London,  where  he  was  be-
friended by  Mr.  Cheeney,  the  American  engraver,
until  after  ten  months  he  had  a  remittance  from
home.  He  spent  two  years  in  close  study,  and
then  returned  to  Boston,  where  he  opened  a  studio,
and  studied  under  Washington  Allston.  He  went
abroad  again  in  1840,  and  studied  in  Paris  under
Eugene  Isabey.  He  spent  twenty  years  in  Ant-
werp, Rome,  Florence,  Paris,  and  London,  and  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1860,  with  a  high
reputation  as  a  landscape  painter  at  home  and
abroad.  Among  his  more  important  pictures  are
"  The  Bay  of  New  York  "  (1860),  presented  to  the
prince  of  Wales,  as  a  memento  of  his  visit  to  this
country,  by  a  number  of  New  York  gentlemen ;
"  The  Crown  of  New  England  "  (1861),  purchased
from  the  artist  by  the  prince  of  Wales ;  "  Venice  " ;
"  Sunset.  Genoa  " ;  "  Niagara  by  Moonlight "  (1876) ;
"  Capri "  (1878) ;  "  Doge's  Palace  at  Sunset "  (1881) ;
"  Sunrise,  Venice  "  (1882) ;  and  "  Doge's  Palace  at
Sunrise  "  (1885).

BROWN,  Goold,  grammarian,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  7  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  31  March,
1857.  He  was  descended  from  some  of  the  earliest
Quaker  settlers  of  New  England,  and  was  educated
in  the  schools  and  academies  of  his  native  state.
At  nineteen  he  began  to  teach  a  district  school  in
Rhode  Island,  then  a  Friends'  boarding-school  in
Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y.,  in  1811.  He  removed  to  New
York  city  in  1813,  where  for  over  twenty  years  he
conducted  an  academy.  He  soon  realized  that  the
grammars  in  use  at  that  time  were  inadequate,  and
set  about  providing  better  ones.  The  superiority
of  his  methods  was  apparent  as  soon  as  his  books
were  brought  into  use,  and  they  commanded  a  very
large  sale.  He  published  "  Institutes  of  English
Grammar "  (New  York,  1823) ;  "  First  Lines  of
English  Grammar  "  (1823) ;  and  "  A  Grammar  of
English  Grammars"  (1851).  He  had,  at  the  time
of  his  death,  just  revised  the  last-named  work.

BROWN,  Harvey,  soldier,  b.  in  Rahway,  N.  J.,
in  1795 ;  d.  in  Clifton.  N.  Y.,  31  March,  1874.  Af-
ter graduation,  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy,  in
1818,  he  joined  the  light  artillery,  and  served  on
garrison  and  staff  duty  until,  on  the  reorganiza-
tion of  the  army  in  1821,  he  was  assigned  to  the


400


BROWN


BROWN


1st  and  shortly  afterward  to  the  4th  artillery,
when  he  was  promoted  first  lieutenant.  After
ten  years'  service  in  this  grade  he  was  promoted
captain.  He  was  in  the  Black  Hawk  expedition  in
1882,  but  saw  no  actual  fighting.  After  four  years
in  garrison  he  was  ordered  to  Florida,  in  1836,  and
took  part  in  the  arduous  campaigns  against  the
Seminole  Indians.  He  was  again  in  Florida  in
1838-9,  and  later  in  1839  was  ordered  to  the
northern  frontier,  to  quell  expected  disturbances
on  the  Canadian  border.  He  was  major  of  the
artillery  battalion,  in  the  Army  of  Occupation  in
Mexico,  and  was  present  at  many  battles  of  the
campaign.  For  gallantry  on  these  occasions  he
received  successive  brevets,  including  that  of  colo-
nel, 13  Sept.,  1847,  and  was  promoted  to  the  full
grade  of  major,  9  Jan.,  1851.  He  was  superin-
tendent of  recruiting  in  New  York  in  1851-2,
and  was  in  Florida  fighting  the  Seminoles  in
1852-3,  and  still  again  in  1854-'6.  After  an  in-
terval of  garrison  and  recruiting  duty  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  artillery  school  for
practice  at  Fort  Monroe,  remaining  there,  with  brief
details  on  other  duty,  until  the  civil  war  began,  in
1861.  He  commanded  the  regulars  in  the  defences
of  Washington  until  4  April,  1861,  when  he  was
ordered  to  Fort  Pickens,  in  Pensacola  harbor,  Fla.,
and  on  28  April  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel.
He  repelled  the  confederate  attack  of  9  Oct.,  and
in  turn  bombarded  their  works,  with  partial  suc-
cess, 22-23  Nov.,  and  again  1  Jan.,  1862.  For
these  services  he  was  brevetted  brigadier  in  the
regular  service,  and  promoted  colonel,  5th  artillery,
14  May,  1861 ;  but  he  declined  a  command  as  brig-
adier in  the  volunteers.  He  was  in  command  of
the  forces  in  New  York  city  during  the  formidable
draft  riots  of  12-16  July,  1863,  and  was  brevetted
major-general,  U.  S.  A.,  for  distinguished  services
at  that  time.  He  was  retired  from  active  service
1  Aug.,  1863,  having  been  borne  on  the  army  regis-
ter more  than  forty-five  years,  and  having  passed
the  legal  limit  of  age  for  active  duty.

BROWN,  Henry  Armitt,  orator,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  1  Dec,  1844;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1879.
He  received  a  careful  preliminary  training  and  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1865.  From  the  first  he  was
a  leader  among  his  playmates  and  fellow-students
in  all  that  called  for  brilliant  intellectual  powers
and  natural  histrionic  talents.  He  studied  in
Columbia  law  school,  and  afterward  in  Philadel-
phia, where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1869.
But  before  beginning  to  practise  he  spent  several
years  in  travel  through  Europe  and  the  East.  On
returning  to  Philadelphia  he  was  called  upon  to
respond  to  a  toast  before  a  large  assembly  of  the
bench  and  bar  of  that  city,  and  made  such  an  im-
pression that  he  was  at  once  recognized  as  one  of
the  most  promising  among  the  younger  generation
of  lawyers.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1876,  being  among  the  most
effective  speakers  on  the  republican  side.  He  was
a  member  of  the  "  Cobden  Club "  of  London,  of
the  Union  League  in  Philadelphia,  and  of  many
other  prominent  social  and  political  associations.
His  principal  orations  are  historical  in  character
and  were  delivered  on  commemorative  occasions,
such  as  the  one  hundredth  anniversary  of  the  meet-
ing of  congress  in  Carpenter's  hall,  Philadelphia
(1874) ;  the  two  hundredth  anniversary  of  the  set-
tlement of  Burlington,  N.  J.  (1877);  the  Valley
Forge  centennial  (1878) ;  and  the  centennial  of  the
battle  of  Monmouth  (1878).  These  addresses  were
carefully  prepared  "  briefs,"  and  are  collected  in  a
handsome  memoiral  volume,  prepared  by  Prof.  J.
M.  Hoppin,  of  Yale  college  (Philadelphia,  1880).


BROWN,  Henry  B.,  painter,  b.  in  Portland
Me.,  in  1831 ;  d.  there  in  1860.  He  learned  the
trade  of  a  house,  sign,  and  banner  painter,  but
early  had  aspirations  for  work  of  a  less  mechanical
description,  and  eventually  devoted  himself  to
landscape  and  marine  painting,  with  excellent  suc-
cess. His  favorite  sketching-ground  was  the  North
Atlantic  sea-coast,  including  Nova  Scotia  and
Grand  Menan.  He  was  especially  successful  in
depicting  coast  scenery;  and  Paul  Akers  wrote,
"  in  his  wonderful  rendering  of  the  sea  he  stands
among  American  artists  unrivalled."  "  East  High-
lands," "  On  the  Androscoggin,"  and  "  On  the
Coast  of  Maine  "  are  among  the  best  of  his  works.

BROWN,  Henry  Billings,  Jurist,  b.  in  Lee,
Mass..  2  March,  1836.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1856,  studied  law,  and  after  a  few  years'  prac-
tice was  appointed  assistant  U.  S.  district  attorney
(1863-'8).  In  1868  he  was  circuit  Judge  for  Wayne
CO.,  Mich.,  and  in  1875  became  U.  S.  district  Judge.
In  December,  1890,  he  was  appointed  a  Justice  of
the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  He  compiled  a  volume
of  "Admiralty  Reports"  (New  York,  1875).

BROWN,  Henry  Kirke,  sculptor,  b.  in  Levden,
Mass.,  24  Feb.,  1814;  d.  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  10
July,  1886.  In  early  boyhood  he  evinced  a  talent
for  painting,  and  when  about  fourteen  years  old,
without  any  instruction,  and  before  he  had  ever
seen  a  work  of  art,  he  executed  a  creditable  portrait
of  an  old  man.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  he  be-
gan to  study  with  Chester  Harding,  a  portrait-
painter  of  Bos-
ton. The  sum-
mers from  1836
till  1839  were
spent  in  survey-
ing on  the  Illi-
nois central  rail-
road, and  the  win-
ters in  Cincin-
nati painting  and
modelling  in  clay.
His  first  finished
work  in  this  line
was  an  ideal  fe-
male head.  After
a  winter  in  Boston
he  removed  first
to  Troy  and  soon
afterward  to  Al-
bany, N.  Y.,  where
he  devoted  him-
self to  sculpture,  executing  portrait  busts  of  many
gentlemen  of  Albany  and  the  neighboring  cities.
Among  these  are  the  Rev.  William  B.  Sprague,  D.
D.,  Erastus  Corning,  Dr.  Eliphalet  Nott,  and  Silas
Dutcher.  He  also  produced  two  ideal  statues,
"  Hope,"  and  a  discobolus.  Accompanied  by  his
wife,  he  went  to  Italy  in  1842  and  remained  there
until  1846.  During  this  period  he  executed  "  Ruth,
a  group  representing  a  boy  and  a  dog,  now  owned
by  the  historical  society  of  New  York,  a  "  Rebecca,
and  a  "  David,"  which  was  destroyed.  On  his  re-
turn to  the  United  States  he  opened  a  temporary
studio  in  New  York,  brought  over  skilled  worK-
men  from  Europe,  and  did  some  preliminary  woiK
in  bronze  casting,  the  first  attempted  in  this  coun-
try. In  1848  he  went  among  the  Indians  ana
modelled  many  interesting  subjects,  some  of  wliicn
were  reproduced  in  bronze.  About  this  time  ne
made  the  altar-piece  for  the  church  of  the  Annun-
ciation in  New  York,  and  modelled  portrait  busts
of  William  Cullen  Brvant  and  Dr.  Willard  ParKer,
both  of  whom  were 'his  warm  personal  i"enas
About  1850  he  built  a  studio  in  Brooklyn,  ana  lur


, /^"^^^-z^^-^^f^-^


BROWIT


BROWN


401


two  years  was  engaged  with  the  statue  of  De  Witt
Clinton  for  Greenwood  cemetery.  This  was  the
first  bronze  statue  cast  in  this  country.  During
these  yeai-s  and  until  1855  he  was  at  work  on  the
fine  equestrian  statue  of  Washington  in  Union
square,  New  York.  In  1857  he  was  invited  by  the
state  of  South  Carolina  to  undertake  the  decora-
tion of  the  state-house  in  Columbia,  which  current
rumor  made  the  capital  of  the  then  projected  con-
federacy. The  principal  design  was  a  group  for
the  main  pedimtnt,  a  colossal  ideal  figure  of  South
Carolina,  with  Justice  and  Liberty  on  either  hand,
while  the  industries  wei'e  represented  by  negro
slaves  at  work  in  cotton-  and  rice-fields.  The  fig-
ure of  South  Carolina  was  nearly  finished  when
the  civil  war  began,  and  Sherman's  soldiers,  re-
garding it  as  the  typical  genius  of  secession,  de-
stroyed it  when  they  passed  through  Columbia  in
1865.  Mr.  Brown  made  many  friends  during  his
residence  in  the  south,  was  strongly  urged  to  cast
his  lot  with  the  seceding  states,  and  remained  in
fulfilment  of  his  professional  contract  until  hostili-
ties actually  began.  During  1859  and  18G0  he
served  on  an  art  commission  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Buchanan,  and  wrote  a  report,  submitted  9
March,  1860,  which  to  some  extent  disseminated
correct  ideas  about  art  among  members  of  both
houses  of  congress.  During  the  civil  war  he  was
an  active  officer  of  the  sanitary  commission.  Mr.
!  Brown's  average  work  undeniably  suffei-s  by  com-
iparison  with  the  highest  standards;  but  his  best
leflforts  evince  earnestness  and  dignity  and  no  small
I  degree  of  artistic  talent.  The  equestrian  statues
are  particularly  good,  a  result  doubtless  due  to  his
love  for  horses.  His  artistic  career  will  always  be
noteworthy  as  covering  the  whole  period  of  Ameri-
can sculpture  from  its  very  beginning  until  a  time
when  our  sculptors  had  worked  their  way  to  the
jforemost  rank  of  contemporary  artists.  The  fol-
|lowing-named  statues  are  among  his  principal
works :  "  Dr.  Geo.  W.  Bethune,"  in  Packer  insti-
tute, Brooklyn  (1865);  "Lincoln,"  in  Prospect
park,  Brooklyn  (1866) ;  "  Gen.  Nathanael  Greene,"
for  the  state  of  Rhode  Island,  presented  to  the  na-
tional gallery  in  the  capitol  at  Washington  (1867) ;
' Lincoln,"  in  Union  square,  New  York  (1867-8) ;
'  Equestrian  Statue  of  Gen.  Scott,"  for  the  U.  S.
rovernment  (begun  in  1871),  considered  his  best
vork ;  "  Gen.  George  Clinton,"  for  presentation  to
he  U.  S.  government  by  the  state  of  New  York
1873) ;  '•  Gen.  Philip  Kearny,"  in  Newark,  N.  J.,
ilso  "Richard  Stockton,"  for  the  state  of  New
'ersey  (1874);  "An  Equestrian  Statue  of  Gen.
^athanael  Greene,"  for  the  national  government
1875-'7) ;  "  The  Resurrection  "  (1877).

BROWN,  Isaac  Van  Arsdale,  clergvman,  b.

n  Somerset  co.,  N.  J.,  4  Nov.,  1784 ;  d.  in  Trenton,

^.  J.,  19  April,  1861. He  was  graduated  at  Prince-

on  in  1803  and  studied  theology  under  Dr.  John

VoodhuU,  of  Freehold,  N.  J.,  was  ordained  by  the

^'ew  Brunswick  presbytery,  and  in  1807  was  made

astor  at  Lawrence vi'lle,  N.  J.,  where  in  1810  he

stablished  a  classical  and  commercial  boarding-

3hool. In  1842  he  removed  to  Mount  Holly,  and

^bsequently  to  Trenton,  N.  J.,  where  he  devoted

is  time  principally  to  literarv  work. Among  his

ublications  are  "  Life  of  Robert  Finlev,  D.  D.,"

The  Unity  of  the Human Race."  and also  a

Historical  Vindication  of  the  Abrogation  of  the

Ian  of  Union  bv  the  Presbyterian  Church  in  the

nited  States  of  America"  (Philadelphia,  1855).

r.  Brown  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Ameri-

m  Colonization  Society,  and  worked  for  its  ad-

uicement,  and  was  one  of  the  original  members

the  American  Bible  Society.
1  VOL.  I. — 26


BROWN,  J.  Appleton,  artist,  b.  in  Newburv-
port,  Mass.,  24  July,  1844.  He  pursued  his  early
art  studies  in, Boston  under  B.  C.  Porter,  and  in
Paris  under  Emile  Lambinet.  On  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  opened  a  studio  in  Boston,
where  he  Has  since  resided.  Among  his  works  are
"  A  View,  Dives  Calvados,  France  "  (1875) ;  "  Old
Road  near  Paris  "  (1875) ;  "  On  the  Merrimac  at
Newburyport,  Autumn  " ;  "  Storm  at  the  Isle  of
Shoals";  "Glen  Mill  Brook,  Byfield,  Mass.";
"  Springtime  "  (1884). — His  wife,  Agnes,  b.  in  New-
buryport, is  also  an  artist,  painting  landscapes,
flower-pieces,  and  animals  in  oil-colors ;  her  espe-
cial forte  being  cats,  which  she  portrays  with  re-
markable success,  Her  pictures  are  well  known  in
the  principal  exhibitions  of  the  United  States.

BROWN,  Jacob,  soldier,  b.  in  Bucks  co..  Pa.,
9  May,  1775 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  24  Feb.,
1828.  He  was  of  Quaker  ancestry  and  supported
himself  in  early  life  by  teaching  school.  From
1796  till  1798  he  was  engaged  in  surveying  pub-
lic lands  in  Ohio.  In  1798  he  settled  in  New
York,  where  he  conducted  a  school,  studied  law,
and  wrote  political  articles  for  the  press.  Later
he  purchased  land  in  Jefferson  co.,  N.  Y.,  where  he
established  himself  and  erected  the  first  building
in  Brownsville,  which  has  since  become  a  flourish-
ing village.  He  became  county  judge,  and,  having
had  military  experience  as  secretary  to  Gen.  Alex-
ander Hamilton,  he  was  in  1809  made  colonel  of
the  militia.  In  1810  he  was  advanced  to  brigadier-
general,  and  in  1812  received  the  appointment  of
commander  of  the  frontier  from  Oswego  to  Lake
St.  Francis,  a  line  200  miles  in  extent.-  On  4  Oct.,
1812,  he  repelled  the  attack  of  a  superior  British
force  on  Ogdensburg,  where  his  headquarters  were
located.  He  was  then  offered  a  regiment  in  the
regular  army,  but  he  declined.  During  the  spring
of  1818  he  assumed  command  at  Sackett's  Harbor,
where,  on  29  May,  1813,  he  defeated  an  attack  of  a
superior  force.  On  19  July,.  1813,  he  was  appointed
brigadier-general  in  the  regular  army,  and  on  24
Jan.,  1814,  placed  in  command  of  the  army  of  Ni-
agara with  the  rank  of  major-general.  In  the
campaign  that  followed  the  American  forces  were
successful.  Gen.  Brown  took  possession  of  Fort
Erie,  and  on  5  July,  1814,  gained  a  victory  over
Gen.  Riall  at  Chippewa.  On  25  July  he  defeated
a  superior  force  under  Gen.  Drummond  at  the  bat-
tle of  Lundy's  Lane,  where  he  received  two  severe
wounds.  In  the  sortie  from  Fort  Erie  on  17  Sept.,
1814,  he  again  defeated  Gen.  Drummond.  In  con-
nection with  this  engagement  it  was  said  of  Gen.
Brown  that  "  no  enterprise  that  he  undertook  ever
failed."  The  city  of  New  York  voted  him  its  free-
dom, he  received  the  thanks  of  congress  on  3  Nov.,
1814,  and  was  awarded  a  gold  medal  emblematical
of  his  triumphs.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was
retained  in  command  of  the  northern  division  of
the  army,  and  on  10  March,  1821,  became  general-
in-chief  of  the  U.  S.  army.  He  was  buried  in  the
Congressional  cemetery  in  Washington. — His  son,
Nathan  W.,  soldier,  b.'  in  New  York  about  1819.
He  was  appointed  a  major  and  paymaster  in  the
U.  S.  army  on  5  Sept.,  1849,  and  served  in  Florida
in  1849,  in  California  in  1850-5,  in  New  York
city  in  1856-7,  in  Florida  and  the  west  in  1858-
'60,  and  was  with  Sturgis  when  he  evacuated  Fort
Smith,  Ark.,  in  April,  1861.  He  then  joined  Em-
ory's command  at  Fort  Washita,  and  until  1869
was  stationed  at  St.  Louis  in  charge  of  the  pay
district  of  the  Missouri.  He  was  appointed  deputy
paymaster-general,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  on  4  April,  1864,  and  .assistant  paymaster-
general,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  on  28  July,  1866.


402


BROWN


BROWN


On  13  March,  1865.  he  was  made  brigadier-general
by  brevet  for  faithful  and  meritorious  services  dur-
ing the  war.  On  8  June,  1880,  he  was  appointed
paymaster-general,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  and  on  0  Feb.,  1882,  retired  from  service.
— His  nephew,  Thompson  S.,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Brownville,  N.  Y.,  in  1807;  d.  in  Naples,  Italy,  30
Jan.,  1855,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1825,  and  was  assistant  professor  of
mathematics  there  for  a  few  months,  then  served
in  the  construction  of  Fort  Adams,  R.  1.,  and  from
1828  till  1833  as  aide  to  his  uncle,  and  afterward
in  the  construction  of  fortifications,  light-houses,
harbors,  and  roads.  On  31  Oct.,  1830.  he  resigned
his  commission,  and  was  chief  engineer  of  the
Buffalo  and  Erie  railroad  in  1836-8,  of  the  west-
ern division  of  the  New  York  and  Erie  railroad  in
1838-'42,  and  of  the  whole  road  from  1842  till  1849.
He  then  went  to  Russia  as  consulting  engineer  of
the  St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow  railroad.

BROWN,  James,  publisher,  b.  in  Acton,  Mass.,
19  May,  1800;  d.  10  March,  1855.  His  entrance
into  active  life  was  as  a  servant  in  the  family  of
Prof.  Hedge,  of  Cambridge,  by  whom  he  was
instructed  in  the  classics  and  in  mathematics.  He
was  next  employed  by  William  Hillard  as  a  shop-
boy,  and  in  due  course  of  time  became  a  member
of  the  publishing  firm  of  Hillard,  Gray  &  Co.
That  firm  being  dissolved  in  consequence  of  the
death  of  one  of  the  partners,  he  joined  that  of
Charles  C.  Little  &  Co.,  afterward  Little  &  Brown,
and  remained  in  connection  with  it  until  his
death.  The  specialty  of  the  firm  to  which  Mr.
Brown  belonged  was  the  publication  of  law-books
and  the  importation  of  foreign  editions  in  the
general  trade.  In  each  of  those  departments  his
literary  knowledge  and  refined  taste  were  notable,
and  materially  aided  in  improving  the  style  of
book-making  in  the  United  States.  A  life  of  Mr.
Brown,  by  George  S.  Hillard,  was  published  in  Bos-
Ion  in  1855.

BROWN,  James  Cauldwell,  clergyman,  b.  in
St.  Clairsville,  Ohio,  5  Oct.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Paducah,
Ky.,  14  July,  1862.  He  was  graduated  at  Jefferson
College,  Canonsburg,  Pa.,  in  1835,  after  which  he
spent  two  years  at  the  Western  Theological  Semi-
nary in  Alleghany,  Pa.,  and  then  studied  at  the
theological  seminary  in  Columbia,  S.  C.  He  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of  Harmony,
S.  C,  and  in  1839  went  to  Indiana  to  engage  in
missionary  work  along  the  southern  shore  of  Lake
Michigan.  Settling  in  Valparaiso,  Ind.,  he  preached
there  for  twenty-one  years,  and  built  up  the  largest
Presbyterian  church  in  northern  Indiana.  Nearly
all  the  churches  of  his  denomination  within  a  cir-
cuit of  thirty  miles  were  organized  by  him.  In
1860  he  became  general  agent  of  the  Theological
Seminary  of  the  Northwest  in  Chicago,  where  he
initiated  measures  that  resulted  in  the  establish-
ment of  a  Presbyterian  Seminary.  During  the
winter  of  1861  he  preached  in  South  Bend,  Ind.,
and  while  there  was  elected  chaplain  of  the  48th
Indiana  volunteers.  He  served  with  his  regiment
from  May,  1862,  till  shortly  before  his  death,
which  resulted  from  disease  contracted  in  camp.

BROWN,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Sandisfield,  Mass.,
19  Oct.,  1744;  d.  in  Stone  Arabia,  N.  Y.,  19  Oct.,
1780.  Plis  parents  early  settled  in  Rutland,  Vt.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1771,  and  studied  law
with  Oliver  Arnold  in  Providence.  After  being
admitted  to  the  bar  he  began  practice  at  Caghna-
waga  (now  Johnstown),  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  ap-

?ointed  king's  attorney. In  1773  he  removed  to
'ittsfield,  Mass.,  and became an  active patriot.
He  was  sent  to  Canada  to  excite  the  people  to  re-


volt in  1774,  and  again  in  1775.  His  pretence  was
the  purchase  of  horses ;  but  the  Canadians  re-
marked that  he  was  a  singular  jockey,  for  the
horses  never  suited  him.  In  1775  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  provincial  congress,  and  was  among
those  from  Massachusetts  who  were  associated
with  Ethan  Allen  in  the  capture  of  Fort  Ticon-
deroga  and  intrusted  with  the  conveying  away  of
the  prisoners.  During  July  of  1775  he  accompa-
nied Allen  on  his  expedition  to  Canada,  and  on  .24
Sept.  captured  Fort  Chambly.  As  he  failed  to  co-
operate with  Allen  at  the  engagement  before  Mon-
treal, the  latter  was  captured  and  Brown  severely
censured.  He  was  present  at  the  attack  of  Quebec
on  31  Dec,  1775,  when  Gen.  Montgomery  fell,  and
successfully  accomplished  the  firing  of  St.  John's
gate.  Congress,  on  1  Aug.,  1776,  voted  him  a  com-
mission as  lieutenant-colonel,  with  rank  and  pay  in
the  continental  army  from  November,  1775.  During
the  early  part  of  1777  he  was  actively  engaged  in
the  fighting  along  the  shores  of  Lake  George,  and
on  18  Sept.,  1777,  he  surprised  the  outposts  of  Fort
Ticonderoga,  liberating  100  American  prisoners  and
capturing  293  of  the  Biitish  forces,  together  Avith
a  large  quantity  of  supplies.  He  then  joined  the
main  army  under  Gen.  Gates,  to  whom  during  the
following  month  Gen.  Burgoyne  surrendered  his
army.  Soon  after  this  event  Col.  Brown  retired
from  the  service  on  account  of  his  detestation  of
Benedict  Arnold,  whom  he  charged  with  having
levied  contributions  on  the  Canadians  for  his  own
private  use  and  benefit.  He  said  that  Arnold
would  prove  a  traitor,  as  he  had  already  sold  many
lives  for  money.  Subsequently  he  was  employed
occasionally  in  the  Massachusetts  service,  and  was
a  member  of  the  state  legislature  in  1778.  In  the
autumn  of  1780  he  marched  up  the  valley  of  the
Mohawk  for  the  relief  of  Gen.  Schuyler,  but. was
led  into  an  ambuscade  of  Canadians,  tories,  and
Indians  at  Stone  Arabia,  in  Palatine,  where  he  was
killed  with  forty-five  of  his  men.

BROWN,  John,  senator,  b,  in  Staunton,  Va.,
12  Sept.,  1757:  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  29  Aug.,  1837.
He  was  a  student  at  Princeton  when  the  revolu-
tionary army  retreated  through  New  Jersey,  and
at  once  enlisted,  serving  until  the  close  of  the
war,  after  which  he  continued  his  education  at
Washington  College,  Lexington,  Va.,  and  then
taught  school  while  studying  law.  In  1782  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began  practice  at
Frankfort,  Ky.  He  was  elected  a  member  of  the
legislature  of  Virginia  from  the  district  of  Ken-
tucky, and  was  also  a  delegate  from  the  same  dis-
trict to  the  continental  congress  in  1787-8.  Later
he  was  elected  to  congress  from  this  section  of
Virginia,  serving  from  4  March,  1789,  till  5  Nov.,
1792,  when  he  became  the  first  U.  S.  senator  from
Kentucky,  serving  from  5  Nov.,  1792,  till  3  March,
1805.  Senator  Brown  took  a  prominent  part  in
the  Indian  warfare  of  his  time,  in  the  admission
of  Kentucky  into  the  union,  and  in  securing  for
the  west  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.  He
was  the  first  member  of  congress  from  the  Missis-
sippi valley,  and  the  last  survivor  of  the  continen-
tal congress.— His  brother,  James,  senator,  b.  near
Staunton,  Va.,  11  Sept.,  1766;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  7  April,  1835.  He  received  a  classical  educa-
tion at  Washington  College,  Lexingtcn,Va.,stuaio(l
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  began  practice
in  Frankfort,  Ky.  In  1791  he  commanded  a  com-
pany of  sharp-shooters  in  an  expedition  against  tlie
Indians,  and  in  1792  became  secretary  to  Gov.
Isaac  Shelby,  of  Kentucky.  Soon  after  the  cession
of  Louisiana  he  removed  to  New  Orleans,  and  for  a
time  assisted  Edward  Livingston  in  compiling  tHe


BROWN


BROWN


403


Louisiana  code.  Later  he  was  appointed  secretary
of  the  territory,  and  in  1804  became  V.  S.  judge
for  that  territory.  In  1812  he  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  from  Louisiana,  serving  from  5  Feb.,
1813,  till  3  March,  1819.  He  was  again  elected,
and  served  from  6  Dec,  1819,  till  10  Dec,  1823,
when  he  was  appointed  minister  to  France,  where
he  remained  until  1  July,  1829.  On  his  return  to
the  United  States  he  settled  in  Philadelphia. —
Another  brother,  Samuel,  physician,  b.  in  Rock-
bridge CO.,  Va.,  30  Jan.,  1769 ;  d.  in  Alabama,
12  Jan.,  1830,  graduated  at  Dickinson  college,
Pa.,  in  1789,  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Rush  in
Philadelphia,  and  took  the  degree  of  M.  D.  at  Aber-
deen, Scotland.  He  practised  a  while  near  the
present  site  of  Washington  city,  settled  in  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  in  1797,  and  in  1806  in  New  Orleans,
whence  he'  removed  to  Natchez,  where  he  married
Miss  Catharine  Percy  in  1808,  after  which  he  re-
sided on  a  plantation  in  the  vicinity  of  that  place,
and  after  her  death  settled  on  a  plantation  near
Huntsville,  Ala.  From  1819  till  1825  he  was  pro-
fessor of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine  at
Transylvania  university,  Lexington,  Ky.  He  had
intended  to  found  a  medical  school  in  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  in  association  with  Dr.  Drake ;  but  at  the
solicitation  of  the  trustees  of  the  university  in
Lexington  he  began  the  enterprise  in  that  city,
where  he  was  joined  by  Dr.  Drake,  who  in  1825
succeeded  him  as  head  of  the  school.  Besides  at-
tending to  an  extensive  practice  and  devoting
himself  to  medical  and  scientific  instruction,  Dr.
Brown  introduced  various  improvements  in  agri-
cultural and  industrial  processes.  He  first  sug-
gested the  method  that  came  into  general  use  for
clarifying  ginseng  for  the  Chinese  market.  The
process  of  using  steam  instead  of  the  direct  heat
of  the  fire  in  the  distillation  of  spirits  was  invented
by  him.  He  united  with  his  brothers  John  and
James  Brown  and  Henry  Clay,  in  1799,  when  an  elec-
tion for  a  constitutional  convention  was  pending  in
Kentucky,  in  advocating  the  abolition  of  slavery
in  that  state  and  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the
slaves ;  but  the  majority  of  the  delegates  were  op-
posed to  the  project.  In  medical  practice  Dr.
Brown  was  instrumental  in  introducing  in  the
United  States  the  process  of  lithotrity  shortly
after  its  first  successful  application  by  French
surgeons.  He  established  a  medical  society  in
Lexington,  and  framed  for  it  a  code  of  medical
ethics.  This  body,  at  first  a  secret  society,  was  the
original  of  the  medical  associations  of  Philadel-
phia, New  York,  and  Baltimore.  He  contributed
to  the  "Transactions"  of  the  philosophical  so-
ciety a  paper  entitled  "A  Description  of  a  Cave  on
Crooked  Creek,  with  Observations  on  Nitre  and
Gunpowder,"  and  was  also  a  contributor  to  the
New  York  "  Medical  Repository." — John's  son,
Mason,  jurist,  b,  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10  Nov.,
1799;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  27  Jan.,  1867,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1820,  and  entered  the  law
office  of  John  J.  Crittenden,  of  Frankfort,  Ky.,
completing  his  stud^-s  in  the  Lexington  law-
school.  Entering  upon  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion in  Frankfort,  he  became,  after  a  few  years,  a
:)artner  of  Gov.  Charles  S.  Morehead,  with  whom
le  compiled  the  valuable  digest  of  the  state  laws,
<nown  as  "Morehead  and  Brown's  Digest."  He
kvas  judge  of  the  circuit  court  of  his  district  for
nany  years,  and  from  1855  till  1859,  during  the  ad-
ninistration  of  Gov.  Morehead,  he  was  secretary
)f  state.  To  his  public  spirit  Frankfort  was  large-
y  indebted  for  works  of  public  utility  and  orna-
nent— Mason's  son,  Beniamin  Gratz,  lawyer,  b.
n  Lexington,  Ky.,  28  May,  1826 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,


Mo.,  13  Dec,  1885,  was  graduated  at  Transylvania
university,  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1845,  and  at  Yale  in
1847,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
and  soon  afterward  settled  in  St.  Louis.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Missouri  legislature  from  1852
till  1859,  and  in  1857  made  there  a  remarkable
anti-slavery  speech,  which  is  said  to  have  been  the
beginning  of  the  free-soil  movement  in  that  state.
He  edited  the  "  Missouri  Democrat,"  a  journal  of
radical  republican  principles,  which  had  for  its
most  violent  political  opponent  "  The  Missouri  Re-
publican," a  democratic  sheet  of  the  most  uncom-
promising character.  For  five  years  (1854-'9)  he
constantly  opposed  the  pro-slavery  party,  and  was
often  threatened  with  personal  violence,  on  one  oc-
casion being  wounded  by  a  pistol-shot.  In  1857
he  was  the  free-soil  candidate  for  governor,  and
came  within  500  votes  of  election.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war,  in  1861,  he  gave  all  his  in-
fluence to  the  support  of  the  union,  and  was  in
close  consultation  with  Gen.  Lyon  when  he  planned
the  capture  of  Camp  Jackson  and  broke  up  the  first
secession  movement  in  St.  Louis.  Brown  com-
manded a  regiment  of  militia  on  that  occasion,  and
afterward,  during  the  invasion  of  the  state  by
Price  and  Van  Dorn,  commanded  a  brigade.  He
was  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  senate  from  1863  till
1867,  and  lent  his  powerful  influence  in  1864  to
favor  the  passage  of  the  ordinance  of  emancipation
by  the  Missouri  state  convention.  In  1871  he  was
elected  governor  of  Missouri,  on  the  liberal  repub-
lican ticket,  by  a  majority  of  40,000.  In  1872  he
was  the  candidate  for  vice-president  on  the  demo-
cratic ticket  wuth  Horace  Greeley,  and  after  the
election,  which  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  the  demo-
crats and  the  election  of  the  republican  candidate,
Gen.  Grant,  he  resumed  his  law  practice.

BROWN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  county  An-
trim, Ireland,  15  June,  1763 ;  d.  in  Fort  Gaines,
Ga.,  11  Dec,  1842.  His  parents  emigrated  to  this
country  and  secured  a  title  to  160  acres  of  land  in
Chester  District,  S.  C.  The  son  was  compelled  to
aid  his  parents  on  the  farm,  and  his  early  educa-
tion consisted  of  a  short  course  in  a  grammar
school  in  the  Waxhaw  settlement.  In  1779  he
joined  the  revolutionary  army  as  a  volunteer  and
fought  under  Gen.  Sumter.  After  the  war  he
studied  theology  under  the  Rev.  Dr.  McCorkle
near  Salisbury,  N.  C,  and  was  licensed  to  preach
in  1788.  Shortly  afterward  he  became  pastor  of
the  Waxhaw  church,  where  he  remained  until  1809,
when  he  was  elected  professor  of  logic  and  moral
philosophy  in  the  University  of  South  Carolina.
In  1811  he  became  president  of  the  University  of
Georgia,  where  he  remained  for  many  years,  and,
on  retiring  from  teaching,  resumed  his  pastoral
duties  at  Mount  Zion  church,  in  Hancock  cc,  Ga.
His  last  years  were  spent  in  Fort  Gaines,  Ga.

BBOWN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  near  Bremen,
Germany,  21  July,  1771 :  "d.  in  Virginia,  26  Jan.,
1850.  He  came  to  this  country  in  1797  and  studied
theology  under  the  Rev.  Philip  Stoeck.  He  was
licensed  by  the  synod  of  the  German  Reformed
church  in  1800,  and  ordained  in  1803.  He  was
given  charge  of  scattered  congregations  in  Vir-
ginia, and  his  labors  extended  over  six  counties.
During  the  early  part  of  his  ministry  he  was  com-
pelled to  make  his  appointments  by  travelling  on
foot.  For  nearly  half  a  century  he  labored  in  the
same  field,  refusing  all  oft'ers  from  elsewhere.  He
preached  in  German  only,  and  in  1818  published  in
that  language  a  volume  of  400  pages,  which  was  a
pastoral  address  to  the  Germans  in  Virginia.

BROWN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  New  York
city,  19  May,  1791 ;  d.  in  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  15  Aug.,


404


BROWN


BROWN


1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1811,  and
studied  for  the  Protestant  Episcopal  ministry  un-
der Bishop  J.  PI.  Hobart.  In  1813  he  was  ordained
in  St.  Paul's  church,  New  York,  and  took  charge
of  Trinity  church,  Pishkill,  wliere  he  remained  un-
til 1815,  when  he  became  rector  of  St.  George's
church,  Newburg.  He  continued  with  this  par-
ish until  1878,  and  from  1818  till  1847  was  also
rector  of  St.  Thomas's  church  in  New  Windsor.
Dr.  Brown  succeeded  in  forming  his  own  congre-
gation into  a  strong  parish,  and  largely  aided
feebler  churches  in  neighboring  counties.  He  was
believed  to  be  the  oldest  Episcopal  clergyman,  in
point  of  service,  in  the  United  States,  and  was  also
one  of  the  oldest  masons  in  the  country,  having
been  initiated  on  1(3  June,  1817,  in  Hiram  lodge,
Newburg.  When  Gen.  Lafayette  visited,  the
United  States,  in  1824,  Dr.  Brown,  at  a  reception
held  at  Washington's  headquarters,  delivered  the
address  of  welcome.

BKOWN,  John,  of  Osawatomie,  abolitionist,
b.  in  Torrington,  Conn.,  9  May,  1800 ;  executed  in
Charlestown,  Va.,  2  Dec,  1859.  His  ancestor,
Peter  Brown,  came  over  with  the  historic  party  in
the  "Mayflower"  in  1620.  Peter  was  unmarried,
by  trade  a  carpenter,  and  drew  his  house-lot  in
Plymouth  with  the  rest;  but  he  removed  soon
afterward,  with  Bradford,  Standish,  and  Wins-
low,  to  the  neighboring  settlement  of  Duxbury.

He  was  twice
married,  and  died
early.  One  of
his  descendants
in  the  main  line
was  a  Captain
John  Brown,  of
the .  Connecticut
militia,  who  died
of  disease  in  the
revolutionary  ser-
vice in  1776.  This
revolutionary  cap-
tain married  Han-
nah Owen,  of
Welsh  origin ;  and
their  son,  Owen
Brown,  married
Ruth  Mills,  who
was  of  Dutch  de-
scent ;  so  that
John  Brown  of
Osawatomie,  their
son,  had  a  min-
gling of  the  blood
of  three  races  in
his  veins,  resulting  in  a  corresponding  mixture  of
strong  qualities.  Owen  Brown  left  a  brief  auto-
biography, which  begins  by  saying :  "  My  life  has
been  of  little  worth,  mostly  filled  up  with  vanity."
Then  he  goes  on  to  describe,  with  some  fulness,
this  career  of  frivolity,  which  will  seem  to  most
readers  grave  and  decorous  to  the  last  degree.
The  most  interesting  entry  is  the  following :  ''  In
1800,  May  9,  [my  son]  John  was  born,  one  hundred
years  after  his  great-grandfather;  nothing  else
very  uncommon " ;  and  he  adds,  in  tranquil  ig-
norance of  the  future :  "  We  lived  in  peace  with  all
mankind,  so  far  as  I  know."  How  far  the  parent
would  have  approved  the  stormy  career  of  the  son
is  now  matter  of  inference  only;  but  we  have  it
in  Owen  Brown's  own  declaration  that  he  was  one
of  that  early  school  of  abolitionists  whom  Hopkins
and  Edwards  enlightened ;  and  he  apparently  took
part  in  the  forcible  rescue  of  some  slaves  claimed
by  a  Virginia  clergyman  in  Connecticut  in  1798,


cMf*^^ u^-^nJyi


soon  after  that  state  had  abolished  slavery.  The
continuous  anti-slavery  devotion  of  the  whole  fam-
ily, for  three  generations,  was  a  thing  almost  un-
exampled, Mr.  Sanborn  has  preserved  verbatim
a  most  quaint  and  graphic  fragment  of  autobiog-
raphy, written  by  John  Brown,  of  Osawatomie,  in
1859.  In  this  he  records  with  the  utmost  frank-
ness his  boyish  pursuits  and  transgressions;  how
at  the  age  of  four  he  stole  three  brass  pins,  and
at  the  age  of  five  removed  with  his  parents  to
Ohio,  where  he  grew  familiar  with  the  Indians,
who  were  then  dwelling  all  around  them.  He  says
of  himself:  "John  was  never  quarrelsome;  but
was  exceedingly  fond  of  the  harshest  and  roughest
kind  of  plays;  and  could  never  get  enough  [of]
them.  Indeed,  when  for  a  short  time  he  was
sometimes  sent  to  school,  the  opportunity  it  oifered
to  wrestle  and  snow-ball  and  run  and  jump  and
knock  off  old  seedy  wool  hats,  offered  to  him
almost  the  only  compensation  for  the  confinement
and  restraint  of  school."  In  this  boyish  combat-
iveness,  without  personal  quarrelsomeness,  we  see
the  quality  of  the  future  man.  He  further  records
that  in  boyhood  his  great  delight  was  in  going  on
responsible  expeditions,  and  by  the  age  of  twelve
he  was  often  sent  a  hundred  miles  into  the  wilder-
ness with  cattle.  This  adventurous  spirit  took  no
military  direction  ;  he  was  disgusted  with  what  he
heard  of  the  war  of  1812,  and  for  many  years  used
to  be  fined  for  refusing  to  do  militia  duty.  He
was  very  fond  of  reading,  and  familiar  with  every
portion  of  the  Bible;  but  he  never  danced,  and
never  knew  one  card  from  another.  Staying  in  a
house  where  there  was  a  slave-boy  almost  his  own
age.  and  seeing  this  boy  ill-treated — even  beaten,
as  he  declares,  with  an  iron  fire-shovel — he  became,
in  his  own  words,  "  a  most  determined  abolition-
ist." and  was  led  "  to  declare,  or  swear,  eternal  war
with  slavery."  From  the  fifteenth  to  the  twentieth
years  of  his*  age  he  worked  as  a  farmer  and  currier,
chiefly  for  his  father,  and  for  most  of  the  time  as
foreman.  He  then  learned  surveying,  and  followed
that  for  a  while,  afterward  gratifying  his  early
love  for  animals  by  becoming  a  shepherd.  Mean-
while he  married,  as  he  says,  "  a  remarkably  plain,
but  neat,  industrious,  and  economical  girl,  of  ex-
cellent character,  earnest  piety,  and  good  prac-
tical common  sense,"  who  had',  he  asserts,  a  most
powerful  and  good  influence  over  him.  This  was
Dianthe  Lusk,  a  widow,  and  they  had  seven  chil-
dren. His  second  wife  was  Mary  Anne  Day,  by
whom  he  had  thirteen  children,  and  who  survived
him  twenty-five  years,  dying  in  San  Francisco  in
1884.  She  also  was  a  woman  of  strong  and  decided
character;  and  though  among  the  twenty  children
of  the  two  marriages  eight  died  in  early  childhood,
the  survivors  all  shared  the  strong  moral  convic-
tions of  their  father,  and  the  whole  family  habitu-
ally lived  a  life  of  great  self-denial  in  order  that
his  purposes  might  be  carried  out.

The  contest  for  Kansas  in  1855-'6  between  the
friends  of  freedom  and  those  of  slavery  was  un-
doubtedly, as  it  has  since  been  called,  the  skirmish-
line  of  the  civil  war.  It  was  there  made  evident—
what  an  anti-slaverv  leader  so  conspicuous  as
Joshua  R.  Giddings  had  utterly  refused  to  believe
—that  the  matter  was  coming  to  blows.  The  con-
dition of  affairs  was  never  better  stated  than  in  the
Charleston  "  Mercury  "  by  a  young  man  named
Warren  Wilkes,  who  had  commanded  for  a  time  a
band  of  so-called  southern  "settlers "in  Kansas.
He  wrote  in  the  spring  of  1856  :  "  If  the  south  se-
cures Kansas,  she  Avill  extend  slavery  into  all  terri-
tories soutli  of  the  fortieth  parallel  of  north  lati-
tude to  the  Rio  Grande ;  and  this,  of  course,  will


BROWN


BROWN


405


secure  for  her  pent-up  institution  of  slavery  an
ample  outlet,  and  restore  her  power  in  congress.
If  the  north  secures  Kansas,  the  power  of  the
south  in  congress  will  be  gradually  diminished,
and  the  slave  property  will  become  valueless.  All
depends  upon  the  action  of  the  present  moment."
Here  was  a  point  on  which  young  Wilkes  on  the
one  side,  and  John  Brown  on  the  other,  were  abso-
lutely agreed ;  and  each  went  to  work  in  his  own
way  to  save  Kansas  to  his  side  by  encouraging  im-
migration from  their  respective  regions.  We  can,
at  this  distance  of  time,  admit  that  this  was  with-
in the  right  of  each ;  but  the  free-state  men  went
almost  wholly  as  bona-fide  settlers,  while  num-
bers of  those  who  went  from  Missouri,  Virginia,
and  South  Carolina  viewed  the  enterprise  simply
as  a  military  foray,  without  intending  to  remain.
It  was  also  true  that  the  latter  class,  coming  from
communities  then  more  lawless,  w'ent  generally
armed ;  while  the  free-state  men  went  at  first  un-
armed, afterward  arming  themselves  reluctantly
and  by  degrees.  The  condition  of  lawlessness  that
ensued  was  undoubtedly  demoralizing  to  both
sides ;  it  was  to  a  great  extent  a  period  of  violence
and  plunder — civil  war  on  a  petty  scale ;  but  the
original  distinction  never  wholly  passed  away,  and
the  ultimate  character  of  the  community  was  for-
tunately shaped  and  controlled  by  the  free-state
settlers.  However  it  might  be  with  others,  for
John  Brown  the  Kansas  contest  was  deliberately
undertaken  as  a  part  of  the  great  war  against
slavery.  He  went  there  with  more  cautious  and
far-reaching  purposes  than  most  others,  and  he
carried  out  those  purposes  with  the  strength  of  a
natural  leader.  As  early  as  1834,  by  a  letter  still
in  existence,  he  had  communicated  to  his  brother
Frederick  his  purpose  to  make  active  war  upon
slavery,  the  plan  being  then  to  bring  together
some  "first-rate  abolitionist  families"  and  under-
take the  education  of  colored  youth.  "  If  once  the
Christians  of  the  free  states  would  set  to  work  in
earnest  teaching  the  blacks,  the  people  of  the  slave-
holding  states  would  find  themselves  constitu-
tionally driven  to  set  about  the  work  of  emanci-
pation immediately."  This  letter  was  written
when  he  was  postmaster  under  President  Jack-
son, at  Randolph,  Pa.,  and  was  officially  franked
by  Brown,  as  was  then  the  practice.  When  we
consider  what  were  Jackson's  views  as  to  anti-
slavery  agitation,  especially  through  the  mails,  it
is  curious  to  consider  what  a  firebrand  he  was  har-
boring in  one  of  his  own  post-offices.  It  appears
from  this  letter  and  other  testimony  that  Brown
at  one  time  solemnly  called  his  older  sons  together
and  pledged  them,  kneeling  in  prayer,  to  give  their
lives  to  anti-slavery  work.  It  must  be  remembered
that  Prudence  Crandall  had  been  arrested  and
sent  to  jail  in  Connecticut,  only  the  year  before,
for  doing,  in  a  small  way,  what'  Brown  now  pro-
posed to  do  systematically.  For  some  time  he  held
to  his  project  in  this  form,  removing  from  Penn-
sylvania to  Ohio  in  1835- '6,  and  from  Ohio  to
^lassachusetts  in  1846,  engaging  in  different  en-
terprises, usually  in  the  wool  business,  but  always
keeping  the  main  end  in  view.  For  instance,  in
1840  he  visited  western  Virginia  to  survey  land
belonging  to  Oberlin  college,  and  seems  to  have
had  some  plan  for  colonizing  colored  people  there.
At  last,  in  1846,  on  the  anniversary  of  West  India
emancipation,  Gerrit  Smith,  a  great  land-owner  in
New  York  state,  offered  to  give  a  hundred  thousand
acres  of  wild  land  in  northern  New  York  to  such
colored  families,  fugitive  slaves,  or  others  as  would
take  them  in  small  farms  and  clear  them.  It  was
a  terribly  hard  region  into  which  to  invite  those


children  of  the  south ;  six  months  of  winter  and
no  possibility  of  raising  either  wheat  or  Indian
corn.  Brown  convinced"  liiraself ,  nevertheless,  that
he  could  be  of  much  use  to  the  colored  settlers,
and  in  1848-'9  purchased  a  farm  from  Mr.  Smith
and  removed  the  younger  part  of  his  family  to
North  Elba,  which  was  their  home  until  his  death.
His  wife  and  young  children  lived  there  in  the
greatest  frugality,  voluntarily  practised  by  them
all  for  the  sake  of  helping  others.  He,  meanwhile,
often  absented  himself  on  anti-slavery  enterprises,
forming,  for  instance,  at  Springfield,  Mass.,  his
former  home,  a  "League  of  Gileadites,"  pledged
to  the  rescue  of  fugitive  slaves.  In  one  of  his
manuscript  addresses  to  this  body  he  lays  down
the  rule,  "  Stand  by  one  another  and  by  your
friends  while  a  drop  of  blood  remains;  and  be
hanged  if  you  must,  but  tell  no  tales  out  of
school."  This  was  nearly  nine  years  before  his
own  death  on  the  scaffold.

In  1854  five  of  Brown's  sons,  then  resident  in
Ohio,  made  their  arrangements  to  remove  to  Kan-
sas, regarding  it  as  a  desirable  home,  where  they
could  exert  an  influence  for  freedom ;  but  they
were  so  little  prepared  for  an  armed  struggle  that
they  had  among  them  only  two  small  shot-guns
and  a  revolver.  They  selected  claims  eight  or  ten
miles  from  Osawatomie,  and  their  father,  contrary
to  his  previous  intention,  joined  them  there  in  Oc-
tober, 1855.  In  March  of  that  year  the  first  elec-
tion for  a  territorial  constitution  had  taken  place.
Thousands  of  Missourians,  armed  with  rifles,  and
even  with  cannon,  had  poured  over  the  border,  and,
although  less  than  a  thousand  legal  votes  were
thrown  in  the  territory,  more  than  six  thousand
went  through  the  form  of  voting.  This  state  of
things  continued  through  that  year  and  the  next,
and  the  present  writer  saw  an  election  precisely
similar  in  the  town  of  Leavenworth,  in  the  autumn
of  1856.  Hostilities  w^ere  soon  brought  on  by  the
murder  and  unlawful  arrest  of  men  known  to  be
opposed  to  slavery.  The  Brown  family  were  mus-
tered in  as  Kansas  militia  by  the  free-state  party,
and  turned  out  to  defend  the  town  of  Lawrence
from  a  Missourian  invasion,  which  was  compro-
mised without  bloodshed.  A  few  months  later
Lawrence  was  attacked  and  pillaged.  Other  mur-
ders took  place,  and  a  so-called  grand  jury  indicted
many  free-state  men,  including  in  the  indictment
the  "Free  State  Hotel"  in  Lawrence.  Two  of
Brown's  sons  were  arrested  by  United  States  cav-
alry, which,  at  this  time.  Pierce  being  president,
acted  wholly  with  the  pro-slavery  party.  John
Brown,  Jr.,  the  oldest,  was  driven  on  foot  at  the
head  of  a  cavalry  company,  at  a  trot,  for  nine  miles
to  Osawatomie,  his  arms  being  tied  behind  him.
This  state  of  things  must  be  fully  remembered  in
connection  with  the  so-called  "  Pottawatomie  mas-
sacre," which  furnishes,  in  the  opinion  of  both,
friends  and  foes,  the  most  questionable  incident  in
Brown's  career.  This  occurrence  took  place  on  25
May,  1856,  and  consisted  in  the  deliberate  assassi-
nation of  five  representatives  of  the  pro-slavery
party  at  night,  they  being  called  from  their  beds
for  the  purpose.  It  was  done  in  avowed  retribu-
tion for  the  assassination  of  five  free-state  men,
and  was  intended  to  echo  far  beyond  Kansas,  as  it
did,  and  to  announce  to  the  slave-holding  com-
munity that  blood  for  blood  would  henceforth  be.
exacted  in  case  of  any  further  invasion  of  rights.
Lt  undoubtedly  had  that  effect,  and  though  some
even  in  Kansas  regarded  it  with  disapproval,  it  is
certain  that  leading  citizens  of  the  territory,  such
I  as  Governor  Robinson,  themselves  justified  it  at
I  the  time. Robinson  wrote,  as  late  as  February,


406


BROWN


BROWN


1878 :  "  I  never  had  much  doubt  that  Capt.  Brown
was  the  author  of  the  blow  at  Pottawatomie,  for
the  reason  that  he  was  the  only  man  who  compre-
hended the  situation,  and  saw  the  absolute  neces-
sity of  some  such  blow,  and  had  the  nerve  to  strike
it."  Brown  himself  said,  a  few  years  later:  "I
knew  all  good  men  who  loved  freedom,  when  they
became  better  acquainted  with  the  circumstances
of  the  case,  would  approve  of  it."  It  is,  neverthe-
less, probable  that  the  public  mind  will  be  perma-
nently divided  in  judgment  upon  this  act ;  just  as
there  is  still  room,  after  centuries  have  passed,  for
two  opinions  as  to  the  execution  of  Charles  1.  or
the  banishment  of  Roger  Williams.  Much,  of
course,  turns  upon  the  actual  character  of  the  five
men  put  to  death — men  whom  the  student  will  find
painted  in  the  darkest  colors  in  Mr.  Sanborn's  life
of  John  Brown,  and  in  nmch  milder  hues  in  Mr.
Spring's  "  History  of  Kansas."  The  successive
phases  of  sentiment  on  the  whole  subject  may  be
partly  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  more  pacific
Kansas  leaders,  such  as  Robinson  and  Pomeroy,
have  happened  to  outlive  the  fighting  men,  such  as
Brown,  Lane,  and  Montgomery ;  so  that  there  is  a
little  disposition  just  now  to  underrate  the  services
of  the  combatants  and  overrate  those  of  the  non-
combatants.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  was  in  the
territory  at  the  time  no  noticeable  difference  of
opinion  between  those  two  classes ;  and  it  is  quite
certain  that  slavery  would  have  triumphed  over
all  legal  and  legislative  skill  had  not  the  sword
been  thrown  into  the  balance,  even  in  a  small
way.  The  largest  affairs  in  which  Brown  and  his
sons  took  part,  "  Black  Jack  "  and  "  Osawatomie,"
for  instance,  seem  trifling  amid  the  vast  encoun-
ters of  the  civil  war ;  but  these  petty  skirmishes,
nevertheless,  began  that  great  conflict.

The  purpose  that  finally  took  John  Brown  to
Virginia  had  doubtless  been  many  years  in  his
mind,  dating  back,  indeed,  to  the  time  when  he  was
a  surveyor  in  the  mountains  of  that  state,  in  early
life.  Bishop  Meade  says,  in  his  "  Old  Churches
and  Ministers  of  Virginia,"  that  he  wrote  the  book
in  view  of  a  range  of  mountains  which  Washing-
ton had  selected  as  the  final  stronghold  of  his  revo-
lutionary army,  should  he  be  defeated  in  the  con-
test with  England ;  and  it  was  these  same  moun-
tains which  John  Brown  regarded  as  having  been
designed  by  the  Almighty,  from  all  eternity,  as  a
refuge  for  fugitive  slaves. His  plan  for  his  enter-

Srise  varied  greatly  in  successive  years,  and  no
oubt  bore  marks  of  the  over-excited  condition  of
his  mind ;  but  as  he  ordinarily  told  it  to  the  few
with  whom  he  had  consulted  outside  of  his  own
band,  there  was  nothing  incoherent  or  impractica-
ble about  it ;  it  was  simply  the  establishment  on
slave  soil  of  a  defensible  station  for  fugitive  slaves,
within  the  reach  of  the  Pennsylvania  border,  so
that  bodies  of  slaves  could  hold  their  own  for  a
time  against  a  superior  force,  and  could  be  trans-
ferred, if  necessary,  through  the  free  states  to
Canada.  Those  who  furnished  him  with  arms  and
money  at  the  north  did  so  from  personal  faith  in
him,  and  from  a  common  zeal  for  his  objects,  with-
out asking  to  know  details.  He  had  stated  his
general  plan  to  Douglass  and  others  in  1847,  and
in  1857  had  established  at  Tabor,  in  Iowa,  a  town
peculiarly  friendly  to  the  free-state  men  during
the  Kansas  troubles,  a  sort  of  school  of  mili-
tary drill  under  the  direction  of  a  Scottish
adventurer,  Hugh  Forbes,  who  attempted  to  be-
tray him.  He  afterward  had  a  similar  school  at
Springfield,  Iowa,  and  meanwhile  negotiated  with
his  eastern  friends  for  funds.  He  had  already  in
his  hands  two  hundred  rifles  from  the  national


Kansas  committee ;  and  although  these  were  really
the  property  of  George  L.  Stearns,  of  Medforcl,
Mass.,  representing  a  small  part  of  the  $10,000
which  that  gentleman  had  given  to  make  Kansas
free,  yet  this  was  enough  to  hamper  in  some  de-
gree the  action  of  his  Boston  allies.  Their  posi-
tion was  also  embarrassed  by  many  curious,  ram-
bling letters  from  his  drill-master,  Forbes,  written
to  members  of  congress  and  others,  and  disclosing
what  little  he  knew  of  the  plans.  This  led  the
eastern  allies  to  insist — quite  unnecessarily,  as  it
seemed  to  one  or  two  of  them — on  a  postponement
for  a  year  of  the  whole  enterprise.  On  3  June,
1858,  Brown  left  Boston,  with  $500  in  gold  and
with  liberty  to  keep  the  Kansas  rifles.  Most  of
his  friends  in  the  eastern  states  knew  nothing
more  of  his  movements  until  it  was  announced
that  he  had  taken  possession  of  the  U.  S.  arsenal
at  Harper's  Ferry,  Va.  A  few,  however,  were
aware  that  he  was  about  to  enter  on  the  execution
of  his  plans  somewhere,  though  they  did  not  know
precisely  where.  Late  in  June,  1859,  Brown  and
several  of  his  men  appeared  in  the  vicinity  of  Har-
per's B^erry,  and  soon  afterward  hired  a  small  farm,
which  they  occupied.  Then  his  daughter  Anne,  a
girl  of  fifteen,  together  with  his  daughter-in-law,
wife  of  Oliver  Brown,  appeared  upon  the  scene  and
kept  house  for  them.  There  they  lived  for  many
weeks,  unsuspected  by  their  neighbors,  and  gradu-
ally receiving  from  Ohio  their  boxes  of  rifles  and
pistols,  besides  a  thousand  pikes  from  Connecticut.
In  August  he  was  visited  by  Frederick  Douglass,  to
whom  he  disclosed  his  plan  of  an  attack  on  Har-
per's Ferry,  which  Douglass  opposed,  thinking  it
would  not  really  be  favorable  to  his  ultimate  ob-
ject of  reaching  the  slaves.  But  he  persevered,
and  finally  began  his  operations  with  twenty-two
men,  besides  himself.  Six  of  these  were  colored ;
and  it  may  be  added  that  only  six  of  the  whole
party  escaped  alive,  and  only  one  of  these  is  now
(September,  1886)  living — Owen  Brown.

On  Sunday  evening,  16  Oct.,  1859,  Brown  mus-
tered eighteen  of  his  men — the  rest  having  been
assigned  to  other  duties — saying:  "Men,  get  on
your  arms ;  we  will  proceed  to  the  Ferry."  It  was
a  cold,  dark  night,  ending  in  rain.  At  half-past
ten  they  reached  the  armory-gate  and  broke  it  in
with  a  crow-bar,  easily  overpowering  the  few  watch-
men on  duty.  Before  midnight  the  village  was
quietly  patrolled  by  Brown's  men,  without  firing
a  gun,  and  six  men  had  been  sent  to  bring  in  cer-
tain neighboring  planters,  with  their  slaves.  He
had  taken  several  leading  citizens  prisoners,  as
hostages,  but  had  allowed  a  railway  train  to  go
through  northward,  which  of  course  carried  the
news.  The  citizens  of  the  town  gradually  armed
themselves,  and  some  shots  were  exchanged,  kill-
ing several  men  ;  and  before  night  Brown,  who
might  easily  have  escaped,  was  hopelessly  hemmed
in.  Col.  Robert  E.  Lee,  afterward  well  known  m
history,  arrived  from  Washington  at  evening  with  a
company  of  U.  S.  marines,  and  all  was  practically
over.  Brown  and  his  men,  now  reduced  to  six,
were  barricaded  in  a  little  building  called  the  en-
gine-house, and  were  shot  down  one  by  one,  tnou-
sands  of  bullets,  according  to  a  Virginia  witness,
having  been  imbedded  in  the  walls.  Brown  con-
stantly returned  the  fire,  refusing  to  surrenaer:
but  when  some  of  his  men  aimed  at  passers-b)
who  had  taken  no  part  in  the  matter,  he  would
stop  them,  according  to  the  same  Virginia  witness,
Capt.  Dangerfield,  saying :  "  Don't  shoot !  that  man  ,
is  unarmed."  Col.  Washington,  another  Virginia  »
witness,  has  testified  to  the  extraordinary  coolness
with  which  Brown  felt  the  pulse  of  his  dying  son,


BROWN


BROWN


407


while  holding  his  own  rifle  with  the  other  hand,
and  encouraging  his  men  to  be  firm.  All  this
time  he  was  not  recognized,  until  Lieut.  J.  E.  B.
Stuart,  who  had  known  him  in  Kansas,  called  him
by  his  name.  When  he  was  finally  captured,  his
two  sons  were  dead,  and  he  himself  was  supposed
to  be  dying.

No  one  will  ever  be  able  exactly  to  understand
that  mood  of  John  Brown's  mind  which  induced
him  to  remain  in  Harper's  Ferry  to  certain  death.
His  reason  for  taking  possession  of  the  town  and
arsenal  was  undoubtedly  a  desire  to  alarm  the
country  at  large,  and  not  merely  secure  arms,  but
attract  recruits  to  his  side,  after  he  should  have
withdrawn.  Why  did  he  remain  ?  Those  who  es-
caped from  the  terrible  disaster  could  not  answer.
Brown  himself  is  reported  as  saying  that  it  was
preordained ;  that  if  he  had  once  escaped,  he  knew
the  Virginia  mountains  too  well  to  be  captured ;
but  that  he  for  the  first  time  lost  command  of
himself  and  was  punished  for  it.  Gov.  Wise,  of
Virginia,  with  several  hundred  men,  reached  Plar-

Eer's  Perry  by  the  noon  train  of  18  Oct.,  and  Brown
eld  conversations,  which  have  been  fully  reported,
with  him  and  others.  Gov.  Wise  said  of  him  :
"  They  are  mistaken  who  take  Brown  to  be  a  mad-
man. He  is  a  bundle  of  the  best  nerves  I  ever
saw;  cut  and  thrust  and  bleeding  and  in  bonds.
He  is  a  man  of  clear  head,  of  courage,  fortitude,
and  simple  ingenuousness.  He  is  cool,  collected,
indomitable  ;  and  it  is  but  just  to  him  to  say  that
he  was  humane  to  his  prisoners,  and  he  inspired
me  with  great  trust  in  his  integrity  as  a  man  of
truth."  This  opinion,  coming  from  the  man  whose
immediate  duty  it  was  to  see  him  tried  and  exe-
cuted as  a  felon,  may  be  regarded  as  a  final  and
trustworthy  estimate.

John  Brown  was  tried  before  a  Virginia  court,
legal  counsel  going  to  him  from  Massachusetts.
All  thought  of  a  rescue  was  precluded  by  strong
messages  of  prohibition  sent  by  him.  The  pro-
posal to  send  his  wife  to  him,  this  being  planned
partly  in  the  hope  that  she  might  shake  his  deter-
mination, was  also  refused,  and  she  did  not  see
him  until  after  his  trial.  He  was  sentenced  to
death  by  hanging,  and  this  sentence  was  executed
2  Dec.,  1859.  On  the  day  of  his  death  he  handed
to  one  of  his  guards  a  paper  on  which  he  had  writ-
ten this  sentence :  "Charlestown,  Va.,  Dec.  2,  1859.
I,  John  Brown,  am  now  quite  certain  that  the
crimes  of  this  guilty  land  will  never  be  purged
away  but  with  blood.  I  had,  as  I  now  think,  vain-
ly flattered  myself  that  without  very  much  blood-
shed it  might  be  done."  Within  eighteen  months
this  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  and  many  a  northern
regiment,  as  it  marched  to  the  seat  of  war,  sang
that  which  will  always  remain,  more  than  any
other,  the  war-song  of  the  great  conflict :
"  John  Brown's  body  lies  a-mouldering  in  the
grave,
But  his  soul  is  marching  on."
His  bearing  on  the  scaffold,  under  exceptionally
trying  circumstances,  evinced  wonderful  fortitude.
After  the  sheriff  had  told  him  that  all  was  ready,
and  had  adjusted  the  rope  and  the  cap,  ten  or  fif-
teen minutes  passed,  while  the  military  escort
formed  a  hollow  square.  During  this  painfully
long  interval,  John  Brown,  blindfolded,  stood
alone  erect,  like  a  statue  unsupported.  An  eye-
witness who  was  very  near  him  could  not  detect  a
tremor.  A  further  delay  occurred  while  the  sheriff
descended  the  steps  of  the  scaffold,  but  Brown
never  wavered,  and  died  apparently  with  muscles
and  nerves  still  subject  to  his  iron  will.  His  ca-
reer is  remarkable  for  its  dramatic  quality,  for  the


important  part  he  played  in  events  preliminary  to
the  great  civil  war,  and  for  the  strong  and  heroic
traits  shown  in  his  life  and  death,  lie  belonged
to  a  class  of  men  whose  permanent  fame  is  out  of
all  proportion  to  their  official  importance  or  coii-
temporary  following;  and  indeed  he  represents  a
type  more  akin  to  that  seen  among  the  Scottish
covenanters  of  two  centuries  ago  than  to  anything
familiar  in  our  own  days.  With  John  Brown  were
executed  Copeland,  Green,  Cook,  and  Coppoc,  of
his  company.  Stephens  and  Hazlett  were  put  to
death  in  the  same  way  later.  An  effort  for  their
rescue,  organized  in  Boston,  with  men  brought
mainly  from  Kansas,  under  Capt.  Montgomery  as
leader,  proved  abortive.

In  regard  to  the  bearing  of  John  Brown's  enter-
prise upon  subsequent  history,  it  is  enough  if  we
recall  the  fact  that  a  select  committee  of  the  U.  S.
senate  investigated  the  whole  affair,  and  the  ma-
jority, consisting  of  John  M.  Mason,  Jefferson
Davis,  and  Graham  N.  Fitch,  submitted  a  report
in  which  occurs  the  following  passage :  "  The  in-
vasion (to  call  it  so)  by  Brown  and  his  followers
at  Harper's  Ferry  was  in  no  sense  of  that  char-
acter. It  was  simply  the  act  of  lawless  ruffians,
under  the  sanction  of  no  public  or  political  au-
thority— distinguishable  only  from  ordinary  felo-
nies by  the  ulterior  ends  in  contemplation  by  them,
and  by  the  fact  that  the  money  to  maintain  the
expedition,  and  the  large  armament  they  brought
with  them,  had  been  contributed  and  furnished
by  the  citizens  of  other  states  of  the  union,  under
circumstances  that  must  continue  to  jeopard  the
safety  and  peace  of  the  southern  states,  and  against
which  congress  has  no  power  to  legislate.  If  the
several  states,  whether  from  motives  of  policy  or
a  desire  to  preserve  the  peace  of  the  union,  if  not
from  fraternal  feeling,  do  not  hold  it  incumbent
on  them,  after  the  experience  of  the  country,  to
guard  in  future  by  appropriate  legislation  against
occurrences  similar  to  the  one  here  inquired  into,
the  committee  can  find  no  guarantee  elsewhere
for  the  security  of  peace  between  the  states  of  the
union."  It  is  a  sufficient  commentary  on  the  im-
plied threat  with  which  this  report  concludes,  to
point  out  that  two  of  its  three  signers,  within  the
year  following,  became  leaders  of  the  movement
for  a  forcible  division  of  the  union.  In  view  of
this  fact,  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  enter-
prise of  John  Brown  was  an  important  link  in  the
chain  of  historical  events.  The  life  of  Capt.  Brown
has  been  at  least  three  times  written — by  James
Redpath,  by  Richard  D.  Webb,  of  Dublin,  and  by
Frank  B.  Sanborn.  The  last  named  is  the  fullest
work,  and  has  the  approval  of  John  Brown's  fami-
ly ;  it  is  the  result  of  much  personal  research,  and
is,  with  some  defects  of  arrangement,  a  mine  of
information  in  regard  to  one  of  the  most  remark-
able men  of  his  time.

BROWN,  John  B.,  politician,  b.  in  Richfield,
N.  Y.,  16  July,  1807 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  9
Dec,  1867.  In  1849  he  removed  to  Virginia,  where
he  became  prominent  in  politics  in  that  state.  In
1856  he  was  one  of  the  electors  for  Fremont,  and
in  1860  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  convention,
where  Lincoln  was  nominated.  On  his  return  to
Virginia  he  was  thrown  into  prison  on  the  charge
of  circulating  incendiary  documents.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  the  confederate  authorities
offered  $1,000  for  his  apprehension.  He  subse-
quently received  an  appointment  in  Washington.

BROWN,  John  Calvin,  soldier,  b.  in  Giles  co.,
Tenn.,  6  Jan.,  1827;  d.  at  Red  Boiling  Springs,
Tenn.,  17  Aug..  18B9.  He  was  graduated  at  Jackson
college,  Tenn.,  in  1846. He  entered  the  military


408


BROWN


BROWN


service  of  the  confederate  states  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war,  and  was  successively  promoted  to
colonel,  brigadier-general,  and  major-general.  Left
nearly  penniless  by  the  war,  he  found  employment
as  a  railroad  surveyor  at  a  small  salary,  but  proved
so  efficient  a  manager  that  he  was  made  president
of  the  Nashville  railroad.  After  constructing  sev-
eral small  lines  in  Tennessee,  he  entered  the  ser-
vice of  the  Texas  Pacific  railroad  and  had  charge  of
it  during  its  extension  westward  to  the  Rio  Grande
and  eastward  to  New  Orleans.  Later  he  was  ap-
pointed receiver  of  the  entire  property.  He  was
president  of  the  constitutional  convention  of  Ten-
nessee, and  was  twice  governor  of  the  state — in
1870  and  1875.  He  travelled  extensively  in  Europe,
Asia,  Africa,  and  North  America. — His  brother,
Neil  S.,  d.  in  Feb..  1886,  was  governor  of  Tennes-
see in  1847  and  1849,  and  was  U.  S.  minister  to
Russia  under  Taylor's  administration.

BROWN,  John  George,  artist,  b.  in  Durham,
England,  11  Nov.,  1881.  He  studied  in  Newcastle-
on-Tyne  and  in  the  royal  Scottish  academy,  where
he  received  a  medal  in  the  antique  class  in  1858.
During  the  same  year  he  came  to  the  United  States
and  studied  in  the  National  Academy  of  Design  in
New  York.  He  has  received  medals  in  Boston  and
in  San  Francisco.  In  1863  he  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  Academy,  and  in  1866  was
among  the  original  members  of  the  Water-Color  So-
ciety, serving  during  several  years  as  its  vice-presi-
dent. He  was  actively  interested  in  the  "  Artists'
Fund,"  and  filled  a  similar  place  in  that  organiza-
tion. Mr.  Brown  has  made  a  specialty  of  Ameri-
can subjects.  Among  his  best-known  works  are
'♦  His  First  Cigar,"  "  Curling  in  Central  Park  "
(1876) ;  "  The  Passing  Show  "  (1877) ;  "  The  Dress
Parade  "  ;  "  The  Three  (Scape)  Graces  " ;  "  The
'Longshoreman's  Noon"  (1880);  "A  Merry  Air
and  a  Sad  Heart"  (1880);  "The  Thrilling  Mo-
ment "  (1881) ;  "  The  Old  Folks  at  Home  "  (1882) ;
and"A  Jolly  Lot  "(1885).

BROWN,  John  Henry  Hobart,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  New  York  city,  1  Jan.,  1881 ;  d.  in  Fond  du
Lac,  Wis.,  2  May,  1888.  He  was  graduated  at  tlie
general  theological  seminary.  New  York,  in  1854,
and  was  ordained  priest,  1  Dec,  1855.  He  be-
came assistant  minister  in  Grace  church,  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  in  1854,  and  soon  afterward  rector  of  a  new
church  organized  by  him  in  that  city.  In  1856  he
assumed  the  rectorship  of  the  church  of  the  Evan-
gelists, New  York,  and  in  1863  that  of  St.  John's
church,  Cohoes,  N.  Y.  He  was  secretary  of  the
convention  of  Albany  in  1868,  and  archdeacon  of
the  Albany  convocation  in  1870.  He  was  chosen
to  be  the  first  bishop  of  the  diocese  of  Fond  du
Lac,  Wis.,  and  was  consecrated  in  Cohoes,  15  Dec,
1875.  Bishop  Brown  published  a  number  of  ser-
mons, addresses,  etc

BROWN,  John  Newton,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
London,  Conn.,  29  June,  1803  ;  d.  in  Germantown,
Pa.,  15  May,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Ham-
ilton Literary  and  Theological  Institution  (now
Madison  University),  Hamilton,  N.  Y,,  in  1823.  For
a  year  he  preached  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  then  be-
came pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  after  which  he  had  charge  of  churches
in  Maiden,  Mass.,  and  in  Exeter,  N.  H.  In  1888
he  removed  to  Boston,  where  he  edited  the  "  Ency-
clopaedia of  Religious  Knowledge "  (Brattleboro,
1835),  which  was  republished  in  England.  From
1838  till  1845  he  was  professor  of  theology  and  ec-
clesiastical history  in  the  New  Hampton  Theologi-
cal Institution,  N.  H. ;  but  the  failure  of  his  health
compelled  him  to  go  south.  He  was  pastor  of  a
church  in  Lexington,  Va.,  from  1845  till  1849,  and


was  subsequently  editorial  secretary  of  the  Ameri-
can Baptist  Publication  Society  and  editor  of  the
"Christian  Chronicle"  and  the  "National  Bap-
tist." The  remainder  of  his  life  was  spent  in  the
service  of  this  society,  for  which  he  edited  the
works  of  Bunyan  and  Fuller  and  Fleetwood's
"  Life  of  Christ."  The  Baptist  articles  of  faith
called  the  "  New  Hampshire  Confession  "  were  pre-
pared by  him  and  revised  in  1852.  One  of  his  best
efforts  was  a  translation  of  the  "  Dies  Irae,"  and
he  published  " Emily  and  other  Poems"  (1840).

BROWN,  John  Porter,  oriental  scholar,  b.  in
Chillicothe,  Ohio,  17  Aug.,  1814;  d.  in  Constanti-
nople, Turkey,  28  April,  1872.  After  serving  for
some  years  in  the  navy  as  a  midshipman,  in  1832
he  accompanied  his  uncle,  David  Porter,  to  Con-
stantinople, where  the  latter  has  been  sent  as  first
American  minister  to  the  porte.  He  applied  him-
self at  once  to  the  study  of  the  oriental  languages
and  literature,  and  with  such  success  that  for  many
years  he  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  accom-
plished orientalists  in  Turkey.  In  1838  he  was
appointed  assistant  dragoman,  and  three  years
later  was  promoted  to  be  first  dragoman.  From
1858  till  his  death  he  was  secretary  of  legation.
During  his  forty  years  of  service  he  represented
the  United  States  nine  times  as  charge  d'affaires.
He  was  acting  in  that  capacity  when  the  Hunga-
rian patriot,  Martin  Koszta,  after  giving  notice  of
his  intended  citizenship  to  the  American  consul,
was  seized  by  the  Austrian  authorities  at  Smyrna
and  sent  on  board  of  one  of  their  frigates.  Koszta  j
appealed  to  the  American  legation  for  protection,
and  Mr.  Brown's  simple  instructions  to  Capt.  In-
graham,  of  the  U.  S.  corvette  "Dale,"  were,  "Take
him."  On  receipt  of  this  order  the  Austrian  cap-
tain was  given  three  hours  to  deliver  up  the  pris-
oner, and  meanwhile  the  American  vessel  prepared
for  action.  Half  an  hour  before  the  time  expired
Koszta  was  handed  over  to  the  French  consul,  who
delivered  him  to  Capt.  Ingraham.  The  day  fol-
lowing, two  Austrian  line-of-battle  ships  entered
the  bay;  but  the  American  corvette  had  sailed.
For  hfs  conduct  on  this  occasion  Mr.  Brown  re-
ceived a  service  of  plate  from  his  American  ad-
mirers. He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  Ameri-
can newspapers  and  magazines,  and  wrote  "  Der-
vishes, or  Oriental  Spiritualism "  (Philadelphia,
1868),  and  also  translated  Ahmed  Ben  Hemden's
"Turkish  Evening  Entertainments"  (New  York,
1850),  and  Constantino's  "Ancient  and  Modern
Constantinople  "  (1868).

BROWN,  Joseph  Emerson,  statesman,  b.  in
Pickens  co.,  S.  C,  15  April,  1821.  When  fifteen
years  old  he  removed  with  his  father  to  Georgia,
and,  after  being  educated  at  Calhoun  academy,  S.
C,  taught  school  at  Canton,  Ga.,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  August,  1845.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  law-school  in  1846,  and  be-
gan practice  at  Canton,  Ga.,  was  elected  to  the  state
senate  in  1849,  chosen  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Pierce  ticket  in  1852,  and  in  1855  became  judge  of
the  superior  courts  of  the  Blue  Ridge  circuit.  He
was  elected  governor  by  the  democrats  in  1857,
and  was  re-elected  by  increased  majorities  in  1859,
1861,  and  1863.  He  was  an  active  secessionist,
seizing  Forts  Pulaski  and  Jackson,  near  Savannah,
on  8  Jan.,  1861,  sixteen  days  before  his  state  re-
ceded, and  taking  possession  of  the  U.  S.  arsenal  at
Augusta,  five  days  after  the  passage  of  the  ordi-
nance. During  the  war  he  was  a  vigorous  sup-
porter of  the  confederate  government,  but  disputed
with  Mr.  Davis  the  constitutionality  of  the  con-
scription measures.  During  Sherman's  invasion
he  put into  the field an army  of 10,000  men,


BROWN


BROWN


409


made  up  of  state  officers,  youth,  aged  men,  and
others  usually  exempt  from  military  duty,  but  re-
fused to  send  them  out  of  the  state  when  requisi-
tion for  them  was  made  by  the  confederate  govern-
ment. In  October,  1864,  he  refused  Gen.  Sher-
man's request  for  a  conference,  denying  that  he  had
power  to  act  without  the  permission  of  the  legisla-
ture. On  his  release  from  the  prison,  where  he  had
been  confined  by  the  national  authorities  at  the
conclusion  of  the  war,  he  resigned  the  governor-
ship, and,  after  a  visit  to  Washington,  in  1806,
strongly  advised  his  state  to  accept  the  situation
and  comply  with  the  terms  of  reconstruction.
This  position  made  him  unpopular,  and  for  a  time
he  acted  with  the  republicans,  supporting  Gen.
Grant  in  1868,  and  being  the  defeated  republican
candidate  for  U.  S.  senator  in  the  same  year.  After
his  defeat  he  was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the
Georgia  supreme  court,  which  office'  he  resigned
in  December,  1870,  and  temporarily  left  public  life.
Since  that  time  he  has  been  president  of  the  West-
ern and  Atlantic  railroad  company,  and  of  several
other  large  corporations,  and  has  promoted  the  de-
velopment of  the  resources  of  his  state.  Since  1872
he  has  acted  with  the  democrats,  and  in  1880  was
chosen  U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by
the  resignation  of  Gen.  Gordon.  In  1884  he  was
re-elected,  with  but  a  single  opposing  vote,  for  the
term  ending  in  March,  1891.  After  his  election  in
1880  he  made  a  speech  before  the  assembly,  justi-
fying his  course  in  1806,  and  declaring  that  the  re-
sults of  the  war  must  be  accepted  as  final ;  that
the  sentiments  of  the  former  slave-holding  aristoc-
racy must  be  rejected ;  and  that  the  negroes  must
be  assured  absolute  civil  and  political  equality.
See  "  Life  and  Times  of  Joseph  E,  Brown,'  by  H.
Fielder  (Springfield,  Mass.,  1883).

BROWN,  Matthew,  educator,  b.  in  North-
umberland CO.,  Pa.,  in  1776;  d.  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,
29  July,  1853.  His  father,  who  was  of  Scotch-
Irish  extraction,  died  when  Matthew  was  two  years
old,  and  the  boy  was  adopted  by  his  uncle.  William
Brown,  who  lived  near  Harrisburg,  Pa.  He  was
graduated  at  Dickinson  college,  Carlisle,  Pa,,  in
1794,  and  taught  a  classical  school  in  Northumber-
land CO.,  where  he  became  acquainted  with  Dr.
Joseph  Priestley  and  other  well-known  men.  He
began  the  study  of  divinity  in  1790,  and  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  Carlisle  presbytery  on  3
Oct.,  1799.  In  1801  he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the
united  congregations  of  Mifflin  and  Lost  Creek,
and  in  1805  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  at  Washington,  Pa.,  and  principal  of  the
academy  there.  When  the  academy  was  chartered
as  Washington  college,  in  1800,  Mr.  Brown  was
made  its  first  president.  He  resigned  in  1810,  still
retaining  his  pastorate.  After  refusing  the  presi-
dency of  Centre  college,  Danville,  Ky.,  he  accepted,
in  1822,  that  of  Jefferson  college,  Cannonsburg,
Pa.  For  several  years  he  also  assisted  Dr.  McMil-
lan, the  pastor  at  "Chartiers,  Pa.,  but,  on  the  organi-
zation of  a  church  at  Cannonsburg,  he  took  charge
of  it  until  failing  health  forced  him  to  sever  his
connection  with  the  college  in  1845.  From  this
time  until  his  death,  however,  he  preached  fre-
quently. Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.
in  1823,  and  he  received  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Ham-
ilton in  1835,  and  from  Jefferson  in  1845.  Dr.
Brown  published  a  "  Memoir  of  0.  Jennings,  D.  D."
(1832),  and  "  Life  of  Rev.  John  McMillan,  D.  D.,"
besides  numerous  addresses  and  sermons.

BROWN,  Moses,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Newbury-
port,  Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1742;  d.  at  sea,  1  Jan.,  1804.
During  the  revolutionary  war  he  commanded  some
of  the  largest  privateers  of  New  England,  and  was


engaged  in  several  battles.  He  is  probablv  the
Capt.  Brown  that  commanded  the  "  Diligent ''  dur-
ing the  engagements  off  Penobscot  in  July  and
August,  1779,  and  later  in  the  same  year  captured
four  vessels  under  Capt.  Gardiner,  while  he  com-
manded the  "  Intrepid."  On  the  establishment  of
the  U.  S.  navy,  the  merchants  of  Newburyport
built  the  "Merrimack,"  by  subscription,  for  the
government,  and  Capt.  Brown  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  her,  his  commission  dating  from  15  Sept.,
1798.  This  vessel,  under  his  captaincy,  was  one  of
the  squadron  commanded  by  Corns.  J.  Barry  and
S.  Decatur,  in  1798-'9,  and  1800.  The  capture  of
the  French  vessels  "  Le  Phenix,"  "  Le  Magicien,"
•'  Le  Bonaparte,"  and  "  Le  Brillante,"  during  1799
and  1801,  was  accomplished  by  him.  When  the
reduction  of  the  navy  took  place,  he  was  among
those  who  were  dismissed ;  but  he  continued  to  fol-
low the  sea  until  his  death.

BROWN,  Olympia,  lecturer,  b.  in  Prairie
Ronde,  Mich.,  5  Jan.,  1835.  She  went  to  Mount
Holyoke  seminary  and  to  Antioch  college,  Yellow
Springs,  Ohio,  where  she  was  graduated  in  1800.
Entering  the  Universalist  theological  school  at
Canton,  N.  Y.,  she  was  graduated  and  ordained  in
June,  1803,  and  in  February,  1864,  was  installed
as  pastor  of  a  church  in  Weymouth,  Mass.  In
1809  she  became  pastor  of  a  church  in  Bridge-
port, Conn.,  and  afterward  married  Henry  Willis.
She  has  since  been  pastor  of  churches  in  the  west,
lectures  frequently,  and  is  now  (1887)  president  of
the  Wisconsin  woman  suffrage  association.

BROWN,  Peter,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Scotland  in  1784 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  30  June,  1803.
During  his  earlier  years  he  was  engaged  in  busi-
ness in  Edinburgh,  and  took  an  active  part  in  poli-
tics, on  the  liberal  side,  at  the  time  of  the  borough-
reform  igitation.  He  emigrated  with  his  family  to
the  United  States  in  1838,  and  for  the  five  years
following  resided  in  New  York.  During  a  part  of
that  period  he  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the
"  Albion,"  and  he  afterward  became  editor  of  the
"  British  Colonist."  In  1843  Mr.  Brown  removed
to  Toronto,  where* he  established  the  ''Banner,"  an
organ  of  liberal  Presbyterian  views.  This  journal
was  edited  with  great  ability  for  many  years,  and,
besides  vigorously  supporting  the  claims  of  the
Free  Church  party  in  the  Presbyterian  denomina-
tion, in  opposition  to  the  claims  of  the  Established
Church  in  the  same  body,  also  gave  its  support  to
the  cause  of  political  reform.  From  1844  till  1849
Mr.  Brown  also  contributed  largely  to  the  columns
of  the  "  Globe,"  which  had  been  established  by  his
son  George.  While  in  New  York  he  published
"The  Fame  and  Glory  of  England  Vindicated"
(1842),  which  was  intended  as  a  rejoinder  to
Charles  Edwards  Lester's  "  Glory  and  Shame  of
England." — His  son,  (Treorg:e,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  29  Nov.,  1818 ;  d.  in  To-
ronto, 9  May,  1880,  was  educated  at  the  high  school
and  the  southern  academy  of  his  native  city.  After
finishing  his  studies  he  assisted  his  father  in  busi-
ness, and  emigrated  with  him  to  the  United  States.
In  New  York  George  was  for  a  time  his  father's
publisher  and  general  manager  in  his  newspaper
enterprise.  In  1843  the  former  visited  Canada,
and,  being  promised  the  support  of  influential  lib-
erals, established  the  "Globe"  newspaper,  as  a
weekly,  in  Toronto,  the  first  issue  appearing  on  5
March,  1844.  Under  his  management  this  journal
became  a  great  success,  and  was  soon  issued  as  a
daily.  In  1804  he  founded  the  "  Canada  Farmer,"
a  journal  devoted  to  agricultural  interests,  and  he
subsequently  engaged  largely  in  stock-raising  at
his  model  Bow  Park  farm.  '  Mr.  Brown  first  en-


410


BROWN


BROWN


^^^r^,


-^^yn


tered  parliament  in  1852,  and  was  opposed  during
his  candidature  by  the  well-known  leader  of  the
rebellion  of  1837,  William  Lyon  Mackenzie,  who
had  returned  from  his  exile  two  years  before.  Mr.
Brown  soon  took  rank  as  a  powerful  speaker,  and
such  measures  of  reform  as  the  abolition  of  the
clergy  reserves,  state  churchism,  and  seigniorial
tenure,  always  found  in  him  an  able  advocate,

both  in  parlia-
ment, through  the
columns  of  his  pa-

f)er,  and  on  the
ecture  platform.
He  was  called  up-
on to  form  a  gov-
ernment by  Sir
Edmund  Head  on
2  Aug.,  1858,  and
the  Brown- Dori-
on  administration
came  into  exist-
ence as  the  result.
Before  it  was  pos-
sible for  the  mem-
bers of  his  admin-
istration to  be  re-
elected, the  house
of  assembly  passed
a  vote  of  want  of  confidence,  and  the  governor-
general  having  refused  to  grant  a  dissolution,  as
desired  by  Mr.  Brown,  he  and  his  colleagues  at  once
resigned,  after  holding  office  for  three  days.  On
30  June,  1864,  he  entered  the  coalition  government,
formed  for  the  purpose  of  securing  confederation,
being  leader  of  the  reform  section,  then  in  a  ma-
jority in  the  house,  as  John  A.  Macdonald  was
leader  of  the  conservatives  of  Ontario,  and  Mr.
Cartier  of  the  French  Canadian  conservatives.  In
the  session  of  1864  Mr.  Brown  had  obtained  a  se-
lect committee  to  inquire  into  and  report  upon
such  changes  in  the  constitution  as  would  satisfy
the  just  expectations  of  the  people  of  western
Canada.  The  committee  reported  in  favor  of  a
federal  system,  such  as  was  afterward  established
in  1869.  On  21  Dec,  1865,  he  resigned,  after  the
confederation  scheme  was  arranged,  though  the
imperial  act  was  not  passed,  owing  to  his  disappro-
val of  the  policy  of  the  government  relative  to  a
reciprocity  treaty  with  the  United  States.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Charlottetown  union  conference
in  1864,  and  of  that  at  Quebec  the  same  year,  and
of  the  confederate  council  of  British  North  Ameri-
can colonies,  for  the  negotiation  of  commercial
treaties,  which  sat  in  Quebec  in  September,  1865.
He  went  to  England,  as  a  delegate,  on  public  busi-
ness in  1865,  and  to  Washington  in  1874,  in  behalf
of  Canada  and  the  empire,  as  joint  plenipotentiary
with  Sir  Edward  Thornton,  to  negotiate  with  the
United  States  a  commercial  treaty.  In  1875  he
declined  the  lieutenant-governorship  of  Ontario,  as
he  had  also  declined  the  twice-offered  honor  of
knighthood.  He  was  called  to  the  senate  on  16
Dec,  1873,  from  which  time  he  did  not  actively
interfere  in  politics  except  through  the  columns  of
the  "Globe."  In  1862  he  visited  Scotland,  and
while  there  married  Annie,  the  daughter  of  Thom-
as Nelson,  the  well-known  Edinburgh  publisher.
On  25  March,  1880,  he  was  shot  in  the  leg  by  a  dis-
charged employee,  and  though  the  wound  was  not
regarded  as  dangerous  at  the  time,  he  died  from
its  effects  on  9  May  following.  Mr.  Brown's  tragic
death  was  deeply  regretted,  even  by  those  he  had  so
persistently  opposed  politically,  the  statue  erected  to
his  memory  in  Queen's  park,  Toronto,  which  was
unveiled  25  Nov.,  1884,  being  purchased  partly  by


their  contributions.  Though  Mr.  Brown  was  for
years  looked  upon  as  the  leader  of  the  Keforrn
party  in  Canada,  and  was  always  a  power  in  poli-
tics, "he  never  secured  an  enthusiastic  tollowing  in
parliament  or  the  steady  allegiance  of  his  col-
leagues in  office,  the  reason  probably  being  that  he
was  too  uncompromising  and  required  an  unhesi-
tating obedience,  which  his  political  associates
were  but  rarely  willing  to  concede.  In  1882  was
published  "  The  Life  and  Speeches  of  the  Hon.
George  Brown,"  by  Alexander  Mackenzie. — Johii
Gordon,  Canadian  journalist,  brother  of  George,
b.  in  Alloa,  Scotland,  16  Nov.,  1827,  was  educated
in  Edinburgh  and  New  York,  coming  to  the  latter
city  in  November,  1838.  In  1843  he  removed  to
Toronto,  and  in  1844  became  connected  with  the
"  Globe  "  newspaper.  Subsequently  he  edited  the
Quebec  "  Gazette "  for  about  a  year,  and  in
1851  became  actual  editor  of  the  "Globe,"  his
brother,  for  many  years  before  his  death,  devoting
himself  almost  exclusively  to  the  commercial  de-
partment of  the  paper,  and  to  political  matters
not  intimately  connected  therewith.  After  the
death  of  his  brother  his  formal  elevation  to  the
position  of  managing  editor  and  president  of  the
"  Globe  "  association  took  place.  A  difference  of
opinion  between  Mr.  Brown  and  the  majority  of
the  members  of  the  association  relative  to  the  en-
forced withdrawal  of  Alexander  Mackenzie  from
the  leadership  of  the  Liberal  party,  the  expediency
and  honorable  character  of  •  which  course  was
doubted  by  Mr.  Brown,  together  with  other  disa-
greements, led  to  his  leaving  the  "  Globe  "  in  1882.
In  May,  1883,  he  was  appointed  registrar  of  the
surrogate  court  of  Toronto.

BROWN,  Phoebe  Hinsdale,  poet,  b.  in  Ca-
naan, N.  Y.,  in  1783;  d.  in  Henry,  111.,  10  Oct.,
1861.  She  married  Timothy  H.  Brown.  In  1824
she  contributed  to  Dr.  Asahel  Nettleton's  "  Village
Hymns "  the  popular  lyric,  "  I  Love  to  steal
Awhile  Away,"  and  several  of  her  hymns  are  in
Cleveland's  "  Lyra  Sacra  Americana."  One  of  her
sons  became  a  missionary  in  Japan.

BROWN,  Rawdon,  English  antiquarian,  b,  in
1803;  died  in  Venice,  Italy,  25  Aug.,  1883.  He
spent  many  years  in  searching  the  Venetian  ar-
chives for  material  illustrating  English  history,
and  in  the  course  of  his  investigations  threw  some
light  on  early  American  history.  During  his
labors  he  sent'no  less  than  126  volumes  of  manu-
script copies  to  the  public  record  office.  Much  of
this  material  has  been  published  by  the  English
government  in  the  rolls  series,  under  the  title,
"Calendar  of  State  Papers  in  the  Archives  of
Venice." Six  volumes  have  been  issued  (1864-'86).

BROWN,  Richard,  Cherokee  chief,  b.  in  1773;
d.  in  Tennessee,  26  Jan.,  1818.  During  the  Creek
war  he  led  the  Cherokees,  under  Jackson,  with  the
rank  of  colonel,  and  was  present  at  every  battle,
being  severely  wounded  in  the  action  at  Horseshoe,
Ala.,  in  1814.  He  was  a  personal  friend  of  Gen.
Jackson,  and  was  regarded  by  his  countrymen  as  a
leader  both  in  war  and  peace.  At  the  time  of  his
death  he  was  one  of  a  delegation  sent  to  Washmg-
ton  respecting  a  treaty  with  the  United  States.

BROWN,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Northampton
CO.,  Pa.,  in  1745;  died  there,  26  Feb..  1823.  Jle
was  appointed  at  the  beginning  of  the  revol'uion
an  officer  in  the  Pennsvlvania  "  flying  camp,  was
made  prisoner  on  Long  Island,  and,  being  permittea
to  work  at  his  trade,  that  of  a  blacksmith,  distrib-
uted the  proceeds  of  his  wages  among  his  leljow-
prisoners.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-general  ot  tne  !
state  militia,  filled  several  civil  stations,  and  was  a
member  of  the  state  senate  for  some  time. In  1  <  Jo


BROWN


he  was  elected  to  congress  from  Pennsylvania  to
fill  a  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Samuel
Sitgreaves.  and  served  by  successive  re-elections  till
2  March,  1815.

BROWN,  Samuel  R.,  author,  b.  m  1775;  d.  m
Cherry  Valley,  N.  Y,,  15  Sept.,  1817.  He  was  a
volunteer  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  afterward  edited,
until  1815,  a  newspaper  called  the  "  Patriot,"  at
Cayuga,  N.  Y.  He  published  "A  View  of  the
Campaigns  of  the  Northwestern  Army"  (1814);
"  History  of  the  War  of  1812  "  ;  and  "  The  Western
Gazetteer;  or.  Emigrant's  Directory"  (1817).

BROWN,  Samuel  R.,  missionary,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1810 ;  d.  in  Monson,  Mass.,  in  1880.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1832,  and  in  1838  went
as  a  missionary  to  China,  and  founded  the  first
Protestant  school  in  that  country,  the  Morrison
Chinese  school  for  boys,  at  Canton,  of  which  he
was  the  head  from  1838  till  1847.  He  returned  to
the  United  States  in  1847,  but  in  1859  again  went
out  as  a  missionary,  and  was  stationed  at  Yoko-
hama, where  he  was  one  of  the  earliest  Christian
teachers.  He  translated  the  Bible  into  Japanese,
and  a  number  of  Japanese  books  into  English,  pre-
pared grammars  entitled  "  Colloquial  Japanese  "
and  "  Prendergast's  Mastery  System  applied  to
English  and  Japanese,"  and  wrote  many  articles
on  Chinese  and  Japanese  subjects.

BROWN,  Solyman,  author,  b.  in  Litchfield,
Conn.,  17  Nov.,  1790;  d.  in  New  York  about  1865.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,  was  ordained
a  Congregational  minister  in  1814,  and  preached
{and  taught  school  until  1822,  when  he  removed  to
iXew  York,  where  he  preached  Swedenborgianism.
After  1832  he  practised  dentistry  in  that  city.  He
published  an  essay  on  American  poetry,  together
with  some  miscellanies  (1818) ;  "  Dentologia,"  a
poem  on  the  diseases  of  the  teeth  (1833) ;  and
"  Dental  Hygeia,"  a  poem  on  the  general  laws  of
health  (1838).  He  was  co-editor  of  the  "  Journal  of
Dental  Science."  He  was  a  friend  and,  for  many
years,  a  correspondent  of  Pitz-Greene  Halleck.

BROWN,  Staley,  Canadian  merchant,  b.  in
Glasgow,  Scotland,  in  1801 ;  d.  14  April,  1877.  The
family  emigrated  to  Nova  Scotia  and  settled  in
Yarmouth  about  1813.  After  being  engaged  for
iiany  years  as  a  successful  merchant,  he  was  elected
:o  the  assembly  in  1843,  and  at  once  nominated  to
-he  legislative  council.  In  January,  1856,  he  be-
came receiver-general  in  the  Conservative  adminis-
;ration  of  James  W.  Johnston,  and  held  office  un-
;il  the  fall  of  the  cabinet  in  1860.  From  11  March,
1874,  until  19  Jan.,  1875,  he  was  president  of  the
iouncil,  and  afterward  provincial  treasurer.

BROWN,  Tarleton,  soldier  of  the  revolution,
).  in  Barnwell  District,  S.  C,  in  1754;  d.  in  1846.
le  served  through  the  war  of  independence,  at-
aining  the  rank  of  captain.  His  "  Memoirs,"  with
lotes  by  Charles  J.  Bushnell  (New  York  printed,
)rivately,  1862),  contain  interesting  and  original
hformation  in  relation  to  the  events  of  his  time  in
he  Carolinas.

BROWN,  Thomas,  colonial  author,  b.  about
740.  He  was  a  resident  of  Charlestown,  Mass.  In
757  he  was  captured  by  the  Indians,  after  being
''ounded  in  an  engagement  between  the  French
nd  English.  He  was  held  in  captivity  for  nearly
3ur  years,  and  then  returned  to  his  father's  house.

he  narrative  of  his  adventures,  written  by  him-

ilf  (Boston,  1760),  is  perhaps  the  rarest  of  Ameri-
m  books  of  its  class. Its  title-page  reads: "A

lain  Narrativ  of  the  uncommon  Sufferings  and

emarkable Deliverance of Thomas Brown of

harlestown  in  New  England;  who  returned  to
IS  Father's House  in the Beginning  of Jan.


BROWN


411


1760,  after  having  been  absent  three  years  and
about  eight  months:  Containing  An  Account  of
the  Engagement  between  a  Party  of  Englisli  com-
manded by  Major  Rogers,  and  a  Party  of  French
and  Indians  in  Jan.  1757,  in  which  Capt.  Spike-
man  was  kill'd;  and  the  Author  .  .  .  left  for  dead
on  the  field.  .  .  .  Plow  he  was  taken  Captive  by
the  Indians,  and  carried  to  Canada,  and  from
thence  to  the  Mississippi,  etc."  The  only  copy
that  has  found  its  way  into  open  market  of  late
years  brought  $30  at  the  sale  of  the  Brinley  col-
lection in  1879.

BROWN,  Thomas,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ohio  about
1819 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  t.,  13  June,  1867.  He
passed  the  earlier  years  of  his  life  upon  his  father's
farm,  was  graduated  at  Franklin  college,  and  stud-
ied law  in  Cleveland,  where,  for  a  time,  he  practised
his  profession.  He  took  a  prominent  part  in  the
free-soil  movement  of  1848,  and  in  1850  abandoned
the  profession  of  law,  and,  in  connection  with  Col.
John  C.  Vaughn,  established  the  "True  Demo-
crat," the  free-soil  organ  of  northern  Ohio.  In
1853  he  withdrew  from  that  paper,  which,  in  the
course  of  the  next  year,  became  tlie  "  Cleveland
Leader,"  and  established  the  "Ohio  Farmer."
When  his  friend,  Salmon  P.  Chase,  became  secre-
tary of  the  treasury,  Mr.  Brown  was  appointed
special  agent  of  the  treasury  department  for  the
Pacific  coast.  In  that  capacity  he  first  went  to
San  Francisco  in  1862,  and  while  thei-e  he  corrected
irregularities  in  the  management  of  the  mint,  ma-
rine hospital,  and  custom-house.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  supervisor  and  special  agent  of
the  treasury  department  in  New  York  citv.

BROWN,  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  "in  Dela-
ware ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  Nov.,  1828.  He
entered  the  service  as  midshipman,  27  April,  1801,
was  promoted  a  lieutenant,  21  March,  1807,  master,
1  March,  1815,  and  captain.  3  March,  1825.  He
commanded  the  schooner  "  Gov.  Tompkins "  in
several  engagements  with  the  enemy  on  Lake  On-
tario in  1814.  In  1819-'21  he  commanded  the  ship
"  Peacock  "  in  the  Mediterranean.

BROWN,  Thomas  Storrow,  Canadian  insur-
gent, b.  in  St.  Andreas,  New  Brunswick,  7  May,
i803,  of  New  England  loyalist  parentage.  He  was
a  prosperous  hardware  merchant  in  Montreal.  His
strong  democratic  tendencies  led  him  to  ally  him-
self with  the  "  Sons  of  Liberty,"  a  French-Cana-
dian political  organization  which  undertook  to  re-
lease Lower  Canada  from  British  rule.  Papineau
and  the  other  French-Canadian  leaders  of  the  revo-
lutionary movement  gladly  welcomed  recruits  of
English  descent,  and  Mr.  Brown  soon  became  gen-
eral of  the  order.  The  first  conflict  was  in  street
riots  in  Montreal,  and  Brown  received  a  blow  that
destroyed  one  eye  and  subsequently  caused  his  total
blindness.  Warrants  having  been  issued  for  the
arrest  of  the  principal  agitators.  Brown,  among
others,  escaped  to  the  banks  of  the  Richelieu,  where
the  people  were  eagerly  waiting  to  take  up  arms.
He  commanded  the  rebels  at  the  battle  at  St.
Charles,  where  they  were  routed  by  the  loyal  troops.
He  escaped  across  the  frontier,  and,  settling  in
Florida,  was  employed  in  various  public  capacities
in  that  state.  In  1844  the  Canadian  government
entered  a  nolle  pr'osequi  in  his  case,  and  he  re-
turned to  Montreal.  In  1862  he  was  appointed
chairman  of  a  commission  to  investigate  the  con-
dition of  the  public  departments  of  Canada,  and
in  1864  an  official  assignee.  He  retired,  in  1876,
owing  to  his  loss  of  sight,  butcontiTmed  to  take  an
active  interest  in  social  movements.  In  spite  of
his  blindness  and  his  advanced  age  he  is  still  one
of  the  most  active  leaders  of  the  temperance  move-


412


BROWI^


BROWNE


ment  in  the  province  of  Quebec,  He  has  been  a
prolific  contributor  to  the  press  of  Montreal,  New
York,  and  Florida.

BROWN,  Thurlow  Weed,  journalist,  d.  at
Fort  Atkinson,  Wis.,  4  May,  1866.  He  was  for
some  years  editor  of  the  "  Cayuga  Chief,"  and  from
1860,  when  he  removed  to  Atkinson,  edited  the
"Wisconsin  Chief."  He  published  a  volume  of
"  Miscellanies,"  mostly  on  the  subject  of  tem-
perance, of  which  he  was  an  eloquent  advocate ;
"  Minnie  Hermon,  the  Landlord's  Daughter  "  (New
York,  1854);  "Why  1  am  a  Temperance  Man"
(Auburn,  1853) ;  and  "  Temperance  Tales  and
Hearthstone  Revelations."

BROWN,  William,  Argentine  naval  officer,  b.
in  Ireland,  about  1779.  He  went  to  Baltimore  in
1793,  and  was  employed  as  a  sailor  in  the  mer-
cantile marine  until  1796,  when  he  was  impressed
by  a  British  man-of-war.  In  1814,  being  at  Buenos
Ayres  in  command  of  an  English  merchant-ship,
during  the  war  of  independence,  he  was  induced
to  enter  the  naval  service  of  that  country.  Re-
ceiving the  command  of  its  flotilla,  he  engaged,  in
April,  1814,  some  Spanish  vessels  off  the  island  of
Martin  Garcia.  In  the  ensuing  May  a  more  de-
cisive engagement  took  place  off  Montevideo,  while
Gen.  Alvear  attacked  the  city  by  land.  Four  of
the  enemy's  vessels  were  taken  or  destroyed,  and
the  rest  dispersed,  causing  the  speedy  capture  of
that  city.  Brown  was  made  admiral,  planned  an
expedition  against  the  Spaniards  in  the  Pacific
ocean,  and  was  for  some  time  successful,  taking
many  rich  prizes.  After  greatly  annoying  the
Spanish  commerce  in  the  Pacific,  he  was  returning,
when  he  was  captured  by  a  British  ship-of-war,
carried  into  Antigua,  and  condemned  upon  frivo-
lous allegations.  Owing  to  this  proceeding.  Brown
lived  at  Buenos  Ayres  in  retirement,  and  almost  in
poverty,  until  the  war  with  Brazil,  which  began  in
1826,  when  he  defeated  the  Brazilian  fleet,  and
rendered  other  important  services.

BROWN,  William,  Canadian  author,  b.  in  Tur-
riff. Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  14  April,  1835.  He
is  the  son  of  James  Brown,  LL.  D.,  author  of  "  The
Forester."  He  received  his  education  in  the  Scot-
tish parochial  schools  until  his  seventeenth  year,
after  which  he  was  entirely  self-taught.  He  was
a  railway  director  in  Aberdeenshire  from  1864  till
1869,  also  commissioner  for  that  county.  In  1871
he  emigrated  to  Canada,  and  in  1875  was  given
charge  of  the  Ontario  agricultural  college.  His
writings  include  "British  Sheep  Farming"  and
"  Claims  of  Arboriculture  as  a  Science."

BROWN,  William  Faulkner,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  York  city;  d.  in  New  Jersey,  22  Aug.,  1881.
He  was  educated  as  a  physician,' and  during  the
civil  war  served  as  surgeon  on  the  U.  S.  steamer
"  Mystic,"  and  afterward  as  examining  surgeon  at
Park  barracks.  New  York.  He  subsequently  went
to  Rome  as  a  newspaper  correspondent,  and  re-
ported the  proceedings  of  the  Vatican  council  for
Catholic  newspapers,  having  been  converted  to
Catholicism  in  1857.  After  his  return  from  Rome
he  studied  in  a  theological  seminary,  and  took
clerical  orders  in  Louisville,  Kentucky.  He  was
assigned  to  a  parish  in  Georgia,  where  he  suffered
so  severely  from  the  effects  of  yellow  fever  that
he  was  obliged  to  remove  to  the  north,  and  in  1880
accepted  the  place  of  chaplain  to  St.  Joseph's  hos-
pital at  Paterson.

BROWN,  William  Henry,  capitalist,  b.  in
North  Huntington.  Westmoreland  co.,  Pa.,  15  Jan.,
1815 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  12  Oct.,  1875.  He  was  in
early  life  a  canal-boatman  and  coal-digger,  became
a  small  dealer  in  coal  in  Pittsburg,  afterward  part


owner  in  a  mine,  and  in  1848  commenced  mining
and  coking  for  the  Pittsburg  iron  furnaces.  In
1858  he  began  the  new  enterprise  of  sending  coal
in  flat-boats,  towed  by  steamers,  down  the  Missis-
sippi. He  supplied  the  government  with  coal  at
Cairo  and  Memphis  during  the  war,  also  furnished
it  for  the  gas-works  of  St.  Louis,  and  stood  at  llic
head  of  the  coal  trade  of  New  Orleans  and  the
lower  Mississippi.

BROWN,  William  Hill,  poet,  b.  in  1766;  d.  in
Murfreesborough,  N.  C,  2  Sept.,  1793.  He  wrote  a
tragedy,  founded  on  the  death  of  IVIaior  John
Andre,  and  a  comedy.  His  "Ira  and  Isabella"
was  published  in  1807.

BROWNE,  B.  Bernard,  physician,  b.  in  Wheat-
lands,  Queen  Anne  co.,  Md.,  11  June,  1842.  After
graduation  at  Loyola  college,  Baltimore,  he  studied
medicine  in  the  university  of  Maryland,  and  was
gi-aduated  there  in  1867.  '  Several  years  of  practi-
cal experience  in  the  Bay  View  asylum  led  him  to
turn  his  attention  chiefly  to  surgery  as  applied  to
the  diseases  of  women,  and  to  obstetrics.  He  holds
professorships  in  the  medical  college  of  Baltimore,
in  the  polyclinic  and  post-graduate  medical  school
of  that  city,  and  is  president  of  the  Baltimore
clinical  society.  He  has  successfully  introduced  a
new  operation  for  chronic  inversion  of  the  uterus,
and  has  written  extensively  for  the  medical  jour-
nals on  obstetrical  and  gynaecological  subjects,

BROWNE,  Charles  Farrar,  humorist,  b.  in
Waterford,  Me.,  about  1834 ;  d.  in  Southampton,
England,  6  March,  1867.  Mr.  Browne  was  much
better  known  as  "  Artemus  Ward  "  than  by  his  real
name.  He  began  learning  the  printer's  trade  when
under  fourteen  years  of  age  as  a  compositor  on  the
Skowhegan  (Me.)  "  Clarion,"  and  when  about  fif-
teen was  working  in  a  similar  capacity  on  the
"  Carpet  Bag,"  a  comic  weekly  journal  in  Boston.
To  this  he  made  his  first  contributions.  Before
abandoning  type-setting  for  literary  work,  he  was
one  of  the  most  expert  compositors  in  the  United
States.  After  leaving  Boston,  he  became  a  report-
er on  the  Cleveland  "  Plaindealer,"  a  daily  paper
of  extensive  circulation.  Here  the  idea  of  writing
in  the  character  of  a  showman,  and  giving  his  ob-
servations on  all  sorts  of  topics,  first  occurred  to
him,  and  he  began  his  first  series  of  "Artemus
Ward's  Sayings."  At  the  outset  these  articles  were
written  carelessly,  and  without  any  expectation
that  they  would  serve  for  anything  more  than
"  filling  " ;  but,  finding  that  they  attained  an  ex-
tended notoriety,  he  bestowed  more  care  upon
them,  and  their  real  merit  made  even  the  atrocious
spelling  atti-active,  and  gained  for  him  a  reputa-
tion as  one  of  the  most  clever  and  original  humor-
ous writers  in  the  country.  When  "Vanity Fa!'
was  established  in  New  York,  he  was  asked  to  '
come  one  of  its  contributors,  and  after  a  time  i..-
editor.  Its  existence  was  brief  but  brilliant.  Dur-
ing this  period  he  projected  his  humorous  lec-
tures, delivering  the  first  one  in  Brooklyn,  and
afterward  repeating  the  series  in  other  cities.  The
titles  were  "The  Babes  in  the  Wood,"  "Sixty
Minutes  in  Africa,"  etc.  These  proved  very  suc-
cessful. In  1862  he  visited  California  and  Utah
in  search  of  materials  for  illustrating  the  peculiar
characteristics  of  Mormon  life.  The  result  of  this
expedition  was  a  series  of  comic  lectures  on  iMor-
monism  with  panoramic  accompaniment,  whic"
were  the  best  of  their  kind  ever  attempted  either  in
this  countrv  or  in  England,  and  of  so  novel  a  cnar-
acter  that  thev  were  very  popular.  About  1864  ttie.
premonitorv  symptoms  of  pulmonary  consumption,
the  disease  from  which  he  finally  died,  made  their
appearance,  and  he  was  obliged  for  a  time  to  desisc


BROWNE


from  public  engagements.  His  health  apparently
improving  in  the  spring  of  1866,  he  resolved  to
undertake  a  lecturing  tour  abroad.  He  reached
England  in  June,  1866,  but  was  too  feeble  to  lec-
ture. In  November  he  made  his  first  appearance,
was  most  warmly  welcomed,  and  achieved  a  pop-
ularity as  unexpected  as  it  was  gratifying.  For
three  months  he  continued  his  lectures  with  the
greatest  success,  but  his  health  completely  failed
early  in  February,  1867.  He  went  first  to  the  isle
of  Jersey,  and  thence  to  Southampton,  intending
to  return  home;  but  was  not  strong  enough  to
attempt  the  voyage.  By  his  will,  after  providing
for  his  mother  and  for  the  education  of  a  lad  who
had  been  kind  to  him  in  his  last  sickness,  he  left
his  property  to  found  an  asylum  for  printers,  and
for  the  education  of  their  orphan  children.  His
])ublished  books  are  as  follows :  "  Artemus  Ward,
His  Book,"  and  "Artemus  Ward,  His  Travels"
(New  York,  1865) ;  "  Artemus  Ward  in  London  "
(1867);  "Artemus  Ward's  Lecture,  as  delivered  in
Egyptian  Hall,  London,"  edited  by  T.  W.  Robert-
son and  E.  P.  Hingston  (1869);  "Artemus  Ward,
His  Works  Complete,"  with  a  biographical  sketch
by  Melville  D.  Landon  (1875).

BROWNE,  Francis  Fisher,  editor,  b.  in  South
Halifax,  Vt.,  1  Dec,  1843.  His  father,  William
Goldsmith  Browne,  b.  in  Vermont  in  1812,  is  the
author  of  the  popular  song  "  A  Hundred  Years  to
Gome,"  and  other  poems.  Francis  was  educated  at
he  high  school  of  Chicopee,  Mass.,  which  he  left  to
enlist  in  the  46th  Massachusetts  volunteers  in  1862,
serving  till  its  discharge.  He  studied  law  in  Roch-
».ster,  N.  Y.,  and  at  the  Universitv  of  Michigan
1866-'7).  He  edited  the  "Lakeside  Monthly,"
I^hicago,  in  1869-'74;  afterward  was  literary  edi-
or  of  the  "  Alliance  " ;  and  in  1880  became  edi-
;or  of  the  Chicago  "  Dial."  He  has  compiled  and
idited  "  Golden  Poems,  by  British  and  American
\uthors"  (Chicago,  1881);  "The  Golden  Treas-
ny  of  Poetry  and  Prose "  (St.  Louis,  1883) ;  and
Bugle  Echoes,"  a  collection  of  poems  of  the  civil
var,  both  national  and  confederate  (New  York,
886).  He  has  written  "The  Every-day  Life  of
Vbraham  Lincoln  "  (St.  Louis,  1886).

BROWNE,  Irving,  lawyer,  b.  in  Marshall,
)neida  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Sept.,  1835.  He  was  edu-
ated  in  the  academies  in  Nashua,  N.  H.,  and  Nor-
i'ich,  Conn.,  and  graduated  from  Albany  Law-
School  in  1857.  Mr.  Browne  settled  in  Troy,  and
here  followed  his  profession,  becoming  for  two
erms  president  of  the  school  board.  In  1879  he
etnoved  to  Albany,  and  became  editor  of  the  "  Al-
bany Law  Journal "  and  the  "  American  Reports."
besides  his  editorial  work,  he  has  published  an
inglish  metrical  translation  of  "The  Suitors,"
rom  Racine  (New  York,  1871);  "Humorous
Miases  of  the  Law  "  (San  Francisco,  1875) ;  "  Our
•est  Society,"  a  parlor  comedy  (New  York,  1876) ;
Short_ Studies  of  Great  Lawyers  "  (Albany,  1878) ;
Judicial  Literpretation  of  Common  Words  and
'hrases"(San  Francisco,  1883);  "Law  and  Law-
ers  in  Literature  "  (Boston,  1883) ;  and  "  Icono-
asm  and  Whitewash  "  (New  York,  1885).
BROWNE,  John  Ross,  traveller  and  author,  b.
I  Ireland  in  1817:  d.  in  Oakland,  Cal.,  9  Dec,  1875.
Hide  he  was  a  child  his  father  emigrated  to  the
mted  States  and  settled  in  Kentuckv.  In  his
sfhteenth  year  the  son  descended  the  Ohio  and
Mississippi,  from  Louisville  to  New  Orleans.  He
as  employed  for  two  or  three  years  as  a  short-
ind  reporter  in  the  senate.  His  passion  for  travel
»en  impelled  him  to  embark  on  a  whaler,  and  on
^s  return,  after  visiting  a  great  part  of  the  world.
i  published  "  Etchings  of  a  Whaling-Cruise,  with


BROWNE


413


Notes  of  a  Sojourn  oh  the  Island  of  Zanzibar"
(New  York,  1846).  He  next  became  private  secre-
tary to  Robert  J.  Walker,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
and  in  1849  went  to  California  as  a  government
commissioner,  and  was  employed  in  reporting  the
proceedings  of  the  convention  for  framing  the  state
constitution.  In  1851  he  went  to  Europe  as  a  news-
paper correspondent.  A  tour  in  Sicily  and  the
Holy  Land  he  described  in  "  Yusef,  or  the  Journey
of  the  Fragi :  a  Crusade  in  the  East  "  (New  York,
1853).  After  his  return  to  the  United  States  he
became  an  inspector  of  customs  on  the  northern
frontier  and  the  Pacific  coast.  He  wrote  numer-
ous magazine  articles,  one  series  of  which  was  pul>
lished  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Adventures  in  the
Apache  Country  "  (1869).  In  1861  he  went  to  Eu-
rope again,  and,  leaving  his  children  in  Frankfort
to  be  educated,  travelled  through  Algeria,  Iceland,
Russia.  Poland,  and  other  countries.  Some  of  his
excursions  were  described  in  the  volumes  entitled
"The  Land  of  Thor"  (1866),  and  "Adventures  of
an  American  Family  in  Germany"  (1867).  His
books  of  travel  are  illustrated  with  comical  draw-
ings from  his  own  pencil.  After  his  return  home
he  was  commissioned  by  the  government  to  inves-
tigate the  mineral  resources  of  the  region  west  of
the  Rocky  mountains.  His  report,  descriptive  of
the  mines,  climate,  agriculture,  and  commerce  of
that  part  of  the  country,  was  published  under  the
title  "  Resources  of  the  Pacific  Slope  "  (1869).  He
published,  also,  "  Crusoe's  Island,  with  Sketches  of
Adventures  in  California  and  Washoe  "  (1864).  On
11  March,  1868,  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to
China,  but  was  recalled  on  5  July,  1869.  After  his
return  he  resided  in  Oakland.

BROWNE,  Samuel  J.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land, 19  March,  1788;  d.  at  Harrison  Junction,
Ohio,  10  Sept.,  1872.  He  went  to  Cincinnati  in.
1798  with  his  father,  Rev.  John  W.  Browne,  who
was  an  English  Independent  minister.  He  became
a  minister  of  the  United  Brethren,  but  parted  with
them  on  the  question  of  secret  societies,  and  joined
the  presbytery  of  Cincinnati  about  1868.  He  ac-
cumulated a  large  fortune  by  the  rise  of  real  estate
in  that  city,  and  bequeathed  $150,000  for  the  es-
tablishment of  a  university  to  bear  his  name,  also
land  whereon  to  erect  the  building,  and  an  endow-
ment for  professorships.  He  left  other  sums  for
the  building  of  a  church  and  for  the  establishment
of  a  free  school  in  Cincinnati.

BROWNE,  Sara  H.,  author,  b.  in  Sunderland,
Mass.  She  has  published  "  The  Book  for  the  El-
dest Daughter,"  "  The  Borrowed  Bible,"  "  Philip
Alderton,"  "  Maggie  Menealy,"  and  other  volumes
for  the  j^oung;  also  "A  Manual  of  Commerce,"
and  magazine  articles  in  prose  and  poetry. — Her
sister,  Maria  J.  B.,  b,  in  Northampton,  Mass.,  be-
came a  teacher  by  profession,  devoting  herself  to
the  study  of  Spanish  and  other  languages,  and
writing  extensively  for  magazines  and  newspapers.
She  has  published"  Margaret."  "Laura  Huntley,"
and  "Story  of  a  Western  Sunday-School,"  and
translated  into  Spanish  "The  Borrowed  Bible,"
written  by  her  sister,  and  two  other  small  volumes.
She  translated  from  the  Spanish  "A  History  of
Granada,"  bv  Jose  Francisco  de  Luque.

BROWNE,  Thomas,  soldier,  d.  in  the  island  of
St.  Vincent,  3  Aug.,  1825.  He  was  a  resident  of
Augusta,  Ga.  In  1775  he  incurred  the  enmity  of
the  whigs  by  ridiculing  them  in  toasts  at  dinner,
and,  when  warned  of  popular  vengeance,  he  fled,
but  was  brought  back,  tarred  and  feathered,  and
drawn  in  a  cart  exposed  to  the  populace.  Remov-
ing to  Florida,  he  collected  a  small  force,  and  made
raids  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  Savannah. Joined


414


BROWNE


BROWNELL


in  1778  by  about  300  tories  from  the  interior,  he
organized  the  king's  rangers,  uniformed  and  com-
manded them,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.
In  1779,  at  the  head  of  400  mounted  men,  he  made
a  forced  march  to  Augusta,  and,  after  being
wounded  and  twice  defeated  by  Cols.  Twiggs  and
Few,  he  reached  that  place,  and  established  a  mili-
tary post.  In  September,  1780,  Col.  Clarke  be-
sieged him,  but,  although  shot  through  both  thighs,
he  conducted  the  defence  with  skill  until  he  was
re-enforced  by  Col.  Cruger.  The  wounded  of  the
patriot  force  who  fell  into  his  hands  were  hanged
or  delivered  over  to  the  Indians  to  be  burned  alive.
He  was  again  besieged  in  April,  1781,  by  Pickens
and  Lee,  and  forced  to  surrender  in  June.  Such
was  the  hatred  his  cruelties  had  inspired  that  he
was  specially  guarded  until  delivered  at  Savannah.
The  British  officer  in  command  at  St.  Augustine
threatened  to  hang  six  rebel  prisoners  if  Browne
were  not  treated  as  a  prisoner  of  war.  After  he
was  exchanged  he  served  at  Savannah.  In  the  lat-
ter part  of  the  war  he  was  colonel  commandant  of
the  queen's  rangers  of  South  Carolina,  and  super-
intendent-general of  Indian  affairs  in  the  southern
districts  of  North  America.  In  May,  1782,  he
marched  out  with  a  considerable  force,  but  was
completely  routed  by  Wayne.  His  estates  in  Geor-
gia and  South  Carolina  having  been  confiscated,  he
retired  to  the  Bahamas  at  the  peace,  whence,  in
1786,  he  wrote  an  elaborate  and  able  reply  to  Ram-
say's comments  on  his  conduct  during  the  war,  ad-
dressed to  the  historian  himself.  In  1800  he  re-
ceived a  grant  of  6,000  acres  of  crown  lands  in  the
island  of  St.  Vincent.

BROWNE,  William,  loyalist,  of  Massachusetts,
b.  27  Feb.,  1787;  d.  in  England,  13  P^eb.,  1802.  He
was  a  grandson  of  Gov.  Burnet,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1755,  and  was  many  years  a  repre-
sentative of  Salem  and  a  colonel  of  the  Essex  co.
militia.  He  was  one  of  the  seventeen  rescinders
of  1768,  and  was  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  in
1773-4.  Prior  to  the  revolution  he  enjoyed  great
popularity.  In  1774  a  committee  of  the  Essex
CO.  convention  waited  on  him  to  express  the
grief  of  the  county  at  his  exertions  to  carry  out
acts  of  parliament  calculated  to  ruin  and  enslave
his  native  land.  He  had  retired  to  London  as
early  as  May,  1776.  He  was  included  in  the  ban-
ishment act  of  1778,  and  his  extensive  landed  es-
tates were  confiscated.  The  English  government
made  him  governor  of  Bermuda  in  1781,  which
office  he  retained  until  1790.

BROWNE,  William  Hand,  author,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  31  Dec,  1828.  He  was  educated  at  the
university  of  Maryland  and  studied  medicine.  In
conjunction  with  R.  M.  Johnston  he  has  prepared  a
"  Life  of  Alexander  H.  Stephens  "  and  a  "  Histori-
cal Sketch  of  English  Literature,"  and,  with  J.  T.
Scharf,  a  "  School  History  of  Maryland,"  He  has
also  assisted  in  the  compilation  of  the  "  Clarendon
Dictionary,"  and  is  the  author  of  "  Maryland"  in
the  "Commonwealth  Series"  (Boston,  1884).  He
has  translated  Jakob  von  Falke's  work  on  "  Greece
and  Rome  "  (New  York,  1882).

BROWNELL,  Henry  Howard,  author,  b.  in
Providence,  R.  I.,  6  Feb.,  1820 ;  d.  in  East  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  31  Oct.,  1872.  He  was  a  nephew  of
Bishop  Brownell,  was  graduated  at  Trinity  college,
Hartford,  in  1841,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  but  became  a  teacher,  and  settled  in
Hartford.  Early  in  the  civil  war  he  turned  into
spirited  verse  the  "General  Orders"  issued  by
Farragut  for  the  guidance  of  his  fleet  in  the  attack
on  the  defences  of  New  Orleans.  This  piece  of
verse,  floating  through  the  newspapers,  came  to


Farragut's  notice,  and  so  pleased  him  that  he
made  inquiry  for  the  author.  In  a  correspondence
that  ensued,  Brownell  expressed  a  strong  desire  to
witness  a  naval  battle,  and  Farragut  promised  to
gratify  him,  a  promise  that  was  fulfilled  in  Brown-
ell's  appointment  as  acting  ensign  on  the  flag-ship
"  Hartford,"  and  his  participation  in  the  battle  of
Mobile  bay.  "The  River  Fight"  and  "The  Bay
Fight,"  describing  the  naval  actions  at  New  Or-
leans and  Mobile,  are  his  longest  and  finest  poems.
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  said  of  them :  "  They  are  to
all  the  drawing-room  battle-poems  as  the  torn  flags
of  our  victorious  armadas  to  the  stately  ensigns
that  dressed  their  ships  in  the  harbor."  After  the
war  he  accompanied  Admiral  Farragut  on  his
cruise  in  European  waters.  He  published  "  Poems  "
(New  York,  1847) ;  "  The  People's  Book  of  Ancient
and  Modern  History  "  (Hartford,  1851);  "  The  Dis-
coverers, Pioneers,  and  Settlers  of  North  and  South
America"  (Boston,  1853);  "Lyrics  of  a  Day,  or
Newspaper  Poetry,  by  a  Volunteer  in  the  U.  S.  Ser-
vice" (New  York,  1864);  and  a  revised  edition  of
his  poems,  containing  all  that  he  cared  to  preserve
(Boston,  1866).  See  "Our  Battle  Laureate,"  bv
Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly ''
for  May,  1865.

BROWNELL,  Thomas  Church,  P.  E.  bishop,
b.  in  Westport,  Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1779 ;  d.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  13  Jan.,  1865.  His  early  education
was  in  a  common  school,  in  which  he  himself  served
as  teacher  at  the  age  of  fifteen.  Preparing  for
college  at  Bristol  academy,  Taunton,  he  entered
Brown  just  be-
fore attaining
his  majority.
At  the  close  of
his  sophomore
year  he  fol-
lowed Presi-
dent Maxcy  to
Union,  where
he  was  gradu-
ated with  the
honors  of  the
valedictory  in
1804.  In  the
following  year
he  was  ap-
pointed tutor
in  Greek  and
Latin,  and  in
1806  professor
of  logic  and
belles-lettres ;

then,  after  three  years,  having  spent  a  year  m
Great  Britain  and  Ireland  in  the  study  of  chemis-
try and  kindred  sciences  and  in  pedestrian  excur-
sions, he  entered  upon  new  duties  as  lecturer  on
chemistry,  and  in  1814  was  elected  professor  of
rhetoric  and  chemistry.  Having  become  con  vniccd
of  the  historical  and  scriptural  grounds  of  Episco-
pacy, as  opposed  to  the  Calvinistic  Congregational-
ism in  which  he  had  been  educated  and  to  the  min-
istry of  which  he  had  meant  to  devote  hirasen,  he
was  baptized  and  confirmed  in  1813,  and,  after  pur-
suing the  study  of  theology  in  connection  ^'V'  "'^
academic  duties,  was  ordained  deacon  by  Bi^nop
Hobart  in  New  York,  11  April,  1816.  In  1H18  ur
was  elected  assistant  minister  of  Trinity  churcn,
New  York,  and  in  the  following  June  the  conven-
tion of  the  diocese  of  Connecticut  chose  hira  to  me
episcopate,  which  had  been  vacant  for  six  years.
He  was  consecrated,  27  Oct.,  1819,  in  Trinity  churcn.
New  Haven,  bv  Bishops  White,  Hobart,  and  Wib'
wold. Bishop  Brownell  entered  upon  his  duties  u.


^  ^  ^/^a.^^-^^'^z^^tyC^


BROWNING


BROWNLOW


415


Connecticut  at  a  very  important  time.  The  adop-
tion of  a  state  constitution  in  1818  had  caused  the
overthrow  of  the  Congregational  "  Standing  Order,"
and  effected  a  revolution,  political,  social,  and  relig-
ious. The  new  bishop  made  good  use  of  his  learn-
ino-  and  his  quiet,  practical  wisdom,  and  laid  hold  of
his  opportunities.  The  efforts  to  establish  a  church
college  in  Connecticut  were  renewed,  and  in  1828
the  charter  of  Washington  college  (now  Trinity),
Hartford,  was  granted  by  the  legislature,  and
Bishop  Browne!  1  was  elected  its  first  president.
In  the  winter  of  1829-30,  at  the  request  of  the  gen-
eral missionary  society  of  the  church,  he  visited
the  south,  travelling  down  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi
rivers  from  Pittsburgh  to  New  Orleans.  He  offici-
ated as  bishop  in  Kentucky,  Mississippi,  Louisiana,
and  Alabama,  and  assisted  in  organizing  the  church
in  the  two  last-named  states.  A  second  visit  to
the  church  in  the  south  was  paid  in  1834.  In  1831,
at  the  request  of  the  convention  of  the  diocese,
Bishop  Brownell  withdrew  from  the  presidency  of
the  college,  and  was  given  the  honorary  office  of
chancellor,  the  active  duties  of  the  episcopate  de-
manding all  his  time.  These  duties  called  for  no
little  amount  of  literary  labor,  and  his  publications
were  of  much  use  to  his  people.  In  1851,  on  ac-
count of  growing  infirmities,  Bishop  Brownell
asked  for  an  assistant,  and  the  Rev.  John  Williams,
D.  D.,  president  of  Trinity  college,  was  chosen.
The  senior  bishop  officiated  from  time  to  time  as
he  was  able,  his  last  public  service  being  irt  1860.
During  the  forty-five  years  of  his  episcopate,  for
the  last  twelve  of  which  he  had  been,  by  seniority,
presiding  bishop  of  the  Episcopal  church  in  the
United  States,  he  had  seen  the  number  of  the
clergy  of  his  diocese  increase  fivefold,  and  he  him-
self had  ordained  179  deacons  and  confirmed  over
15,000  persons ;  and  the  small  number  of  parishes
that  he  found  in  1819,  of  which  but  seven  could
support  full  services,  had  increased  to  129.  A
colossal  statue  of  him,  the  gift  of  his  son-in-law,
Gordon  W.  Burnham,  stands  on  the  campus  of
Trinity  college.  Bishop  Brownell  was  for  many
years  president  of  the  corporation  of  the  retreat
for  the  insane  at  Hartford.  Among  his  publica-
tions, which  included  sermons,  charges,  and  ad-
dresses, are  "  The  Family  Prayer-Book,"  an  edition
of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  with  ample  ex-
planatory and  devotional  notes,  chiefly  from  Eng-
lish authors  (New  York,  1823) ;  "  Selections  on  the
Religion  of  the  Heart  and  Life  "  (Hartford,  1840) ;
"  The  Christian's  Walk  and  Consolation,"  and  an
abridgment  of  an  English  commentary  on  the  New
Testament.  His  charge  to  his  clergy,  in  1843,  on
the  "  Errors  of  the  Times,"  called  forth  an  ani-
mated discussion  on  the  contrasted  doctrines  and
usages  of  Episcopalianism  and  Puritanism.

BROWNING,  Orville  Hickman,  senator,  b.  in
Harrison  co.,  Ky.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Quincy,  111.,  10
Aug.,  1881.  He  removed  to  Bracken  co.,  Ky.,  early
m  life,  and  received  a  classical  education  at  Au-
gusta college,  being  at  the  same  time  employed  in
the  county  clerk's  office.  He  afterward  studied
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1831,  and  began
practice  in  Quincy,  111.  He  served  in  the  Black
Hawk  war  of  1832,  and  was  a  member  of  the  state
senate  from  1836  till  1840,  when  he  was  elected  to
the  lower  branch  of  the  legislature  and  served  till
1843.  At  the  Bloomington  convention  he  assisted
Abraham  Lincoln  to  organize  the  republican  party
of  Illinois.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago  con-
vention of  1860,  which  nominated  Lincoln  for  the
presidency,  and  was  an  active  supporter  of  the  gov-
ernment during  the  civil  war.  In  1861  he  was  ap-
pomted  by  Gov.  Yates  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  to  fill


the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Stephen
A.  Douglas,  and  served  till  1863,  On  18  July,
1861,  he  spoke  in  the  senate,  declaring  in  favor  of
the  abolition  of  slavery,  should  the  south  force  the
issue,  and  on  25  Feb.,  1862,  took  an  active  part  in
the  debate  on  the  confiscation  bill,  speaking  in  op-
position to  it.  While  in  Washington  he  practised
law  with  Jeremiah  Black  and  Thomas  G.  Ewing.
Mr.  Browning  was  an  active  member  of  the  union
executive  committee  in  1866,  and  in  the  same  year
was  appointed  secretary  of  the  interior  by  Presi-
dent Johnson,  serving  till  3  March,  1869.  After
March,  1868,  he  also  acted  as  attorney-general.  In
1869  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional
convention,  and  from  that  time  till  his  death  prac-
tised his  profession  at  Quincy,  111.

BROWNLEE,  William  Crai^,  clergyman,  b.
in  Torfoot,  Lanarkshire,  Scotland,  in  1784;  d.  in
New  York  city,  10  Feb.,  1860.  He  studied  for  five
years  in  the  university  of  Glasgow,  and  received
the  degree  of  M.  A.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in
1808,  married,  and  came  to  this  country,  where  he
became  pastor  of  two  Associate  churches  in  Wash-
ington CO.,  Pa.  He  was  invited  to  the  Associate
church  in  Philadelphia  in  1813,  and  in  1815  be-
came rector  of  the  grammar  school  in  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.  He  was  called  to  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Baskingridge,  N.  J.,  in  1817,  and  in  1825
made  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  at  Rutgers.
In  1826  he  was  installed  as  one  of  the  ministers  of
the  Collegiate  Reformed  Dutch  church  in  New
York.  About  1843  Dr.  Brownlee  had  a  paralytic
stroke,  from  which  he  never  fully  recovered.  He
was  prominent  as  a  controversial  writer,  and  was
an  earnest  opponent  of  the  Roman  Catholic  church
and  the  Quakers.  He  edited  the  "  Dutch  Church
Magazine  "  through  four  consecutive  volumes,  and
published  "  Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  the  Quak-
ers "  (Philadelphia,  1824) ;  "  The  Roman  Catholic
Controversy"  (1834);  "Treatise  on  Popery  "(New
York,  1847) ;  "  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Christian
Life"  (1847);  "The  Christian  Youths'  Book,"
"  Christian  Father  at  Home,"  "  Deity  of  Christ,"
"  History  of  the  Western  Apostolic  Church,"  "  The
Converted  Murderer,"  and  "  The  Whigs  of  Scot-
land," a  romance,  besides  several  pamphlets.  See
"  Memorial  of  Dr.  Brownlee"  (New  York,  1860).

BROWNLOW,  William  Ganiiaway,  Journal-
ist, b.  in  Wythe  co.,  Va.,  29  Aug.,  1805;  d.  in
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  29  April,  1877.  He  was  left  an
orphan  at  the  age  of  eleven,  but,  having  earned
enough  by  hard  work  as  a  carpenter  to  give  him-
self a  fair  English  education,  he  entered  the  Meth-
odist ministry  in  1826,  and  labored  for  ten  years  as
an  itinerant  preacher.  He  began  to  take  part  in
politics  in  1828  by  advocating,  in  Tennessee,  the  re-
election of  John  Quincy  Adams  to  the  presidency ;
and  while  travelling  the  South  Carolina  circuit,  in
which  John  C.  Calhoun  lived,  made  himself  un-
popular by  publicly  opposing  nullification.  He
afterward  published  a  pamphlet  in  vindication  of
his  course.  He  became  editor  of  the  Knoxville
"  Whig  "  in  1838,  and  from  his  trenchant  mode  of
expression  became  known  as  "  the  fighting  parson."
He  was  a  candidate  for  congress  against  Andrew
Johnson  in  1843,  and  in  1850  was  appointed  by
President  Fillmore  one  of  several  commissioners  to
carry  out  the  provisions  made  by  congress  for  the
improvement  of  navigation  on  the  Missouri.  Al-
though an  advocate  of  slavery,  he  boldly  opposed
th^  secession  movement,  taking  the  ground  that
southern  institutions  were  safer  in  the  union  than
out  of  it.  His  course  subjected  him  to  much  perse-
cution. For  a  time  his  house  was  the  only  one
in  Knoxville  where  the  union  flag  was  displayed ;


416


BROWJ^-S^QUARD


BR0WN--S16QUARD


but  all  efforts  to  make  him  haul  it  down  were  un-
successful. His  paper  was  finally  suppressed  by
the  confederate  authorities,  and  in  the  last  issue,
that  of  24  Oct.,  1861,  he  published  a  farewell  ad-
dress to  his  readers,  in  which  he  said  that  he  pre-
ferred imprisonment  to  submission.  Refusing  to
take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  confederate  gov-
ernment, he  was  at  last  persuaded  by  his  friends  to
leave  Knoxville  for  another  district.  During  his
absence  he  was  accused  of  burning  railway  bridges
in  east  Tennessee,  and  a  company  of  troops  was
sent  out  with  orders  to  shoot  him  on  sight ;  but  he
escaped  by  secreting  himself  among  the  loyalists  on
the  North  Carolina  border.  He  was  finally  induced,
by  the  promise  of  a  free  pass  to  Kentucky,  to  re-
turn to  Knoxville,  but  was  arrested  there,  0  Dec,
1861,  on  charge  of  treason,  and  thrown  into  jail,
where  he  was  confined  without  fire,  and  suffered
much  during  his  imprisonment.  He  was  released
at  the  close  of  the  month,  but  was  detained  at  his
own  house  under  guard.  Hearing  that  Judah  P.
Benjamin  had  called  him  a  "  dangerous  man,"  and
had  wished  him  out  of  the  confederacy,  Brownlovv
wrote  him  a  characteristic  letter,  in  which  occur  the
words,  "Just  give  me  my  passport,  and  I  will  do
more  for  your  confederacy  than  the  devil  has  ever
done — I  will  leave  the  country."  Benjamin  ad-
vised his  release,  to  relieve  the  government  from
the  odium  of  having  entrapped  him.  Brownlow
was  taken  at  his  word,  and  sent  inside  the  union
lines  at  Nashville,  on  3  March,  1862.  After  this  he
made  a  tour  through  the  northern  states,  speaking
to  immense  audiences  in  the  principal  cities,  and  at
Philadelphia  was  joined  by  his  family,  who  had
also  been  expelled  from  Knoxville.  He  returned
to  Tennessee  in  1864,  and,  on  the  reconstruction  of
the  state  in  1865,  was  elected  governor,  serving  two
terms.  In  his  message  of  October,  1865,  he  advo-
cated the  removal  of  the  negro  population  to  a
separate  territory,  and  declared  it  bad  policy  to
give  them  the  ballot.  In  that  of  November,  1866,
he  reiterated  these  sentiments,  but  recognized  the
fact  that  the  blacks  had  shown  greater  aptitude  for
learning  than  had  been  expected,  and,  although
confessing  to  "  caste  prejudice,"  said  he  desired  to
act  in  harmony  with  the  great  body  of  loyal  people
throughout  the  union.  In  1867  Gov.  Brownlow
came  into  conflict  with  Mayor  Brown,  of  Nashville,
over  the  manner  of  appointing  judges  of  election
under  the  new  franchise  law.  The  U.  S.  troops
were  ordered  to  sustain  the  governor,  and  the  city
authorities  finally  submitted.  During  the  ku-klux
troubles  Gov.  Brownlow  found  it  necessary  to  pro-
chiim  martial  law  in  nine  counties  of  the  state.  In
1869  lie  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  resigned
the  office  of  governor.  In  1875  he  was  succeeded
in  the  senate  by  ex-President  Johnson.  After  the
close  of  his  term  he  returned  to  Knoxville,  bought
a  controlling  interest  in  the  "  Whig,"  which  he  had
sold  in  1869,  and  edited  it  until  his  death.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Iron  Wheel  Examined,  and  its  False
Spokes  Extracted,"  a  reply  to  attacks  on  the  Meth-
odist church  (Nashville,  1856) ;  "  Ought  American
Slavery  to  be  Perpetuated  T'  a  debate  with  Rev.  A.
Prynne,  of  New  York,  in  which  Mr.  Brownlow  took
the  affirmative  (Philadelphia,  1858) ;  and  "  Sketches
of  the  Rise,  Progress,  and  Decline  of  Secession,
with  a  Narrative  of  Personal  Adventures  among
the  Rebels  "(1862).

BRO  WN-SEQU  ARD,  Charles  Edouard,  physi-
ologist, b.  in  the  island  of  Mauritius  in  1818.  His
father  was  a  sea-captain  from  Philadelphia,  whose
vessel  was  lost  in  an  attempt  to  convey  provisions
to  the  inhabitants  of  Mauritius  during  a  famine,
and who married  a French  lady  on the  island


named  Sequard.  Their  son  was  carefully  educated
in  Mauritius  and  sent  to  Paris  to  complete  his
studies.  He  took  the  degree  of  bachelor  of  letters
in  1838,  that  of  bachelor  of  science  in  1889,  and
pursuing  his  studies  in  the  school  of  medicine,  re-
ceived the  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1846.  He  devoted
himself,  after  acquiring  his  profession,  to  physio-
logical experiments,  and  made  important  discov-
eries. Five  prizes  were  awarded  him  by  the  French
academy  of  sciences,  and  twice  he  received  the
queen's  grant  for  the  encouragement  of  science
from  the  British  royal  society.  By  the  transfu-
sion of  defibrinated  blood  he  produced  results
tending  to  show  that  the  fibrin  in  the  blood  has  no
value  in  nutrition,  but  is  an  exerementitious  prod-
uct. He  discovered  that  defibrinated  and  oxy-
genated blood  will  restore  the  irritability  of  the
muscles  after  a  corpse  has  become  rigid ;  that  the
blood  returns  through  the  veins  as  venous  blood,
containing  fibrin  ;  and  that  by  injecting  it  repeat-
edly into  the  arteries,  after  defibrinating  and  oxy-
genating it  each  time,  the  irritability  of  the  muscles
can  be  maintained  for  hours.  His  experiments  led
him  to  the  conclusion  that  arterial  blood  alone  is
subservient  to  nutrition,  but  that  venous  blood  is
necessary  to  produce  contractions  of  the  muscles.
He  conducted  a  series  of  experiments  on  animal
heat,  by  which  he  fixed  the  temperature  of  the
human  body  at  103° — several  degrees  higher  than
previous  investigators.  He  found  that,  in  the  case
of  poisons  that  cause  a  diminution  of  temperature,
the  toxic  action  can  be  counteracted  to  a  consider-
able extent  by  artificially  maintaining  the  heat  of
the  body.  His  experiments  on  the  spinal  cord  led
him  to  the  conclusion  that  the  fibres  of  the  poste-
rior or  sensory  columns  of  the  cord  do  not  connect
directly  with  the  brain,  but  convey  impressions  to
the  gray  matter  of  the  cord,  which  transmits
them  to  the  brain,  and  that  the  fibres  intersect
within  the  gray  matter,  near  the  point  where  they
enter,  and  not  in  the  cerebrum  or  medulla  oblon-
gata. The  decussation  of  the  motor  fibres,  those
of  the  anterior  column  of  the  spinal  cord,  he
found,  on  the  other  hand,  is  in  the  medulla  o])lon-
gata.  He  experin\ented  likewise  on  the  muscles,
on  the  sympathetic  system  of  nerves  and  ganglions,
and  on"^the  effect  of  the  removal  of  the  supra-
renal capsules.  In  May,  1858,  he  delivered  a  series
of  lectures  on  the  nervous  system  before  the  royal
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  London.  In
1864  he  was  appointed  professor  of  the  physiology
and  pathology  of  the  nervous  system  at  Harvard,
and  took  up  his  residence  in  the  United  States.
He  held  the  professorship  for  four  years,  and  in
1869  returned  to  France,  and  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  experimental  and  comparative  pathology
in  the  school  of  medicine  in  Paris,  which  chair
he  held  till  1871.  In  1858  he  established  in  Paris
the  "Journal  de  la  physiologic  de  Fhomme  et
des  animaux,"  which  he  conducted  till  18C:i
After  his  return  to  France  in  1869  he  founded
another  journal,  called  "  Archives  de  la  physiologic
normale  et  pathologique."  In  1873  he  became  a
practitioner  in  New  York  city.  In  association
with  Dr.  E.  C.  Seguin  he  began  in  that  city  the
publication  of  a  medical  journal  entitled  "  Archives
of  Scientific  and  Practical  Medicine."  Eventuallv
he  returned  to  Paris,  and  on  3  Aug.,  1878,  succeeaed
Claude  Bernard  in  the  chair  of  experimental  medi-
cine in  the  College  of  France.  The  same  year  he
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  medicine  in  the  French
academy  of  sciences.  His  services  have  been  in
constant  demand  as  a  consulting  physician  in
diseases  of  the  nervous  system,  to  which  special
branch  he  has  confined  his  practice. He  has  been


BROWNSON


BROWNSON


417


remarkably  successful  in  the  treatment  of  difficult
and  obscure  diseases  of  the  spinal  column  and  the
nervous  system.  In  his  numerous  visits  to  Eng-
land and  America  he  has  delivered  short  courses  of
lectures  and  instructed  private  classes  of  physi-
cians in  his  discoveries,  illustrating  them  by  vivi-
section. He  was  elected  in  1868  a  member  of  the
National  Academy  of  Sciences.  Besides  special
memoirs,  he  has  published  "  Lectures  on  the  Phys-
iology and  Pathology  of  the  Nervous  System "
(Philadelphia,  1860) ; '  "  Lectures  on  Paralysis  of
the  Lower  Extremities  "  (1860) ;  and  "  Lectures  on
Nervous  Affections  "  (1873).

BROWNSON,  Nathan,  statesman,  d.  in  Liberty
CO.,  Ga.,  6  Nov.,  1796.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1761,  studied  medicine,  and  practised  in  Liberty
CO.,  Ga.  He  was  an  early  supporter  of  the  patriot
cause,  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  congress  of
1775,  and  was  for  some  time  surgeon  in  the  revolu-
tionary army.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  conti-
nental'congress  in  1776  and  1778,  and  in  1781,  when
speaker  of  the  Georgia  legislature,  was  chosen  by
that  body  governor  of  the  state.  He  was  again
speaker  in  1788,  and  president  of  the  state  senate  in
1789-91.  In  1789  he  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  framed  the  state  constitution.

BROWNSON,  Orestes  Augustus,  author,  b.  in
Stockbridge,  Vt.,  16  Sept.,  1803;  d.  in  Detroit,
Mich.,  17  April,  1876.  His  father  died,  leaving  the
family  in  poverty,  and  from  his  seventh  till  his
fourteenth  year  he  lived  with  elderly  relatives  at
Royalton,  who  reared  him  in  the  simple,  rigorous
discipline  of  puritanism.  After  this  he  removed  to
Saratoga,  and  there  earned  enough  money  to  enter

an  academy
at  Ballston ;
while  there  he
united  with
the  Presbyte-
rian church
in  1822;  but
he  afterward
changed  his
views,  and  be-
came in  1825
aUniversalist
minister.  He
preached  in
Vermont  and
New  York,
conductedthe
"Gospel  Ad-
vocate," the
leading  Uni-
versalist  or-
gan, was  af-
terward edi-
tor of  the  "  Philanthropist,"  and  wrote  for  religious
periodicals  in  support  of  his  new  belief.  Making  the
acquaintance  of  Robert  Owen,  he  was  fascinated  by
schemes  of  social  reform,  and  in  1828  was  promi-
nent m  the  formation  of  the  working-men's  party
m  New  York,  the  design  of  which  was  to  relieve
the  poorer  classes  by  political  organization  ;  but  he
presently  despaired  of  the  effectiveness  of  this  move-
ment. Afterward  the  writings  of  Dr.  Channing
drew  his  attention  to  the  Unitarians,  and  in  1832  he
became  pastor  of  a  congregation  of  that  denomina-
f^-  ^^  1836  he  organized  in  Boston  the  Society
tor  Christian  Union  and  Progress,  of  which  he  re-
!^"l®^  ^6  pastorate  till  he  ceased  preaching  in
.,  ^^-  Brownson  became  a  popular  leader  in

tne  democratic  party,  a  vigorous  and  acrimonious
opponent  of  the  whigs,  whom  he  regarded  as  an
aristocratic  party,  and  a  favorite  stump-speaker,
VOL.  I. — 27


especially  in  Massachusetts.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  original  loco-foco  party  in  New
York,  and  in  his  review  he  warmly  supported  Van
Buren,  who,  when  president,  gave  him  the  appoint-
ment of  steward  of  Chelsea  hospital.  He  was  in-
dependent in  his  political  views,  and  troublesome
to  party  leaders.  When  the  democrats  and  free-
soilers  of  Massachusetts  agreed  on  a  new  constitu-
tion, he,  with  other  independents,  secured  its  re-
jection and  helped  to  secure  the  triumph  of  the
whigs.  Immediately  after  removing  to  Boston  he
published  his  "  New  Views  of  Christian  Society
and  the  Church  "  (Boston,  1836),  remarkable  for  its
protest  against  Protestantism.  Articles  on  the
eclectic  philosophy,  published  in  the  "  Christian
Examiner,"  in  1837,  gave  him  a  reputation  as  a
philosopher.  In  1838  he  established  the  "  Boston
Quarterly  Review,"  of  which  he  was  proprietor,
and  almost  sole  writer,  during  the  five  years  of  its
separate  existence,  and  to  which  he  contributed
largely  during  the  first  year  after  it  was  merged
in  the  "  Democratic  Review,"  of  New  York.  It
was  designed  not  to  support  any  definite  doctrine,
but  to  awaken  thought  on  great  subjects  and  lead
the  way  to  radical  changes.  Mr.  O'SulIivan,  pro-
prietor of  the  "  Review  "  when  he  purchased  the
subscription-list  of  the  "  Quarterly,"  entered  into  a
contract  to  allow  Dr.  Brownson  to  print  what  he
pleased.  His  articles  were  often  opposed  to  the
policy  of  the  party,  and  cost  the  "  Democratic  Re-
view" many  subscribers.  He  published  in  1840
"  Charles  Elwood.  or  the  Infidel  Converted,"  an
autobiographic  philosophical  novel,  which  passed
through  several  editions ;  but,  because  the  author
changed  his  religious  views,  he  refused  to  have
more  than  one  edition  issued  in  the  United  States.
In  1844  he  entered  the  Roman  Catholic  commun-
ion, to  which  he  afterward  remained  attached.
The  method  adopted  in  his  philosophical  system  is
the  distinction  between  intuition  and  indirect  or
reflex  knowledge.  His  review  was  continued  un-
der the  title  of  "  Brownson's  Quarterly  Review,"
but  was  afterward  transferred  to  New  York.  He
came  into  collision  with  the  authorities  of  his
church  on  certain  questions,  which  he  treated  from
the  stand-point  of  what  was  called  liberal  Catho-
licity. The  writings  of  Cousin,  Leroux,  and  Gio-
berti  had  always  had  much  influence  over  him,  and
certain  theories  of  those  philosophers  were  so  much
insisted  on  in  the  pages  of  the  "Review"  that  the
question  of  Dr.  Brownson's  orthodoxy  was  referred
to  Rome,  and  Cardinal  Franzelin  was  deputed  by
the  pope  to  examine  the  matter.  This  great  theo-
logian found  nothing  worthy  of  censure  in  the
opinions  of  Dr.  Brownson,  but  recommended  him
to  be  more  moderate  in  his  language.  However,
the  indignation  that  his  views  on  certain  points
aroused  among  the  clergy,  combined  with  domestic
trials,  impaired  health,  and  his  anxiety  for  the
safety  of  the  union,  to  whose  cause  he  had  given
two  sons,  had  such  a  depressing  effect  on  him  that
he  discontinued  the  "  Review"  in  1864.  When  the
syllabus  was  published  in  the  following  year  he
wrote  strongly  in  its  defence  in  the  "Catholic
World  "  and  "  Tablet,"  and  was  accused  of  being
too  rigorous  on  some  points  of  Catholic  doctrine,
while  he  was  lax  on  others.  He  was  offered  a
chair  in  the  new  university  in  Dublin,  but  pre-
ferred to  continue  his  labors  in  his  native  country.
He  revived  his  "  Review "  in  1873,  but  after  two
years  discontinued  it  again,  partly  because  he
wished  to  live  in  Detroit  with  his  son,  and  partly
because  he  disliked  the  contests  that  certain  news-
papers tried  to  force  upon  him.  "  Brownson's  Re-
view "  was  the  first  American  periodical  reprinted


418


BRUCE


BRUCE


in  England,  where  it  had  a  large  circulation.  The
later  publications  of  Mr.  Brovvnson's  are :  "  Essays
and  Reviews "  (New  York,  1852) ;  "  The  Spirit-
Rapper,  an  Autobiography  "  (Boston,  1854) ;  "  The
Convert,  or  Leaves  from  my  Experience"  (New
York,  1857) ;  "  The  American  Republic,  its  Consti-
tution, Tendencies,  and  Destiny,"  a  work  treating
of  the  ethics  of  politics  (1865);'  "Conversation  on
Liberalism  and  the  Church  "  (1870).  Translations
of  several  of  his  works  and  essays  have  appeared
in  Europe.  A  collected  edition  of  his  works  has
been  published  in  nineteen  volumes.

BRUCE,  Archibald,  physician,  b.  in  New
York  in  February,  1777;  d.  there,  22  Feb.,  1818.
He  was  graduated  at  C!olumbia  in  1797.  His
father,  William  Bruce,  head  of  the  medical  depart-
ment of  the  British  army  at  New  York,  on  being
ordered  to  the  West  Indies,  specially  directed  that
his  son  should  not  be  brought  up  to  the  medical
profession.  But  from  the  medical  lectures  of
Nicholas  Romayne,  the  teachings  of  Dr.  Hosack,
and  attendance  on  the  courses  of  medical  instruc-
tion of  Columbia,  he  attained  a  knowledge  of  the
science.  He  went  to  Europe  in  1798,  received  the
degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  university  of  Edinburgh
in  1800,  and,  in  a  tour  of  two  years  in  France,
Switzerland,  and  Italy,  collected  a  mineralogical
cabinet  of  great  value.  He  married  in  London,
and  in  the  summer  of  1803  returned  to  New  York
city  and  began  practice.  In  1807  he  was  appointed
professor  of  materia  medica  and  mineralogy  in  the
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  being  the  first
to  fill  such  a  chair  in  the  United  States.  On  the
reorganization  of  the  college  in  1811,  he  was  super-
seded on  account  of  some  disagreement  with  the
management,  and  after  1812  filled  the  same  chair
in  Queen's,  now  Rutgers,  college,  New  Jersey.  He
projected  the  "  American  Mineralogical  Journal "
in  1810,  and  edited  it  until  1814.  His  chemical
analysis  "of  native  magnesia  from  New  Jersey"
made  known  to  science  the  mineral  now  called
after  him,  "  Brucite."  He  also  detected  and  cor-
rectly analyzed  the  zincite  of  Sussex  co.,  N.  J.,  and
published  a  valuable  paper  "  On  the  Ores  of  Titan-
ium occurring  within  the  United  States."  Dr.
Bruce  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  New
York  historical  society,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  a  member  of  many  learned  societies
both  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.

BRUCE,  Blanche  K.,  senator,  b.  in  Prince
Edward  co.,  Va.,  1  March,  1841.  He  is  of  African
descent,  was  born  a  slave,  and  received  the  rudi-
ments of  education  from  the  tutor  of  his  master's
son.  When  the  civil  war  began  he  left  his  young
master,  whose  companion  he  had  been,  and  who
went  from  Missouri  to  join  the  confederate  army.
Mr.  Bruce  taught  school  for  a  time  in  Hannibal,
Mo.,  became  a  student  at  Oberlin,  afterward  pur-
sued special  studies  at  home,  and  after  the  war
went  to  Mississippi.  In  1869  he  became  a  planter
in  Mississippi.  He  was  sergeant-at-arms  of  the
legislature,  a  member  of  the  Mississippi  levee
board,  shonff  of  Bolivar  co.  in  1871-'4,  county
superintendent  of  education  in  1872-'3,  and  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  on  3  Feb.,  1875,  as  a  republi-
can, taking  his  seat  on  4  March,  1875,  and  serving
till  3  Man^h.  1881.  He  was  a  member  of  every  re-
publican convention  held  after  1868.  On  19  May,
1881,  he  entered  upon  the  office  of  register  of  the
treasury,  to  which  he  was  appointed  by  President
Garfield.  In  1886  he  delivered  a  lecture  on  the
condition  of  his  race,  entitled  "The  Race  Prob-
lem," and  one  on  "  Popular  Tendencies."

BRUCE,  Sir  Frederick  William  Adolphiis,
British  diplomatist,  b.  in  Broomhall,  Fifeshire,  Scot-


land, 14  April,  1814 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  19  Sept.,
1867.  He  was  the  fourth  son  of  the  seventh  earl  of
Elgin,  a  distinguished  diplomatist.  Sir  Frederick
was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1834,  and  was  called  to
the  bar  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  but,  his  tendencies  being
strongly  manifested  toward  diplomacy,  he  never
attempted  to  gain  practice  as  a  barrister.  In  1842
he  was  attached  to  Lord  Ashburton's  special  mis-
sion to  the  United  States  for  settling  the  north-
eastern boundary  question.  After  this  he  filled
various  important  diplomatic  offices,  and,  while
minister  to  China  in  1861,  distinguished  himself
by  services  toward  Americans  there.  A  contro-
versy having  arisen  in  1864  between  this  country
and  the  republic  of  Colombia,  he  was  appointed
umpire  by  the  two  governments,  and  discharged
the  delicate  duties  to  general  acceptance.  In  1865,
when  Lord  Lyons  was  removed  from  Washington
to  Constantinople,  Sir  Frederick  was  selected  by
the  earl  of  Clarendon  to  fill  the  important  and
difficult  position  of  minister  to  the  United  States.
His  course  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  duties  was
always  judicious.  The  London  "  Times  "  (21  Sept.,
1867)  is  authority  for  the  statements  that  "  it  was
in  accordance  with  his  repeated  advice  and  exhor-
tations that  a  wise  overture  toward  a  settlement"'
of  the  Alabama  claims  was  made  by  the  British
government,  and  that  it  was  greatly  owing  to  his
representations  that  the  United  States  government
interrupted  the  preparations  for  the  Fenian  raid
into  Canada  in  1866.

BRUCE,  George,  type-founder,  b.  in  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  5  July,  1781 :  d.  in  New  York
city,  6  July,  1866.  He  emigrated  to  the  United
States,  where  his  brother  David  had  preceded  him
in  July,  1795,  and  at  first  attempted  to  learn  the
book-binder's  trade,  but,  his  master  being  tyranni-
cal and  exacting,  he  left  him,  and  by  his  brother's
persuasion  apprenticed  himself  to  Thomas  Dobson,
printer  in  Philadelphia.  In  1798  the  destruction
of  Dobson's  office  by  fire,  and  the  prevalence  of
yellow  fever,  led  the  brothers  to  leave  the  city.
George  had  yellow  fever  at  Amboy,  but  recovered
through  his  brother's  care.  The  two  went  to  Al-
bany and  obtained  employment  there,  but  after  a
few  months  returned  to  New  York.  In  1803  young
Bruce  was  foreman  and  a  contributor  to  the  "  Daily
Advertiser,"  and  in  November  of  that  year  printer
and  publisher  of  the  paper  for  the' proprietor.  In
1806  the  two  brothers  opened  a  book  printing-oflRce
at  the  corner  of  Pearl  street  and  Coft'ee-house  slip.
The  same  year  they  brought  out  an  edition  of
"  Lavoisier's  Chemistry,"  doing  all  the  work  with
their  own  hands.  Their  industry  and  personal  at-
tention to  business  soon  brought  them  abundant
employment,  and  in  1809,  removing  to  Sloat  lane,
near  Hanover  square,  they  had  nine  presses  in  op-
eration, and  published  occasionally  on  their  own
account.  In  1812  David  went  to  England,  and
brought  back  with  him  the  secret  of  stereotyping.
The  brothers  attempted  to  introduce  the  process,
but  encountered  many  difficulties,  which  it  re-
quired all  their  ingenuity  to  surmount.  The  tvpe
of  that  day  was  cast  with  so  low  a  bevelled  shoulder
that  it  was  not  suitable  for  stereotyping,  as  it  m-
terfered  with  the  moulding  and  weakened  the  plate.
They  found  it  necessary,  therefore,  to  cast  their
own  tvpe.  They  invented  a  planing-machine  for
smoothing  the  backs  of  the  plates  and  reducing
them  to  a  uniform  thickness,  and  the  mahogany
shifting-blocks  to  bring  the  plates  to  the  same
height  as  tvpe.  Their  first  stereotype  works  were
school  editions  of  the  New  Testament  in  bourgeois,
and  the  Bible  in  nonpareil  (1814  and  1815).  Ihey
subsequently  stereotvped  the  earlier  issues  ot  tiie


BRUCE


BRUNOT


419


American  Bible  society,  and  a  series  of  Latin  clas-
sics In  1816  thev  sold  out  the  printing  business,
and  bought  a  building  in  Eldridge  street  for  their
foundry.  Here,  and  subsequently  in  1818,  when
they  erected  the  foundry  still  occupied  by  their
successors  in  Chambers  street,  George  gave  his  at-
tention to  the  enlargement  and  development  of  the
type-founding  business,  while  David  confined  his
labors  to  stereotyping.  In  1822  David's  health
failed,  and  the  partnership  was  dissolved.  George
soon  relinquished  stereotyping,  and  gave  his  whole
attention  to  type-founding,  and  introduced  valu-
able improvements  into  the  business,  cutting  his
own  punches,  making  constantly  new  and  tasteful
designs,  and  graduating  the  size  of  the  body  of  the
type  so  as  to  give  it  a  proper  relative  proportion  to
the  size  of  the  letter.  In  connection  with  his
nephew,  David  Bruce,  Jr.,  he  invented  the  only
type-casting  machine  that  has  stood  the  test  of  ex-
perience, and  is  now  in  general  use.  His  scripts
became  famous  among  printers  as  early  as  1882,
and  retained  their  pre-eminence  for  a  generation.
The  last  set  of  punches  he  cut  was  for  a  great
primer  script.  He  was  at  the  time  in  his  seventy-
eighth  year,  but  for  beauty  of  design  and  neatness
of  finish,  the  tyf)e  in  question  has  rarely  been  ex-
celled. Mr.  Bruce  was  a  man  of  large  benevolence.
of  unfiinching  integrity,  and  great  decision  of
character.  He  was  president  for  many  years  of
the  Mechanics'  institute,  and  of  the  type-founders'
association,  and  an  active  member  of.  and  contrib-
utor to,  the  historical  society,  St.  Andrew's  society,
the  typographical  society,  and  the  general  society
of  mechanics  and  tradesmen.

BRUCE,  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Machias,
Me.,  12  Feb.,  1798.  He  was  appointed  to  the  navy
as  midshipman  from  Massachusetts  on  9  Nov.,
1813,  and  was  captured  while  attached  to  the
"  Frolic,"  18  guns,  when  she  surrendered  to  the  Brit-
ish man-of-war  "  Orpheus,"  36  guns,  remaining  for
six  months  as  prisoner  of  war  in  Halifax,  N.  S.
He  became  lieutenant  on  13  Jan.,  1825,  was  attached
to  the  "  Macedonian  "  and  afterward  to  the  "  Frank-
lin," when  she  conveyed  Minister  Rush  to  England.
He  was  appointed  to  the  frigate  "  Brandywine,"
of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1837,  and  was
commissioned  commander,  8  Sept.,  1841.  In  1845
he  was  appointed  to  the  brig  "  Truxtun."  on  the
African  coast, capturing  the  slaver  "Spitfire"  dur-
ing his  cruise,  and  in  1848-'50  commanded  the
naval  rendezvous  at  Boston,  Mass.  He  was  put  on
the  reserved  list,  13  Sept.,  1855,  commissioned  com-
modore, 16  July,  1862.  and  retired,  4  April,  1867.

BRUCE,  Wallace,  lecturer,  b.  in  Hillsdale,  Co-
lumbia CO.,  N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1867,  and  has  lectured  extensively
before  lyceums  and  associations  on  literary  sub-
jects, especially  on  Shakespeare,  Scott,  Burns,  Irv-
ing, and  Bryant.  He  has  published  "Land  of
Burns"  (Boston,  1878);  "Yosemite"  (1879);  "The
Hudson"  (1881);  and  "From  the  Hudson  to  the

V  osemite  "  (New  York,  1884).

BRUEN,  Matthias,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newark,

V  J.,  11  April,  1793;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6
Sept.,  1829.  He  was  fond  of  books,  and  when
only  six  years  old  would  sometimes  lock  him-
self m  a  room  that  he  might  read  undisturbed.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1812  and  licensed
to  preach  in  1816 ;  but  failing  health  forced  him  to
travel  m  Europe  for  the  next  three  years.  He  was
ordamed  m  London,  4  Nov.,  1818,  and  took  charge
ot  the  "  American  chapel  of  the  oratorv  "  in  Paris
&L  ^^^  "i<^"tlis  before  returning  to  this  country.
A"^J  another  visit  to  Europe  in  1821,  he  -became
m  1822  a  missionary  in  New  York  city,  and  as  a


result  of  his  work  the  Bleecker  street  congregation
was  formally  organized,  22  April,  1825.  He  was
installed  as  its  pastor  on  14  June,  1825,  and  held
the  office  until  his  death.  Mr.  Bruen  published
"  Essays  descriptive  of  Scenes  in  Italy  and  France  "
(Edinburgh,  1822) ;  a  sermon  on  taking  leave  of
his  congregation  in  Paris  (1819);  a  Thanksgiving
sermon  delivered  at  Woodbridge,  N.  J.  (1821) ;  and
contributed  to  various  periodicals.  A  memoir  of
him  written  by  Mrs.  Duncan,  of  Scotland,  was  pub-
lished in  New  York  in  1831.

BRUHL,  Gustavus,  physician,  b.  in  Herdorf,
Prussia,  31  May,  1826.  He  studied  at  the  colleges
of  Siegen,  Miinstereifel,  and  Treves,  was  graduated
at  the  last  named,  and  studied  medicine  at  Munich,
Halle,  and  Berlin.  In  1848  he  removed  to  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio.  He  was  physician  of  St.  Mary's
hospital,  lecturer  on  laryngoscopy  in  Miami  medi-
cal college,  and  one  of  the  founders  and  first  presi-
dent of  the  Peter  Claver  society  for  the  education
of  colored  children.  From  1869  till  1871  he  edited
the  "  German  Pioneer,"  and  in  1871  was  nominated
by  the  democrats  for  state  treasurer.  In  1874  he
was  one  of  the  examiners  of  public  schools  in  Cin-
cinnati. He  has  published  "  Poesien  des  Urwalds  "
(1871),  and  has  written  much  for  periodicals,  both
in  prose  and  in  verse.

BRUNEL,  Alfred,  Canadian  engineer,  b.  in
1818.  From  1844  till  1850  he  was  employed  on
various  public  works  in  Canada.  He  was  superin-
tendent of  the  Northern  railway  from  1853  till
1856,  was  a  commissioner  to  inquire  into  the  work-
ings of  the  free  ports  of  Gaspe  and  Sault  Ste.  Marie
in  1862,  and  in  1863  he  was  appointed  inspector  of
customs,  excise,  and  canals,  in  1869  assistant  com-
missioner of  inland  revenue,  and  in  1871  commis-
sioner of  inland  revenue.  During  the  Fenian  troub-
les he  was  in  active  service  as  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  10th  royal  regiment.

BRUNEL,  Sir  Mark  Isambard,  French  engi-
neer, b.  in  Hacqueville,  near  Rouen,  France,  25
April,  1769  ;  d.  in  London,  England,  12  Dec,  1849.
He  became  a  sailor  in  1786,  made  voyages  to  the
West  Indies,  and  in  1793  escaped  from  France  for
political  reasons  and  settled  in  New  York.  He
surveyed  lands  belonging  to  a  French  company,
and  in  1794  began  the  surveys  for  the  Champlain
canal.  He  was  much  employed  as  an  engineer  and
architect  in  New  York,  where  he  built  the  Park
theatre  and  took  charge  of  the  construction  of  for-
tifications in  the  harbor.  He  also  conducted  a
cannon-foundry.  His  design  for  the  national  capi-
tol  at  Washington  was  rejected  because  it  involved
too  great  expense.  After  remaining  many  years  in
the  United  States  he  settled  in  England,  where  he
invented  machinery  for  cutting  blocks  used  in  the
rigging  of  ships  besides  other  useful  devices,  con-
structed the  Thames  tunnel  and  other  works  of
engineering,  and  designed  several  important  public
buildings,

BRUNOT,  Felix  R.,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New-
port, Ky.,  7  Feb.,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  Jef-
ferson college,  Cannonsburg,  Pa.,  followed  the
profession  of  civil  engineer  until  1842,  became  a
miller  at  Rock  Island,  111.,  and  in  1847  returned  to
Pittsburg,  where  his  early  years  had  been  spent,
and  purchased  an  interest  in  a  steel  furnace.  He
devoted  his  mind  largely  to  benevolent  schemes,
and  when  the  civil  war  began  he  went  to  the  seat
of  war  in  charge  of  a  corps  of  volunteer  physicians,
with  medicines  and  comforts  for  the  sick  and
wounded.  In  1865  President  Grant  appointed  him
one  of  the  commissioners  to  investigate  Indian
grievances.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the  board,
and  spent  five  summers  in  visiting  the  tribes.


430


BRUSH


BRUTfi


BRUSH,  Charles  Francis,  inventor,  b.  in  Eu-
clid, Ohio,  17  March,  1849.  PI  is  early  life  was
spent  on  his  father's  farm,  after  which  he  entered
the  public  schools  in  Cleveland  and  was  graduated
at  the  high  school.  During  the  years  so  occupied
he  was  interested  in  physics,  chemistry,  and  engi-
neering, in  which  subjects  he  became  very  profi-
cient. Much  of  his  leisure  was  spent  in  experi-
rnenting  and  in  manufacturing  scientific  instru-
ments. As  early  as  1864  he  constructed  microscopes
and  telescopes  for  himself  and  his  companions,  and
during  the  same  year  he  devised  a  plan  for  turning
on  gas  in  street-lamps,  lighting  it,  and  then  turn-
ing it  off  again.  Soon  after  leaving  the  high
school  he  entered  the  University  of  Michigan,  where
he  was  graduated  in  1869  with  the  degree  of  M.  E.
Returning  to  Cleveland,  he  fitted  up  a  laboratory,
became  an  analytical  chemist,  and  within  three
years  obtained  a  high  reputation  for  the  accuracy
of  his  work.  Then  for  four  years  he  was  engaged
in  the  iron  business.  In  1875  Mr.  Brush's  atten-
tion was  directed  to  electric  lighting.  The  prob-
lem of  producing  a  dynamo  machine  that  could
generate  the  proper  amount  and  kind  of  electrical
current  for  operating  several  lamps  in  a  single  cur-
rent was  submitted  to  him,  and  in  less  than  two
months  a  machine  was  built  so  perfect  and  com-
plete that  for  ten  years  it  has  continued  in  regular
use  without  change.  A  lamp  that  could  success-
fully work  upon  a  circuit  with  a  large  number  of
other  lamps,  so  that  all  would  burn  uniformly,  was
then  necessary,  and  this  he  produced  in  a  few
weeks.  These  two  inventions  were  successfully  in-
troduced in  the  United  States  during  1876.  Since
then  he  has  obtanied  more  than  fifty  patents,  two
thirds  of  which  are  sources  of  revenue.  They  re-
late principally  to  details  of  his  two  leading  inven-
tions— the  dynamo  and  the  lamp — and  to  methods
for  their  production.  All  of  his  patents,  present
and  future,  are  the  property  of  the  Brush  electric
company  of  Cleveland,  and  his  foreign  patents  are
owned  by  the  Anglo-American  Brush  electric  light
corporation  of  London.  Mr.  Brush  has  been  fortu-
nate both  in  honors  and  in  pecuniary  reward.  In
1880  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Western
Reserve,  and  in  1881  the  French  government  dec-
orated him  chevalier  of  the  legion  of  honor.

BRUSH,  George  Jarvis,  mineralogist,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  15  Dec,  1831.  He  removed  with
his  father  to  Danbury,  Conn.,  in  1835,  and  returned
to  Brooklyn  in  1841.  He  was  educated  in  the
schools  of  these  places  and  at  West  Cornwall,
Conn.,  where  he  acquired  a  fondness  for  science.
From  1846  till  1848  he  was  in  business  in  New
York ;  but  in  the  latter  year  a  severe  illness  deter-
mined him  to  become  a  farmer,  and  he  went  to
New  Haven  to  attend  a  six-months'  course  of  lec-
tures on  agriculture.  Instead  of  leaving  at  the  end
of  that  time,  he  remained  two  years  studying  chem-
istry and  mineralogy.  In  October,  1850,  he  went
to  Louisville,  Ky.,  as  assistant  to  Benjamin  Silli-
man,  Jr.,  who  had  been  chosen  professor  in  the  uni-
versity there,  and  in  1851  accompanied  the  elder
Silliman  on  a  tour  in  Europe.  In  1852  he  was  one
of  six  who  received,  after  examination,  the  newly
created  degree  of  Ph.  B.  from  Yale,  and  in  1852-''3
was  assistant  in  chemistry  at  the  University  of
Virginia,  where  he  made,  with  Prof.  J.  L.  Smith,  a
series  of  valuable  examinations  of  American  min-
erals, the  results  of  which  were  published  in  volumes
XV.  and  xvi.  of  the  "American  Journal  of  Sci-
ence." From  1853  till  1855  he  studied  at  Munich
and  Freiburg,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  elected
professor  of  metallurgy  in  Yale  Scientific  School.
This  chair  he  exchanged  in  1864  for  that  of  miner-


alogy. After  a  course  of  study  in  the  Royal  School
of  Mines,  London,  and  a  visit  to  the  principal
mines  and  smelting-works  of  Europe,  he  returned
to  this  country,  and  in  January,  1857,  entered  upon
his  new  duties.  From  that  time  till  the  present
Prof.  Brush  has  been  identified  with  the  Sheffield
Scientific  School,  where  his  energy,  judgment,  and
executive  capacity  soon  gave  him  the  leading  direc-
tion in  its  affairs.  He  was  for  some  time  its  secre-
tary, has  always  been  its  treasurer,  and,  since  the
formal  organization  of  its  faculty  in  1872,  has  been
director  of  the  governing-board.  Prof.  Brush  has
aided  Prof.  James  D.  Dana  in  the  preparation  of
the  recent  editions  of  his  "  Descriptive  Meneralogy,"
has  published  a  "  Manual  of  Determinative  Miner-
alogy "  (1875),  and  has  been  a  constant  contributor
to  the  '•  American  Journal  of  Science."  He  is  a
member  of  numerous  scientific  societies  in  this
country  and  abroad.  In  1868  he  received  his  elec-
tion to  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  in
1880  was  chosen  president  of  the  American  Asso-
ciation for  the  Advancement  of  Science.  For  a
list  of  his  numerous  scientific  papers,  see  a  sketch
of  him  by  Prof.  Lounsbury,  in  the  ''  Popular  Sci-
ence Monthly,"  November,  1881.

BRUTE,  "Simon  Gabriel,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Rennes,  France,  in  1779;  d.  in  Yincennes.  Ind.,  in
1839.  His  father,  who  was  superintendent  of  the
royal  domains  in  Brittany,  died,  leaving  his  affairs
in  such  embarrassment  that  his  widow  was  obliged
to  sacrifice  her  private  fortune  to  pay  her  debts.
Being  a  woman  of  cultivated  intellect,  she  conduct-
ed the  education  of  her  son,  assisted  by  the  cele-
brated Abbe  Carron.  He  afterward  studied  in  one
of  the  colleges  of  his  native  city,  where  he  prepared
himself  to  enter  the  polytechnic  school ;  but  the
breaking  out  of  the  French  revolution  changed  all
his  plans.  During  the  reign  of  terror  many  priests
were  secreted  in  his  mother's  house,  and  he  visited
and  relieved  others  in  their  retreats.  His  mother
having  been  forced  to  open  a  printing-ofiice  on  ac-
count of  family  reverses,  he  worked  at  type-set-
ting, and  became  a  skilful  compositor.  In  1706  he
entered  the  medical  college  of  Rennes,  and  in  1799
went  to  Paris  to  complete  his  professional  studies.
He  was  graduated  in  1803,  winning  the  first  prize
among  the  120  students  selected  to  compete  for  it
out  of  the  1,100  that  attended  the  college.  He  was
immediately  appointed  physician  to  the  First  Dis-
pensary of  Paris ;  but  he  "had  already  determined
upon  a  different  career,  and  in  November  entered
the  seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  at  Paris,  where  he  de-
voted himself  ardently  to  the  study  of  theology  and
canon  law.  He  was  ordained  in  1808,  and  was  of-
fered several  places,  among  them  that  of  chaplain
to  the  Emperor  Napoleon ;  but,  preferring  to  be
the  guide  of  young  candidates  for  the  ministry,  he
refused  them  all,  and  was  appointed  professor  of
theology  in  the  Sulpitian  seminary  of  his  native
city.  In  1810  he  met  Bishop  Flaget,  of  Kentucky.
During  his  ecclesiastical  course  in  the  sennnary  he
had  often  thought  of  devoting  himself  to  the  for-
eign missions,  and  his  intercourse  with  the  Ameri-
can prelate  now  revived  his  early  intentions,  and,
with  the  consent  of  his  superiors,  he  embarked  at
Bordeaux,  and  landed  at  Baltimore  in  1810.  Im-
mediately on  his  arrival  he  was  made  professor  ot
philosophy  in  the  college  of  St.  Mary's,  and  during
his  two  j-ears'  residence  he  did  much  to  elevate  the
reputation  of  that  institution.  In  1812  he  was
summoned  by  Father  Dubois  to  assist  him  in  his  mis-
sionarv  work  at  Emmittsburg,  where  he  became
spiritual  attendant  to  the  sisters  of  charity,  ana
was  principally  instrumental  in  building  up  the  in-
stitution they  had  established. He  went  to  France


BRUYAS


BRYANT


421


m  1815  with  the  object  of  interesting  the  French
church  in  the  American  mission,  and  also  of  bring-
ing over  his  valuable  library  of  more  than  5,000
volumes,  which  he  presented  to  St.  Mary's  college.
After  spending  two  years  as  president  of  St.  Mary's,
he  returned  to  Emmittsburg,  where,  in  addition  to
his  pastoral  duties,  he  lectured  on  sacred  Scripture,
and  was  professor  of  theology  and  moral  philoso-
phy in  the  ecclesiastical  seminary,  and  taught  natu-
ral* philosophy  and  various  other  branches  in  the
college.  Here  he  was  consulted  by  the  clergy  and
bishops  of  America  on  the  most  abstruse  subjects,
and  it  is  doubtful  if  any  priest  has  since  exercised
the  same  influence  over  the  entire  Catholic  church
of  the  United  States.  The  see  of  Vincennes,  com-
prising Indiana  and  the  greater  part  of  Illinois,
was  created  in  1888,  and  Father  Brute  was  nomi-
nated its  first  bishop.  Being  struck  on  his  first
visit  to  his  d  iocese  by  its  impoverished  condition
and  dearth  of  priests,  he  went  to  France,  hoping  to
secure  both  money  and  missionaries,  and  was  suc-
cessful, but  returned  in  failing  health.  He  em-
ployed the  money  he  had  collected  in  Europe  in
establishing  a  diocesan  seminary  at  Vincennes,  as
well  as  an  orphan  asylum  and  free  school.  The
surplus  he  devoted  to  the  erection  of  his  cathedral,
and  of  small  churches  in  other  parts  of  his  diocese.
He  afterward  crossed  the  ocean  eight  times  to  ob-
tain resources  for  carrying  on  his  mission.  When
he  entered  his  diocese  he  had  but  two  priests;
when  he  died  he  left  twenty-four.  He  built  twenty-
three  churches,  one  theological  seminary,  one  col-
lege for  young  men,  one  female  academy,  and  two
free  schools.  He  also  established  two  religious
communities,  and  he  did  all  this  without  incurring
debt  or  leaving  a  mortgage.

BRUYAS,  Jaques,  missionary,  b.  in  the  17th
century.  He  went  from  Lyons  to  New  France  in
1666,  and  reached  Quebec  Aug.  3  of  that  year.
He  became  chief  of  the  Iroquois  missions  in  1671,
and  superior  of  his  order  in  1698.  In  1700  he  was
instrumental  in  securing  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the
Five  Nations,  which  lasted  more  than  half  a  cen-
tury. This  treaty  was  formally  ratified  the  follow-
ing year,  and  Bruyas  attended  the  ceremonies.
He  wrote  several  books  in  the  Mohawk  language,
including  a  dictionary  and  a  catechism.

BRYAN,  George,' jurist,  b  in  Dublin,  Ireland,
in  1731 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  Jan.,  1791.  He
came  to  this  country  in  early  life,  and  was  engaged
some  years  in  commercial  pursuits  in  Philadelphia.
He  was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly,  and  in
1765  was  a  delegate  to  the  stamp-act  congress,  in
which,  and  in  the  subsequent  struggle,  he  took  an
active  part.  He  was  vice-president  of  the  supreme
executive  council  of  Pennsylvania  from  the  period
of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and  in  May,
1778,  was  advanced  to  the  presidency.  In  Noveni-
ber  of  that  year  he  sent  a  message  to  the  assembly,
pressing  upon  their  attention  a  bill  proposed  by
the  council  in  1777  for  the  gradual  abolition  of
slavery  in  the  state.  "  In  divesting  the  state  of
slaves,"  said  he,  "  you  will  equally  serve  the  cause
of  humanity  and  policy,  and  offer  to  God  one  of
the  most  proper  and  best  returns  of  gratitude  for
his  great  deliverance  of  us  and  our  posterity  from
tliraldom."  In  1779  Bryan  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature. On  his  motion  the  subject  was  referred
to  a  committee,  of  which  he  himself  was  a  member,
and  he  prepared  the  draft  of  a  law  for  gradual
emancipation.  Pie  was  appointed  a  judge  of  the
state  supreme  court  in  1780,  and  remained  in  that
office  until  his  death.  In  1784  he  was  elected  one
ot  the  council  of  censors.  He  strenuously  opposed
the  adoption  of  the  federal  constitution.


BRYAN,  Mary  Edwards,  author,  b.  in  Jeffer-
son CO.,  Fla.,  in  1846.  Her  father  was  Maj.  John
D.  Edwards,  an  early  settler  in  Florida,  and  a
member  of  the  legislature.  She  was  married  at
sixteen  years  of  age,  and,  while  still  at  school,  to
Mr.  Bryan,  a  wealthy  Louisianian.  Mrs.  Bryan
began  to  write  for  publication  at  an  early  age,
and,  after  acting  for  a  year  as  literary  editor
of  the  "Literary  and  Temperance  Crusader,"  a
weekly  journal  published  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,  became
a  regular  contributor  to  the  '•  Southern  Field  and
Fireside."  After  the  war  she  became  editor  of  the
"  Semi- Weekly  Times,"  published  in  Natchitoches,
La.,  writing  political  leading  articles  as  well  as
stories,  sketches,  and  poems.  She  left  this  place
to  assume  control  of  the  "  Sunny  South,"  an  eight-
page  illustrated  paper  published  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
which  she  edited  for  ten  years.  In  1885  she  be-
came assistant  editor  of  the  "Fashion  Bazar"  and
"  Fireside  Companion "  in  New  York.  She  has
published  several  novels :  "  Manch "  (New  York,
1879) ;  "  Wild  Work,"  a  story  of  the  reconstruc-
tion period  in  Louisiana  (1881) ;  and  "  The  Bayou
Bride  "  and  "  Kildee  "  (1886).

BRYAN,  Thomas  Jefferson,  art  collector,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  about  1800;  d.  at  sea,  between
Havre  and  New  York,  15  May,  1870.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1823.  and  studied  law,  but
gave  much  of  his  time  to  foreign  travel,  and  to
forming  a  valuable  collection  of  paintings,  which
he  bequeathed  to  the  New  York  historical  society.
His  favorite  work  was  a  beautiful  face  and  figure
by  Greuze,  which  was  always  hung  so  that  it  should
be  the  first  object  that  met  his  gaze  on  awaking  in
the  morning.  The  handsome  old  man  called  it
his  wife,  having  no  other.

BRYANT,  Edwin,  pioneer,  b.  in  Massachusetts
in  1805;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  in  1869.  Before
1846  he  was  for  some  time  a  journalist  in  Ken-
tucky. In  the  summer  of  that  year,  chiefly  with  a
view  to  travelling,  he  acted  as  leader  of  a  party  of
emigrants  from  Missouri  to  California.  While  va-
rious parties  had  gone  overland  to  California  since
1841,  the  large  numbers  and  the  critical  circum-
stances of  this  emigration  gave  it  much  historical
importance.  The  conquest  of  California  by  Fre-
mont, Sloat,  and  Stockton  passed  through  its  early
stages  while  the  emigrants  of  1846  were  on  the
way.  They  arrived,  therefore,  to  find  the  supposed
Mexican  territory,  which  they  had  gone  to  seek,
already  a  province  of  their  own  country.  But  they
were  just  in  time  to  give  much  -  needed  aid  in
suppressing  the  disturbances  of  the  winter  of
1846-'7 ;  and,  by  virtue  of  their  numbers  and  en-
ergy, they  took  'thenceforth  an  important  part  in
all  the  pioneer  life  of  California.  The  emigration
of  1846  deserved,  therefore,  a  chronicler,  and  Bry-
ant did  this  service,  describing  the  overland  jour-
ney, the  explorations  undertaken  by  the  way,  the
conditions  just  succeeding  the  conquest,  as  ob-
served on  his  arrival,  the  life  of  the  California  bat-
talion under  Fremont  during  the  suppression  of
the  revolt  of  the  winter  of  1846-7,  and  his  own
experiences  as  alcalde  in  the  San  Francisco  district.
He  added  a  general  summary  of  such  portions  of
the  conquest  history  as  he  had  not  personally  wit-
nessed, and  gave  a  good  geographical  sketch  of  the
country.  His  book  was  published  under  the  title
"What  I  Saw  in  California"  (New  York,  1848).
Bryant,  after  serving  as  alcalde,  returned  east  with
Geii.  Kearny,  was  witness  at  the  Fremont  court-
martial,  and,  after  1849,  attracted  by  the  gold  ex-
citement, once  more  lived  for  a  time  in  California,
being  prominent  as  a  politician.  His  later  life  was
passed  in  Kentucky.


422


BRYANT


BRYANT


BRYANT,  Gridley,  engineer,  b.  in  Scituate,
Mass.,  in  1789 ;  d.  there,  13  June,  1867.  He  was
left  fatherless  at  an  early  age,  was  apprenticed  to
a  builder  in  Boston  when  fifteen  years  old,  and
when  twpnty-one  began  business  on  his  own  ac-
count. In  1828  he  invented  the  portable  derrick.
He  obtained  the  contract  for  building  the  U.  S.
bank  in  Boston,  and  other  public  buildings,  and
was  master  builder  and  contractor  to  supply  stone
for  Bunker  Hill  monument.  In  order  to  bring  the
stone  from  his  quarry  at  Quincy,  he  conceived  the
plan  of  building  a  railroad,  suggested  by  the  Liv-
erpool and  Manchester  railroad,  then  in  contempla-
tion in  England,  but  not  yet  built.  Thomas  H.
Perkins  and  other  members  of  the  Bunker  Hill
monument  association  consented  to  the  project,
though  doubtful  of  its  success;  the  legislature
hesitated  to  charter  the  corporation,  and  finally
granted  a  charter  that  was  encumbered  with
vexatious  restrictions.  Mr.  Perkins  alone  of  the
original  subscribers  was  willing  to  risk  capital  in
the  venture,  and  took  the  whole  stock  when  the
others  neglected  to  pay  their  assessments.  The
railroad,  four  miles  long,  including  branches,  was
begun  on  1  April,  1826,  and  on  7  Oct.  of  the  same
year  the  first  train  of  cars  passed  over  the  entire
line.  Bryant  devised  a  swing  platform,  balanced
by  weights,  to  receive  the  loaded  cars  as  they  came
from  the  quarry.  The  platform  was  connected
with  an  inclined  plane,  on  which  the  cars  were
lowered,  by  means  of  an  endless  chain,  to  the  rail-
road, eighty-four  feet  below.  He  also  constructed  a
turn-table  at  the  foot  of  the  quarry.  All  the  cars,
tracks,  and  machinery  were  invented  by  him.  His
cars  had  four-wheeled  trucks,  which  were  used
singly,  or  were  joined  in  pairs,  by  means  of  a  plat-
form and  king-bolts,  to  form  eight-wheeled  cars.
The  turn-table,  switches,  and  turnouts  invented
by  Bryant  were  not  patented,  but  were  abandoned
to  the  public,  and  were  afterward  in  general  use
on  railroads.  In  1834  Ross  Winans  patented  an
eight-wheeled  car  with  appliances  and  improve-
ments adapted  for  general  railroad  use ;  but,  in-
stead of  taking  out  a  patent  for  his  improvements
and  combinations,  he  claimed  the  invention  of  the
principle  of  eight-wheeled  carriages.  Other  rail-
roads besides  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio,  which  con-
trolled the  Winans  patent,  used  eight-wheeled  cars
similar  to  those  of  Winans,  on  the  strength  of  Bry-
ant's prior  invention,  which  was  not  patented  ;  and
after  five  years  of  litigation  the  courts  decided
against  the  validity  of  the  Winans  patent.  Mr.
Bryant's  testimony  was  frequently  required  in  the
Ross  Winans  suit.  He  had  become  reduced  in
circumstances,  and  was  encouraged  to  incur  much
trouble  and  outlay  by  repeated  promises  of  ample
compensation  from  the  interested  railroad  corpora-
tions; and  their  failure  to  keep  these  promises,
after  winning  the  suit,  greatly  depressed  his  spirits
and  hastened  his  death  from  paralysis.

BRYANT,  Joel,  physician,  b.  in  Suffolk  co.,
N.  Y.,  10  Nov.,  1813 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  20
Nov.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Pennsylvania
medical  college,  and  entered  upon  his  profession  in
his  native  village,  but  removed  to  Brooklyn  in
1850,  and  became  quite  prominent  as  a  practi-
tioner. For  some  years  previous  to  his  death  he
was  a  great  sufferer,  and  was  unable  to  attend  to
his  duties  as  a  physician.  He  was  the  author  of
several  treatises  on  homoeopathy,  the  best  of  which
was  "  The  Pocket  Manual,  or  Repertory  of  Homoeo-
pathic Practice  "  (New  York,  1851).

BRYANT,  Solomon,  Indian  clergyman,  b.  in
Massachusetts  in  1695 ;  d.  8  May,  1775.  After  the
resignation  of  Rev.  Joseph  Bourne  as  pastor  of  the


Indian  church  at  Marshpee,  Mass.,  Bryant  was  or-
dained in  his  stead  in  1742  and  preached  to  the  In-
dians in  their  own  language.  He  was  a  good  min-
ister, but  imprudent  in  admitting  members  to  the
church,  and  was  deficient  in  economy.  He  was
dismissed  from  his  place  in  1758,  on  account  of
dissatisfaction  among  his  flock,  and  was  succeeded
by  Rev.  Mr.  Hawley,  but  continued  to  preach  occa-
sionally at  Marshpee  for  several  years.

BRYANT,  William  Ciillen,  poet  and  editor,
b.  in  Cummiiigton,  Mass.,  3  Nov.,  1794;  d.  in  New
York,  12  June,  1878.  His  ancestry  might  have
been  inferred  from  the  character  of  his  writings,
which  reflect  whatever  is  best  and  noblest  in  the
life  and  thought  of  New  England.  The  first  Bry-
ant of  whom  there  is  any  account  in  the  annals  of
the  New  World,  Stephen,  came  over  from  Eng-
land, and  was  at  Plymouth,  Mass.,  as  early  as  1632,
of  which  town  he  was  chosen  constable  in  lOOo.
He  married  Abigail  Shaw,  who  had  emigrated  with
her  father,  and  who  bore  him  several  children  be-
tween 1650  and  1665.  Stephen  Bryant  had  a  son
Ichabod,  who  was  the  father  of  Philip  Bryant,  born
in  1732.  Philip  married  Silence  Howard",  daughter
of  Dr.  Abiel  Howard,  of  West  Bridgewater,  whoso
profession  he  adopted,  practising  in  North  Bridge-
water.  He  was  the  father  of  nine  children,  one  of
whom,  Peter,  born  in  1 767,  succeeded  him  in  his  pro-
fession. Young  Dr.  Bryant  married  in  1192  Jliss
Sarah  Snell,  daughter  of  Ebenezer  Snell,  of  Bi'idge-
water,  who  removed  his  family  to  Cummington,
where  the  subject  of  this  sketch  was  born.  Dr.
Bryant  was  proud  of  his  profession;  and  in
the  hope,  no  doubt,  that  his  son  would  become  a
shining  light  therein,  he  perpetuated  at  his  chris-
tening the  name  of  a  great  medical  authority,  who
had  died  four  years  before,  William  Cullen.  The
lad  was  exceedingly  frail,  and  had  a  head  the  im-
mensity of  which  troubled  his  anxious  father.
How  to  reduce  it  to  the  normal  size  was  a  puzzle
that  Dr.  Bryant  solved  in  a  spring  of  clear,  cold
water,  into  which  the  child  was  immersed  every
morning,  head  and  all,  by  two  of  Dr.  Bryant's  stu-
dents. William  Cullen  Bryant's  mother  was  a
descendant  of  John  Alden  ;  and  the  characteristics
of  his  family  included  some  of  the  sterner  qualities
of  the  Puritans.  His  grandfather  Snell  was  a
magistrate,  and  without  doubt  a  severe  one,  for
the  period  was  not  one  that  favored  leniency  to
criminals.  The  whipping-post  was  still  extant  in
Massachusetts,  and  the  poet  remembered  that  one
stood  about  a  mile  from  his  early  home  at  Cum-
mington, and  that  he  once  saw  a  young  fellow  of
eighteen  who  had  received  forty  lashes  as  a  pun-
ishment for  theft.  It  was,  he  thought,  the  last  ex-
ample of  corporal  punishment  inflicted  by  law  in
that  neighborhood,  though  the  whipping-post  re-
mained in  its  place  for  several  years.

Magistrate  Snell  was  a  disciplinarian  of  the
stricter  sort ;  and  as  he  and  his  wife  resided  with
Dr.  Bryant  and  his  family,  the  latter  stood  in  awe
of  him,  so  much  so  that  Villiam  Cullen  was  pre-
vented from  feeling  anything  like  affection  for
him.  It  was  an  age  of  repression,  not  to  say  op-
pression, for  children,  who  had  few  rights  that
their  elders  were  bound  to  respect.  To  the  'terrors
of  the  secular  arm  were  added  the  deeper  terrors  of
the  spiritual  law,  for  the  people  of  that  primitive
period  were  nothing  if  not  religious.  The  minister
was  the  great  man,  and  his  bodily  presence  was  a
restraint  upon  the  unruly,  and  the  ruly  too,  for
that  matter.  The  lines  of  our  ancestors  did  not !
fall  in  pleasant  places  as  far  as  recreations  were  con-  (
cerned ;  for  they  were  few  and  far  between,  con- 1
sisting,  for the  most part,  of militia  musters,


Zjigravediy  S.HoUyeT.  Outteiib-Lirg,


^fe^'a^m^  (^::i^fe^^:^^^5.,*^<-r^


^^^c'/^/zyyOy  A:4>'^^tv


-^^^^'^//^v-^^^/^.^^  ,i^^^1^^^U':y^ly/^^^fyy^<^^yycyZJ^.


D  Appleton  i  Co


BRYANT


BRYANT


423


"  raisings,"  corn-huskings,  and  singing-schools,  di-
versified with  the  making  of  maple  sugar  and
cider.  Education  was  confined  to  the  three  R's,
though  tlie  children  of  wealthy  parents  were  sent  to
colleges  as  they  now  are.  It  was  not  a  genial  social
condition,  it  must  be  confessed,  to  which  William
CuUen  Bryant  was  born,  though  it  might  have
been  worse  but  for  his  good  father,  who  was  in
many  respects  superior  to  his  rustic  neighbors.  He
was  broad-shouldered  and  muscular,  proud  of  his
strength,  but  his  manners  were  gentle  and  reserved,
his  disposition  serene,  and  he  was  fond  of  society.
He  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  house  of  rep-
resentatives several  times,  afterward  to  the  state
senate,  and  associated  with  the  cultivated  circles
of  Boston  both  as  legislator  and  physician.

We  have  the  authority  of  the  poet  himself  that
his  father  taught  his  youth  the  art  of  verse.  His
first  efl'orts  were  several  clever  "  Enigmas,"  in  imi-
tation of  the  Ijatin  writers,  a  translation  from
Horace,  and  a  copy  of  verses  written  in  his  twelfth
year,  to  be  recited  at  the  close  of  the  winter  school,
"in  the  presence  of  the  master,  the  minister  of  the
parish,  and  a  number  of  private  gentlemen."  They
were  printed  on  18  March,  1807,  in  the  "  Hamp-
shire Gazette,"  from  which  these  particulars  are
derived,  and  which  was  favored  with  other  contri-
butions from  the  pen  of  "C.  B."  The  juvenile
poems  of  William  CuUen  Bryant  are  as  clever  as
those  of  Chatterton,  Pope,  and  Cowley;  but  they
are  in  no  sense  original,  and  it  would  have  been
strange  if  they  had  been.  There  was  no  original
writing  in  America  at  the  time  they  were  written  ;
and  if  there  had  been,  it  would  hardly  have  com-
mended itself  to  the  old-fashioned  taste  of  Dr.
Bryant,  to  whom  Pope  was  still  a  power  in  poetry.
It  was  natural,  therefore,  that  he  should  offer  his
boy  to  the  strait-laced  muses  of  Queen  Anne's
time ;  that  the  precocious  boy  should  lisp  in  heroic
couplets;  and  that  he  should  endeavor  to  be
satirical.  Politics  were  running  high  in  the  first
decade  of  the  present  century,  and  the  favorite
bugbear  in  New  England  was  President  Jefferson,
who,  in  1807,  had  laid  an  embargo  on  American
shipping,  in  consequence  of  the  decrees  of  Napo-
leon, and  the  British  orders  in  council  in  relation
thereto.  This  act  was  denounced,  and  by  no  one
more  warmly  than  by  Master  Bryant,  who  made  it
the  subject  of  a  satire :  "  The  Embargo ;  or.  Sketches
of  the  Times "  (Boston.  1808).  The  first  edition
was  sold,  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  well  received  ;
but  doubts  were  expressed  as  to  whether  the  author
was  really  a  youth  of  thirteen.  His  friends  came
to  his  rescue  in  an  "  Advertisement,"  prefixed  to  a
second  edition  (1809),  certifying  to  his  age  from
their  personal  knowledge.  They  also  certified  to
his  extraordinary  talents,  though  they  preferred  to
have  him  judged  by  his  works,  without  favor  or
affection,  and  concluded  by  saying  that  the  printer
was  authorized  to  disclose  their  addresses.

The  early  poetical  exercises  of  William  Cullen
Bryant,  like  those  of  all  young  poets,  were  colored
Dy  the  books  he  read.  Among  these  were  the  works
of  Pope,  and,  no  doubt,  the  works  of  Cowper  and
Thomson.  The  latter,  if  they  were  in  the  library
of  Dr.  Bryant,  do  not  appear  to  have  impressed  his
son  at  this  time;  nor,  indeed,  does  any  English
poet  except  Pope,  so  far  as  we  can  judge  from  his
contributions  to  the  "  Hampshire  CJazeUe."  They
were  bookish  and  patriotic :  one,  written  at  Cum-
mmgton,  8  Jan.,  1810,  being  "The  Genius  of  Co-
lumbia "  ;  and  another,  "  An  Ode  for  the  Fourth
of  July,  1812,"  to  the  tune  of  "Ye  Gentlemen  of
iingland."  These  productions  are  undeniably  clev-
er, but  they  are  not  characteristic  of  their  writer,


nor  of  the  nature  that  surrounded  his  birthplace,
with  which  he  was  familiar,  and  of  which  he  was  a
close  observer.

He  entered  Williams  college  in  his  sixteenth
year,  and  remained  there  one  winter,  distinguish-
ing himself  for  aptness  and  industry  in  classical
learning  and  polite  literature.  At  the  end  of  two
years  he  withdrew,  and  began  the  study  of  law,
first  with  Judge  Howe,  of  Worthington,  and  after-
ward with  William  Baylies,  of  Bridgewater.  So
far  he  had  written  nothing  but  clever  amateur
verse;  but  now,  in  his  eighteenth  year,  he  wrote
an  imperishable  poem.  The  circumstances  under
which  it  was  composed  have  been  variously  related,
but  they  agree  in  the  main  particulars,  and  are
thus  given  in  "The  Bryant  Homestead  Book":
"  It  was  here  at  Cummington,  while  wandering  in
the  primeval  forests,  over  the  floor  of  which  were
scattered  the  gigantic  trunks  of  fallen  trees,  mould-
ering for  long  years,  and  suggesting  an  indefinitely
remote  antiquity,  and  where  silent  rivulets  crept
along  through  the  carpet  of  dead  leaves,  the  spoil
of  thousands  of  summers,  that  the  poem  entitled
'  Thanatopsis '  was  composed.  The  young  poet
had  read  the  poems  of  Kirke  White,  which,  edited
by  Southey,  were  published  about  that  time,  and  a
small  volume  of  Southey's  miscellaneous  poems;
and  some  lines  of  those  authors  had  kindled  his
imagination,  which,  going  forth  over  the  face  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  globe,  sought  to  bring  under
one  broad  and  comprehensive  view  the  destinies  of
the  human  race  in  the  present  life,  and  the  perpet-
ual rising  and  passing  away  of  generation  after
generation  who  are  nourished  by  the  fruits  of  its
soil,  and  find  a  resting-place  in  its  bosom."  We
should  like  to  know  what  lines  in  Southey  and
Kirke  White  suggested  "  Thanatopsis,"  that  they
might  be  printed  in  letters  of  gold  hereafter.

When  the  young  poet  quitted  Cummington  to  be-
gin his  law  studies,  he  left  the  manuscript  of  this
incomparable  poem  among  his  papers  in  the  house
of  his  father,  who  found  it  after  his  departure,
"Here  are  some  lines  that  our  Cullen  has  been
writing,"  he  said  to  a  lady  to  whom  he  showed
them.  She  read  them,  and,  raising  her  eyes  to  the
face  of  Dr.  Bryant,  burst  into  tears — a  tribute  to
the  genius  of  his  son  in  which  he  was  not  ashamed
to  join.  Blackstone  bade  his  Muse  a  long  adieu
before  he  turned  to  wrangling  courts  and  stubborn
law;  and  our  young  lawyer  intended  to  do  the
same  (for  poetry  was  starvation  in  America  four-
score years  ago),  but  habit  and  nature  were  too
strong  for  him.  There  is  no  diffictilty  in  tracing
the  succession  of  his  poems,  and  in  a  few  instances
the  places  where  they  were  written,  or  with  which
they  concerned  themselves.  "  Thanatopsis,"  for
example,  was  followed  by  "The  Yellow  Violet,"
which  was  followed  by  the  "  Inscription  for  the
Entrance  to  a  Wood,"  and  the  song  beginning
"  Soon  as  the  glazed  and  gleaming  snow."  The
exquisite  lines  "  To  a  Waterfowl  "  were  written  at
Bridgewater,  in  his  twentieth  year,  where  he  was
still  pursuing  the  study  of  law,  which  appears  to
have  been  distasteful  to  him.  The  concluding
stanza  sank  deeply  into  a  heart  that  needed  its
pious  lesson :

"  He  who.  from  zone  to  zone.
Guides  through  the  boundless  sky  thy  certain  flight.
In  the  long  way  that  I  must  tread  alone.
Will  lead  my  steps  aright."

The  lawyer- poet  had  a  long  way  before  him,  but
he  did  not  tread  it  alone ;  for,  after  being  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Plymouth,  and  practising  for  a  time
in  Plainfield,  near  Cummington,  he  removed  to
Great  Barrington,  in  Berkshire,  where  he  saw  the


424


BRYANT


BRYANT


dwelling  of  the  Genevieve  of  his  chilly  little  "  Song."
his  Genevieve  being  Miss  Frances  Fairchild  of  that
beautiful  town,  whom  he  married  in  his  twenty-
seventh  year,  and  who  was  the  light  of  his  house-
hold for  nearly  half  a  century.  It  was  to  her,  the
reader  may  like  to  know,  that  he  addressed  the
ideal  poem  beginning  "  O  fairest  of  the  rural  maids  "
{circa  1825),  "  The  Future  Life  "  (1837),  and  "  The
Life  that  Is  "  (1858) ;  and  her  memory  and  her  loss
are  tenderly  embalmed  in  one  of  the  most  touching
of  his  later  poems,  "  October,  1866."

"  Thanatopsis  "  was  sent  to  the  "  North  Ameri-
can Review "  (whether  by  its  author  or  his  father
is  uncertain),  and  with  such  a  modest,  not  to  say
enigmatical,  note  of  introduction,  that  its  author-
ship was  left  in  doubt.  The  "  Review  "  was  man-
aged by  a  club  of  young  literary  gentlemen,  who
styled  themselves  "The  North  American  Club,"
two  of  whose  members,  Richard  Henry  Dana  and
Edward  Tyrrel  Channing,  were  considered  its  ed-
itors. Mr.  Dana  read  the  poem  carefully,  and  was
so  surprised  at  its  excellence  that  he  doubted
whether  it  was  the  production  of  an  American,  an
opinion  in  which  his  associates  are  understood  to
have  concurred.  While  they  were  hesitating  about
its  acceptance,  he  was  told  that  the  writer  was  a
member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate ;  and,  the  sen-
ate being  then  in  session,  he  started  immediately
from  Cambridge  for  Boston.  He  reached  the  state-
house,  and  inquired  for  Senator  Bryant.  A  tall,
middle-aged  man,  with  a  business-like  look,  was
pointed  out  to  him.  He  was  satisfied  that  he  could
not  be  the  poet  he  sought,  so  he  posted  back  to
Cambridge  without  an  introduction.  The  story
ends  here,  and  rather  tamely ;  for  the  original  nar-
rator forgot,  or  perhaps  never  knew,  that  Dr.  Bry-
ant was  a  member  of  the  senate,  and  that  it  was
among  the  possibilities  that  he  was  the  senator
with  a  similar  name.  American  poetry  may  be
said  to  have  begun  in  1817  with  the  September
number  of  the  "North  American  Review,"  which
contained  "  Thanatopsis  "  and  tlie  "  Inscription  for
the  Entrance  of  a  Wood,"  the  last  being  printed
as  a  "  Fragment."  In  March,  1818,  the  impression
that  "Thanatopsis"  created  was  strengthened  by
the  appearance  of  the  lines  "  To  a  Waterfowl,"  and
the  "  Version  of  a  Fragment  of  Simonides."


Mr.  Bryant's  literary  life  may  now  be  said  to
have  begun,  though  he  depended  upon  his  profes-
sion for  his  daily  bread.  He  continued  his  contri-
butions to  the  "  North  American  Review  "  in  prose
papers  on  literary  topics,  and  maintained  the  most
friendly  relations  with  its  conductors ;  notably  so
with  Mr.  Dana,  who  was  seven  years  his  elder,  and
who  possessed,  like  himself,  the  accomplishment  of
verse.  At  the  suggestion  of  this  poetical  and  crit-
ical brother,  he  was  invited  to  deliver  a  poem  be-
fore the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  at  Harvard  col-
lege—an honor  which  is  offered  only  to  those  who


have  already  made  a  reputation,  and  are  likely  to
reflect  credit  on  the  society  as  well  as  on  them-
selves. He  accepted,  and  in  1821  wrote  his  first
poem  of  any  length,  "  The  Ages,"  which  still  re-
mains the  best  poem  of  the  kind  that  was  ever  re-
cited before  a  college  society  either  in  this  country
or  in  England ;  grave,  stately,  thoughtful,  present-
ing in  animated  picturesque  stanzas  a  compact
summary  of  the  history  of  mankind.  A  young
Englishman  of  twenty-one,  Thomas  Babington
Macaulay,  delivered  in  the  same  year  a  poem  on
"  Evening,"  before  the  students  of  Trinity  college,
Cambridge ;  and  it  is  instructive  to  compare  his
conventional  heroics  with  the  spirited  Spenserian
stanzas  of  Bryant.  The  lines  "  To  a  Waterfowl."
written  at  Bridge  water  in  1815,  were  followed  by
"Green  River,"  "A  Winter  Piece,"  "The  West
Wind,"  "  The  Burial-Place,"  "  Blessed  are  they  that
mourn,"  "  No  man  knoweth  his  Sepulchre,"  "  A
Walk  at  Sunset,"  and  the  "  Hynm  to  Death."
These  poems,  which  cover  a  period  of  six  busy
years,  are  interesting  to  the  poetic  student  as  ex-
amples of  the  different  styles  of  their  writer,  and  of
the  changing  elements  of  his  thoughts  and  feel-
ings. "Green  River,"  for  example,  is  a  momen-
tary revealment  of  his  shy  temperament  and  his
daily  pursuits.  Its  glimpses  of  nature  are  charm-
ing, and  his  wish  to  be  beside  its  waters  is  the  most
natural  one  in  the  world.  The  young  lawyer  is
not  complimentary  to  his  clients,  whom  he  styles
"  the  dregs  of  men,"  while  his  pen,  which  does  its
best  to  serve  them,  becomes  "a  barbarous  pen."
He  is  dejected,  but  a  visit  to  the  river  will  restore
his  spirits ;  for,  as  he  gazes  upon  its  lonely  and
lovely  stream,

"  An  image  of  that  calm  life  appears
That  won  my  heart  in  my  greener  years."
"  A  Winter  Piece "  is  a  gallery  of  woodland  pic-
tures, which  surpasses  anything  of  the  kind  in  the
language.  "  A  Walk  at  Sunset "  is  notable  in  that
it  is  the  first  poem  in  which  we  see  (faintly,  it  must
be  confessed)  the  aboriginal  element,  which  was
soon  to  become  prominent  in  Bryant's  poetry.  It
was  inseparable  from  the  primeval  forests  of  the
New  World,  but  he  was  the  first  to  perceive  its
poetic  value.  The  "Hymn  to  Death  "—stately,
majestic,  consolatory — concludes  with  a  touching
tribute  to  the  worth  of  his  good  father,  who  died
while  he  was  writing  it,  at  the  age  of  fifty-four.  The
year  1821  was  important  to  Bryant,  for  it  wit-
nessed the  publication  of  his  first  collection  of
verse,  his  marriage,  and  the  death  of  his  father.

The  next  four  years  of  his  life  were  more  pro-
ductive than  any  that  had  preceded  them,  for  he
wrote  more  than  thirty  poems  during  that  time.
The  aboriginal  element  was  creative  in  "  The  Indi-
an Girl's  Lament,"  "  An  Indian  Story,"  "  An  In-
dian at  the  Burial-Place  of  his  Fathers,"  and,  no-
blest of  all,  "  Monument  Mountain  " ;  the  Hellenic
element  predominated  in  "The  Massacre  at  Scio"
and  "The  Song  of  the  Greek  Amazon";  the  He;
braic  element  touched  him  lightly  in  "Rizpah
and  the  "  Song  of  the  Stars  "  ;  and  the  pure  poetic
element  was  manifest  in  "  March,"  "  The  Rivulet
(which,  by  the  way,  ran  through  the  grounds  of  the
old  homestead  at  Cummington),  "After  a  Tem-
pest," "  The  Murdered  Traveller,"  "  Hymn  to  the
North  Star,"  "  A^Forest  Hvmn,"  "  0  Fairest  of  tne
Rural  Maids,"  and  the  exquisite  and  now  most  pa-
thetic poem,  "  June."  These  poems  and  others  not
specified  here,  if  read  continuously  and  in  the  order
in  which  they  were  composed,  show  a  wide  range
of  sympathies,  a  perfect  acquaintance  with  many
measures,  and  a  clear,  capacious,  ever-growing  in-
tellect. They  are  all  distinctive  of  the  genius  of


BRYANT


BRYANT


425


their  author,  but  neither  exhibits  the  full  measure
of  his  powers.  The  publication  of  Bryant's  little
volume  of  verse  was  indirectly  the  cause  of  his
adopting  literature  as  a  profession.  It  was  warmly
commended,  and  by  no  one  more  so  than  by  Gillian
C.  Verplanck  in  the  columns  of  the  New  York
"  American."  He  was  something  of  a  literary  au-
thority at  the  time,  a  man  of  fortune  and  college-
bred.  '  Among  his  friends  was  Henry  D.  Sedgwick,
a  summer  neighbor,  so  to  speak,  of  Bryant's,  hav-
ing a  country-house  at  Stockbridge,  a  few  miles
from  Great  Barrington,  and  a  house  in  town,
which  was  frequented  by  the  literati  of  the  day,
such  as  Cooper,  Halleck,  Percival,  Verplanck,  and
others  of  less  note.  An  admirer  of  Bryant,  Mr,
Sedgwick  set  to  work,  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.
Verplanck,  to  procure  him  literary  employment  in
New  York  in  order  to  enable  him  to  escape  his
bondage  to  the  law ;  and  he  was  appointed  assist-
ant editor  of  a  projected  periodical  called  the
"New  York  Review  and  Athenaeum  Magazine."
The  at  last  enfranchised  lawyer  dropped  his  bar-
barous pen,  closed  his  law-books,  and  in  the  winter
or  spring  of  1835  removed  with  his  household  to
New  York.  The  projected  periodical  was  begun,
as  these  sanguine  ventures  always  are,  with  fair
hopes  of  success.  It  was  well  edited,  and  its  con-
tributors were  men  of  acknowledged  ability.  The
June  number  contained  two  poems  that  ought  to
have  made  a  great  hit.  One  was  "  A  Song  of  Pit-
cairn's  Island  " ;  the  other  was  "  Marco  Bozzaris."
There  was  no  flourish  of  trumpets  over  them,  as
there  would  be  now;  the  writers  merely  prefixed
their  initials,  "B."  and  "H."  The  reading  public
of  New  York  were  not  ready  for  the  "  Review,"  so
after  about  a  year's  struggle  it  was  merged  in  the
"  New  York  Literary  Gazette,"  which  had  begun
its  mission  about  four  years  earlier.  This  maga-
zine shared  the  fate  of  its  companion  in  a  few
months,  when  it  was  consolidated  with  the  '*  United
States  Literary  Gazette,"  which  in  two  months  was
swallowed  up  in  the  "  United  States  Review,"  The
honor  of  publishing  and  finishing  the  last  was
shared  by  Boston  and  New  York.  Profit  in  these
publications  there  was  none,  though  Bryant,  Hal-
leck, Willis,  Dana,  Bancroft,  and  Longfellow  wrote
for  them.  Too  good,  or  not  good  enough,  they
lived  and  died  prematurely.

Mr.  Bryant's  success  as  a  metropolitan  man  of
letters  was  not  brilliant  so  far ;  but  other  walks
than  those  of  pure  literature  were  open  to  him  as
to  others,  and  into  one  of  the  most  bustling  of
these  he  entered  in  his  thirty-second  year.  In  other
words,  he  became  one  of  the  editors  of  the  "  Even-
ing Post."  Henceforth  he  was  to  live  by  journal-
ism. Journalism,  though  an  exacting  pursuit,
leaves  its  skilful  followers  a  little  leisure  in  which
to  cultivate  literature.  It  was  the  hevday  of  those
ephemeral  trifles, "  Annuals,"  and  Mr.  Bryant  found
time  to  edit  one,  with  the  assistance  of  his  friend
Mr.  Verplanck  and  his  acquaintance  Robert  C.
Sands;  and  a  very  creditable  work  it  was.  His
contributions  to  "  The  Talisman  "  included  some  of
Ills  best  poems.  Poetry  was  the  natural  expression
of  his  genius,  a  fact  he  could  never  understand,  for
It  always  seemed  to  him  that  prose  was  the  natural
expression  of  all  mankind.  His  prose  was  master-
ly. Its  earliest  examples,  outside  of  his  critical
papers  in  the  "North  American  Review"  and
other  periodicals  (and  outside  of  the  "Evening
}/fJ'„  of  course),  are  two  stories  entitled  "Med-
neld  and  "  The  Skeleton's  Cave,"  contributed  to
•  tales  of  the  Glauber  Spa"  (1832),  a  collection  of
jnginal  stories  by  Paulding,  Verplanck,  Sands,
vv  iiiiam  Leggett,  and  Catharine  Sedgwick. Three


years  before  (1828)  he  had  become  the  chief  editor
of  the  '•  Evening  Post."  Associated  with  him  was
Mr.  Leggett,  who  had  shown  some  talent  as  a
writer  of  sketches  and  stories,  and  who  had  failed,
like  himself,  in  conducting  a  critical  publication
for  which  his  countrymen  were  not  ready.  He  made
a  second  collection  of  his  poems  at  this  time  (1882),
a  copy  of  which  was  sent  by  Mr.  Verplanck  to
Washington  Irving,  who  was  then,  what  he  had
been  for  years,  the  idol  of  English  readers,  and  not
without  weight  with  the  trade.  Would  he  see  if
some  English  house  would  not  reprint  it?  No
leading  publisher  nibbled  at  it,  not  even  Murray,
who  was  Irving's  publisher ;  but  an  obscure  book-
seller named  Andrews  finally  agreed  to  undertake
it  if  Irving  would  put  his  valuable  name  on  the
title-page  as  editor.  He  was  not  acquainted  with
Bryant,  but  he  was  a  kind-hearted,  large-souled
gentleman,  who  knew  good  poetry  when  he  saw  it,
and  he  consented  to  "  edit "  the  book.  It  was  not
a  success  in  the  estimation  of  Andrews,  who  came
to  him  one  day,  by  no  means  a  merry  Andrew,  and
declared  that  the  book  would  ruin  him  unless  one
or  more  changes  were  made  in  the  text.  What  was
amiss  in  it  %  He  turned  to  the  "  Song  of  Marion's
Men,"  and  stumbled  over  an  obnoxious  couplet  in
the  first  stanza :

"  The  British  soldier  trembles
When  Marion's  name  is  told,"
"  That  won't  do  at  all,  you  know."  The  absurdity
of  the  objection  must  have  struck  the  humorist
comically:  but,  as  he  wanted  the  volume  repub-
lished, he  good-naturedly  saved  the  proverbial
valor  of  the  British  soldier  by  changing  the  first
line  to

"  The  foeman  trembles  in  his  camp,"
and  the  tempest  in  a  teapot  was  over,  as  far  as
England  was  concerned.  Not  as  far  as  the  United
States  was  concerned,  however,  for  when  the  cir-
cumstance became  known  to  Mr.  Leggett  he  exco-
riated Irving  for  his  subserviency  to  a  bloated
aristocracy,  and  so  forth.  Prof.  Wilson  reviewed
the  book  in  "  Blackwood's  "  in  a  half-hearted  way,
patronizing  the  writer  with  his  praise.

The  poems  that  Bryant  wrote  during  the  first
seven  years  of  his  residence  in  New  York  (about
forty,  not  including  translations)  exhibited  the
qualities  that  distinguished  his  genius  from  the  be-
ginning, and  were  marked  by  characteristics  rather
acquired  than  inherited ;  in  other  words,  they  were
somewhat  different  from  those  written  at  Great
Barrington.  The  Hellenic  element  was  still  visi-
ble in  "  The  Greek  Partisan "  and  "  The  Greek
Boy,"  and  the  aboriginal  element  in  "  The  Disin-
terred Warrior,"  The  large  imagination  of  "  The
Hymn  to  the  North  Star"  was  radiant  in  "The
Firmament "  and  in  "  The  Past,"  Ardent  love  of
nature  found  expressive  utterance  in  "  Lines  on
Revisiting  the  Country,"  "  The  Gladness  of  Na-
ture," "A  Summer  Ramble,"  "A  Scene  on  the
Banks  of  the  Hudson,"  and  "The  Evening  Wind."
The  little  book  of  immortal  dirges  had  a  fresh
leaf  added  to  it  in  "  The  Death  of  the  Flowers,"
which  was  at  once  a  pastoral  of  autumn  and  a
monody  over  a  beloved  sister.  A  new  element  ap-
peared in  "  The  Summer  Wind,"  and  was  always
present  afterward  in  Mr.  Bryant's  meditative  poetry
— the  association  of  humanity  with  nature — a  calm
but  sympathetic  recognition  of  the  ways  of  man
and  his  presence  on  the  earth.  The  power  of  sug-
gestion and  of  rapid  generalization,  which  was  the
key-note  of  "  The  Ages,"  lived  anew  in  every  line
of  "  The  Prairies,"  in  which  a  series  of  poems  pre-
sent themselves  to  the  imagination  as  a  series  of
pictures  in  a  gallery — pictures  in  which  breadth


426


BRYANT


BRYANT


and  vigor  of  l.ivalincnt  and  oxquisKo  (lolicjicy  of
d(5tail  uro  cvoryvvljiTi!  Iiannoniously  hleiidcd  and
the  unity  of  i)uni  art  is  attained.  It  was  worth
goinj::  <<>  the  onds  of  tlio  world  to  bo  able  to  write
"  The  I'niiri(!s."

Conliditiij^  in  the  discretion  of  liis  assoeiaie,  Mr.
Lejfgett,  and  anxious  to  escape  from  his  daily  edi-
torial labors,  Bryant  saiU^d  for  Kuro|)(^  with  his
family  in  the  summer  of  IHJM.  It  was  his  inten-
tion io  perfect  ills  lilei'ary  studies  while  abroad,
and  dev)tc  himself  to  the  echicat  ion  of  iiis  children  ;
but  his  intention  was  frustrated,  after  u  short
course  of  travel  in  France,  (lernumy.  and  Italy,  by
the  illness  of  Mr.  Legyett,  whose  mistaken  /-(>al  in
the  advocacy  of  unpopular  measures  had  seriously
injured  the  "  Kvening  i'ost."  lie  returned  in
luustc  early  in  WM>,  and  devoted  his  lime  and  ener-
gies to  restoring;  the  prosptM-ity  of  his  paper.  Nino
years  j)assed  before  he  ventured  to  return  to
Europe,  though  he  visited  certain  portions  of  his
own  country.  His  readers  t.rackeu  his  journ(>ys
(hrougli  the"  letters  that  he  wrote  to  the  "  Evening
rost,"  which  were  not iceal)li!  for  justness  of  obser-
vation and  clearness  of  expression.  A  selection
from  his  foi-eign  ami  hotnc  letters  was  nublished
in  1852,  under  the  title  of  "  Letters  of  a  Traveller."

The  Inst  thirty  years  of  Bryant's  life  wen^  devoid
of  incident,  though  one  of  "them  (1805)  was  not
without  the  supreme  sorrow,  death.  lie  devoted
himself  It)  journalism  as  conscientiously  as  if  he
still  ha.d  his  sj)urs  to  win,  discussing  all  public
(piestions  with  mde{)en(lence  and  fearlessness;  and
from  time  to  tinu>,  as  the  spirit  moved  him,  he
added  to  our  treasures  of  song,  contributing  to  the
popular  nuigazines  of  the  period,  and  occasionally
issuing  thes(>  contribiitions  in  separate  volunu^s.
He  pul)lish(>d  "  The  Fountain  and  Other  Poems''
in  1842;  "The  While- Footed  Deer  and  Other  Po-
ems" in  1844;  a.  colli'cted  edition  of  his  poems,
with  illustrations  by  Leutze,  in  184(5;  an  edition  in
two  volunu's  in  1855;  "Thirty  Poems  "  in  18(14;
aiul  in  187(J  a  complete  illustrated  edition  of  his
po(>tical  writings.  To  the  honors  that  these  vol-
umes brought  him  he  added  fresh  laurels  in  1870
and  1871  by  his  translation  of  the  "  Iliad  "  and  the
"Odyssey  " — a  translation  which  was  highly  praised
both  at  lunne  and  abroad,  and  which,  if  not  the
best  that  the  English  huiguage  is  capable  of.  is,  in
numy  respects,  the  b(>st  that  any  English-writing
poet  has  yet  i)roduc(Hl.

There  comes  a  day  in  the  intellectual  lives  of
most  i)oets  when  their  powers  coa.sc  to  be  progres-
sive and  productive,  or  are  productive  only  in  the
forms  to  which  they  have  accustomed  themselves,
and  which  have  become  mauTUM-isms.  It  was  not
so  with  Mr.  Bryant,  lh«  enjoyed  the  dangerous
distinction  of  proving  himself  a  great  poet  at  an
early  age;  he  pr(>served  this  distinction  to  the  last,
for  iln>  sixty-four  years  that  elapsed  between  the
writing  of  " Thana.to|>sis  "  and  the  writing  of  "The
Flood  of  Years"  witnessed  no  decay  of  his  poetic
caj)acities,  but  rather  the  growth  and  developnuMit
of  trains  of  thought  and  forms  of  verse  of  which
there  was  no  evidence  in  his  early  writings.  His
sympathies  were  etdarged  as  the  years  went  on,
and  the  crystal  clearness  of  his  nn'nd  was  colored
with  human  emotions.  To  Bryant  the  earth  was  a
theatre  upon  which  the  great  dranui.  of  life  was
everlastingly  played.  The  remend)rance  of  this
fact  is  his  inspiration  in  "The  Fountain,"  "  An
Evening  Kevery,"  "The  Antiquity  of  Freedom,"
"The  Orowded  Street."  "The  Planting  of  the  Ap-
ple-Tree," "Th(>  Night  Journ(n'  of  a  Kiver,"  "  The
Sower." and  "The  Flood  of  Years."  The  most  poiM-
ical  of  Mr.  liryant  's  poems  are,  perhaps,  "  The  Land


of  Dreatns,"  "  The  Burial  of  Love,"  "  The  May  Sun
sheds  an  Amber  Ijight,"  and  "The  Voice  of
Autumn";  and  they  were  written  in  a  succession
of  happy  hours,  and  in  the  older  named.  Next  to
these  pieces,  as  examples  of  pure  poetry,  should  bo
placed  "Sella"  and  "Tho  Little  People  of  (ho
Snow,"  which  ai'e  ex(]uisite  fairy  fantasie.s.  The
tpudities  by  which  Bryant's  poetry  are  chiefly  di.s-
tinguish(>(l  are  serenity  and  gravity  of  tlioiiglii ;
an  intense,  though  repressed,  recognition  of  Dk;
mortality  of  mankind;  an  ardent  love  for  Inniuui
freedom;  and  unrivalled  skill  in  painting  tin;
scenery  of  his  native  land.  He  had  no  superior  in
this  walk  of  poetic  art—it  might  almost  be  said  no
(•(pial,  for  his  descriptions  of  nature  are  never  in-
atx'.urate  or  redundant.  "  The  Excursion  "  is  a
tiresome  poem,  which  contains  several  exquisite
episodes.  Bryant  knew  how  to  write  exquisite
episodes  and  omit  the  platitudes  through  which
W(^  reach  them  in  other  poets.

It  is  not  given  to  nuuiy  })octs  to  possess  as  many
residences  as  Bryant,  for  he  had  three — a  town-
house  in  New  York,  a  country-house,  called
"{/cdarmere,"  at  Koslyn,  Long  Island,  and  the  old
homestead  of  the  family  at  Cummington,  Mass.


The  engraving  on  |)age  424  represents  the  house  in
Cummington;  that  on  this  |)age  is  a  view  of  his
hom(>  in  Koslyn.  He  passed  the  winter  months  in
New  York,  and  the  summer  and  early  autumn  at
his  country-houses.  No  distinguished  man  in
America  was  better  known  by  sight  than  he.
"  O  good  gray  head  that,  all  men  knew"
rose  unbi(ld(Mi  to  on(>'s  lii)s  as  he  passed  his  fcllmv-
pedestrians  in  the  streets  of  the  great  city,  active,
alert,  with  a  springing  ste|)  and  a  buoyant  gait.
He  was  seen  in  all  weathers,  walking  down  to  his
olVice  in  the  morning,  and  back  to  his  house  in  the
afternoon — an  observant  anti(]uity,  with  a  majes-
tic white  beard,  a  pair  of  sharp  eyes,  and  a  ftu-c
thai,  when  observed  closely,  recalled  the  lino  of
the  poet :

"A  million  wrinkles  carved  his  skin."
Bryant  had  a  peculiar  talent,  in  which  the
FnMi'ch  excel— the  talent  of  delivering  discourses
upon  the  lives  and  writings  of  eminent  men  ;  and
he  was  always  in  recpiest  after  the  death  of  his
contemporaries,  lieginning  with  a  eulogy  on  his
friend  (\ile,  the  painter,  who  died  in  1848,  ho  paid
his  well-considered  tributes  to  the  memory  of
Cooper.  Irving,  Fitz-(irei>ne  Halleck,  and  Ver-
planck,  and  assisted  at  the  dedication  in  the  Cen-
tral park  of  the  i\Iorse,  Shakespeare,  Scott,  and
Hall(>ck  statues.  His  addresses  on  these  and  other
occasions  were  models  of  justice  of  ai»preeiation
and  felicity  of  expression.  His  last  public  appear-
ance was  at  the  Central  j^ark.  on  the  afternoon  ot
2!)  Mav,  1878,  at  the  unveiling  of  a  bust  of  Mazzini.
It  was  an  nnusuallv  hot  dav,  and  after  delivering
his  address,  which  was  remarkable  for  its  eloquence,


BRYANT


BRYMNER


427


he  accompanied  Gen,  Jas.  Grant  Wilson,  a  friend
of  many  years'  standing?,  to  his  residctnce,  No.  15
Ka.st  Seventv-foiirtii  stnjet.  Gen.  Wilson  reached
his  door  with  Mr.  Jiryant  leaning  on  his  arm  ;  he
touk  a  ste[)  in  advances  to  open  th(!  inner  door,  and
while  his  back  was  turned  th(!  jKxst  fell,  liis  hearl
Btriking  on  the  stone  platform  (d'  th(i  fr(;nt  st(;f)s.
It  was  his  death-blow;  for,  though  he  recov(!red
his  consciousness  sudiciently  to  converse  a  little,
and  was  able  to  ride  to  his  own  house  with  Gen.
Wilson,  his  fate  was  sealed,  lie  lingered  until  the
morning  of  12  June,  when  his  spirit  passed  out  into
th(!  unknown.  Two  days  later  all  tnat  was  mortal
of  him  was  buried  at  Roslyn,  Ij.  I.,  beside  his  wife,
who  died  27  July,  1805.

Since  the  poet's  death  the  name  of  one  of  the
city  [)leasure-grounds  has  bcfm  changcsd  (in  1884)
to  iiryant  park,  where  tlusre  will  be;  soon  unveiled
a  noble  bn)nze  statue  of  the  poet,  to  be  erected  bv
his  many  friends  and  admirers.  In  the  Metropoli-
tan museum  of  art  may  be  seen  a  beautiful  sdvjjr
vase,  presented  to  Bryant  in  1870,  and  an  admira-
ble bronze  bust  of  hen^ic  size,  executed  from  life
by  Launt  Thom{)son.  Among  the  numy  portraits
of  Bryant,  painted  by  prominent  American  artists,
the  poet  preferred  Inman's  and  Durand's;  but
these  were  supf)Ianted  in  his  estimation  by  photo-
graphs of  later  days,  from  oru;  of  which  was  taken
the  fine  steel  portrait  that  accompanies  this  art  ic;le.
A  complete  edition  of  his  po(!tic)d  and  f)rose  works
(4vols.,  8vo)  was  pidjlished  in  188;i-'4.  S(!e  "  Homes
of  American  Authors"  (New  York,  185.'{);  "The
Bryant  lloniestead  Hook  "  (1870) ;  "  Presentation
to  Bryant  at  Eighty  Years"  (1870):  "Bryant  Me-
morial Meeting  of  the  Gfjethe  Club"  (1878);  Sym-
ington's "Biographical  Sketch  of  Bryant"  (1880);
Godwin's  "  Life  of  Bryant"  (188:^);  Wilson's  "  liry-
ant  and  his  Friends  (1886,  two  editions,  one  on
large  paper  and  illustrated).  A  new  life  of  Bryant,
by  John  Bigclow,  was  issued  three  years  later.
His  brother,  John  Howard,  b.  in  Cummington,
Mass.,  22  Jidy,  1807.  lb*  studied  at  the  Rensselaer
polytechnic  institute  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  but  was  never
graduated. He  removed  to  Illinois  in  18.'J1,  became

justice of the
^,_^  peace for Put-

nam CO.  in  18o4,
and  in  18'>7  was
elected  first  re-
corder of  deeds
for  (he  newly  or-
ganized Bureau
CO.  ile  was  twice
a  member  of  tlie
legislature,  fre-
quently served
on  tlie  board  of
supervisors,  and
was  for  fifteen
years  a  mend>er
of  the  board  of
,1  edu(;ation, anrl

^\^ Xp-^-^  /> 1 4^.^^-^ time its chair-
^^-^  ^ man. President

,  . ,,  Lincoln made

turn  collector  of  internal  revenue  in  1802,  and  he
held  the  office  till  1804.  Until  his  sixtieth  year
->ir.  liryant  took  charge  of  the  farm  on  which  he
Mas  always  lived,  laboring  on  it  with  his  own  hands
lor  the  greater  part  of  the  time.  He  is  the  author
;;r  loems,"  a  small  volume  (New  York,  1855);
ii'f»?  y^tten  from  Youth  to  Old  Afrit -,  1824-
l'i/ffi:!!lP"^'^^'y'I'rinceton,lll.,  1885);  and


several  addresses.


BRYANT,  William  Perkins,  jurist,  b.  in  Mer-
cer CO.,  Ky.,  :j  Aug.,  1800;  d.  10  Get.,  1800.  Ho
was  cducattMl  in  Shakertown,  Ky.,  but  remov(!d  to
Kockvillo,  Ind.,  in  1825.  He  was  a  member  of  tlie
state  house  of  rc{)resentativ(!S  for  Parke  co.  in
18.'J2-'JJ,  and  of  the  senate  in  18.'{8-'J),  served  in  the
Black  Hawk  war,  and  subsequcintly  emigrated  to
Oregon  whih;  it  was  still  a  t(!rritory.  In  1849  Ik;
was  appointed  chief  justice  of  the  U.  S.  court  for
that  district.

IJRYCK,  George,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Mount  Plfjasunt,  Brant  co.,  Ontario.  22  April,
1844. He  was  graduated  at  Toronto  university  in

1807,  and  at  Knox  college  (Presbyterian)  in  1871,
having  taken  five  out  of  the  six  scholarships  open
for  comr)etition.  In  1871  ho  was  selected  as  assist-
ant ami  su(!C(!ssor  in  (Jhalmer's  church,  Quijbec;,
and  in  August  of  the  sanu}  year  was  authorized  by
the  home  mission  committee  of  the  Presbyterian
general  assembly  to  found  a  college  among  the
Selkirk  setthirs  on  Red  river,  and  also  to  organize
a^  Presbyterian  church  in  Winnip'ig,  Manitoba.
The  projected  college  was  successfully  organized
l)y  him  and  established  at  Kildonan,  four  miles
from  Winni[)eg.  In  188:}  it  was  incor[)orated,  and
in  1884  removed  to  Winni[)eg.  Mr.  Bryce,  in
1877,  was  one  of  the  principal  founders  of  Mani-
toba university,  which  includes  St.  Boniface  (Ro-
man Gatholic),  St.  John's (P]f)iscopal),  and  Manitoba
(Presbyterian)  colleges.  He  was  apf)oint(;d  first
inspector  of  Winnip(!g  puljlic  schools  in  1877,  and
has  been  an  examiner  in  natural  Hcience  in  Mani-
toba university  since  1878.  He  is  trustee  of  all  the
Presbyterian  Indian  mission  property  in  the  north-
west, and  in  1884  was  appointed  mod(!rator  of  the
first  Presbyterian  syiKjd  of  Marnt(;ba  and  the
northwest  territories.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Mani-
toba: its  Infancy,  (irowth,  and  Present  Condition  "
(London,  1882),  and  of  "Manitoba"  in  the  " Ency-
clo{)a'dia  Britannica,"  and  is  now  (1880)  writing  a
history  oi  Canmla  and  the  northwest.

BRYDGES,  CharloH  John,  Canadian  official,
b.  in  England  in  P'ebruar)',  1820.  He  was  in  the
service  of  the  London  and  Southwestern  railway
company,  ultimately  becoming  assistant  secretary  ;
appointwi  managing  director  of  the  Grand  Trunk
railway  of  Canada  in  SeptendK',r,  1802,  and  became
intercolonial railway  commissioner  in December,

1808.  He  wjis  made  general  superintendent  of
government  railways  in  1874.  and,  since  the  aboli-
tion (jf  the  Intercolorn'al  railway  commission,  has
had  charge  of  the  completion  of  the  works  of  that
railway,  and  also  of  the  government  railways  east
of  Quebec.

BRYMNER,  Bouglas,  Canadian  archivist,  b.
in  Greenock,  Scotland,  in  182."{.  He  was  educated
at  the  (ireenock  grammar  school,  and  received  a
thorough  mercantile  training.  He  began  business,
and  subsequently  admitted  his  brotlier  as  a  partner,
but  was  forced  to  retire  in  1850  in  consequence  of
failing  health.  In  1857  he  emigrated  to  Canada,
and  subsequently  f)ecame  editor  of  the  "  Presby-
terian," and  about  the  same  time  was  appointed
associate  editor  of  the  Montreal  "Herald."  In
1872  he  was  made  liistorical  arrdiivist  of  the  Do-
minion, and  in  this  capacity  has  been  awarded
much  praise  for  his  jminstaking  labors  in  collect-
ing the  historical  records  of  the  Dominion  and  the
provinces  and  in  their  s<d(;ction  and  arrangement,
under  the  pen-name  of  "  Tummas  I'reddles"  he
wrote  humorous  articles  for  the  Montreal  "  Her-
ald," was  for  some  time  a  contributor  to  the
"Scottish  American  Journal,"  New  York,  and  has
translated  the  odes  oi  Horace  into  verse  in  the
Lowland  Scottish  dialect.


428


BRYSON


BUCHANAN


BRYSON,  Andrew,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  July,  1822.  He  entered  the  navy  as
midshipman  in  1837 ;  was  promoted  lieutenant  on
30  Aug.,  1851 ;  commander,  1(3  July,  18()2 ;  captain,
25  July,  1866;  commodore,  14  Feb.,  1873;  rear-
a<.lmiral,  25  JMarch,  1880,  with  which  rank  he  was
retired  on  1  July,  1881.  During  the  civil  war  he
commanded  the  steamer  "Chippewa"  on  special
service  in  1862-3  ;  the  iron-clad  " Lehigh,"  of  the
South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in  1863,  being
present  at  the  reduction  of  Fort  Macon,  and  in  the
principal  actions  off  Charleston  from  22  Sept.,
1863,  till  5  April,  1864,  receiving  a  wound  from
a  shell,  and  in  1864-5  commanded  the  iron-clad
"  Essex  "  in  the  Mississippi  squadron.  Previous  to
his  retirement,  after  forty-three  years  of  service,  he
was  in  command  of  the  South  Atlantic  station.

BUCARELI  Y  URSUA,  Antonio  Maria  de
(boo-cah-ray'-le),  forty-seventh  viceroy  of  Mexico.
He  filled  that  office  from  2  Sept.,  1771,  till  his
death,  9  April,  1779.  Bucareli's  administration
was  very  successful  in  every  respect.  In  his  time
three  great  benevolent  institutions  were  founded :
the  Montepio,  the  Hospicio,  and  the  Cuna.  He
also  established  the  mining  court,  and  obtained
from  the  king  of  Spain  permission  to  use  quick-
silver from  the  Mexican  mines.  Many  other  im-
provements and  industries  for  the  public  welfare
were  promoted  by  him,  and  a  promenade  in  the
city  of  Mexico  still  bears  his  name.  His  remains
are  buried  in  the  colegiataof  Guadalupe.

BUCHAN,  David,  British  explorer,  b.  in  1780;
lost  at  sea  in  1837.  He  became  a  lieutenant  in  the
British  navy  in  1806,  and  commanded  a  schooner
on  the  Newfoundland  station  in  1810,  when  he  was
despatched  by  Admiral  Sir  John  Duckworth  to
explore  the  river  Exploit  and  open  communica-
tions with  the  natives.  He  penetrated  160  miles
into  the  interior  early  in  1811,  sustaining  many
hardships.  In  1816  he  was  promoted  commander,
and  in  1818  sent  out  on  an  expedition  to  the  north
pole,  at  the  same  time  that  Ross  and  Parry  were
despatched  in  search  of  the  northwest  passage.
The  "  Dorothea "  and  "  Trent,"  commanded  by
Capt.  Buchan  and  Lieut.  Franklin,  sailed  in  April,
1818,  and  reached  Magdalena  bay,  Spitzbergen,
aoout  1  June.  They  attempted  to  penetrate  the
ice-field  on  7  June,  and  were  shut  up  in  the  floes
for  thirteen  days.  On  6  July  they  made  another
attempt  to  find  a  passage  through  the  ice-barrier,
and  sailed  northward  until  the  ice  closed  in  on
them  in  lat.  80"  34'  N.  After  vainly  attempting  to
drag  the  vessels  northward  by  means  of  ropes  and
ice-anchors,  they  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Greenland.
The  "  Dorothea  "  was  disabled  by  the  floating  ice,
and  the  expedition  consequently  returned  to  Dept-
ford  on  18  Oct.  Buchan  was  made  a  captain  in
1823,  and  for  some  time  was  commodore  on  the
Newfoundland  station.  In  1825  he  became  high
sheriff  in  Newfoundland.  A  few  years  later  he  set
out  on  a  new  arctic  expedition,  and  was  never  heard
from  afterward.  His  vessel  is  supposed  to  have
been  burned  at  sea.  He  made  important  observa-
tions on  the  variations  of  the  needle,  on  under-
currents, on  the  temperature  of  the  ocean's  depths,
and  on  the  compression  of  the  earth  at  the  pole.

BUCHANAN,  Franklin,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  17  Sept.,  1800;  d.  in  Talbot  co.,
Md.,  11  May,  1874.  He  entered  the  navy  as  a  mid-
shipman, 28  Jan.,  1815,  served  some  years  at  sea,
and  before  reaching  the  age  of  twenty-one  served
as  acting-lieutenant  on  a  cruise  to  India.  He  be-
came lieutenant,  13  Jan.,  1825,  and  in  July,  1826,
commanded  the  frigate  "  Baltimore,"  built  for  the
emperor  of  Brazil,  on  her  voyage  to  Rio  Janeiro.


On  his  return  he  sailed  in  the  Pacific,  part  of  the
time  being  attached  to  the  "  Peacock."  On  8  Sept.,
1841,  he  was  promoted  to  master-commandant!
having  charge  of  the  "Mississippi,"  and  afterward
of  the  "  Vincennes."  In  1845  he  was  selected  bv
the  secretary  of  the  navy  to  organize  the  naval
academy  at  Annapolis.  The  same  year  he  opened
the  school  as  its  first  superintendent,  but  in  1847
left  the  place  for  the  command  of  the  "  German-
town,"  in  which  he  took  part  in  the  Mexican
war,  participating  in  the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz.
In  1852  he  commanded  the  "  Susquehanna,"  flag-
ship of  Com.  Periy's  Japan  expedition,  which
opened  China  and  Japan  to  the  commerce  of  the
world,  and  on  14  Sept.,  1855,  was  made  captain.
He  was  made  commandant  of  the  Washington
navy-yard  in  1859,  but  on  22  April,  1801,  after  the
attack  on  the  Massachusetts  troops  in  Baltimore,
resigned  his  commission.  Finding  that  his  state
did  not  secede,  he  wrote  to  Gideon  Welles,  secre-
tary of  the  navy,  withdrawing  his  resignation,  and
asking  to  be  restored,  but  his  request  was  refused.
He  entered  the  confederate  navy  in  September,  1861,
with  the  rank  of  captain,  superintended  the  fitting
out  of  the  "  Merrimac,"  and  commanded  her  in  the
attack  on  the  federal  fleet  in  Hampton  Roads,  when
the  "Cumberland"  was  sunk  and  the  "Congress"
blown  up.  He  was  so  severely  wounded  in  this
action  that  he  could  not  take  command  of  his  ves-
sel in  her  subsequent  combat  with  the  "  Monitor."
For  his  gallantry  at  this  time  he  was  thanked  by
the  confederate  congress,  and  promoted  to  full  ad-
miral and  senior  officer  of  the  confederate  navy.
Subsequently  he  was  placed  in  command  of  tHe
naval  defences  of  Mobile,  and  there  superintended
the  construction  of  the  iron-clad  ram  "  Tennessee,"
which  he  commanded  during  the  action  with  the
union  fleet  in  Mobile  bay,  5  Aug.,  1864.  His  vessel
finally  surrendered  after  her  armor  had  been  pene-
trated and  her  steering  apparatus  disabled,  and
Admiral  Buchanan  was  again  wounded  and  taken
prisoner  of  war,  but  was  exchanged  in  February
following.  After  the  war  he  was  for  a  time  presi-
dent of  the  Maryland  agricultural  college,  and
afterward  was  for  a  few  months  an  agent  for  a  St.
Louis  life  insurance  company.

BUCHANAN,  Isaac,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Glasgow,  Scotland,  21  July,  1810 ;  d.  1  Oct.,  1883.
He  migrated  to  Canada  in  1833,  and  became  one
of  the  principal  pioneer  merchants  of  Upper  Can-
ada, and  was  elected  to  the  1st  Parliament  of  the
united  provinces  in  1840  as  a  supporter  of  the
principle  of  responsible  government,  professing
allegiance  to  neither  of  the  political  parties.  He
entered  the  Tache-Macdonald  cabinet  in  1864  as
president  of  the  council,  declining  the  salary  of  the
office,  and  retired  on  the  formation  of  the  coalition
government.  He  was  appointed  a  Dominion  arbi-
trator in  1878,  and  retained  that  appointment  until
his  death.  Mr.  Buchanan  was  an  able  writer  on
political  and  commercial  questions,  and  was  the
author  of  "  The  Relations  of  the  Industry  of  Canada
with  the  Mother-Country  and  the  United  States."

BUCHANAN,  James,  fifteenth  president  of  the
United  States,  b.  near  Mercersburg,  Pa.,  23  April,
1791 ;  d.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,  1  June.  1868.  The  days
of  his  youth  were  those  of  the  nation's  youth ;  his
public  career  of  forty  years  saw  all  our  great  exten-
sions of  boundary  on  "the  south  and  west,  acquired
from  foreign  powers,  the  admission  of  thirteen  new
states,  the  development  of  many  important  ques-
tions of  internal  and  foreign  policy,  and  the  grad-
ual rise  and  final  culmination  of  a  great  and  disas-
trous insurrection.  He  was  educated  at  a  school
in  Mercersburg  and  at  Dickinson  college.  Pa.,  where


-^^2^7?^^^  (2y^6cc>^^:(^^^^e^^?7/^


BUCHANAN


BUCHANAN


429


he  was  graduated  in  1809.  He  began  to  practise
law  in  Lancaster  in  1812.  His  early  political  prin-
ciples were  those  of  the  federalists,  who  disap-
proved of  the  war;  yet,  as  he  himself  said,  "he
thought  it  was  the  duty  of  every  patriot  to  defend
the  country,  while  the  war  was  raging,  against
a  foreign  enemy."  His  first  public  addi-ess  was
made  at  the  age  of  twenty-three,  on  the  occa-
sion of  a  popular  meeting  in  Lancaster  after  the
capture  of  Washington  by  the  British  in  1814.  He
urged  the  enlistment  of  volunteers  for  the  defence
of  ^Baltimore,  and  was  among  the  first  to  enroll  his
name.  In  October  of  the  same  year  he  was  elected
to  the  house  of  i-epresentatives  in  the  legislature  of
Pennsylvania  for  Lancaster  county.  Peace  was  pro-
claimed early  in  1815.  and  on  4  July  Mr.  Buchanan
delivered  an' oration  before  the  Washington  associa-
tion of  Lancaster.  In  it  he  spoke  of  the  war  as  "  glo-
rious, in  the  highest  degree,  to  the  American  char-
acter, but  disgraceful  in  the  extreme  to  the  admin-
istration." The  speech  excited  much  criticism,  and
in  later  life  he  said  that  "  it  contained  many  senti-
ments which  he  regretted,  but  that  at  the  same  time
it  could  not  be  denied  that  the  country  was  wholly
unprepared  for  war  at  the  period  of  its  declaration,
and  the  attempt  to  carry  it  on  by  means  of  loans,
without  any  resort  to  taxation,  had  well  nigh  made
the  government  bankrupt."  He  was  again  elected  to
the  legislature  in  October,  1815,  and  at  the  close  of
that  session  he  retired  to  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion, in  which  he  gained  early  distinction,  especially
in  the  impeachment  of  a  judge,  whom  he  successfully
defended.  His  intention  at  this  time  was  not  to  re-
enter public  life,  but  the  death  of  a  young  lady  to
whom  he  was  engaged  caused  him  to  seek  change
and  distraction  of  thought,  and  he  accepted  a  nomi-
nation to  congress,  and  was  elected  in  1820  for  a
district  composed  of  the  counties  of  Lancaster,
York,  and  Dauphin,  taking  his  seat  in  Decem-
ber, 1821.  He  was  called  a  federalist,  but  the  party
distinctions  of  that  time  were  not  very  clearly  de-
fined, and  Mr.  Buchanan's  political  principles,  as  a
national  statesman,  were  yet  to  be  formed.  Mr.
Monroe  had  become  president  in  1817,  and  held
that  office  during  two  terms,  his  administration  be-
ing called  "  the  era  of  good  feeling."  The  excite-
ment and  animosities  of  the  war  of  1812  had  sub-
sided, and  when  Mr.  Buchanan  entered  congress
there  was  no  sectionalism  to  disturb  the  repose  of
the  country.  Questions  of  internal  policy  soon
arose,  however,  and  he  took  an  able  part  in  many
impoi-tant  debates.  Mr.  Monroe's  veto  of  a  bill
imposing  tolls  for  the  support  of  the  Cumberland
road,  for  which  Mr.  Buchanan  had  voted,  pro-
duced a  strong  effect  upon  the  latter's  consti-
tutional views.  It  was  the  first  time  that  his  mind
had  been  brought  sharply  to  the  consideration
of  the  question  in  what  mode  "  internal  improve-
ments "  can  be  effected  by  the  general  government,
and  consequently  he  began  to  perceive  the  dividing
fine  between  the*  federal  and  the  state  powers.  Mr.
Buchanan  remained  in  the  house  of  representa-
tives ten  years — during  Mr,  Monroe's  second  term,
through  the  administration  of  John  Quincy  Adams,
and  during  the  first  two  years  of  Jackson's  admin-
istration. In  December,  "1829.  he  became  chairman
of  the  judiciary  committee  of  the  house,  and  as
such  introduced  a  bill  to  amend  and  extend  the
judicial  system  of  the  United  States,  by  includ-
ing in  the  circuit-court  system  six  new  states,  and
by  increasing  the  number  of  judges  of  the  supreme
court  to  nine.  His  speech  in  explanation  of  this
measure— which  was  not  adopted  at  the  time-
was  as  important  as  any  that  has  been  made  upon
the  subject. Another  *  measure, evincing  a  thor-


ough knowledge  and  very  accurate  views  of  the
nature  of  our  mixed  system  of  government,  was  a
minority  report,  presented  by  him  as  chairman  of
this  committee,  against  a  proposition  to  repeal  the
25th  section  of  the  judiciary  act  of  1789,  which
gave  the  supreme  court  appellate  jurisdiction,  by  •
writ  of  error  to  the  state  courts,  in  cases  where  the
constitution,  treaties,  and  laws  of  the  United  States
are  drawn  in  question.  This  report  caused  the  re-
jection of  the  bill  by  a  vote  of  138  to  51.  During
Mr.  Adams's  term  the  friends  of  the  administration
began  to  take  the  name  of  national  republicans,
while  the  opposing  party  assumed  the  name  of
democrats.  Mr.  Buchanan  was  one  of  the  leaders
of  the  opposition  in  the  house  of  representatives.
He  was  always  a  strong  supporter  and  warm  per-
sonal friend  of  Gen.  Jackson,  At  the  close  of  the
21st  congress  in  March,  1881,  it  was  Mr,  Buchanan's
wish  to  retire  from  public  life,  but,  at  the  request
of  Gen.  Jackson  (who  had  become  president  in  1829),
he  accepted  the  mission  to  Russia.  He  embarked
from  New  York  in  a  sailing-vessel  on  8  April,  1832,
and  arrived  at  St.  Petersburg  about  the  middle  of
June.  The  chief  objects  of  his  mission  were  the  ne-
gotiation of  a  commercial  treaty  that  should  pro-
mote an  increase  of  the  commerce  between  Russia
and  the  United  States  by  regulating  the  duties  to  be
levied  on  the  merchandise  of  each  country  by  the
other  so  far  as  to  prevent  undue  discrimination  in
favor  of  the  products  of  other  countries ;  to  provide
for  the  residence  and  functions  of  consuls,  etc. ;  and
also  the  negotiation  of  a  treaty  respecting  the  mari-
time rights  of  neutral  nations  on  the  principle  that
"  free  ships  make  free  goods."  The  Russian  minis-
ter for  foreign  affairs  at  this  time  was  Count  Nes-
selrode.  He  favored  the  treaty  of  commerce,  and,
though  there  was  much  opposition  to  it  from  some
members  of  the  Russian  ministry,  it  was  finally
concluded  on  18  Dec,  1832.  The  negotiation  con-
cerning a  treaty  on  maritime  rights  was  not  suc-
cessful, because,  as  Mr.  Buchanan  wrote,  "Russia
is  endeavoring  to  manage  England  at  present,  and
this  is  an  unpropitious  moment  to  urge  her  to
adopt  principles  of  public  law  which  would  give
offence  to  that  nation,  and  which  would  in  any  way
abridge  her  own  belligerent  rights,"  His  attractive
manners  and  evident  sincerity  of  character  produced
their  effect  on  the  Russians,  especially  the  emperor
and  empress ;  and  he  wrote  home :  "  I  flatter  myself
that  a  favorable  change  has  been  effected  in  his  [the
emperor's]  feelings  toward  the  United  States  since
my  arrival " :  and  at  his  audience  of  leave  the  em-
peror told  him  to  tell  Gen.  Jackson  to  send  him
another  minister  exactly  like  himself.  He  wrote
to  President  Jackson :  "  Your  foreign  policy  has
had  no  small  influence  on  public  opinion  through-
out Europe."  Of  Russia  and  the  emperor  Mr.  Bu-
chanan wrote :  "  There  is  no  freedom  of  the  press,
no  public  opinion,  and  but  little  political  conversa-
tion, and  that  very  much  guarded ;  in  short,  we
live  in  the  calm  of  despotism,  though  the  Emperor
Nicholas  [L]  is  one  of  the  best  of  despots.  Coming
abroad  can  teach  an  American  no  other  lesson  but
to  love  his  country,  its  institutions,  and  its  laws
better,  much  better  than  he  did  before,  I  have  not
yet  learned  to  submit  patiently  to  the  drudgery  of
etiquette.  Foreign  ministers  must  drive  a  carriage
and  four  with  a  postilion."  He  left  St.  Petersburg
on  8  Aug.,  1833,  spent  a  short  time  in  Paris  and
London,  and  reached  home  in  November.  The
next  year  was  spent  in  private  occupations  in  Lan-
caster, except  that  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners
appointed  by  Pennsylvania  to  arrange  with  com-
missioners from  New  Jersey  concerning  the  use  of
the waters of Delaware  river. On  6  Dec,  1834,


430


BUCHANAN


BUCHANAN


the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania  elected  him  to  the
U.  S.  senate  to  succeed  Mr.  Wilkins,  who  had  been
appointed  minister  to  Russia.  This  ofRce  was  ac-
knowledged by  Mr.  Buchanan  afterward  to  be  "  the
only  public  station  he  desired  to  occupy."  He  took
his  seat  Dec.  15.  He  held  very  strongly  the  doc-
trine of  instruction,  that  is,  the  right  of  a  state
legislature  to  direct  the  vote  of  a  senator  of  th6  state
in  congress,  and  the  duty  of  the  senator  to  obey.
There  has  never  been  a  period  in  the  history  of  the
senate  when  more  real  power  of  debate  was  dis-
played, or  when  public  measures  were  more  thor-
oughly considered,  than  at  this  time.  President
Jackson's  celebrated  proclamation  against  nullifi-
cation, and  his  removal  of  the  public  deposits
from  the  bank  of  the  United  States  into  certain
selected  state  banks,  had  been  made  during  Mr.
Buchanan's  residence  abroad.  Jackson  enjoyed
great  popularity  and  influence  throughout  the
country,  but  a  large  majority  of  the  senate  were
opposed  to  his  financial  measures.  This  opposing
party,  the  old  "  national  republicans "  of  John
Quincy  Adams's  administration,  were  now  called
whigs,  and  included  Mr.  Clay,  Mr.  Webster,  Mr.
Clayton,  of  Delaware,  Mr.  Ewing,  of  Ohio,  and
Mr.  Frelinghuysen  and  Mr.  Southard,  of  New  Jer-
sey. Among  the  Jackson  men,  or  democrats,  were
Mr.  Buchanan,  Mr.  Wright,  of  New  York,  Mr.  Ben-
ton, of  Missouri,  and  Mr.  King,  of  Alabama.  Mr.
Calhoun  stood  apart  from  both  the  political  parties,
a  great  and  powerful  debater  who  had  been  vice-
president,  and  who  was  now  senator  from  the  "  nul-
lifying "  state  of  South  Carolina.  One  of  the  first
debates  in  which  Mr.  Buchanan  took  part  in  the
senate  (and  one  that  has  not  yet  lost  its  interest)
was  upon  a  bill  requiring  the  president,  when  mak-
ing a  nomination  to  fill  a  vacancy  occasioned  by  the
removal  of  any  officer,  to  state  the  fact  of  such  re-
moval and  to  render  reasons  for  it.  Mr.  Buchanan
opposed  it.  He  contended  that  the  constitution
only  made  the  consent  of  the  senate  necessary  in
the  appointment  of  officers  by  the  executive,  not  in
their  removal ;  that,  if  such  consent  were  required,
long  and  dangerous  delays  might  occur  when  the
senate  was  not  in  session  ;  and  that,  if  the  president
must  assign  reasons  for  removals,  these  reasons
must  be  investigated,  much  time  would  be  con-
sumed, and  the  legislative  branch  of  the  govern-
ment would  thus  exercise  functions  to  which  it
has  no  claim.  Another  great  discussion  into  which
Mr.  Buchanan  entered  related  to  the  refusal  of
the  legislative  chambers  of  France  to  pay  a  cer-
tain sum  that  had  been  promised  in  1831  by  a
convention  between  the  United  States  and  the  gov-
ernment of  King  Louis  Philippe  for  the  liquida-
tion of  certain  claims  of  American  citizens  against
France.  The  United  States  waited  three  years  in
vain  for  the  payment  of  this  money ;  and  finally,
in  January,  1836,  the  president  recommended  to
congress  a  partial  non-intercourse  with  France.
Mr.  Buchanan  made  a  long  and  earnest  speech,
contending  against  Webster  and  Clay,  in  support
of  this  measure,  insisting  that  "there  is  a  point  in
the  intercourse  between  nations  at  which  diplomacy
must  end  and  a  nation  must  either  consent  to
abandon  her  rights  or  assert  them  by  force."  There
was  some  danger  for  a  time  of  war  with  France,
but  eventually  Great  Britain  made  an  offer  of  me-
diation and  the  difficulty  was  amicably  adjusted.
In  January,  1837,  Mr.  Buchanan  delivered  a  speech
that  may  be  regarded  as  his  ablest  effort  in  the
senate.  It  was  in  support  of  Col.  Benton's  "  ex-
punging" resolution,  which  proposed  to  cancel  in
the  journal  of  the  senate  Mr.  Clay's  resolution  of
censure  against  President  Jackson  for  his  removal


of  the  public  deposits  from  the  bank  of  the  United
States.  In  this  argument  Mr.  Buchanan  separated,
in  a  remarkable  degree,  that  which  was  personal
and  partisan  in  the  controversy  from  the  serious
questions  involved.  He  contended  that  the  cen-
sure passed  by  the  senate  in  1834  upon  the  presi-
dent was  unjust,  because  he  had  violated  no  law ;
and  that  the  senate,  in  recording  such  a  mere  cen-
sure, adopted  in  its  legislative  capacity,  had  ren-
dered itself  incompetent  to  perform  its  high  judi-
cial function  of  impeachment.  He  concluded  with
a  very  ingenious  and  elaborate  criticism  of  the
word  "expunge."  The  "expunging"  resolution
was  adopted  by  a  party  vote.  Toward  the  end  of
Jackson's  administration  the  subject  of  slavery  be-
gan to  be  pressed  upon  the  attention  of  congress  by
petitions  for  its  abolition  in  the  District  of  Colum-
bia. One  memorial  on  this  subject  was  presented
by  Mr.  Buchanan  himself  from  some  Quakers  in  his
own  state.  Mr.  Calhoun  and  others  objected  to  the
reception  of  these  petitions.  Mr.  Buchanan,  though
he  disapproved  of  slavery,  yet  contended  that  con-
gress had  no  power  imder  the  constitution  to  in-
terfere with  slavery  within  those  states  where  it  ex-
isted, and  that  it  would  be  very  unwise  to  abolish  it
in  the  District  of  Columbia — "  a  district  carved  out
of  two  slave-holding  states  and  surrounded  by  them
on  all  sides  " ;  but,  nevertheless,  he  also  contended,
in  a  long  and  forcible  speech,  for  the  people's  right
of  petition  and  the  duty  of  congress,  save  under  ex-
ceptional circumstances,  to  receive  their  petitions.
In  June,  1836,  Mr.  Buchanan  argued,  against  Mr.
Webster,  for  a  bill,  introduced  in  conformity  with  a
special  recommendation  from  President  Jackson,
prohibiting  the  circulation  through  the  mails  of
incendiary  publications  on  the  subject  of  slavery.
In  a  very  sarcastic  speech  against  a  bill  to  prevent
the  interference  of  certain  federal  officeis  with
elections,  even  in  conversation,  Mr.  Buchanan  thus
expressed  his  political  faith  :  "  I  support  the  presi-
dent because  he  is  in  favor  of  a  strict  and  limited
construction  of  the  constitution,  according  to  the
true  spirit  of  the  Virginia  and  Kentucky  resolu-
tions. I  firmly  believe  that  if  this  government  is
to  remain  powerful  and  permanent  it  can  only  be
by  never  assuming  doubtful  powers  which  must
necessarily  bring  it  into  collision  with  the  states.
I  oppose  the  whig  party,  because,  according  to  their
reading  of  the  constitution,  congress  possesses,  and
they  think  ought  to  exercise,  powers  which  would
endanger  the  rights  of  the  states  and  the  liberties
of  the  people."  The  most  important  and  far-
reaching  of  President  Jackson's  executive  meas-
ures was  his  veto  in  1832  of  a  bill  for  renewing  the
charter  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States.  Jack-
son removed  the  national  deposits  into  certain  state
'banks,  which  produced  financial  distress  throughout
the  land.  Mr.  Buchanan  was  conspicuous  in  the
senate  as  a  supporter  of  Jackson's  financial  policy
throughout  his  administration  and  that  of  his  suc-
cessor, Mr.  Van  Buren,  of  the  same  party.  Mr.  Bu-
chanan had  been  reelected  to  the  senate  in  January,
1837,  by  a  very  large  vote  and  for  a  full  term,  his
first  election  having  been  to  a  vacancy,  and  he  was
the  first  person  that  had  ever  received  a  second  elec-
tion from  the  legislature  of  Pennsylvania.  In  183J
Mr.  Van  Buren  offered  Mr.  Buchanan  the  attorney-
generalship,  which  Mr.  Grundy  had  resigned.  Mr.
Buchanan  answered  that  he  "  preferred  his  position
as  a  senator  from  Pennsvlvania:  that  nothing
could  induce  him  to  waive  this  preference  except  a
sense  of  public  duty,  and  that  he  felt  that  he  could
render  a  more  efficient  support  to  the  pnnciples
of  the  administration  "on  the  floor  of  the  senate
than  he  could  in  an  executive  office. I  he  great


BUCHANAN


BUCHANAN


431


commercial  distress  of  the  country  produced,  in  the
elections  of  1840,  a  political  revolution,  and  on  4
March,  1841,  the  whigs  came  into  power  under  Presi-
dent Harrison.  His  death  in  April  placed  in  the
executive  chair  Mr.  Tyler,  who  proved  to  be  opposed
to  a  national  bank,  and  vetoed  two  bills :  the  first  for
a  national  bank,  and  the  second  for  a  "  Fiscal  Cor-
poration of  the  United  States."  Mr.  Clay  made  fre-
quent attacks  upon  Mr.  Tyler's  vetoes,  and  even
proposed  a  Joint  resolution  for  an  amendment  of
the  constitution  requiring  but  a  bare  majority,  in-
stead of  two  thirds,  of  each  house  of  congress  to
pass  a  bill  over  the  president's  objections.  Mr.
Buchanan,  on  2  Feb.,  1842,  replied  to  Mr.  Clay  in
a  speech  that  may  be  ranked  very  high  as  an  ex-
position of  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of  our
political  system.  He  showed  that  the  president's
veto  was  the  people's  safeguard,  through  the  officer
who  "  more  nearly  represents  a  majority  of  the
whole  people  than  any  other  branch  of  the  gov-
ernment," against  the  encroachments  of  the  sen-
ate. The  veto  power  "owes  its  existence,"  said
he,  "  to  a  revolt  of  the  people  of  Rome  against  the
tyrannical  decrees  of  the  Roman  senate.  The  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  elected  by  his  fellow-
citizens  to  the  highest  official  trust  in  the  country,
is  directly  responsible  to  them  for  the  manner  in
which  he  shall  discharge  his  duties;  and  he  will
not  array  himself,  by  the  exercise  of  the  veto  power,
against  a  majority  in  both  houses  of  congress,  un-
less in  extreme  cases,  where,  from  strong  convic-
tions of  public  duty,  he  may  be  willing  to  draw
down  upon  himself  their  hostility."  Mr.  Buchanan
was  one  of  those  that  opposed  the  ratification  of
the  treaty  with  England  negotiated  by  Mr.  Webster
and  Lord  Ashburton  in  1842.  In  1843  he  was
elected  to  the  senate  for  a  third  term,  and  in  1844
his  name  was  brought  forward  as  the  democratic
candidate  of  Pennsylvania  for  the  presidential
nomination ;  but  before  the  national  convention
met  he  withdrew  in  order  that  the  whole  strength
of  the  party  might  be  concentrated  upon  one  can-
didate. James  K.  Polk  was  elected ;  he  asked  Mr.
Buchanan  to  become  his  secretary  of  state,  and  the
invitation  was  accepted.  In  this  responsible  posi-
tion Mr.  Buchanan  had  two  very  important  ques-
tions to  deal  with,  and  they  required  the  exercise
of  all  his  political  tact  and  indefatigable  industry.
One  was  the  settlement  of  the  boundary  between
the  territory  of  Oregon  and  the  British  posses-
sions. (See  Polk,  James  Knox.)  The  other  was
the  annexation  of  Texas,  which  resulted  in  the
Mexican  war.  Texas  had  been  for  nine  years  inde-
pendent of  Mexico,  and  now  sought  admission  into
our  union.  The  difficulties  that  attended  this  ques-
tion were,  on  the  one  hand,  the  danger  of  increas-
ing the  excitement,  already  considerable,  against
slavery  (for  Texas  would  be  a  slave-holding  state) ;
and,  on  the  other,  the  danger  of  interference  on
the  part  of  England  if  Texas  should  remain  in-
dependent and  resume  her  war  with  Mexico.  The
adoption  by  Texas  of  the  basis  of  annexation  pro-
posed by  the  United  States  was  followed  by  the
refusal  of  the  Mexican  government  to  receiv^e  Mr.
Slidell,  sent  by  Mr.  Polk  as  envoy  extraordinary,
with  the  object  of  avoiding  a  war  and  to  settle  all
questions  between  the  two  countries,  including  the
western  boundary  of  Texas.  The  result  of  the
Mexican  war  was  the  cession  to  the  U  nited  States
of  California  and  New  Mexico  and  the  final  settle-
ment of  the  Texan  boundary.  The  policy  of  Mr.
Polk's  administration  toward  the  states  of  Central
America  and  on  the  subject  of  the  Monroe  doctrine
was  shaped  by  Mr.  Buchanan  very  differently  from
that  adopted  by  the  succeeding  administration  of


Gen.  Taylor,  whose  secretary  of  state  was  Mr.  Clay-
ton, the  American  negotiator  of  the  Clayton-Bul-
wer  treaty  with  Great  Britain.  Acting  under  Mr.
Buchanan's  advice,  President  Polk,  in  his  first  an-
nual message,  in  December,  1845,  reasserted  the
Monroe  doctrine  that  no  European  nation  should
henceforth  be  allowed  by  the  United  States  to  plant
any  colony  on  the  American  continent  or  to  inter-
fere in  any  way  in  American  affairs.  This  declara-
tion was  intended  to  frustrate  the  attempts  of
England  to  obtain  a  footing  in  the  then  Mexi-
can province  of  California  by  an  extensive  system
of  colonization.  England's  aims  were  defeated  for
the  time.  Two  years  afterward,  when  the  Mexican
war  was  drawing  to  a  close,  Mr.  Buchanan  turned
the  attention  of  President  Polk  to  the  encroach-
ments of  the  British  government  in  Central  Amer-
ica, under  the  operation  of  a  protectorate  over  the
kingdom  of  the  Mosquito  Indians.  Great  disturb-
ances followed  in  Yucatan,  and  the  Indians  began
a  war  of  extermination  against  the  whites.  If
not  actually  incited  by  the  British  authorities,  the
savages  were  known  to  be  supplied  with  British
muskets.  The  whites  were  reduced  to  such  ex-
tremities that  the  authorities  of  Yucatan  offered  to
transfer  the  dominion  and  sovereignty  of  the  pen-
insula to  the  United  States,  as  a  consideration  for
defending  it  against  the  Indians,  at  the  same  time
giving  notice  that  if  this  offer  should  be  declined
they  would  make  the  same  proposition  to  England
and  Spain.  The  president  recommended  to  con-
gress the  appeal  of  Yucatan,  but  declined  to  recom-
mend the  adoption  of  any  measure  with  a  view  to
acquire  the  dominion  and  sovereignty  over  the  pen-
insula. In  April,  1848,  the  United  States  appointed
a  charge  d'affaires  to  Guatemala,  and  Mr.  Buchanan
instructed  him  to  "  promote,  by  his  counsel  and  ad-
vice, should  suitable  occasions  offer,  the  reunion  of
the  states  that  formed  the  federation  of  Central
America;  to  cultivate  the  most  friendly  relations
with  Guatemala  and  the  other  states  of  Central
America;  and  to  communicate  to  the  state  depart-
ment all  the  information  obtainable  concerning  the
British  encroachments  upon  the  Mosquito  king-
dom." The  new  charge  was  prevented  from  reach-
ing Guatemala  until  late  in  Mr.  Polk's  adminis-
tration, and  the  plan  wisely  conceived  by  Mr.  Bu-
chanan was  not  carried  out.  In  the  mean  time  the
British  government  seized  upon  the  port  of  San  Juan
de  Nicaragua,  the  only  good  harbor  along  the  coast.
Instead  of  carrying  out  the  policy  of  President  Polk
and  Mr.  Buchanan,  the  administration  of  President
Taylor,  without  consulting  the  states  of  Central
America,  entered  in  1850  into  the  Clayton-Bulwer
treaty,  the  ambiguous  language  of  which  soon  gave
rise  to  such  complications  and  misunderstandings
between  England  and  the  United  States  that  Mr.
Buchanan  was  obliged  to  go,  subsequently,  as  min-
ister to  London,  to  endeavor  to  unravel  them.  In-
stead of  a  simple  provision  requiring  Great  Britain
absolutely  to  recede  from  the  Mosquito  protecto-
rate, and'  to  restore  to  Honduras,  Nicaragua,  and
Costa  Rica  their  respective  territories,  the  treaty
declared  that  neither  of  the  parties  should  "  make
use  of  any  protection  which  either  affords  or  may
afford,  or  any  alliance  which  either  has  or  may
have,  to  or  with  any  state  or  people,  for  the  pur-
pose of  erecting  or  maintaining  any  fortifications,
or  of  occupying,  fortifying,  or  colonizing  any  part
of  Central  America,  or  of  assuming  or  exercising
any  dominion  over  the  same."  It  soon  became  the
British  construction  of  this  clause  that  it  recog-
nized the  existence  of  the  Mosquito  protectorate
for  all  purposes  other  than  those  expressly  prohib-
ited :  and  down  to  the  time  when  Mr.  Buchanan


432


BUCHANAN


was  sent  by  President  Pierce  as  minister  to  Eng-
land this  claim  was  still  maintained.

On  the  accession  of  the  whig  party  to  power
under  Taylor,  in  March,  1849,  Mr.  Buchanan  re-
tired for  a  time  from  official  life.  His  home,  from
the  age  of  eighteen,  had  been  the  city  of  Lancaster,
where  he  owned  a  house.  In  the  autumn  of  1848
he  purchased  a  small  estate  of  twenty-two  acres,
known  as  Wheatland,  about  a  mile  from  the  town.
The  house  was  a  substantial  brick  mansion,  and,  on
Mr.  Buchanan's  retirement  from  the  cabinet,  this
became  his  permanent  abode  when  he  was  not  oc-
cupying an  official  residence  in  London  or  in
Washington.  Mr.  Buchanan  never  married.  The
death  of  the  lady  whom  he  had  intended  to  marry
was  a  deep  and  lasting  sorrow.  The  loss  of  his
sister,  Mrs.  Lane,  in  1889,  and  of  her  husband  two
years  later,  gave  him  the  care  of  their  four  chil-
dren ;  and  the  youngest  of  these,  afterward  widely
known  as  Miss  Harriet  Lane,  became  an  inmate  of
his  household.  James  Buchanan  Henry,  the  son
of  another  sister,  who  died  about  the  same  time,
was  also  taken  into  his  family ;  and  these  two  cous-
ins were  brought  up  by  their  uncle  with  the  most
wise  and  affectionate  care.  Mr.  Buchanan's  letters
to  his  niece,  begun  when  she  was  a  school-girl,  and,
after  Miss  Lane  had  grown  up,  written  almost
daily  during  her  absences  from  him,  give  a  charm-
ing picture  of  his  private  life.  During  the  few
years  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  unofficial  life,  passed  chiefly


at  Wheatland,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  devoted
much  time  to  the  law.  His  correspondence  was
large ;  and  this,  with  a  constant  and  lively  interest
in  public  affairs,  rendered  him,  even  in  retirement,
very  busy.  He  lent  considerable  influence  to  his
party  as  a  private  individual ;  but  his  exertions
were  not  marked  by  purely  partisan  feeling.  He
strenuously  opposed  the  Wilmot  proviso,  which
aimed  at  excluding  slavery  from  all  newly  acquired
territory;  and  favored  Mr.  Clay's  "Compromise
Measures  of  1850,"  which  provided  for  the  admis-
sion of  California  as  a  free  state,  and  the  abolition
of. the  slave-trade  in  the  District  of  Columbia;  but,
by  the  fugitive  slave  law,  secured  the  return  to  their
owners  of  slaves  that  had  escaped  into  free  states.
He  wrote  many  influential  public  letters,  in  one  of
which  he  declared  that  "  two  things  are  necessary  to
preserve  the  union  from  danger:  1.  Agitation  in
the  north  on  the  subject  of  southern  slavery  must
be  rebuked  and  put  down  by  a  strong  and  enlight-
ened public  opinion ;  2.  The  fugitive  slave  law  must
be  enforced  in  its  spirit."  In  the  presidential  elec-
tion of  1852  Mr.  Buchanan  was  a  candidate  for  the
democratic  nomination ;  but  Gen.  Franklin  Pierce
received  the  nomination  and  was  elected.  The  most
important  service  rendered  by  Mr.  Buchanan  to  his
party  in  this  election— and  with  him  a  service  to  his
party  was alike  a  service  to  his  country — was  a


BUCHANAN


speech  made  at  Greensburgh,  Pa.,  in  October,  1852
in  opposition  to  the  election  of  Gen.  Scott,  the  whi^
candidate.  This  speech  exhibited  in  a  very  cleai
light  the  whole  political  history  of  that  period,  and
asserted  a  principle  which  he  said  ought  to  be  ar
article  of  democratic  faith  :  "  Beware  of  elevating;
to  the  highest  civil  trust  the  commander  of  youi
victorious  armies,"  drawing  a  distinction  betweer
one  "  who  had  been  a  man  of  war,  and  nothing  bul
a  man  of  war  from  his  youth  upward,"  and  such  a
had  been  "  soldiers  only  in  the  day  and  hour  o
danger,  when  the  country  had  demanded  their  ser
vices,  and  who  had  already  illiistrateJ  high  civi
appointments  " ;  and  then  criticising  exhaustiveh
each  of  Gen.  Scott's  avowed  politicaf  opinions,  anc
quoting  Mr.  Thurlow  Weed,  "  one  of  Gen.  Scott
most  able  supporters,"  as  acknowledging  thai
"  there  was  weakness  in  all  Scott  said  or  did  aboui
the  presidency."  When  in  1853  Franklin  Pierce
became  president,  he  appointed  Mr.  Buehanai
minister  to  England.  Buchanan,  though  socia
in  his  nature,  was  a  man  of  simple  republicar
tastes,  and  the  formality  and  etiquette  of  lif<
at  a  foreign  court,  never  agreeable,  now,  at  th
age  of  sixty-two,  appeared  to  him  particularly  dis
tasteful ;  besides,  he  considered  that  his  duty  t(
his  young  relatives  as  well  as  to  his  only  surviving
brother,  a  clergyman  in  delicate  health,  requiret
his  presence  at  home.  But  with  Mr.  Buchanar
duty  to  his  country  always  outweighed  every  othei
consideration,  and  Mr.  tierce's  urgent  appeal  t(
him  to  accept  what  was  at  that  time  a  very  impor
tant  mission,  at  length  prevailed.  Mr.  Buehanai
sailed  for  England  from  New  York  on  5  Aug.,  1853
and  landed  in  Liverpool  on  the  17th.  There  wer«
three  important  questions  to  be  settled  with  Eng
land  at  this  time :  the  first  related  to  the  fisheries
the  second  was  the  desire  of  England  to  establisl
reciprocal  free  trade  in  certain  enumerated  article:
between  the  United  States  and  the  British  Nortl
American  provinces,  and  thus  preserve  their  alle
giance  and  ward  off  the  danger  of  their  annexatioi
to  the  United  States ;  and  this  Mr.  Buchanan  was
very  desirous  to  use  as  a  powerful  lever  to  secun
the  third  point,  which  the  United  States  earnestlj
desired,  viz.,  the  withdrawal  of  all  British  dominior
in  Central  America,  and  the  recognition  of  the  Mon
roe  doctrine,  which  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty  hac
not  firmly  established.  President  Pierce  considerec
it  best  that  the  reciprocity  and  fishery  questioni
should  be  settled  at  Washington  ;  but  Mr.  Buchan
an  was  intrusted  with  the  negotiation  of  the  Centra
American  question  in  London.  Mr.  Buchanan's
main  object  was  to  develop  and  ascertain  the  precise
differences  between  the  two  governments  in  regard
to  the  construction  of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty
but  the  Crimean  war  so  long  delayed  the  negotia-
tions with  this  country  that  nothing  could  be  ac-
complished while  he  remained  in  England.  As  the
war  approached,  and  when  it  was  finally  declared
the  principles  of  neutrality,  privateering,  and  manj
other  topics  came  within  the  range  of  the  discus-
sion ;  and  it  was  very  much  in  consequence  of  the
views  expressed  by  Mr.  Buchanan  to  Lord  Claren-
don, and  by  the  latter  communicated  to  the  Brit-
ish cabinet,  that  the  course  of  England  toward
neutrals  during  that  war  became  what  it  was.
When  Lord  Clarendon,  in  1854,  presented  to  Mr
Buchanan  a  projei  for  a  treaty  between  Great  Brit-
ain, France,  and  the  United  States,  making  it  pira-
cy for  neutrals  to  serve  on  board  of  privateere  cruis-
ing against  the  commerce  of  either  of  the  three
nations  when  such  nation  was  a  belligerent,  tlif
very  impressive  reasons  that  Mr.  Buchanan  opposed
to  it  caused  it  to  be  abandoned. An  Ameriean


BUCHANAN


BUCHANAN


433


minister  at  the  English  court,  at  periods  of  exciting
and  critical  questions  between  the  two  nations,  is
verv  likely  to  experience  a  considerable  variation
in  the  social  barometer.  But  the  strength  of  Mr.
Buchanan's  character,  and  the  agreeable  personal
qualities  which  were  in  him  united  with  the  grav-
ity of  years  and  an  experience  of  a  very  uncommon
kind,  overcame  at  all  times  any  tendency  to  social
unpleasantness  that  might  have  been  caused  by
national  feelings  excited  by  temporary  causes.
Throughout  his  residence  in  England  Mr.  Buchan-
an was  treated  with  marked  attention,  not  only  by
society  in  general,  but  by  the  queen  and  the  prince
consort.  Miss  Lane  joined  him  in  the  spring  of  1854,
and  remained  with  him  until  the  autumn  of  1855.
Mr.  Buchanan  arrived  in  New  York  in  April,  1856,
and  there  met  with  a  public  reception  from  the  au-
thorities and  people  of  the  city,  that  evinced  the
interest  that  now  began  to  be  everywhere  mani-
fested in  him  as  the  probable  future  president.
Prior  to  the  meeting  of  the  national  democratic
convention  at  Cincinnati  in  June,  1856,  there  was
lack  of  organization  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Buchan-
an's political  friends ;  and  Mr.  Buchanan  him-
self, though  willing  to  accept  the  nomination,  made
no  efforts  to  secure  it,  and  did  not  believe  that  he
would  receive  it.  The  rival  claimants  were  Presi-
dent Pierce  and  Senator  Douglas,  of  Illinois.
Chiefly  through  the  efforts  of  Mr.  Slidell,  Mr.  Bu-
chanan was  nominated.  By  this  time  the  whig
party  had  disappeared,  the  old  party  lines  were  ob-
literated, and  the  main  political  issue  had  come  to
be  the  question  of  slavery  or  no  slavery  in  the  ter-
ritories. The  anti-slavery  party  now  called  them-
selves republicans,  and  their  candidate  was  Gen.
Fremont.  The  result  of  the  election  shows,  with
great  distinctness,  the  following  facts:  1.  That
Mr.  Buchanan  was  chosen  president  because  he  re-
ceived the  electoral  votes  of  the  five  free  states  of
Pennsylvania,  New  Jersey,  Indiana,  Illinois,  and
California  (sixty-two  in  all),  and  that  without  them
he  could  not  have  been  elected.  2.  That  his  south-
ern vote  (that  of  every  slave-holding  state  except-
ing Maryland)  was  partly  given  to  him  because  of
his  conservative  opinions  and  position,  and  partly
because  the  candidate  for  the  vice-presidency,  Mr.
Breckiiu'idge,  was  a  southern  man.  3.  That  Gen.
Fremont  received  the  electoral  vote  of  no  southern
state,  and  that  this  was  due  partly  to  the  character
of  the  republican  party,  and  partly  to  the  fact
that  the  republican  candidate  for  the  vice-presi-
dency, Mr.  Dayton,  of  New  Jersey,  was  a  citi-
zen of  a  non-slaveholding  state.  Gen.  Fremont
himself  was  nominally  a  citizen  of  California.
This  election,  therefore,  foreshadowed  the  section-
al division  that  would  be  almost  certain  to  happen
in  the  next  one  if  the  four  years  of  Mr.  Bu-
chanan's administration  should  riot  witness  a  sub-
sidence in  the  sectional  feelings  between  the  north
and  the  south.  It  would  only  be  necessary  for
the  republicans  to  wrest  from  the  democratic  par-
ty the  five  free  states  that  had  voted  for  Mr.
Buchanan,  and  they  would  elect  the  president  in
1880.  Whether  this  was  to  happen  would  depend
upon  the  ability  of  the  democratic  party  to  avoid  a
rupture  into  factions  that  would  themselves  be
representatives  of  irreconcilable  dogmas  on  the  sub-
ject of  slavery  in  the  territories.  Hence  it  is  that
Mr.  Buchanan's  course  as  president,  for  the  first
tliree  years  of  his  term,  is  to  be  judged  with  refer-
ence to  the  responsibility  that  was  upon  him  so  to
conduct  the  government  as  to  disarm,  if  possible,
the  antagonism  of  section  to  section.  His  admin-
istration of  affairs  after  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln
IS  to  be  judged  simply  by  his  duty  as  the  executive
VOL.  I. — 28


in  the  most  extraordinary  and  anomalous  crisis  in
which  the  country  had  ever  been  placed.

Mr.  Buchanan  was  inaugurated  on  4  March,  1857.
The  cabinet,  which  was  confirmed  by  the  senate
on  6  March,  consisted  of  Lewis  Cass,  of  Michigan,
secretary  of  state ;  Howell  Cobb,  of  Georgia,  secre-
tary of  the  treasury ;  John  B.  Floyd,  of  Virginia,
secretary  of  war;  Isaac  Toucey,  of  Connecticut,
secretary  of  the  navy ;  Aaron  V.  Brown,  of  Tennes-
see, postmaster-general ;  Jacob  Thompson,  of  Mis-
sissippi, secretary  of  the  interior;  and  Jeremiah
S.  Black,  of  Pennsylvania,  attorney-general.  The
internal  affairs  of  the  country  during  Buchanan's
administration  occupied  so  much  of  the  public
attention  at  the  time,  and  have  since  been  a  sub-
ject of  so  much  interest,  that  his  management
of  our  foreign  relations  has  been  quite  obscured.
The  wisdom  displayed  in  this  branch  of  his  duties
was  such  as  might  have  been  expected  from  one
who  had  had  his  previous  experience  in  the  state
department  and  in  important  diplomatic  posts.
His  only  equals  in  the  executive  office  in  this  re-
spect have  been  Mr.  Jefferson  and  Mr.  John  Quincy
Adams.  During  an  administration  fraught  with
the  most  serious  hazards  to  the  internal  relations
of  the  states  with  each  other,  he  kept  steadily
in  view  the  preservation  of  peace  and  good  will
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  while
he  abated  nothing  from  our  just  claims  or  our
national  dignity.  He  left  to  his  successor  no  unset-
tled question  between  these  two  nations  that  was
of  any  immediate  importance,  and  he  also  left  the
feeling  between  them  and  their  respective  govern-
ments in  a  far  better  condition  than  he  found  it
on  his  accession  to  the  presidency.  The  long-stand-
ing and  dangerous  question  of  British  dominion  in
Central  America,  in  the  hope  of  settling  which  Mr.
Buchanan  had  accepted  the  mission  to  England,
was  still  pending,  but  it  was  at  length  amicably
and  honorably  settled,  under  his  advice  and  appro-
bation after  he  became  president,  by  treaties  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  the  two  Central  American
states,  in  accordance  with  the  American  construc-
tion of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty.  Another  subject
of  contention  that  had  long  existed  between  the
two  countries  was  removed  by  President  Buchan-
an in  a  summary  and  dignified  way.  The  bellig-
erent right  of  search  had  been  exercised  by  Great
Britain  in  the  maritime  war  of  1812.  In  pro-
cess of  time  she  undertook  to  assert  a  right  to
detain  and  search,  on  the  high  seas,  in  time  of
peace,  merchantmen  suspected  of  being  engaged
in  the  slave-trade.  In  1858  she  despatched  some
cruisers  with  such  orders  to  the  coast  of  Cuba
and  the  Gulf  of  Mexico.  President  Buchanan,  al-
ways vigilant  in  protecting  the  commerce  of  the
country,  but  mindful  of  the  importance  of  prevent-
ing any  necessity  for  war,  remonstrated  to  the  Eng-
lish government  against  this  violation  of  the  free-
dom of  the  seas.  Then  he  sent  a  large  naval  force
to  the  neighborhood  of  Cuba  with  instructions  "to
protect  all  vessels  of  the  United  States  on  the  high
seas  from  search  or  detention  by  the  vessels  of  war
of  any  other  nation."  The  effect  was  most  salu-
tary. The  British  government  receded,  abandoned
the  claim  of  the  right  of  search,  and  recognized  the
pi-inciple  of  international  law  in  favor  of  the  free-
dom of  the  seas.  During  the  whole  of  Mr.  Buchan-
an's administration  our  relations  with  Mexico  were
in  a  complicated  and  critical  position,  in  conse-
quence of  the  internal  condition  of  that  country
and  of  the  danger  of  interference  by  European
powers.  Great  outrages  were  committed  in  Mexi-
co upon  our  citizens  and  their  property,  and
their claims against that  government exceeded


434


BUCHANAN


$10,000,000.  Mr.  Buchanan  recommended  to
congress  to  send  assistance  to  the  constitutional
government  in  Mexico,  which  had  been  forcibly
superseded  by  military  rule,  but  which  still  held  the
allegiance  of  the  majority  of  the  people,  and  to
enforce  redress  for  the  wrongs  of  our  citizens.  He
saw  very  clearly  that,  unless  active  measures  should
be  taken  by  the  government  of  the  United  States
to  reach  a  power  with  which  a  settlement  of  all
claims  and  difRculties  could  be  effected,  some  other
nation  would  undertake  to  establish  a  government
in  Mexico,  and  the  United  States  would  then  have
to  interfere,  not  only  to  secure  the  rights  of  their
citizens,  but  to  assert  the  principle  of  the  Monroe
doctrine.  He  also  instructed  the  Mexican  minis-
ter, Mr.  McLane,  to  make  a  "  Treaty  of  Transit  and
Commerce"  and  a  "convention  to  enforce  treaty
stipulations,  and  to  maintain  order  and  security  in
the  territory  of  the  republics  of  Mexico  and  the
United  States."  But  congress  took  no  notice  of  the
president's  recommendation,  and  refused  to  ratify
the  treaty  and  the  convention.  Mexico- was  left  to
the  interference  of  Louis  Napoleon ;  the  establish-
ment of  an  empire,  under  Maximilian,  followed,
for  the  embarrassment  of  President  Lincoln's  ad-
ministration while  we  were  in  the  throes  of  our  civil
war,  and  the  claiirH  of  American  citizens  were  to
all  appearance  indelinitcly  postponed.  Our  rela-
tions with  Spain  were  also  in  a  very  unsatisfactory
condition  at  the  beginning  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  term.
There  were  many  just  claims  of  our  citizens  against
the  Spanish  government  for  injuries  received  in
Cuba,  and  Mr.  Buchanan  succeeded  in  having  a
"  convention  concluded  at  Madrid  hi  1860,  establish-
ing a  joint  commission  for  the  final  adjudication  and
payment  of  all  the  claims  of  the  respective  parties."
The  senate  refused  to  ratify  this  convention  also,
probably  because  of  the  intense  excitement  against
slavery,  the  convention  having  authorized  the  pre-
senting before  the  commissioners  of  a  Spanish
claim  against  the  United  States  for  the  value  of
certain  slaves.  In  the  settlement  of  claims  against
the  government  of  Paraguay  the  president's  firm
policy  was  seconded  by  congress,  and  he  was  author-
ized to  send  a  commissioner  to  that  country  ac-
companied by  "a  naval  force  sufficient  to  exact
justice  should  negotiation  fail."  This  was  entirely
successful ;  full  indemnification  was  obtained
without  any  resort  to  arms.  Mr.  Buchanan's  ne-
gotiations with  China,  conducted  through  Will-
iam B.  Reed  as  minister,  were  also  successful ;  a
treaty  was  concluded  in  1858,  which  established
very  satisfactory  commercial  relations  with  that
country  and  secured  the  liquidation  of  all  claims.
June  22,  1860,  Mr.  Buchanan  vetoed  a  bill  "to
secure  homesteads  to  actual  settlers  in  the  public
domain,  and  for  other  purposes."  The  other  pur-
poses contemplated  donations  to  the  states.  The
ground  of  the  veto  was  that  the  power  "  to  dis-
pose of"  the  territory  of  the  United  States  did
not  authorize  congress  to  donate  public  lands
to  the  states  for  their  domestic  purposes.  In  the
senate  the  bill  failed  to  receive  the  two  thirds
majority  necessary  to  pass  it  over  the  veto.  In
internal  affairs  the  preceding  administration  of
President  Pierce  had  left  a  legacy  of  trouble  to  his
successor  in  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise,
which  was  followed  by  a  terrible  period  of  lawless-
ness and  bloodshed  in  Kansas,  under  what  was
called  "  squatter  sovereignty,"  the  slavery  and  the
anti-slavery  parties  among  the  settlers  struggling
for  supremacy.  The  pro-slavery  party  sustained
the  territorial  government  and  obtained  control
of  its  legislature.  The  anti-slavery  party  repu-
diated this  legislature  and  held  a  convention  at


BUCHANAN


Topeka  to  institute  an  opposition  government.
Congress  had  recognized  the  authority  of  the  teiri-
torial  government,  and  Mr.  Buchanan,  as  president,
had  no  alternative  but  to  recognize  and  uphold  it
also.  The  fact  that  the  legislature  of  that  govern-
ment was  in  the  hands  of  the  pro-slavery  party
made  the  course  he  •  adopted  seem  as  if  he  far
vored  their  pro-slavery  designs,  while,  in  truth,
he  had  no  object  to  subserve  but  to  sustain,  as  he
was  officially  obliged  to  sustain,  the  government
that  congress  had  recognized  as  the  lawful  gov-
ernment of  the  territory.  Now,  throughout  the
north,  the  press  and  the  pulpit  began  to  teem  with
denunciations  of  the  new  president,  who  had  not
allowed  revolutionary  violence  to  prevail  over  the
law  of  the  land,  and  this  was  kept  up  throughout
his  administration.  The  anti-slavery  party  gained
ground,  and  the  election  of  1860  resulted  in  the
triumph  of  Mr.  Lincoln.  Mr.  Buchanan  was  a  con-
servative and  far-seeing  man,  who,  though  opposed
to  slavery,  believed  that  the  blind  and  fanatical
interference  of  the  northern  abolitionists  in  the
domestic  affairs  of  the  southern  states  would  excite
the  latter  in  a  manner  dangerous  to  the  peace  and
prosperity  of  the  union.  His  messages  constantly
recojnmended  conciliatory  legislative  measures;
but  congress  paid  no  attention  to  his  advice.  Fi-
nally the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  was  seized  upon
as  the  signal  in  South  Carolina  for  the  break-
ing out  of  her  old  doctrine  of  secession.  She
passed  her  ordinance  of  secession  on  20  Dec,
1860.  Mr.  Buchanan  never  for  a  moment  admitted
that  a  state  had  any  power  to  secede  from  the
union.  South  Carolina  had  once  and  forever  i
adopted  and  ratified  the  constitution  of  the  United
States,  and  he  maintained  that  she  had  by  this  act  I
permanently  resigned  certain  powers  to  the  federal
government,  and  that  she  could  not,  by  her  own
will  and  without  the  consent  of  the  other  states,  i
resume  those  powers  and  declare  herself  independ-
ent. She  could,  if  actually  oppressed  by  the  gen-
eral government,  seek  to  redress  her  wrongs  by
revolution ;  but  never  by  secession.  Pie  refused  to
receive,  in  their  assumed  official  capacity,  the  com-
missioners sent  by  South  Carolina,  in  December,
1860,  to  treat  with  him  as  with  a  foreign  power.
In  October,  1860,  before  the  election,  Mr,  Buchanan
received  from  Gen,  Scott,  the  general-in-chief  of
the  army,  a  communication  saying  that,  in  the
event  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  election,  Gen.  Scott  antici-
pated that  there  would  be  a  secession  of  one  or
more  of  the  southern  states ;  and  that,  from  the
general  rashness  of  the  southern  character,  there
was  danger  of  a  "preliminary"  seizure  of  certain
southern  forts.  This  paper  became  known  as
"  General  Scott's  Views."  It  was  the  foundation,  at
a  later  period,  of  a  charge  that  President  Buchan-
an had  been  warned  by  Gen.  Scott  of  the  danger  of
leaving  the  southern  forts  without  sufficient  gar-
risons to  prevent  surprises,  and  that  he  had  neg-
lected this  warning.  Mr.  Buchanan,  who  had
publicly  denied  the  right  of  secession,  could  not
furnish  the  southern  states  with  any  justification
of  such  a  proceeding  by  prematurely  reenforcing
the  forts  as  if  he  anticipated  secession.  But,  even
if  the  president  had  wished  to  adopt  such  a  meas-
ure, there  were,  as  Gen.  Scott  himself  said,  but
five  companies  of  regular  troops,  or  400  men,  avail-
able for  the  garrisoning  of  nine  fortifications  in  six
highly  excited  southern  states.  The  remainder  ot
the  army  was  scattered  over  the  western  plains.
Scott's  views  were  clearly  impracticable,  and  pro-
duced no  imf)ression  upon  the  president's  mind,

Mr.  Buchanan  has  been  often  and  severely  re-
proached for  a  "  temporizing  policy  "  and  a  want


BUCHANAN


BUCHANAN


435


of  such  vigor  as  might  have  averted  the  civil  war ;
but  the  policy  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  administration,
until  after  the  attack  on  Fort  Sumter,  was  identi-
cal with  that  of  Mr.  Buchanan,  In  his  annual
message  of  5  Dec,  1860,  Mr.  Buchanan  stated
clearly  and  forcibly  his  denial  of  the  right  of  se-
cession, and  also  his  conviction  that  if  a  state
should  adopt  such  an  unconstitutional  measure  the
federal  government  had  no  power,  under  the  con-
stitution, to  make  aggressive  war  upon  her  to  com-
pel her  to  remain  in  the  union ;  but  at  the  same
time  drawing  a  definite  distinction  between  this
and  the  right  of  the  use  of  force  against  individu-
als, in  spite  of  secession,  in  enforcing  the  execution
of  federal  laws  and  in  the  preservation  of  federal
property.  This  doctrine  met  the  secessionists  upon
their  own  ground ;  for  it  denied  that  a  state  ordi-
nance of  secession  could  absolve  its  people  from
obeying  the  laws  of  the  United  States.  Mr.  Bu-
chanan thus  framed  the  only  justiflable  basis  of  a
civil  war,  and  left  upon  the  records  of  the  country
the  clear  line  of  demarcation  that  would  have  to
be  observed  by  his  successor  and  would  make  the
use  of  force,  if  force  must  be  used,  a  war,  not  of
aggression,  but  of  defence.  In  order  to  disarm  all
unreasonable  opposition  from  the  south,  Mr.  Bu-
chanan urged  upon  congress  the  adoption  of  an
"  explanatory  amendment "  of  the  constitution,
which  should  effectually  secure  to  slave-holders  all
their  constitutional  rights.  From  all  parts  of  the
country,  north  and  south,  he  received  private  let-
ters approving,  on  various  grounds,  the  tone  of  the
message ;  but  nearly  the  whole  of  the  republican
party  saw  fit  to  treat  it  as  a  denial  by  the  president
of  any  power  to  enforce  the  laws  against  the  citi-
zens of  a  state  after  secession,  and  even  after  act-
ual rebellion ;  while  this  very  power,  emphatically
stated  as  it  was  in  the  message,  was  made  by  the
secessionists  their  ground  of  attack.  It  was  the
great  misfortune  of  Mr.  Buchanan's  position  that
he  had  to  appeal  to  a  congress  in  which  there  were
two  sectional  parties  breathing  mutual  defiance;
in  which  broad  and  patriotic  statesmanship  was
confined  to  a  small  body  of  men,  who  could  not
win  over  to  their  views  a  sufficient  number  from
either  of  the  parties  to  make  up  a  majority  upon
any  proposition  whatever.  In  the  hope  of  prevent-
ing the  secession  of  South  Carolina,  the  president
sent  Caleb  Cushing  to  Charleston,  with  a  letter  to
Gov.  Pickens,  urging  the  people  of.  the  state  to
await  the  action  of  congress.

After  the  actual  secession  of  South  Carolina,
Mr.  Buchanan's  two  great  objects  were :  1.  To
confine  the  area  of  secession,  so  that  if  there  was
to  be  a  southern  confederacy  it  might  comprehend
only  the  cotton  states,  vs^hich  were  most  likely  to
act  together.  2.  To  induce  congress  to  prepare  for
a  civil  war  in  case  one  should  be  precipitated.
While  he  made  it  apparent  to  congress  that  at  that
time  he  was  without  the  necessary  executive  pow-
ers to  enforce  the  collection  of  the  revenue  in
South  Carolina,  he  did  not  fail  to  call  for  the  ap-
propriate powers  and  means.  But  at  no  time  dur-
ing that  session  did  a  single  republican  senator
(and  the  republicans  had  a  majority  in  the  senate),
in  any  form  whatever,  give  his  vote  or  his  influ-
ence for  any  measure  that  would  strengthen  the
hands  of  the  president  either  in  maintaining  peace
or  in  executing  the  laws  of  the  United  States.
whatever  was  the  governing  motive  for  their  in-
action, it  never  can  be  said  that  they  were  not  sea-
sonably warned  by  the  president  that  a  policy  of
inaction  would  be  fatal.  That  policy  not  only
crippled  him,  but  crippled  his  successor.  When
Mr.  Lincoln  came  into  office,  seven  states  had  al-


ready seceded,  and  not  a  single  law  had  been  put
upon  the  statute-book  that  would  enable  the  execu-
tive to  meet  such  a  condition  of  the  union.  Mr.
Crittenden,  of  Kentucky,  had  introduced  into  the
senate  a  resolution,  which  became  known  as  the
"  Crittenden  Compromise,"  providing  in  substance
for  a  restoration  of  the  Missouri  compromise-line
of  36"  30' :  and  it  was  proposed  that  this  question
should  be  referred  to  a  direct  vote  of  the  people  in
the  several  states.  On  8  Jan.,  1861,  Mr.  Buchanan
sent  a  special  message  to  congress,  strongly  recom-
mending the  adoption  of  this  measure;  but  it  pro-
duced no  effect.  During  the  last  three  months  of
his  term  there  were  several  changes  in  his  cabinet.
Mr.  Cobb  resigned  his  portfolio  on  8  Dec,  1860,
and  Mr.  Thomas,  who  succeeded  him  as  secretary
of  the  treasury,  also  resigned  on  11  Jan.,  their
sympathies  being  with  the  secessionists.  This  de-
partment was  then  taken  by  Gen.  John  A.  Dix,
Mr.  Thompson,  secretary  of  the  interior,  resigned
on  8  Jan.,  also  because  he  was  a  southern  man,  and
the  duties  of  this  office  were  subsequently  per-
formed by  Moses  Kelly,  chief  clerk.  Gen.  Cass
and  Gov.  Floyd  resigned  their  offices  in  Decem-
ber ;  Judge  Black  was  transferred  from  the  attor-
ney-generalship to  the  state  department,  and  Ed-
win M.  Stanton  became  attorney-general.  Joseph
Holt  succeeded  Sec.  Floyd  in  the  war  department.

The  two  critical  questions  which  it  was  impor-
tant that  the  president  should  correctly  and  con-
sistently decide  were,  whether  he  was  to  receive  in
their  assumed  official  character  any  commissioners
sent  by  the  southern  states  as  to  a  foreign  power,
and  whether  re-enforcements  should  be  sent  to
Maj.  Anderson  at  Fort  Sumter,  or  to  any  other
southern  fort.  Mr.  Buchanan  always  refused  to
receive  both  the  South  Carolina  commissioners  and
also  Mr.  Crawford,  the  first  of  the  commissioners
from  the  confederate  government  at  Montgomery,
who  arrived  in  Washington  just  before  the  close
of  his  term ;  he  thus  left  the  new  president  entire-
ly free  to  act  as  he  saw  best,  and  entirely  untram-
melled by  any  previous  pledges.  As  to  re-enforce-
ments for  southern  forts,  Maj.  Anderson  was  in-
structed to  report  to  the  government  any  necessity
for  assistance,  and  in  the  mean  time  an  expedition
was  fitted  out  at  New  York  and  held  in  readiness
to  sail  at  an  hour's  notice.  Until  the  close  of  Mr.
Buchanan's  administration,  Maj.  Anderson  con-
sidered himself  sufficiently  strong,  and  agreed  with
the  president  that  any  unnecessary  movement  of
troops  would  be  regarded  by  the  south  as  a  menace
and  would  provoke  hostilities.  Mr.  Buchanan
would  not  initiate  a  civil  war ;  his  policy  was  en-
tirely defensive ;  and  yet  he  did  all  that  he  could,
constitutionally,  to  avert  a  war.  It  has  often  been
asked,  Why  did  Mr.  Buchanan  suffer  state  after
state  to  go  out  of  the  union  ?  Why  did  he  not  call
on  the  north  for  volunteers,  and  put  down  rebel-
lion in  its  first  stage  ?  The  president  had  no  power
to  call  for  volunteers  under  any  existing  law ;  con-
gress, during  the  whole  winter,  refused  to  pass  any
law  to  provide  him  with  men  or  money.  In  the
application  of  all  the  means  that  he  had  for  pro-
tecting the  public  property,  he  omitted  no  step
that  could  have  been  taken  with  safety,  and,  at  the
inauguration  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  Maj.  Anderson  not
only  held  Fort  Sumter,  but  had  held  it  down  to
that  time  in  perfect  confidence  that  he  could  main-
tain his  position.

On  9  March,  1861,  Mr.  Buchanan  returned  to
his  home  at  Wheatland,  a  view  of  which  appears
on  page  432,  rejoicing  to  be  free  from  the  cares
of  a  long  and  responsible  public  life,  and  wel-
comed  by  an immense  gathering  of  his  neigh-


436


BUCHANAN


bors  and  the  citizens  of  Lancaster.  Here  he  lived
quietly  for  the  remaining  seven  years  of  his  life,
taking,  however,  a  lively  interest  in  public  affairs
and  always  supporting,  with  his  influence  as  a  pri-
vate citizen,  the  maintenance  of  the  war  for  the
restoration  of  the  union.  His  health  was  generally
good  throughout  his  whole  life.  After  his  final
return  to  Wheatland  he  began  to  be  attacked  occa-
sionally by  rheumatic  gout,  and  this  malady  at
last  terminated  his  life  in  his  seventy-eighth  year.
His  remains  were  interred  in  a  cemetery  near  Lan-
caster. No  man  was  ever  treated  with  greater  in-
justice than  he  was  during  the  last  seven  years  of
his  life  by  a  large  part  of  the  public.  Men  said  he
was  a  secessionist ;  he  was  a  traitor ;  he  had  given
away  the  authority  of  the  government;  he  had
been  weak  and  vacillating ;  he  had  shut  his  eyes
when  men  about  him,  the  very  ministers  of  his
cabinet,  were  plotting  the  destruction  of  the  union ;
he  was  old  and  timid ;  he  might  have  crushed  an
incipient  rebellion,  and  he  had  encouraged  it.
But  he  bore  all  this  with  patience  and  dignity,  for-
bearing to  say  anything  against  the  new  adminis-
tration, and  confident  that  posterity  w'ould  ac-
knowledge that  he  had  done  his  duty.  In  18G2  he
was  attacked  by  Gen.  Scott,  who  made  several
statements  concerning  the  president's  management
of  the  Fort  Sumter  affairs  during  the  last  winter
of  his  administration,  which  Mr.  Buchanan  suc-
cessfully refuted.  Mr.  Buchanan's  loyalty  to  the
constitution  of  the  United  States  was  unbounded.
Pie  was  not  a  man  of  brilliant  genius,  nor  did  he
ever  do  anyone  thing  to  make  his  name  illustrious
and  immortal,  as  Webster  did  when  he  defended
the  constitution  against  the  heresy  of  nullification.
But  in  the  course  of  a  long,  useful,  and  consistent
life,  filled  with  the  exercise  of  talents  of  a  fine
order  and  uniform  ability,  he  had  made  the  con-
stitution of  his  country  t!ie  object  of  his  deepest
affection,  the  constant  guide  of  all  his  public  acts.
He  published  a  vindication  of  the  policy  of  his  ad-
ministration during  the  last  months  of  his  term,
"Buchanan's  Administration"  (New  York,  1866).
See  "Life  of  President  Buchanan,"  by  George
Ticknor  Curtis  (3  vols.,  New  York,  1883).

BUCHANAN,  Joseph  Rhodes,  physician,  b.  in
Frankfort,  Ky.,  11  Dec,  1814.  He  was  graduated
as  M.  D,  at  Louisville  university  in  1842,  and  in
1846  to  1856  was  professor  of  physiology  in  the
eclectic  medical  institute  of  Cincinnati.  He  was
dean  of  the  faculty  from  1850  to  1855,  and  edited
the  medical  journal  connected  with  the  institute.
He  was  subsequently  connected  with  similar  col-
leges in  New  York  and  Boston.  Prof.  Buchanan
has  discovered  what  he  calls  the  sciences  of  Psy-
chometry  and  Sarcognomy,  and  claims  to  have
demonstrated  the  action  of  the  brain  on  the  body
as  its  controlling  physiological  organ.  He  pub-
lished "Buchanan's  Journal  of  Man,"  from  1849
to  1856,  and  has  written  "  Outlines  of  Lectures  on
the  Neurological  System  of  Anthropology  "  (Cincin-
nati, 1854),  "  Eclectic  Practice  of  Medicine  and  Sur-
gery" (3d  revised  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1868),  "The
New  Education  "  (3d  ed.  New  York,  1882),  "  Thera-
peutic Sarcognomy"  (Boston,  1884),  "Manual  of
Psychometry"  (1885),  and  is  preparing  a  volume
on  "  Cerebral  Physiology."

BUCHANAN,  Mckean,  actor,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  28  Feb.,  1823;  d.  in  Denver,  Col.,  16
April.  1872.  He  was  the  son  of  Paymaster  IMcKean
Buchanan,  U.  S.  navy.  He  was  educated  for  the
navy,  and  served  three  years  as  midshipman  on
the  sloop-of-war  "  St.  Louis."  His  first  appearance
as  an  actor  was  made  at  the  St.  Charles  theatre.
New  Orleans,  in  the  character  of  Hamlet,  in  Avhich


BUCHANAN


role  he  made  his  appearance  in  New  York  in  1850>
but  with  little  success.  He  visited  England  twice
and  also  made  tours  in  Australia  and  California!
His  sombre  and  antiquated  style  did  not  please  the
people  of  New  York,  and  during  the  latter  years  of
his  professional  life  he  confined  his  labors  to  the
west,  where  he  was  very  popular.  Mr.  Buchanan
possessed  sterling  merit  as  an  actor  and  made  many
warm  friends.— His  daughter,  Yirgiiiia  Ellen,  b.
in  1866,  has  adopted  her  father's  profession.— His
son,  Thomas  McKean,  lieutenant-commander,  U.
S.  navy,  b.  in  Bellefonte,  Pa.,  10  Sept.,  1837;  d.  in
Bayou  Teche,  La.,  15  Jan.,  1862.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy  in  1855,  became
lieutenant  in  1860  and  lieutenant-commander  in
1882.  He  co-operated  with  the  national  army  in
many  battles  on  the  lower  Mississippi,  and  was
killed  while  encouraging  his  men  in  the  sharp  action
at  Bayou  Teche.  Farragut  called  him  "  one  of  our
most  gallant  and  persevering  young  officers."

BUCHANAN,  Robert  Christie,  soldier,  b.  in
Maryland  about  1810 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  29
Nov.,  1878.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  the  District  of  Columbia,  and  after
his  graduation  in  1830  served  as  lieutenant  in  the
Black  Hawk  and  Seminole  wars.  He  was  made  cap-
tain on  1  Nov.,  1838,  and  in  the  war  with  Mexico
took  part  in  numerous  battles.  He  was  brevetted
major,  9  May,  1846,  commanded  a  battalion  of  Mary-
land volunteers  from  25  Nov.,  1846,  till  30  May,  1847,
and  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  8  Sept.,  1847,  for
services  at  Molino  del  Rey.  He  was  made  major  in
the  4th  infantry,  3  Feb.,  1855,  served  ngainst  hos-
tile Indians  and  in  various  positions  until  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war,  when  he  became  lieuten-
ant-cohmel  of  his  regiment  and  stationed  in  the
defences  of  Washington  from  November,  1861,  till
March,  1862.  Pie  had  command  of  his  regiment  in
the  army  of  the  Potomac  during  the  peninsular
cainpaign,  and  afterward  of  a  brigade  of  infantry.
He  was  engaged  in  the  siege  of  Yorktown  and  in
the  battles  of  Gaines's  Mills,  Glendale.  and  Malvern
Hill,  and  made  brevet  colonel  27  June,  1862.  Pie
took  part  in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run  and  in
the  Maryland  and  Rappahannock  campaign,  in
November,  1862,  was  appointed  brigadier-general
of  volunteers,  and  in  March,  1863,  was  placed  in
command  of  Fort  Delaware.  In  P^bruary,  1864,
he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  colonel  of  the  1st
infantry,  which  regiment  he  commanded  at  New
Orleans  from  December,  1864,  till  August,  1865.
In  March,  1865,  he  was  made  brevet  brigadier-gen-
eral of  the  U.  S.  army  for  gallant  conduct  at  Mal-
vern Hill,  and  brevet  major-general  for  services  at
Manassas  and  P^'redericksburg,  He  commanded
the  district  of  Louisiana  from  January,  1868,  till
January,  1869,  and  on  31  Dec,  1870,  was  retired,
on  his  own  application,  after  thirty  years  of  con-
secutive service.  When  retired  he  was  in  com-
mand of  Fort  Porter,  N.  Y.  '

BUCHANAN,  Sarah,  pioneer,  d.  in  Buchanan's
Station,  Tenn.,  23  Nov.,  1831.  She  was  the  wife  of
Maj.  Buchanan,  in  command  of  a  frontier  fort,
and  displayed  much  bravery  on  many  occasions.
At  one  time,  while  riding  in  the  woods  with  a  kins-
woman, she  was  intercepted  by  a  party  of  Indians,
whom  the  women  deceived  by  assuming  the  posi-
tions of  men  on  horseback  and  charging  on  the
savages  with  furious  yells.  During  the  war  with
the  Creeks  and  Cumberlands  in  1792  the  fort  was
attacked  by  the  Indians.  Wlien  the  bullets  gave
out,  Mrs.  Buchanan  was  at  hand  with  an  apronfui
moulded  from  pewter  plates  and  spoons  during  the
progress  of  the  fight.  She  cheered  the  defenders
of  the  fort  in  every  possible  way  during  the  long


BUCK


BUCKHOUT


437


attack,  and  after  its  repulse  became  celebrated  as
the  greatest  heroine  of  the  west.

BUCK,  Dudley,  composer,  b.  in  Hartford,
Conn,,  10  March,  1839.  He  studied  at  Trinity  col-
lege and  afterward  at  the  Leipsic  Conservatory  of
Music,  where  he  was  associated  with  A.  Sullivan,
and  had  instruction  from  Hauptmann,  Richter,
Rietz,  Moschelles,  and  Plaidy.  Subsequently  he
studied  under  Schneider  at  Dresden.  He  was  at
Paris  in  1861-2.  He  was  for  many  years  the  or-
ganist of  Music  Hall,  Boston,  and  gained  a  de-
served reputation  as  a  performer  as  well  as  a
composer.  In  1875  he  was  invited  by  Theodore
Thomas  to  become  assistant  director  at  the  garden
concerts  in  New  York,  then  the  centre  of  the  high-
est musical  culture  in  the  United  States.  He  was
requested  to  compose  the  cantata  to  be  sung  at  the
opening  of  the  centennial  exhibition  in  Philadel-
phia in  1876,  which  work  he  performed  with  distin-
guished success.  The  music  was  rendered  by  a
chorus  of  800  voices  and  150  instruments  under
the  direction  of  Theodore  Thomas.  He  also  be-
came organist  of  the  Church  of  the  Holy  Trinity,
Brooklyn,  and  director  of  the  Apollo  club.  Mr.
Buck  has  produced  some  excellent  operetta,  notably
that  written  for  William  A.  Croffut's  humorous
drama  "  Deseret."  He  has  published  a  large  num-
ber of  compositions  for  the  organ,  including  a  prize
"  Te  Deum,"  which  has  won  a  wide  popularity.
Three  more  important  works  have  recently  ap-
peared, namelv,  "  The  Legend  of  Don  Munio "
(1874),  "Marmlon"  (1880),  and  "The  Golden  Le-
gend." The  latter  won  the  prize  of  |1,000  offered
by  the  Cincinnati  May  festival  for  the  best  compo-
sition for  solo  voices,  chorus,  and  opera.  He  has
also  written  music  to  several  of  Edmund  C.  Sted-


I's  poems,  some  of  which  have  become  popular,
has  published  a  "  Dictionary  of  Musical  Terms,"


man

He  has  published  a  "  Dictionary
and  a  work  on  the  "  Influence  of  the  Organ  in  His-
tory "  (New  York,  1882).

BUCK,  Gurdoii,  surgeon,  b.  in  New  York  city,
4  May,  1807 ;  d.  there,  6  March,  1877.  He  received
a  classical  education  in  the  schools  of  his  native
city,  and  engaged  in  business  for  several  years ;
but  finally,  after  studying  medicine  under  Dr.
Thomas  Cock,  he  was  graduated  at  the  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons  in  1880.  He  first  served
the  regular  term  in  the  medical  department  of  the
New  York  hospital,  and  then  went  abroad  to  com-
plete his  professional  studies,  whence  he  returned
in  1833  and  began  practice  in  New  York  city,
where  he  afterward  resided.  During  a  second  trip
to  Europe  (1835-'7)  he  married  Miss  Wolff,  of  Gene-
va, Switzerland.  He  was  successful  in  performing
many  difficult  operations  in  surgery,  and  brought
into  general  use  the  treatment  of  fractures,  gen-
erally known  as  "  Buck's  extension."  He  was  one
of  the  oldest  hospital  surgeons  in  New  York,  hold-
ing the  place  of  visiting  surgeon  of  the  New  York
hospital  from  1837  till  his  death.  He  was  also  vis-
iting surgeon  of  the  St.  Luke's  and  the  Presbyte-
rian hospitals,  consulting  surgeon  of  the  Roosevelt
hospital,  and  for  ten  years  previous  to  1862  visit-
ing surgeon  of  the  New  York  eye  and  ear  infirm-
ary. Besides  being  a  fellow  o^f  the  academy  of
medicine  from  the  time  it  was  founded,  and  serv-
ing one  term  as  its  vice-president,  he  was  con-
nected with  the  New  York  pathological  society,
the  American  medical  association,  and  at  different
times  acted  as  a  trustee  of  the  New  York  eye  and
ear  infirmary,  the  college  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons, the.  New  York  dispensary,  and  the  New
York  ophthalmic  and  aural  institute.  For  thirty-
five  years  he  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  medical
journals. He  also  published  an  elaborate  treatise


entitled  "Contributions  to  Reparative  Surgery"
(New  York,  1876).

BUCK  ALE  W,  Charles  R.,  senator,  b.  in  Colum-
bia CO.,  Pa.,  28  Dec,  1821.  After  receiving  an  aca-
demic education,  he  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1843.  From  1845  till  1847  he  was
prosecuting  attorney  for  Columbia  co.,  and  from
1850  till  1856  a  state  senator.  In  1854  he  was  a
commissioner  to  ratify  a  treaty  with  Paraguay,  in
1857  chairman  of  the  state  democratic  committee,
elected  again  a  state  senator,  and  a  commissioner
to  revise  f  he  Pennsylvania  penal  code.  In  1858-*61
he  was  U.  S.  minister  to  Ecuador.  He  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator  in  1868  by  a  majority  of  one  vote,  and
served  until  1869.  While  in  the  senate  he  served
on  important  committees,  and  took  an  active  part
in  the  debates,  particularly  in  those  on  the  recon-
struction measures,  which  he  opposed  as  illegal.  In
1869  he  was  again  chosen  to  the  state  senate,  and
while  there  began  the  movement  for  a  state  con-
stitutional convention,  of  which  he  was  afterward
a  leading  member.  In  1886  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress from  Pennsylvania.

BUCKE,  Richard  Maurice,  Canadian  phy-
sician, b.  in  Methwold,  Norfolk,  England,  18  March,
1837.  When  a  year  old  he  came  to  Canada  with
his  father,  the  Rev.  Horatio  Walpole  Bucke,  who
settled  near  London.  He  was  educated  at  the
London  grammar  school,  and  studied  medicine  at
McGill  university,  being  graduated  in  1862.  After
further  professional  study  in  London  and  Paris,
he  returned  to  Canada  in  1864,  and  in  the  follow-
ing year  began  practice  at  Sarnia.  In  1876  he  was
appointed  medical  superintendent  of  the  asylum
for  the  insane  at  Hamilton,  Ontario,  and  in  Feb-
ruary, 1878,  medical  superintendent  of  the  London
insane  asylum.  Dr.  Bucke  is  the  author  of  '•  Man's
Moral  Nature  "  (New  York,  1879)  and  "  Walt  Whit-
man "  (1882),  which  has  been  republished  in  Eng-
land. He  has  written  many  magazine  articles.

BUCKHOUT,  Isaac  Crai^,  civil  engineer,  b,
in  Morrisania,  N.  Y.,  in  1831 ;  d.  in  White  Plains,
N.  Y.,  27  Sept.,  1874.  Plis  father  was  manager  of
the  old  Gouverneur  Morris  estate.  On  leaving
school  in  1848  he  was  employed  on  the  Harlem
railroad  as  a  rodman  under  Allen  Campbell,  who
afterward  became  president  of  the  road.  Here  he
attracted  the  attention  of  his  employers  by  his  in-
telligence and  quickness.  He  was  afterward  a  sur-
veyor in  Paterson,  N.  J.,  and  was  then  made  engineer
and  superintendent  of  the  water-works  of  that  city.
After  this  he  returned  to  New  York,  became  city
surveyor,  and  then  resumed  his  connection  with
the  Plarlem  railroad  company,  superintending  the
construction  of  the  old  viaduct  over  the  Harlem
flats  and  bridge  over  the  Harlem  river  in  1858.
He  was  engineer  of  the  company  in  1857,  and  in
1863  was  made  superintendent.  He  designed  the
Grand  Central  station,  as  well  as  the  improvement
on  Fourth  avenue.  When  the  charter  for  that  work
was  granted,  the  legislature  appointed  a  board  of
four  engineers,  one  of  whom  was  Mr.  Buckhout,
and  the  members  elected  him  as  the  superinten-
dent. When  Mr.  Vanderbilt  obtained  the  charter
for  building  an  underground  railroad  to  the  City
Hall,  Mr.  Buckhout's  plan  was  declared  the  best
submitted,  and  his  plan  for  an  underground  rail-
road in  Brooklyn  was  also  adopted.  Mr.  Buckhout
was  a  personal  friend  of  Horace  Greeley,  and  su-
perintended the  improA^ements  about  Mr.  Greeley's
residence  at  Chappaqua.  His  death  was  caused  by
fever,  contracted  by  standing  on  the  marshy  ground
at  Sixtieth  street  and  North  river,  where  he  was
superintending  the  construction  of  an  elevator  for
the  Hudson  river  railroad  company.


438


BUCKINGHAM


BUCKINGHAM


BUCKINGHAM,  Catharinns  Putnam,  sol-
dier, b.  ill  Springfield  (now  part  of  Zanesville),  Ohio,
14  March,  1808.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1829,  and  served  as  second
lieutenant  in  the  3d  artillery  on  topographical  duty
till  19  Aug.,  1830,  and  as  assistant  professor  of
natural  and  experimental  philosophy  at  West  Point
till  28  Aug.,  1831.  He  resigned  from  the  army,  30
Sept.,  1831,  and  from  1833  till  1836  was  professor
of  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  Kenyon
college,  Ohio.  From  1849  till  1861  he  was  pro-
prietor of  the  Kokosing  iron  works,  Knox  co.,  Ohio,
He  was  appointed  assistant  adjutant-general  of
Ohio  on  3  May,  1861,  commissary-general  on  8  May,
and  adjutant-general  on  1  July,  1861,  serving  until
2  April,  1862.  He  became  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers, 16  July,  1862,  and  served  on  special  duty
in  the  war  department  at  Washington  till  11  Feb.,
1863,  when  he  resigned,  and  became  a  merchant  in
New  York  city.  From  1868  till  1873  he  was  occu-
pied in  building  the  Illinois  central  grain  elevators
at  Chicago,  and  rebuilding  them  after  their  de-
struction by  the  great  fire.  In  1873  he  became
president  of  the  Chicago  steel  works.

BUCKINGHAM,  James  Silk,  English  travel-
ler, b.  in  Flushing,  near  Falmouth,  England,  in
1786;  d.  in  London,  30  June,  1855.  He  was  in-
tended for  the  church,  but  preferred  a  career  of  ad-
venture. Before  he  reached  his  thirtieth  year  he
had  been  sailor,  bookseller's  clerk,  law  student,
printer,  and  captain  of  a  West-Indiaman,  and  had
three  times  lost  all  his  property.  In  1813  he  was
engaged  by  the  pacha  of  Egypt  to  determine  the
best  site  for  a  canal  across  the  isthmus  of  Suez,
After  being  stripped  by  robbers,  he  reached  Suez,
but  the  pacha  gave  up  his  design  and  sent  Bucking-
ham to  India,  where  he  took  command  of  a  ship
belonging  to  the  sultan  of  Muscat.  He  was  ex-
pelled from  India  because  he  had  no  license  from
the  East  India  company ;  but,  after  returning  to
Egypt  and  travelling  through  the  east  disguised  as
a  Mameluke,  he  was  given  leave  to  reside  at  Cal-
cutta, and  established  there,  in  1816,  the  '  Calcutta
Journal."  Offending  the  government  by  his  strict-
ures, he  was  again  expelled,  and  his  press  seized.
He  thus  lost  his  property  a  fourth  time.  He  then
returned  to  London  and  established  the  "  Oriental
Herald"  and  the  "Athenaeum."  Between  1822
and  1830  he  published  his  "  Travels  in  Palestine,"
"  Travels  in  Arabia,"  "  Travels  in  Mesopotamia,"
and  "  Travels  in  Assyria  and  Media,"  and  subse-
quently two  volumes  on  Belgium,  the  Rhine,  and
Switzerland,  and  two  on  France,  Piedmont,  and
Switzerland.  He  lectured  throughout  the  United
Kingdom  in  support  of  various  reforms,  and  from
1832  till  1837  was  member  of  parliament  for  Shef-
field, After  this  he  travelled  extensiA-ely  in  Amer-
ica, lecturing  on  temperance  and  anti-slavery.  He
published  his  travels  in  ten  octavo  volumes,  three
being  devoted  to  the  northern  United  States,  three
to  the  slave  states,  three  to  the  eastern  and  west-
ern states,  and  one  to  Canada,  Nova  Scotia,  and
New  Brunswick  (London,  1841-3).  In  1849  he  pub-
lished a  volume  on  "  National  Evils  and  Practical
Remedies,"  in  1851  became  president  of  the  Lon-
don temperance  league,  and  published  the  first
two  volumes  of  his  autobiography  (1855),  but  died
before  the  work  was  finished.

BUCKINGHAM,  Joseph  Tinker,  journalist,
b.  in  Windham,  Conn.,  21  Dec,  1779 ;  d.  in  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  11  April,  1861.  His  father's  name
was  Nehemiah  Tinker;  but  Joseph,  when  twenty-
seven  years  old,  was  authorized  by  the  Massachu-
setts legislature  to  take  his  mother's  name  of
Buckingham. Nehemiah Tinker died in 1783,


leaving  his  widow  and  ten  children  so  destitute,
that  they  were  supported  during  one  winter  by  the
town  authorities.  They  then  removed  to  Worth-
ington,  Mass.,  where  Joseph  was  apprenticed  to  a
farmer,  and  acquired  a  knowledge  of  reading,
writing,  and  arithmetic.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he
entered  a  printing-office  at  Walpole,  N.  H.,  and  a
few  months  later  became  a  printer  in  the  office  of
the  Greenfield,  Mass.,  "  Gazette."  He  removed  to
Boston  in  1800,  and  in  1803  filled  the  office  of
prompter  to  a  company  of  comedians.  He
founded  the  "  Polyanthus,"  a  monthly  magazine,
in  1806,  but  discontinued  it  in  September,  1807,
and  published  a  weekly,  called  the  "  Ordeal,"  in
1809,  but  it  ran  only  six  months.  The  "Polyan-
thus "  was  revived  in  1812,  and  continued  through
six  volumes.  From  1817  till  1828,  in  company
with  Samuel  L.  Knapp,  he  published  the  "New
England  Galaxy  and  Masonic  Magazine,"  which
sided  with  the  federalists  in  politics.  In  1828  he
sold  the  "  Galaxy  "  that  he  might  give  his  whole
attention  to  the  Boston  "  Courier,"  which  he  had
begun  to  publish  in  1824.  He  continued  to  edit
this  till  1848,  and  from  1831  till  1834  published,
with  his  son  Edwin,  the  "  New  England  Maga-
zine." In  this  magazine  Dr.  Holmes  published
one  or  two  articles  under  the  title  of  •'  The  Auto-
crat of  the  Breakfast-Table,"  which  became  fa-
mous when  he  resumed  it  twenty-five  years  later
for  a  series  in  the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."  Mr.
Buckingham  was  frequently  elected  to  the  lower
house  of  the  legislature,  and  in  1847  and  1850
served  in  the  state  senate.  Among  other  public
services,  he  made  a  report  in  favor  of  the  suppres-
sion of  lotteries.  He  was  president  of  the  Massa-
chusetts charitable  association,  of  the  Bunker  Hill
monument  association,  and  of  the  Middlesex  agri-
cultural society.  After  retiring  from  the  press  he
published  "Specimens  of  Newspaper  Literature,
with  Personal  Memoirs,  Anecdotes,  and  Reminis-
cences "  (2  vols.,  Boston,  1850) ;  "  Personal  Memoirs
and  Recollections  of  Editorial  Life  "  (2  vols.,  1852) ;
and  "Annals  of  the  Massachusetts  Charitable
Mechanics'  Association  "  (1853). — His  son,  Edwin,
associated  with  him  in  the  publication  of  the  "  New
England  Magazine,"  died  at  sea,  on  a  voyage  to
Smyrna,  in  1833,  aged  twenty-three  years.

BUCKINGHAM,  William  Alfred,  governor
of  Connecticut,  b.  in  Lebanon,  Conn.,  28  May,
1804;  d.  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  3  Feb.,  1875^  He  was
educated  in  the  public  schools,  and  spent  his  boy-
hood on  his  father's  farm.  When  twenty-one
years  old  he  removed  to  Norwich,  and  was  for
many  years  a  successful  merchant  and  manufac-
turer there.  He  was  mayor  of  the  city  in  1849,
1850,  1856,  and  1857,  and  was  elected  governor  of
the  state  every  year  from  1858  till  1866,  when  he
refused  a  renomination.  In  1860  the  result  of  the
election  in  Connecticut  was  awaited  with  interest
by  the  whole  country,  and  the  defeat  of  ex-Gov,
Thomas  H.  Seymour,  the  democratic  candidate,  by
Gov.  Buckingham,  was  regarded  by  the  southern
leaders  as  an  indication  of  the  general  feeling  at
the  north.  During  the  war  Gov.  Buckingham
co-operated  promptly  with  the  president,  and  was
untiring  in  his  efforts  to  sustain  the  national  gov-
ernment. He  was  one  of  the  governors  on  whoni
Mr.  Lincoln  especially  leaned.  The  number  of
troops  he  raised  was  prodigious  for  the  population
of  the  state,  then  only  461,000.  Connecticut
never  suffered  a  draft,  and  sent  into  the  field
nearly  55,000  men— 6,000  more  than  her  miota.
This  was  due  largely  to  Gov.  Buckingham's  efforts.
Although  known  as  the  "  war  governor  of  Con-
necticut," he  was  by  nature  and  training  a  civilian,


BUCKLAND


BUCKLEY


439


of  kindly  disposition  and  gentle  manners.  He
was  president  of  the  American  temperance  union,
moderator  of  the  first  national  Congregational
council,  and  one-  of  the  corporate  members  of  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis-
sions..  After  two  years  in  private  life  he  was
elected,  in  1808,  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  died  just
before  the  expiration  of  his  term.  Gov,  Bucking-
ham contributed  liberally  to  the  poor,  and  for  re-
ligious and  educational  purposes ;  among  his  gifts
was  $25,000  to  Yale  theological  school.  A  bronze
statue  of  Gov.  Buckingham  was  unveiled  in  the
State-house  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  on  18  June,  1884,

BUCKLAND,  Cyrus,  inventor,  b.  in  Manches-
ter, Conn.,  10  Aug.,  1799.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  turned  his  attention  to  mechani-
cal pursuits  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  assisted
in  building  the  machinery  in  a  cotton  factory  at
Monson,  Mass.,  and  in  the  first  mills  erected  at
Chicopee  Falls,  Mass.  In  1828  he  became  a  pat-
tern-maker in  the  U.  S.  armory  at  Springfield,
Mass.  He  rose  to  be  a  designer  of  machinery  and
tools  for  the  manufacture  of  fire-arms,  and  at
different  times  was  employed  as  inspector  in  all
the  different  parts  of  the  armory,  and  also  as  in-
spector of  cannon.  His  skill  and  inventive  pow-
ers were  called  into  requisition  in  remodelling
old  weapons  and  designing  new  ones,  and  in  de-
vising labor-saving  machinery  for  producing  the
arms  used  in  the  U.  S.  service.  The  machinery
in  the  armory  was  in  a  primitive  condition  when
he  entered  it ;  but  the  improvements  suggested  by
him  raised  the  machinery  and  appliances  to  a
standard  of  mechanical  attainment  far  above  any
private  establishment  in  the  country.  A  set  of
stocking-machines  of  his  invention,  perfected  in
1843,  comprises  thirteen  machines  for  working  gun-
stocks  from  the  rough  state,  as  they  were  served
out  at  the  mills,  to  a  degree  of  finish  that  requires
only  the  smoothing  of  the  outer  surface  to  com-
plete the  manufcicture.  One  machine  cuts  the
groove  in  the  stock  in  which  the  barrel  is  inserted ;
a  second  profiles  the  stock ;  a  third  cuts  the
groove  for  the  butt-plate  and  bores  the  holes  for
the  screws  that  fasten  it ;  a  fourth  cuts  on,  in  a
single  operation,  the  three  bands  that  bind  to-
gether the  stock  and  the  barrel ;  a  fifth  trims  off
the  surplus  wood  between  the  bands ;  a  sixth  re-
turns the  stock  and  gives  it  the  final  form ;  a
seventh  cuts  the  bed  for  the  guard,  with  mortise,
screw-holes,  etc. ;  and  an  eighth  is  a  finishing-ma-
chine for  cutting  in  the  band-springs,  boring  for
band-spring  and  ramrod-spring,  wires,  grooving
for  the  ramrod,  etc.  Buckland  invented  machines
for  turning  the  upper  band  of  the  musket;  for
punching  and  cutting  various  parts  of  the  arm ;
for  finishing  the  cone ;  for  niilling  screws  ;  for  fin-
ish-milling and  tapping  the  cone-seat ;  for  check-
ing the  comb  of  the  hammer ;  for  boring  and  turn-
ing the  barrel ;  for  milling  the  lock-plate  edges ;
for  rifling  muskets ;  and  for  cutting  the  thread  of
the  screw  on  the  inside  of  the  barrel  and  milling
the  breech-screw.  This  last  invention,  perfected
in  1857,  effected  a  great  improvement  in  the  manu-
facture of  small-arms  by  producing  a  perfect  in-
terchange of  parts,  any  screw  fitting  any  barrel.
The  stocking  apparatus  and  other  inventions  of
Mr.  Buckland  reduced  the  cost  of  making  muskets
fifty  per  cent.  The  British  government  sent  over
commissioners,  who  had  the  gun-stock  machines
copied  in  Chicopee,  and  imported  men  from  the
Springfield  armory  to  work  them.  Continental
governments  likewise  adopted  this  machinery.
Mr.  Buckland  received  no  compensation  for  his
valuable  inventions  beyond  his  daily  wages,  but


when  he  retired  congress  voted  him  a  grant  of
$10,000.  His  nervous  system  broke  down  under
the  protracted  mental  strain,  and  he  retired  from
the  armory,  an  invalid,  in  1859.

BUCKLAND,  Ralph  Pomeroy,  soldier,  b.  in
Leyden,  Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1812,  His  father  removed
to  Ohio  when  Ralph  was  but  a  few  months  old.
He  was  educated  at  Kenyon  college,  but  was
never  graduated,  afterward  studied  law,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1837,  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  whig  national  convention  of  1848,  served  as
state  senator  from  1855  till  1859,  and  in  1861  was
appointed  colonel  of  the  72d  Ohio  infantry.  He
commanded  the  4th  brigade  of  Sherman's  divi-
sion at  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  and  was  made  a  briga-
dier-general 29  Nov.,  1862,  He  also  commanded
a  brigade  of  the  15th  army  corps  at  Vicksburg
and  the  district  of  Memphis  during  the  year  1864.
During  absence  from  the  field,  in  1864,  he  was
elected  to  congress,  and  served  two  terms.  Pie  re-
signed from  the  army,  9  Jan.,  1865,  and  on  13
March  was  brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  loyalists'
convention  of  1866,  to  the  Pittsburgh  soldiers'
convention,  and  to  the  republican  national  conven-
tion of  1876.  Gen.  Buckland  was  president  of  the
managers  of  the  Ohio  soldiers'  and  sailors'  orphans'
home  from  1867  till  1873,  and  government  director
of  the  Pacific  railroad  from  1877  till  1880.

BUCKLEY,  James  Monroe,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rahway,  N.  J,,  16  Dec,  1836,  He  was  educated  at
Pennington,  N,  J,,  seminary,  and  entered  the  class
of  1860  at  Wesleyan  university,  but  left  during
freshman  year,  to  study  theology  at  Exeter,  N,  H,
In  1858  he  joined  the  New  Hampshire  Methodist
Episcopal  conference  on  trial,  and  was  stationed  at
Dover  in  that  state.  After  proving  his  abilities  at
several  small  stations,  he  was  transferred  to  De-
troit, Mich,,  in  1864,  and  to  Brooklyn,  N,  Y„  in
1866,  He  was  a  member  of  the  general  conference  in
1872,  1876,  and  1880,  and  in  1881  was  a  delegate
to  the  Methodist  ecumenical  conference  in  London.
The  same  year  he  was  elected  editor  of  the  "  New
York  Christian  Advocate,"  Since  1860  he  has  been
constantly  assigned  to  the  most  important  posts,
and  he  is  one  of  the  most  influential  men  among
the  denominational  clergy.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university  in  1872,
and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Emory  and  Henry  col-
lege, Virginia.  He  has  written  "  Two  Weeks  in  the
Yosemite  Valley"  (New  York,  1873);  "Supposed
Miracles "  (Boston,  1875) ;  "  Christians  and  the
Theatre  "  (1877) ;  "  Oats  or  Wild  Oats '"  (New  York,
1885) :  and  "The  Land  of  the  Czar  and  the  Nihil-
ist" (Boston,  1886).

BUCKLEY,  Samuel  Botsford,  naturalist,  b.  in
Torrey,  Yates  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  May,  1809 ;  d.  in  Aus-
tin, Tex.,  18  Feb.,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1836,
and  in  1837-'8  made  botanical  collections  in  Vir-
ginia and  Illinois.  In  1839-'40  he  was  principal  of
Allenton,  Ala.,  academy,  and  in  1842  travelled  ex-
tensively through  the  south,  discovering  twenty-
four  new  species  of  plants  and  a  new  genus,  which
was  named  Buckleya.  He  also  discovered  and  ob-
tained in  Alabama  a  nearly  complete  skeleton  of  a
zeuglodon.  In  1843  he  studied  at  the  college  of
physicians  and  surgeons.  New  York,  and  in  the
same  year,  in  an  expedition  to  Florida,  he  discov-
ered thirteen  new  species  of  shells.  From  1843  till
1855  he  lived  on  the  homestead  farm.  In  1858  he
determined  barometrically  the  height  of  several
mountains  in  Tennessee  and  North  Carolina,  and
one  of  them,  Mount  Buckley,  N.  C,  bears  his
name. In  1859-60  he  travelled  south  and  west  to


440


BUCKMINSTER


BUDD


collect  materials  for  a  supplement  to  Michaux  and
Nuttall's  Sylva.  He  was  assistant  geologist  and
naturalist  of  the  Texas  geological  survey  in  1860-1,
and  from  1863  till  1865  was  connected  Avith  the
U.  S.  sanitary  commission.  He  was  state  geologist
of  Texas  from  1866  till  1867,  and  again  from  1874
till  1877,  and  prepared  two  geological  maps  of  the
state.  He  showed  by  his  investigations  that  Texas
had  deposits  of  iron  and  coal  of  much  greater  ex-
tent than  had  been  supposed.  In  1871-'3  he  was
scientific  editor  of  the  "State  Gazette,"  Austin,
Tex.  From  1877  till  1881  he  was  engaged  in  pre-
paring a  work  on  the  geology  and  natural  history
of  the  state.  He  was  a  member  of  various  learned
societies,  and  contributed  largely  to  scientific  pub-
lications. He  also  published  several  valuable  re-
ports as  state  geologist.  A  list  of  his  scientific
papers  may  be  found  in  "  Alumni  Record  of  Wes-
leyan  Universitv  "  (Middletown,  Conn.,  1883).

BUCKMINSTER,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in
Rutland,  Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1751 ;  d.  in  Readsboro,
Vt,  10  June,  1812.  He  was  graduated  in  1770  at
Yale,  studied  three  years  longer  on  a  Berkeley
scholarship,  and  was  a  tutor  from  1774  till  1778.
Thomas,  his  ancestor,  came  early  to  Boston,  and
died  in  Brookline  in  1656.  He  was  the  son  of
Joseph  Buckminster,  nephew  of  Col.  William
Buckminster,  and  minister  of  Rutland,  Mass.,  who
published  several  sermons,  and  died  27  Nov.,  1792,
aged  seventy-two  years.  He  became  attached,
while  at  New  Haven,  to  a  lady  of  reputation  and
celebrity,  whose  history  is  the  basis  of  Miss  Fos-
ter's story,  "The  Coquette."  He  was  ordained  in
January,  1779,  pastor  of  the  North  church  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.  After  a  ministry  of  thirty-
three  years,  his  health  becoming  greatly  impaired,
he  left  home,  2  June,  1812,  accompanied  by  his  wife
and  two  friends,  but  died  a  few  days  after.  He
was  an  earnest  preacher,  distinguished  for  fervent
eloquence,  and  was  interested  in  the  controversy
that  led  to  a  division  in  the  Congregational
church,  adhering  to  conservative  and  orthodox
principles,  while  his  son  adopted  liberal  views.  He
published  about  twenty-five  sermons  and  a  short
sketch  of  Dr.  McClintock,  and  was  part  author  of
the  "  Piscataqua  River  Prayer-Book,"  Eliza  B.
Lee,  his  daughter,  published  "Memoirs  of  the
Rev.  Joseph  Buckminster,  D.  D.,  and  of  iiis  Son,
the  Rev.  Joseph  Stevens  Buckminster"  (Boston,
1851).— His  son,  Joseph  Stevens,  clergyman,  b.  in
Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  26  May,  1784;  d.  9  June,  1812.
He  was  gi-aduated  at  Harvard  in  1800,  studied  the-
ology and  general  literature,  and  -was  for  a  time
an  assistant  in  Phillips  Exeter  academy,  where  he
had  Daniel  Webster  as  one  of  his  pupils.  In  Oc-
tober, 1804,  he  preached  in  Boston  for  the  first
time,  and  accepted,  in  1805,  an  invitation  from  the
Brattle  street  society  there.  A  voyage  to  Europe
was  rendered  necessary  for  the  restoration  of  his
health  ;  and  in  1806-7  he  travelled  in  England
and  on  the  continent.  While  in  London  he  pur-
chased many  books  for  the  Boston  Athenasum.  He
was  an  active  member  of  the  anthology  club,  fa-
mous for  the  gifted  men  it  included,  and  for  hav-
ing originated  one  of  the  first  purely  literary  pez-i-
odicals  of  this  country.  In  1809  he  delivered  be-
fore the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Harvard  an
address  on  "  The  Dangers  and  Duties  of  Men  of
Letters,"  He  was  a  celebrated  preacher  and  a
contributor  to  periodicals.  The  new  edition  of  the
Greek  Testament  of  Griesbach  was  directed  by
him  in  1808.  In  1811  he  was  appointed  the  first
lecturer  on  biblical  criticism  at  Harvard;  but,
while  preparing  for  this  office,  he  was  attacked
with  epilepsy,  a  disease  with  which  he  was  affected


during  his  entire  life,  and  died  after  a  few  days.
In  1808  he  published  a  collection  of  hymns  for  the
use  of  his  society.  A  volume  of  his  sermons  was
published,  with  a  memoir  of  his  life  and  character,
by  Samuel  C.  Thacher,  in  1814.  His  collected  works
were  issued  in  two  volumes  (Boston,  1839).

BUCKMINSTER,  WilHain,  soldier,  b.  in
Framingham,  Mass.,  15  Dec,  1736;  d.  22  June,
1786;  removed  to  Barre  in  1757,  commanded  the
minute-men  in  1774,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
Brewer's  regiment  at  Bunker  Hill,  and  received
there  a  wound  that  crippled  him  for  life.

BUCKMINSTER,  WilHam  J.,  journalist,  b.
in  Maine  in  1813 ;  d.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  2  March,
1878.  He  was  a  son  of  the  founder  of  the  "  Massa-
chusetts Ploughman,"  and  was  for  twenty-one
years  one  of  its  editors  and  publishers.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  college  in  1835.  His  father,
William,  died  at  Framingham,  Mass.,  in  June,
1865,  aged  eighty-two  years.

BUCKNEK,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  in  Indi-
ana; d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  15  June,  1833.  He  set-
tled in  Missouri,  was  a  member  of  the  state  consti-
tutional convention  in  1820,  was  several  terms  in
the  legislature,  and  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
serving  from  4  March,  1831,  until  his  death.

BUCKNER,  Simon  BoHvar,  soldier,  b.  in
Kentucky  in  1823.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1844.  Entering  the  2d  in-
fantry, he  was,  from  August,  1845,  till  May,  1846,
assistant  professor  of  ethics  at  West  Point.  He
was  brevetted  first  lieutenant  for  gallantry  at  Con-
treras  and  Churubusco,  where  he  was  wounded,
and  captain  for  gallantry  at  Molino  del  Rey.  He
was  appointed  assistant  instructor  of  infantry  tac-
tics at  West  Point,  August,  1848,  and  resigned  25
March,  1855.  He  was  superintendent  of  constiiic-
tion  of  the  Chicago  custom-house  in  1855,  and
colonel  of  the  volunteers  raised  in  Illinois  in  that
year  for  the  Utah  expedition,  but  not  mustered
into  service.  He  then  practised  law,  and  became
the  most  prominent  of  the  Knights  of  the  Golden
Circle  in  Kentucky.  After  the  civil  war  began  he
was  made  commander  of  the  state  guard  of  Ken-
tucky and  adjutant-general  of  the  state.  On  12
Sept.,  1861,  he  issued  from  Russellville  an  address
to  the  people  of  Kentucky,  calling  on  them  to  take
up  arms  against  the  usurpation  of  Abraham  Lin-
coln, after  which  he  occupied  Bowling  Green.  Af-
ter the  capture  of  Fort  Henry  he  evacuated  that
place  and  withdrew  to  Fort  Donelson,  where  he
commanded  a  brigade  in  the  battles  of  13,  14,  and
15  Feb.,  1862,  and,  after  the  escape  of  Pillow  and
Floyd,  surrendered  the  fort,  16  Feb.,  to  Gen.  Grant,
with  16,000  prisoners  and  vast  stores.  He  was  im-
prisoned at  Fort  Warren,  Boston,  until  exchanged
in  August,  1862.  He  subsequently  commanded  the
1st  division  of  Gen.  Hardee's  corps  in  Bragg'sarmy
in  Tennessee.  Later  he  was  made  a  major-general,
and  assigned  to  the  3d  grand  division,  was  in  the
battles  of  Murf  reesboro  and  Chickamauga,  and  sur-
rendered with  Kirby  Smith's  army  to  Osterhaus,  at
Baton  Rouge,  26  May,  1865.  Gen.  Buckner's  first
wife  was  a  daughter  of  Maj.  Kingsbury.  He  was
one  of  the  pall-bearers  at  Gen.  Grant's  funeral.
He  was  elected  governor  of  Kentucky  in  1887.

BUDD,  Charles  Henry,  phvsician,  b.  in  Pera-
berton,  N.  J.,  8  Dec,  1822 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
22  Oct.,  1880.  He  was  educated  at  Marshall  col-
lege, Mercersburg,  Pa.,  and  studied  medicine  at
the  university  of  Pennsylvania,  after  which  he  be-
gan to  practise  in  Darby,  Pa.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  received  an  appointment  at  the
Chestnut  Hill  hospital,  and  afterward  at  the  Nice-
town  hospital,  Philadelphia. Subsequent  to  the


BUDINGTON


BUELL


441


war  he  practised  medicine  in  Jenkintown,  but  soon
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  natural
science  in  Franklin-Marshall  college,  Lancaster,
Pa.  Later  he  became  professor  of  natural  history
in  Girard  college,  Pliiladelphia.  where  he  continued
until  his  death.  He  was  early  a  member  of  the
academy  of  natural  sciences,  and  an  active  partici-
pator in  its  work.  Possessed  of  considerable  me-
chanical skill,  he  constructed  scientific  instruments,
and  also  devised  several  processes  that  have  since
become  of  commercial  value.

BUDINGTON,  William  Ives,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  Plaven,  Conn.,  25  April,  1815  ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  29  Nov.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1834,  and  studied  theology  in  New  Haven  and
at  Andover,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1839.  In
April,  1840,  he  was  installed  as  pastor  of  the  First
cluireh  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,  and  remained  there
until  1854,  when  he  removed  to  Philadelphia.  He
intended  to  enter  upon  a  pastorate  there,  but
changed  his  plans  in  consequence  of  the  death  of
his  wife.  In  December  of  the  same  year  he  accept-
ed a  call  to  the  Clinton  Avenue  Congregational
church  in  Brooklyn.  The  church  flourished  under
his  charge,  and  he  became  a  leader  in  the  denomi-
nation. In  maintaining  orthodoxy  and  resisting
innovations,  he  was  supported  by  his  congrega-
tion. His  death  was  caused  by  a  cancer,  from
which  he  suffered  for  two  years.  Dr.  Budington's
publications  were  the  "  History  of  the  First  Church
of  Charlestown"  (1845);  a  sermon  on  "  Patriotism
and  the  Pulpit,"  delivered  at  the  anniversary  of
the  American  educational  society  of  Boston  in
1861 :  an  address  on  "  The  Relations  of  Science  to
Religion,"  delivered  at  Yale  college  in  1871 ;  and
*'  Responsive  Worship  "  (New  York,  1874).

BUEL,  Jesse,  agriculturist,  b.  in  Coventry,
Conn.,  4  Jan.,  1778 ;  d.  in  Danbury,  Conn.,  6  Oct.,
1839.  He  was  originally  a  printer.  He  began  the
Troy  "Budget"  in  1797,  and  the  Poughkeepsie
I  "  Guardian  "  in  1801,  failed,  and  removed  to  Kings-
I  ton,  N.  Y.,  where  he  edited  the  "  Plebeian,"  re-
moved to  Albany  in  1813,  and  established  the
"Argus,"  which  he  edited  until  1821,  when  he  re-
tired to  a  farm  on  an  elevated  and  sandy  tract
near  Albany,  which  was  unproductive  under  the
prevailing  system  of  cultivation,  but  which  he
made  one  of  the  best  farms  in  the  state  by  deeper
tillage  and  the  application  of  fertilizers.  Pie  was
in  1823  a  member  of  the  state  assembly,  for  many
years  a  judge,  whig  candidate  for  governor  in  1836,
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  a  regent  of  the  state
university.  In  1834  he  established  the  "Culti-
vator," which  exerted  great  influence  among  agri-
culturists, and  was  the  means  of  effecting  many
improvements  in  husbandry.  He  delivered  numer-
ous addresses  and  published  the  "Farmer's  In-
structor," in  ten  volumes,  and  the  "  Farmer's  Com-
panion, or  Essays  on  the  Principles  and  Practice
of  American  Husbandry  "  (New  York,  1839).

BUELL,  Abel,  mechanic,  b.  in  Killingworth,
Conn.,  about  1750;  d.  in  New  Haven  about  1825.
His  youth  was  spent  as  an  apprentice  to  a  gold-
and  silver-smith,  and  his  skill  in  engraving  led
him,  before  he  became  of  age,  to  alter  ingeniously
a  colonial  note.  This  act  was  detected  and  pun-
ished. The  first  lapidary  machine  is  believed  to
have  been  constructed  by  him.  Later  he  estab-
lished a  type-foundry,  and,  unaided,  completed
several  fonts  of  long-primer  type.  He  then  re-
moved to  New  Haven,  and  was  employed  by  Ber-
nard Romano  in  the  construction  of  a  map  of
North  America.  For  this  purpose  he  surveyed  the
coast  about  Pensacola,  and  afterward  engraved  the
map  that  was  published  during  the  revolutionary


war.  In  consideration  of  his  various  services  to
the  public  he  was  restored  to  his  civil  rights  by
the  legislature.  Subsequent  to  the  war  he  was  em-
ployed by  the  state  in  coining,  for  which  he  de-
vised all  of  his  own  apparatus.  He  then  visited
England,  where  he  acquired  some  knowledge  of
the  machinery  used  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth,
and  on  his  return  erected  a  cotton-factory  in  New
Haven,  one  of  the  first  in  the  United  States.

BUELL,  Don  Carlos,  soldier,  b.  on  the  present
site  of  Lowell,  Ohio,  23  March,  1818.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841,
entered  the  3d  infantry,  became  first  lieutenant  on
18  June,  1846,  and  won  the  brevet  of  captain  at
Monterey,  and  of  major  at  Contreras  and  Churu-
busco,  where  he  was  severely  wounded.  He  served
as  assistant  adjutant-general  at  Washington  in
1848-'9,  and  at  the  headquarters  of  various  depart-
ments till  1861,  was  made  a  lieutenant-colonel
on  the  staff,  11  May,  1861,  and  appointed  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers,  17  May,  1861.  After
assisting  in  organizing  the  army  at  Washington,  he
was  assigned
in  August  to
a  division  of
the  Army  of
the  Potomac,
which  be-
came distin-
guished for
its  discipline.
In  Novem-
ber he  super-
seded Gen.  W.
T.  Sherman
in  the  de-
partment of
the  Cumber-
land, which
was  re-organ-
ized as  that
of  the  Ohio.

The cam-  » ^^ <t^^^

paigninKen-  c^Chp^  /  A<x,^ ,
tucky  was  be-
gun by  an  at-
tack upon  his  pickets  at  Row^lett  station,  near
Munfordsville,  on  17  Dee.  On  14  Feb.,  1862,  Gen.
Buell  occupied  Bowling  Green.  On  the  23d,  with
a  small  force,  he  took  possession  of  Gallatin,  Tenn.,
and  on  the  25th  his  troops  entered  Nashville,  sup-
ported by  gunboats.  He  was  promoted  major-geii-
eral  of  volunteers  on  21  March,  1862,  and  on  the
same  day  his  district  was  incorporated  with  that
of  the  Mississippi,  commanded  by  Gen.  Halleck.
He  arrived  with  a  part  of  a  division  on  the  battle-
field of  Shiloh,  near  the  close  of  the  first  day's
action,  6  April.  Three  of  his  divisions  came  up
the  next  day,  and  the  confederates  were  driven  to
their  intrenehments  at  Corinth.  On  12  June  he
took  command  of  the  district  of  Ohio.  In  July
and  August  Bragg's  army  advanced  into  Kentucky,
capturing  several  of  Buell's  posts,  compelling  the
abandonment  of  Lexington  and  Frankfort,  and  tlie
removal  of  the  state  archives  to  Louisville,  which
city  was  threatened  as  well  as  Cincinnati.  Gen.
Bragg  advanced  from  Chattanooga  on  5  Sept.,  and,
entering  Kentucky  by  the  eastern  route,  passed  to
the  rear  of  Buell's  army  in  middle  Tennessee.  The
manoeuvre  compelled  Gen.  Buell,  whose  communi-
cations with  Nashville  and  Louisville  were  en-
dangered, to  evacuate  central  Tennessee  and  re-
treat rapidly  to  Louisville  along  the  line  of  the
railroad  from  Nashville  to  Louisville.  The  ad-
vance of  Gen.  E.  Kirby  Smith  to  Frankfort  had


442


BUELL


BUFFUM


already  caused  consternation  in  Cincinnati,  which
place,  as  well  as  Louisville,  was  exposed  to  attack.
At  midnight  of  24  Sept.,  Buell's  retreating  army
entered  Louisville  amid  great  excitement,  as  it  was
feared  that  Bragg  would  reach  there  first.  On  80
Sept.,  by  order  from  Washington,  Buell  turned
over  his  command  to  Gen.  Thomas,  but  was  re-
stored the  same  day,  and  on  1  Oct.  began  to  pursue
the  confederates.  On  7  Oct.  the  two  divisions  of
the  confederate  army  formed  a  junction  at  Frank-
fort. Bragg  had  already  drained  the  country  of
supplies  and  sent  them  southward,  which  was  the
object  of  his  raid,  before  Gen.  Buell  was  able  to
meet  him  with  equal  numbers.  As  the  confeder-
ates retreated  the  union  troops  pressed  upon  their
heels,  and  at  Perryville  Gen.  Bragg  halted  and
determined  to  give  battle.  The  two  armies  formed
in  order  of  battle  on  opposite  sides  of  the  town.
The  action  was  begun,  after  the  opening  artillery
fire,  by  a  charge  of  the  confederates  early  in  the
afternoon  of  the  8  Oct.,  1862,  and  soon  became
general,  and  was  hotly  contested  until  dark,  with
heavy  losses  on  both  sides.  The  next  morning
Gen.  Bragg  withdrew  to  Harrodsburg.  The  eon-
federates  retreated  slowly  to  Cumberland  Gap,  and,
though  Gen.  Buell  pursued  them,  he  was -blamed
for  not  moving  swiftly  enough  to  bring  them  into
action  again.  On  the  24th  he  was  ordered  to  trans-
fer his  command  to  Gen.  Rosecrans.  A  military
commission,  appointed  to  investigate  his  opera-
tions, made  a  report,  which  has  never  been  pub-
lished. He  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer
service  on  23  May,  1864,  and  on  1  June  resigned
his  commission  in  the  regular  army,  having  been
before  the  military  commission  from  24  Nov.,  1862,
till  10  May,  1863,  and  since  that  time  waiting  orders
at  Indianapolis.  lie  became  president  of  the  Green
River  iron-works  of  Kentucky  in  I860,  and  subse-
quently held  the  office  of  pension  agent  at  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  from  which  he  was  removed  in  1890.

BUELL,  Jacob  Dockst.ader,  Canadian  politi-
cian, b.  in  Brockville,  Ontario,  4  Oct.,  1827.  He
is  a  son  of  the  late  William  Buell,  of  the  7th
Leeds  militia,  who  held  the  medal  with  clasps  for
the  battle  of  Chrysler's  Farm,  1813,  and  who  sat
as  a  representative  for  the  county  of  Leeds  in  the
Upper  Canada  assembly  from  1828  till  1836.  He
was  educated  at  the  public  schools  of  Brockville,
studied  law,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1854.  In
1872  he  was  elected  to  the  House  of  Commons
from  Brockville,  and  re-elected  for  the  same  con-
stituency in  1874.  He  is  lieutenant-colonel  in  the
42d  battalion,  Brockville. He  is  a  liberal.

BUELL,  Richard  Hooker,  engineer,  b.  in
Cumberland,  Md.,  9  Nov.,  1842.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  Troy,  N.
Y.,  in  1862,  was  an  engineer  officer  in  the  IJ.  S.
navy  in  1862-'7,  and  in  1870  assistant  civil  engi-
neer in  the  Tehuantepec  survey.  He  has  published
"The  Cadet  Engineer"  (Philadelphia,  1875);
"  Safety- Valves  "  (New  York,  1878) ;  additions  to
Weisbach's  "  Mechanics  of  Engineering  "  on  heat,
steam,  and  steam-engines  (1878);  and  ''The  Com-
pound Steam-Engine  and  its  Steam  -  Generating
Plant"  (1884).

BUELL,  Riifns  F.,  missionary,  b.  in  1813 ;  d.
in  Washington,  D.  C,  21  Feb.,  1866. .  He  studied
at  Madison  university,  and  was  graduated  at  An-
dover  theological  seminary  in  1840.  In  the  spring
of  the  following  year  he  set  sail  for  Greece,  where
he  and  his  wife  labored  as  missionaries  of  the
American  Baptist  missionary  union,  amid  many
discouragements,  and  in  the  face  of  violent  oppo-
sition, until  the  Greek  mission  was  abandoned  in
1855. After  their  return  they  taught a  young


ladies'  school  in  Providence,  R.  I.  Mr.  Buell  sub-
sequently removed  to  Washington,  where  he  held
an  appointment  in  the  internal  revenue  office.  He
edited  a  "  Life  of  Washington  "  in  Greek.

BUFFINOTON,  Adelbert  R.,  soldier,  b.  in
Wheeling,  Va.,  22  Nov.,  1837.  He  was  graduated
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  May,  1861,  and
made  brevet  second  lieutenant  of  ordnance.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  served,  first,  in  drilling  volun-
teers at  Washington,  D.  C,  from  7  May,  till  5
June,  1861 ;  was  assistant  ordnance  officer  at  St.
Louis  arsenal  from  8  June  till  15  Oct.,  1862,  and
was  promoted  first  lieutenant  of  ordnance,  22  July
From  25  Oct.,  1862,  till  12  Sept.,  1863,  he  was  en-
gaged in  mustering  Missouri  and  Illinois  volun-
teers ;  aided  with  artillery  and  men  in  the  defence
of  Pilot  Knob,  Mo, ;  acted  as  assistant  adjutant-
general  of  the  5th  division,  Army  of  the  West :
drilled  and  organized  the  employees  of  the  arsenal
into  a  regiment  of  Missouri  militia  (of  which  he
was  commissioned  colonel  by  Gov.  Gamble);  and
also  commanded  the  Wheeling,  W.  Va.,  ordnance
depot.  He  was  inspector  of  rifling  sea-coast  can-
non from  19  Sept.,  1863,  till  13  July,  1864,  and  bre-
vet major,  13  March,  1865.  He  was  in  command
of  the  New  York  arsenal  from  13  July,  1864,  till
September,  1865,  and  of  Baton  Rouge  arsenal,  La.,
from  14  Sept.,  1865,  till  15  Aug.,  1866;  was  chief
of  ordnance,  department  of  the  gulf,  from  15  Aug.,
1866,  till  26  March,  1867 ;  of  the  5th  military  dis-
trict, Texas  and  Louisiana,  in  1867-'8 ;  was  in
command  of  the  Watertown  arsenal  from  May.
1868,  till  20  Oct.  of  the  same  year,  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  Detroit  arsenal,  15  Dec,  1870,
from  which  he  retired,  in  February,  1872,  to  super-
intend the  southern  forts,  first,  as  assistant,  from
Februarv,  1872,  till  April,  and  then  as  chief  from
that  time  till  May,  1873.  From  14  May  lill  Octo-
ber, 1873,  was  assistant  at  Watervliet  arsenal ;  was
in  command  of  Indianapolis  arsenal,  15  Oct.,  1873,
till  19  April,  1875  ;  was  promoted  major  of  ord-
nance, 23  June,  1874;  and  was  in  command  of  the
Alleghany  arsenal  from  19  April,  1875,  till  Decem-
ber, 1880,"  and  of  Watervliet  arsenal  from  Decem-
ber, 1880,  till  3  Oct.,  1881.  He  was  on  leave  of  ab-
sence, inspecting  arms  for  the  Egvptian  govern-
ment, from  6  Dec,  1865,  till  22  April,  1876.  On  1
June,  1881,  he  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-colonel
of  ordnance,  made  a  member  of  the  board  on  heavy
ordnance  and  projectiles,  13  July,  1881,  till  May,
1882,  and  on  3  Oct.  of  that  year  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  national  armory.  He  has  perfected
the  following  inventions :  A  magazine  fire-arm ;
carriages  for  light  and  heavy  guns ;  parts  of  mod-
els of  1884  Springfield  rifles,  and  several  mechan-
ical devices.  He  also  introduced  the  gas-forging
furnaces  and  improved  methods,  simplifying  and
reducing  the  cost  of  manufacture,  at  the  national
armory,  of  Springfield  rifles,  and  was  the  originator
of  the  nitre  and  manganese  method  of  bluing  iron
and  steel  surfaces,  which  is  used  at  the  national
armorv  for  small  arms.

BUFFUM,  Edward  Gould,  journalist,  b.  in
Rhode  Island  about  1820 ;  d.  in  Paris,  France,  24
Oct.,  1867.  He  was  the  son  of  Arnold  Buffum,  a
well-known  philanthropist  of  New  England.  In
early  life  he  became  connected  with  the  "New
York  Herald,"  and  continued  his  connection  with
this  journal  until  the  beginnmg  of  the  Mexican
war,  when  he  joined  Col.'Stevenson's  regiment  of
New  York  volunteers,  with  which  he  went  to  Cali-
fornia in  1846  as  a  lieutenant.  He  served  on  the
Pacific  side  of  Mexico,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
returned  to  California  and  took  an  active  part  m
the  explorations  for  gold. The  fruits  of  his  obser-


BUFORD


BUIL


443


vations  he  embodied  in  a  work  entitled  "Six
Months  in  the  Gold  Mines  "  (Philadelphia,  1850).
When  the  "  Alta  California  "  newspaper  was  found-
ed, Mr.  Buffum  became  its  editor-in-chief.  He
was  elected,  a  member  of  the  legislature  from
San  Francisco,  and  declined  the  speakership.  He
wrote  a  history  of  Col.  Stevenson's  regiment,  in
which  he  gave  a  graphic  and  interesting  descrip-
tion of  life  in  California  in  its  early  days.  He
went  to  Europe  as  special  correspondent  of  the
"  New  York  Herald,  residing  in  Paris  in  that
capacity  for  more  than  eight  years,  up  to  the  time
of  liis  "death.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  to
magazines,  both  European  and  American.

BUFORD,  Abraham,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia;
d.  in  Scott  CO.,  Ky.,  39  June,  1833.  He  was  ap-
pointed colonel  of  Morgan's  11th  Virginia  regi-
ment, 16  May,  1778.  Ou  29  May,  1780,  his  com-
mand was  surprised  and  massacred  by  Col.  Tarle-
ton's  at  Waxhaw  Creek.  They  had  set  out  for
Charleston  to  relieve  Gen.  Lincoln,  but,  hearing
of  his  surrender,  were  on  the  return  march.  Tarle-
ton's  men  surrounded  the  force,  which  consisted
of  400  infantry  and  a  small  detachment  of  cavalry,
with  700  cavalry  and  mounted  infantry.  While
parleying,  the  British  commander  prepared  for  an
attack,  which  was  carried  out  so  suddenly,  when
Col.  Buford  refused  the  offered  terras,  that  the
continental  troops  were  thrown  into  confusion  and
were  killed  without  quarter  by  the  British.
"  Tarleton's  quarter  "  after  that  came  to  be  a  syno-
nym for  barbarity.

BUFORD,  Abraham,  soldier,  b.  in  Kentucky
about  1820 :  d.  9  June,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1841,  and  assigned
to  the  1st  dragoons,  was  promoted  first  lieuten-
ant in  1846,  and  bre vetted  captain  for  gallantry  at
Buena  Vista.  In  1848-'51  he  served  in  New  Mexi-
co, and  in  1852-4  in  the  cavalry  school  at  Carlisle,
Pa.,  and  as  secretary  of  the  military  asylum  of
Harrodsburg,  Ky.,  with  the  rank  of  captain,  and
on  22  Oct.,  1854,  he  resigned  from  the  army  and
became  a  farmer  in  Woodford  co.,  Ky.  In  1861  he
entered  the  service  of  the  Confederate  states,  was
commissioned  a  brigadier-general,  and  performed
distinguislied  services. He  died  by  his  own  hand.

BUFORD,  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  soldier,  b.  in
Woodlord  CO.,  Ky.,  13  Jan..  1807;  d.  28  March,
1883.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1827,  and  employed  as  a  lieutenant
of  artillery  in  various  surveys.  In  1831  he  ob-
tained leave  to  enter  Harvard  law-school,  and  in
1834-'5  was  assistant  professor  of  natural  and
experimental  philosophy  at  West  Point.  On  31
Dec,  1835,  he  resigned  his  commission,  and  be-
came resident  engineer  of  the  Licking  river  im-
provement, in  the  service  of  the  state  of  Kentucky,
and  afterward  an  iron-founder  and  banker  at  Rock
Island,  III,  and  in  1857  president  of  the  Rock  Isl-
and and  Peoria  railroad.  On  10  Aug.,  1861,  he
entered  the  national  army  as  colonel  of  the  27th
Illinois  volunteers,  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Bel-
mont, Mo.,  7  Nov.,  1861,  was  in  command  at  Co-
lumbus, Ky.,  after  its  evacuation  by  the  confeder-
ates in  March,  1862,  and  in  the  attack  on  Island  No.
10,  captured  LFnion  City  by  surprise  after  a  forced
march,  commanded  the  garrison  at  Island  No.  10
after  the  capitulation  of  the  fort,  and  was  engaged
in  the  expedition  to  Fort  Pillow  in  April,  1862.
He  was  promoted  brigadier-general  on  15  April,
1862,  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Corinth,  commanded
a  division  at  Jacinto  from  June  till September,

1862,  was  engaged  at  the  battle  of  Corinth  on  3
and  4  Oct.,  1862,  and  in  the  siege  of  Vicksburg  in

1863,  and  was  in  command  of  Cairo,  111.,  from


March  till  September,  1863,  and  at  Helena,  Ark.,
from  12  Sept.,  1863,  till  9  March,  1865.  Pie  was
brevetted  major-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,
1865,  and  mustered  out  of  the  service  on  24  Aug.,
1865.  He  was  special  U.  S.  commissioner  of  In-
dian affairs  from  7  Feb.  till  1  Sept.,  1868,  and  for
inspecting  the  Union  Pacific  railroad  from  1  Sept.,
1867,  till  10  March,  1869,  when  the  road  was  com-
pleted.— His  half-brother,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Ken-
tucky in  1825 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.  C,  16  Dec,
1863,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy
in  1848 ;  was  appointed  brevet  second  lieutenant
in  the  1st  dragoons  and  served  on  the  plains,
being  engaged  in  the  Sioux  expedition  of  1855,  at
Blue  Water,  in  the  Kansas  disturbances  of  1856-'7,
and  in  the  Utah  expedition  of  1857-'8  until  the
civil  war  began  ;  he  was  made  a  major  in  the  in-
spector-general's corps  on  12  Nov.,  1861.  His  du-
ties did  not  give  him  an  opportunity  to  engage
in  the  campaigns  until  1862,  when  he  was  at-
tached to  the  staff  of  Gen.  Pope  in  the  Army  of
Virginia  on  26  June,  and  on  27  July  made  a  briga-
dier-general, assigned  to  the  command  of  a  brigade
of  cavalry  under  Gen.  Hooker  in  the  northern  Vir-
ginia campaign,  and  engaged  at  the  skirmish  at
Madison  Court-House,  9  Aug.,  the  passage  of  the
Rapidan  in  pursuit  of  Jackson's  force,  12  Aug.,
Kelly's  U'ord,  Thoroughfare  Gap,  28  Aug.,  and
Manassas,  29  and  30  Aug.,  where  he  was  wounded.
He  served  as  chief  of  cavalry  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  in  the  Maryland  campaign,  being  engaged
at  South  Mountain,  14  Sept.,  1862,  at  Antietam,  17
Sept.,  where  he  succeeded  Gen.  Stoneman  on  Gen.
McClellan's  staff,  and  in  the  march  to  Falmouth.
When  the  cavalry  organization  of  the  Army  of  the
Potomac  was  perfected,  of  which  Gen.  Stoneman  was
at  that  time  the  chief.  Gen.  Buford  was  assigned
to  command  the  reserve  cavalry  brigade.  He  was
subsequently  conspicuous  in  almost  every  cavalry
engagement,  being  at  Fredericksburg,  13  Dec,
1^62,  in  Stoneman's  raid  toward  Richmond  in  the
beginning  of  May,  1863,  and  at  Beverly  Ford,  9
June,  1863.  He  commanded  the  cavalry  division
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  Pennsylvania
campaign,  was  engaged  at  Aldie,  Middleburg,  and
Upperville,  and  at  Gettysburg  he  began  the  attack
on  the  enemy  before  the  arrival  of  Reynolds  on  1
July,  and  the  next  day  rendered  important  services
both  at  Wolf's  Plill  and  Round  Top.  He  partici-
pated in  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  to  Warrenton,
and  in  the  subsequent  operations  in  Virginia,  being
engaged  at  Culpepper,  and,  after  pursuing  the  ene-
my across  the  Rapidan,  cut  his  way  to  rejoin  the
army  north  of  the  Rappahannock.  A  short  time
previous  to  his  death  he  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  cavalry  in  the  Army  of  the  Cumber-
land, and  had  left  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  for
that  purpose.  His  last  sickness  was  the  result  of
toil  and  exposure.  His  commission  as  major-gen-
eral reached  him  on  the  day  of  his  death.

BUGrBEE,  Lucins  Halen,  educator,  b.  in  Go-
wanda,  N.  Y.,  25  Nov.,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  in  1854,  became  a  teacher,  was  ordained  a
minister  in  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and
was  principal  of  Fayette  seminary,  Iowa,  in  1857-
'60,  pastor  of  a  church  in  Chicago,  111.,  in  1861-3,
president  of  the  Northwestern  female  college  at
Evanstown,  111.,  in  1865-'8,  of  Cincinnati  Wesleyan
college  in  1868-75,  and  afterward  of  Alleghany
college,  Meadville,  Pa.

BUIL,  Bernardo  (boo-eel'),  Spanish  missionary,
b.  in  Catalonia;  d.  in  Cuxa  in  1520.  He  was  a
member  of  the  Benedictine  order,  a  monk  of  St.
Benoit,  in  Austria,  and  in  1493  was  appointed  by
the  pope  vicar-apostolic  in  the  New  World. He  ac-


444


BUIST


BULL


companied  Columbus  on  his  second  voyage  to  the
New  World,  bringing  with  him  several  priests.  In
consequence  of  differences  with  Columbus  respect-
ing the  treatment  of  the  natives  of  Hispaniola,  he
returned  to  Spain,  supported  the  charges  that
brought  about  the  downfall  of  the  admiral,  and
died  abbot  of  the  convent  at  Cuxa.  An  account
of  what  he  did  in  America,  entitled  "  Nova  Typis
transacta  navigatione  Novi  Orbis  Indiae  occi-
dentalis,"  published  in  1621  under  the  name  of
B>anciscus  Honorius  Philoponus,  is  supposed  to
have  been  written  by  Bull  himself.

BUIST,  George,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fifeshire,
Scotland,  in  1770;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  31  Aug.,
1808.  He  was  educated  at  Edinburgh  university,
attained  great  proficiency  in  philology,  was  called
to  a  church  in  Charleston  in  1793,  and  in  1805  be-
came principal  of  the  college  in  that  city.  He
published  an  abridgment  of  Hume's  "  History "
for  schools  (1792)  and  a  version  of  the  Psalms
(1796),  and  contributed  to  the  "  British  Encyclo-
pa3dia."  A  volume  of  his  sermons,  with  a  memoir,
was  published  in  1809.

BULFINCH,  Charles,  architect,  b,  8  Aug.,
1763 ;  d.  in  Boston,  15  April,  1844.  He  was  a  son
of  Dr.  Thomas  Bulfinch,  an  eminent  physician,
who  attempted  to  establish  a  small-pox  hospital  in
Boston  in  1763,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1781,
and  acquired,  by  travel  in  Europe,  a  knowledge  of
architecture.  On  his  return  from  Europe  in  1786,
he  devoted  himself  to  architecture  as  a  profession.
In  1793  he  built  the  first  theatre  in  Boston.  He
drew  the  plans  for  the  state-house  and  city-hall  in
Boston,  for  the  capitol  at  Washington,  for  Faneuil
hall,  and  designed  as  many  as  forty  churches  and
other  buildings  in  New  England  cities.  He  was
the  architect  of  the  national  capitol  from  1817
until  it  was  completed  in  1830. — His  son,  Stephen
Grreenleaf,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  18
June,  1809 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1870.
He  accompanied  his  father  to  Washington  at  the
age  of  nine,  and  was  graduated  at  Columbian  col-
lege in  1826.  After  studying  at  the  Cambridge
divinity  school,  he  was,  from  1830  till  1837,  a  Uni-
tarian clergyman  at  Augusta,  Ga.  He  taught
school  and  preached  in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  was
similarly  engaged  in  Washington,  D.  C,  for  six
years.  In  1845  he  was  settled  in  Nashua,  N.  H.,
and  in  1852  removed  to  Boston.  He  published
"Contemplations  of  the  Saviour"  (Boston,  1832);
a  volume  of  "Poems"  (Charleston,  1834);  "The
Holy  Land  and  its  Inhabitants "  (Boston,  1834) ;
"  Lays  of  the  Gospel "  (1835) ;  "  Communion
Thoughts"  (1852);  "The  Harp  and  the  Cross"
(1857) ;  "  Honor,  or  the  Slave  Dealer's  Daughter  "
(1864) ;  "Manual  of  the  Evidences  of  Christianity"
(1866) ;  and  "  Studies  in  the  Evidences  of  Christ-
ianity '■  (1869).  Pie  was  a  contributor  to  the  collec-
tion of  Unitarian  hymns.

BULFINCH,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  15  July,  1796;  d.  there,  27  May,  1867.  He
studied  in  the  Latin  school  and  at  Phillips  Exeter
academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1814.
He  was  in  mercantile  business  imtil  1837,  and  a
clerk  in  the  Boston  merchants'  bank  during  the
rest  of  his  life.  His  leisure  hours  were  devoted  to
literary  pursuits.  He  published  "  Hebrew  Lyrical
History"  (Boston,  1853);  "The  Age  of  Fkble"
(1855) ;  «  The  Age  of  Chivalry  "  (1858) ;  the  "  Boy
Inventor  "  (1860) :  "  Legends  of  Charlemagne  "
(1863) ;  "  Poetry  of  the  Age  of  Fable  "  (1863) ;  and
"Oregon  and  Eldorado;  or,  Romance  of  the
Rivers  "  (1866).

BULKELEY,  EHphalet  Adams,  lawyer,  b.  in
Colchester,  Conn.,  29  June,  1803 ;  d.  in  Hartford,


13  Feb.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1824,
studied  law,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Leba-
non, Conn.  Later  he  settled  in  East  Haddam,
where  he  followed  his  profession  and  became  presi-
dent of  the  bank.  While  residing  in  this  district
he  was  elected  to  the  lower  branch  of  the  state
legislature,  and  afterward  twice  to  the  senate. In

1847  he  removed  to  Hartford,  where  he  was  ap-
pointed school-fund  commissioner,  and  in  1857
again  elected  to  the  state  legislature,  becoming
speaker  of  the  house.  For  many  years  he  was  as-
sociated in  law  business  with  Judge  Henry  Perkins,
under  the  firm-name  of  Bulkeley  &  Perkins.  Dur-
ing the  latter  portion  of  his  life  he  was  interested  in
the  business  of  life  insurance,  and  associated  in  the
organizing  of  both  the  Connecticut  mutual  com-
pany, becoming  its  first  president,  and  the  ^tna
life  insurance  company,  of  which  he  was  president
from  1850  till  his  death. — His  son,  Morgan  Gardi-
ner, financier,  b.  in  East  Haddam,  Conn.,  26  Dec,
1838,  was  educated  in  Hartford,  and  subsequently
entered  upon  a  mercantile  career  in  Brooklyn.  On
the  death  of  his  father  he  returned  to  Hartford
and  became  president  of  the  United  States  bank,
and  later  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  the
-^tna  life  insurance  company.  He  is  prominent
in  Connecticut  politics  as  a  republican,  and  has
four  times  been  elected  mayor  of  Hartford.

BULKELEY,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Odell,
Bedfordshire,  England,  31  Jan.,  1583 ;  d.  in  Con-
cord, Mass.,  9  March,  1659.  He  was  educated  at
Cambridge,  where  he  afterward  became  a  fellow.
Later  he  took  orders,  and  succeeded  to  the  living
of  his  father  in  Odell,  where  he  remained  for
twenty-one  years,  when  he  was  removed  by  Arch-
bishop Laud  for  non-conformity.  In  1635  he  sold
his  estates  and  came  to  this  country  with  other
settlers.  He  remained  for  some  time  at  Cambridge,
Mass.,  but  pushed  farther  inland  and  founded
Concord,  where  he  lived  until  his  death.  Mr.
Bulkeley  was  an  excellent  scholar.  He  wrote
Latin  verses,  some  of  which  have  been  preserved
in  Cotton  Mather's  "  History  of  New  England  " ;  an
elegy  on  the  Rev.  Thomas  Hooker ;  and  "  The  Gos-
pel Covenant ;  or,  the  Covenant  of  Grace  Opened  "
(London,  1646).  He  contributed  a  large  part  of
his  own  valuable  collection  to  establish  the  library
of  Harvard  college.

BULKLEY,  Henry  Daggett,  physician,  b.  in
New  Haven,  Conn.,  20  April,  1803 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  4  Jan.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1820,  and  spent  several  years  in  New  Y^ork,  en-
gaged in  business,  after  which  he  returned  to  New
Haven  and  studied  medicine  under  Dr.  Knight,
receiving  his  medical  degree  in  1830.  He  spent
some  time  in  the  study  of  cutaneous  diseases  in
the  hospitals  of  Paris,  and  in  November,  1832,
settled  in  New  York  and  devoted  his  attention
principally  to  that  specialty,  in  which  he  became  a
recognized  authority.  He  delivered  several  courses
of  lectures  on  this  subject  in  the  college  of  physi-
cians and  surgeons,  and  was  the  first  to  establish
a  dispensary  in  New  Y^ork  for  skin  diseases. In

1848  he  was  appointed  attending  physician  to  tiie
New  York  Hospital,  a  post  which  he  occupied  until
his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  medical  societies
and  some  time  president  of  the  New  Y^ork  County
Medical  Society  and  of  the  New  York  Academy  of
Medicine.  Dr.  Bulklev  edited  the  American  edi-
tions of  Cazenave  and  Schedel's  "JManual  of
Diseases  of  the  Skin"  (New  York,  1846),  and
Gregory's  "  Eruptive  Fevers  "  (1851).

BULL,  Henry,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  b.  in
South  Wales  in  1609 ;  d.  in  Rhode  Island  in  iG{}S.
He  early  emigrated  to  America,  and  after  a  short


BULL


BULLARD


445


residence  in  Massachusetts,  with  a  party  of  seven-
teen, purchased  land  and  settled  in  Newport  about
1G38. In  1085  and  in  1689  he  was  governor.

BULL,  Ole  Boriiemaiin,  violinist,  b.  in  Ber-
gen, Norway,  5  Feb.,  1810;  d.  tliere,  18  Aug.,  1880.
Music  cameras  if  by  instinct  to  this  artist.  When
only  five  years  of  age  he  played  on  the  violin  with-
out having  any  previous  training.  His  fondness
for  music  "was  encouraged  by  his  uncle,  Jens  Bull,
and  in  his  eighth  year  he  began  receiving  in-
struction. A  year  later  he  was  first  violinist  at
the  theatre  where  his  father  acted,  the  latter  be-
ing a  clever  amateur  performer.  In  1822  he  stud-
ied under  Lundholm,  a  Swede  who  settled  in  Ber-
gen, and  soon  acquired  the  little  that  this  mu-
sician could  impart  to  him.  Later  his  father,  who
desired  that  he  should  become  a  clergyman,  placed
him  under  the  care  of  Musjeus ;  but,  as  he  was
not  permitted  to  use  his  violin,  he  soon  revolted.
In  1828  he  was  sent  to  the  university  at  Christi-
ania;  but  his  stay  was  short,  and  he  became  di-
rector of  the  philharmonic  and  dramatic  societies.
lie  then  determined  to  study  music  under  Louis
Spohr  at  Cassel ;  but  his  reception  was  so  cold  that
he  turned  his  attention  to  study  and  spent  a  few
months  at  Gottingen.  Returning  to  Noi'way,  he
gave  several  concerts,  and  so  obtained  funds  with
which  to  visit  Paris.  His  experiences  there  were
the  same  as  those  of  many  men  of  genius  that,  first
and  last,  have  been  attracted  to  that  gay  capital.
Faith  in  himself,  hope,  struggling,  despondency,
death  almost,  then  rescue  and  success,  is  the  brief
story.  After  a  severe  illness  at  the  residence  of
Madame  Viileminot,  whose  granddaughter  he  mar-
ried some  years  later  (1836),  he  was  enabled  to  give
his  first  concert  under  the  patronage  of  the  duke
of  Montebello,  and  with  the  proceeds  he  made  a
concert  tour  througli  Switzerland  and  Italy,  spend-
ing some  time  in  hard  study  at  Milan.  His  first
really  great  success  was  made  in  Bologna.  Mali-
bran  and  De  Beriot  were  to  appear  together  at  a
concert ;  but  at  the  last  moment  Malibran  declined
to  sing  on  account  of  indisposition,  and  De  Beriot
claimed  that  he  was  suffering  from  a  sprained
thumb.  Ole  Bull  was  hastily  sought  out,  and,  al-
though he  had  retired  for  the  night,  hurried  to  the
theatre.  Wearied  and  almost  unnerved,  choosing
his  own  composition  and  closing  his  eyes,  he  played
with  such  ecstasy  of  feeling  that  he  captivated  his
audience.  His  reputation  was  now  established,
and  he  continued  in  Italy,  giving  concerts  in  the
principal  cities  until  May,  1835,  when  he  returned
to  Paris.  The  Grand  Opera  was  open  to  him,  and
he  gave  several  concerts  there,  after  which  he
played  in  Lyons  and  elsewhere  in  France.  In  1830
he  visited  London,  and,  after  a  series  of  successful
concerts,  made  a  tour  through  the  United  King-
dom. During  the  following  years  he  visited  Bel-
gium, Germany,  Russia,  Sweden,  and  his  own  home
in  Norway,  then  Denmark,  Austria,  and  until  1843
travelled  in  continental  Europe.  Late  in  1843  he
landed  in  Boston,  and  travelled  through  the  United
States,  Canada,  and  part  of  the  West  Indies,  re-
turning to  Paris  in  December,  1845.  From  that
time  until  1852  he  was  in  Europe,  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  brief  experience  in  Algiers  with  Gen.
Youssuf  in  1847.  In  1848  he  settled  in  Norway,
and  for  some  time  devoted  all  his  energies  to  the
establishment  of  a  national  theatre  in  Bergen,  in
which  he  was  successful ;  but  ultimately  its  man-
agement passed  into  other  hands.  In  1852  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States  and  remained  for  five
years.  While  in  Pennsylvania  he  purchased  a  large
tract  of  land  in  Potter  co.  and  endeavored  to  found
a  colony,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  Oleana ;  but


he  had  been  deceived  in  regard  to  the  land-titles,
and  the  project,  after  considerable  expenditure,
was  abandoned.  He  returned  to  Bergen,  where  for
a  time  he  managed  the  theatre  he  had  originated,
but  later  made  concert  tours,  and  from  1863  till
1867  was  so  occupied  in  Germany,  Poland,  and
Russia.  During  1867  he  again  visited  the  United
States,  returning  to  Bergen  for  a  sl)ort  time  in
1870,  when  he  married  Miss  Thorpe,  whom  he  had
met  in  1868  at  Madison,  Wis.  In  1872  he  spent
the  summer  in  Norway,  but  returned  to  the  United
States  in  the  autumn.  Later  he  spent  some  time
in  Europe ;  but  in  1876  he  again  came  to  this  coun-
try, and  appeared  in  the  principal  cities  afterward.
During  the  years  that  followed,  his  summers  were
spent  abroad  and  his  winters  in  America,  that  of
1879,  at  Cambridge,  Mass.  See  "  Ole  Bull :  a  Me-
moir," by  his  widow,  Sara  C.  Bull  (Boston,  1883).

BULL,  William,  lieutenant-governor  of  South
Carolina,  b.  in  1710 ;  d.  in  London,  4  July,  1791.
He  was  a  son  of  William  Bull,  who  had  also  been
lieutenant-governor  of  South  Carolina,  and  who
died  in  1755,  aged  seventy-two.  After  distinguish-
ing himself  in  his  studies  at  home,  he  went  to  En-
rope  and  became  a  pupil  of  Boerhaave,  the  famous
Leyden  physician,  and,  having  completed  his  stud-
ies, returned  to  South  Carolina.  He  was  a  member
of  the  colonial  council  of  South  Carolina  in  1751
and  speaker  of  the  house  of  delegates  in  1763,  and
was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  that  colony
in  1764.  He  continued  in  the  latter  office  many
years,  and  was  commander-in-chief  of  the  colony.
In  1782  he  accompanied  the  British  troops  to  Eng-
land, and  remained  there  until  his  death.

BULLARD,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Northbridge,
Mass.,  26  March,  1804.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1828,  and  then  for  a  year  taught  school.
From  1829  till  1831  he  studied  at  Andover  theo-
logical seminary,  and  on  13  Jan.,  1832,  was  or-
dained. In  1831  he  became  agent  and  secretary  of
the  Maine  Sabbath-school  union,  and  in  1834  was
elected  secretary  of  the  Massachusetts  Sabbath-
school  society  (afterward  Congregational  publish-
ing society),  continuing  as  such  until  1875,  when
he  became  honorary  secretary  and  its  representa-
tive before  the  churches.  He  has  edited  a  great
number  of  the  society's  books,  and  has  written
"Children's  Album  of  Pictures  and  Stories"
(Springfield,  1867) ;  "  Children's  Book  for  Sabbath
Hours "  (1875)  ;  "  Sunnvbank  Stories  "  (Boston,
1863);  "Fifty  Years  with  the  Sabbath-Schools"
(Boston,  1876).  From  1834  till  1844  he  edited
"  The  Sabbath-School  Visitor,"  and  since  then  he
has  had  charge  of  "  The  Well-Spring."

BULLARD,  Henry  Adams,  jurist,  b.  in  Gro-
ton,  Mass.,  9  Sept.,  1781 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La,,
17  April,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1807,  and  studied  law.  He  accompanied  Gen.  To-
ledo on  his  revolutionary  expedition  to  New  Mexico
in  the  spring  of  1813  in  the  capacity  of  aide  and
military  secretary.  The  revolutionists  were  de-
feated by  the  royal  troops  at  San  Antonio,  and
BuUard  suffered  many  hardships,  but  reached
Natchitoches,  where  he  entered  upon  the  practice
of  his  profession.  He  was  elected  a  district  judge
in  1822,  entered  congress  in  1831,  and  served  till
1834,  when  he  was  raised  to  the  supreme  'bench  of
Louisiana,  and  held  that  office  till  1846,  except  in
1839,  when  he  served  as  secretary  of  state  for  Lou-
isiana. In  1847  he  became  professor  of  civil  law
in  the  law-school  of  Louisiana.  In  1850  he  was
elected  to  the  legislature,  and  a  few  weeks  later
was  chosen  to  serve  out  the  unexpired  term  of
Charles  M.  Conrad  in  congress,  but  died  from
fatigue  after  returning  from  Washington.


446


BULLARD


BULLOCK


BULLARD,  Talbot,  physician,  b.  in  Sutton,
Mass.,  10  Aug.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Indianapolis,  Ind.,  18
June,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  Marietta,  and
then  studied  medicine  in  the  Cincinnati  medical
college.  After  settling  in  Indianapolis  he  followed
his  profession  and  acquired'  a  lucrative  practice.
Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  became  in-
terested in  the  welfare  of  the  soldiers,  and  at  the
battle  of  Pittsburg  Landing  he  assumed  the  super-
intendence and  care  of  the  Indiana  wounded,
^^he  devotion  he  showed  at  that  time  was  such  that
his  service  was  called  for  by  Gov.  Morton  after
every  subsequent  battle  in  which  Indiana  troops
were  engaged.  At  Pittsburg  Landing  he  con-
tracted a  complaint  from  which  he  never  recov-
ered, and  when  called  on  by  the  governor  to  go  to
Vicksburg,  he  did  so  contrary  to  the  advice  of  his
friends,  and,  after  the  mission  was  accomplished,
returned  to  his  home  and  soon  died.

BULLIONS,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Moss
Side,  Scotland,  in  December,  1791 ;  d.  in  Troy,  K
Y.,  13  Feb.,  1864.  He  received  an  excellent  early
education,  and  assisted  his  parents  on  the  farm.
In  1810  he  entered  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
supporting  himself  during  his  three  years'  course
by  teaching.  He  then  studied  theology  under
Prof.  Paxton,  and  late  in  1817  came  to  the  United
States.  In  March,  1818,  he  was  ordained  pastor  at
Argyle,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained  until  1824,  when
ill  health  compelled  his  resignation.  He  then  be-
came professor  of  languages  in  the  Albany  acade-
my, and  continued  as  such  until  1848.  From  1832
till  1852  he  was  pastor  of  the  United  Presbyterian
congregation  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  and  again  from  1853
until  his  death,  having  in  the  meanwhile  spent
some  time  in  travel.  He  published  an  extensive
series  of  classical  text-books,  which  came  into  use
very  extensively.  Among  them  are  "  Principles  of
English  Grammar"  (New  York,  1834);  "Analyti-
cal and  Practical  English  Grammar "  (1850) ;
"  Cicero's  Select  Orations  "  (1851) ;  "  Principles  of
Greek  Grammar"  (1840);  "Principles  of  Latin
Grammar"  (1853);  "Latin  Exercises"  (1855);
"Latin  and  English  Dictionary"  (1862).  He  also
published  a  "  Life  of  Alexander  Bullions."

BULLITT,  Alex.in(ler  Scott,  statesman,  b.  in
Prince  William  co.,  Va.,  in  1761 ;  d.  in  Jefferson
CO.,  Ky.,  13  April,  1816.  In  1784  he  settled  in
Shelby  co.,  Va.  (now  Kentucky),  but  the  continual
depredations  of  the  Indians  caused  him  to  remove
to  Jefferson  co.,  and  he  settled  near  Sturgus'  Sta-
tion. He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that
met  at  Danville  in  1792  to  frame  the  constitution
of  Kentucky.  After  its  adoption  he  represented
his  county  in  the  state  senate,  and  was  the  first
speaker,  serving  as  such  from  1792  till  1804.  In
1799  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention  that  met
at  Frankfort  for  the  purpose  of  amending  the  state
constitution,  and  presided  at  its  meetings.  Pie
became  in  1800  the  first  lieutenant-governor  of
Kentucky.  He  retired  from  politics  in  1808,  and
passed  the  latter  portion  of  his  life  on  the  farm
in  Jefferson  co.,  where  he  died.

BULLOCH,  Archibald,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  about  1730 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  23  Feb.,
1777.  He  received  a  liberal  education,  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  settled  in  Georgia.
In  1772  he  became  speaker  of  the  commons  house,
in  1775  was  elected  a  member  of  the  provincial
congress,  and  became  its  president,  and  during  the
following  year  he  was  again  called  upon  to  pre-
side over  the  second  provincial  congress,  and  sent
as  a  delegate  to  the  continental  congress  meeting
at  Philadelphia.  He  would  have  been  one  of  the
signers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence  had  not


official  duties  called  him  home ;  but  he  was  the
first  person  in  Georgia  to  receive  a  copy  of  that
document,  which  he  read  publicly  to  the  citizens  of
Savannah.  He  was  chosen  first  republican  presi-
dent of  Georgia,  holding  that  office  from  20  June,
1776,  till  5  Feb.,  1777,  when  the  state  constitution
came  into  existence.  Gov.  Bulloch  was  one  of  the
most  eminent  men  of  his  time,  and  had  great  in-
fluence in  shaping  the  course  of  his  state. — His  son,
William  Bellinger,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in  Savannah'
Ga.,  in  1776;  d.  there,  6  March,  1852.  He  received
a  classical  education,  after  which  he  studied  law.
As  a  lawyer  he  became  prominent,  and  in  1809  was
elected  mayor  of  Savannah.  Subsequently  he  be-
came collector  of  the  port,  and  during  the  war  of
1812  served  in  the  Savannah  heavy  artillery.  He
was  appointed  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused  by  the
resignation  of  William  H.  Crawford  in  the  U.  S.
senate,  and  served  from  24  May,  1813,  till  6  Dec.,
1813.  From  1816  till  1843  he  was  president  of  the
state  bank  of  Georgia,  having  been  one  of  the
founders  of  that  institution.

BULLOCK,  Alexander  Hamilton,  governor
of  Massachusetts,  b.  in  Royalston,  Mass.,  2  March,
1816;  d.  in  Worcester,  17  Jan.,  1882.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1836,  and  for  three  years
he  taught  school  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  after  which,
from  1839  till  1841,  he  studied  law  with  Emory
Washburn  and  in  Harvard  law-school.  In  1841  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began  practice  at
Woi'cester.  He  soon  became  interested  in  politics,
and  was  a  member  of  the  lower  branch  of  the  legis-
lature from  1845  till  1847,  and  again  from  1862  Ull
1866,  acting  as  speaker  during  the  latter  period.
In  1849  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  from
1853  till  1856  was  commissioner  of  insolvency,
and  in  1856-'8  judge  of  the  court  of  insolvency.
In  1859  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Worcester,  ami
from  1866  till  1868  was  governor  of  Massachusetts,
From  1848  till  1850  he  edited  "The  ^gis"  in
Worcester.  He  was  elected  trustee  of  Amherst
college  in  1852,  and  received  the  degree  of  LL,  D.
from  Harvard  in  1866,  Gov.  Bullock  published
addresses,  both  political  and  literary,  among  which
is  "  The  Centennial  Situation  of  Women  "  (Worces-
ter, 1876).  He  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
historical  society,  and  his  death  was  commemorated
by  an  address  bv  the  president.  See  Winthrop's
"  Addresses  "  (Boston,  1880).

BULLOCK,  Jonathan  Rnssell,  b.  in  Bristol,
R,  I.,  0  Sept.,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown
in  1834,  studied  law  in  his  father's  office,  and  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1836.  Soon  afterward  he  re-
moved to  Alton,  111.,  where  he  practised  his  pro-
fession till  April,  1843,  when  he  returned  to  Rhode
Island,  and  was  associated  in  practice  with  the  late
Joseph  M.  Blake,  then  attorney-general  until  1849.
when  he  was  appointed  collector.  In  1844  and  the
two  succeeding  years  he  was  chosen  first  representa-
tive to  the  general  assembly  from  the  town  of
Bristol;  but  in  1847,  having  been  retained  as
counsel  from  that  town  in  an  important  question
atfecting  its  boundaries,  then  pending  before  the
legislature,  he  declined  re-election.  In  1849  he  was
selected  as  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  inqun-e
into  the  validity  of  the  state  (revolutionary)  debt,
and  in  the  same  year  was  appointed  collector  ot
Bristol  and  Warren,  an  office  which  he  held  unti.
4  March,  1854.  In  April,  1859,  he  was  elected  to
the  state  senate,  and  in  December,  1860.  was  chosen
lieutenant-governor.  In  December,  1861,  he  was
appointed  by  the  governor  a  special  commissioner


to  adiust  the  accounts  between  Rhode  Island


ind
the  United  States,  growing  out  of  the  expenses  in-
curred by  the  state  in  raising  troops  to  suppress


BULLOCK


BULLUS


447


the  rebellion,  and  while  engaged  in  this  duty  in
September,  1802,  he  was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  su-
preme court.  He  remained  upon  the  bench  of  this
court  until  March,  1864,  when  he  was  appointed
by  President  Lincoln  judge  of  the  district  court  of
the  United  States  for  Rhode  Island.  In  Septem-
ber, 18'J9,  in  consequence  of  failing  health,  he  re-
signed this  office.

BULLOCK,  Rufus  Brown,  governor  of  Geor-
gia, b.  in  Bethlehem,  Albany  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  March,
183i.  He  was  graduated  at  Albion  (X,  Y.)  acade-
my in  1850,  and,  after  various  pursuits,  was  sent
during  1859-'00  to  organize  the  business  of  the
Adams  express  company  in  the  South  Atlantic
states.  His  headquarters  were  at  Augusta,  Ga.,
where  he  formed  the  southern  express  company,
and  became  one  of  its  active  managers.  During
the  civil  war  he  continued  this  occupation  under
the  direction  of  the  confederate  government,  es-
tablishing railroads  and  telegraph  lines  on  interior
routes.  Later  he  was  placed  in  charge  of  contri-
butions for  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Army  of
Northern  Virginia,  and  at  Appomattox  he  gave  his
parole  as  an  acting  assistant  quartermaster-general.
After  the  cessation  of  hostilities,  Mr.  Bullock  re-
sumed the  general  management  of  express  affairs.
and  was  elected  one  of  the  trustees  and  secretary  of
the  southern  express  company.  Its  present  magni-
tude is  largely  due  to  his  management  at  that  time.
He  was  also  associated  in  the  organization  of  the
first  national  bank  of  Georgia,  and  was  elected  pres-
ident of  the  Macon  and  Augusta  railroad.  In  1867
he  was  chosen  a  delegate  to  the  conv^ention  called
to  frame  a  constitution  under  the  reconstruction
laws  then  recently  passed.  His  course  at  that  con-
vention met  with  the  approval  of  its  progressive
members,  and  he  was  their  unanimous  choice  as
candidate  for  governor.  After  a  bitter  canvass  in
the  spring  of  1868,  the  new  constitution  was  rati-
fied, and  Mr.  Bullock  was  declared  elected.  But
the  reactionists  obtained  a  majority  in  the  legisla-
ture, and  expelled  the  colored  men  who  had  been
elected  and  seated.  Against  this  action  Gov.
Bullock  earnestly  protested,  and  after  its  accom-
plishment brought  the  matter  to  the  attention  of
congress,  by  which  he  was  empowered  to  reassem-
ble the  old  legislature,  including  the  expelled  col-
ored members.  This  struggle  for  the  rights  of  ne-
groes to  hold  office  rendered  him  very  unpopular  in
his  state,  and  he  was  overwhelmed  with  abuse.  At
the  next  regular  election  the  opposition  seated  a
large  majority  of  the  general  assembly,  and,  just
prior  to  its  convening  in  Nov^ember,  1870,  Gov.
Bullock  resigned  his  ofRce.  Charges  of  corruption
were  made  against  him,  and,  after  a  hearing  in  the
state  courts  at  Atlanta,  he  was  acquitted  and  thor-
oughly vindicated  from  every  accusation.  During
his  term  of  office  over  600  miles  of  new  railroad
were  built  within  the  state,  and  the  value  of  prop-
erty as  returned  by  its  owners  for  taxation  was
increased  over  $50,000,000.  Gov.  Bullock  contin-
ued his  residence  in  Georgia,  and  became  president
of  one  of  the  largest  cotton-mills  in  Atlanta.  He
has  taken  no  public  part  in  politics  since  his  resig-
nation of  the  office  of  governor.

BULLOCK,  WilHain  A.,  inventor,  b.  in  Green-
ville, Greene  co.,  X.  Y.,  in  1813;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  14  April,  1867.  At  an  early  age  he,  with  his
brother,  learned  the  trade  of  iron-founder  and  ma-
chinist. He  devoted  all  his  leisure  to  books,  and
acquired  a  good  theoretical  as  well  as  practical
knowledge  of  mechanics.  After  engaging  in  vari-
ous pursuits,  and  making,  among  other  things,
hay-  and  cotton-presses,  he  began  the  publication
of  a  newspaper,  the "  Banner  of  the  Union,"  in ,


Philadelphia  in  1849.  The  establishment  was  re-
moved three  years  later  to  Catskill,  N.  Y,,  where
he  made  in  1852,  for  his  own  use,  a  wooden  press
turned  by  a  hand-crank.  To  this  machine  a  self-
feeder  was  attached,  which  contained  the  germ  of
one  of  his  most  important  inventions.  Mr.  Bullock
soon  afterward  went  to  New  York  city,  where  he
constructed  a  fast  press  on  the  planetary  system
for  "Frank  Leslie's  Illustrated  Weekly."  His
name  became  immediately  prominent  because  of
the  unprecedented  rapidity  with  which  a  very  large
edition  of  the  paper,  containing  an  illustrated  ac-
count of  a  prize-fight,  M'as  issued.  He  devoted  his
attention  to,  and  perfected,  about  this  time,  the
automatic  feeding  mechanism  that  forms  an  im-
portant feature  in  the  presses  bearing  his  name,
Mr.  Bullock  now  gave  his  energies  to  the  problem
of  constructing  a  printing-press  that  should  em-
body in  one  machine  accurate  self-adjustment  and
feeding,  perfecting,  or  printing  on  both  sides,  with
the  highest  rate  of  speed.  He  was  successful  in
accomplishing  all  these  objects,  and  the  Bullock
web  perfecting  press  revolutionized  the  art  of
press-building.  In  carrying  into  practice  his  plans,
he  fed  the  paper  from  a  roll  containing  five  or  six
miles  of  linear  measurement,  moistened  it  by  pass-
ing it  through  a  spray,  carried  it  between  the  im-
pression cylinder  and  the  form,  first  for  one  side,
then  for  the  other,  and  cut  the  sheets  off  at  the
proper  intervals  with  great  precision  with  a  serrated
knife  which  struck  the  paper  with  lightning-like
rapidity,  and  was  so  constructed  as  rarely  to  need
sharpening,  after  which  the  sheets  were  automat-
ically delivered  on  the  receiving-board  at  the  rate,
in  his  earlier  presses,  of  12,000  an  hour.  Sub-
sequent modifications  and  improvements  have
brought  the  delivery  up  to  30,000  an  hour.  While
engaged  in  setting  up  and  adjusting  one  of  his
new  presses  for  the  "  Public  Ledger,"  in  Philadel-
phia, Mr.  Bullock  was,  3  April,  1867,  accidentally
caught  by  the  main  driving-belt  from  the  engine-
room.  His  leg  was  crushed,  and  he  sustained  other
injuries,  which  caused  his  death.  He  had  a  long
time  in  his  confidence  one  of  his  workmen,  a  for-
eigner, to  whom  he  had  imparted  many  of  his
ideas,  so  that  after  his  death  improvements  of  his
own  devising  were  made,  and  the  Bullock  press
rapidly  superseded  all  previous  ones.

BULLUS,  Oscar,  naval  officer,  b.  about  1800;
d.  in  New  York  city,  29  Oct.,  1871.  In  1815  he
was  appointed  from  New  York  to  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  but  resigned  and  entered  the  navy
as  a  midshipman  in  1817.  He  was  ordered  to  the
sloop  "  Ontario,"  and  served  under  Capt.  Biddle  in
the  Pacific  ocean  until  1819.  From  1819  till  1821
he  was  in  service  on  the  Mediterranean,  where,  in
June,  1821,  he  fell  from  aloft  and  received  injuries
that  led  to  his  being  placed  on  the  reserved  list.
From  1822  till  1824  he  was  on  duty  on  the
"  Washington,"  and  at  the  navy-yard.  New  York.
In  1830  he  was  assigned  the  command  of  the
"  Bush,"  later  of  the  receiving-ship  "  Franklin,"
then  was  on  the  sloop  "  St.  Louis,"  and  from  1835
till  1838  on  the  "  Constitution."  From  1842  till
1844  he  was  in  command  of  the  "Boxer,"  and,
after  short  duty  at  New  York,  commander  of  the
store-ship  "  Relief."  In  1848  he  was  commissioned
commander,  and  assigned  to  the  charge  of  the
"  Michigan  "  on  the  lakes.  He  was  piaced  on  the
retired  list  in  September,  1855,  for  disability  re-
ceived in  the  line  of  duty.  He  was  commissioned
captain  in  1861,  and  in  command  of  rendezvous.
New  York,  rendered  good  service  in  connection
with  recruiting.  In  1867  he  was  promoted  commo-
dore, and  had  charge  of  the  depot  at  Maiden,  Mass,


448


BULWER


BUNCOMBE


BULWER,  William  Henry  Lytton  Earle,

Baron,  diplomatist,  b.  in  London,  13  Feb.,  1801 ;
d.  at  Naples,  23  May,  1873.  To  citizens  of  the
United  States  he  is  better  known  as  Sir  Henry
BuLWER,  negotiator  with  Senator  John  M.  Clayton
of  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty.  He  was  educated  at
Cambridge,  but  left  the  university  in  1824  to  begin
his  diplomatic  career  as  a  government  messenger
to  Greece.  On  his  return  in  1825  he  entered  the  2d
life-guards  as  a  cornet,  but  soon  obtained  an  un-
attached commission  on  half-pay,  and,  commuting
the  latter  by  one  of  those  convenient  regulations
known  to  the  British  army,  entered  the  civil  ser-
vice. He  was  appointed  attache  at  Berlin  in  1827,
transferred  to  Vienna  in  1829,  and  to  the  Hague
in  1830.  His  despatches  during  the  revolutionary
proceedings  in  Belgium  that  year  were  considered
so  able  that  he  was  given  a  regular  official  appoint-
ment at  Brussels,  lie  was  returned  to  parliament
in  1830,  and  during  the  four  succeeding  sessions
won  high  repute  as  a  debater.  He  was  appointed
secretary  of  legation,  and  afterward  charge
d'affaires  at  Brussels  in  1835-6.  In  1837  he  was
sent  to  Constantinople  as  secretary  of  embassy,
thence  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  thence  to  Paris  in
1839  as  charge  d'affaires.  He  was  ambassador  to
Spain  from  1843  till  1848.  In  all  of  these  places  he
evinced  unusual  diplomatic  talents,  and  conducted
several  important  and  complicated  negotiations.
On  19  May,  1848,  Marshal  Navarrez  expelled  him
from  Spain,  because  he  formally  protested  against
some  cf  the  insurrectionary  proceedings  in  Madrid.
In  December  of  the  same  year  he  married  a  niece
of  the  first  duke  of  Wellington.  On  27  April,  1849,
Sir  Henry  was  appointed  British  minister  at  Wash-
ington, where  he  remained  three  years.  During
this  time  he  was  associated  with  Senator  John
INIiddleton  Clayton  in  preparing  the  treaty  bearing
their  joint  names,  which  is  still  in  force.  This
guarantees  the  neutrality  of  interoceanic  commer-
cial routes  across  the  Central  American  isthmus.
After  this  he  was  sent  successively  to  Florence,
Constantinople,  and  the  Danubian'  principalities,
adding  greatly  to  his  reputation  as  a  skilled  diplo-
matist. He  retired  from  the  diplomatic  service  in
lb65,  and  two  years  later  re-entered  parliament,  and
retained  his  seat  until  he  was  raised  to  the  peerage
in  1871  as  Baron  Dalling  and  Bulwer.  He  pub-
lished a  small  volume  of  poems  (1822);  "Autumn
in  Greece  "  (1826) ;  "  France,  Social,  Literary,  and
Political "  (1834).  The  last  named  is  the  first  half
of  a  work  completed  in  1836,  called  "  The  Monarchy
of  the  Middle  Classes."  He  prefixed  a  "Life  of
Lord  Byron "  to  the  Paris  edition  of  that  poet's
works  (1835).  His  best-known  books  are  "  Histori-
cal Characters"  (London,  1868)  and  "Life  of  Pal-
merston"  (2  vols.,  London,  1870;  Philadelphia,
1871).  He  was  a  brother  of  Bulwer  the  novelist,
and  during  his  residence  at  Washington  had  for
his  private  secretary  the  present  Lord  Lytton,
known  in  literature  as  "  Owen  Meredith."

BUMSTEAD,  Freeman  Josiali,  physician,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  21  April,  1826 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  28  Nov.,  1879.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams
in  1847,  and  at  Harvard  medical  college  in  1851,
after  which  he  attended  medical  lectures  in  Paris.
In  1852  he  settled  in  New  York,  and  became  a
specialist  in  venereal  diseases.  He  held  many  im-
portant offices,  among  which  were  those  of  surgeon
to  the  New  York  eye  and  ear  infirmary,  to  the
venereal  wards  of  the  charity  hospital,  Blaekwell's
island,  to  the  stranger's  hospital ;  and  from  1867
till  1871  he  was  professor  of  venereal  diseases  at
the  college  of  physicians  and  surgeons.  New  York,
Dr.  Bumstead  was  a  member  of  various  medical


societies,  and  from  1875  till  1876  vice-president  of
the  Torrey  botanical  club.  He  contributed  papers
to  the  medical  journals,  and  translated  Ricord's
notes  to  "  Hunter's  Treatise  on  the  Venereal  Dis-
eases" (Philadelphia,  1854).  and  Culleriers  "Atlas
of  Venereal  Diseases"  (1867).  "Pathology  and
Treatment  of  Venei'eal  Diseases"  (1861)  is  his
most  important  work.

BUNCE,  Oliver  Bell,  author,  b.  in  New  York
city,  8  Feb.,  1828;  d.  there,  15  May,  1890.  He
was  educated  at  Rand's  academy,  in  New  York,
and  was  for  twenty  years  a  bookseller  and  pub-
lisher. His  first  book  was  "  The  Romance  of  the
Revolution,"  a  compilation  of  revolutionary  inci-
dents and  anecdotes  (New  York,  1852).-  His  other
works  include  "  A  Bachelor's  Story  "  (1859) ;  "  Life
Before  Him"  (1860);  "Bensley"  (1863)— the  last
two  published  anonymously ;  "  Bachelor  Bluff,"
a  collection  of  social  and  literary  essays  (1882) ;
"  Don't,"  a  small  book  on  manners,  of  which  more
than  85,000  copies  were  sold  in  the  United  States,
and  there  are  several  English  editions  (1884);
"  My  House,  an  Ideal "  (1885) ;  and  "  Timias  Terry-
stone,"  a  novel  (1885).  He  also  wrote  a  romantic
drama,  "  Marco  Bozzaris,"  which  was  produced  in
1849;  and  "Love  in  '76"  (1856),  which  enjoys  the
distinction  of  being  the  only  parlor  comedy  of  the
revolution.  Mr.  Bunce  was  connected  editorially
with  "Appletons'  Journal"  during  its  existence,
first  as  associate  editor,  and  afterward  as  editor-in-
chief,  and  also  contributed  to  other  periodicals.

BUNCE,  William  Gedney,  landscape  painter,
b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  19  Sept.,  1842.  He  studied
under  William  Hart  in  New  York,  and  subsequently
lived  for  twelve  years  abroad,  studying  under  An-
dreas Aschenbach  in  Dlisseldorf,  and  under  Paul
Jean  Clays  in  Brussels.  His  first  public  exhibi-
tion was  in  the  Paris  salon  in  1875.  Oh  his  return
to  the  United  States  he  opened  a  studio  in  New
York.  His  pictures  include  "Venice — Night"
(1876);  " Venice— Morning " ;  "La  Luna  Venezi-
ana"(1878);  "  Approach  to  Venice "  ;  "Twilight
in  Holland ";"  Watch  Hill,  Rhode  Island"  (1880);
"Satucket  Hillside,  New  England";  "Among  the
Sail,  Venice";  "Bit  of  Harbor,  Venice"  (1882);
"  Sun,  Sails,  and  Sen,  Venice  " ;  "  Day  in  May,  Ven-
ice "  (1883) ;  "  In  the  Lagoon,  San  Giorgio  "  (1884);
"  Venetian  Day  "  and  "  Venetian  Night "  (1885).

BUNCH,  Sanuiel,  soldier,  b.  in  Granger  cc,
Tenn.,  4  Dec,  1786;  d.  in  Rutledge,  Tenn..  5
Sept.,  1849,  He  commanded  a  regiment  of  mount-
ed yeomen  from  Tennessee  during  the  Creek  war,
serving  under  Gen.  Andrew  Jackson,  and  distin-
guished himself  in  the  attack  on  Hillibeetown  on
18  Nov.,  1813.  ■  In  the  charge  of  the  battle  at
Horseshoe  Bend,  on  27  March,  1814,  he  was  among
the  first  to  pass  over  the  breastworks  of  the  enemy.
For  many  years  he  was  sheriff  of  Granger  county.
He  was  elected  from  Tennessee  to  the  23d  congress
as  a  whig,  and  was  re-elected  to  the  24th,  servmg
from  2  Dec,  1833.  till  3  March,  1837.

BUNCOMBE,  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Kitts,
W.  1.;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1777.  He  was
educated  in  England,  inherited  a  large  estate,  came
to  this  country,  and  in  1776  settled  in  Tyrrel  cc,
N.  C.  During  the  revolutionary  war  he  noised  ancl
commanded  the  5th  North  Carolina  regiment,  and
fought  under  Gen.  Francis  Nash  at  the  battles  ot
Brandvwine  and  Germantown.  He  was  severely
wounded  in  the  latter  engagement,  and,  after  beuig
captured,  was  taken  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  soon
died  from  the  effects  of  his  injuries.  In  liJi  ni3
name  was  given  to  a  county  in  North  Carolma.
The  Americanism  "speaking  for  Buncombe,  si!2^i-
fying  any  speech  made  solely  to  please  a  constitu-


BUNTING


BUBCHARD


449


eiicy  or  the  public,  is  derived  from  the  following
incident :  A  representative  in  congress  from  Bun-
combe CO.  was  in  the  habit  of  making  speeches  to
which  no  one  listened.  One  day,  observing  that
many  members  were  leaving  the  house  while  he  was
speaking,  he  declared  that  he  did  not  care  how
many  left— he  was  not  speaking  to  the  house,  but
to  Buncombe.

BUNTING,  Christopher  William,  Canadian
publisher,  b.  in  Amigan,  county  Limerick,  Ireland,
in  September,  1837.  He  was  educated  in  Ireland
and  Toronto,  and  was  connected  with  the  press  in
early  life,  but  left  journalism  and  engaged  for
many  years  in  the  West  India  trade.  He  has  been
for  soriie  time  the  proprietor  and  publisher  of  the
Toronto  "  Mail,"  the  principal  organ  of  the  Con-
servatives in  Canada.  He  was  first  returned  to
Parliament  in  1878.

BURBANK,  Sidney,  soldier,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts, 26  Sept.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Newport,  Ky.,  7  Dec,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1829,  and  entered  the  1st  infantry
as  second  lieutenant.  After  some  years  of  fron-
tier duty,  at  various  garrisons,  he  served  in  the
"  Black  ilawk  "  war  in  1832,  and  at  the  military
academy  from  1836  till  1839,  as  instructor  of  in-
fantry tactics.  He  was  made  captain  in  1839,  and
fought  in  the  Florida  war  against  the  Seminole
Indians.  He  was  again  on  frontier  duty  from
1841  till  1859,  when  he  became  superintendent  of
the  western  recruiting  service  at  Newport  bar-
racks, Ky.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of
the  2d  infantry  and  in  command  of  a  brigade  at-
tached to  the  army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  pres-
ent at  the  battles  of  Chancellorsville  and  Gettys-
burg, and  for  his  services  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general.  Subsequent  to  the  war  he  joined
his  regimen*  and  was  stationed  at  Newport  bar-
,  racks,  Ky.,  and  at  Louisville.  Later,  from  1867
I  till  1809,  he  was  in  command  of  the  district  of
Kentucky,  and  from  1869  till  1870  superintend-
I  ent  of  general  recruiting  service.  He  was  retired
I  in  1870,  after  forty  consecutive  years  of  service.
BURBECK,  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  8  June,  1754 ;  d.  in  New  London,  Conn.,  2
Oct.,  1848.  He  was  the  son  of  an  officer  at  Castle
William,  Boston  harbor,  and  served  with  distinc-
tion in  the  revolutionary  war.  In  1776  he  was
made  a  lieutenant,  and  subsequently  participated
in  the  battles  of  Brandywine  and  Germantown,  as
well  as  in  the  terrible  privations  and  sufferings  of
Valley  Forge.  He  shared  the  perils  of  the  mem-
orable retreat  through  New  Jersey,  and  was  pres-
ent at  the  battle  of  Monmouth.  In  1777  he  was
made  a  captain  in  the  artillery,  and  continued  in
active  service  until  the  close  of  the  war,  when  he
received  the  brevet  of  major.  He  again  entered
the  service  in  1786  as  captain  in  the  artillery,  and
was  actively  engaged  for  some  time  in  the  Indian
war  on  the  western  border  under  Gen.  Anthony
Wayne.  After  several  promotions  he  received  the
rank  of  colonel  in  the  artillery,  and  in  1813  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general.  In  1815  he  was  mus-
tered out  of  service.

BURBRIDGE,  George  Wheelock,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Cornwallis,  Nova  Scotia,  6  Feb.,  1847.
He  was  graduated  at  Mount  Allison  Weslevan  col-
lege in  1804,  studied  law,  and  in  1871  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  New  Brunswick,  and  began  to  prac-
tise at  St.  John.  He  was  secretary  of  the  com-
missioners for  consolidating  the  laws  of  New
Brunswick  in  1877,  became  deputv  minister  of
justice  and  solicitor  of  Indian  affairs  in  1882,  and
in  1883  was  selected  as  one  of  the  commissioners
to  revise  and  consolidate  the  statutes  of  Canada.
VOL.  :  — 29


BURBRIDGE,  Stephen  Gano,  soldier,  b.  in
Scott  CO.,  Ky.,  19  Aug.,  1831.  He  was  educated  at
Georgetown  college,  and  at  the  Kentucky  military
institute  in  Frankfort,  after  which  he  studied  law
with  Senator  Garrett  Davis  in  Paris,  Ky.  From
1849  till  1853  he  followed  mercantile  pursuits  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  and  then  turned  his  attention  to
agriculture.  He  conducted  a  large  farm  in  Logan
CO.  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  when  he
raised  the  26th  Kentucky  infantry  and  was  made
its  colonel.  At  the  battle  of  Shiloh  he  distin-
guished himself,  and  was  made  a  brigadier-general.
During  Gen.  Bragg's  invasion  of  Kentucky  in  1862,
he  was  ordered  to  that  state,  and  was  variously  en-
gaged until  the  confederate  forces  were  driven  out.
He  then  joined  the  expedition  against  Vicksburg,
and  participated  in  several  actions.  He  had  com-
mand of  the  1st  brigade  in  the  1st  division  of  the
13th  corps  of  the  army  of  the  Mississippi,  and  led
the  charge  at  Arkansas  Post  that  resulted  in  its
capture,  planting  the  American  flag  upon  the  fort,
which  had  been  placed  in  his  hands,  as  a  tribute  to
his  gallantry,  by  Gen.  A.  G.  Smith,  for  that  pur-
pose. Gen.  Burbridge  was  also  conspicuous  at  the
capture  of  Port  Gibson,  and  was  among  the  first  to
enter  the  place.  Later  he  was  placed  in  command
of  the  military  district  of  Kentucky,  and  defeated
Gen.  John  H.  Morgan  on  his  raid,  driving  him  into
Tennessee.  For  this  service  he  received  the  thanks
of  President  Lincoln,  and  on  4  July,  1864,  the
brevet  of  major-general.  He  resigned  in  1865,  and
retired  to  Kentucky.

BURCHARD,  Samuel  Dickinson,  clergyman,
b.  in  Steuben,  N.  Y.,  6  Sept.,  1812.  He  received  an
academic  education,  and  at  eighteen  years  of  age
removed  to  Kentucky,  and  was  graduated  at  Cen-
tre college,  Danville,  in  1836.  Immediately  after
graduation  he  began  to  lecture  on  temperance,
slavery,  and  religious  questions,  and  thus  became
known  throughout  the  state.  He  also  won  many
friends  in  Kentucky  by  his  services  as  a  volunteer
nurse  during  the  cholera  epidemic  of  1837.  He
was  licensed  to  preach  in  1838,  and  was  installed  as
pastor  of  a  Presbyterian  church  in  New  York  city,
1  May,  1839.  He  was  very  successful  as  a  pastor
and  as  a  lecturer,  and  was  at  different  times  chan-
cellor of  Ingham  university  and  president  of  Rut-
gers female  college.  He  was  peculiarly  happy  in
making  addresses  on  occasions  when  it  was  desira-
ble to  entertain  a  miscellaneous  audience.  Having
nearly  finished  an  exceptionally  honorable,  useful,
and  unobtrusive  career  as  a  clergyman,  it  was  his
fate,  near  the  close  of  the  exceedingly  bitter  presi-
dential canvass  of  1884,  to  raise  himself,  by  the
utterance  of  a  brief  alliterative  sentence,  into  the
most  unprecedented  and  unexpected  political  noto-
riety. A  few  days  before  the  election  the  repub-
lican managers  called  a  "ministers'  meeting"  in
New  York.  About  600  clergymen,  nominally  rep-
resenting all  denominations,  assembled,  and  Dr.
Burchard  addressed  them  in  a  dignified  and,  in  the
main,  temperate  speech.  In  concluding,  however,
he  stigmatized  the  democrats  as  the  party  of  "  Rum,
Romanism,  and  Rebellion."  Mr.  Blaine,  the  repub-
lican candidate  for  the  presidency,  was  present,
but  failed  to  repudiate  the  sentiment  on  the  spot.
Extraordinary  and,  it  w^as  believed,  successful
efforts  had  been  made  by  the  republicans  to  secure
the  Roman  Catholic  vote ;  but  these  fatal  words
undid  the  work  of  months.  Hardly  had  they  been
uttered  when  the  democratic  managers  saw  their
importance,  and  the  whole  country,  especially  near
the  centres  of  Roman  Catholic  population,  was
placarded  with  posters  headed  '•  R.  R.  R.,"  with  all
manner  of  additions  and  variations. Liquor-deal-


450


BURDEN


BURGER


ers  labelled  their  bottles  "  Rum,  Romanism,  and
Rebellion,"  and  nothing  was  left  undone  to  convey
the  impression  that  the  republican  leaders  secretly,
if  not  openly,  approved  the  expression.  The  elec-
tion proved  closer  even  than  was  anticipated,  and
eventually  the  choice  depended  upon  the  vote  of
New  York  state,  which  was  so  evenly  balanced  that
it  remained  for  several  days  in  doubt.  The  official
count  gave  the  state,  and  the  presidency,  to  the
democrats  by  only  1,047  votes,  and  the  number
changed  by  Dr.  Burchard's  remark  was  reasonably
estimated  at  several  thousand.  For  weeks  he  was
subjected  to  untold  annoyances,  and  it  is  but  fair
to  say  that  he  bore  them  in  a  philosophical,  manly,
and  Christian  manner,  alleging  that  if  he  had  been
made  an  instrument  for  good  or  evil  in  the  hands
of  Providence  against  his  own  will,  he  was  content
to  abide  by  the  consequences.

BURDEN,  Henry,  inventor,  b.  in  Dumblane,
Scotland,  20  April,  1791 ;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  19
Jan.,  1871.  He  was  a  farmer's  son,  and  early
showed  his  inventive  genius  by  m.aking,  with  his
own  hands,  labor-saving  machinery  from  the  rough-
est materials,  and  with  but  few  tools  and  no  moulds.
His  first  great  success  was  in  the  construction  of  a
threshing-machine ;  afterward  he  was  engaged  in
erecting  grist-mills  and  in  making  farm  imple-
ments. Having  decided  to  come  to  the  United
States,  with  the  intention  of  becoming  an  inventor,
he  followed  in  Edinburgh  a  full  course  of  scientific
studies,  including  mathematics,  engineering,  and
drawing.  He  left  Scotland  in  1819,  and  on  his
arrival  in  this  country  at  once  devoted  himself  to
the  manufacture  of  agricultural  implements.  His
first  effort  resulted  in  the  production  of  an  im-
proved plough,  which  received  the  first  premium
at  thrfee  county  fairs.  The  first  cultivator  invented
in  this  country  was  patented  by  him  in  1820,  and  in
1825  he  received  a  patent  for  making  the  wrought-
iron  spike.  Meanwhile,  in  1822,  he  had  become
the  agent  of  the  Troy  iron  and  nail  factory,  which
was  greatly  enlarged  under  his  supervision,  and
ultimately  he  became  sole  proprietor.  In  1835  he
invented  a  machine  for  making  horse-shoes,  and  in
1840  one  for  making  the  hook-headed  spike,  after-
ward used  on  nearly  every  railroad  in  the  United
States.  Without  this  invention  the  rapid  progress
of  railroad  building  in  this  country  would  have
been  impossible;  for  spikes  could  not  have  been
made  by  hand  with  sufficient  rapidity  to  supply
the  demand.  He  was  continually  improving  his
inventions,  and  in  1843  received  a  patent  for  a
modification  of  his  machine  for  making  horse-
shoes, and  in  1849  patented  a  self-acting  machine
for  rolling  iron  into  bars.  His  greatest  triumph
in  mechanics  was  his  new  machine  for  making
horse-shoes,  which  he  devised  in  June,  1857.  A  rod
of  iron,  fed  into  this  machine,  is  converted  into
shoes  entirely  completed,  with  creases  and  counter-
sunk holes,  leaving  nothing  more  to  be  done  but
to  clean  out  the  holes,  and  each  machine  produces
from  the  iron  bars  sixty  shoes  a  minute,  which
is  equivalent  to  a  day's  labor  of  two  men.  Mr.
Burden  obtained  patents  for  this  machine  from
nearly  CA^ery  government  in  Europe.  He  was  also
interested  in  steam  navigation,  and  in  1833  built  a
steamboat,  which  from  its  shape  was  called  the
"cigar-boat."  In  1836  he  warmly  advocated  the
construction  of  a  line  of  ocean  steamers  of  18,000
tons'  burden,  and  in  1845  visited  England  for  the
purpose  of  persuading  ship-owners  to  adopt  the
side-wheel ;  but  in  this  he  was  unsuccessful.  The
works  at  Troy  were  increased  until  the  plant  be-
came one  of  the  most  extensive  in  the  world.
Blast-furnaces, Bessemer-furnaces, and rolling-


mills  were  built,  and  the  manufacture  of  iron  be-
came the  principal  business  of  the  corporation.
Mr.  Burden  accumulated  a  large  fortune,  and  was
liberal  in  his  donations  for  charitable  purposes. —
His  son,  James  Abercrombie,  iron-master,  b.
in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  6  Jan.,  1833.  He  studied  in  New
Haven  with  a  tutor,  and  attended  lectures  in  the
Yale  scientific  school,  after  which  he  pursued  a
partial  course  in  the  Rensselaer  polytechnic  in-
stitute. Later  he  became  a  practical  mechanical
engineer  and  millwright,  and  then  was  made  fore-
man of  one  of  the  departments  of  the  works,  ad-
vancing step  by  step  until  he  became  president  of
the  Burden  iron  company.  Subsequently  he  held
many  places  of  trust,  and  was  for  some  time  presi-
dent of  the  Hudson  river  ore  and  iron  company.
Mr.  Burden  has  obtained  several  patents  for  inven-
tions of  his  own,  the  most  important  of  which  are
one  for  the  manufacture  of  horse-  and  mule-shoes,
and  one  for  making  snow-  and  mud-shoes  for
horses  and  mules.  From  these  inventions  alone  a
very  large  revenue  is  obtained.  In  1880  he  was  a
presidential  elector  on  the  republican  ticket.  He
is  a  prominent  member  of  the  American  institute
of  mining  engineers,  and  has  been  elected  its  vice-
president  several  times.

BURDETTE,  Robert  Jones,  humorist,  b.  in
Greensborough,  Pa.,  30  July,  1844.  Early  in  life
he  removed  to  Peoria,  111.,  where  he  was  educated
in  the  public  schools.  He  enlisted  as  a  private  in
the  47th  Illinois  volunteers  in  1862,  and  served
during  the  war.  In  1869  he  became  one  of  the
editors  of  the  Peoria  "  Transcript,"  was  afterward
connected  with  the  "  Review,"  and  still  later,  in
connection  with  others,  established  a  new  paper  in
Peoria,  which  did  not  succeed.  He  then  became
associate  editor  of  the  Burlington,  Iowa,  "  Hawk-
eye,"  and  his  humorous  contributions' to  this  jour-
nal, being  widely  copied,  made  his  reputation.  In
1877  he  began  to  deliver  public  lectures,  in  which
he  has  been  very  successful,  his  subjects  being
"  The  Rise  and  Fall  of  the  Mustache,"  "  Home,"
and  "The  Pilgrimage  of  the  Funny  Mao."  He
has  published,  in  book-form,  "  The  Rise  and  Fall
of  the  Mustache  and  other  Hawkeyetems"  (Bur-
lington, 1877) ;  "  Hawkeyes  "  (1880) ;  "  Life  of  Will-
iam Penn  "  (New  York,  1882) ;  and  "  Innach  Gar-
den, and  other  Comic  Sketches  "  (1886).

BUREAU,  Jacqnes  Olivier,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Three  Rivers,  province  of  Quebec,  in
February,  1820.  He  was  educated  at  Nicolet  col-
lege, and  was  admitted  as  a  notary  public  of  Lower
Canada  in  1843,  represented  Napierville  in  the
Canadian  assembly  from  1854  until  1862,  when  he
was  elected  for  "  De  Lorimer  "  division,  for  which
he  sat  until  the  union  in  1867.  He  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  and  provincial  secretary
(succeeding  A.  A.  Dorion)  from  January  to  May,
1863.  He  was  a  reformer  in  politics,  and  was  called
to  the  senate  in  1867.

BURGER,  Louis,  soldier,  b.  in  Spire,  Bavaria,
6  Feb.,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25  May,  1871.
He  was  educated  at  the  high  school  in  Kaisers-
lautern,  and  then  at  the  polytechnic  school  in
Munich,  where  he  devoted  special  attention  to  en-
gineering and  architecture  during  1840-'4.  After-
ward he  followed  his  profession  and  filled  various
posts  in  Bavaria  and  Wiirtemberg.  Subseque.it
to  the  revolution  in  1849  became  to  the  Lmted
States  and  established  himself  in  New  York  as  an
architect.  In  1854  he  organized  the  engineer  corps
of  the  5th  regiment  of  tlie  New  York  state  national
guards,  and  was  elected  captain.  During  the  civil
war  he  commanded  his  regiment  in  the  short  cam-
paign in  1861,  and  again  during  +^"  i"v««ion  ot


the  invasion


BURGES


BURGESS


451


Pennsylvania  in  18G3,  and  for  liis  services  he  re-
ceived the  brevet  of  brigadier-general.  In  1805  he
was  elected  brigadier-general  of  the  2d  brigade,  1st
division  of  the  State  national  guard.  He  was  twice
president  of  the  "  Liederkranz,"  a  German  musical
society  in  New  York,  and  was  a  director  of  the
Bowery  national  bank  and  German  savings  bank.

BURGES,  Tristam,  jurist,  b.  in  Rochester,
Mass.,  26  Feb.,  1770 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  13  Oct..
1853.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1796.  and,
while  teaching  school  in  Providence,  studied  law
with  Judge  Barnes,  in  1799  he  was  admitted  to
the  Rhode  Island  bar,  and  soon  rose  to  the  head  of
his  profession.  He  became  a  prominent  leader  of
the  federal  party,  and  in  1811  entered  the  state
legislature.  In  1815  he  was  appointed  chief  jus-
tice of  the  supreme  court  of  Rhode  Island,  and
from  1815  till  1828  was  professor  of  oratory  and
belles-lettres  in  Brown  university.  He  was  elected
in  1835  representative  in  congress,  and  served  con-
tinuously until  3  March,  1835.  In  1836  he  was  de-
feated as  whig  candidate  for  governor,  and  then
retired  from  public  life,  resuming  his  practice.
His  famous  retort  to  John  Randolph,  of  Virginia —
"Moral  monsters  can  not  propagate;  w^e  rejoice
that  the  father  of  lies  can  never  become  the  fa-
ther of  liars  " — made  while  a  member  of  congress,
is  historical.  He  published  orations  and  speeches,
and  also  wrote  the  "  Battle  of  Lake  Erie,  with  No-
tices of  Com.  Elliott's  Conduct"  (Philadelphia,
1839).  See  "Memoirs  of  Tristam  Burges,"  by  H.
L.  Bowen  (Providence,  1839).

BURGESS,  Alexander  Mackinnon,  Cana-
dian journalist,  b.  in  Strathspey,  Inverness-shire,
Scotland,  21  Oct.,  1850.  He  was  educated  at  the
University  of  Aberdeen,  emigrated  to  Canada  in
1871,  and  was  editor  and  chief  reporter  of  the  de-
bates of  the  Senate  and  House  of  Commons  in
1876.  In  1882  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the  de-
partment of  the  interior,  and  on  1  July,  1883,  was
created  deputy  minister  of  the  interior.  Mr.  Bur-
gess was  at  one  time  a  member  of  the  staff  of  the
Toronto  "Globe,"  became  editor  of  the  Ottawa
"  Times  "  on  1  July,  1874,  and  subsequently  owner
of  that  paper,  which  he  retained  until  1876.

BURGESS,  Ebenezer,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ware-
ham,  Mass.,  1  April,  1790 ;  d.  in  Dodham,  5
Dee.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1899,
and  was  a  tutor  there  from  1811  till  1813.  He
then  entered  Andover  theological  seminary,  was
graduated  there  in  1815,  and  was  professor  of
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Vermont  from  1815  till  1817.  He  was  the
agent  of  the  American  colonization  society  in
Africa  from  1817-18,  assisted  in  founding  the
colony  of  Liberia,  and  in  1818-19  was  the  society's
agent  in  the  United  States.  He  was  acting  pastor
of  the  first  Congregational  church  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  in  1820-'l,  was  ordained  its  pastor  in  March
of  the  latter  year,  and  remained  there  till  his  death.
He  published  "  The  Dedham  Pulpit "  (1846),  and
"The  Burgess  Genealogy  "  (1805).

BURGESS,  Ebenezer,  missionary,  b.  in  Graf-
ton, Vt,  25  June,  1805;  d.  in  Newton  Centre,
Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1831,  and  became  a  tutor  there  from  1833  till
1835.  lie  then  entered  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, was  graduated  in  1837,  and  taught  Hebrew
and  Greek  in  Union  theological  seminary.  New
York  city,  for  a  year.  After  another  year,  spent
at  Andover  in  advanced  study,  he  was  ordained  on
19  March,  1839,  and  went  as  a  missionary  to  the
Mahrattas,  in  western  India.  He  was  stationed  at
Ahmednuggertill  1851,  then  at  Satara,  and  in  1854
returned  to  the  United  States. He  was  acting  pas-


tor at  Centreville,  Mass.,  from  1857  till  1859,  at
Lanesville  from  1861  till  1863,  and  at  South
Franklin  from  1864  till  1867.  He  afterward  en-
gaged in  lecturing  and  literary  work  until  his
death.  He  had  nearly  completed  an  elaborate
work  on  the  antiquity  of  man,  on  which  he  had
been  engaged  since  his  return  from  India.

BURGESS,  Edward,  naval  architect,  b.  in
West  Sandwich,  Mass.,  30  June,  1848.  After
graduation  at  Harvard  in  1871,  he  became  secre-
tary of  the  Boston  society  of  natural  history,
edited  its  publications  for  several  years,  and  pub-
lished several  memoirs  on  anatomical  subjects.
From  1879  till  1883  he  was  instructor  in  ento-
mology in  Harvard.  He  travelled  in  Europe,  and,
in  an  amateur  way,  studied  the  principles  of  naval
architecture,  bringing  his  knowledge  and  judgment
to  the  practical  test  of  designing  and  building  ves-
sels for  his  own  use.  His  success  in  this  line  was
so  marked  that  when,  in  1883,  a  reverse  of  fortune
threw  him  upon  his  own  resources  for  a  livelihood,
he  naturally  turned  to  the  designing  of  sailing-
yachts.  Several  of  his  boats  won  fame  in  eastern
waters,  and  when,  in  1884,  it  became  necessary  to
build  a  large  sloop-yacht  to  represent  the  United
States  in  a  series  of  international  races,  he  was
selected  by  a  committee  of  Boston  gentlemen  to
draw  plans  for  a  suitable  vessel.  The  famous
sloop  "  Puritan  "  was  the  result,  aad  in  the  con-
test for  the  "  America's  "  cup  in  1885  she  defeated
all  competitors,  including  the  fine  English  cutter
"  Genesta,"  which  had  crossed  the  ocean  to  enter
the  contest.  This  was  a  remarkable  triumph  in
view  of  the  fact  that  it  was  the  first  attempt  of  an
American  designer  to  solve  certain  ship-building
problems  to  which  Englishmen  had  given  their  at-
tention for  a  score  of  years.  In  the  following  sea-
son Mr.  Burgess  brought  out  the  "  Mayflower,"  a
sloop  slightly  larger  than  the  "  Puritan,"  and  the
"  Sachem,"  a  large  schooner-yacht  that  has  shown
remarkable  sea-going  qualities.  During  the  season
of  1886  the  "Mayflower"  easily  defeated,  not  only
all  American  vessels  of  her  class,  but  distanced  the
English  cutter  "  Galatea  "  which  had  come  over  in
the  hope  of  redeeming  the  "Genesta's"  defeat  of
the  preceding  year.

BURGESS,  George,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  31  Oct.,  1809;  d.  at  sea,  near  Port  au
Prince,  W.  I.,  23  April,  1866.  His  father,  Thomas
Burgess,  who  died  in  1856,  was  for  many  years  a
judge  in  Rhode  Island.  He  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1826,  with  the  highest  honors,  and  spent
some  time  abroad  in  1831-'4,  of  which  an  interest-
ing journal  remains.  He  was  admitted  to  deacon's
orders,  by  Bishop  Griswold,  in  Providence,  10
June,  1834,  and  ordained  priest,  2  Nov.,  1834.  He
thereupon  became  rector  of  Christ  church,  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  was  married  in  October,  1846,  and  be-
came actively  engaged  in  literary  as  well  as  profes-
sional work.  He  was  elected  first  bishop  of  Maine,
early  in  October,  1847,  and  consecrated  in  Christ
church,  Hartford,  31  Oct.  On  removing  to  Maine
he  took  the  rectorship  of  the  church  in  Gardiner,
which  place  he  retained  until  his  death.  Bishop
Burgess  joined  the  Rev.  Dr.  Muhlenberg  in  what
is  known  as  the  "  Memorial  Movement "  in  1853.
He  was  active  in  parochial  as  well  as  episcopal  la-
bors, in  missions  of  the  church,  in  the  house  of
bishops,  and  as  a  teacher.  His  churchmanship
was  of  the  style  of  Muhlenberg,  Alonzo  Potter,  and
Bishop  Griswold.  sometimes  designated  as  high
church  evangelicals.  Bishop  Burgess  was  one  of  the
presenters  of  Bishop  G.  W.  Doane,  of  New  Jersey,
on  charges  affecting  that  prelate's  financial  integ-
rity. He  was  attacked  with  severe  ha^norrhage  in


452


BURGESS


BURGOYNE


July,  1865,  sailed  for  the  West  Indies  in  December,
and,  by  appointment  of  the  house  of  bishops,  visited
Hayti  in  the  interests  of  the  church.  He  published
"  The  Book  of  ]^salms,  translated  into  English
Verse  "  (New  York,  1840) ;  "  Strife  of  Brothers,"  a
poem  (1844) ;  "  Pages  from  the  Ecclesiastical  His-
tory of  New  England  between  1740  and  1840"
(Boston,  1847);  "The  Last  Enemy  "  (Philadelphia,
1850);  "Ternon  on  the  Christian  Life"  (1854);
besides  nnmerous  sermons,  charges,  etc.  After  his
death  a  volume  containing  his  "Poems"  was  pub-
lished, with  an  introduction  by  Arthur  Cleveland
Coxe  (1868). — His  brotiier,  Alexander,  P.  E.  bish-
op, b.  in  Providence,  R.  L,  31  Oct.,  1819.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1838,  and  at  the  general
theological  seminary.  New  York,  in  1841.  He  was
ordained  deacon  in  Providence,  3  Nov.,  1842,  and
priest,  1  Nov.,  1843.  While  in  deacon's  orders  he
had  charge  of  St.  Stephen's  church.  East  Haddam,
Conn.  In  1843  he  became  rector  of  St.  Mark's
church,  Augusta,  Me.,  which  place  he  held  until
Easter,  1854.  He  then  removed  to  Portland,  and
was  rector  of  St.  Luke's  church  from  1854  till  1867.
In  the  latter  year  he  became  rector  of  St.  John's
church,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  where  he  served  for  two
years.  He  then  accepted  the  rectorship  of  Christ
church,  Springfield,  Mass.,  which  he  held  until  his
elevation  to  the  episcopate.  Dr.  Burgess  was  a
deputy  to  the  general  convention  of  the  Episcopal
church  from  1844  till  1877,  and  represented  the
diocese  of  Maine,  Long  Island,  and  Massachusetts
during  that  time.  In  1877  he  was  president  of  the
house  of  deputies. After  his  brother's  death,  in

1866,  he  was  elected  by  the  clergy  of  Maine  to  be
the  bishop,  but  declined  to  allow  his  name  to  go
to  the  laity  for  confirmation.  He  also  served  on
standing  committees  of  the  three  dioceses  just
named.  When  the  new  diocese  of  Quincy,  111.,  was
formed,  he  was  chosen  to  be  its  first  bishop,  and
was  consecrated  in  Christ  church,  Springfield,
Mass.,  15  May,  1878.  Bishop  Burgess  has  pub-
lished a  memoir  of  his  brother,  the  first  bishop  of
Maine  (1869);  also  sermons,  addresses,  etc.,  with
Sunday-school  question  -  books,  and  carols  and
hymns;  and  has  been  a  contributor  to  periodical
church  literature.

BUEGESS,  John  William,  educator,  b.  in
Cornersville,  (jliles  co.,  Tenn.,  26  Aug.,  1844.  He
was  educated  at  Cumberland  university,  Lebanon,
Tenn.,  and  at  Amherst,  where  he  was  graduated  in

1867,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at
Springfield  in  1869.  The  same  year  he  was  called  to
the  professorship  of  English  literature  and  political
economy  in  Knox  college,  which  he  filled  for  two
years.  He  then  studied  public  law  and  political
science  for  two  years  at  Gottingen,  Leipsic,  and
Berlin,  and  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  be-
came professor  of  history  and  political  science  at
Amherst,  and  in  1876  of  history,  political  science,
and  international  law  in  Coluinbia  college,  New
York  city,  and  of  public  law  and  political  science
in  the  law  school,  the  title  of  which  chair  was
changed  in  1878  to  international  and  constitutional
law  and  political  science.  In  1880  he  became  also
professor  of  constitutional  and  international  his-
tory and  law  in  the  Columbia  college  school  of  po-
litical science.

BURGOA,  Francisco  (boor-go'-ah),  Mexican
monk,  b.  in  Oajaca  about  1605 ;  d.  in  Teozopotlan
in  1681.  He  was  a  professor  of  theology,  and  a
thorough  scholar  in  the  Mixteco  and  Zapoteco  lan-
guages. Burgoa  was  provincial  of  the  Dominican
order,  and  represented  it  at  a  general  chapter  held
in  Rome.  Among  his  works  are  "  Palestra  his-
torica,"  a  history  of  the  Dominican  province  of  Oa-


jaca ;  "  Descripcion  geografica  de  la  America  Sep-
tentrional y  de  la  JSueva  Iglesia  de  Occideute:
Situacion  Astronomica  de  la  Provincia  de  Santo
Domingo  de  Oajaca  " ;  and  an  "  Itinerario  de  Oa-
jaca a  Roma  y  de  Oajaca  a  Roma."

BURGOYNE,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  24  Feb.,
1723;  d.  in  London,  4  Aug.,  1792.  He  was  the
eldest  son  of  John  Burgoyne  and  Anna  Maria,
daughter  of  Charles  Burneston,  of  Hackney,  in
Middlesex.  The  popular  belief  that  he  was  a
natural  son  of  Lord  Bingley  is  pure  fiction,  and
had  its  rise  in  the  malicious  gossip  of  Horace
Walpole.  Burgoyne  was  educated  at  Westminster,
and  entered  the  army  at  an  early  age.  While  at
Preston  with  his  regiment,  he  eloped  with  Lady
Charlotte  Stanley,  daughter  of  the  eleventh  earl
of  Derby;  and  the  earl,  becoming  reconciled  to
the  marriage,  obtained  for  him  a  captaincy  in  the
11th  dragoons,  14  June,  1756.  He  was  in  the  at-
tack on  Cherbourg  in  1758,  and  also  in  the  abor-
tive attempt  on  St.  i\Ialo  the  same  year ;  was  ap-
pointed, 10  May,  1758,  captain-lieutenant  in  the
Coldstream  guards,  and  next  year  was  promoted
to  the  command  of  the  16th  dragoons,  called  sub-
sequently "  Burgoyne's  light-horse."  He  was  elect-
ed to  parliament  in  1762,  held  his  seat  in  that  body
continuously  until  his  death,  and  took  an  active
part  in  matters
relating  to  In-
dia, hence  in-
curring the  dis-
pleasure of  Ju-
nius, by  whom
he  was  severely
criticised.  He
was  made  ma-
jor-general, 25
May,  1772,  ap-
pointed to  a
command  in
America,  ar-
rived in  Bos-
ton, 25  May,
1775,  and  wit-
nessed the  bat-
tle of  Bunker
Hill,  of  which
he  gave  a  graph-
ic description
in  a  letter  to
his  brother-in-
law,  Lord  Stan-
ley. He  was  commissioned,  1  Jan.,  1776,  lieu-
tenant-general m  America  only,  and  took  part
in  the  operations  of  that  year  for  expelling  the
Americans  from  Canada;  but  in  November,  dis-
satisfied with  his  subordinate  position  under  Carle-
ton,  he  returned  to  England.  In  December  he
concerted  with  the  British  ministry  a  plan  for  the
campaign  of  1777.  A  large  force  under  his  com-
mand was  to  go  to  Albany  by  way  of  Lakes  Chain-
plain  and  George,  while  "^another  body,  under  Sir
Henry  Clinton,  advanced  up  the  Hudson.  Sinud-
taneously.  Col.  Barry  St.  Leger  was  to  make  a  di-
version, by  way  of  Oswego,  on  the  Mohawk  river.
In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  Burgoyne,  in  June,  be-
gan his  advance  with  one  of  the  best-equipped
armies  that  had  ever  left  the  shores  of  England.
Proceeding  up  Lake  Champlain,  he  easily  forced
the  evacuation  of  Crown  Point,  Ticonderoga,  and
Fort  Anne.  But,  instead  of  availing  hnnself  ol
the  water-carriage  of  Lake  George,  at  the  head  of
which  there  was  a  direct  road  to  Fort  Edward,  he
advanced  upon  that  work  by  land,  consummg
three  weeks  in  cutting  a  road  through  the  woods


y>^>t^ -JW-^j^^^^^vC^/


BURGOYNE


BURKE


453


and  building  bridges  over  swamps.  This  gave
time  for  Schuyler  to  gather  the  yeomanry  together,
and  for  Washington  to  re-enforce  that  general
with  troops,  under  Morgan,  from  the  southern  de-
partment. Burgoyne  also  lost  valuable  time  and
received  a  fatal  check  by  his  disastrous  attack  on
Bennington.  At  length,  finding  his  progress
stopped  by  the  intrenchments  of  Gates  at  Bemus's
heights,  nine  miles  south  of  Saratoga  (Schuyler-
ville),  he  endeavored  to  extricate  himself  from  his
perilous  position  by  fighting.  Two  battles  were
fought,  on  nearly  the  same  ground,  on  19  September
and  7  October.  The  first  was  indecisive ;  the  sec-
ond resulted  in  so  complete  a  rout  for  the  British
that,  leaving  his  sick  and  wounded  to  the  compas-
sion of  Gates,  Burgoyne  retreated  to  Saratoga.
Here,  finding  that  his  provisions  were  giving  out.
Stark  in  his  rear,  and  that  there  was  no  chance  of
escape,  he  capitulated  with  his  entire  army,  17  Oct.,
1777.  This  event  was  the  turning-point  in  the
American  revolution.  It  secured  the  French  alli-
ance, and  lifted  the  clouds  of  moral  and  financial
gloom  that  had  settled  upon  the  hearts  of  the  lead-
ers, even  the  hopeful  Washington.  Burgoyne,
until  his  unfortunate  campaign,  stood  very  high
in  his  profession.  He  had  made  a  brilliant  record
on  the  banks  of  the  Tagus  for  dash  under  that
master  in  the  art  of  war,  the  famous  Count
Schaumberg-Lippe.  He  also  added  to  a  prepos-
sessing exterior  the  polished  manners  and  keen
sagacity  of  a  courtier.  He  was  likewise  witty  and
j  brave.  But  he  was  hasty  and  self-willed.  Desirous
I  to  do  everything  himself,  he  rarely  consulted  with
others ;  yet  he  never  knew  how  to  keep  a  plan  se-
I  cret.  •  While  in  a  subordinate  position,  he  was
I  continually  carping  at  his  military  superiors,  yet,
1  when  given  a  separate  command,  he  was  guilty  of
the  same  faults  that  he  had  reprehended  in  others.
His  boastful  ways  drew  up  )n  him  the  nicknames
of  "  Sir  Jack  Brag  "  and  "  Chrononnotonthologos,"
a  character  in  a  burlesque  play  by  Henry  Carey.
Being  a  Sybarite,  he  often  neglected  the  duties  of  a
general,  and  while  he  was  enjoying  his  wines  and
choice  food,  his  army  suffered  the  keenest  want.
Early  in  1778  he  returned  to  P^ngland,  and  justly
threw  the  failure  of  the  expedition  upon  the  min-
istry, since,  in  arranging  the  campaign,  he  had  in-
sisted that  success  depended  upon  Howe's  co-opera-
tion. Had  he  been  properly  supported  he  would,
despite  mistakes,  have  reached  Albany,  as  Gates
would  not  have  been  at  Bemus's  heights  to  oppose
him.  On  his  arrival  in  England  he  was  received
very  coldly  by  the  court  and  people,  the  king  re-
fusing to  see  him.  Having  in  vain  demanded  a
court-martial,  he  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  hearing
on  the  floor  of  parliament;  and  in  1780  published
a  narrative  of  the  campaign  and  a  vindication  of
himself  in  a  work  entitled  "  A  State  of  the  Expe-
dition." Joining  the  opposition,  he  resigned,  in
1779,  all  his  offices.  Upon  a  change  in  the  minis-
try he  regained  somewhat  of  his  popularity,  and
in  1782  was  restored  to  his  rank  in  the  army  and
appointed  prize-councillor  and  commander-in-chief
in  Ireland.  In  1784  he  retired  from  public  life,
and,  possessing  considerable  literary  ability,  amused
himself  in  writing  numerous  comedies  and  poems,
which  were  published  (2  vols.,  1808).  He  was  one
of  the  managers  of  the  impeachment  of  Warren
Hastings,  but  did  not  live  to  see  the  result  of  that
trial.  By  his  wife  he  had  but  one  daughter,  who
died  in  childhood;  but  by  Miss  Susan  Caulfield,
after  his  wife's  death,  he  had  four  children,  of
whom  the  late  Sir  John  Burgoyne,  of  Crimean
fame,  was  the  eldest.  His  descendants  have  filled
many  honorable  positions  in  the  British  army  and


navy,  and  several  of  them  are  still  (1886)  living.
For  an  exhaustive  sketch  of  Burgoyne  and  an  an-
alysis of  his  campaigns,  see  "  Iladden's  Journal,"
edited  by  Gen.  Horatio  Rogers. — His  son.  Sir  John
Fox,  British  soldier,  b.  in  London,  24  July,  1782;
d.  7  Oct.,  1871.  He  was  educated  at  Eton  and
Woolwich,  and  entered  the  royal  engineers  as  sec-
ond lieutenant  in  1798.  He  acted  as  commanding
engineer  under  Gen.  Frazer  at  the  siege  of  Rosetta
and  the  assault  on  Alexandria,  Egypt,  in  1807:  un-
der Sir  John  Moore  in  his  Portuguese  campaign  in
1808,  and  in  the  peninsular  war.  He  served  dur-
ing the  war  between  the  United  States  and  Great
Britain  in  1812-'5,  and,  as  commanding  engineer
under  Gen.  Pakenham,  was  present  at  the  battle  of
New  Orleans,  8  Jan.,  1815,  and  also  at  the  capture
of  Fort  Bowers  (Mobile  Point)  on  11  February.  In
1845  he  was  appointed  inspector-general  of  fortifi-
cations. In  the  Crimean  war  he  rendered  distin-
guished services  at  the  battles  of  the  Alma,  Bala-
klava,  and  Inkerman,  and  at  the  siege  of  Sebasto-
pol.  On  his  recall  from  the  Crimea  he  received  a
baronetcy  and  was  made  a  general  and  resumed  his
position  at  the  war-oflice  as  inspector-general  of
fortifications,  retiring  in  1868  with  the  rank  of
field-marshal.  The  "  Military  Opinions  of  Sir  John
Fox  Burgoyne,"  edited  by  G.  Wrottesley,  was  pub-
lished in  London  in  1859.  He  was  also  the  author
of  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Blasting  and  Quarrying  of
Stone  "  (London,  1852).

BURK,  John  Daly,  historian,  b.  in  Ireland;
d.  near  Campbell's  Bridge,  Va.,  11  April,  1808.  He
was  of  the  same  family  as  Edmund  Burke,  the
orator.  While  in  Trinity  college,  Dul)lin,  he  pub-
lished articles  in  the  Dublin  "  Evening  Post,"  which
caused  his  expulsion  on  a  charge  of  deism  and
republicanism.  He  afterward  made  himself  ob-
noxious to  the  government,  and  fled  to  this  country
about  1796.  In  October  of  that  year  he  established
a  daily  paper  in  Boston,  called  the  "  Polar  Star,"
which  met  with  little  success,  and  was  discontinued
in  1797.  He  afterward  edited  another  paper  in
New  York  city,  where  he  was  arrested  under  the
sedition  law  for  publishing  a  libel.  He  then  re-
moved to  Petersburg,  V^a.,  and  devoted  himself  to
the  practice  of  law  and  to  literature.  He  was  killed
in  a  duel  with  Felix  Coquebert,  in  consequence  of
a  political  dispute.  Burk  was  at  one  time  master
of  ceremonies  at  the  Boston  theatre.  He  published
"  Bunker  Hill,"  a  tragedy ;  "  Bethlem  Gabor,"  an
historical  drama  (1803);  "History  of  the  Late  War
in  Ireland  "  (Philadelphia,  1799) ;  and  a  "  History  of
Virginia  from  its  First  Settlement  to  1804 ''  (8  vols.,
Petersburg,  1804).  An  additional  volume,  by  JMessrs.
Jones  and  Girardin,  was  published  in  1816.  Burk's
" Bunker  Hill"  was  for  some  time  performed  peri-
odically at  the  Boston  theatre,  to  please  patriotic
audiences.  It  was  hastily  written,  and  had  little
merit.  President  Adams  said  it  represented  War-
ren as  a  "  bully  and  a  blackguard." — Burk's  son,
John  Junius,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1800 ;  d.  in  Baton
Rouge,  La.,  17  July,  1866,  was  educated  at  William
and  Mary  college,  went  to  Louisiana,  where  he
studied  law,  and  was  for  many  years  a  prominent
lawyer  there,  and  judge  of  the  state  court.  See  a
meinoir  of  Burk,  by  Charles  Campbell  (Albany,  1868).

BURKE,  JEdanus,  jurist,  b.  in  Galwav,  Ireland,
16  June,  1743 ;  d.  in  Charleston.  S.  C,  30  March,  1802.
He  was  educated  as  a  priest  at  the  college  of  St.
Omer,  in  France,  visited  the  West  Indies,  and  came
thence  to  South  Carolina  near  the  beginning  of  the
revolution.  He  A'olunteered  in  the  patriot  army,
was  chosen  a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  in
1778,  and,  when  the  British  overran  that  part  of
the  country,  left  the  bench  and  again  joined  the


454


BURKE


BURKE


army.  When  the  courts  were  re-establislied,  he  re-
sumed his  office,  and  in  1785  was  appointed  one  of
three  commissioners  to  form  a  digest  of  the  state
law.  He  was  outspoken  in  the  state  convention
against  the  federal  constitution,  because  he  feared
consolidated  power,  but  after  its  adoption  was
elected  to  the  1st  congress.  He  served  from  4
March,  1789,  until  he  resigned  in  1791,  the  South
Carolina  legislature  having  passed  a  law  prohibit-
ing any  state  judge  from  leaving  the  state.  Judge
Burke  was  for  several  years  a  member  of  the  as-
sembly, and  just  before  his  death  became  chancellor
of  the  state.  He  published  a  pamphlet  against  the
Society  of  the  Cincinnati,  which  became  famous,
and  caused  that  body  to  abandon  some  of  the
aristocratic  provisions  formerly  in  its  constitution.
The  pamphlet  was  translated  into  French  by  Mi-
rabeau,  and  used  by  him  in  the  assembly.  Judge
Burke  had  a  plentiful  fund  of  Irish  wit,  and  many
stories  are  told  of  him ;  but,  though  eccentric,  he
was  an  upright  and  earnest  republican.

BURKE,  Edmund,  English  statesman,  b.  in
Dublin,  1  Jan.,  1730;  d.  in  Beaconsfield,  England,
9  July,  1797.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Dublin  attor-
ney, was  graduated  at  Trinity  college  in  1748,  stud-
ied law,  and,  going  to  London,  wrote  political  ar-
ticles for  newspapers  there.  In  1755  he  was  offered
a  government  place  in  America,  and  was  anxious
to  take  it,  but  was  deterred  by  his  father's  opposi-
tion. He  published  in  1756  his  "  Vindication  of
Natural  Society  "  and  the  essay  on  "  The  Sublime
and  Beautiful,"  in  1757  "An  Account  of  the
European  Settlements  in  America,"  and  in  1758-'9
established,  with  Dodsley,  ''  The  Annual  Register."
In  1701-'5  he  was  the  friend  and  adviser  of  William
Gerard  Hamilton,  secretary  to  the  lord-lieutenant
of  Ireland,  and  in  1765-'6  was  secretary  to  the
prime-minister,  Rockingliam,  and  entered  parlia-
ment 14  Jan.,  1706.  He  took  an  active  part  in  the
discussion  of  American  questions,  and  proved  him-
self an  able  and  eloquent  speaker.  His  thorough
acquaintance  with  American  affairs  was  ^awarded,
in  November,  1771,  by  the  appointment  of  agent
for  the  colony  of  New  York.  On  19  April,  1774,
he  made  a  speech  on  American  taxation,  considered
by  many  as  the  greatest  effort  of  oratory  ever
heard  in  the  house  of  commons.  His  speech  of  22
March,  1775,  recommending  conciliatory  measures
toward  the  colonies,  also  excited  general  admira-
tion. His  earnestness  in  espousing  the  cause  of
the  colonists  displeased  his  constituents,  and  he  de-
fended his  course  in  two  able  '•  Letters  to  Gentle-
men of  Bristol."  At  the  opening  of  the  November
session  of  parliament  in  1781,  Burke  ridiculed  the
king's  speech,  which,  in  spite  of  Cornwallis's  sur-
render, insisted  on  the  rights  of  the  crown  in  Amer-
ica. He  compared  the  ministry  to  men  who  Avould
shear  a  wolf,  and  in  the  next  year  the  combined
attacks  of  Fox  and  himself  on  the  conduct  of  the
war,  forced  North  to  retire.  During  Rockingham's
brief  administration  in  1782,  Burke  was  a  privy
councillor  and  paymaster  of  the  forces,  a  place  he
also  held  under  the  coalition  ministry  in  1783.  He
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  affairs  of  India,  and,
in  January,  1786,  began  the  prosecution  of  Warren
Hastings.  His  speech  on  the  opening  of  Hastings's
trial,  10  Feb.,  1788,  was  worthy  of  the  occasion  and
of  his  great  reputation.  Though  the  impeachment
of  Hastings  was  not  carried,  the  herculean  labors
of  Burke  in  behalf  of  India  were  not  fruitless.  In
November,  1790,  he  published  his  great  work  in
opposition  to  the  French  revolution,  entitled  "  Re-
flections on  the  Revolution  in  France."  On  6  May,
1791,  an  open  rupture  took  place  between  Burke
and  Fox,  who  accused  him  of abandoning  the


principles  of  his  party.  Burke  vindicated  himself
in  his  "  Appeal  from  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs."
In  1796  he  wrote  his  "  Letter  to  a  Noble  Lord,"  one
of  the  most  successful  and  popular  of  all  his  pro-
ductions. The  best  edition  of  his  works  is  that
edited  by  George  Nichols  (12  vols,,  Boston,  1865-' 7).
BURKE,  Edmund,  lawver,  b.  in  Westminster"
Vt,  23  Jan.,  1809 ; d.  in  Newport,  N.  H.,  25  Jan.'

1882.  He  was  educated  by  private  tutors,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1829,  beginning
practice  in  Newport,  N.  H,,  in  1833.  He  established
the  "  New  Hampshire  Argus  "  in  1835.  and  edited
it  for  many  years.  He  was  adjutant  in  the  slate
militia  in  1837,  and  brigade  inspector  in  1838 ;  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat,  and  served  three
successive  terms,  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3  March,
1845.  President  Polk  appointed  him  commissioner
of  patents  in  1846,  and  he  retained  the  office  till
1850,  after  which  he  resumed  practice  in  Newpoit,
N.  H.,  having  also  an  office  in  Boston.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  union  convention  of
1866.  He  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  The  Pro-
tective System  Considered  "  (1846).

BURKE,  John  Edmund,  clergyman,  b.  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1852.  He  attended  St.
Francis  Xavier's  college  in  New  York,  and  studied
for  the  priesthood  at  Mount  St.  Mary's  seminary,
Emmetsburg,  Md.,  and  at  the  American  college  in
Rotne,  where  he  was  ordained  a  priest  on  4  Aug.,
1878.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  be-
came pastor  of  the  church  of  the  Epiphany,  New
York.  Becoming  deeply  interested  in  the  spiritual
condition  of  the  coloreii  Roman  Catholics  of  that
city,  and  i-ealizing  their  great  need  of  church  accom-
modation, he,  in  1878,  voluntarily  resigned  his  pas-
toral charge  to  devote  himself  to  supplying  this
want  of  the  colored  Roman  Catholics. On  4  Oct.,

1883,  the  property  of  the  3d  Universalist  church
society,  on  the  southeast  corner  of  Bleecker  and
Downing  streets,  was  purchased  by  James  Clyne
for  Father  Richard  L.  Burtsell,  of  the  church  of  the
Epiphany,  and  on  18  November  of  that  year  the
church  was  re-dedicated  as  the  church  of  St.  Bene-
dict the  Moor,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Burke  being  appointed
its  pastor.  This  is  the  first  church  for  colored
Roman  Catholics  in  the  United  States.

BURKE,  Stevenson,  lawyer,  b.  in  St.  Law-
rence CO.,  N.  Y.,  26  Nov.,  1826'.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Elyria,  Ohio,  in  1848,  was  judge  of
common  pleas  iii  Lorain  co.  from  1862  till  1869,
and  subsequently  practised  law  in  Cleveland.  He
was  attorney  for  the  Erie  railway  company  in  the
proceedings  connected  with  the  re-organization  of
the  Atlantic  and  Great  Western  railroad,  and  acted
with  Chief-Justice  Waite  as  arbitrator  in  the  case.
He  was  counsel  for  some  of  the  Oberlin  rescuers,
who  forcibly  released  an  escaped  slave  that  had
been  seized  by  sheriff's  officers  from  Kentucky.
Despairing  of  an  acquittal  of  his  clients  in  Cleve-
land, he  secured  the  arrest  of  the  Kentuckians  and
their  indictment  for  kidnapping  in  Lorain  co.,  a
proceeding  that  impelled  the  opposite  counsel  to
agree  to  a  discontinuance  of  the  cases  on  both
sides.  In  the  Butzman  and  Mueller  case  in  1884
he  delivered  a  notable  argument  against  the  con-
stitutionality of  the  Scolt'liquor  law.  He  was  the
agent  employed  by  the  managers  of  the  New  York
Central  railroad  in  the  purchase  of  the  New  York,
Chicago,  and  St.  Louis,  known  as  the  "Nickel
Plate  "  railroad,  and  has  been  the  regular  attorney
of  several  railroad  corporations  and  taken  an  active
part  in  the  management  of  railroads,  becoming
vice-president  of  the  Cleveland,  Columbus,  Cin-
cinnati, and  Indianapolis,  and  the  Indianapolis
and  St.  Louis  railroads,  and  president  of  the  Cleve-


BURKE


BURLEY


455


land  and  Mahoninp:  Valley  railroad.  He  is  also
interested  in  the  Hocking  valley  coal-lands,  and
purchased  for  their  owners  the  three  railroads  car-
rying coal  from  that  field  in  June,  1881,  and  in  1885
the  Ohio  Central  railroad.

BL'RKE,  Thomas,  governor  of  North  Carolina,
b.  in  Ireland  about  1747 ;  d.  in  Hillsborough,  N.  C,
2  Dec,  1788.  He  left  Ireland  about  17G4,  and  lived
for  some  years  in  Accomac  co.,  Va.,  engaged  in  the
study  and  practice  of  medicine.  He  next  studied
law,  began  practice  in  Norfolk,  and  in  1774  re-
moved to  Hillsborough,  N.  C.  Of  a  bold  and  im-
petuous temper,  a  ready  writer  and  speaker,  he  be-
came one  of  the  leading  spirits  in  the  revolutionary
contest.  While  he  was  in  Virginia,  his  writings  in
opposition  to  the  stamp-act  had  brought  him  into
notice ;  and  he  had  a  large  share  in  the  formation
of  the  constitution  of  North  Carolina.  He  was  a
member  of  the  provincial  congress  at  Halifax  in
1776,  and  a  volunteer  at  the  battle  of  Brandy  wine,
lie  was  a  member  of  congress  from  December,  1776,
until  1781,  when  he  was  chosen  first  governor  of
North  Carolina  under  the  new  constitution.  In
September  of  that  year  he  was  surprised  and  seized
by  the  tories,  and  retained  at  James  island,  S.  C,
as  a  prisoner  on  parole.  Obnoxious  to  the  tories
from  his  previous  course,  he  was  in  daily  apprehen-
sion of  assassination,  to  escape  which,  after  endeav-
oring unsuccessfully  to  obtain  an  exchange  or  a
parole  to  some  other  state,  he  effected  his  escape  in
the  night  of  16  Jan.,  1782,  after  an  imprisonment
of  four  months.  In  a  letter  to  Gen.  Leslie,  Burke
gave  his  reasons  for  withdrawing,  and  said  that  he
still  considered  himself  subject  to  the  disposal  of
the  British  authorities.  He  was  regularly  ex-
changed soon  afterward,  and  resumed  his  duties  as
governor,  but  was  defeated  the  following  year,
when  a  candidate  for  re-election,  it  being  urged
that  he  had  violated  his  parole.

BURLEIGH,  William  Henry,  journalist,  b.
in  Woodstock,  Conn.,  2  Feb.,  1812 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  18  March,  1871.  He  was  a  lineal  de-
scendant, on  his  mother's  side,  of  Gov.  Bradford.
His  father,  a  graduate  of  Yale  in  1803,  had  been  a
popular  and  successful  teacher,  but  in  1827  became
totally  blind.  William,  who  had  been  bred  on  a
farm  and  educated  principally  by  his  father,  was
now  apprenticed  to  a  clothier  and  afterward  to  a
village  printer.  He  contributed  to  the  columns  of
the  newspaper  it  was  a  part  of  his  duty  to  print,
not  in  written  communications,  but  by  setting  up
his  articles  without  the  intervention  of  writing.
From  the  autumn  of  1832  till  1835  he  was  almost
constantly  engaged  in  editorial  duties  and  in  charge
of  papers  advocating  one  or  all  of  the  great  reforms
then  agitating  the  public  mind — anti-slavery,  tem-
perance, and  peace.  Though  naturally  one  of  the
most  genial  and  amiable  of  men,  Mr.  Burleigh  was
stern  in  his  adherence  to  principle.  In  1836  he
added  to  his  editorial  duties  the  labor  of  lecturing
in  behalf  of  the  American  anti-slavery  society,  and
defending  their  views.  For  a  time  he  had  charge
of  the  "  Literary  Journal "  in  Schenectady,  then  be-
came in  1837  editor  of  the  Pittsburg  "  Temperance
Banner,"  afterward  called  the  "  Christian  Witness,"
the  organ  of  the  western  Pennsylvania  anti-slavery
society.  In  1843  he  was  invited*^  to  Hartford  by  the
executive  committee  of  the  Connecticut  anti-slavery
society,  and  took  charge  of  its  organ,  the  "  Chris-
tian Freeman,"  which  soon  became  the  "  Charter
Oak,"  a  vigorously  edited  and  brilliant  defender  of
the  anti-slavery  and  temperance  reforms.  Mr.  Bur-
leigh afterward  took  charge  of  the  Washington
"Banner."  He  struck  trenchant  blows  at  popular
vices  and  political  depravity  in  his  papers,  and  re-


ceived his  reward  more  than  once  in  mob  violence.
But  while  he  deemed  this  heroic  defence  of  un-
popular doctrines  a  duty,  and  maintained  it  with
unfaltering  heart,  he  disliked  controversy,  and,
whenever  he  could  command  the  means  for  it,  he
would  establish  a  purely  literary  paper,  which,
though  generally  short-lived,  always  contained
gems  of  poetry  and  prose  from  his  prolific  pen,  and
avoided  controversial  topics.  In  1850  he  disposed
of  the  "  Charter  Oak "  to  the  free-soilers,  the  nu-
cleus of  the  republican  party,  and  removed  to  Syra-
cuse, and  subsequently  to  Albany,  N.  Y.,  to  be  the
general  agent  and  lecturer  of  the  New  York  state
temperance  society  and  editor  of  the  "  Prohibition-
ist." When  in  1855  Gov.  Clark  offered  him,  un-
solicited, the  place  of  harbor-master  of  the  port  of
New  York,  he  accepted  it  and  removed  to  Brook-
lyn. For  the  next  fifteen  years  he  was  either  har-
bor-master or  port-warden,  but  foimd  time  for
much  literary  and  some  political  labor.  In  the
political  campaigns  he  was  in  demand  as  a  speaker,
and  his  thonmgh  knowledge  of  all  the  questions
before  the  people,  together  with  his  eloquence,
made  him  popular.  He  was  also  in  request  as  a
lyceuin  lecturer,  especially  on  anti-slavery  sub-
jects. A  collection  of  his  poems  was  published  in
1841,  followed  by  enlarged  editions  in  1845  and
1850.  A  part  of  these  were  after  his  death  pub-
lished, with  a  memoir  by  his  widow  (Boston,  1871).
— His  wife,  Celia,  reformer,  b.  in  Cazenovia,  N.
Y.,  in  1825;  d.  in  Syracuse,  26  July,  1875.  She
was  a  teacher,  and  in  1844  married  C.  B.  Kellum
and  removed  with  him  to  Cincinnati.  She  was
divorced  from  him.  and  in  1851  married  Charles
Chauncy  Burr ;  was  again  divorced,  and  in  1865
married  Mr.  Burleigh.  She  was  the  first  president
of  the  Woman's  club,  Brooklyn,  and  took  an  active
part  in  advocating  woman  suffrage  and  other  re-
form movements.  After  Mr.  Burleigh's  death  she
prepared  herself  for  the  ministry,  and  was  pastor
of  a  Unitarian  church  in  Brooklyn,  Conn.,  until
1873 ;  but  failing  health  compelled  her  to  resign  in
October,  1871,  when  she  went  to  the  water-cure  es-
tablishment of  Dr.  Jackson  in  Danville,  N.  Y.
Mrs.  Burleigh  had  a  wide  reputation  as  an  able
writer  and  an  eloquent  speaker. — His  brother,
Charles  C,  abolitionist,  b.  in  Plainfield,  Conn.,
10  Nov..  1810 ;  d.  in  Florence,  Mass.,  14  June,  1878.
He  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Windham  co..  Conn.,  but  soon  became  interested  in
the  anti-slavery  movement,  in  which  he  attained
high  distinction  as  an  orator  and  an  earnest  worker.
He,  with  his  brother,  edited  an  abolitionist  news-
paper called  "  The  Unionist,"  the  publisher  being
Miss  Prudence  Crandall  {q.  v.),  who  was  indicted
for  keeping  a  colored  school  in  Connecticut.  He
rendered  efficient  service  to  Mr.  Garrison  in  Boston
in  protecting  him  from  the  violence  of  the  mob  in
1835,  and  was  one  of  the  speakers  in  Pennsylva-
nia hall,  in  Philadelphia,  when  that  building  was
burned  by  a  mob  in  1838.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest
advocates  of  women's  rights  and  of  liberalism  in  re-
ligion, as  he  was  also  of  temperance  principles,  in
behalf  of  which  he  spoke  frequently.  For  fifteen
years  he  was  resident  speaker  of  the  free  Congrega-
tional society  in  Florence,  Mass.,  and  for  one  year
preached  in  Bloomington,  111.  He  was  the  author  of
"Thoughts  on  the  Death  Penalty"  (1845),  and  a
tract  on  the  Sabbath,  which  advanced  anti-Sabba-
tarian views.

BURLEY,  Bennett  G.,  Confederate  naval  offi-
cer. On  19  Sept.,  1864,  assisted  by  Capt.  Bell  and
others,  he  captured  the  steamer  "  Philo  Parsons,"
plying  between  Detroit  and  Sandusky,  when  about
two  miles  from  Kelly's  island,  off  the  Ohio  coast.


456


BURLING


BURLINGAME


Subsequently  another  American  steamer,  the
"  Island  Queen."  was  captured  by  Burley  and  his
party,  and  after  her  passengers,  including  twenty-
five  LJ.  S.  soldiers,  had  been  made  prisoners  and
transferred  to  the  "  Philo  Parsons,'^  the  "  Island
Queen  "  was  sent  adrift.  The  "  Philo  Parsons  "  was
afterward  taken  to  Sandwich,  on  the  Canadian
shore,  and  left  there.  Burley  was  arrested,  and  the
evidence  produced  at  the  extradition  trial  at  To-
ronto in  his  case  rendered  it  manifest  that  he  was
acting  under  the  authority  of  the  southern  confed-
eracy in  the  capture  of  the  steamers ;  that  the  im-
mediate object  was  the  capture  of  the  U.  S.  war-
vessel  "  Michigan,"  guarding  Johnson's  island  :  and
the  ultimate  object,  the  taking  of  Johnson's  island
and  the  liberation  of  the  8,000  Confederate  soldiers
imprisoned  there.  That  all  this  was  not  attempted
by  Burley  and  his  comrades  was  probably  owing
to  the  fact  of  his  discovery  of  the  hazardous  and
seemingly  impossible  character  of  the  undertaking,
after  he  had  captured  the  "  Philo  Parsons "  and
the  "  Island  Queen."  After  some  diplomatic  corre-
spondence between  the  British  government  and
that  of  the  United  States,  Barley  was  surrendered
to  the  authorities  of  the  latter,  under  the  pro-
visions of  the  extradition  treaty,  the  plea  of  "  bel-
ligerent rights"  in  his  behalf  by  Jefferson  Davis
not  being  regarded  by  the  court  as  sufficient  to  free
him  from  the  crime  of  robbery  charged  against
him  in  the  indictment.

BURLING,  Gilbert,  painter,  b.  in  1843 ;  d.  in
1875. At  the  beginning  of  his  artistic  career  he

f)ainted  almost  exclusively  in  oil-colors;  but  his
ater  and  best  work  is  in  water-colors,  which  expe-
rience proved  to  be  a  better  medium  for  his  style.
He  excelled  in  studies  of  game-birds,  and  contrib-
uted to  the  illustrated  publications  several  articles
on  this  subject,  accompanied  with  his  own  draw-
ings. He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  American
society  of  painters  in  water-colors,  and  was  always
represented  in  their  exhibitions.  His  last,  and
perhaps  his  best,  works  were  exhibited  in  the  year
of  his  death.  They  were  entitled  "  Normandy
Sketches,"  "  Beach  below  Easthampton,"  and  "  A
Canadian  Lake."

BURLINGAME,  Anson,  diplomatist,  b.  in  New
Berlin,  Chenango  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Nov.,  1820 ;  d.  in  St.
Petersburg,  Russia,  23  Feb.,  1870.  He  was  the  de-
scendant of  a  family  who  were  among  the  early  set-
tlers of  Rhode
Island.  His  fa-
ther, a  farmer,
removed,  when
Anson  was  three
years  old,  to  a
farm  in  Seneca
CO.,  Ohio,  where
they  liveil  for
ten  years,  and  in
1833  again  re-
moved to  De-
troit, and  after
two  years  more
to  a  farm  at
Branch,  Mich.
In  1837  Anson
was  admitted  to
the  University
of  Michigan,  and
six  years  later
went  to  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  and  entered  the  law-school  of  Har-
vard university,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1846.
He  began  the  practice  of  the  law  in  Boston,  and  a
yeav  or  two  later  became  an  active  member  and  a


t***v^


popular  orator  of  the  free-soil  party,  then  recently
formed. In  the  political  campaign  of  1848  he  ac-
quired a  wide  reputation  as  a  public  speaker  in  be-
half of  the  election  of  Van  Buren  and  Adams. In
1849-'50 he  visited Europe. In 1852 he  was
elected  to  the  Massachusetts  senate,  and  in  1853  he
served  as  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional  con-
vention, to  which  he  was  elected  by  the  town  of
Northborough,  though  he  resided  in  Cambridge.
He  joined  the  American  party  on  its  formation  in
1854,  and  in  that  year  was  elected  by  it  to  the  34th
congress. In  the  following  year  he  co-operated  in
the  formation  of  the  republican  party,  to  which  lie
ever  afterward  steadily  adhered. In  congress  he
bore  himself  with  courage  and  address,  and  was
recognized  as  one  of  the  ablest  debaters  on  the
anti-slavery side of  the house. For the  severe
terms  in  which  he  denounced  the  assault  commit-
ted by  Preston  S.  Brooks  upon  Senator  Sumner,  in
1856,  he  was  challenged  by  Brooks. He  promptly
accepted  the  challenge,  and  named  rifles  as  the
weapons, and Navy island, just  above Niagara
Falls,  as  the  place.  '  To  the  latter  proposition  Mr.
Brooks  demurred,  alleging  that,  in  order  to  meet
his  opponent  in  Canada,  in  the  then  excited  state
of  public  feeling,  he  would  have  to  expose  himself
to popular violence in passing through "the
enemy's  country,"  as  he  called  the  northern  states.
The  matter  fell  through,  but  the  manner  in  which
Mr. Burlingame had conducted  himself  greatly
raised  him  in  the  estimation  of  his  friends  and  of
his  party  ;  and  on  his  return  to  Boston,  at  the  end
of  his  term,  he  was  received  with  distinguished
honors. He  was  re-elected  to  the  3oth  and  36th
congresses; but failing, after  an animated  and
close  contest,  to  be  returned  to  the  37th,  his  legis-
lative career  ended  in  March,  1861. He  was  im-
mediately appointed  by  President  Lincoln  minis-
ter to  Austria ;  but  that  government  declined  to
receive,  in  a  diplomatic  capacity,  a  man  who  had
spoken  often  and  eloquently  in  favor  of  Hungarian
independence, and had moved in congress  the
recognition  of  Sardinia  as  a  first-class  power. He
was  then  sent  as  minister  to  China. In  18G5  he
returned  to  the  United  States  with  the  intention
of  resigning  his  office ;  but  the  secretary  of  state
urged  him  to  resume  his  functions  for  the  pur-
pose of  carrying  out  important  projects  and  ne-
gotiations that he had initiated. To  this he
finally  consented. When,  in  1867,  he  announced
his intention of returning  home,  Prince  Kung,
regent of  the empire, offered to appoint him
special  envoy  to  the  United  States  and  the  great
European powers, for  the purpose  of framing
treaties of  amity  with  those  nations— an  honor
never  before  conferred  on  a  foreigner. This  place
Mr.  Burlingame  accepted,  and,  at  the  head  of  a
numerous  mission,  he  arrived  in  the  United  States
in  March,  1868. On  28  Julv  supplementary  arti-
cles to  the  treaty  of  1858  were  signed  at  Washington,
and  soon  afterward  ratified  by  the  Chinese  govern-
ment. These  articles,  afterward  known  as  "The
Burlingame  Treaty,"  marked  the  first  official  ac-
ceptance by  China  of the principles  of  interna-
tional law, and provided, in general,  that  the
privileges  enjoyed  bv  western  nations  under  that
law— the  right  of  eminent  domain,  the  right  of  ap-
pointing consuls  at  the  ports  of  the  United  States,
and  the  power  of  the  government  to  grantor  with-
hold commercial  privileges  and  immunities  at  their
own discretion,  subject  to  treatv— should  be  se-
cured to  China ;  that  nation  undertaking  to  ob-
serve the  corresponding  obligations  prescribed  by
international  law  toward  other  peoples. Special
provisions  also  stipulated  for  entire  liberty  of  con-


BURMEISTER


BURNET


457


science  and  worship  for  Americans  in  China,  and
Chinese  in  America ;  for  joint  efforts  against  the
cooly  trade;  for  the  enjoyment  by  Chinese  in
America  and  Americans  in  China  of  all  rights  in
respect  to  travel  and  residence  accorded  to  citizens
of  the  most  favored  nation  ;  for  similar  reciprocal
rights  in  the  matter  of  the  public  educational  in-
stTtutions  of  the  two  countries,  and  for  the  right  of
establishing  schools  by  citizens  of  either  country
in  the  other.  The  concluding  article  disclaims,  on
the  part  of  the  United  States,  the  right  of  inter-
ference with  the  domestic  administration  of  China
in  the  matter  of  railroads,  telegraphs,  and  internal
improvements,  but  agrees  that  the  IJnited  States
will  furnish  assistance  in  these  points  on  proper
conditions,  when  requested  by  the  Chinese  govern-
ment. From  America  Mr.  Burlingame  proceeded
in  the  latter  part  of  1868  to  England,  and  thence
to  France  (1869),  Denmark,  Sweden,  Holland,  and
Prussia,  in  all  of  which  countries  he  was  favorably
received,  and  in  all  of  which,  but  France,  to  which
he  intended  returning,  he  negotiated  important
treaties  or  articles  of  agreement.  He  reached  St.
Petersburg  early  in  1870,  and  had  just  entered
upon  the  business  of  his  mission  when  he  died  of
pneumonia,  after  an  illness  of  only  a  few  days. —
His  son,  Edward  Livermore,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
30  May,  1848,  entered  Harvard,  but  left  before
graduation,  accompanying  his  father  to  China  as
his  private  secretary.  He  studied  at  Heidelberg,
Germany,  in  1807-9,  taking  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.,
and  afterward  at  Berlin.  He  travelled  extensively
in  Japan  and  China  in  1860,  and  afterward  in
Europe.  He  was  on  the  editorial  staff  of  the  New
York  "  Tribune  "  in  1871,  and  on  that  for  the  re-
vision of  the  "American  Cyclopaedia"  in  1872-*6,
has  been  a  contributor  to  periodical  literature,
and  associated  in  the  preparation  of  several  his-
tories and  other  works.  In  1879  he  became  con-
nected editorially  with  the  publishing-house  of
Charles  Scribner's  Sons,  New  York,  and  in  1886  was
appointed  editor  of  its  new  magazine.  He  has
translated  and  edited  '*  Art  Life  and  Theories  of
Richard  Wagner  "  (New  York,  1875).

BURMEISTER,  Hermann,  zoologist,  b.  in
Stralsund,  Germany,  15  Jan.,  1807.  He  became
professor  of  zoology  at  Halle  in  1842;  in  1848,  dur-
ing the  revolutionary  excitement,  he  was  sent  by  the
city  of  Halle  as  deputy  to  the  national  assembly,
and  subsequently  by  the  town  of  Leibnitz  to  the
first  Prussian  chamber.  At  the  close  of  the  session
he  travelled  for  two  years  in  Brazil,  and  in  1861  was
appointed  director  of  the  Museum  of  natural  his-
tory at  Buenos  Ayres.  He  was  also  at  the  head  of
the  academy  of  sciences,  formed  from  the  scientific
faculty  of  the  national  university  of  Cordoba,  Ar-
gentine Republic.  Among  his  works  are  a  "Trea-
tise on  Natural  History  "  (Halle,  1830) ;  "  Manual
of  Entomology"  (4  vols.,  1832-4);  "Natural  His-
tory of  the  Calandra  Species"  (1837);  "The  His-
tory of  Creation  "  (Leipsic,  1843) ;  "  Geological
Pictures  of  the  Historv  of  the  Earth  and  its  In-
habitants" (1851);  and"'  "  The  Animals  of  Brazil"
(3  vols.,  1854-'6).  Dr.  Burmeister  has  also  pub-
lished the  "  Anales  del  Museo  Publico,"  a  scientific
periodical  which  contained  detailed  descriptions  of
many  new  species,  the  originals  of  which  are  in  the
museum  at  Buenos  Ayres.  The  huge  edentates
and  other  mammalia,  which  have  rendered  that
museum,  which  was  established  by  him,  so  famous,
are  described  and  pictured  in  this  work.

BURNABY,  Andrew,  English  clergyman,  b.  in
Asfordby,  Leicestershire,  in  1732 ;  d.  9  M^irch,  1812.
He  was  educated  at  Westminster  and  Cambridge,
receiving  the  degree  of  M.  A.  in  1757. He  pub-


lished, in  1776,  "Travels  through  the  Middle  Set-
tlements of  North  America  in  1759-60,"  and  in
1786  was  made  archdeacon  of  Leicester.

BURNAP,  George  Washington,  clergyman,  b.
in  Merrimack,  N.  H.,  30  Nov.;  1802;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  8  Sept.,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1824,  and  on  23  April,  1828,  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  1st  Congregational  church  of
Baltimore.  Among  his  published  works  are  "  Lec-
tures on  the  Doctrines  of  Controversy  between  LTni-
tarians  and  other  Denominations  of  Christians"
(1835);  "Lectures  to  Young  Men"  (Baltimore,
1840) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Sphere  and  Duty  of  Wom-
an "  (1840) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  History  of'Christian-
ity"  (1842):  "Biography  of  Henry  A.  Ingalls"
(1845) ;  "  Expository  Lectures  on  the  Principal
Texts  which  relate  to  the  Doctrine  of  the  Trinity  "
(1845);  "Miscellaneous  Writings"  (Philadelphia);
"  Popular  Objections  to  Unitarian  Christianity  Con-
sidered and  Answered  "  (Boston,  1848) ;  "  What  is
Unitarianism?"  (1848);  "Lectures  on  Doctrines  of
Christianity  "  (1848) ;  "  Discourses  on  the  Rectitude
of  Human  Nature  "  (1850) ;  "  Christianity,  its  Es-
sence and  Evidence^  or  an  Analysis  of  the  New
Testament,"  a  compendious  and  lucid  statement
of  the  biblical  theology  of  the  author's  particular
school  of  Unitarianism  (1855).

BURNET,  Robert,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Ladykirk,  Berwickshire,  Scotland,  in  June,  1823.
He  was  educated  at  Edinburgh  and  Aberdeen,  and
received  ordination  as  a  Presbyterian  minister  in
1852.  Soon  afterward  he  went  to  Canada  as  a  mis-
sionary, was  stationed  at  Hamilton,  and  called  to
the  pastorate  of  St.  Andrew's  church  there.  Here
he  remained  for  twenty-five  years,  and  established
a  flourishing  congregation.  In  1876  he  took  charge
of  St.  Stephen's  church,  London,  and  remained
in  connection  with  it  for  three  years,  when  he
accepted  a  call  from  the  Pictou,  N.  S.,  Presbyte-
rian church.  As  a  preacher,  Mr.  Burnet  is  dis-
tinguished for  his  clear,  well-arranged  sermons,
which  are  often  eloquent  in  the  highest  degree,
and  always  delivered  extemporaneously.  He  is
also  well  known  in  a  widely  different  sphere  of  ac-
tion, being  regarded  as  an  authority  on  the  subjects
of  scientific  agriculture  and  fruit-culture.  While
a  resident  of  Ontario  he  was  a  member  of  the  Do-
minion and  Provincial  boards  of  agriculture,  of  the
Entomological  society,  and  the  Fruit-growers'  asso--
elation.  Papers  by  him  on  scientific  subjects  have
been  published  in  the  "  Transactions "  of  the
American  pomological  society.

BURNET,  William,  colonial  governor,  b.  at
the  Hague,  Holland,  in  March,  1088 ;  d.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  7  Sept.,  1728.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of
Bishop  Burnet,  and  had  for  his  godfather  William
of  Orange,  afterward  king  of  England.  Having
lost  his  fortune  by  speculation  in  the  shares  of
Law's  South  Sea  company,  he  obtained  the  ap-
pointment of  governor  of  the  colonies  of  New  Y^ork
and  New  Jersey,  relinquishing  the  post  of  comp-
troller-general of  customs  in  England,  in  which  he
was  succeeded  by  Robert  Hunter,  the  retiring  gov-
ernor of  New  York.  He  arrived,  17  Sept.,  1720,
and  instituted  a  vigorous  policy  to  frustrate  Freneli
schemes  of  aggrandizement,  and  to  acquire  the  in-
terior for  Great  Britain.  In  1722  he  established  a
tradjng-post  at  Oswego,  where,  in  1696,  Frontenac,
French  governor  of  (Janada.  had  built  a  stockade
fort,  and  in  1727  he  erected  there  and  armed,  at
his  own  expense,  a  small  fort,  planting  the  English
standard  for  the  first  time  on  the  great  lakes,
though  the  friendly  Senecas  aiul  Oneidas  objected,
and  Beauharnois,  governor  of  Canada,  protested
vigorously. He  convened  a  congress  of  governors


458


BURNET


BURNETT


and  commissioners  at  Albany  in  1722,  and  per-
suaded them  to  send  a  message  to  the  eastern  In-
dians, threatening  them  with  war  unless  they  con-
cluded a  treaty  with  the  English.  He  secured  tiie
passage  by  the  assembly  of  an  act  forbidding  the
sale  of  goods  to  French  traders,  a  very  unpopular
measure,  and  rendered  himself  obnoxious  also  by
following  out  the  instructions  of  the  royal  govern-
ment in  prolonging  the  period  of  the  existing  as-
sembly until  it  liad  lasted  more  than  eleven  years,
by  obtaining  for  Plorace  Walpole  his  sinecure  per-
quisites as  auditor-general,  and  by  supporting  the
court  of  chancery,  which  he  brought  into  further
disrepute  by  his  precipitate  decisions  as  chancellor.
On  15  April,  1728,  he  was  removed,  not  so  much
on  account  of  his  unpopularity,  as  to  make  a  place
for  John  Montgomerie,  a  favorite  of  George  II.
Gov.  Burnet  was  transferred  to  Massachusetts,  and
there  became  involved  in  a  quarrel  with  the  assem-
bly by  repeating  the  demand  of  his  predecessor  for
a  fixed  salary.  The  assembly  insisted  on  its  char-
tered right  to  raise  and  appropriate  all  moneys  for
the  support  of  the  government.  The  British  house
of  commons,  in  answer  to  a  petition  that  Massa-
chusetts might  be  heard  by  counsel  in  the  matter,
passed  a  resolve  that  the  proceeding  tended  "  to
shake  off  the  dependency  of  the  said  colony  upon
this  kingdom,  to  which,  in  law  and  right,  they
ought  to  be  subject."  Burnet  was  eventually
obliged  to  recede  from  his  position.  In  1730  he
was  made  governor  of  New  Hampshire  also.  He
was  a  man  of  superior  talents  and  accomplish-
ments, an  honest  administrator,  and  was  impelled
to  some  of  the  more  objectionable  features  of  his
policy  by  the  instructions  of  his  superiors,  rather
than  by  his  own  arbitrary  nature.  He  published
astronomical  observations  in  the  "  Transactions  "
of  the  Royal  society,  and  an  essay  on  the  fulfilment
of  prophecies  in  the  book  of  Daniel  (London,  1724),
BURNET,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Eliza-
beth, N.  J.,  18  Dec,  1730;  d'.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  7
Oct.,  1791.  He  was  the  son  of  a  physician  who
came  from  Scotland,  was  a  graduate  of  Princeton
in  1749,  the  second  year  of  the  college,  and  became
a  physician.  He  held  at  different  times  various
offices  in  the  state  government,  was  elected  to  con-
gress under  the  confederation  in  1776,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1780-'l,  and  surgeon-general  of
the  eastern  district  of  the  United  States  from  1776
till  the  close  of  the  revolutionary  war.  He  suffered
much  in  property  by  the  depredations  of  the  ene-
my, who  carried  off  his  valuable  library.  He  was
a  skilful and successful physician, of  extensive

Sractice. — His  son,  Jacob,  jurist,  b.  in  Newark,
".  J.,  22  Feb.,  1770;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  10
May,  1853,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1791,
studied  law  in  the  office  of  Judge  Boudinot,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1796.  The  same  year
he  removed  to  Ohio,  where  he  became  distin-
guished as  a  lawyer  and  was  a  leading  citizen  in
the  new  settlement  of  Cincinnati.  In  1799  he  was
appointed  to  the  legislative  council  of  the  territory,
continuing  a  member  of  that  body,  in  which  he
took  the  most  prominent  part  in  the  preparation
of  legislative  measures,  until  the  formation  of  a
state  government.  In  1812  he  was  a  member  of
the  state  legislature,  a  judge  of  the  supreme  court
of  Ohio  in  1821-'8,  and  in  1828-'31  U.  S.  senator.
He  was  chosen  by  the  legislature  of  Kentucky  a
commissioner  to  adjust  certain  territorial  disputes
with  Virginia.  He  took  part  in  the  establishment
of  the  Lancastrian  academy  in  Cincinnati,  and  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Cincinnati  college,  and
its  first  president,  and  was  active  in  reorganizing
the  Medical  college  of  Ohio. He  was  a  delegate  to


the  Harrisburg  convention  in  1839,  and  was  main-
ly instrumental  in  securing  the  nomination  of
Harrison  to  the  presidency.  He  was  the  first
president  of  the  Colonization  society  of  Cincinnati.
His  efforts  to  alleviate  the  distress  felt  by  pur-
chasers of  western  lands,  on  account  of  indebted-
ness to  the  government  which  they  were  unable  to
discharge,  resulted  in  an  act  of  congress  granting
relief  to  the  entire  west,  extricating  the  settlers
from  serious  financial  distress.  The  debt  due  to
the  government  amounted  to  $22,000,000,  exceed-
ing the  volume  of  currency  in  circulation  in  the
west,  and  threatening  both  farmers  and  speculators
with  bankruptcy.  The  people  of  the  southwest
were  in  the  same  situation ;  all  the  banks  had  sus-
pended payment,  and  forcible  resistance  was  threat-
ened if  the  government  should  attempt  to  dispos-
sess the  settlers.  Judge  Burnett  drew  up  a  memorial
to  congress,  proposing  a  release  of  back  interest
and  permission  to  settlers  to  relinquish  as  much  of
the  land  entered  as  they  were  unable  to  pay  for.
The  memorial  was  generally  approved  by  the  in-
habitants of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  valleys,  and
in  1821  congress  granted  relief  in  the  form  desired.
In  1830  Judge  Burnett  secured  the  revocation  of
the  forfeiture  of  the  congressional  land-grant  to  the
state  of  Ohio  for  the  extension  of  the  Miami  canal,
and  an  additional  grant  that  emboldened  the  legis-
lature of  Ohio  to  carry  out  the  work.  He  published
"  Notes  on  the  Early  Settlement  of  the  Northwest-
ern Territory"  (New  York,  1847). — Another  son,
Dayid  G.,  Texan  politician,  b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  4
April,  1789 ;  d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  5  Dec,  1870,
entered  a  counting-house  in  New  York,  and  in
1806  joined  Gen.  Miranda's  expedition  to  Venezue-
la. He  became  a  merchant  in  Natchitoches,  La.,  in
1817,  then  studied  law  in  Cincinnati,  and  in  1820
went  to  Texas,  then  a  Mexican  state,  and  entered
zealously  into  the  contest  to  wrest  the  state  from
Mexico  and  establish  a  republic.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  San  Felipe  convention,  1  April,  1833,
and  was  appointed  judge  of  the  municipality  of
Austin  in  1834.  After  the  assumption  of  dictato-
rial powers  by  Santa  Anna,  the  convention  of  1
]\larch,  1830,  issued  a  declaration  of  independence,
and  on  16  March,  chose  Mr.  Burnett  provisional
president  of  the  new  republic.  Four  weeks  later
he  fled  before  Santa  Anna,  and  escaped  to  Galves-
ton, which  was  made  the  seat  of  the  government.
On  22  Oct.  he  gave  over  the  government  into  the
hands  of  Houston,  the  constitutionally  elected
president.  He  was  afterward  elected  vice-presi-
dent, and,  after  the  admission  of  Texas  to  the
union,  lived  in  retirement  near  the  battle-field  of
San  Jacinto.  He  remained  in  the  south  during
the  civil  war,  and  at  its  close  was  elected  in  1860
to  the  U.  S.  senate  from  Texas,  but  congress  re-
fused to  admit  him.  After  that  he  resided  in  re-
tirement on  his  plantation  near  Houston.

BURNETT,  Frances  Hodgson,  novelist,  b.  m
Manchester,  England,  24  Nov.,  1849.  She  was  edu-
cated in  her  native  city,  where  she  became  familiar
with  the  Lancashire  dialect  and  character.  Aboiit
the  close  of  the  American  civil  war  her  parents
were  impelled  by  pecuniary  misfortune  to  emigrate
to  the  United  States.  They  settled  in  180o  at
Knoxville,  Tenn.,  and  subsequently  removed  to
Newmarket.  She  there  began  to  write  short  stories,
the  first  of  which  appeared  in  a  magazine  in  1807.
In  1872  Miss  Hodgson  contributed  to  *'  Scribner  s
Monthlv"  a  dialect  storv  entitled  "Surly  lims
Trouble,"  republished  in  book-form  with  other  tales
in  1877.  In  1873  she  married  Dr.  Luan  M.  Bur-
nett, of  Knoxville,  and,  after  returning  from  a  visit
to  Europe  in  1875,  resided  in  Washington,  D.  <-•


BURNETT


BCJRNHAM


459


Her  story  of  "  That  Lass  o'  Lowrie's,"  printed  in
"  Scribner's  Magazine,"  obtained  great  popularity,
and  was  immediately  issued  in  a  separate  volume
(New  York,  1877).  In  1878-'9  some  of  her  earlier
magazine  stories  were  reprinted,  viz.,  "Kathleen
Mavourneen,"  "  Lindsay's  Luck,"  "  Miss  Cres-
Digny,"  "  Pretty  Polly  Peraberton,"  and  "  Theo."
They  were  originally  contributed  to  a  periodical  in
Philadelphia,  and  were  published  in  book-form
without  her  permission  by  a  house  in  that  city,  a
proceeding  that  led  to  a  public  controversy.  Her
?econd  novel,  "  Haworth's,"  was  published  as  a  serial
in  two  magazines,  and  was  printed  in  a  volume  in
1879.  In  1879  an  authorized  edition  of  her  earlier
love-tales  was  issued  in  New  York.  In  1880  ap-
psared  a  new  novelette  entitled  "  Louisiana."  Her
third  novel,  "  A  Fair  Barbarian,"  was  published  as
a  serial  in  1881,  and  in  a  volume  the  year  follow-
ing; and  a  fourth,  entitled  "Through  One  Admin-
istration," appeared  in  book-form  in  1883.  In  1886
a  juvenile  tale,  entitled  "  Little  Lord  Fauntleroy,"
was  printed  as  a  serial  in  the  "  St.  Nicholas  "  maga-
zine. "That  Lass  o'  Lowrie's,"  depicting  life  at
the  Lancashire  mines,  went  through  many  editions
in  England,  and  has  been  repeatedly  dramatized.

BURNETT,  Henry  Clay,  lawyer,  b.  in  Essex
CO.,  Va.,  5  Oct.,  1825 ;  d.  near  Hopkinton,  Ky.,  1
Oct.,  180G.  He  received  a  classical  education,  re-
moved early  to  Kentucky,  where  he  entered  upon
the  practice  of  law,  and  was  in  1851-'3  clerk  of  the
circuit  court  of  Trigg  co.  He  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  democrat  in  1855,  1857,  1859,  and  1861,  but
was  expelled,  for  his  open  sympathy  with  secession,
on  3  Dec,  1801.  He  had  presided  over  a  Kentucky
southern  conference  held  at  Russellville  on  29
Oct.,  1861,  and  called  a  sovereignty  convention  at
Russellville  on  18  Nov.,  of  which  also  he  was  presi-
dent, and  which  passed  an  ox'dinance  of  secession
and  organized  a  state  government.  He  was  a  rep-
resentative from  Kentucky  in  the  provisional  Con-
federate congress,  serving  from  18  Nov.,  1861,  till
17  Feb.,  1862,  and  a  senator  in  the  Confederate  con-
gress, serving  from  19  Feb.,  1862,  till  18  Feb.,  1865.
After  the  downfall  of  the  Confederacy  he  exerted
himself  to  restore  the  peace  democrats  to  the  as-
cendency in  his  state.

BURNETT,  Peter  Hardeman,  governor  of
California,  b.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  15  Nov.,  1807.
In  his  youth  Burnett  was  a  trader  and  lawyer  in
Missouri' and  Tennessee.  He  went  to  Oregon,  over-
land, in  1843,  took  a  prominent  part  there  in  the  or-
ganization of  the  territorial  government,  was  mem-
ber of  the  legislature  in  1844  and  1848,  and  became
a  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  The  gold  excitement
iittracted  him  to  California  in  1848,  and  he  worked
for  a  short  time  in  the  mines,  and  then  became  agent
in  managing  the  complicated  affairs  of  the  Sutter
family  and  estate  at  New  Helvetia.  In  1849  he  was
one  of  the  most  active  persons  in  urging  the  rights
and  necessities  of  the  people  of  California  as  suffi-
cient warrant  for  the  formation  of  a  state  govern-
ment in  advance  of  congressional  authority.  Dur-
ing the  agitation  of  that  summer  he  was'  an  out-
poken  opponent  of  the  United  States  military  gov-
ernment of  the  territory ;  but  he  cheerfully  joined
in  accepting,  at  length.  Gov.  Riley's  action,  where-
■)y  a  constitutional  convention  was  officially  called.
Under  the  new  constitution  he  was  at  once  elected
governor,  and  assumed  the  office,  although  the
state  was  not  admitted  by  congress  until  September,
1850.  He  resigned  the  governorship  in  1851,  then
practised  law,  and  was  one  of  the  supreme  judges
n  1857-'8.  From  1863  till  1880  he  was  president
)f  the  corporation  now  known  as  the  Pacific  Bank
n  San  Francisco. He  has  published  "  The  Path


which  Led  a  Protestant  Lawyer  to  the  Catholic
Church  "  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  The  American  The-
ory of  Government,  considered  with  reference  to
the  Present  Crisis"  (1861);  "Recollections  of  an
Old  Pioneer "  (1878),  which  is  especially  valuable
in  connection  with  the  early  political  and  constitu-
tional history  of  the  Pacific  coast ;  and  "  Reasons
why  we  should  Believe  in  God,  Love  God,  and
Obey  God  "  (1884).

BURNETT,  Waldo  Irving,  naturalist,  b.  in
Southborough,  Mass.,  12  July,  1828;  d.  in  Boston,
1  July,  1854.  He  was  interested  from  his  boyhood
in  entomology,  studied  medicine  under  the  direc-
tion of  his  father,  a  physician,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  medical  school  in  1849,  and  spent  some
time  in  Europe,  studying  natural  history  and  mak-
ing microscopic  observations.  After  his  return  to
the  United  States,  though  sutfering  from  consump-
tion, he  accomplished  much  valuable  scientific  work,
the  results  of  which  were  published  in  the  "  Jour-
nal "  and  "  Proceedings  "  of  the  Boston  society  of
natural  history,  the  "  Memoirs "  of  the  American
academy  of  arts  and  sciences,  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science,"  the  "  Transactions  "  of  the  Ameri-
can medical  association  for  1853,  and  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Medical  Science."  His  principal
work  was  a  prize  essay  on  "  The  Cell,  its  Physiol-
ogy, Pathology,  and  Philosophy,  as  deduced  from
Original  Observations ;  to  which  is  added  its  His-
tory and  Criticism,"  published  by  the  medical  as-
sociation. He  was  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  death
in  translating  from  the  German  the  "  Comparative
Anatomy  "  of  Siebold  and  Stannius.

BURNETT,  Ward  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  24
June,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1832,  served  in  the  Black  Hawk
war  of  that  year,  in  garrison  at  Fort  Jackson,  La.,
was  an  instructor  at  the  military  academy  in  1833-
'4,  and  on  topographical  and  ordinance  duty  until
1836,  when  he  resigned  and  became  a  civil  engi-
neer. At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican  war  he  was
made  colonel  of  the  2d  New  York  volunteers,  and
was  sent  to  join  the  army  under  Gen.  Scott.  He
was  engaged  with  his  regiment  at  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  in  the  battles  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras,
and  Churubusco,  in  the  last  of  which  he  was  severe-
ly wounded.  The  regiment  was  disbanded  1  Aug.,
1848.  Col.  Burnett  received  the  thanks  of  the  state
legislature  and  a  silver  medal  from  the  city  of  New
York,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-general.  The
surviving  members  of  his  regiment  gave  him  a
gold  medal,  20  Aug.,  1853,  and  further  recognized
his  services,  18  Aug.,  1859,  by  presenting  to  him
the  gold  snuff-box  in  which  the  freedom  of  the
city  of  New  York  had  been  officially  given  to  An-
drew Jackson  forty  years  before.  As  a  civil  engi-
neer he  w^as  engaged  on  dry-dock  construction  from
1849  till  1855  in  the  U.  S.  navy-yards  at  Brooklyn
and  Philadelphia,  and  on  the  water-works  of  Brook-
lyn and  Norfolk,  Va.,  in  1855  and  1856.  From
1858  till  1860  he  was  U.  S.  surveyor-general  of
Kansas  and  Nebraska.  During  the  latter  years  of
his  life  he  was  an  invalid,  and  gave  up  all  active
work.  He  was  buried  at  West  Point.  He  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  Gen.  Aaron  Ward,  of  West-
chester CO.,  and  his  son,  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy,
adopted  his  grandfather's  name.

BURNHAM,  Gordon  Webster,  manufacturer,
b.  in  Hampton,  Conn.,  20  March,  1803;  d.  in  New
York  city,  18  March,  1885.  He  was  a  farmer's  boy
and  began  life  poor,  but  saved  money  while  a  clerk
in  his  native  place,  with  which  in  1828  he  entered
into  business  as  a  principal.  Successful  in  this,  he
entered  the  firm  of  Benedict  &  Coe  in  Waterbury,


460


BURNHAM


BURNS


Conn.,  manufacturers  of  brass  goods,  and  two  years
later  with  other  parties  established  branch  houses
in  New  York  and  Boston.  These  were  continued
until  1863  and  18G7  respectively,  when,  on  the  dis-
solution of  the  partnership,  Mr.  Burnham  found
himself  the  possessor  of  a  large  fortune.  Mean-
while he  had  become  interested  in  many  of  the
manufactures  of  Waterbury,  and  successively  be-
came president  of  the  Waterbury  Clock  Co.,  the
Waterbury  Watch  Co.,  the  Waterbury  Brass  Co.,
and  the  American  Pin  Co.  Mr.  Burnham  made
liberal  use  of  his  money  for  the  public  good,  and
gave  freely  to  the  support  of  religion.  He  was  an
ardent  admirer  of  Daniel  Webster,  whom  he  re-
garded as  the  greatest  of  American  statesmen,  and,
as  a  testimonial  of  this  sentiment,  in  187(3  he  pre-
sented to  New  York  city  a  heroic  bronze  statue  of
Webster  by  Thomas  Bali,  which  was  erected  in
Central  park.  Mr.  Burnham  married  a  daughter
of  Bishop  Brownell,  of  Connecticut,  to  whom  he
erected  a  bronze  statue  in  Hartford.  His  own
monument  in  Greenwood,  built  some  years  prior  to
his  death,  is  one  of  the  finest  in  the  cemetery.

BURNHAM,  Hiram,  soldier,  b.  in  Maine;
killed  in  battle  at  Chapin's  Farm,  29  Sept.,  1864.
He  entered  the  service  as  colonel  of  the  6th  Maine
volunteers,  leading  them  with  skill  and  gallantry
through  the  peninsular  campaign,  at  Antietam,
and  in  subsequent  engagements.  At  the  second
battle  of  Fredericksburg  he  distinguished  himself
for  bravery  and  courage,  and  again  at  Gettysburg.
In  April,  1864,  he  was  made  brigadier-general,
and  during  the  campaign  from  the  Wilderness  to
Petersburg  he  bore  a  conspicuous  part.  A  few
weeks  previous  to  his  death  he  was  assigned  to  a
brigade  in  Stannard's  division,  18th  corps.

BURNHAM,  James  C,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
about  1820 ;  d.  there,  2  Sept.,  1866.  He  was  ap-
pointed major  in  the  2d  New  York  infantry,  3
JDec,  1846,  and  served  with  the  command  in  that
capacity  from  Vera  Cruz  to  Churubusco.  After
the  fall  of  Col.  Baxter  he  commanded  the  regiment
at  the  storming  of  Chapultepec,  was  promoted  to
be  lieutenant-colonel,  27  Sept.,  1847,  and  led  the
regiment  through  the  several  battles  around  the
city  of  Mexico,  distinguishing  himself  in  the  attack
on  the  Belen  gate.  After  the  war  Col.  Burnham
was  city  marshal  of  New  York  under  Mayor  Wood,
and  was  a  prominent  politician  for  several  years.

BURNHAM,  Samuel,  author,  b.  in  Rindge,  N.
H.,  in  1833 ;  d,  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  June,  1873.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1855,  and  as-
sumed charge  of  the  academy  at  Amherst,  N.  H.
Subsequently  he  removed  to  Boston  and  entered
upon  a  literary  career.  He  wrote  the  history  of
East  Boston,  several  small  volumes  for  the  Ameri-
can tract  society  on  natural  history,  was  one  of  the
editors  of  the  "  Congregationalist,"  literary  editor
of  the  "  Watchman  and  Reflector,"  a  correspondent
for  periodicals,  edited  Charles  Sumner's  works,  and
at  the  time  of  his  death  had  nearly  completed  a
history  of  the  Old  South  church  of  Boston.

BURNS,  Alexander,  Canadian  educator,  b.  in
Castlewellan,  county  Down,  Ireland,  12  Aug.,  1834.
He  emigrated  to  Canada  in  1847  with  his  parents,
who,  after  residing  for  three  years  in  Quebec,  re-
moved to  Toronto.  He  had  been  reared  a  Presbyte-
rian, but  became  a  convert  to  Methodism,  and  en-
tered Victoria  college  with  the  intention  of  ultimate-
ly becoming  a  minister  of  that  denomination.  He
was  graduated  there  with  honors  in  1861,  and,  after
remaining  in  the  college  for  a  year  as  a  classical
teacher,  passed  the  next  three  years  in  preaching.
In  1865  he  accepted  the  chair  of  mathematics  in
Iowa  Wesleyan  university  at  Mount  Pleasant,  and


in  1868  became  president  of  Simpson  centenary
college,  which  he  retained  until  1878,  when  he  ac-
cepted the  presidency  of  the  Wesleyan  ladies'  col-
lege, Hamilton,  Ontario.  In  1870  the  University
of  Indiana  conferi-ed  on  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D..
and  in  1878  his  alma  mater  gave  him  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  In  1882  Dr.  Burns  was  tried  before  the
London,  Ontario,  conference  for  holding  views  con-
trary to  the  tenets  of  the  Methodist  church,  the
charge  being  based  upon  statements  contained  in  a
letter  of  sympathy  which  he  had  written  to  the
Rev.  Dr.  Thomas,  of  Chicago.  The  trial  resulted
in  his  acquittal.

BURNS,  Anthony,  fugitive  slave,  b.  in  Virginia
about  1830 ;  d.  in  St.  Catharines,  Canada,  27  July,
1862.  He  effected  his  escape  from  slavery  in  Vir-
ginia, and  was  at  work  in  Boston  in  the  winter  of
1853-'4.  On  23  May,  1854,  the  U.  S.  house  of
representatives  passed  the  Kansas-Nebraska  bill
repealing  the  Missouri  compromise,  and  permit-
ting the  extension  of  negro  slavery,  which  had  been
restricted  since  1820.  The  news  caused  great  in-
dignation throughout  the  free  states,  especially  in
Boston,  where  the  anti-slavery  party  had  its  head-
quarters. Just  at  this  crisis  Burns  was  arrested
by  U.  S.  Marshal  Watson  Freeman,  under  the  pro-
visions of  the  fugitive-slave  act,  on  a  warrant  sworn
out  by  Charles  F.  Suttle.  He  was  confined  in  the
Boston  court-house  under  a  strong  guard,  and  on
25  May  was  taken  before  U.  S.  Commissioner  Lor-
ing  for  examination.  Through  the  eftorts  of  Wen-
dell Phillips  and  Theodore  Parker,  an  adjourn-
ment was  secured  to  27  May,  and  in  the  mean  time
a  mass-meeting  was  called  at  Faneuil  hall,  and  the
U.  S.  marshal  summoned  a  large  [)osse  of  extra
deputies,  who  were  armed  and  stationed  in  and
about  the  court-house  to  guard  against  an  expected
attempt  at  the  rescue  of  Burns.  The  meeting  at
Faneuil  hall  was  addressed  by  the  most  prominent
men  of  Boston,  and  could  hardly  be  restrained
from  adjourning  in  a  body  to  storm  the  court-house.
While  this  assembly  was  in  session,  a  premature
attempt  to  rescue  Burns  was  made  under  the  leader-
ship of  Thomas  W.  Higginson.  A  door  of  the  court-
house was  battered  in,  one  of  the  deputies  was  killed
in  the  fight,  and  Col.  Higginson  and  others  of  the  as-
sailants were  wounded.  A  call  for  re-enforcements
was  sent  to  Faneuil  hall,  but  in  the  confusion  it
never  reached  the  chairman.  On  the  next  day  the
examination  was  held  before  Commissioner  Loring,
Richard  II.  Dana  and  Charles  M.  Ellis  appearing
for  the  prisoner.  The  evidence  showed  that  Bums
was  amenable  under  the  law,  and  his  surrender  to
his  master  was  ordered.  When  the  decision  was
made  known,  m.any  houses  were  draped  in  black,
and  the  state  of  popular  feeling  was  such  that  the
government  directed  that  the  prisoner  be  sent  to
Virginia  on  board  the  revenue  cutter  "Morris.
He  was  escorted  to  the  wharf  by  a  strong  guard,
through  streets  packed  with  excited  crowds.  At
the  wharf  the  tumult  seemed  about  to  culminate
in  riot,  when  the  Rev.  Daniel  Foster  (who  was
killed  in  action  earlv  in  the  civil  war)  exclauned,
"Let  us  pray!"  and  silence  fell  upon  the  mul-
titude, who  stood  with  uncovered  heads,  while
Burns  was  hurried  on  board  the  cutter.  A  more
impressively  dramatic  ending,  or  one  more  charac-
teristic of  an  excited  but  law-abiding  and  Gorl-
fearing  New  England  conmiunity,  could  hardly  be
conceived  for  this  famous  case.  Burns  afterward
studied  at  Oberlin  college,  and  eventually  became
a  Baptist  minister,  and  settled  in  Canada,  where,
during  the  closing  years  of  his  life,  he  presided  over
a  congregation  of  his  own  color.  See  "  Anthony
Burns,  A  History,"  by  C.  E.  Stevens  (Boston,  1804).


BURNS


BURNS


461


BURNS,  Francis,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  5  Dec,  1809 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  18  April,
1863. '  New  York  was  still  a  slave-state  when  at  five
vears  of  age  the  little  negro  Francis  Burns  was  in-
tlentured  as  a  servant  by  his  parents,  who  were  so
poor  that  they  took  this  method  of  reducing  ex-
penses. He  was  converted  at  the  age  of  fifteen,
and  soon  entered  the  Lexington  Heights  academy
and  studied  for  the  ministry.  He  obtained  a  fair
education,  and  soon  evinced  such  talent  as  a  leader
among  his  own  people  that,  after  serving  as  an  ex-
horter  and  preacher  under  the  direction  of  the
Methodist  church,  he  was  appointed  to  the  Libe-
rian  mission  in  1834,  and  landed  in  Monrovia  on
18  Oct.  His  first  appointment  was  as  a  teacher  at
Cape  Palmas.  He  joined  the  Liberia  mission  con-
ference in  1838,  and  from  1840  till  1842  was  an  as-
sistant on  the  Bassa  circuit.  During  1843  and  the
early  part  of  1844  he  was  engaged  at  Monrovia,  but
sailed  for  the  United  States,  and  was  ordained  dea-
con in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  16  June,  and,  later  on  the
same  day,  crossed  over  to  New  Yorlc  and  was  or-
dained elder  in  the  Mulberry  street  church,  Bishop
Janes  ofRciating.  In  the  same  year  he  returned  to
Liberia.  The  next  session  of  the  conference  ap-
pointed him  presiding  elder  of  the  Cape  Palmas
district.  In  1851,  by  order  of  the  missionary  board,
he  was  detailed  to  open  an  academy  at  Monrovia
and  superintend  the  mission  there.  In  1858  he
visited  the  United  States  and  was  ordained  mis-
sionary bishop  at  Perry,  Wyoming  co.,  N.  Y.,
Bishops  Janes  and  Baker  ofRciating.  Almost  im-
mediately he  returned  to  Africa,  and  labored  there
for  five  years  until  his  health  failed.  He  returned
to  the  United  States  by  the  advice  of  a  physician,
and  died  shortly  afterward.

BURNS,  James  Austin,  educator,  b.  in  Ox-
ford, Me.,  25  Jan.,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  Bow-
doin,  where  in  1885  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.
D.  In  August,  1861,  he  entered  the  U.  S.  volun-
teer service  as  lieutenant  in  the  7th  Connecticut
infantry,  and  was  promoted  to  be  captain  in  1862,
after  which  he  served  on  the  staffs  of  Gens.  Viele,
Stephens,  Seymour,  Strong,  and  Terry,  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  sieges  of  Forts  Pulaski,  Sumter,  and
Wagner,  and  in  the  investment  of  Petersburg.
Subsequent  to  the  war  he  settled  in  Atlanta,  Ga.,
where  he  has  followed  the  profession  of  civil  engi-
neering and  also  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  in
the  Southern  medical  college  in  Atlanta.  He  has
published  a  series  of  "  Juxtalinear  Translations  of
the  Classics"  (Atlanta,  1886  et  seq.).  The  set  in-
cludes Virgil,  Horace,  Cicero,  Sallust,  C;i?sar,  Ho-
mer, Xenophon,  Demosthenes,  and  Sophocles.

BURNS,  Jolin,  soldier,  b.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,
5  Sept.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  7  Feb.,  1872.
He  was  of  Scottish  ancestry,  and  through  his  father
claimed  relationship  with  the  poet.  He  was  among
the  first  to  volunteer  for  the  war  of  1812 ;  was  pres-
ent in  the  actions  at  Plattsburg,  Queenstown,  and
Lundy's  Lane,  in  which  last-named  engagement  he
was  one  of  Col.  Miller's  regiment  that  captured  the
British  battery  in  the  centre  and  turned  the  tide
in  favor  of  the  Americans.  He  volunteered  prompt-
ly for  the  war  with  Mexico,  and  again  for  the  civil
war.  For  this  last  service  he  was  rejected  on  ac-
count of  his  age  by  the  United  States  mustering
officer,  but  managed  to  go  with  the  army  as  a
teamster,  and  was  always  anxious  to  borrow  a  rifle
and  be  in  the  ranks  when  the  enemy  was  encoun-
tered. His  age  soon  told  against  him,  and,  con-
trary to  his  will,  he  was  sent  home  to  Gettysburg,
where  his  townsmen  made  him  constable  to  keep
him  busy  and  contented.  When  the  foremost  Con-
federate scouts  approached  in  June,  1868,  he  went


out  with  a  party  of  volunteers  to  fight  them,  but
was  turned  back  by  the  national  cavalry.  When
the  Confederates  under  Gen.  Early  occupied  the
town,  26  June,  Burns  had  to  be  locked  up  for  as-
serting his  civil  authority  as  constable  in  opposi-
tion to  that  of  the  Confederate  provost  guard.  As
soon  as  the  enemy  advanced  toward  York,  Burns
resumed  his  official  functions  and  began  to  arrest
Confederate  stragglers,  including  a  chaplain  named
Gwin,  who  bore  despatches.  Two  days  later  the
National  advance  under  Gen.  Buford  arrived  and
relieved  the  veteran  from  his  self-imposed  duty  of
facing  the  Army  of  Northern  Virginia  single-hand-
ed. Shortly  after  the  preliminary  skirmishing  of
the  battle  of  Gettysburg  began.  Burns  met  a
wounded  Union  soldier,  borrowed  his  rifle  and  am-
munition, with  which  he  went  to  the  front  and
offered  his  services  as  a  volunteer  to  Maj.  Cham-
berlain, of  the  155th  Pennsylvania  regiment.  He
was  referred  to  the  7th  Wisconsin  volunteers,  near
by,  they  being  sharply  engaged  with  the  enemy.
The  old  man  proved  himself  such  a  skilful  sharp-
shooter that  the  colonel  commanding  the  regi-
ment sent  him  a  favorite  long-range  rifle,  which
he  used  all  day  with  deadly  eftect  in  the  advanced
line  ;  but  he  was  badly  wounded  in  the  afternoon,
when  the  National  troops  were  forced  back.  He
told  a  plausible  story  to  his  Confederate  captors,
and  got  himself  carried  to  his  own  house,  where
his  wounds  were  dressed  by  the  surgeons ;  and,
after  a  narrow  escape  from  execution  as  an  un-
uniformed  combatant,  he  was  left  when  the  Con-
federates were  in  turn  driven  back  and  finally  de-
feated. The  story  of  his  patriotic  zeal  aroused  the
greatest  interest  in  the  northern  states;  he  was
lauded  as  the  "  hero  of  Gettysburg,"  and  after  the
war,  as  his  home  was  on  the  battle-field,  became  an
object  of  curiosity  to  visitors  and  accumulated  a
competence  through  their  generosity.  During  the
last  two  years  of  his  life  his  mind  failed,  and  his
friends  were  unable  to  prevent  his  wandering  about
the  country.  He  was  found  in  New  York  city  on
a  cold  winter's  night  in  December,  1871,  in  a  state
of  destitution,  and  was  cared  for  and  sent  home,
but  died  of  pneumonia.

BURNS,  Robert,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in
Borrowstounness,  Linlithgowshire,  Scotland,  13
Feb.,  1798  ;  d.  in  Toronto,  19  Aug.,  1869.  He  was
graduated  in  arts  at  Edinburgh  university  in  1805,
and  in  divinity  in  1810.  He  was  minister  of  St.
George's  church.  Paisley,  from  July,  1811,  till  the
disruption  which,  in  May,  1843,  resulted  in  the  se-
cession of  the  Free  Church  from  the  Established.
He  came  out  with  the  Free  Church,  and  in  March,
1845,  removed  to  Canada,  and  the  same  year  be-
came minister  of  Knox  church,  Toronto,  a  charge
which  he  retained  till  1850.  In  that  year  he  was
appointed  professor  of  church  history  and  apolo-
getics in  Knox  college,  Toronto,  retiring  in  1864.
He  penetrated  the  remotest  bush-regions  in  the
land  of  his  adoption,  so  that  his  name  was  familiar
throughout  Canada.  When  pastor  in  Paisley  he,
for  fourteen  years,  occupied  the  same  pulpit  as  Dr.
Witherspoon,  the  only  clergyman  whose  name  was
affixed  to  the  "  Declaration  of  Independence."  In
1838-9  he  edited  the  Edinburgh  "Christian  In-
structor." His  publications  include  "  Letters  to
Dr.  Chalmers  on  the  Protestant  and  Roman  Catho-
lic Religions  "  (Paisley,  1818) ;  "  Historical  Disser-
tation on  the  Law  and  Practice  of  Great  Britain,
and  particularly  of  Scotland,  with  regard  to  the
Poor"  (2d  ed.,  Edinburgh,  1819):  "Woodrow's
History  of  the  Sufferings  of  the  Church  of  Scot-
land "  (4  vols.,  Glasgow,  1830) ;  "  Treatise  on  Plu-
ralities "  (1824);  and  a  "  Life  of  Dr.  McGill." His


462


BURNS


BURNSIDE


life  has  been  written  hj  his  son  (Toronto,  1871). —
His  son,  Robert  Terrier,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.
in  Paisley,  Scotland,  23  Dec,  1826.  He  entered
the  University  of  Glasgow  in  1840,  and  distin-
guished himself  as  a  student.  During  1844-'5  he
attended  New.  college,  Edinburgh,  a  theological
institution  established  by  the  Free  Church  immedi-
ately after  the  disruption.  In  1845  he  arrived  in
Canada,  a  short  time  after  his  father,  and  com-
pleted his  theological  course  at  Knox  college,
'J'oronto.  In  July,  1847,  he  was  ordained  a  minis-
ter of  the  Presbyterian  church,  and  soon  after-
ward became  pastor  of  Chalmer's  church,  Kings-
ton. In  1855  he  took  charge  of  Knox  church,  St.
Catherines,  retaining  it  for  twelve  years,  during
which  time  he  was  a  member  of  the  grammar-
school  board,  and  organized  the  system  of  Sabbath-
school  conventions.  In  1867  he  became  pastor  of
the  Scottish  church  in  Chicago,  and,  after  minister-
ing there  for  three  years,  during  part  of  which
time  he  assisted  Mr.  Moody  in  his  evangelistic  work,
he  accepted  a  call  to  Cote  street  church,  Montreal,
and  in  1875  was  transferred  to  Fort  Massey  Pres-
byterian church,  Halifax,  N.  S.  He  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  second  pan-Presbyterian  council,  which
was  held  in  Philadelphia  in  1880,  also  of  the  third,
held  in  Belfast  in  1884,  representing  the  mari-
time provinces.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Interna-
tional temperance  council,  held  at  Philadelphia  in
1876,  to  Raikes's  centennial  of  Sabbath-schools,  held
in  London  in  1880,  and  also  from  the  international
committee  to  the  World's  convention  of  young
men's  Christian  associations  in  Berlin  in  1884.  In
1866  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him
by  Hamilton  college.  He  has  published,  besides
the  life  of  his  father,  "  Maple  Leaves  for  the
Grave  of  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (St.  Catherines,  1865) ;
"  Plea  for  Lord's  Day  "  (Montreal,  1874) ;  "  Maine
Law  "  (Halifax,  1875) ;  "  Modem  Babylon  "  (1876) ;
"  Confession  and  Absolution "  (1888) ;  a  contro-
versy with  Roman  Catholic  authorities ;  and  con-
tributions to  current  periodicals.

BURNS,  Robert  Easton,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Niagara,  Canada  West,  26  Dec,  1805 ;  d.  near
Toronto,  12  Jan.,  1863.  He  was  educated  at  home,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised
for  several  years  in  Niagara,  St.  Catherines,  and
Hamilton.  In  September,  1837,  he  was  appointed
judge  of  Niagara  district,  and  in  1838  removed  to
Toronto,  and  entered  into  partnership  with  Attor-
ney-General Hagerman.  When  the  seat  of  govern-
ment was  taken  to  Kingston,  the  court  of  chancery
followed,  and  he  became  a  resident  of  that  city,
but  returned  to  Toronto  when  the  government
was  established  in  Montreal.  In  Toronto  he  en-
tered into  partnership  with  Philip  Vankoughnet,
afterward  chancellor  of  Upper  Canada,  and  Oliver
Mowat,  premier  of  Ontario.  Soon  afterward  he
was  appointed  judge  of  the  home  district,  which
office  he  retained  until  his  resignation,  in  1848.
Within  a  short  time,  however,  he  was  appointed
by  the  Baldwin  -  Lafontaine  government  puisne
judge  of  the  court  of  queen's  bench,  an  office
which  he  retained  until  his  death.

BURNS,  WilHam  WalLace,  soldier,  b.  in
Coshocton,  Ohio,  3  Sept.,  1825.  From  1843  till
1847  he  was  a  cadet  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy.
Joining  the  3d  infantry  after  graduation,  he
served  through  the  war  with  Mexico,  and,  after  ten
years  of  frontier,  garrison,  and  recruiting  service,
received  a  staff  appointment  as  captain  and  com-
missary of  subsistence.  His  experience  in  the  sup-
ply department  led  to  his  appointment  for  similar
important  duties  during  the  civil  war.  He  served
in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  wounded  in


the  action  at  Savage's  station,  29  June,  1862.  He
was  in  the  field  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to
and  including  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  De-
cember, 1862,  and  was  then  appointed  chief  'com-
missary of  the  department  of  the  northwest.
During  the  closing  years  of  the  civil  war  he  was  iri
charge  of  the  commissary  departments  successively
of  the  Carolina  s,  of  Georgia,  and  of  Florida,  and
lastly  of  the  whole  department  of  the  south.  Since
the  war  he  has  been  on  duty  at  Washington.

BURNSIDE,  Ambrose  Everett,  soldier,  b.  in
Liberty,  Ind.,  23  May,  1824 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  3
Sept.,  1881.  The  Burnside  family  is  of  Scottish
origin.  Having  followed  the  fortunes  of  Charles
Edward  the  pretender  until  his  final  defeat  at
Culloden  in  1746,  the  founders  of  the  American
branch  emigrated  to  South  Carolina.  The  revolt
of  the  American  colonies  against  Britain  divided
them,  some  joining  the  patriots,  others  remaining
loyal  to  the  crown.  Among  the  latter  was  James,
grandfather of

Ambrose, who

was  a  captain  in
one  of  the  regi-
ments of  South
Carolinian  roy-
alists. When  it
became  certain
that  the  revolu-
tion would  be
successful,  he,  in
company  with
others, whose  es-
tates were  con-
fiscated,escaped
to  Jamaica,  but
eventually  ob-
tained amnesty
from  the  young
republic  and  re-
turned to  South
Carolina.  After

his  death,  his  widow  and  her  four  sons  migrated
to  Indiana,  manumitting  their  slaves  from  consci-
entious motives.  Edghill,  the  third  of  these  sons,
settled  in  the  new  town  of  Liberty,  and  in  1814
married  Pamelia  Brown,  another  emigrant  from
South  Carolina.  He  taught  school  for  a  time,  and,
having  some  legal  knowledge,  was  in  1815  elected
associate  judge  of  the  county  court,  and  subse-
quently clerk  of  court,  which  office  he  held  until
1850.  Ambrose,  the  fourth  of  nine  children,  was
born  in  a  rude  log  cabin  at  the  edge  of  the  wilder-
ness. The  village  schools  were  exceptionally  good
for  a  frontier  town,  and  at  seventeen  he  had  acquired
a  better  education  than  most  boys  of  his  age ;  but
his  father  could  not  afford  to  give  him  a  profes-
sional training,  and  he  was  indentured  to  a  mer-
chant tailor.  After  learning  the  trade,  he  returned
to  Liberty  and  began  business  as  a  partner  under
the  style  of  "  Myers  &  Burnside,  Merchant  Tailors."
Conversation  with  veterans  of  the  second  war
with  Great  Britain  interested  him  in  military
affairs.  He  read  all  the  histories  and  other  books
bearing  on  the  subject  that  he  could  procure,
and  local  tradition  is  to  the  effect  that  Caleb  13.
Smith,  congressman  from  the  district,  entering
the  shop  to  have  his  coat  repaired,  found  the
young  tailor  with  a  copy  of  "Cooper's  Tactics
propped  up  against  the  "goose,"  and  kept  open  by
a  pair  of  shears,  so  that  he  could  study  and  work
at  the  same  time.  Some  conversation  followed,
and  the  congressman  was  so  impressed  by  the  in-
telligence and  appearance  of  the  young  man  that
he  sought  his  appointment  as  a  cadet  at  the  mill-


BURNSIDE


BURNSIDE


463


tary  academy,  and,  although  the  first  attempt  was
a  faihire,  fortune  at  last  favored  him,  and  he  en-
tered the  class  of  1847,  when  there  were  at  the  acad-
emy more  than  a  score  of  future  generals,  includ-
ini-  McClellan,  Hancock,  and  "Stonewall"  Jack-
son. The  war  with  Mexico  was  nearly  over  when
Burnside  was  graduated ;  but  he  accompanied  one
of  the  last  detachments  of  recruits  to  the  conquered
capital,  and  remained  there  as  second  lieutenant
of  the  3d  artillery  daring  the  military  occupation
of  the  place.  Then  followed  years  of  life  in  gar-
rison and  on  the  frontier,  including  some  Indian
fifhting.  In  1852  he  married  Mary  Richmond,
daughter  of  Nathaniel  Bishop,  of  Providence,  R.  I.,
and  in  November  of  the  same  year  resigned  his
commission,  having  invented  a  breech-loading
rifle,  the  manufacture  of  which  he  wished  to  super-
intend. In  August,  1857,  a  board  of  army  officers
reported  favorably  upon  the  Burnside  breech-
loader ;  but  the  inventor  would  not  pay  his  way
among  the  underlings  of  the  war  department,  and
was  forced  to  go  into  bankruptcy.  He  devoted  all
his  personal  property  to  the  liquidation  of  his
debts,  sought  employment,  found  it  at  Chicago,
under  George  B.  McClellan,  then  vice-president  of
the  Illinois  central  railroad,  and,  by  practising
strict  economy,  he  eventually  paid  every  obliga-
tion. In  June,  1860,  he  became  treasurer  of  the
Illinois  central  railroad,  his  office  being  in  New
York  city.  In  the  autumn  of  that  year  he  visited
New  Orleans  on  business,  and  gained  an  insight
into  the  movement  for  secession  that  shook  his  life-
long faith  in  the  democratic  party.  So  confidently
did  he  anticipate  war  that  he  set  his  business  af-
fairs in  order,  and  was  ready  to  start  at  once  when,
on  15  April,  1861,  Gov.  Sprague,  of  Rhode  Island,
telegraphed  for  him  to  take  command  of  the  1st
regiment  of  detached  militia.  On  20  April  the
regiment  left  Providence  by  sea,  and  marched,  with
the  other  battalions  that  had  been  hurried  forward,
from  Annapolis  to  Washington,  reaching  the  capi-
tal on  26  April.  The  preliminary  operations  about
Washington  soon  culminated,  owing  mainly  to
popular  outcry  and  political  pressure  at  the  north,
in  the  premature  advance  of  the  federal  army,  and
the  battle  of  Manassas  or  Bull  Run  (21  July).  Col.
Burnside  commanded  a  brigade  on  the  extreme
right  of  Hunter's  division,  which  was  detached
from  the  main  army  early  in  the  morning,  and  sent
across  an  upper  ford  to  turn  the  confederate  left.
The  movement  was  anticipated  by  the  enemy,  and
a  sharp  engagement  took  place,  at  the  beginning
of  which  Gen.  Hunter  was  wounded,  leaving  Burn-
side in  command.  The  Confederates  were  forced
back,  losing  heavily,  until  nearly  noon,  when  they
were  re-enforced  by  Gen.  Johnston's  advance  bri-
gade under  Jackson,  who  stemmed  the  tide  of  fugi-
tives, and  there  won  his  name  of  "  Stonewall."  By
this  time  Burnside's  ammunition  was  exhausted,
and  his  command  had  to  fall  back.  It  made  no
further  aggressive  movement,  but  retained  its  or-
ganization after  the  rout  of  the  main  army,  and
on  the  retreat  toward  Washington.  A  period  of
comparative  inactivity  followed,  during  which  Col.
Burnside's  regiment  was  mustered  out  on  the  expi-
ration of  its  term  of  service.  On  6  Aug.,  1861,  he
was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers, and  given  a  command  composed  of  the  three-
year  regiments  then  assembling  at  Washington.
On  23  Oct.,  Gen.  Burnside  was  directed  to  organ-
ize a  "  coast  division "  with  headquarters  at  An-
napolis. This  force  was  largely  composed  of  regi-
ments recruited  on  the  New  England  coasts,  and
was  intended  for  operations  along  the  lower  Poto-
niae  and  Chesapeake  bay. The  plan  was  changed,


however,  the  expeditionary  force  was  largely  in-
creased, and,  on  12  Jan.,  1862,  a  corps  of  12,000
men,  on  a  fleet  of  forty-six  transports,  sailed  from
Hampton  Roads  with  sealed  orders,  directing  them
to  rendezvous  in  Pamlico  soimd  by  way  of  Hatteras
inlet.  Within  twenty-four  hours  a  heavy  gale
arose,  which  lasted  nearly  two  weeks,  scattered  the
fleet,  and  imperilled  its  safety.  On  25  Jan.,  how-
ever, all  the  vessels  had  passed  through  Hatteras
inlet  and  were  safe  in  the  sound.  On  5  Feb.  the
fleet,  with  an  escort  of  gun-boats,  moved  toward
Roanoke  island,  a  fortified  post  of  the  confederates,
and  engaged  the  gun-boats  and  batteries.  Within
a  few  hours  a  landing  was  effected,  and  on  8  Feb.
the  confederate  position  near  the  middle  of  the
island  was  carried  and  the  garrison  captured,  num-
bering 2,500  men.  The  possession  of  Roanoke  isl-
and gave  command  of  the  extensive  land-locked
waters  of  Albemarle  and  Pamlico  sounds,  and  was
one  of  the  earliest  substantial  successes  of  the  na-
tional arms.  Newbern,  N.  C,  was  occupied,  after  a
sharp  struggle,  on  14  March.  The  surrender  of  Fort
Macon  and  Beaufort  soon  followed,  and,  when  Gen.
Burnside  visited  the  north  on  a  short  leave  of  ab-
sence, he  found  himself  welcomed  as  the  most  uni-
formly successful  of  the  federal  leaders.

During  the  campaign  in  the  Carolinas  and  the
early  summer  following,  the  army  of  the  Potomac,
under  McClellan,  had  been  defeated  before  Rich-
mond, and  had  in  turn  repelled  the  confederates  at
Malvern  Hill.  Burnside  relinquished  the  command
of  the  department  of  North  Carolina,  and,  with  his
old  divisions  reorganized  as  the  9th  corps,  was
transferred  to  the  army  of  the  Potomac,  which
held  the  north  shore  of  the  Rappahannock  opposite
Fredericksburg.  The  chief  command  was  offered
to  Burnside,  but  he  resolutely  declined  it,  frankly
declaring  that  he  did  not  consider  himself  compe-
tent. On  27  June  the  order  was  issued  relieving
McClellan  and  placing  Pope  in  command.  The
fortunes  of  the  confederacy  now  seemed  so  dis-
tinctly in  the  ascendant  that  it  was  determined  at
Richmond  to  assume  the  offensive.  The  prepara-
tions for  the  movement  were  at  once  known  in
Washington,  and  the  administration  urged  Gen.
Pope  to  create  a  diversion  along  the  line  of  the  Rap-
pahannock. This  he  attempted,  but  was  foiled  al-
most at  all  points,  and  the  army  of  Virginia,  as  it
was  temporarily  designated,  fell  back  sullen  and
demoralized  after  a  second  defeat  at  Manassas,  upon
the  defences  of  Washington,  where  Burnside  was
again  asked  to  take  command,  but  again  declined.
In  its  extremity,  the  administration  again  called
upon  McClellan,  who  in  a  remarkably  short  time
brought  order  out  of  chaos  and  reinspired  the  army
with  a  degree  of  confidence.  By  this  time  Lee's
advance  had  crossed  the  Potomac  near  Sharpsburg,
and  Burnside  was  sent  to  meet  him  with  the  1st
and  9th  corps.  He  left  Washington  Sept.  3.  On
12  Sept.  he  met  the  enemy's  pickets  at  Frederick
City,  and  on  the  14th  encountered  the  confederates
in  force  at  South  Mountain,  and  very  handsomely
dislodged  them  from  a  strong  position.  The  en-
ergy of  this  movement  was  probably  not  anticipated
by  Gen.  Lee.  He  retreated  to  Antietam  creek,
threw  up  intrenchments,  and  awaited  attack.  To
Burnside's  9th  corps,  on  the  morning  of  the  bat-
tle of  Antietam  (Sept.  17),  was  assigned  the  task  of
capturing  and  holding  a  stone  bridge.  This  was
done  at  a  terrible  sacrifice  of  life ;  but  it  was  the
key  of  the  position,  and,  according  to  a  high  Con-
federate authority  (Edward  A.  Pollard,  the  histo-
rian), if  the  bridge  could  have  been  re-captured,  the
result  of  the  battle  of  Antietam  would  have  been
decisive. The  army  remained  in  the  neighborhood


464


BURNSIDE


BURNSIDE


of  Sharpsburg  until  early  in  November,  when  Mc-
Clellan  was  relieved,  and  on  10  iSlov.  Burnside  re-
luctantly assumed  command.  At  this  time  the
Confederate  army  was  divided,  Longstreet  and
Jackson  commanding,  respectively,  its  right  and
left  wings,  being  separated  by  at  least  two  days'
march.  McClellan  and  Burnside  were  always  warm
personal  friends,  and  the  former  gave  his  successor
in  command  the  benefit  of  his  projected  plans.

A  month  passed  in  reorganizing  the  army  in  three
grand  divisions,  under  Generals  Sumner,  Franklin,
and  Hooker,  with  the  11th  corps  under  Sigel  as  a  re-
serve. The  plan  was  to  cross  the  Rappahannock  at
Fredericksburg  and,  if  possible,  crush  the  separated
wings  of  the  confederate  army  in  detail.  The  move-
ment began  15  Nov.,  and  four  days  later  the  army
occupied  the  heights  opposite  Fredericksburg,  but
with  the  river  intervening  and  no  pontoon-train
ready.  The  responsibility  for  this  failure  has  never
been  charged  to  Gen.  Burnside,  nor  has  it  ever  been
definitely  fixed  upon  any  one  save  a  vague  and
impersonal  "  department " ;  but  it  necessitated  a
fatal  delay,  for  Lee  had  moved  nearly  as  rapidly
as  Burnside,  and  promptly  occupied  and  fortified
the  heiglits  south  of  the  river.  During  the  period
of  enforced  inaction  that  followed.  Gen.  Burnside
went  to  Washington  and  expressed  his  doubts  as
to  the  policy  of  crossing  the  river,  in  view  of  the
failure  of  the  attempt  to  divide  Lee's  forces.  But
he  was  urged  to  push  a  winter  campaign  against
Richmond,  and,  returning  to  the  front,  gave  orders
to  place  the  bridges.  This  was  gallantly  effected
in  the  face  of  a  sharp  resistance,  Fredericksburg
was  cleared  of  the  enemy,  and  on  13  Dec.  the
whole  national  army  had  crossed  and  was  in  posi-
tion south  of  the  Rappahannock.  The  situation
in  brief  was  this :  South  and  in  the  rear  of  Fred-
ericksburg is  a  range  of  hills  irregularly  parallel
to  the  course  of  the  river ;  the  space  between  is  a
plateau  well  adapted  for  the  movement  of  troops.
This  was  occupied  by  the  national  army  in  the
three  grand  divisions  specified,  Sumner  holding
the  right,  Hooker  the  centre,  and  Franklin  the
left.  The  Confederates  occupied  the  naturally
strong  position  along  the  crest  of  the  hills,  and
were  well  intrenched,  with  batteries  in  position.
Longstreet  commanded  the  right  wing,  and  Jack-
son the  left.  The  weak  point  of  the  Confederate
line  was  at  its  right,  owing  to  a  depression  of  the
hills,  and  here  it  was  at  first  intended  to  make  a
determined  assault;  but,  for  some  reason,  orders
were  sent  to  Franklin,  at  the  last  moment,  merely
to  make  a  demonstration,  while  Sumner  attempted
to  carry  Marye's  hill,  which,  naturally  a  strong
position,  was  rendered  nearly  impregnable  by  a
sunken  road,  bordered  by  a  stone  wall,  along  its
base.  The  best  battalions  in  the  army  were  sent
against  this  position ;  but  the  fire  of  artillery  and
infantry  was  so  severe  that  nothing  was  gained,
although  the  struggle  was  kept  up  till  nightfall.
Gen.  Hooker's  division  being  the  last  to  attack,
only  to  be  repelled  as  its  predecessors  had  been.
Burnside  would  have  renewed  the  attack  on  the
next  day,  but  Sumner  dissuaded  him  at  the  last
moment,  and  that  night  the  whole  army  reerossed
the  river,  having  lost,  in  killed,  wounded,  and
missing,  more  than  12,000  men.  Some  of  these,
however,  afterward  returned  to  their  regiments.
The  Confederate  loss  was  5,309.  Lisubordination
was  soon  developed  among  the  corps  and  division
commanders,  and  Burnside  issued  an  order,  sub-
ject to  the  president's  approval,  summarily  dis-
missing several  of  them  from  the  service,  and  re-
lieving others  from  duty.  The  order,  which
sweepingly  included Hooker,  Franklin,  Newton,


and  Brooks,  was  not  approved,  and  Gen.  Burnside
was  superseded  by  Maj.-Gen.  Hooker.

Transferred  to  the  department  of  the  Ohio,  witji
headquarters  at  Cincinnati,  Burnside  found  him-
self forced  to  take  stringent  measures  in  regard  to
the  proceedings  of  southern  sympathizers  on  both
sides  of  the  river.  On  13  April,  18G3,  he  issued  his
famous  general  order  defining  certain  treasonable
offences,  and  announcing  that  they  would  not  be
tolerated.  Numerous  arrests  followed,  including
that  of  Clement  L.  Vallandigham,  who  was  tried
by  military  commission  for  making  a  treasonable
speech,  was  found  guilty,  and  sentenced  to  impris-
onment during  the  remainder  of  the  war.  This
sentence  the  president  commuted  to  banishment,
and  Vallandigham  was  sent  within  the  lines  of  the
Confederacy.  The  democrats  of  Ohio  thereupon
nominated  him  for  governor,  but  he  was  defeated
by  a  majority  of  more  than  100,000.  In  August,
1863,  Burnside  crossed  the  Cumberland  mountains
at  the  head  of  18,000  men,  marching  250  miles  in  14
days,  causing  the  Confederates,  who  had  their  head-
quarters at  Knoxville,  to  make  a  hasty  retreat.  He
pushed  forward,  and  Cumberland  Gap  was  cap-
tured, with  its  garrison  and  stores.  Attacked  by
Longstreet,  with  a  superior  force.  Gen.  Burnside
retreated  in  good  order,  fighting  all  the  way  to
Knoxville,  where  he  was  fortified  and  provisioned
for  a  siege  by  the  time  Longstreet  was  ready  to  in-
vest the  place.  This  movement,  according  to  Gen.
Burnside's  biographer,  was  made,  on  his  own  re-
sponsibility, to  draw  Longstreet  away  from  Grant's
front,  and  thus  facilitate  the  defeat  of  Gen.  Bragg,
which  soon  followed.  The  siege  of  Knoxville  was
prosecuted  with  great  vigor  for  a  month,  when  the
approach  of  Gen.  Sherman  compelled  Longstreet
to  raise  the  siege.  Immediately  afterward  Gen.
Burnside  was  relieved,  and  devoted  himself  to  re-
cruiting and  reorganizing  the  9th  corps.  In  April,
18G4,  he  resumed  command  at  Annapolis,  with  the
corps  nearly  20,000  strong.  Attached  once  more
to  the  army  of  the  Potomac,  this  time  under  Gen.
Grant,  he  led  his  corps  through  the  battles  of  the
Wilderness  and  Cold  Harbor,  and  the  operations
against  Petersburg.  In  these  latter  engagements
the  corps  suffered  very  heavily,  and  Gen.  Meade
preferred  charges  of  disobedience  against  Burn-
side, and  ordered  a  court-martial  for  his  trial.
This  course  was  disapproved  by  Gen.  Grant,  and,  at
Burnside's  request,  a  court  of  inquiry  was  ordered,
which  eventually  found  him  "  answerable  for  the
want  of  success."  He  always  held  that  the  failure
was  due  to  interference  with  his  plan  of  assault,
and  before  a  congressional  committee  of  investi-
gation much  testimony  was  adduced  to  show  that
this  was  really  the  case.

Gen.  Burnside  resigned  from  the  army  on  15
April,  1865,  with  a  military  record  that  does  him
high  honor  as  a  patriotic,  brave,  and  able  officer,
to  whom  that  bane  of  army  life,  professional  jeal-
ousy, was  unknown.  He  always  frankly  admitted
his  "own  unfitness  for  the  command  of  a  large  army,
and  accepted  such  commands  only  under  stress  of
circumstances.  Returning  to  civil  life,  he  became
at  once  identified  with  railroad  construction  and
management.  He  was  elected  governor  of  Rhode
Island  in  April,  1866,  and  re-elected  in  1867  and
1868.  Declining  a  fourth  nomination,  he  devote^,
himself  successfully  to  the  great  railroad  interests
with  which  he  was  identified.  He  went  to  Europe
on  busine.ss  during  the  height  of  the  Franco-Pnis-
sian  war,  and,  as  a  soldier,  naturally  wished  to  wit-
ness some  of  the  siege  operations  before  Pans.
Visiting  the  Prussian  headquarters  at  ^fj^^y'^j
simply  in  a  private  capacity,  he  found  himself  caJlea


BURNSIDE


BURR


465


upon  to  act  as  an  envoy  between  the  hostile  forces,
which  he  did,  passing  back  and  forth  under  a  flag-
of-truce,  endeavoring  to  further  negotiations  for
peace.  In  Paris,  and  among  the  German  besiegers,
he  was  looked  upon  with  the  greatest  curiosity,
and,  although  his  efforts  at  peace-making  were  un-
successful, he  secured  the  lasting  respect  and  con-
fidence of  both  sides.  In  January,  1875,  after  his
return  to  this  country,  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  Rhode  Island,  and  in  1880  was  re-elected.
He  took  a  leading  position  in  the  senate,  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  foreign  affairs,  and  sus-
tained his  life-long  character  as  a  fair-minded  and
patriotic  citizen.  His  death,  which  was  very  sud-
den, from  neuralgia  of  the  heart,  occurred  at  his
home  in  Bristol,  R.  I.  The  funeral  ceremonies  as-
sumed an  almost  national  character,  for  his  valua-
ble services  as  a  soldier  and  as  a  statesman  had  se-
cured general  recognition,  and  in  his  own  state  he
was  the  most  conspicuous  man  of  his  time.  Burn-
side  was  a  tall  and  handsome  man  of  soldierly
bearing,  with  charming  manners,  which  won  for
him  troops  of  friends  and  admirers.  He  outlived
his  wife,  and  died  childless.  See  "  Life  and  Public
Services  of  Ambrose  E.  Burnside,"  by  Benjamin
Perley  Poore  (Providence,  1882).

BURNSIDE,  John,  planter,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1800 ;  d.  at  White  Sulphur  Springs,  Va.,  29  June,
1881.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the  largest
sugar-planter  in  the  United  States.  He  began  life
in  poverty,  and  his  first  business  engagement  was
in  a  country  store  in  Virginia ;  but  so  marked  was
his  ability  that  he  became  partner  in  a  large  New
Orleans  house.  About  1852  he  began  to  invest
money  in  sugar  lands,  and  eventually  owned  ten
of  the  finest  plantations  in  the  sugar  district  of
Louisiana  and  the  finest  residence  in  New  Orleans.
In  spite  of  the  loss  of  more  than  2,000  slaves,  he
was  among  the  first  to  try  sugar-planting  with  free
labor  on  a  large  scale,  and  his  success  had  much  in-
fluence in  re-establishing  the  broken  industries  and
credit  of  the  south.

BURNYEAT,  John,  preacher,  b.  in  Crabtree-
beck,  Cumberland,  in  1G31 ;  d.  in  Dublin,  11  July,
1690.  He  travelled  in  England  and  Ireland,  and
in  1672  came  with  George  Fox  to  America.  His
"  Truth  Exalted  in  the  Writings  of  that  Eminent
and  Faithful  Servant,  J.  Burnyeat"  (1691),  is  a
collection  of  his  expository  essays,  and  his  "  Me-
morials" describe  the  condition  of  Maryland  and
the  other  colonies  through  which  he  passed  from
New  England  to  North  Carolina.  He  was  a  zeal-
ous advocate  of  the  creed  and  polity  of  the  society
of  Friends,  and  suffered  much  persecution  because
of  his  steadfast  ministry.

BURPEE,  Isaac,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
Sheffield,  N.  B.,  28  Nov.,  1825;  d.  in  New  York
city,  1  March,  1885.  He  was  educated  at  the  county
grammar-school,  and  in  1848  went  to  St.  John,
shortly  afterward  entering  into  partnership  with
his  brother  in  the  hardware  trade.  He  was  first
elected  to  Parliament  in  1872  for  St.  John,  N.  B.,
re-elected  in  1874,  and  sworn  of  the  Privy  council
and  appointed  Minister  of  customs  in  the  Macken-
zie administration  (Liberal),  7  Nov.,  1874.  He  was
re-elected  in  1878,  and  holds  many  offices  of  honor
and  public  trust.

BURR,  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Conn.,
4  Jan.,  1716;  d.  24  Sept.,  1757.  He  belonged  to  a
Puritan  family  that  for  three  generations  had  given
to  church  and  state  men  of  eminence.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  his  nineteenth  year,  having
gained  one  of  the  three  Berkely  scholarships,  which
entitled  him  to  maintenance  at  the  college  for  two
years  after  graduating.  While  pursuing  his  post-
voL.  I. — 30


graduate  studies  he  was  converted,  and  at  once
turned  his  attention  to  theology.  At  the  age  of
twenty-two  he  became  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  where  he  soon  acquired  a
commanding  reputation  as  a  pulpit  orator.  Here
he  also  established  a  school  for  boys,  which  proved
highly  successful.  He  prepared  for  his  pupils  a  Latin
grammar  known  as  the  "  Newark  Grammar  "  (1752),
which  was  long  in  use  at  Princeton.  In  later  years
he  published  a  small  work  on  the  "  Supreme  Deity
of  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (new  ed.,  1791),  with  an
occasional  sermon.  In  1748,  at  the  age  of  thirty-
two,  he  became  president  of  the  College  of  New
Jersey,  but  without  interrupting  his  pastoral  ser-
vice. In  the  summer  of  1752  he  married  Esther,
daughter  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  of  Stockbridge,
Mass.  In  the  autumn  of  1756  he  resigned  his
charge  at  Newark  and  removed  to  Princeton,  where
he  (lied  from  overwork.  He  left  two  children,
Sarah,  b.  3  May,  1754,  and  Aaron.  As  scholar,
preacher,  author,  and  educator.  President  Burr  was
one  of  the  foremost  men  of  his  time.  To  his  more
solid  qualities  were  added  a  certain  grace  and  dis-
tinguished style  of  manner,  which  re-appeared  in
his  son.  Though  nominally  the  second  president
of  Princeton,  he  was  practically  the  first,  since  the
former,  Jonathan  Dickinson,  only  served  for  a  few
months.  He  was  in  a  true  sense  its  founder,  and
the  college  may  be  said  to  be  his  monument.  Six
of  its  presidents  are  buried  in  Princeton  by  his
side. — His  son,  Aaron,  statesman,  b.  in  Newark,  N.
J.,  6  Feb.,  1756;  d.  on  Staten  Island,  N.  Y,  14
Sept.,  1836,  His  mother  was  Esther  Edwards,  the
flower  of  the  remarkable  family  to  which  she  be-
longed,  celebrated  for  her  beauty  as  well  as  for
her  superior  intellect
and  devout  piety.
In  the  truest  sense,
Aaron  Burr  was  well
born.  Jonathan  Ed-
wards, his  grand-
father, illustrious  as
divine  and  meta-
physician, had  been
elected  to  succeed
his  son-in-law  as
president  of  Prince-
ton, but  died  of
a  fever,  resulting
from  inoculation  for
small-pox,  before  he
had  fairly  entered
upon  his  work.  Mrs.
Burr,  his  daughter,
died  of  a  similar
disease  sixteen  days
later.  The  infant
Aaron  and  his  sister  Sarah,  left  doubly  orphaned,
were  placed  in  charge  of  their  uncle,  the  Rev,
Timothy  Edwards,  of  Eiizabethtown  (now  Eliz-
abeth), N.  J.  A  handsome  fortune  having  been
bequeathed  to  them  by  their  father,  their  edu-
cation was  conducted  in  a  liberal  manner ;  a  pri-
vate tutor  was  provided,  Tapping  Reeve,  who  af-
terward married  his  pupil,  Sarah  Burr,  and  be-
came judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Connecticut.
A  bright,  mischievous  boy,  and  diffieult  to  control,
Aaron  was  still  sufficiently  studious  to  be  prepared
to  enter  Princeton  at  the  age  of  eleven,  though  he
was  not  admitted  on  account  of  his  extreme  youth.
He  was  very  small,  but  strikingly  handsome,  with
fine  black  "eyes  and  the  engaging  ways  that  be-
came a  fascination  in  his  maturer  life.  In  1769  he
was  allowed  as  a  favor  to  enter  the  sophomore
class,  though  only  in  his  thirteenth  year. He  was


466


BURR


BURR


a  fairly  diligent  student  and  an  extensive  reader,
and  was  graduated  with  distinction  in  September,
1772.  Stories  of  wild  dissipation  during  his  college
course  are  probably  exaggerations.  Just  before
his  graduation  the  college  was  profoundly  stirred
by  religious  excitement,  and  young  Burr,  who  con-
fessed that  he  was  moved  by  the  revival,  resorted
to  Dr.  Witherspoon,  the  president,  for  advice.  The
doctor  quieted  his  anxiety  by  telling  him  that  the  ex-
citement was  fanatical.  Not  entirely  satisfied,  he
went  in  the  autumn  of  the  next  year  to  live  for  a  while
in  the  family  of  the  famous  theologian.  Dr.  Bella-
my, of  Bethlehem,  Conn.,  with  the  ostensible  pur-
pose of  settling  his  mind  with  regard  to  the  claims
of  Christianity.  The  result  was  a  great  surprise  to
his  friends,  if  not  to  himself ;  he  deliberately  re-
jected the  gospel  and  adopted  the  infidelity  then  so
rife  in  Europe  and  America.  The  form  of  unbelief
accepted  by  him  was  that  of  Lord  Chesterfield,
along  with  his  lordship's  peculiar  views  of  morali-
ty. Here  is  probably  the  key  to  a  comprehension
of  Burr's  entire  life.  He  resolved  to  be  a  "  perfect
man  of  the  world,"  according  to  the  Chesterfieldian
code.  Most  of  the  next  year  (1774)  he  passed  in
Litchfield,  Conn.,  where  he  began  the  study  of  the
law  under  Tapping  Reeve,  who  had  married  his  sis-
ter. At  the  beginning  of  the  revolution,  in  1775,
Burr  hastened  to  join  the  patriot  army  near  Bos-
ton. He  had  a  genuine  passion  for  military  life,
and  was  singularly  qualified  to  excel  as  a  soldier.
Here,  fretted  by  inaction,  he  resolved  to  accompany
Col.  Benedict  Arnold  in  his  expedition  to  Quebec.
Against  the  expostulations  of  all  his  friends  and  the
commands  of  his  uncle,  Timothy,  he  persisted  in
his  determination.  Out  of  the  memorable  hard-
ships and  disasters  of  that  expedition  young  Burr
came  back  with  the  rank  of  major  and  a  brilliant
reputation  for  courage  and  ability.  Soon  after  his
return  he  became  a  member  of  Gen.  Washington's
family.  From  some  cause  the  place  did  not  please
him,  and  after  about  six  weeks  he  withdrew  from
Washington's  table  and  accepted  an  appointment
as  aide  to  Gen.  Putnam.  This  incident  was  ex-
tremely unfortunate  for  him.  During  their  brief
association  Burr  contracted  prejudices  against
Washington  which  grew  into  deep  dislike,  and
Washington  got  impressions  of  Burr  that  ripened
into  settled  distrust.  In  July,  1777,  Burr  was  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  with  the
command  of  his  regiment,  the  colonel  preferring  to
remain  at  home.  In  September,  while  occupying
the  house  near  Ramapo  Pass,  of  which  a  represen-
tation is  here  given,  he  defeated  the  enemy  near


Hackensack  and  drove  them  back  to  Paulus  Hook.
At  Monmouth  he  distinguished  himself  at  the  head
of  a  brigade.  While  Burr's  command  lay  in  Orange
CO.,  N,  Y.,  he  became  acquainted  with  Mrs.  Theo-
dosia  Prevost,  an  intelligent  and  accomplished  lady
living  at Paramus,  widow  of  an  English  officer


who  had  recently  died  in  the  West  Indies.  She
was  ten  years  his  senior  and  had  two  sons.  In
March,  1779,  after  four  years  of  service,  he  resigned
his  commission  on  account  of  broken  health.  In
the  autumn  of  1780,  his  health  having  improved.
Burr  resumed  the  study  of  law,  first  with  Judge
Patterson,  of  New  Jersey,  and  afterward  with
Thomas  Smith,  of  Haverstraw,  N.  Y.  On  17  April,
1782,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Albany,  the
rule  that  required  three  years  spent  in  study  having
been  in  his  case  relaxed  on  account  of  his  serv-
ice as  a  soldier.  Now,  at  the  age  of  twenty-six,
he  took  an  office  in  Albany  and  almost  immedi-
ately commanded  a  large  practice.  Being  at  last
in  a  condition  to  warrant  this  step,  he  married
Mrs.  Prevost,  2  July,  1782,  and  at  once  began
housekeeping  in  Albany  in  handsome  style.  In
the  first  year  of  his  marriage  his  daughter,  Theo-
dosia,  was  born,  the  only  child  of  this  union.  In
the  latter  part  of  the  next  year,  just  after  the  Brit-
ish had  evacuated  the  city,  he  returned  to  New  York
and  devoted  himself  to  his  profession  for  eight
years,  having  during  that  period  twice  served  as  a
member  of  the  New  York  legislature.  He  stood
among  the  leaders  of  the  bar,  with  no  rival  but  Alex-
ander Hamilton.  Obtaining  possession  of  Richmond
Hill,  a  fine  New  York  mansion  with  ample  grounds,
he  dispensed  a  liberal  hospitality.  Talleyrand,
Volney,  and  Louis  Philippe  were  among  his  guests.
In  1788,  just  after  the  adoption  of  the  constitution.
Burr  entered  the  arena  of  politics  as  a  candidate  of
the  anti-federal  party,  though  he  was  not  distinctly
identified  with  those  who  nominated  him,  and  soon
afterward  he  was  appointed  by  Gov.  Clinton  attor-
ney-general, an  office  which  he  held  for  two  years.
In  1791  he  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  over
Gen.  Philip  Schuyler,  to  the  great  surprise  of  the
country  and  the  keen  disappointment  of  Ham-
ilton, Schuyler's  son-in-law.  The  federalists  had
a  majority  in  the  legislature,  and  Schuyler  was
one  of  the  pillars  of  the  federal  party.  The
triumph  of  Burr  under  these  circumstances  was
mysterious.  For  six  years  he  served  in  the
senate  with  conspicuous  ability,  acting  steadily
with  the  republican  party.  Mrs.  Burr  died  of
cancer  in  1794.  Among  the  last  words  he  ever
spoke  was  this  testimony  to  the  wife  of  his  youth :
"  The  mother  of  my  Theo  was  the  best  woman  and
finest  lady  I  have  ever  known."  After  her  death
the  education  of  his  daughter  engrossed  a  large
share  of  his  attention.  In  1797  the  tables  turned,
and  his  defeated  antagonist.  Gen.  Schuyler,  was  al-
most unanimously  elected  to  his  seat  in  the  sen-
ate. Burr  was  shortly  afterward  made  a  member
of  the  New  York  assemblv.  Into  the  presidential
contest  of  1800  he  entered  with  all  his  energy.  The
republicans  triumphed ;  but  between  the  two  high-
est candidates  there  was  a  tie,  each  receiving
seventy-three  votes,  which  threw  the  election  into
the  house  of  representatives.  In  connection  with
this  affair.  Burr  was  charged  with  intriguing  to
defeat  the  public  will  and  have  himself  chosen  to
the  first  office,  instead  of  Jefferson.  After  a  fierce
struggle  of  seven  days,  the  house  elected  Jefferson
president  and  Burr'  vice-president.  He  was  then
forty-five  vears  old  and  at  the  top  of  his  fortune.
His  daughter  had  made  a  highly  satisfactory  mar-
riage, and  his  pecuniarv  prospects  were  improved.
In  1801,  just  before  entering  upon  his  duties  as
vice-president,  he  was  a  member  of  a  convention  of
the  state  of  New  York  for  revising  its  constitution,
and  was  made  chairman  by  unanimous  vote.  But
a  great  change  was  at  hand.  Near  the  close  of  his
term  of  office  as  vice-president,  Burr,  finding  him-
self under  a  cloud  with  his  party,  sought  to  re-


BURR


BURR


467


cover  his  popularity  by  being  a  candidate  for  the

fovernorship  of  New  York,  but  was  defeated  by
lorgan  Lewis.  In  this  contest  Alexander  Hamil-
ton had  put  forth  his  utmost  energies  against
Burr,  Though  the  relations  of  these  political
leaders  had  remained  outwardly  friendly,  they  had
long  been  rivals,  and  Hamilton  had  not  hesitated
to  express  in  private  his  distrust  of  Burr,  and  to
balk  several  of  his  ambitious  projects.  In  the
gubernatorial  canvass  Hamilton  had  written  con-
cerning his  rival  in  a  very  severe  manner,  and
some  of  his  expressions  having  got  into  the  news-
papers, Burr  immediately  fastened  upon  them  as
ground  for  a  challenge.  A  long  correspondence
ensued,  in  which  Hamilton  vainly  sought  to  avoid
extremities.  At  length  the  challenge  was  accepted,
and  the  parties  met  on  the  bank  of  the  Hudson,  at
Weehavvken,  N.  J.,  at  seven  o'clock  a.  m.,  7  July,
1804.  At  the  first  fire  Hamilton  fell  mortally
wounded.  But  Burr's  shot  was  more  fatal  to  hijn-
self  than  to  his  foe ;  he  left  that  "  field  of  honor  "
a  ruined  man.  The  tragedy  aroused  an  unprece-
dented excitement,  before  which  Burr  felt  it  wise
to  fly.  The  coroner's  inquest  having  returned  a
verdict  of  murder,  he  escaped  to  South  Carolina
and  took  refuge  in  the  home  of  his  daughter.
Though  an  indictment  for  murder  was  obtained
against  him,  the  excitement  subsided,  and  he  was
left  unmolested.  After  a  season  he  ventured  to
Washington,  and  completed  his  term  of  service  as
vice-president.  Though  his  political  prospects
were  now  blasted  and  his  name  execrated,  his  bold
and  resolute  spirit  did  not  break.  Courage  and
fortitude  were  the  cardinal  virtues  of  his  moral
code,  and  his  restless  mind  was  already  employed
with  new  and  vast  projects.  Early  in  1805  he
turned  his  course  toward  the  great  west,  then  a
new  world.  From  Pittsburg  he  floated  in  a  boat,
specially  built  for  him,  down  to  New  Orleans,  stop-
ping at  many  points,  and  often  receiving  enthusi-
astic attention.  After  some  time  spent  in  the
southwest,  he  slowly  returned  to  Washington,
where  he  sought  from  the  president  an  appoint-
ment suitable  to  his  dignity.  Foiled  in  this  effort,
he  turned  more  earnestly  to  his  mysterious  western
projects.  His  purpose  seems  to  have  been  to  col-
lect a  body  of  followers  and  conquer  Texas — per-
haps Mexico — establishing  there  a  republic  of
which  he  should  be  the  head.  With  this  he  asso-
ciated the  hope  that  the  western  states,  ultimately
falling  away  from  the  union,  would  cast  in  their
lot  with  him,  making  New  Orleans  the  capital  of
the  new  nation.  As  a  rendezvous  and  refuge  for
his  followers,  he  actually  bought  a  vast  tract  of
land  on  Washita  river,  for  which  the  sum  of
$40,000  was  to  be  paid.  It  was  a  wild  scheme,  and,
if  not  technically  treasonable,  was  so  near  to  it  as
to  make  him  a  public  enemy.  Events  had  ad-
vanced rapidly,  and  Burr's  plans  were  nearly  ripe
for  execution,  when  the  president,  who  had  not
been  ignorant  of  what  was  maturing,  issued  a
proclamation,  27  Oct.,  1806,  denouncing  the  enter-
prise and  warning  the  people  against  it.  The  pro-
ject immediately  collapsed.  On  14  Jan.,  1807,
Burr  was  arrested  in  Mississippi  territory,  and,
having  escaped,  was  again  arrested  in  Alabama,
whence  he  was  conveyed  to  Richmond,  Va.  Here
was  held  the  memorable  trial  for  treason,  begin-
ning 22  May,  1807,  and  lasting,  with  some  inter-
ruptions, for  six  months.  In  the  array  of  distin-
guished counsel,  William  Wirt  was  pre-eminent
for  the  prosecution  and  Luther  Martin  for  the  de-
fence. Burr  himself  took  an  active  part  in  the
case.  On  1  Sept.  the  jury  returned  a  verdict  of
not  guilty  on  the  indictment  for  treason,  and  some


time  afterward  the  prisoner  was  acquitted,  on
technical  grounds,  of  the  charge  of  misdemeanor.
Though  Burr  was  now  free,  his  good  name  was
not  restored  by  the  issue  of  the  trial,  and  he  soon
sailed  for  England,  still  animated  by  new  schemes
and  hopes.  After  various  adventures  in  that
country,  he  was  expelled  as  an  "embarrassing"
person,  and  went  to  Sweden.  Having  spent  some
time  in  Copenhagen  and  various  cities  of  Germany,
he  reached  Paris  in  February,  1810.  Here,  kept
under  government  surveillance,  and  refused  per-
mission to  return  to  the  United  States,  he  was  re-
duced to  the  severest  pecuniary  straits.  Return-
ing again  to  England,  he  was  obliged  to  remain
there  in  desperate  extremities  for  a  year  and  a
half.  At  last  he  got  away  in  the  ship  "Auro-
ra," and  reached  Boston  in  May,  1812,  Disguised
under  the  name  of  Arnot,  as  well  as  with  wig,
whiskers,  and  strange  garments,  the  returning  ex-
ile entered  the  city  in  a  most  humiliating  plight.
The  government  prosecutions  still  hung  over  his
head,  and  some  of  his  creditors  had  executions
against  him,  which  might  throw  him  into  a  prison.
He  ventured  to  New  York,  however,  reaching  that
place  four  years  after  leaving  it.  He  soon  opened
an  office  in  Nassau  street,  old  friends  rallied  around
him,  and  the  future  began  to  brighten  somewhat,
when  he  was  stunned  by  the  information  that  his
only  grandchild,  Theodosia's  son,  aged  eleven,  was
dead.  A  still  more  crushing  blow  soon  came.
The  daughter,  who  was  his  idol,  perished  at  sea
while  on  a  voyage  from  Charleston  to  New  York
in  January,  1813.  Burr  was  now  fifty-seven  years
old.  Shunned  by  society,  though  with  a  consider-
able practice,  he  lived  on  for  twenty-three  years.
At  the  age  of  seventy-eight  he  married  Madame
Jumel,  widow  of  a  French  merchant,  who  had  a
considerable  fortune.  The  union  soon  proved  un-
happy, owing  to  Burr's  reckless  use  of  his  wife's
money,  and  they  finally  separated,  though  not  di-
vorced. In  his  last  days  Burr  was  dependent  on
the  charity  of  a  Scotch  woman,  a  friend  of  former
years,  for  a  home.  He  died  at  Port  Richmond,
Staten  Island,  and  his  remains  lie,  according  to  his
request,  in  the  cemetery  at  Princeton,  near  those
of  his  honored  father  and  grandfather.  In  person,
Burr  was  small,  often  being  spoken  of  as  "  little
Burr,"  but  his  appearance  and  manners  were  fasci-
nating. In  his  case  the  finest  gifts  of  nature  and
fortune  were  spoiled  by  unsound  moral  principles
and  the  absence  of  all  genuine  convictions.  His
habits  were  licentious.  He  was  a  master  of  in-
trigue, though  to  little  purpose.  He  was  a  re-
spectable lawyer  and  speaker,  but  lacked  the  quali-
ties of  a  statesman.  Dauntless  resolution  and  cool
self-possession  never  forsook  him.  On  the  morn-
ing of  his  duel  with  Hamilton  he  was  found  by  a
friend  in  a  sound  sleep.  Though  a  skeptic,  he  was
not  a  scoffer.  In  his  last  hours  he  said  of  the
holy  Scriptures :  "  They  are  the  most  perfect  system
of  truth  the  world  has  ever  seen." — His  daughter,
Theodosia,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1783 ;  d.  at  sea
in  January,  1813,  was  one  of  the  most  highly  ac-
complished and  brilliant  of  American  women.  Her
father,  to  whom  she  was  an  ol:)ject  of  pride  as  well
as  passionate  affection,  devoted  himself  to  inform-
ing her  mind  and  training  her  character  in  accord-
ance with  his  own  ideal  of  womanhood.  In  her
tenth  year  she  read  Horace  and  Terence  in  the
original  Latin,  spoke  French,  and  was  studying
the  Greek  grammar.  He  was  as  careful  of  her
physical  as  of  her  mental  education,  and  sought  to
develop  the  independence  of  thought  and  self-reli-
ance that  was  universally  discouraged  at  the  time
in  the  training  of  girls. After  her  mother's  death,


468


BURR


BURRILL


^^S^^^^t^


in  1794,  Tlieodosia  became  mistress  of  her  father's
house  and  the  companion  of  his  leisure  hours.  On
2  Feb.,  1801,  she  married  Joseph  Alston,  a  wealthy
and  talented  young  planter  of  South  Carolina,  who
in  after  years  became  governor  of  his  native  state.

The  devotion  of
Theodosia  to  her
father  approached
idolatry;  through
all  the  disasters
of  his  career  she
clung  to  him  with
unshaken  fidelity.
She  and  her  hus-
band were  cogni-
zant of  her  fa-
ther's scheme  to
become  emperor
of  Mexico,  her  son
was  to  be  the  heir
to  the  throne,
and  when  Burr
was  brought  to
trial  at  Richmond
his  daughter  was
there,  and,  by  the
power  of  her  beau-
ty and  intellectual  graces,  did  much  to  stay  the  tor-
rent of  popular  indignation  and  secure  a  favorable
verdict.  Her  eloquent  letters  to  Mrs.  Madison,  Sec.
Gallatin,  and  other  old  friends  of  Burr  paved
the  way  for  his  return  to  New  York  after  four
years  of  exile  and  poverty.  Before  his  arrival
Theodosia's  son  and  only  child  died,  in  his  eleventh
year.  In  consequence  of  this  blow  she  was  pros-
trated by  a  nervous  fever ;  but,  eager  to  see  her
father  once  more,  she  embarked  at  Charleston  for
New  York,  29  Dec,  1812,  on  a  pilot-boat  called  the
"  Patriot."  A  storm  soon  arose,  and  raged  along
the  coast,  in  which  the  "  Patriot "  probably  foun-
dered off  Hatteras.  Nothing  was  ever  heard  of
the  vessel  again.  This  event  completed  the  tragedy
of  the  Burr  family.  The  accompanying  portrait
of  Theodosia  represents  her  at  the  age  of  nine-
teen. See  "  Life  of  Aaron  Burr,"  by  Samuel  L.
Knapp  (New  York,  1835);  "Memoirs,  with  Selec-
tions from  his  Correspondence "  (2  vols.,  1837-'8),
and  "  Private  Journal "  during  his  residence  abroad,
with  selections  from  his  correspondence  (2  vols.,
1838),  both  edited  by  Matthew  L.  Davis;  and
"  Life  and  Times  of  Aaron  Burr,"  by  James  Par-
ton  (New  York,  1858).

BURR,  Enoch  Fitch,  author,  b.  in  Green's
Farms,  Fairfield  co..  Conn.,  21  Oct.,  1818.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1839,  and  spent  several  years
at  New  Haven  in  theological  and  scientific  studies.
After  a  year  spent  in  foreign  travel,  he  became,  in
1850,  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church  in  Lyme,
Conn.  He  has  published  "  A  Treatise  on  the
Application  of  the  Calculus  to  the  Theory  of  Nep-
tune "  (New  Haven,  1848) ;  "  Ecee  Ccelum  "  (Bos-
ton, 1867) ;  "  Pater  Mundi  "  (1869) ;  "  Ad  Fidem  "
(1871);  "Facts  in  Aid  of  Faith"  (New  York,
1872);  "Doctrine  of  Evolution"  (Boston,  1873);
"A  Song  of  the  Sea,"  an  illustrated  poem  (1873);
"Pasce  Agnos"  (1873);  "Sunday  Afternoons"
(New  York,  1874) ;  "  Thy  Voyage  "  a  poem  (1874) ;
"  Toward  the  Strait  Gate "  and  "  Work  in  the
Vineyard  "  (Boston,  1876) ;  "  From  Dark  to  Day,"
a  poem  (1877) ;  "  Dio  the  Athenian  "  (New  York,
1880) ;  "  Tempted  to  Unbelief"  (1882) ;  "  Ecce  Ter-
ra "  (Philadelphia,  1884);  "  Celestial  Empires  "  (New
York,  1885) ;  and  "  Consensus  of  Faith  "  (1886).

BURRALL,  Jonathan,  soldier,  b.  in  1753 ;  d.
in  Goshen,  N.  Y.,  18  Nov.,  1834. In  1776  he  joined


the  northern  army  under  Schuyler.  His  talents
soon  procured  him  the  appointment  of  assistant
paymaster,  and,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  a  place  in
the  commission  for  settling  the  accounts  of  the
commissary  and  quartermaster's  departments.  He
was  afterward  assistant  postmaster-general,  cashier
of  the  U.  S.  branch  bank  of  New  York,  and  manager
of  the  New  York  state  lotteries  at  a  time  when
public  confidence  in  them  had  been  shaken.

BURRALL,  William  Porter,  railroad  official,
b.  in  Canaan,  Conn.,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
3  March,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1826,  studied  law  in  Salisbury,  Conn.,  and  at  the
Litchfield  law-scliool,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
of  Litchfield  county  in  1829.  He  practised  law
in  his  native  town  until  October,  1839,  when  he
was  chosen  president  of  the  Housatonic  railroad
company,  and  removed  to  Bridgeport,  Conn.  This
office  he  held  for  fifteen  years,  when  he  resigned
in  consequence  of  the  pressure  of  other  engage-
ments. He  was  also  connected  with  the  New  York
and  New  Haven  railroad  during  its  construction
and  the  earlier  years  of  its  operation,  was  treas-
urer, and  afterward  president,  of  the  Illinois  cen-
tral railroad,  vice-president,  and  afterward  presi-
dent, of  the  Hartford  and  New  Haven  railroad,
and  was  finally  vice-president  of  the  New  York,
New  Haven,  and  Hartford  railroad  upon  the  con-
solidation of  those  companies.  He  removed  to
Salisbury,  Conn.,  in  1859,  subsequently  represented
that  town  several  times  in  the  general  assembly,
and  was  also  a  member  of  the  state  senate.

BURRIEL,  Andres  Marcos  (boor-e-el'),  Span-
ish scholar,  b.  in  1719;  d.  in  1762.  Twelve  years
before  his  death  he  was  commissioned  to  make
some  archaeological  explorations,  which  he  effected
with  great  success.  Among  his  best  works  are
"  Prologo  "  on  the  travels  of  Jorge  Juan  and  Anto-
nio de  Ulloa  in  Ecuador,  "  Paleografia  Espaiiola,"
and  "  Noticia  de  la  California,  Cartas,"  etc.

BURRILL,  Alexander  M.,  legal  writer,  b.  in
1807 ;  d.  in  Kearney,  N.  J.,  7  Feb.,  1869.  He  was
graduated  at  Columbia,  in  1824,  with  the  highest
honors  of  the  class,  studied  several  years  in  the
office  of  Chancellor  Kent,  and  Avas  admitted  to
the  New  York  bar  in  1828.  He  was  remarkable
for  his  scholarly  precision  and  discrimination  in
the  use  of  language.  He  published  "  Practice  of
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (2
vols.,  1840;  2d  ed.,  3  vols.,  1846);  "Law  Diction-
ary and  Glossary  "  (2  vols..  New  York,  1850) ;  "  Law
and  Practice  of  Voluntary  Assignments "  (1853) ;
and  "  Circumstantial  Evidence  "  (1856).  He  also
aided  in  compiling  "  Worcester's  Dictionary."

BURRILL,  James,  statesman, b.  in  Providence,
R.  I.,  25  April,  1772 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  25
Dec,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Rhode  Island
college  (now  Brown  university)  in  1788,  and,  after
studying  law  with  Theodore  Foster  and  David  How-
ell (both  afterward  U.  S.  senators),  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  September,  1791.  He  was  attorney-
general  of  Rhode  Island  from  1797  till  1813,  when
the  decline  of  his  health  caused  his  retirement  irora
the  bar.  •  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  m
1813,  speaker  in  1814,  and  chief  justice  of  the  state
supreme  court  in  1816.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  1817,  but  died  before  the  expiration  of  his
term.  He  bore  a  distinguished  part  in  the  senate,
especially  in  the  debate  on  the  Missouri  compro-
mise, to  which  he  was  inflexibly  opposed.

BURRILL,  Thomas  Jonathan,  naturabst  b.
in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  25  April,  1839.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Illinois  state  normal  university  in  l«b&,
where,  in  1868,  he  was  elected  professor  of  botany
and  horticulture. From  1877  till  1884  he  was  dean


BURRINGTON


BURROUGHS


469


of  the  department  of  natural  sciences,  and  in  1882
he  became  vice-president  of  the  university.  In
connection  with  his  botanical  studies,  Prof.  Bur-
rill  has  travelled  extensively  through  the  United
States  and  Central  America,  and  was  a  member  of
MaJ.  J.  W.  Powell's  first  expedition  to  the  Rocky
mountains  in  1867.  He  has  made  careful  studies
of  the  diseases  of  plants,  and,  after  his  investiga-
tions on  the  "  Pear-Tree  Blight "  during  1878-'80,
announced  that  bacteria  were  a  cause  of  disease  in
plants.  In  1878  he  was  president  of  the  Illinois
state  horticultural  society,  during  1883-'4  vice-
president  of  the  American  horticultural  society,
vice-president  of  the  section  of  biology  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  in  1885-'6  president  of  the  American
society  of  microscopists.  He  edited  the  biennial
reports  of  the  University  of  Illinois  during  the
years  1874  to  1886,  and  has  written  many  papers
and  pamphlets,  among  which  are  "  The  Bacteria  "
(Springiield,  1882)  and  the  "  Uredineae,  or  Para-
sitic Fungi  of  Illinois  "  (Peoria,  1885).

BURRINGTON,  George,  colonial  governor  of
North  Carolina,  d.  in  1734.  He  was  appointed
governor,  15  Jan.,  1724,  because  his  father  had
been  active  in  support  of  the  British  government
at  the  accession  of  George  I.  Burrington  was  ig-
norant and  profligate,  and  on  7  April,  1725,  was
succeeded  by  Sir  Richard  Everard.  His  retirement
angered  him  so  much  that  he  proceeded  to  make
himself  disagreeable  to  Everard  in  various  ways,
and  was  several  times  indicted  for  disorderly
conduct,  once  for  knocking  loudly  on  the  new
governor's  door,  calling  him  "a  noodle  and  an
ape,"  and  declaring  that  he  was  "  no  more  fit  to  be
governor  than  Sancho  Panza."  Burrington  did
not  appear  at  the  time  set  for  his  trial,  and  a  nolle
prosequi  was  finally  entered  by  the  governor's  or-
der. Burrington  left  the  colony,  and  in  1730,
when  Everard  was  removed,  the  home  government,
strangely  enough,  considering  his  previous  experi-
ence, sent  him  out  again  as  governor  of  North
Carolina.  He  arrived  in  February,  1731,  and  con-
ducted himself  with  such  a  want  of  prudence  as  to
increase  the  number  of  his  enemies.  Riding  across
the  country  one  day,  and  observing  that  a  poor
man  had  built  a  cabin  on  his  land,  the  governor
ordered  his  servant  to  burn  the  cabin.  Finally,
knowing  that  Smith,  late  chief  justice  of  the  colony,
had  been  sent  to  England  by  the  council  to  com-
plain of  him,  Burrington  left,  in  April,  1734,  osten-
sibly on  a  visit  to  South  Carolina,  but  went  im-
mediately to  England.  Some  time  after  this  he
engaged  in  a  drunken  frolic  in  London,  and  was
found  murdered  one  morning  in  St.  James's  park.

BURRITT,  Elihii,  reformer,  b.  in  New  Britain,
Conn.,  8  Dec,  1810 ;  d.  there,  9  March,  1879.  He
was  the  son  of  a  shoemaker,  was  educated  in  the
common  schools  of  his  native  place,  and  in  1828,
after  his  father's  death,  was  apprenticed  to  a
blacksmith.  The  stories  of  the  old  revolutionary
soldiers  who  came  to  his  father's  house  had  given
him  a  desire  to  know  more  of  books,  and,  when  his
apprenticeship  was  ended,  he  studied  Latin,  French,
and  mathematics  with  his  brother,  the  principal  of
a  small  boarding-school.  He  attempted  to  perform
the  duties  of  a  teacher  as  a  means  of  support,  but
poor  health  prevented  success.  He  returned  to  his
forge,  still  continuing  his  studies,  often  watching
the  castings  in  his  furnace  with  a  Greek  grammar
in  his  hand.  After  beginning  the  study  of  He-
brew, he  thought  of  going  to  sea  and  using  his
wages  to  buy  oriental  books  at  the  first  port,  but
gave  up  this  plan,  and,  going  to  Worcester,  Mass.,
resumed  work  at  the  anvil  and  the  study  of  lan-


guages, for  which  the  antiquarian  library  there  gave
him  special  facilities.  Here  he  translated  all  the
Icelandic  sagas  relating  to  the  discovery  of  America,
and  obtained  the  name  of  the  "  learned  blacksmith."
In  1839  he  published  for  a  year  a  monthly  pe-
riodical to  teach
French,  called
"  The  Literary
Gemini."  Mr.
Burritt  made  his
first  public  ap-
pearance in  1841
as  a  lecturer,
maintaining  the
doctrine  that  all
mental  attain-
ments are  the
result  of  persist-
ent studv  and
effort.  In  1842  he
established  the
"Christian  Citi-
zen" at  Worces-
ter, a  weekly
journal,  devoted
to  anti-slavery,
peace,  temper-
ance, and  self-
culture.  Four  years  later  he  went  to  Europe,
and  during  a  visit  of  three  years  devoted  him-
self to  co-operation  with  the  English  peace  advo-
cates. During  this  time  also  he  developed  the
basis  of  an  international  association  known  as  the
League  of  universal  brotherhood,  which  aimed  at
the  abolition  of  war  and  the  promotion  of  frater-
nal relations  and  feelings  between  different  coun-
tries. At  this  time  he  was  proprietor  and  editor
of  the  "  Peace  Advocate,"  and  published  a  periodi-
cal tract,  the  "  Bond  of  Brotherhood."  He  was
prominent  in  organizing  the  first  peace  congress,
and  took  part  in  two  subsequent  congresses,  in
1849  and  1850.  In  1852  he  became  editor  of  the
"  Citizen  of  the  World,"  Philadelphia,  in  which  he
urged  the  compensated  emancipation  of  southern
slaves.  His  disappointment  at  the  failure  of  his
project  was  great.  He  had  advocated  it  clearly
and  forcibly,  and  to  its  advancement  had  devoted
all  his  time  and  resources,  living  at  times  almost  in
poverty.  Mr.  Burritt  then  retired  to  a  small  farm
which  he  owned  at  New  Britain.  He  made  a  brief
visit  to  England  in  1863,  and  during  the  following
two  years  he  published  three  new  books  and  several
volumes  of  general  writings.  He  was  appointed
U.  S.  consul  at  Birmingham  in  1865,  returned
to  America  in  1870,  and  spent  the  remainder  of
his  days  in  his  native  village.  He  published
"  Sparks  from  the  Anvil "  (London,  1848) ;  "  Mis-
cellaneous Writings  "  (1850) ;  "  Olive  Leaves  "
(1853) ;  "  Thoughts  of  Things  at  Home  and  Abroad  "
(Boston,  1854) ;  "  Hand-Book  of  the  Nations "
(New  York,  1856) ;  "  A  Walk  from  John  O'Groat's
to  Land's  End "  (London,  1864) ;  "  The  Mission
of  Great  Sufferings  "  (1867) ;  "  Walks  in  the  Black
Country  "  (1868) ;  "  Lectures  and  Speeches  "  (1869) ;
"Ten  Minute  Talks"  (1873);  and  "Chips  from
Many  Blocks  "  (1878).  See  "  Life  of  Elihu  Burritt,"
by  Charles  Northend  (New  York,  1879).

BURROUGHS,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  27  Dec,  1787;  d.  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
5  March,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1806,  studied  theology,  was  ordained  a  priest
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1812,  and
was  rector  of  St.  John's  church,  Portsmouth  for
nearly  half  a  century.  He  was  for  thirty  years
president  of  the  New  Hampshire  insane  asylum;


470


BURROUGHS


BURRO  WES


was  for  nearly  forty  years  annually  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Portsmouth  athenajum  ;  was  elected
in  1842  corresponding  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts historical  society,  and  was  president  of  the
general  theological  library  of  Boston  from  its  es-
tablishment until  his  death.  In  1833  the  degree
of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Columbia.
He  published  "  Memoirs  of  Horace  B.  Morse "
(1829)  and  "'The  Poetry  of  Religion,  and  Other
Poems  "  (1851).

BURROUtrHS,  George,  clergyman,  b.  about
1650 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  19  Aug.,  1692.  He  was
graduated  at  Harv^ard  in  1670,  was  a  preacher  at
S'almouth  (now  Portland),  Me.,  in  1676,  and  at
Salem,  Mass.,  in  1680.  Here  he  remained  until
1683,  when,  in  consequence  of  some  dispute,  he  re-
turned to  Falmouth,  where  his  former  parishioners
had  given  hira  200  acres  of  land.  His  place  of
residence  after  1690  is  not  certainly  known,  but  in
1692  he  was  accused  of  witchcraft  in  Salem.  He
was  brought  to  trial  on  5  Aug.,  and  it  was  declared
in  the  indictment  that,  by  his  wicked  arts,  one
Mary  Woleott  "  was  tortured,  afflicted,  pined,  con-
sumed, wasted,  and  tormented."  The  evidence
against  him  was  derived  principally  from  the  "  af-
flicted persons  "  and  from  those  who  had  confessed
that  they  were  witches.  These  latter  affirmed  that
Burroughs  had  attended  witch-meetings  with  them,
and  compelled  them  to  the  snares  of  witchcraft.
Burroughs  possessed  great  physical  strength,  and
this  fact  was  used  against  him.  Just  after  his  ar-
rest, as  the  constables  were  taking  him  through  a
wood,  there  had  been  a  violent  thunder-storm,  and
this,  in  the  minds  of  the  judges,  was  additional
proof  of  his  connection  with  the  evil  one.  He
was  condemned  to  death.  It  is  thought  that  his
conviction  was  the  indirect  result  of  the  prejudice
that  had  been  excited  against  him  in  Salem  while
he  was  pastor  there.  At  the  execution  he  repeated
without  mistake  the  Lord's  prayer,  which,  it  was
said,  could  not  be  done  by  a  witch.  He  moved
many  to  tears  by  his  last  words;  but  Cotton
Mather,  who  was  sitting  on  horseback  in  the  crowd,
reminded  the  people  that  the  devil  often  appeared
as  an  angel  of  light.  Burroughs  was  the  only  cler-
gyman that  suffered  during  the  reign  of  this  re-
markable delusion.  A  list  of  works  referring  to
him  may  be  found  in  Sprague's  "Annals  of  the
American  Pulpit."

BURROUGHS,  John,  author,  b.  in  Roxbury,
N".  Y.,  3  April,  1837.  He  is  the  son  of  a  farmer,
and,  after  receiving  an  academic  education,  taught
school  eight  or  nine  years,  and  then  became  a
journalist  in  New  York.  He  was  a  clerk  in  the
treasury  department  at  "Washington  from  1864  till
1873,  and  was  then  appointed  receiver  of  the  Wall-
kill  national  bank  in  Middletown,  N.  Y.  He
settled  on  a  farm  in  Esopus,  N".  Y.,  in  1874,  giving
his  time  to  literature  and  fruit-culture,  except  the
months  when  his  duties  as  bank-examiner  called
him  away.  He  has  contributed  largely  to  peri-
odicals, writing  mainly  upon  rural  themes.  His
books  are  "  Walt  Whitman  as  Poet  and  Person  "
(New  York,  1867) ;  "  Wake  Robin  "  (Boston,  1871) ;
"Winter  Sunshine"  (1875);  "Birds  and  Poets"
(1877) ;  "  Locusts  and  Wild  Honey  "  (1879) ;  "  Pe-
pacton"  (1881);  "Fresh  Fields"  (1884);  and
"  Signs  and  Seasons  "  (1886).  He  has  also  written
a  few  poems.

BURROUGHS,  John  Curtis,  educator,  b.  in
Stamford,  Delaware  co.,  N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1818.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1842  and  at  Madison  theologi-
cal seminary  in  1846.  After  preaching  one  year
in  Waterford,  N.  Y.,  he  was  pastor  of  the  Baptist
church  in  West  Troy  for  five  years,  and  in  1852


assumed  the  pastorate  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
of  Chicago.  In  1855  he  began  a  movement  in  the
interests  of  higher  education,  which  resulted  in
the  establishment,  in  1857,  of  the  university  of
Chicago.  In  1855  Dr.  Burroughs  declined  the
presidency  of  Shurtleff  college,  but  in  1856  he
accepted  the  presidency  of  the  University  of  Chi-
cago, which  he  resigned  in  1874.  Soon  afterward
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Chicago  board
of  education,  and  in  1884  he  was  elected  assistant
superintendent  of  public  schools  in  that  city.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1858  from  the  Uni-
versity of  Rochester,  and  in  1869  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Madison  university.

BURROUGHS,  Stephen,  adventurer,  b.  in
Hanover.  N.  PL,  in  1765;  d.  in  Three  Rivers,
Canada,  28  Jan.,  1840.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Con-
gregational clergyman,  and  early  gained  the  repu-
tation of  the  worst  boy  in  town.  He  ran  away
when  fourteen  years  old  and  joined  the  army,  but
deserted  and  soon  afterward  entered  Dartmouth,
where  he  engaged  in  all  sorts  of  mischief.  He  left
college  secretly  before  the  end  of  his  course,  went
to  sea  as  a  privateersman,  and  then  figured  as
ship's  physician.  Returning  to  land,  he  became  a
school-master,  and  then,  assuming  the  name  of
Davis,  took  charge  of  a  Congregational  church  at
Pelham,  Mass.  He  preached  there  six  months
without  detection,  but  was  then  discovered,  and
shortly  afterward  arrested  in  Springfield,  Mass.,  for
passing  counterfeit  money.  He  was  convicted  and
imprisoned  at  Northampton,  where,  after  numer-
ous unsuccessful  attempts  to  escape,  he  set  fire  to
the  jail  and  was  then  removed  to  Castle  island,
Boston  harbor.  Even  from  this  place  he  escaped,
but  was  recaptured  and  served  out  his  term.  He
then  went  to  Canada,  where  he  was  for  years  the
head  of  a  gang  of  counterfeiters.  Later  in  life  he
reformed,  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic  church,
and  supported  himself  by  educating  the  sons  of
wealthy  Canadians  at  his  home,  where  he  had  a
valuable  library.  -He  was  successful  as  a  teacher,
beloved  by  his  pupils,  and  respected  by  all,  not-
withstanding his  career.  His  charitable  deeds
were  many,  even  in  the  worst  part  of  his  life.  He
published  "  Memoirs  of  My  Own  Life "  (Albany,
1811 ;  Philadelphia,  1848).

BURROWES,  George,  educator,  b.  in  Trenton,
N.  J.,  3  April,  1811.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1832,  and  took  a  three  years'  course  in  the
theological  seminary  there,  also  acting  as  tutor
in  the  college  from  1834  till  1835.  He  was  or-
dained by  New  Castle  presbytery,  13  Dec,  1836,
preached  at  West  Nottingham,  Md.,  from  1836  till
1850,  and  for  the  next  five  years  was  professor  of
Latin  and  Greek  at  Lafayette  college,  Easton,  Pa.
He  preached  at  Newton,  Pa.,  from  1857  till  1859,
when  he  removed  to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  and  was
the  founder  there  of  City  college,  now  University
college.  He  began  this  work  under  the  direction  of
the  Presbyterian  board  of  education  in  November,
1859,  with  four  pupils  and  not  a  dollar  of  property.
When  he  left,  on  account  of  broken  health,  in  1865,
the  institution  numbered  200  pupils  and  ten  teach-
ers and  owned  property  valued  at  |200,000.  He
was  again  professor  in  Lafayette  college  from  lobo
till  1869,  when  he  returned  to  California  and  es-
tablished a  large  school  at  University  Mound,  three
miles  from  San  Francisco,  remaining  its  pruicipaJ
till  1873.  He  became  professor  of  Hebrew  at  the
Presbyterian  theological  seminary,  San  Francisco,
in  1872,  and  in  1875  was  given  the  chair  of  breek
exegesis.  Washington  college.  Pa.,  gave  hira  tlie
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1853.  He  has  contributed  to
periodical  literature,  and  has  published  a  "  Com-


BURROWS


BURTON


471


mentary  on  the  Song  of  Solomon  "  (Philadelphia,
1853) ;  "  Octorara,  a  Poem,  and  Occasional  Pieces  "
(1855) ;  and  "  Advanced  Growth  in  Grace  "  (San
Francisco,  1885).

BURROWS,  William,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Kensington,  now  part  of  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  Oct.,
1785;  d.  near  Portland,  Me.,  5  Sept.,  1813.  He
was  the  son  of  Lieut.-Col.  Burrows,  formerly  com-
mandant of  the  marine  corps,  and  received  a  mid-
shipman's warrant  in  November,  1799,  Joining  the
"  Portsmouth,"  bound  for  France,  in  January,  1800.
He  joined  the  "  Constitution  "  in  1803,  and  Com.
Preble,  taking  a  fancy  to  him,  made  him  acting
lieutenant,  in  which  rank  he  served  through  the
Tripolitan  war.  He  returned  to  this  country  in
1M07.  and  in  1808  commanded  gun-boat  119,  on  the


Delaware,  enforcing  the  embargo  law.  In  1809  he
became  first  lieutenant  of  the  "  Hornet,"  and,  find-
ing himself  outranked  by  his  former  juniors,  ten-
dered his  resignation  to  Sec.  Hamilton,  but  it  was
not  accepted.  After  a  furlough  of  about  a  year,
during  which  he  made  a  voyage  to  India,  he  was
ordered  to  the  command  of  the  sloop  "Enterprise,
of  fourteen  guns.  He  still  intended  to  resign,  but
decided  to  serve  through  the  war.  The  "  Enter-
prise" sailed  from  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  on  1  Sept.,
1813,  and  on  5  Sept.  fell  in  with  the  British  brig
"  Boxer,"  twelve  guns,  off  Portland,  Me.,  and  cap-
tured her  after  an  action  of  forty-five  minutes.
Burrows,  and  Capt.  Blythe,  of  the  "  Boxer,"  both
fell  at  the  beginning  of  the  action.  Blythe  was
cut  in  two  by  a  chain-shot,  but  Burrows,  though
mortally  wounded,  lived  long  enough  to  receive
the  surrender  of  his  adversary.  The  commanders
were  buried  side  by  side  in  Portland,  and  congress
voted  a  gold  medal  to  Burrows's  nearest  male  rela-
tive. The  engraving  is  a  view  of  their  graves.

BURT,  Armistead,  speaker  of  the  house  of
representatives,  b.  in  Edgefield  District,  S.  C,  16
Nov.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Abbeville,  S.  C,  30  Oct.,  1883.  His
father  removed  to  Pendleton,  S.  C,  in  1810.  Young
Burt  received  a  classical  education,  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  moved  to  Abbe-
ville in  1828,  and  practised  law  there  until  his
death.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Calhoun
democrat,  and  served  from  1843  till  1853.  In  1848,
during  the  absence  of  the  speaker,  Robert  C.  Win-
throp,  Mr.  Burt  was  speaker  pro  tempore.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  strongly  in  sympathy  with
the  Confederate  government,  but  held  no  office.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  New  York  democratic
convention  of  1868.

BURT,  Nathaniel  Clark,  clergvman,  b.  in
Fairton,  N.  J.,  23  April,  1825 ;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  4
March,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1846,  and  took  a  three  years'  course  in  the  theo-
logical seminary  there.  He  was  ordained  by  the
Miami  presbytery  on  1  Nov.,  1850,  and,  after  a  five
years'  pastorate  at  Springfield,  Ohio,  was  called  to


the  Franklin  street  Presbyterian  church  in  Balti-
more in  1855,  and  in  I860' to  the  7th  Presbyterian
church  in  Cincinnati.  He  spent  most  of  the  years
1866  and  1867  in  travel  abroad  for  his  health,  vis-
iting Europe,  Egypt,  and  Palestine,  where  his  in-
vestigations added  much  to  our  knowledge  of  the
localities  and  sites  of  places  mentioned  in  the
Scriptures,  He  was  at  last  compelled  by  failing
health  to  give  up  his  pastorate,  and  was  president
of  the  Ohio  female  college  from  1868  till  1870,  when
he  was  forced  to  resign  this  office  also,  and  spent
the  rest  of  his  life  in  southern  Europe.  Here  he
undertook  the  care  of  young  ladies  who  wished  to
finish  their  education  abroad,  spending  his  winters
in  Rome,  Dresden,  or  Nice,  and  making  excursions
to  the  principal  cities  of  the  continent.  Dart-
mouth gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1861.  Dr.
Burt  wrote  much  for  religious  periodicals,  and
published  "  Hours  among  the  Gospels  "  (Philadel-
phia, 1865);  "The  Far  East"  (Cincinnati,  1867);
and  "  The  Land  and  its  Story  "  (New  York,  1869).
BURT,  William  A.,  surveyor,  b.  in  Worcester,
Mass.,  13  June,  1792;  d.  18  Aug.,  1858.  He  re-
ceived a  good  education,  was  for  some  years  an  en-
fineer  in  Erie  co.,  N.  Y.,  settled  near  Detroit,
lich.,  in  1824,  and  served  several  terms  in  the  ter-
ritorial council.  He  became  U.  S.  deputy  sur-
veyor, and  in  1840-'7  surA^eyed  northern  Michigan.
He  originated  the  idea  of  the  solar  compass,  and
was  awarded  a  prize  medal  for  it  in  1851  at  the
London  industrial  exhibition.  He  also  introduced
important  improvements  in  geological  surveying,
and  in  1856  patented  an  equatorial  sextant,  but  died
before  bringing  it  to  perfection.  He  was  a  judge  of
the  Michigan  circuit  court  and  member  of  the  leg-
islatiire  for  several  terms,  and  was  chief  mover  in
the  construction  of  the  Saute  Ste.  Marie  canal.

BURTON,  Asa,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stonington,
Conn.,  25  Aug.,  1752  ;  d.  m  Thetford,  Vt.,  1  May,
1836.  His  parents  removed  to  Preston,  Conn.,  in
his  infancy,  and  in  his  fourteenth  year  to  Norwich,
Vt.,  where  for  the  next  six  years  he  aided  his
father  in  clearing  the  land  for  cultivation.  It  is
said  that  he  was  one  of  a  few  that  cut  away  the
forest-trees  from  the  spot  where  the  Dartmouth
college  buildings  now  stand.  Somewhat  against
his  father's  will  he  entered  Dartmouth  soon  after
its  foundation,  and  was  graduated  in  1777.  Dur-
ing his  course  the  students  were  frequently  on
guard  all  night,  fearing  attacks  from  hostile  Indi-
ans or  tories  of  the  neighboring  province.  He  re-
mained at  college  after  graduation,  reading  theol-
ogy, and  in  August  or  September,  1777,  with  what
would  now  be  thought  absurdly  little  preparation,
was  licensed  to  preach.  After  officiating  in  vari-
ous towns  and  continuing  his  studies  he  was  or-
dained, 19  Jan.,  1779,  as  pastor  of  the  Congrega-
tional church  at  Thetford,  Vt.,  where  he  remained
more  than  fifty  years.  During  the  first  years  of
his  ministry  there  was  no  church  building  in  Thet-
ford, but  services  were  held  in  private  dwellings  in
winter  and  in  barns  in  summer.  Besides  dis-
charging his  duties  as  minister,  Mr.  Burton  taught
a  singing-school  for  two  years  that  the  church  mu-
sic might  be  improved.  In  1804  he  received  the
degree  of  D.  D.  from  Middlebury  college.  Dr.  Bur-
ton was  noted  as  a  theological  teacher,  and  from
1786  till  1816  trained  about  sixty  young  men  for
the  ministry.  His  congregation  gave  him  a  col-
league in  1825,  and  after  1831  Dr.  Burton  retired
altogether  from  his  labors.  He  published  many
occasional  sermons  and  "Essays  on  some  of  the
First  Principles  of  Metaphysics,  Ethics,  and  The-
ology" (Portland,  Me.,  1824).  A  memoir  of  him
has  been  published  by  Thomas  Adams.


472


BURTON


BURTOK


BURTON,  Henry  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York
in  1818 ;  d.  in  Fort  Adams,  Newport,  R.  I.,  4  April,
1869.  He  was  appointed  to  the  U.  S.  military
academy  from  Vermont,  was  graduated  in  1839,
and  served  as  second  lieutenant  of  the  3d  artillery
in  the  Florida  war  from  1839  till  1842.  He  was
made  first  lieutenant,  11  Nov.,  1839,  and  was  an
assistant  instructor  at  West  Point  from  16  June,
1843,  till  5  Aug.,  1846.  He  served  in  the  Mexican
war  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  New  York  volunteers,
distinguished  himself  by  his  defence  of  La  Paz,
Lower  California,  and  was  also  engaged  at  Todos
Santos.  He  was  made  captain,  22  Sept.,  1847,  and
remained  in  California  on  duty  in  various  forts
most  of  the  time  till  1862,  when,  having  been  pro-
moted to  major  on  14  May,  1861,  he  had  charge  of
the  prisoners  of  war  at  Fort  Delaware  until  Sep-
cember,  1863.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the  5th  ar-
tillery, 11  Aug.,  1863,  and  commanded  the  artillery
reserve  of  the  army  of  the  Potomac  from  January
till  May,  1864.  He  was  inspector  of  artillery  in
the  Richmond  campaign,  and  held  the  same  office
in  the  department  of  the  east  from  7  Sept.  till  2
Dec,  1864,  when  he  became  a  member  of  the  retir-
ing board,  and  served  there  till  15  May,  1865.  He
was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  army,  13
March,  1865,  for  services  at  the  capture  of  Peters-
burg, and  commanded  his  regiment,  stationed  in
various  forts,  for  the  remainder  of  his  life.  From
October,  1868,  till  March,  1869,  he  was  member  of
a  court-martial  in  New  York  city.

BURTON,  Napier  Christie,  British  soldier,  b.
in  America  in  1759 ;  d.  in  England  in  January,
1835.  He  entered  the  service  in  August,  1775,  as
ensign  of  the  22d  regiment,  and  was  made  captain
in  September.  He  served  in  the  Jerseys  during  the
winter  of  1779-'80,  in  the  actions  of  Elizabethtown
and  Springfield  in  1780,  went  to  Portsmouth,  Va.,
in  August,  and  thence  to  South  Carolina.  He  was
engaged  in  the  affairs  of  the  Catawba  and  Yadkin,
in  the  battles  of  Guilford  and  Cross  Creek,  and
was  taken  prisoner  at  Yorktown.  He  was  made
lieutenant-colonel  in  1789,  served  in  Flanders,  and
was  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Cana-
da in  1799.  He  became  lieutenant-general,  1  Jan.,
1805,  general,  4  June,  1814,  and  from  1796  till  1806
was  member  of  parliament  for  Beverley.

BURTON,  Ralph,  British  soldier,  d.  in  1768.
He  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  48th  foot,  and
was  wounded  at  Braddock^s  defeat.  He  com-
manded the  3d  brigade  in  the  expedition  against
Louisburg  in  1758,  was  wounded  at  the  capture  of
Quebec,  and  commanded  the  reserve  on  the  Plains
of  Abraham.  He  was  made  lieutenant-governor  of
Quebec,  brigadier-general  in  1760,  and  major-gen-
eral, 10  July,  1762.  In  Gren.  Murray's  operations
at  the  reduction  of  Montreal  he  commanded  the
1st  brigade.

BURTON,  Robert,  soldier,  b,  in  Mecklenburg
CO.,  Va.,  in  1747;  d.  in  Granville  co.,  N.  C,  in  1825.
He  was  a  planter,  removed  to  Granville  about
1775,  and  served  in  the  revolutionary  army,  attain-
ing the  rank  of  colonel.  From  1787  till  1788  he
was  a  member  of  congress  under  the  confederation.
In  1801  he  was  a  member  of  a  commission  to  fix  the
boundarv  between  the  Carolinas  and  Georgia.

BURTON,  Warren,  author,  b.  in  Wilton,  N.  H.,
13  Nov.,  1800;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  6  June,  1866.
Having  attended  the  district  school  of  his  native
town,  he  prepared  himself  for  Harvard,  and  was
graduated  there  in  1821.  After  teaching  for  some
time,  he  entered  the  Cambridge  theological  school,
and,  on  5  March,  1828,  was  ordained  at  East  Cam-
bridge, Mass.,  but,  after  a  brief  ministry,  devoted
himself  to  objects  of  reform,  still  continuing  to


preach  occasionally.  He  was  a  minister  at  large
in  Boston  from  1844  till  1848,  chaplain  of  the
Worcester  prison  in  1849,  to  the  state  senate  in  1852,
to  the  house  in  1858  and  1860,  and  to  the  state  con-
vention in  1853.  He  labored  to  promote  true  cul-
ture, to  raise  the  condition  of  schools,  and  especially
to  secure  universal  attention  to  the  sphere  of  home
education,  by  lectures,  meetings  for  discussion,  and
through  the  newspaper  press.  His  publications  are
"  Cheering  Views  of  Man  and  Providence  " ;  "  My
Religious  Experience  at  my  Native  Home"  (1829);
"Essay  on  the  Divine  Agency  in  the  Material  Uni-
verse,' maintaining  the  immediate  activity  of  the
Creator  in  all  his  works  (1834);  "Uncle  Sam's
Recommendations  of  Phrenology"  (New  York,
1842) ;  "  District  School  as  it  was  "  (Boston,  1850,
republished  in  England) ;  "  Helps  to  Education  in
the  Homes  of  Our  Country"  (1863);  "DiscipUne
of  the  Observing  Faculties"  (New  York,  1865);
"Scenery  Showing,  or  W  rd-Paintings  of  the
Beautiful,  Picturesque,  and  Grand  in  Nature  " ;  be-
sides articles  in  annuals  and  periodicals.

BURTON,  William  Evans,  actor,  b.  in  Lon-
don, England,  24  Sept.,  1804 ;  d.  in  New  York,  10
Feb.,  1860.  His  father,  George  Burton,  was  the
author  of  "  Biblical  Researches  "  and  other  writ-
ings, and  was  likewise  a  printer.  Burton  was  a
pupil  at  St.  Paul's  school  in  his  native  city,  an  in-
stitution associated  also  with  the  dramatic  names
of  Elliston  and  Mathews.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,
in  consequence  of  the  death  of  his  father,  the  youth
was  called  to  take  charge  of  the  printing-office;
and  also  to  be  the  main-stay  of  a  widowed  mother.
His  first  effort  was  to  establish  a  monthly  magazine.
The  attempt  was  a  failure,  but  it  brought  him
theatrical  acquaintances,  and  under  their  influence
he  presently  drifted  toward  the  stage.  The  first
step,  as  usual,  was  to  join  an  amateur  dramatic
society,  and  it  is  said  that  about  this  time  he  gave
a  performance  of  "Hamlet"  somewhere  on  the
Strand.  In  1825  he  was  associated  with  a  provin-
cial company  acting  at  Norwich,  and  elsewhere  in
England,  and  he  played  low  comedy.  His  aspira-
tions at  the  start  were  for  the  tragic,  and  it  is
known  that  late  in  life  he  still  at  times  entertained
the  fancy  that  nature  had  intended  him  to  be  a
tragedian.  This  is  a  peculiarity  of  mental  bias  by
no  means  unusual
with  actors ;  and  it
is  furthermore  to
be  observed  that,  in
actual  experience,
tragic  actors  are
often  found  to  be
cheerful,  and  even
hilarious,  as  private
individuals,  while
comedians  are  ex-
tremely apt  to  prove
serious,pensive,and
even  melancholy.
Burton  was  one  of
the  funniest  crea-
tures that  ever  lived,
but  his  interior  na-
ture was  thoughtful
and  saturnine.  He
thought,  felt,  and
understood  trag-
edy, but  when  he  l  *.  t
came  to  act,  he  was  all  comedian.  At  the  outset  oi
his  career  he  led  the  usual  life  of  an  itinerant  actor.
There  is  a  tradition  that  in  the  course  of  hi?^!^'}"
derings  he  once  played  before  George  IV.  at  Winu-
sor. His  first  professional  appearance  m  London


BURTOX


BURY


473


was  made,  in  1831,  at  the  Pavilion  theatre,  as
Wormwood  in  "The  Lottery  Ticket,"  in  which
part  he  was  much  admired,  and  which  he  then
acted  there  upward  of  fifty  consecutive  times.
Liston  was  then  the  reigning  favorite  in  London
(Munden,  who  died  in  1832,  being  in  decadence),
and  next  to  Liston  stood  John  Reeve,  upon  whom
it  is  thought  that  the  earlier  style  of  Burton  was
in  a  measure  founded.  In  1832  Burton  obtained  a
chance  to  show  his  talents  at  the  Haymarket — Lis-
ton having  temporarily  withdrawn  in  a  pet — and
there  he  played  Marall  to  Edmund  Kean  as  Sir  Giles
Overreach, and  Mrs.  Glover  as  Meg  in  '•  A  New  Way
to  Pay  Old  Debts,"  a  circumstance  which  he  always
remembered,  and  often  mentioned  with  pride  and
pleasure.  His  talents  as  a  writer  likewise  dis-
played themselves  at  an  early  age.  In  May,  1833,
a  play  from  his  pen,  called  "  Ellen  Wareham,"  was
first  presented,  and  it  is  mentioned  that  this  piece
had  the  somewhat  unusual  fortune  of  being  acted
at  five  different  theatres  of  London  on  the  same
evening.  In  1834  he  came  to  the  United  States,
making  his  first  appearance  in  this  country  on
8  Sept.  at  the  Arch  street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  as
Dr.  OUapod  and  Wormwood.  In  that  city  he  re-
mained for  four  years,  acting  in  many  old  standard
plays,  and  continually  advancing  in  the  public
favor.  On  31  Oct.,  1837,  he  made  his  advent  in
New  York  at  the  National  theatre  in  Leonard
street,  enacting  Guy  Goodluck  in  "John  Jones."
The  theatre  was  under  the  management  of  James
W.  Wallack,  and  this  performance  was  given  for
the  benefit  of  Samuel  Woodworth,  author  of  "  The
Old  Oaken  Bucket."  Burton  began  a  star  engage-
ment there  on  4  Feb.,  1839,  as  Billy  Lackaday  in
"  Sweethearts  and  Wives."  It  was  not  until  1848,
however,  that  he  finally  settled  in  New  York,  as  a
manager.  On  10  July  of  that  year  he  opened  his
theatre  in  Chambers  street  (it  had  been  Palmo's
opera-house,  built  in  1842),  and  from  that  time  for
eight  years  he  was  the  leader  of  the  dramatic  pro-
fession in  the  United  States.  His  theatrical  com-
pany included,  first  and  last,  John  Brougham,
William  Rufus  Blake,  Henry  Placide,  John  Lester
Wallack,  George  Jordan,  Humphrey  Bland,  George
Barrett,  T.  B.  Johnston,  John  Dyott,  Charles  Fisli-
er,  Lysander  Thompson,  George  Holland,  C.  W.
Clarke,  W.  H.  Norton,  Charles  Mathews,  Daniel  E.
Setchell,  Mary  Devlin  (afterward  the  first  wife  of
Edwin  Booth),  Mrs.  Russell  (afterward  Mrs.  Hoey),
Lizzie  Weston  (afterward  Mrs.  A.  H.  Davenport,
and  finally  Mrs.  C.  Mathews),  Mrs.  Hughes  (after-
ward wife  of  John  Brougham),  Mrs.  Skerrett,  Mrs.
Hough,  Mrs.  Rea,  Miss  Raymond,  Miss  Agnes
Robertson  (afterward  wife  of  Dion  Boucicault),
Miss  Malvina  Pray  (afterward  Mrs.  W.  J.  Florence),
Fanny  Wallack,  Miss  Chapman,  and  Mary  Taylor.
Burton  revived  "  Twelfth  Night,"  and  other  Shake-
spearian comedies  in  a  luxurious  style,  and  pro-
duced a  great  variety  of  plays  in  the'  best  possible
manner.  The  story  of  Burton's  Chambers  street
theatre,  indeed,  is  one  of  the  brightest  passages  in
the  chronicle  of  the  American  stage.  The  stock  sys-
tem was  maintained,  and  every  detail  of  the  work
was  planned  and  accomplished  with  sedulous  care.
Here  it  was  that  Burton  made  brilliant  and  mem-
orable hits  as  Sir  Toby  Belch,  Capt.  Cuttle  (with
John  Brougham  as  Bunsby  and  as  Bagstock),  Job
Thornbury,  Micawber,  Sam  Weller,  Bottom,  Lord
Duberly,  Mr.  Toodles  (first  given  Oct.  2,  1848),
Jeremiah  Clip,  Touchstone,  Aminidab  Sleek,  Cali-
ban, Autolycus,  and  Falstaff.  Burton  acted  Fal-
staff  in  the  "  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  "  ;  never  in
"Henry  IV."  This  enumeration,  although  it  gives
but  a  few  of  the  characters  in  which  he  was  pre-


eminently fine,  and  in  which  he  became  widely
famous,  may  serve  to  indicate  the  direction  and  the
range  of  his  faculties.  The  Chambers  street  theatre
was  closed  on  6  Sept.,  1856,  and  the  comedian  then
opened  the  Metropolitan,  which  afterward  became
Winter  Garden ;  but  he  did  not  luxuriantly  pros-
per in  the  new  house,  and  in  1858  he  gave  it  up
and  reverted  to  "  starring."  His  last  appearance  in
New  York  was  made,  on  15  Oct.,  1859,  at  Niblo's
Garden,  where,  for  his  benefit,  afternoon  and  night,
he  played  Mr.  Toodles,  Mr.  Sudden,  Toby  Tramp,
and  Micawber.  His  last  performance  on  any  stage
occurred  on  16  Dec,  1859,  at  Mechanics'  Hall,
Hamilton,  Canada,  where  he  acted  Aminidab  Sleek
and  Goodluck  in  "  The  Serious  Family  "  and  "  John
Jones."  The  former  part  was  acted  by  Burton  600
times,  and  Mr.  Toodles  was  acted  by  him  640  times,
in  the  course  of  his  professional  career.  His  affec-
tionate and  reverent  biographer,  William  L.  Keese,
whose  "Life  of  Burton"  was  published  in  New
York  in  1885,  enumerates  184  characters  with  which
the  great  comedian's  name  was  prominently  associ-
ated. Burton  wrote  several  works,  "The  Actor's
Alloquy  "  and  "  Waggeries  and  Vagaries  "  among
the  rest,  edited  the  "  Literary  Souvenir "  in  1838
and  1840,  established  "  The  Gentleman's  Maga-
zine "  in  New  York  in  1837,  of  which  periodical  for
a  short  time  in  1840  Edgar  Allan  Poe  was  assistant
editor,  and  published  a  "Cyclopaedia  of  Wit  and
Humor  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1858).  He  collected  a
magnificent  library,  especially  rich  in  Shakespeare-
an literature.  He  was  twice  married,  and  left  a
widow  and  three  daughters.  He  was  buried  in
Greenwood  cemetery.

BURTT,  John,  poet,  b.  in  Riccarton,  Ayrshire,
Scotland,  26  May,  1789;  d.  in  Salem,  N.  J.,  24
March,  1866.  He  lost  his  mother  when  a  child,
and  went  to  live  with  his  grandmother.  After  at-
tending school  and  becoming  a  good  classical
scholar,  he  was  sent  to  learn  the  weaver's  trade,  but
soon  returned  to  his  books.  When  sixteen  years
old  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  press-gang,  and
served  five  years  in  the  Royal  navy  as  a  common
sailor.  He  then  escaped,  opened  a  school  at  Kil-
marnock, and  in  1816  went  to  Glasgow,  where  he
attended  medical  lectures  at  the  university.  He
came  to  the  United  States  in  1817,  and  in  1822  en-
tered Princeton  theological  seminary,  where  he  re-
mained nearly  a  year.  He  then  acted  as  a  domes-
tic missionary  at  Trenton  and  Philadelphia,  was
ordained  by  the  presbytery  of  the  latter  place  on  8
June,  1824,"  and  became  pastor  of  a  church  at  Sa-
lem, N.  J.,  where  he  remained  till  1830.  He  be-
came editor  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Presbvterian  "  in
1831,  and  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Standard  "  in  1833,
and  from  1835  till  1842  was  pastor  of  the  5th
church  in  the  latter  city.  He  supplied  the  pulpit
of  a  church  in  Blackwoodtown,  N.  J.,  from  1842
till  1859,  and  in  the  latter  year  retired  to  Salem,
N.  J.,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Mr.
Burtt  began  to  write  poetry  while  he  was  a  sailor,
and  continued  to  do  so  throughout  his  life.  A
collection  of  his  verses  was  published  before  he
came  to  this  country  (Glasgow,  1817),  and  was  re-
published, with  additions,  under  the  title  "  Hor*
Poetics"  (Bridgeton,  N.  J.,  1819).  See  Wilson's
"  Poets  and  Poetry  of  Scotland  "  (New  York,  1876).

BURY,  William  Coutts  Keppel,  Viscount,
British  official,  b.  in  1832.  He  is  a  son  of  the  earl
of  Albemarle,  who  is  one  of  the  few  survivors  of
the  battle  of  Waterloo,  was  educated  at  Eton,  and
entered  the  Scots  fusilier  guards  in  1849.  He  af-
terward went  to  India  as  aide-de-camp  to  Lord  F.
Fitz-Clarence,  and  in  1854  was  nominated  civil
secretary  and  superintendent-general  of  Indian  af-


474


BUSH


BUSHNELL


fairs  for  the  province  of  Canada.  He  entered  par-
liament in  1857,  and  was  appointed  treasurer  of
the  Royal  household  on  the  return  of  Lord  Palmer-
ston  to  office  in  1859.  In  1876  he  was  summoned  to
the  house  of  peers  in  his  father's  barony  of  Ash-
ford,  and  was  appointed  Under-secretary  of  state
for  war  in  succession  to  Lord  Cadogan  in  March,
1878,  and  held  that  office  until  the  Conservatives
lost  control  of  the  government  in  1880.  He  mar-
ried a  daughter  of  Sir  Alan  Napier  MacNab,  so
long  prominent  in  Canada.  In  1879  Lord  Bury
entered  the  Roman  Catholic  church,  and  in  1885
he  visited  the  United  States.  He  is  the  author  of
a  history  of  American  colonization,  entitled  "  Exo-
dus of  the  Western  Nations  "  (London,  1865) ;  "  A
Report  on  the  Condition  of  the  Indians  of  British
North  America,"  and  other  historical  papers.

BUSH,  George,  theologian,  b.  in  Norwich,  Vt.,
12  June,  1796 ;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  19  Sept.,  1859.
He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1818,  studied
theology  at  Princeton,  was  a  tutor  there  in  1823-4,
was  ordained  in  the  Presbyterian  ministry,  spent
four  years  as  a  missionary  in  Indiana,  and  in  1831
became  professor  of  Hebrew  and  oriental  litera-
ture in  the  university  of  New  York.  He  pub-
lished a  "  Life  of  Mohammed  "  (New  York,  1832),
and  a  "Treatise  on  the  Millennium"  (1833),  in
which  he  maintained  that  that  period  was  the  time
when  Christianity  supplanted  Roman  paganism.
He  also  published  a  " Bible  Atlas,"  "Illustrations
from  the  Scriptures,"  a  "  Hebrew  Grammar,"  and
commentaries  on  Exodus  and  other  books  of  the
Old  Testament.  In  1844  he  published  a  monthly
magazine  called  "  Ilierophant,"  devoted  to  the  elu-
cidation of  scriptural  prophecies.  The  same  year
he  issued,  in  New  York,  a  work  entitled  "Anas-
tasis,"  in  which  he  opposed  the  doctrine  of  the  literal
resurrection  of  the  body.  Attacks  upon  this  work,
which  attracted  much  attention,  he  answered  in
"The  Resurrection  of  Christ."  He  subsequently
united  with  the  New  Jerusalem  church,  translated
and  published  the  diary  of  Swedenborg  in  1845,
became  editor  of  the  "  New  Church  Repository,"
and  published  in  1845  "  The  Soul,  an  Inquiry  into
Scripture  Psychology,"  in  1847  "  Mesmer  and
Swedenborg,"  in  which  he  argued  that  the  doc-
trines of  Swedenborg  were  corroborated  by  the  de-
velopments of  mesmerism,  in  1855  "  New  Church
Miscellanies,"  and  in  1857  "  Priesthood  and  Clergy
Unknown  to  Christianity."  A  miemoir  of  him,  by
W.  M.  Fernald,  was  published  in  1860.

BUSH,  Norton,  artist,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
22  Feb.,  1834.  He  studied  art  in  his  native  town,
and  in  1851  became  a  pupil  of  Jasper  F.  Cropsey
in  New  York.  Most  of  his  life  has  been  spent  in
San  Francisco.  In  1853,  1868,  and  1875  he  visited
South  America,  and  he  has  devoted  himself  spe-
cially to  painting  the  scenery  of  the  tropics.  He
was  elected,  in  1877,  director  of  the  San  Francisco
art  association,  of  which  he  had  been  a  member
since  1874,  and  was  president  of  the  Sacramento
"  Bric-a-Brae  Club  "  from  1879  till  1882.  Among
his  works  are  "Mount  Diablo"  (1858);  "City  of
Panama"  (1869):  "Western  Slope  of  the  Cordil-
leras" (1872);  "Mount  Chimborazo "  (1876);
"  Lake  Tahoe  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Sutter's  Fort,  Califor-
nia, in  1846  and  1886 "  (1886).  His  "  Summit  of
the  Sierras  "  (1868)  is  in  the  Crocker  gallery,  Sac-
ramento, and  his  "Lake  Nicaragua"  (1869)  in  the
Stanford  gallery,  San  Francisco.

BUSHNELL,  Charles  Ira,  editor,  b.  in  New
York  city,  28  July,  1826 ;  d.  there  in  1883.  He  was
of  the  same  family  as  David  Bushnell,  the  inventor.
He  studied  law  with  Theodore  Sedgwick  in  New
York,  but  did  not  practise,  devoting  his  time  to  the


editorship  and  publication  of  many  personal  nar-
ratives of  the  revolution  and  the  collection  of  coins
and  medals.  He  directed  his  attention  particu-
larly to  the  antiquities  of  his  own  city,  of  which  he
collected  many  curious  memorials.  A  full  list  of
his  numerous  publications,  most  of  which  have
been  printed  privately,  is  given  in  Duyckinck's
"  Cyclopaedia  of  American  Literature."  Among
them  are  "  An  Arrangement  of  Tradesmen's  Cards,
etc..  Current  for  the  last  Sixty  Years"  (1858);  a
series  of  "  Crumbs  for  Antiquarians  " ;  and  "  Recol-
lections of  Christopher  Hawkins  "  (New  York,  1864).
BUSHNELL,  David,  inventor,  b.  in  Saybrookj
Conn.,  in  1742;  d.  in  Warrenton,  Ga..  in  1824.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1775.  He  had  previously
given  some  attention  to  submarine  warfare,  and
during  his  college  course  he  matured  plans  that  led
to  the  production  of  what  may  be  called  the  earli-
est of  torpedoes.  His  intention  was  to  fix  a  small
powder-magazine  to  the  bottom  of  a  vessel,  and  to
explode  it  by  a  clock-work  apparatus.  In  order  to
do  this,  he  contrived  a  tortoise-shaped  diving-boat
of  iron  plate,  which  contained  air  enough  to  sup-
ply a  man  for  half  an  hour.  This  boat,  called  the
"American  Turtle,"  was  propelled  by  a  sort  of
screw,  and  guided  by  means  of  a  compass  made
visible  by  phosphorus.  The  torpedo  was  carried
outside  of  the  boat,  but  could  be  detached  by  the
concealed  operator  contained  within.  It  was  con-
nected by  a  line  to  a  screw,  which  was  to  be  driven
into  the  bottom  of  the  hostile  ship.  As  soon  as
this  was  effected,  the  torpedo  was  to  be  cast  off
when  it  floated  against  the  vessel's  side.  The  ac-
tion of  casting  off  set  the  clock-work  going,  and
then  the  operator  had  time  to  retire  to  a  safe  dis-
tance before  the  catastrophe.  A  detailed  account
of  this  machine  is  given  in  the  "  Transactions  of
the  American  Philosophical  Society  "  and  in  SiUi-
man's  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "  in  1820.  A
machine  capable  of  conveying  an  operator  with  100

gounds  of  powder  was  tested  on  "  The  Eagle,"  a
Iritish  64-gun-ship  lying  in  New  York  harbor,  but
the  attempt  proved  unsuccessful.  In  1777,  in  an
attack  on  the  frigate  "Cerberus"  at  anchor  off
New  London,  he  blew  up  a  schooner  astern  of  the
frigate,  and  killed  several  men  on  board.  This  was
the  first  vessel  ever  destroyed  in  such  a  manner.
Mr.  Bushnell  invented  several  other  machines  for
the  annoyance  of  the  British  shipping;  but  from
accidents,  not  militating  against  the  philosophical
principles  on  which  their  success  depended,  they  but
partially  succeeded.  In  January,  1778,  he  sent  a
fleet  of  kegs  down  the  Delaware,  to  destroy  the
British  ships  that  held  possession  of  the  river,
against  which  fire-ships  had  been  ineffectually  em-
ployed. Owing  to  the  darkness,  they  were  left  at
too  great  a  distance  from  the  shipping,  and  were
dispersed  by  the  ice,  but  during  the  following  day
exploded  and  blew  up  a  boat,  occasioning  no  little
alarm  to  the  British  seamen.  This  incident  gave
rise  to  the  humorous  poem  bv  Francis  Hopkinson,
entitled  "  The  Battle  of  the  Kegs."  Mr.  Bushnell
served  continuously  during  the  war,  attaining  the
rank  of  captain  in  the  corps  of  sappers  and  mniers,
and  was  on  duty  at  New  York,  Hudson  High-
lands, Philadelphia,  Yorktown,  and  elsewhere.
Later  he  went  to  France,  and  was  supposed  to  have
died  there,  but  he  appeared  to  have  been  subse-
quently at  the  head  of  one  of  the  most  important
schools  in  Georgia,  after  which  he  settled  in  V\/ ar-
renton.  where  he  practised  medicine  as  Dr.  Bush.

BUSHNELL,  Horace,  clergyman,  b.  in  ^ew
Preston,  Litchfield  eo.,  Conn.,  14  April,  1802 ;  d.
in  Hartford,  Conn.,  17  Feb.,  1876.  He  was  the  son
of  a  farmer,  and  was  employed,  when  a  boy,  in  a


BUSHNELL


BUSTAMANTE


475


fulling-mill  in  his  native  place.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1827,  became  literary  editor  of  the  New
York  "Journal  of  Commerce,"  and  then  taught
school  in  Norwich,  Conn.  From  1829  till  1881  he
was  a  tutor  at  Yale,  studying  law  at  the  same  time,
and  afterward  theology.  In  May,  1838,  he  became
pastor  of  the  North  Congregational  church  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  where  he  made  a  reputation  as  a
brilliant  preacher.  He  remained  in  Hartford  till
his  death,  though  failing  health  compelled  him  to
resign  his  pastorate  in  1859.  He  received  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  from  Wesleyan  university  in  1842,
and  from  Harvard  in  1852,  and  Yale  gave  him  that
of  LL.  D.  in  1871.  In  1849  Dr.  Bushnell  published
three  discourses,  under  the  title  of  "  God  in
Christ "  (Hartford,  1849).  The  book  opened  with
a  preliminary  dissertation  on  the  inefficacy  of
language  to  express  thought.  The  views  of  the
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  expressed  in  this  work  were
obnoxious  to  many  of  Dr.  Bushnell's  fellow-clergy-
men, and  he  was  brought  before  the  association  of
Congregational  ministers,  of  which  he  was  a  mem-
ber, to  answer  to  a  charge  of  heresy.  Pie  defended
himself  with  much  skill,  and  the  charge  was  not
sustained.  His  defence  was  afterward  published
under  the  title  "  Christ  in  Theology  "  (1851).  In
the  preface  to  this  volume  the  author  concludes
that  an  exposition  of  exact  theology  in  human
language  is  impossible.  Dr.  Bushnell  wrote  much
for  periodical  literature  and  published  many  ad-
dresses. When  in  Europe,  in  1846,  he  wrote  a  let-
ter to  the  pope,  which  was  published  in  London.
He  was  a  bold  thinker,  and  his  writings  are  dis-
j  tinguished  by  their  graphic  style.  "Bushnell
j  Park,"  Hartford,  in  which  the  state-house  stands,
■  was  named  in  his  honor.  Besides  works  already
mentioned,  he  wrote  "  Christian  Nurture  "  (Hart-
I  ford,  1847  ;  enlarged  ed..  New  York,  1860) ;  "  Ser-
1  mons  for  the  New  Life  "  (1858) ;  "  Nature  and  the
Supernatural  "  (1858) ;  "  Character  of  Jesus  "  (1861) ;
"  Work  and  Play,"  a  collection  of  addresses  (1864) ;
"  Christ  and  His  Salvation  "  (1864) ;  "  The  Vicari-
ous Sacrifice"  (1865);  "Moral  Uses  of  Dark
Things  "  (1868) ;  "  Woman  Suffrage,  the  Reform
against  Nature  "  (1869) ;  "  Sermons  on  Living  Sub-
jects "  (1872) ;  and  " Forgiveness  and  Law"  (1874).
See  "  Life  and  Letters  of  Horace  Bushnell,"  by  his
daughter,  Mary  Bushnell  Cheney  (New  York,  1880).
BUSHNELL,  William,  physician,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  10  Sept.,  1800.  His  father  settled  in
Trumbull  county,  Ohio,  in  1805,  and  in  Ashland
county  in  1820.  William  studied  medicine  in  the
Ohio  medical  college,  supporting  himself  by  teach-
ing, practised  a  year  in  Louisiana,  and  in  1828
opened  an  office  in  Mansfield,  Ohio.  He  became
interested  in  the  New  York,  Lake  Erie,  and  West-
ern railroad,  and,  when  the  enterprise  was  threat-
ened with  failure,  devoted  eight  years  to  superin-
tending the  building  of  the  road,  securing  the  right
of  way,  and  raising  the  capital.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Ohio  legislature  in  1849  and  succeeding
years,  and  assisted  in  passing  the  Ohio  school-law.
In  1878  he  was  a  delegate  to  the  international  con-
gress for  prison  reform  at  Stockholm.

BUSHYHEAD,  Jesse,  chief  justice  of  the
Cherokees,  d.  at  the  mission  in  the  Cherokee  na-
tion, west,  17  July,  1844.  He  was  a  self-made
man,  acquired  great  distinction  among  his  tribe,
and  filled  with  fidelity  many  public  trusts.

BUSSEY,  Benjamin,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Can-
ton, Mass.,  1  March.  1757;  d.  in  Roxbury,  Mass..
13  Jan.,  1842.  He  enlisted  in  the  revolutionary
army  when  eighteen  years  old,  and  was  present  at
the  capture  of  Burgoyne.  At  the  age  of  twenty-
two  he  married,  and  began  business  in  DedhaiUj


Mass.,  as  a  silversmith,  with  a  capital  of  ten  dollars.
He  removed  in  1782  to  Boston,  where  he  engaged  in
foreign  trade,  and  made  a  fortune,  which  he  left,
after  the  decease  of  certain  relatives,  to  Harvard
university,  one  half  to  endow  a  school  of  agricul-
ture and  the  other  half  for  the  support  of  the  law
and  divinity  schools.  His  estate  included  a  farm
of  several  hundred  acres  at  Jamaica  Plain,  near
Boston,  and,  in  accordance  with  his  will,  the  uni-
versity established  there  in  1869  a  School  of  practi-
cal agriculture  and  horticulture.  Mr.  Bussey's  be-
quest was  estimated  at  the  time  of  his  death  to
amount  to  $350,000.

BUSSEY,  Cyrus,  soldier,  b.  in  Hubbard,  Trum-
bull CO.,  Ohio.  5  Oct.,  1888.  His  father  was  a
Methodist  minister.  When  fourteen  years  old  he
became  a  merchant's  clerk  in  Dupont,  Ind.,  and  at
the  age  of  sixteen  began  business  on  his  own  ac-
count, becoming  a  prosperous  merchant.  From
this  time  until  he  was  twenty-two  he  devoted  sev-
eral hours  a  day  to  study,  and  for  two  years  stud-
ied medicine  with  his  brother.  Mr.  Bussey  was
elected  to  the  state  senate  as  a  democrat  in  1858,
and  was  a  delegate  to  the  Baltimore  convention
that  nominated  Stephen  A.  Douglas  for  president.
At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  he  came  forward  strong-
ly to  the  support  of  the  government,  and  was  ap-
pointed by  (jtov.  Kirkwood  to  the  command  of  the
militia  in  the  southeastern  part  of  the  state,  with
the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  On  10  Aug.,  1861,
he  became  colonel  of  the  3d  Iowa  volunteer  cav-
alry, which  he  had  raised,  and  joined  the  Army  of
the  Southwest,  He  commanded  a  brigade  in  the
battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  participated  in  the  Arkansas
campaign  of  1862,  and  on  10  July  led  the  3d  brigade
of  Steele's  division.  He  commanded  the  district
of  eastern  Arkansas  from  11  Jan.,  1863,  till  the
following  April,  when  he  took  charge  of  the  2d
cavalry  division  of  the  Army  of  the  Tennessee.  He
was  chief  of  cavalry  at  the  siege  of  Vicksburg,
doing  good  service  in  watching  Gen.  Joseph  E.
Johnston's  attempts  to  raise  the  siege,  led  the  ad-
vance in  Sherman's  movement  against  Johnston,
and  defeated  Jackson  at  Canton,  17  July,  1863.
He  was  made  brigadier-general,  5  Jan.,  1864,  for
"special  gallantry,"  and  shortly  afterward  was
given  command  of  western  Arkansas  and  the  In-
dian territory,  with  the  3d  division  of  the  7th
corps.  This  district  had  been  in  a  disorganized
state.  Fort  Smith,  its  headquarters,  was  the  resort
of  dishonest  contractors,  who  cheated  the  govern-
ment and  plundered  the  residents,  and  drunkenness
and  theft  prevailed  among  the  troops  to  an  alarming
extent.  With  a  view  to  breaking  up  corruption
and  restoring  discipline.  Gen.  Bussey  was  given
command  there,  and  he  succeeded  in  a  short  time
in  accomplishing  this  difficult  task.  He  was  brevet-
ted  major-general  on  13  March,  1865,  and  after  the
war  resumed  business  as  a  commission  merchant,
first  in  St.  Louis,  and  then  in  New  Orleans.  He
was  a  delegate  to  the  republican  convention  of
1868,  which  nominated  Gen.  Grant  for  president,
was  for  six  years  president  of  the  New  Orleans
chamber  of  commerce,  and  chairman  of  a  commit-
tee of  that  body  that  obtained  from  congress  the
appropriation  for  Capt.  Eads's  jetties  at  the  mouth
of  the  Mississippi.  Gen.  Bussey  engaged  in  busi-
ness in  New  York  city  in  1881,  and  in  1884  took
an  active  part  in  the  canvass  for  Mr.  Blaine.

BUSTAMANTE,  Anastasio,  president  of  Mex-
ico, b.  in  Jiquilpan,  in  the  state  of  Michoacan,  27
July,  1780 ;  d.  in  San  Miguel  de  Allende,  6  Feb.,
1853.  He  was  family  physician  to  Don  Felix
Maria  Calleja,  military  governor  at  San  Luis  Po-
tosi,  who  in  1808  gave  him  a  commission  in  the


476


BUSTAMANTE


BUTLER


San  Luis  regiment  of  militia,  composed  of  the  sons
of  the  wealthy.  He  served  in  all  the  campaigns
in  which  Calleja  commanded  till  1819,  gaining  dis-
tinction especially  in  the  battles  of  Aculco,  Guana-
juato, and  Calderon,  and  at  the  siege  of  Cuautla  in
1812,  and  rising  to  the  rank  of  colonel.  In  1820,
having  gained  the  confidence  of  Iturbide,  he  was
made  chief  commander  of  the  cavalry,  and  in  1821
member  of  the  provisional  junta.  He  was  shortly
afterward  raised  to  the  rank  of  field-marshal  by
the  regency,  and  appointed  captain-general  of  the
eastern  and  western  provinces  of  the  interior.  In
April,  1822,  he  gained  a  signal  victory  over  the  re-
maining Spanish  forces  near  Juchi.  After  the
death  of  the  Emperor  Iturbide,  having  taken  sides
with  the  federal  party,  he  was  by  the  government
of  Victoria  appointed  anew  military  governor  of
the  provinces  of  the  interior,  with  the  rank  of  gen-
eral of  division,  then  the  highest  in  the  Mexican
army.  In  1829  he  headed  the  revolution,  and  pro-
claimed the  plan  of  Jalapa  toward  the  end  of  the
same  year ;  and  the  first  day  of  the  following  year
found  him  vice-president  of  the  republic  and  exer-
cising the  supreme  executive  power.  In  1832,  a
new  revolution  having  taken  place  imder  Santa
Anna,  Bustamante  resigned  the  presidency.  In
1833  he  was  exiled  and  visited  the  principal  coun-
tries of  Europe,  but  especially  France,  where  he
resided  till  1836,  when  he  was  recalled  by  the  gov-
ernment after  the  fall  of  Santa  Anna.  He  was  re-
elected president  of  the  republic,  and  as  such  be-
gan his  functions  on  19  April,  1837,  his  adminis-
tration continuing  until  22  Sept.,  1841.  He  then
set  out  anew  for  Europe,  and  remained  there  till
1845.  The  next  year  he  was  appointed  president
of  the  congress,  the  last  important  ofiice  that  he
filled.  The  republic  had  been  prosperous  under
his  administration.

BUSTAMANTE,  Carlos  Maria,  Mexican  his-
torian, b.  in  Oajaca,  4  Nov.,  1774;  d.  21  Sept.,  1848.
He  was  graduated  as  a  lawyer  in  1801,  soon  dis-
tinguished himself  in  his  profession,  and  the  Span-
ish government  gave  him  an  important  office.  He
then  served  the  revolutionary  party  during  the  war,
both  with  pen  and  sword.  His  numerous  works
include  "  Cuadro  Historico  de  la  Revolucion  de  la
America  Mejicana,"  "  Galeria  de  Antiguos  Principes
Mejicanos,"  "  Cronicas  Mejicanas,"  "  Ilistoria  del
Emperador  D.  Agustin  de  Iturbide,"  and  "  Historia
de  la  Invasion  de  los  Anglo- Americanos  en  Mejico."

BUSTAMANTE,  Jos6  Maria,  Mexican  com-
poser, b.  in  Toluca  in  March,  1777;  d.  in  1861.
He  received  a  scientific  education,  but  his  real  vo-
cation was  music.  He  was  chapel-master  of  the
cathedral,  as  well  as  of  many  other  churches  of
the  city  of  Mexico,  and  left  a  large  number  of  com-

gositions,  mostly  religious,  in  their  music  libraries,
lustamante  also  composed  several  special  orches-
trations for  Italian  operas.

BUSTAMANTE  Y  GUERRA,  Jos^,  Spanish
naval  officer,  b.  in  Santander  in  1759 ;  d.  in  Mad-
rid in  1825.  He  made  an  important  exploring
voyage  in  1780  to  examine- the  coasts  of  Marianas
and  Philippine  islands,  Macao,  New  Guinea,  New
Hebrides,  New  Zealand,  Peru,  Patagonia,  and  the
Maldive  islands.  In  1796  he  was  appointed  gov-
ernor of  Montevideo,  and  it  was  due  to  him  that
the  English  fleet  failed  to  get  possession  of  that
port.  While  he  was  escorting  a  transport  to  Lima
four  British  ships  attacked  his  own,  and  he  was
wounded,  made  a  prisoner,  and  taken  to  England
with  his  flotilla.  When  he  had  recovered  from  his
wounds  he  returned  to  Spain,  where,  after  an  in-
quest, he  was  honorably  acquitted.  In  1810  he
was  appointed  captain-general and president of


Guatemala,  and  thence  he  returned  to  Madrid  to
be  director  of  the  navy  and  fill  other  high  offices
until  his  death.

BUSTEED,  Richard,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cavan,  Ire-
land, 16  Feb.,  1822.  His  father,  George  Washing-
ton Bu  steed,  was  a  Dublin  barrister,  and  at  one
time  held  a  colonel's  commission  in  the  British
army.  In  1829  the  elder  Busteed  was  appointed
chief  secretary  of  the  island  of  St.  Lucia,  but  his
zeal  in  the  cause  of  emancipation  led  to  his  re-
moval from  office,  and,  after  returning  to  Ireland,
he  emigrated  to  London,  Canada,  where  he  estab-
lished a  paper  called  "  The  True  Patriot."  Richard
began  work  on  this  paper  as  a  type-setter,  and
afterward  accompanied  his  father  to  Chicinnati,
Ohio,  to  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  finally  to  New  York,
where  he  worked  on  the  "  Commercial  Advertiser."
At  this  time  he  was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher  in
the  Methodist  church.  After  a  visit  to  Ireland  for
his  health  in  1840,  he  began  the  study  of  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1846.  His  management
of  the  defence  in  several  celebrated  extradition
cases  soon  made  his  reputation,  and  he  became  a
successful  lawyer.  In  1856  he  was  elected  corpora-
tion counsel  of  New  York  city,  holding  the  office
till  1859,  and  in  the  presidential  campaign  of  1860
he  was  a  supporter  of  Douglas,  and  a  bitter  oppo-
nent of  Lincoln,  but  after  the  attack  on  Sumter  he
became  a  strong  union  man.  On  7  Aug.,  1862,  he
was  appointed  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  by
President  Lincoln,  and  assigned  to  duty,  first  in
New  York  and  then  in  Washington.  In  December,
1862,  he  took  command  of  a  brigade  at  Yorktown,
Va.  Gen.  Busteed's  course  in  support  of  the  ad-
ministration, and  on  the  slavery  question,  had
raised  against  him  •  many  enemies,  who  determined
to  prevent  his  confirmation.  The  five  colonels  of
his  brigade  sent  a  joint  letter  to  the  senate,  testi-
fying to  the  improvement  in  discipline  made  by
their  commands  under  him.  His  name,  however,
was  not  sent  to  that  body  for  confirmation,  as  on
10  March,  1863,  he  sent  his  resignation  to  the  presi-
dent. On  17  Sept.,  1863,  Gen.  Busteed  was  ap-
pointed by  President  Lincoln  to  be  U.  S.  district
judge  for  Alabama.  He  was  unanimously  con-
firmed by  the  senate  on  20  Jan.,  1864,  and  in  the
autumn  of  1865  he  opened  the  court.  He  decided
that  the  test-oath  prescribed  by  congress  was  un-
constitutional, so  far  as  it  applied  to  attorneys
practising  before  U.  S.  courts,  and  this  decision
was  followed  by  judges  in  other  states,  the  supreme
court  afterward  delivering  a  similar  opinion.  In
November,  1865,  Judge  Busteed  had  a  controversy
with  the  U.  S.  military  authorities  in  Alabama,
which  excited  great  interest,  and  involved  impor-
tant questions  relating  to  the  suspension  of  the
habeas  corpus  act.  In  1874  he  resigned  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law  in  New  York  city.

BUTLER,  Benjamin  Franklin,  lawyer,  b.  at
Kinderhook  Landing,  N.  Y.,  17  Dec,  1795;  d.  m
Paris,  France,  8  Nov.,  1858.  He  was  a  lineal  de-
scendant of  Oliver  Cromwell  on  his  mother's  side.
His  early  years  were  spent  in  his  father's  store  and
in  attending  the  district  school.  At  the  age  of
fourteen  he  was  sent  to  the  academy  at  Hudson,
and  soon  afterward  began  the  study  of  law  with
Martin  Van  Buren,  then  practising  in  that  town
He  accompanied  Van  Buren  to  Albany  in  1810,
and,  on  admission  to  the  bar,  in  1817,  became  his
partner.  He  was  appointed  district  attorney  of
Albanyco.  in  1821,  and  held  the  office  till  January,
1825.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  named  by  the  leg-
islature one  of  three  commissioners  to  revise  the
statutes  of  New  York.  Chancellor  Kent  says  that
"  the  plan  and  order  of  the  work,  the  learning  ol


BUTLER


BUTLER


477


the  notes,  the  marginal  references,  should  be
ascribed  to  Mr.  Butler."  He  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly  in  1828,  for  the  special  purpose
of  aiding  it  in  its  deliberations  on  the  work  sub-
mitted by  himself  and  his  colleagues.  In  1833  he
was  appointed  commissioner  for  the  state  of  New
York  to  adjust  •  the  New  Jersey  boundary-line,
Theodore  Frelinghuysen  being  the  New  Jersey
commissioner,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  was
appointed  by  President  Jackson  attorney-general
of  the  United  States.  He  held  the  office  through
a  part  of  Van  Buren's  administration,  resigning  in
January,  1888,  and  from  October,  1836,  till  March,
1837,  was  also  acting  secretary  of  war.  From  1888
till  1841  he  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  for  the
southern  district  of  New  York.  In  1848  he  was
appointed  member  of  a  commission  to  codify  the
laws  of  the  state,  but  declined.  By  request  of  the
council  of  the  University  of  the  city  of  New  York,
he  had  prepared,  in  1835,  a  plan  for  organizing  a
faculty  of  law  in  that  institution,  and  in  1837  be-
came its  principal  law  professor.  During  the  great-
er part  of  his  life  he  was  an  influential  member  of
the  democratic  party,  but  on  the  passage  of  the  Kan-
sas-Nebraska bill,  abolishing  the  Missouri  compro-
mise, he  joined  the  republicans,  and  voted  for  Fre-
mont in  1856.  Mr.  Butler  was  a  thorough  scholar,
and  a  great  admirer  of  the  Grreek  and  Latin  writers.
William  CuUen  Bryant,  in  1825,  writes  of  "  his  puri-
ty of  character  and  singleness;  how  much  he  was
admired  on  his  first  visit' to  New  York,  then  a  young
man  with  finely
,-, -^  chiselled  features,

made  a  little  pale
by  study,  and  ani-
mated by  an  ex-
pression both  of
the  greatest  intel-
ligence and  in-
genuousness." In
1847  Mr.  Butler
delivered,  before
the  New  York  his-
torical society,  a
discourse  entitled
"  Outlines  of  the
Constitutional  His-
tory of  New  York"
(New  York,  1847).
See  "  Life  and
Opinions  of  B.  P.
Butler,"  by  W.  L.
Mackenzie.  —  His
son,  William  Allen,  lawyer,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
20  Feb.,  1825,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
the  city  of  New  York  in  1848,  studied  law  with  his
father,  and,  after  travelling  in  Europe  in  1846-'8,
and  contributing  sketches  of  travel  entitled  "  Out-
of-the-Way  Places  in  Europe "  to  the  "  Literary
World,"  he  entered  upon  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession in  New  York,  which  he  actively  and  suc-
cessfully pursued.  He  contributed  poetical  pieces,
displaying  wit  and  fancy,  to  periodicals.  Among
his  occasional  contributions  to  magazines  were  hu-
morous papers  published  in  the  "  Literary  World,"
under  the  title  "  The  Colonel's  Club,"  "  The  Cities
of  Art  and  the  Early  Artists,"  printed  in  "  The
Art  Union  Bulletin,"  and  poetical  contributions  to
the  "  Democratic  Review."  In  1846  he  published  i
"  The  Future,"  an  academic  poem  ;  in  1850,  "  Bar-
num's  Parnassus,"  a  volume  of  the  character  of
the  "  Rejected  Addresses  " ;  in  1857,  "  Nothing  to
Wear,"  a  satirical  poem  which  attained  celebi-ity,
and  was  published  in  many  forms  in  the  United
States  and  in  England,  and  "has  been  reproduced  in


French  and  German  translations.  It  was  originally
published  anonymously  in  "  Harper's  Weekly,"  and
its  authorship  was  claimed  by  an  impostor,  until
Mr.  Butler  publicly  declared  himself  the  author :
in  1858,  "Two
Millions,"  origi-
nally written  for
the  Phi  Beta  Kap-
pa society  of  Yale
college  ;  "  Gen-
eral Average,"  a
stinging  satire  on
sharp  practices  in
mercantile  life  ;
in  1860,  "The
Bible  by  Itself,"
an  address  deliv-
ered before  the
New  York  Bible
society ;  in  1862,
"  Martin  Van  Bu-
ren,"  a  biograph-
ical sketch ;  in  ^^  ,
1871,  "Lawyer  ^^,^.^^.^1
and  Client,"  an
ethical  disquisi-
tion on  their  relations,  being  the  substance  of  a
lecture  delivered  to  the  law-school  of  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York;  and  his  collected
poems  (Boston).  In  prose  fiction  he  published
anonymously,  in  1876,  "  Mrs.  Limber's  Raffle,"  and
in  1886  "  Domesticus,"  a  story  illustrating  vari-
ous phases  of  the  labor  question.  In  1879  he  pub-
lished a  memorial  address  on  his  friend,  Evert  A.
Duyckinck.

BUTLER,  Benjamin  Franklin,  lawyer,  b.  in
Deerfield,  N.  H.,  5  Nov.,  1818.  He  is  the  son  of
Capt.  John  Butler,  who  served  under  Jackson  at  New
Orleans.  He  was  graduated  at  Waterville  college
(now  Colby  university),  Maine,  in  1838,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  \n  1840,  began  practice  at  Lowell,
Mass.,  in  1841.  and  has  since  had  a  high  reputation
as  a  lawyer,  especially  in  criminal  cases.  He  early
took  a  prominent  part  in  politics  on  the  demo-
cratic side,  and  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts house  of  representatives  in  1853,  and
of  the  state  senate  in  1859.  In  1860  he  was  a
delegate  to  the  democratic  national  convention
that  met  at  Charleston.  When  a  portion  of  the
delegates  reassembled  at  Baltimore,  Mr.  Butler,
after  taking  part  in  the  opening  debates  and  votes,
announced  that  a  majority  of  the  delegates  from
Massachusetts  would  not  further  participate  in  the
deliberations  of  the  convention,  on  the  ground  that
there  had  been  a  withdrawal  in  part  of  the  majority
of  the  states;  and  further,  he  added,  "upon  the
ground  that  I  would  not  sit  in  a  convention  where
the  African  slave-trade,  which  is  piracy  by  the
laws  of  my  country,  is  approvingly  advocated."  In
the  same  year  he  was  the  unsuccessful  democratic
candidate  for  governor  of  Massachusetts.  At  the
time  of  President  Lincoln's  call  for  troops  in  April,
1861,  he  held  the  commission  of  brigadier-general
of  militia.  On  the  17th  of  that  month  he  marched
to  Annapolis  with  the  8th  Massachusetts  i-egiraent,
and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  district  of  An-
napolis, in  which  the  city  of  Baltimore  was  in-
cluded. On  18  May,  1861,  he  entered  Baltimore  at
the  head  of  900  men,  occupied  the  city  without  op-
position, and  on  16  May  was  made  a  major-general,
and  assigned  to  the  command  of  Fort  Slonroe  and
the  department  of  eastern  Virginia.  While  he  was
here,  some  slaves  that  had  come  within  his  lines
were  demanded  by  their  masters ;  but  he  refused
to  deliver  them  up  on  the  ground  that  they  were


478


BUTLER


BUTLER


contraband  of  war ;  hence  arose  the  designation  of
"  contrabands,"  often  applied  to  slaves  during  the
war.  In  August  he  captured  Forts  Hatteras  and
Clark  on  the  coast  of  North  Carolina.  He  then  re-
turned to  Massa-
chusetts to  recruit
an  expedition  for
thegulf  of  Mexico
and  the  Mississip-
pi. On  23  March,
1863,  the  expedi-
tion reached  Ship
island,  and  on  17
April  went  up  the
Mississippi.  The
fleet  under  Farra-
gut  having  passed
the  forts,  24  April,
and  virtually  capt-
ured New  Orleans,
Gen.  Butler  took
possession  of  the
city  on  1  May.  His
administi-ation  of  affairs  was  marked  by  great  vigor.
He  instituted  strict  sanitary  regulations,  armed  the
free  colored  men,  and  compelled  rich  secessionists
to  contribute  toward  the  support  of  the  poor  of
the  city.  His  course  in  hanging  William  Mum-
ford  for  hauling  down  the  U.  S.  flag  from  the  mint,
and  in  issuing  "  Order  No.  28,"  intended  to  prevent
women  from  insulting  soldiers,  excited  strong  re-
sentment, not  only  in  the  south,  but  in  the  north
and  abroad,  and  in  December,  1802,  Jefferson  Davis
issued  a  proclamation  declaring  him  an  outlaw.
On  10  May,  1802,  Gen.  Butler  seized  about  $800,000
which  had  been  deposited  in  the  office  of  the  Eiutch
consul,  claiming  that  arms  for  the  confederates
were  to  be  bought  with  it.  This  action  was  pro-
tested against  by  all  the  foreign  consuls,  and  the
government  at  Washington,  after  an  investigation,
ordered  the  return  of  the  money.  On  16  Dec,
1862,  Gen.  Butler  was  recalled,  as  he  believes,  at
the  instigation  of  Louis  Napoleon,  who  supposed
the  general  to  be  hostile  to  his  Mexican  schemes.
Near  the  close  of  1863  he  was  placed  in  command
of  the  department  of  Virginia  and  North  Carolina,
and  his  force  was  afterward  designated  as  the  Army
of  the  James.  In  October,  1804,  there  being  ap-
prehensions of  trouble  in  New  York  during  the
election,  Gen.  Butler  was  sent  there  with  a  force  to
insure  quiet.  In  December  he  conducted  an  inef-
fectual expedition  against  Fort  Fisher,  near  Wil-
mington, N.  C,  and  soon  afterward  was  removed
from  command  by  Gen.  Grant.  He  then  returned
to  his  residence  in  Massachusetts.  In  1800  he  was
elected  by  the  republicans  a  member  of  congress,
where  he  remained  till  1879,  with  the  exception  of
the  term  for  1875-7,  He  was  the  most  active  of
the  managers  appointed  in  1808  by  the  house  of
representatives  to  conduct  the  im'peachment  of
President  Johnson.  He  was  the  unsuccessful  re-
publican nominee  for  governor  of  Massachusetts  in
1871 ;  and  in  1878  and  1879,  having  changed  his
politics,  was  the  candidate  of  the  independent
greenback  party  and  of  one  wing  of  the  democrats
for  the  same  office,  but  was  again  defeated.  In
1882  the  democrats  united  upon  him  as  their  can-
didate, and  he  was  elected,  though  the  rest  of  the
state  ticket  was  defeated.  During  his  administra-
tion he  made  a  charge  of  gross  mismanagement
against  the  authorities  of  the  Tewksbury  alms-
house ;  but,  after  a  long  investigation,  a  committee
of  the  legislature  decided  that  it  was  not  sustained.
In  1883  he  was  renominated,  but  was  defeated.
In  1884  he  was  the  candidate  of  the  greenback  and


anti-monopolist  parties  for  the  presidencv  and  re
ceived  133,825  votes.— His  wife,  Sarah,  a"daughter
of  Dr.  Israel  Hildreth,  of  Lowell,  b.  in  1821 ;  d  in
Boston,  Mass.,  8  April,  1870,  was  on  the  stage  from
1837  till  1842,  when  she  married  Gen.  Butler  and
retired.  Their  daughter  married  Gen.  Adalbert
Ames,  of  the  U.  S.  army.  See  "  General  Butler  in
New  Orleans,"  by  James  Parton  (New  York  1868)

BUTLER,  Caleb,  author,  b,  in  Pelham,  N.
H.^  13  Sept.,  1770;  d.  in  Groton,  Mass.,  7  Oct.",
1854.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1800,'
studied  law  in  Groton,  and  was  the  principal  in-
structor of  the  Groton  academy  for  eleven  years.
He  published  a  masonic  oration  (1810) ;  "  Facts  as
to  Affairs  in  Groton  "  (1827) ;  "  Review  reviewed  "
(1850) ;  and  "  History  of  Groton  "  (Boston,  1848)

BUTLER,  Clement  Moore,  clergyman,  b,  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  10  Oct.,  1810 ;  d.  in  Germantown,  Pa.,
5  March,  1890.  Pie  was  graduated  at  Trinity  col-
lege in  1833,  and  at  the  General  theological  semi-
nary, New  York  in  1830,  Froin  1837  to  1854  he
was  pastor  of  churches  in  New  York  city,  Palmyra,
N,  Y.,  Georgetown,  D.  C,  Boston,  Mass.,'and  Wash-
ington, D.  C.  He  was  chaplain  of  the  U.  8.  senate
from  1849  till  1853.  From  1854  till  1857  he  had
charge  of  Christ  church,  Cincinnati,  0.,  and  then
returned  to  Washington,  where  he  was  again  rector
of  Trinity  church  till  1801.  From  that  time  till
1804  he  was  chaplain  to  the  U,  S.  minister  at  Rome,
Italy,  and  rector  of  Grace  church  in  that  city,  lie
returned  to  the  United  States  in  1804,  and  became
professor  of  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  divinity
school  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  Phila-
delphia, resigning  in  1884  on  account  of  failing
health.  He  published  "  The  Year  of  the  Church,"
hymns  for  the  feasts  and  festivals  of  the  church,
for  young  people  (Utica,  N,  Y.,  1840) ;  "  The  Flock
Fed,"  confirmation  lessons  (New  York,  1845) ;  "  The
Book  of  Common  Prayer  interpreted  by  its  His-
tory "  (Boston,  1846 ;  2d  ed.,  enlarged,  Washington,
D.  C,  1849) ;  "  Old  Truths  and  New  Errors"  (New-
York,  1848) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Revelation  of  St.
John"  (1850);  "Addresses  in  Washington"  (Cin-
cinnati, 1858);  "Ritualism  of  Law"  (1859);  "St.
Paul  in  Rome"  (Philadelphia,  1865);  "Inner
Rome  "  (1800) ;  "  Manual  of  Ecclesiastical  History,
from  the  First  to  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (2  vols.,
Philadelphia,  1808  and  1872);  "History  of  the
Book  of  Common  Prayer"  (1879);  and  "History
of  the  Reformation  in  Sweden  "  (New  York,  1883).
Dr.  Butler  also  published  about  forty  occasional
sermons,  among  them  the  funeral  sermons  of  John
C.  Calhoun  and  Henry  Clay,  printed  by  order  of
the  U.  S.  senate.

BUTLER,  Cyrus,  philanthropist,  b.  in  1767;  d,
in  Providence,  R.  I.,  22  Aug.,  1849.  His  father,
Samuel  Butler,  was  originally  a  shoemaker  in  Ed-
garton,  Mass.,  and  brought  up  his  sons,  Samuel
and  Cyrus,  to  the  same  trade,  but  became  a  ship-
owner in  Providence,  where  he  had  removed  in
1750,  and  left  them  a  large  fortune.  Cyrus  in-
creased his  share  by  frugality  and  wide  commercial
operations,  and  died  worth  several  millions.  He
gave  140,000  to  endow  the  Butler  hospital  for  the
insane  at  Providence.

BUTLER,  Ezra,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lancaster,
Mass.,  in  September,  1763';  d.  in  Waterbury,  \t.,
12  July,  1838.  His  mother  died  when  he  was  a
mere  boy,  and,  after  living  for  a  few  years  with  his
eldest  brother,  he  went,  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  to
Claremont,  N.  H.,  where  he  took  charge  of  a  large
farm,  remaining  there  till  he  was  of  age,  with  the
exception  of  six  months'  service  in  the  revolution-
ary army,  in  1779.  In  1785,  with  his  brother
Asaph,  he  removed  to  Waterbury,  Vt.,  then  in  the


BUTLER


BUTLER


479


midst  of  a  dense  forest.  They  arrived  there  on  20
March,  having  travelled  the  last  twenty-five  miles
of  their  journey  on  snow-shoes.  Mr.  Butler  began
to  think  seriously  on  religious  subjects  in  1790,  be-
came a  Baptist  in  the  following  year,  and  in  1800
began  to  preach  at  Bolton,  Vt.  A  Baptist  church
w^  organized  in  Waterbury  in  the  same  year,  and
he  was  its  pastor  for  more  than  thirty  years.  He
had  been  the  first  town  clerk  of  Waterbury  in
1790,  and  had  been  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1797,  and  he  did  not  allow  his  ordination  to  the
ministry  to  interfere  with  his  public  career.  He
was  in  the  legislature  eleven  years,  in  the  council
fifteen  years,  was  first  judge  of  Chittenden  county
court  from  1803  till  1806,  chief  justice  of  that  coun-
ty from  180(j  till  1811,  and  of  Washington  county
from  1814  till  1836.  He  was  a  member  of  congress
from  1813  till  1815,  a  delegate  to  the  Vermont  con-
stitutional convention  of  1822,  and  governor  of  the
state  from  1836  till  1828.  His  administration  as
governor  was  marked  by  the  suppression  of  lot-
teries, and  by  improvement  in  the  state  educa-
tional system.'  Gov.  Butler  was  of  the  Jeffersonian
school  of  politics,  and  was  fifty-three  years  in  the

{)ublic  service,  not  including  the  time  when  he  held
oeal  offices,

BUTLER,  Fanny  Kemble. See  Kemble.

BUTLER,  Francis,  dog-trainer,  b.  in  England
in  1810;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  17  June,  1874.  He
was  an  accomplished  linguist,  and  had  been  pro-
fessor of  languages  in  several  educational  institu-
tions, but  finally  adopted  the  business  of  buying,
training,  and  selling  dogs  of  the  choicest  breeds.
His  ability  in  controlling  and  training  them  was
remarkable.  He  died  of  hydrophobia  from  the
bite  of  an  animal  he  had  undertaken  to  treat.  He
published  "  Breeding  and  Training  of  Dogs  "  (New
York,  1857),  an  acknowledged  authority.

BUTLER,  Francis  Eugene,  clergyman,  b.  in
Suffolk,  Conn.,  7  Feb.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Suffolk,  Va.,  4
May,  1863.  He  was  for  several  years  a  merchant
in  New  York  city,  where  he  was  secretary  of  the
New  York  Bible  society,  one  of  the  founders  of  the
Young  men's  Christian  association,  and  an  active
friend  of  other  religious  institutions.  When
twenty-nine  years  old,  he  entered  Yale  with  the
determination  of  fitting  himself  for  the  ministry.
He  was  graduated  in  1857,  and  spent  three  years
in  the  study  of  theology  at  Princeton,  and  one  year
at  Andover.  He  supplied  for  a  time  the  pulpit  of
a  church  in  Bedford  Springs,  Pa.,  and  afterward
that  of  the  second  Presbyterian  church  in  Cleve-
land, Ohio.  After  his  ordination  on  16  April,  1862,
he  preached  in  the  Congregational  church  in  Pater-
son,  N.  J.  When  the  25th  regiment  of  New  Jersey
volunteers  was  organized,  he  accepted  the  post  of
chaplain,  and  accompanied  the  regiment  to  Suf-
folk, Va.  In  an  engagement  near  that  place  on  3
May,  learning  that  some  men  of  a  Connecticut
regiment  on  the  right  were  suffering  for  want  of
surgical  assistance,  he  went  to  their  relief,  and  was
shot  bv  a  sharp-shooter  and  died  the  next  day.

BUTLER,  Frederick,  author,  b.  about  1766 :
d.  in  1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1785,  and
became  a  resident  of  Hartford,  Conn.  He  pub-
lished "  History  of  the  United  States  to  1820 "  (3
vols.,  Hartford,  1821);  "The  Farmer's  Manual"
(Wethersfield,  Conn.,  1821);  and  "Memoirs  of
Lafayette  and  his  Tour  in  the  United  States,"
with  plates  (Wethersfield,  1825).

BUTLER,  George  B.,  lawyer,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  in  1809;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13  April,
1886.  He  came  to  New  York  at  the  age  of  twenty,
studied  law,  and  became  an  associate  of  Daniel
Lord. He  was  secretary  and  legal  adviser  of  the


Hudson  river  railroad  company  at  its  formation,
and,  after  the  completion  of  the  road,  joined  in
publishing  the  "  Journal  of  Commerce,"  being  also
one  of  its  editors  until  1857.  He  was  attorney  for
A.  T.  Stewart  &  Co.  for  twenty-five  years.

BUTLER,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  William
county,  Va. ;  d.  in  South  Carolina  in  1781.  He
emigrated  to  South  Carolina  about  1772,  settling  in
what  was  then  a  frontier  region,  took  part  in  Gen,
Richardson's  "  Snow-Camp  Expedition,"  and  after-
ward in  a  similar  expedition  under  Gen.  William-
son, in  1776.  Butler  joined  Gen.  Lincoln  near  Au-
gusta in  1779,  when  the  latter  had  taken  command
of  the  southern  continental  forces,  and  after  the
fall  of  Charleston,  in  1780,  he  was  one  of  those  who
refused  to  swear  allegiance  to  the  British  crown,
and  was  lodged  in  the  jail  at  Ninety-Six.  He  was
afterward  taken  to  the  provost  of  Charleston,  then
to  the  prison-ship,  and  was  kept  in  close  confine-
ment for  eighteen  months.  After  his  release,  he
was  summoned  to  repel  a  foray  of  the  tones  of  his
precinct,  and  was  killed  at  Cloud's  creek.

BUTLER,  James  Davie,  educator,  b.  in  Rut-
land, Vt.,  15  March,  1815.  He  was  graduated  at
Middlebury  in  1836,  and  at  Andover  theological
seminary  in  1840,  having  been  tutor  in  Middle-
bury  in  1837-'8.  He  was  professor  of  ancient  lan-
guages in  Norwich  university,  Vt.,  in  1845-'7,  and,
after  ordination  in  the  latter  year,  was  pastor  of
Congregational  churches  in  Wells  River,  Vt.,  Pea-
body,  Mass.,  and  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  He  held  the-
chair  of  ancient  languages  in  Wabash  college,  In-
diana, in  1854-'8,  and  in  the  University  of  Wiscon-
sin in  1858-'67.  Since  then  he  has  devoted  him-
self to  lecturing  and  occasional  preaching.  His
best-known  lectures  are  "  The  Architecture  of  St.
Peter's,"  "Prehistoric  Wisconsin,"  "The  Hapax
Legomena  in  Shakespeare,"  and  "Commonplace
Books."  Prof.  Butler  has  travelled  widely,  and
has  contributed  largely  to  periodical  literature.

BUTLER,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Connecticut ;  d.
in  Niagara  in  1794.  He  was  a  well-known  resi-
dent of  Tryon  county,  N.  Y.  (a  name  then  applied
to  the  Mohawk  region  west  of  Schenectady),  and
commanded  a  militia  regiment  there.  He  com-
manded the  Indians  under  Sir  William  Johnson  in
the  Niagara  campaign  of  1759,  and  also  in  the
Montreal  expedition  of  1760.  At  the  beginning  of
the  war  he  espoused  the  British  cause,  and  was
made  deputy  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs.  In
1775  he  was  one  of  a  party  of  tories  that  broke  up  a
patriot  meeting  in  Tryon  county,  N.  Y.,  and  was  act-
ive in  the  predatory  warfare  that  so  long  disturbed
that  part  of  the  state.  In  1776  he  organized  a
band  of  marauders  consisting  of  Indians  and  white
men  painted  like  Indiums,  and  commanded  these  at
the  battle  of  Oriskany  in  1777.  In  July,  1778,  he
led  the  force  of  1,100  men  that  desolated  Wyom-
ing in  the  famous  "  Wyoming  massacre,"  and  was
guilty  of  the  greatest  atrocities.  He  fought  Sulli-
van in  central  New  York  in  1779,  and  took  part  in
Sir  John  Johnson's  raid  on  the  Schoharie  and  Mo-
hawk settlements  in  1780.  After  the  war  Butler
fled  to  Canada.  His  estates  in  this  country  were
confiscated ;  but  he  was  rewarded  by  the  British
government  for  his  services  with  the  office  of
Indian  agent,  a  salary  and  pension  of  $3,500  a
year,  and  5,000  acres  of  land.  Butler's  barbarities,
though  great,  have  been  exaggerated.  Some  of
the  most  atrocious  deeds  at  Wyoming  were  due
to  his  son  Walter,  a  major  in  the  British  ser-
vice, commander  of  a  party  of  500  Indians  and
whites,  who  massacred  women  and  children  at
Cherry  Valley  on  11  Nov.,  1778.  Col.  John  But-
ler professed  to  be  grieved  by  his  son's  conduct


480


BUTLER


BUTLER


on  this  occasion. — His  son,  Walter,  was  connected
with  some  of  the  most  infamous  transactions  of  the
revohition.  While  a  lieutenant,  he  was  sentenced
to  death  as  a  spy,  but  was  reprieved  at  the  inter-
cession of  some  American  officers,  who  had  known
him  as  a  law-student  in  Albany.  Shortly  after-
ward, when  confined  in  a  private  house,  he  made
his  escape.  He  was  killed  in  October,  1781,  in  an
action  on  the  Mohawk.

BUTLER,  John  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  1792;  d.  in
Mount  Auburn,  near  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  7  Dec,
1870.  He  served  as  a  private  in  the  war  of  1812,
after  which  he  went  to  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  engaged
in  the  printing  business,  and  subsequently  was  for
many  years  editor  and  publisher  of  the  Pittsburg
"  Statesman."  At  this  period  of  life  he  was  active
in  politics,  and  in  1888  was  appointed  recorder  of
deeds  and  afterward  canal  commissioner.  At  the
beginning  of  the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  commis-
sioned paymaster  in  the  army,  25  June,  1846,  and
accompanied  Gen.  Taylor's  command  to  the  seat  of
war.  He  was  made  military  storekeeper  at  the
Alleghany  arsenal,  30  June,  1847,  and  remained
there  until  he  was  retired,  1  Oct.,  1863.

BUTLER,  John  Jay,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ber-
wick, Me.,  9  April,  1814.  He  was  graduated  at
Bowdoin  in  1837,  taught  school  in  Parsonfield  and
Farmington,  Me.,  in  1838-9,  and  was  principal  of
Clinton  seminary,  N.  Y.,  in  1841-2.  After  gradu-
ation at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1844,  he
was  ordained  as  a  Free  Baptist,  28  Jan.,  1846.  He
was  professor  of  systematic  theology  at  the  semi-
nary in  Whitestown,  N.  Y.,  from  1844  till  1854,
when  he  went  to  fill  the  same  chair  in  the  New
Hampton,  N.  H.,  theological  institute.  He  was
professor  of  theology  in  Bates  college  from  1870
till  1873,  and  in  the  latter  year  was  appointed  to
the  chair  of  sacred  literature  in  Hillsdale  college,
Michigan.  In  1860  Bowdoin  gave  him  the  degree
of  D.  D.  He  has  published  many  theological  works,
including  "  Natural  and  Revealed  Theology  "  (Do-
ver, N.  H.,  1861);  "Commentary  on  the  Gospels"
(1870) ;  and  "  Commentary  on  the  Acts,  Romans,
and  First  and  Second  Corinthians"  (1871).  Dr.
Butler  has  been  since  1834  assistant  editor  of  the
"Morning  Star,"  the  organ  of  his  denomination,
formerly  published  in  Dover,  N.  H.,  but  now  in
Boston,  Mass.

BUTLER,  Mann,  author,  d.  in  November,  1835,
in  consequence  of  a  railroad  accident  in  Missouri.
He  emigrated  to  Kentucky  in  1806,  and  published
a  "  History  of  Kentucky  "  (Louisville,  1834).

BUTLER,  Moses,  surveyor,  b.  in  Berwick,  Me.,
13  July,  1702;  d.  in  1756.  His  father,  Thomas
Butler,  who  was  prominent  in  the  affairs  of  York
county.  Me.,  for  more  than  twenty  years,  was  a  de-
scendant of  the  noble  house  of  Ormonde  in  Ire-
land. His  son  was  chosen  in  1730  to  represent
Berwick  in  matters  relating  to  the  seizure  of  prop-
erty belonging  to  citizens,  by  the  crown  surveyor
of  woods,  and  from  1733  till  1756  he  was  annually
elected  selectman  of  Berwick  and  surveyor  of
land.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in  the  1st
Massachusetts  regiment,  5  Feb.,  1744,  and  during
the  siege  and  capture  of  Louisburg  was  in  com-
mand of  his  company,  under  Sir  William  Pepper-
ell's  immediate  instructions.  In  a  letter  from  Sir
William  Pepperell  to  John  Hill,  Capt.  Butler's
alacrity  in  enlisting  his  full  company  of  men  for
service  in  the  Louisburg  expedition  is  warmly
praised.  He  was  chosen  in  1748  to  answer  a  peti-
tion executed  against  the  town  of  Berwick  at  the
general  court  in  Boston,  and  on  22  May,  1749,  was
elected  a  representative  to  the  general  court.  Dr.
George  H.  Butler,  of  New  York,  has  published  a


work  entitled  "  Thomas  Butler  and  his  Descendants
1674-1886  "  (New  York,  1886).  '

BUTLER,  Noble,  educator,  b.  in  Washington
county.  Pa.,  in  1819  ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  12  Feb.,
1882.  He  was  educated  at  Hanover  college,  Indi-
ana, and  in  1839  became  professor  of  Greek  and
Latin  in  the  University  of  Louisville,  Ky.  He
published  a  "  Practical  and  Critical  English  Gram-
mar "  (Louisville,  1875),  and  various  text-books  in
reading  and  composition.

BUTLER,  Pierce,  senator,  b.  in  Ireland,  11
July,  1744;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  15  Feb.,  1822.  He
was  the  third  son  of  Sir  Richard  Butler,  5th  baronet.
He  was  made  lieutenant  in  the  46th  regiment  of
the  British  army,  18  Aug.,  1761 ;  became  captain  in
the  29th  in  July,  1762;  major  in  April,  1766,  and
was  stationed  in  Boston,  but  resigned  before  the
revolution  and  settled  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  He
was  a  delegate  from  South  Carolina  to  the  old
congress  in  1787,  and  in  1788  a  member  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  federal  constitution,
taking  an  active  part  in  its  discussions.  He  sup-
ported the  "  Virginia  Plan,"  saying  that  he  had  been
opposed  to  granting  new  powers  to  a  single  body,
but  would  support  their  distribution  among  differ-
ent bodies.  He  spoke  against  the  plan  of  a  triple
executive,  and  maintained  that  property  was  the
only  true  basis  of  representation.  After  the
adoption  of  the  constitution  he  was  senator  from
his  state  in  1789-'96  and  in  1802-4.  He  opposed
some  of  the  measures  of  Washington's  administra-
tion, but  approved  of  the  war  of  1812.  Senator
Butler  was  at  one  time  a  director  of  the  U.  S.
bank.  He  was  proud  of  tracing  his  descent  from
the  dukes  of  Ormond,  and  his  political  opponents
often  twitted  him  upon  his  family  pride. — His  son,
Pierce,  b.  in  1807;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  15  Aug.,
1867,  was  a  lawyer  of  ability,  and  married  in  1834
Miss  Fanny  Kemble,  the  actress,  who  had  come  to
this  country  about  two  years  before.  In  1849,
owing  to  incompatibility  of  temper,  they  were
separated. See  Kemble,  Frances  Anne.

BUTLER,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Ireland;
killed  at  the  defeat  of  St.  Clair,  4  Nov.,  1791.  He
came  to  America  with  his  parents  before  1760,  was
made  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  Pennsylvania  line
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolutionary  war,  in  the
spring  of  1777  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  Morgan's
rifle  corps,  and  distinguished  himself  on  many  oc-
casions. While  with  Lafayette's  detachment  near
Williamsburg,  Va.,  26  June,  1781,  he  attacked  Col.
Simcoe's  rangers,  gaining  the  advantage.  He  held
the  rank  of  colonel  of  the  9th  Pennsylvania  regi-
ment at  the  close  of  the  war,  was  agent  for  Indian
affairs  in  Ohio  in  1787,  and  in  the  expedition  of  St.
Clair  against  the  Indians,  in  1791,  commanded  the
right  wing,  with  the  rank  of  major-general  When
attacked  early  in  the  morning  of  4  Nov.,  he  re-
peatedly charged  the  enemy,  received  several  severe
wounds,  and  finally  was  tomahawked  and  scalped.
—His  brother,  William,  was  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  4th  Pennsvlvania  regiment  in  the  Revolutionary
army.  In  October,  1778,  after  the  destruction  of
Wyoming  by  John  Butler  and  the  Indians,  he  con-
ducted an  expedition  from  Schoharie,  which  de-
stroyed the  Indian  settlements  of  Unadilla  and
Anaguaga.  His  account  of  the  expedition  was  pub-
lished.—Thomas,  soldier,  third  of  the  Butler  brotn-
ers,  b.  in  Pennsvlvania  in  1754 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,
La.,  7  Sept.,  1805.  In  1776,  while  studying  law  with
Judge  Wilson,  of  Philadelphia,  he  joined  the  army,
soon  obtained  a  company,  and  was  in  almost  every
action  in  the  middle  states  during  the  revolution.
At  Brandywine,  11  Sept.,  1777,  he  received  the
thanks  of  Washington  on  the  field  for  intrepidity


BUTLER


BUTLER


481


in  rallying  a  retreating  detachment.  At  Mon-
mouth he  was  thanked  by  Wayne  for  defending  a
defile  in  the  face  of  a  hea.vy  fire,  while  Col.  Rich-
ard Butler's  regiment  withdrew.  After  the  war
he  retired  to  a  farm,  but  in  1791  was  made  major,
and  commanded  a  battalion  from  Carlisle  in  Gib-
son's regiment,  under  St.  Clair,  at  whose  defeat,
4  Nov.,  he  was  twice  wounded.  His  elder  brother,
Richard,  was  killed,  and  he  was  with  difficulty  re-
moved, his  leg  having  been  broken  by  a  ball,  by
his  surviving  brother,  Edward.  He  became  major
of  the  4th  sub-legion  on  11  April,  1792,  lieutenant-
colonel  commanding  the  4th  infantry  on  1  July,
1792,  and,  on  the  reorganization  of  the  army  on  a
peace  basis  in  June,  1802,  was  retained  as  colonel
of  the  2d  infantry,  to  which  he  was  appointed  on  1
April,  1802.  In  1797  he  was  ordered  by  President
Washington  to  expel  settlers  from  Indian  lands  in
Tennessee,  and  made  several  treaties  with  the  In-
dians while  in  that  country.  His  son,  Robert
Butler,  served  in  the  army  as  assistant  adjutant-
general  to  Gen.  Harrison  in  the  battle  of  the
Thames,  distinguished  himself  at  New  Orleans,  re-
signed his  colonelcy  in  1821,  and  from  1824  till
1849  was  surveyor  of  public  lands  in  Florida. —
Percival,  fourth  of  the  brothers,  soldier,  b.  in
Pennsylvania  in  1760;  d.  in  Port  William,  Ky.,
11  Sept.,  1821.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  revolu-
tionary army,  was  with  Morgan  at  Saratoga,  com-
manded in  the  conflict  with  Col.  Simcoe  at  Spen-
cer's Ordinary,  25  June,  1781,  and  served  at  the
siege  of  Yorktown.  After  the  war  he  removed  to
Jessamine  co.,  Ky.,  and  was  adjutant-general  in
the  war  of  1812.  His  son,  Thomas  Langford,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Lexington,  Ky.,  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Louis-
ville, Ky.,  21  Oct.,  1880.  In  1796  he  removed  to
Carrollton,  then  Port  William,  Ky.,  and  in  1809
entered  the  army  as  lieutenant.  In  1813  he  was
promoted  captain,  and  served  through  the  north-
western campaign  under  Harrison.  In  1814,  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Jackson,  he  was  at  the  siege
of  Pensacola,  and  in  1815  at  the  battle  of  New
Orleans,  and  was  bre vetted  major  for  gallantry.
After  the  war  he  received  the  appointment  of  sur-
veyor and  inspector  of  the  port  of  New  Orleans.
He  resigned  his  post  and  returned  to  his  home  in
Kentucky.  In  1826  he  represented  Gallatin  eo.  in
the  legislature.  He  was  a  member  of  the  old  court
party,  and  aided  in  its  success  on  the  question  that
then  agitated  the  state.  In  1847  he  again  repre-
sented Carroll  and  Gallatin  in  the  legislature.  An-
other son,  William  Orlando,  soldier,  b.  in  Jessa-
mine CO.,  Ky.,  in  1791;  d.  in  Carrollton,  Ky.,  6
Aug.,  1880.  He  was  graduated  at  Transylvania
university  in  1812,  and  was  studying  law  under
Robert  Wickliffe  at  Lexington,  when,  at  the  break-
ing out  of  hostilities  with  England,  he  enlisted  as
a  private,  and  hastened  to  the  relief  of  Fort
Wayne.  Promoted  ensign  in  the  17th  infantry,  he
was  at  the  disastrous  battles  of  18  and  22  Jan.,
1813,  at  Raisin  river.  He  distinguished  himself  in
the  second  engagement  by  burning  a  barn  from
which  the  Indians  poured  a  galling  fire  into  the
American  ranks,  was  afterward  wounded  and  taken
prisoner,  and,  after  enduring  privations  and  inhu-
man treatment,  was  paroled  at  Fort  Niagara,  and
made  his  way  back  to  Kentucky  amid  many  hard-
ships. Commissioned  a  captain,  he  raised  a  com-
pany, and  did  good  service  at  Pensacola.  He  was
ordered  to  New  Orleans,  where,  on  the  night  of  23
Dec,  1814,  while  in  command  of  four  companies
on  the  left  wing,  he  attacked  and  repelled  Gen.  Sir
Edward  Pakenham.  This  check  gave  time  for  the
construction  of  defences  at  Chalmette,  which  on  8
Jan.  enabled  the  Americans  to  defeat  a  force
VOL.  I. — 31


"?7'-^'yi^..^;^Z;


double  their  own  and  win  a  decisive  victory.  For
this  service  he  was  made  brevet  major,  'in  the
following  year  he  succeeded  his  brother,  Maj.
Thomas  Butler,  as  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Jackson.
In  1817  he  resigned  from  the  army  and  resumed
the  practice  of  law,  was  elected  in  that  year  to  the
legislature,  and  served  through  three  terms.  In
1839  he  was  elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,  and
he  was  again  returned  in  1841,  but  declined  a
third  nomination.  He  was  induced  to  accept  the
nomination  for  governor  in  1844,  with  no  hope  of
election,  but  with  the  effect  of  reducing  the  mar
jorities  of  the
whig  partv  from
28,000  to"  few-
er than  5,000.
His  success  at
the  bar  was
marked,  but  at
the  beginning
of  the  Mexican
war  he  joined
thearmy,andon
29  June,  1846,
was  appointed
major  -  general
of  volunteers.
He  reported  to
Gen.  Taylor,
and  in  the  early
military  move-
ments in  Texas
and northern

Mexico  bore  a  prominent  part.  At  the  siege  of
Monterey,  24  Sept.,  he  charged  a  battery,  was
wounded  in  the  leg,  and  was  sent  home,  but  rejoined
the  army  of  Gen.  Scott  the  following  year,  and  was
at  the  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  For  his  bra-
very at  Monterey  he  received  a  sword  of  honor  from
congress,  and  one  from  his  own  state.  In  Febru-
ary, 1848,  being  senior  major-general,  he  succeeded
Gen.  Scott  in  the  chief  command,  and  held  that
place  when  peace  was  signed,  29  May,  1848.  In
May,  1848,  the  national  democratic  convention  at
Baltimore  nominated  Gen.  Butler  for  vice-presi-
dent on  the  ticket  on  which  Lewis  Cass  held  the
first  place.  This  ticket  was  defeated  by  the  schism
in  the  party,  and  the  nomination  in  New  York  of
the  free-soil  candidates.  Van  Buren  and  Adams.
Gen.  Butler  remained  in  private  life  after  this  elec-
tion, refusing  the  appointment  of  governor  of  the
territory  of  Nebraska  in  1855.  His  last  appearance
on  the  public  stage  was  as  a  member  of  the  peace
congress  which  met  at  Washington  in  1861.  He
was  the  author  of  "The  Boatman's  Horn"  and
other  short  poems.  His  "  Life  and  Public  Services,"
edited  by  Francis  P.  Blair,  Jr.,  appeared  in  1848. —
Edward,  the  youngest  of  the  five  brothers,  d.  at
Fort  Wilkinson,  Ga.,  6  May,  1803,  was  a  captain  in
Gibson's  regiment  of  Pennsylvania  levies  of  1791,
adjutant-general  to  General  Wayne  in  1796,  and
was  retained  with  the  rank  of  major  on  the  estab-
lishment in  1802.  His  son,  Edward  G.  W.,  entered
the  army  as  a  cadet  in  1816,  rose  to  be  1st  lieuten-
ant, resigned  in  1831,  re-entered  the  army  from
Louisiana  in  1847  as  colonel  of  dragoons,  and
served  in  the  Mexican  war.

BUTLER,  Simeon,  publisher,  b.  in  1770 ;  d.  in
Northampton,  Mass.,  in  1847.  In  1792  he  estab-
lished the  first  publishing-house  in  western  Massa-
chusetts at  Northampton.  He  printed  the  earliest
American  edition  of  Vattel's  "Law  of  Nations,"
and  the  first  volume  of  Massachusetts  supreme
court  reports,  and  brought  out  Dwight's  "  School
Geography,"  which  had  a  large  sale. He  also  en-


482


BUTLER


gaged  in  paper-making,  and  manufactured  the  first
domestic  letter-paper  used  by  the  U.  S.  senate.

BUTLER,  Thomas  Belden,  jurist,  b.  in
Wethersfield,  Conn.,  23  Aug.,  1806;  d.  in  Norwalk,
Conn.,  8  June,  1873.  He  received  a  classical  edu-
cation, entered  Yale  medical  school  in  1826,  and
took  his  degree  of  M.  D.  in  1828.  He  practised
medicine  for  eight  years  in  Norwalk,  when,  finding
that  it  affected  his  health,  he  abandoned  it,  and
studied  law  with  Clark  Bissell.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  Norwalk  in  1837,  was  a  member  of  the
Connecticut  house  of  representatives  in  1832-'46,
and  of  the  state  senate  in  1848-53,  and  in  1849  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  whig,  and  served  one  term.
In  May,  1855,  he  was  elected  a  judge  of  the  superior
court,  in  1861  was  appointed  to  the  supreme  court
of  Connecticut,  and  was  made  chief  justice  in  1870.
He  was  a  careful  student  of  the  law,  and  his  in-
sight into  difficult  points,  and  perception  of  the
principles  of  equity,  gave  his  decisions  a  high  re-
putation. He  was  also  an  excellent  farmer,  versed
m  the  principles  of  mechanics,  and  interested  in
meteorology.  He  published  "The  Philosophy  of
the  Weather "  (New  York,  1856),  and  in  1870  an
enlarged  edition  under  the  title  of  "  Concise  Ana-
lytical and  Logical  Development  of  the  Atmos-
pheric System,  and  Prognostication  of  the
Weather  "  (Norwalk).

BUTLER,  William,  soldier  and  politician,  b.
in  Prince  William  co.,  Va.,  in  1759 ;  d.  in  Columbia,
S.  C,  15  Nov.,  1821.  He  was  a  son  of  James  But-
ler, who  was  captured  and  murdered  by  the  notori-
ous Cunningham,  was  graduated  at  South  Carolina
college  as  a  student  of  medicine,  became  a  lieuten-
ant in  Lincoln's  army  in  1779,  was  engaged  at
Stono,  and  served  in  the  famous  corps  of  Pulaski.
Butler  next  joined  Gen.  Pickens,  subsequently
served  with  Gren.  Lee,  under  Greene,  at  the  siege  of
Ninety-Six,  and  was  detached  on  several  separate
services  requiring  celerity,  courage,  and  vigilance.
He  at  length  rose  to  a  command  of  mounted  rang-
ers, and  took  part  in  many  affairs  with  the  tories.
At  the  head  of  a  body  of  cavalry,  he,  with  Capt.
Michael  Watson,  attacked  and  dispersed  double  the
number  of  the  enemy  in  Dean's  swamp,  though
Watson  fell  in  the  action.  He  was  soon  after  the
war  made  a  brigadier-general,  and,  in  1796,  major-
general  of  militia.  He  was  a  member  of  the  con-
vention of  1787  to  consider  the  adoption  of  the
federal  constitution,  and,  with  Gen.  Sumter  and
others,  voted  against  it.  He  was  subsequently  a
member  of  the  convention  that  passed  the  pres-
ent constitution  of  South  Carolina,  for  some  time
a  member  of  the  legislature,  sheriff  in  1794,  and
served  as  a  magistrate.  From  1801  till  1813,  when
he  resigned  his  seat  to  make  way  for  John  C.  Cal-
houn, he  was  a  member  of  congress.  In  1818  he  was
again  a  candidate  for  congress,  but  was  defeated
by  Eldred  Simkins.  In  the  war  of  1812  he  com-
manded the  South  Carolina  troops  for  state  defence.
— His  son,  Andrew  Pickens,  jurist,  b.  in  Edge-
field district,  S.  C,  17  Nov.,  1796 ;  d.  near  Edgefield
Court-House,  25  May,  1857,  was  graduated  at
South  Carolina  college  in  1817,  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1819,  and  soon  gained  a  reputation  for  eloquence
and  humor.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1824,  and  in  1825,  as  aide  to  Gov.  Manning,  took  part
in  the  reception  given  to  Gen.  Lafayette.  In  1827
he  was  one  of  the  committee  that  conducted  the
impeachment  trial  of  Judge  James,  a  revolutionary
veteran,  charged  with  incompetence  and  drunken-
ness. During  the  nullification  troubles  in  1831  he
commanded  a  cavalry  regiment.  He  was  judge  of
sessions  in  1833,  and  of  the  state  court  from  1835
till  1846,  and  was  then  appointed  by  the  governor


BUTLER

to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  was  after-
ward elected  by  the  legislature,  remaining  a  sena-
tor till  his  death.  Soon  after  taking  his  seat  he
became  chairman  of  the  judiciary  committee,  and
he  took  a  conspicuous  part  in  debate,  particu'larlv
on  questions  affecting  the  south.  His  report  on
the  fugitive  slave  law  was  defended  by  him  in  an
able  speech.  His  last  effort  was  in  reply  to  Charles
Sumner  and  in  defence  of  his  state.  Judge  Butler
was  a  relative  of  Preston  S.  Brooks,  and  it  was
because  of  remarks  about  him  in  debate  that  Mr.
Brooks  assaulted  Mr.  Sumner  in  the  senate-cham-
ber.—Another  son,  Pierce  Mason,  b.  in  Edgefield
district,  S.  C,  11  April,  1798;  killed  in  the  battle
of  Churubusco,  Mexico,  20  Aug.,  1847,  received
a  military  education,  and  entered  the  army  in  1819
as  second  lieutenant  of  infantry.  He  displayed
from  the  first  abilities  that  promised  distinction,
was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant  in
1823,  and  attained  the  grade  of  captain  in  1825.
After  four  years  of  service,  he  resigned  his  com-
mission, and  in  1829  became  a  resident  of  Columbia,
S.  C,  and  was  elected  president  of  a  bank  estab-
lished at  that  place.  In  1836  he  resigned  the
office  and  accepted  the  appointment  of  lieutenant-
colonel  in  Goodwyn's  regiment  of  South  Carolina
volunteers,  raised  to  aid  in  suppressing  the  Semi-
nole Indians  of  Florida.  He  served  throughout
the  war,  and  won  distinction  in  several  hard-fought
battles.  On  his  return  from  Florida,  he  was  in
1838  elected  governor  of  South  Carolina.  At  the
end  of  his  term,  having  given  great  satisfaction  to
the  state  by  the  dignity  and  ability  that  he  dis-
played in  the  office,  he  was  appointed  by  the  presi-
dent Indian  agent,  and  filled  that  place  to  the  sat-
isfaction of  the  government  until  the  beginning  of
the  war  with  Mexico  in  1846,  when  he  resigned  it
to  enter  the  army.  He  organized  the  Palmetto
regiment,  was  elected  its  colonel,  and  led  it  witli  the
greatest  gallantry  in  the  fierce  conflicts  in  which  it
took  part,  winning  marked  distinction  in  the  battle
of  Cerro  Gordo.  At  the  battle  of  Churubusco,  22
Aug.,  1847,  Col.  Butler  was  wounded  in  the  early
part  of  the  engagement,  but  would  not  retire  from
the  field,  and  continued  to  lead  his  men  in  the  im-
petuous charge  upon  the  Mexican  lines  until  he
was  shot  through  the  head  and  killed  instantly.
Col.  Butler  was  over  six  feet  in  height,  finely  pro-
portioned, his  features  classical,  his  face  beaming
with  the  ardor  of  his  heroic  spirit,  and  his  bearing
full  of  soldierly  dignity.— Another  son,  William,  b.
in  Columbia,  S.  C,  was  educated  at  South  Carolina
college,  and  served  in  the  federal  house  of  repre-
sentatives from  1841  till  1843.— Matthew  Cal-
braith,  senator,  son  of  William,  b.  near  Green-
ville, S.  C,  8  March,  1836,  was  educated  at  South
Carolina  college,  studied  law  at  Edgefield  Court-
House  with  his  uncle,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1857,  practised  at  Edgefield  Court-House,  and  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1859.  He  entered  ,
the  confederate  service  as  captain  in  June,  1861,  |
became  colonel  of  the  2d  South  Carolina  cavalry  j
on  22  Aug.,  1862,  brigadier-general  on  1  Sept.,
1863,  and  afterward  a  major-general,  commanding
Wright's  and  Logan's  brigades  of  cavalry  in  tlie
Army  of  northern  Virginia.  At  the  battle  ot
Brandy  Station,  9  June,  1863,  he  lost  his  right  leg.
He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  of  South  Caroxina
in  1866,  was  a  candidate  for  lieutenant-governor  in
1870,  and  received  the  democratic  vote  for  U.  S.  sen-
ator the  same  year.  In  1876,  when  there  were  two
contending  state  governments  in  existence,  he  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  by  the  democratic  legislature,
as  the  successor  of  Thomas  J.  Robertson,  republi-
can. David  T.  Corbin,  who  was  elected  by  tlie


BUTLER


BUTTERWORTH


483


republican  legislature,  contested  the  election :  but
Gen.  Butler  was  admitted  to  the  seat  on  2  Dec,
1877  In  1882  he  was  re-elected  for  the  term  ex-
piring 3  March,  1889.

BUTLER,  William,  missionary,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  in  1819.  He  studied  for  the  Wesleyan
ministry  at  Didsbury,  near  Manchester,  England,
completing  his  course  in  1844,  and  in  the  same
year  joined  the  Irish  conference.  He  preached  six
years  in  Ireland,  removed  to  the  United  States,
remained  six  years  in  the  New  England  conference,
and  in  1856  was  sent  to  India  to  select  and  organ-
ize a  field  for  a  Methodist  mission.  He  estab-
lished the  Methodist  missions  in  the  valley  of  the
Ganges,  and  labored  there  for  nearly  ten  years.  In
1864  he  returned  to  the  United  States,  preached
for  a  time  in  New  England,  and  then  became  a
secretary  of  the  American  and  foreign  Christian
union.  In  1872  he  was  commissioned  to  found  a
mission  for  his  church  in  Mexico.  He  reached  that
country  23  Feb.,  1873,  and  labored  there  until
obliged  by  failing  health  to  return  in  February,
1879.  Afterward  he  resumed  the  pastoral  ofTice  in
the  New  England  conference.  Pie  is  the  author  of
a  "  Missionary  Compendium  "  (New  York,  1850) ;
•'  The  Land  of  the  Veda  "  (1872) ;  "  Mexico  from
the  Conquest  to  1880  "  (1881) ;  and  "  From  Boston
to  Bareily  and  Back  "  (1885).

BUTLER,  Zebulon,  soldier,  b.  in  Lyme,  Conn.,
in  1731 ;  d.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  28  July,  1795.  He
served  in  the  French  war  and  in  the  expedition  to
Havana,  and  rose  to  be  a  captain  in  1761.  In  1769
he  settled  at  Wyoming,  Pa.  In  the  early  part  of
the  revolutionary  war  he  was  a  lieutenant-colonel
in  the  Connecticut  line,  servmg  in  New  Jersey  in
1777-8,  and  became  colonel  on  13  March,  1778.
On  3  July,  1778,  he  commanded  the  weak  garrison
at  Wyoming  at  the  time  of  the  massacre,  which  he
was  unable  to  prevent.  He  accompanied  Sullivan
in  his  Indian  expedition  in  1779,  and  served  with
distinction  throughout  the  war.  See  Miner's  "  His-
tory of  Wvoming  "  (Philadelphia,  1845).

BUTTERFIELD,  Consul  Willshire,  author,
b.  in  Mexico,  Oswego  co.,  N.  Y.,  28  July,  1824.  He
was  educated  in  the  normal  school  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,
became  a  teacher,  and  in  1848-'9  superintendent  of
schools  in  Seneca  co.,  Ohio,  and  removed  in  1875  to
Wisconsin.  He  has  published  "  History  of  Seneca
County,  Ohio"  (Sandusky,  1848);  "An  Historical
Account  of  the  Expedition  against  Sandusky  in
1782"  (Cincinnati,  1873);  "The  History  and  Bio-
graphical Annals  of  the  University  of  Wisconsin  "
(Madison,  1879) ;  and  "  History  of  the  Discovery  of
the  Northwest  by  John  Nicolet "  (Cincinnati,  1881).
He  has  edited  the  "  Washington-Crawford  Letters  "
(Cincinnati,  1877) ;  the  "  Washington-Irvine  Corre-
spondence "  (Madison,  1882) ;  "  A  Short  Biography
of  John  Leith  "  (Cincinnati,  1883) ;  and  "  Journal
of  Capt.  Jonathan  Heart "  (Albany,  1885).

BUTTERFIELD,  John,  expressman,  b.  in  Hel-
derberg,  N.  Y.,  in  1783 ;  d.  in  Utica,  15  Nov.,  1869.
He  was  self-educated,  and  was  a  stage-coach  driver
ill  early  life.  In  1822  he  removed  to  Utica  to  as-
sist in  the  management  of  the  stage-line  between
Albany  and  Buffalo,  and  soon  became  the  leading
manager  of  that  business  in  the  state,  owner  of
nearly  all  the  stage-coach  lines  in  western  New
York,  and  part-owner  of  a  line  of  steamers  on  Lake
Ontario  and  the  St.  Lawrence  river.  In  1849  he
formed  the  express  company  of  Butterfield,  Wesson
&  Co.  On  the  establishment  of  railroads,  he  di-
rected his  energies  to  the  new  project,  and  was  also
the  originator  of  the  American  express  company,
organization  he  was  a  directing  power


m  which

until  his  death.


The  corporation  was  formed


1850  by  the  consolidation  of  the  rival  firms  of  But-
terfield, Wesson  &  Co.,  Wells  &  Co.,  and  Livingston

6  Fargo,  which  was  accomplished  at  the  suggestion
of  Mr.  Butterfield.  Perceiving  the  commercial  im-
portance of  the  electric  telegraph,  he  projected  and
built  the  Morse  telegraph  line  between  New  Y^ork
and  Buffalo.  He  was  president  of  the  Overland
mail  company,  which,  in  1858,  contracted  with  the
government  to  carry  a  monthly,  and  subsequently
a  daily,  mail  between  San  Francisco  and  the  Mis-
souri river.  He  also  aided  largely  in  building  up
the  city  of  Utica. — His  son,  Daniel,  soldier,  b.  in
Utica,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,  1831,  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1849,  and  became  a  merchant  in  New  Y'ork
city.  He  was  colonel  of  the  12th  New  York  militia
when  the  civil  war  began.  Accompanying  his  regi-
ment to  Washington  in  July,  1861,  he  led  the  ad-
vance into  Virginia  over  the  Long  Bridge,  joined
Gen.  Patterson  on  the  upper  Potomac,  and  com-
manded a  brigade.  On  the  enlargement  of  the
regular  army,  he  was  commissioned  a  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  assigned  to  the  12th  infantry,  14  May,
1861, appointed brigadier-general of  volunteers,

7  Sept.,  1861,  and  ordered  to  the  corps  of  Fitz-
John  Porter,  in  which  he  made  the  campaign  of
the  peninsula,  taking  a  conspicuous  part  in  the
actions  at  Hanover  Court-House,  Mechanicsville,
Gaines's  Mills,  where  he  was  wounded,  and  in  the
battles  fought  during  the  retreat  of  McClellan's
army  to  Harrison's  Landing,  where  he  commanded
a  detachment  on  the  south  side  of  the  James  river
to  cover  the  retreat.  He  took  part  in  the  great
battles  under  Pope  and  McClellan  in  August  and
September,  1862,  and  near  the  close  of  October  took
command  of  Morell's  division.  He  became  major-
general  of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  was  made
colonel  of  the  5th  infantry  in  the  regular  army  on
1  July,  1863,  and  commanded  the  5th  corps  at  the
battle  of  Fredericksburg,  Va.,  was  chief  of  staff.
Army  of  the  Potomac,  at  Chancellorsville,  and  at
Gettysburg,  where  he  was  wounded,  was  ordered  to
re-enforce  Rosecrans's  Army  of  the  Cumberland,
in  October,  1863,  acting  as  chief  of  staff  to  Hooker
at  Lookout  Mountain,  Mission  Ridge,  Ringgold,
and  Pea  Vine  Creek,  Ga.  He  commanded  a  di-
vision of  the  20th  corps  at  the  battles  of  Buzzard's
Roost,  Resaca,  Dallas,  New  Hope  Church,  Kene-
saw,  and  Lost  Mountain,  Ga.,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier-  and  major-general,  U.  S.  A.,  for  gallant
and  meritorious  conduct.  He  is  the  author  of
"  Camp  and  Outpost  Duty  "  (New  York,  1862).  He
served  after  the  war  as  superintendent  of  the  gen-
eral recruiting  service  of  the  U.  S.  army,  with  head-
quarters in  New  York,  and  in  command  of  forces
in  New  York  harbor  from  1865  till  1869,  when  he
resigned  from  the  army  and  was  appointed  head  of
the  Sub-treasury  of  the  United  States  in  New  York.
Since  leaving  this  position  he  has  been  connected
with  the  American  express  company.  On  21  Sept.,
1886,  he  married,  in  London,  England,  Mrs.  Julia
L.  James,  of  New  York  citv.

BUTTERWORTH,  Benjamin,  commissioner
of  the  patent-office,  b.  in  Warren  co.,  Ohio,  22  Oct.,
1837.  His  father  was  originally  a  Virginia  planter,
who  had  freed  his  slaves,  and,  removing  to  Ohio,
became  active  with  Levi  Coffin  in  the  "under-
ground railroad."  The  son  was  educated  at  Ohio
university  in  Athens,  studied  law  in  Cincinnati,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1861,  and  practised  in
that  city.  He  was  U.  S.  district  attorney  in  1870,
a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1873  and  1874,  and
was  elected  to  congress  in  1878,  and  re-elected  for
the  following  term.  He  was  the  author  of  the  com-
pulsory army  retirement  act.  In  1883  President
Arthur  appointed  him  a  commissioner  to  examine


484


BUTTERWORTH


a  part  of  the  Northern  Pacific  railroad.  He  was
also  retained  by  the  government  as  counsel  to  prose-
cute the  South  Carolina  election  cases  in  that  year.
After  the  retirement  of  E.  M.  Marble  from  the
patent-office,  1  Sept.,  1883,  Mr.  Butterworth  was
appointed  commissioner  of  patents.  In  1884  he  was
again  elected  to  congress,

BUTTERWORTH,  Hezekiali,  author,  b.  in
Warren,  R.  I.,  22  Dec,  188J).  He  received  a  com-
mon-school education,  and  travelled  at  different
times  in  Europe,  Cuba,  Canada,  and  the  United
States.  In  1871  he  became  assistant-editor  of  the
"Youth's  Companion."  He  has  published  "  Story
of  the  Hymns"  (Boston,  1876);  volumes  entitled
"  Zig-Zag'Journeys  "  (1876-'86),  annual  volumes  de-
scriptive of  the  Levant,  Acadia,  northern  lands,  the
Occident,  the  orient,  and  classic  lands ;  "  The  Pray-
ers of  History"  (1880);  "Poems  for  Christmas,
Easter,  and  New  Year"  (1883);  "Great  Composers,"
written  for  Chautauqua  readings ;  and  "  Wonderful
Christraasses  of  Old,  illustrated  by  F.  H.  Lungren
(1885),  The  "  Zig-Zag  Journeys  in  the  Occident "
was  republished  in  England,  He  is  also  the  author
of  the  cantata  "  Under  the  Palms,"  of  which  15.000
copies  were  sold  in  the  United  States  and  30,000  in
England,  of  that  entitled  "  Faith,"  and  of  one  called
"  Faith  Triumphant,"  which  was  published  in  Glas-
gow, Scotland,  Mr.  Butterworth  has  also  contrib-
uted frequently  to  periodicals,  and  has  travelled
and  pursued  researches  in  Spanish  and  French
colonial  history  with  reference  to  a  work  on  the
"  Ballads  of  Florida."

BUTTERWORTH,  Samuel  F.,  lawyer,  d.  in
San  Francisco,  5  May,  1875,  He  studied  and  prac-
tised law  in  New  York  city,  and  during  the  ad-
ministration of  President  Buchanan  was  at  the
head  of  the  sub-treasury  in  New  York,  Afterward
he  went  to  California  as  superintendent  of  a  mining
company,  engaged  largely  in  gold-mining  and  land
speculations,  and  acquired  a  fortune  estimated  at
$7,000,000,  which  was  invested  in  real  estate.

BUTTON,  Sir  Thomas,  English  navigator.
He  was  placed  in  command  of  an  expedition  to  the
northwest,  sent  out  two  years  after  Hudson's  last
voyage.  He  sailed  from  England  in  May,  1612,
with  two  vessels,  the  "  Resolution  "  and  the  "  Dis-
covery," provisioned  for  eighteen  months.  He
passed  through  Hudson  strait  and  crossed  the  bay
to  the  southern  point  of  Southampton  island,
which  place  he  named  Carey's  Swan's  Nest,  He
continued  his  course  westward,  expecting  to  find
a  northwest  passage,  and,  when  he  came  to  the
western  shore  of  the  bay,  gave  it  the  significant
name  of  Hope's  Check;  then  coasted  along  the
shore  and  came  to  Nelson  river,  which  he  named
Port  Nelson,  after  the  master  of  his  ship.  There  he
wintered,  and  in  the  summer  of  1613,  after  the
breaking  up  of  the  ice,  he  made  an  exploration  of
the  bay  as  far  as  lat.  65°  N.,  and  of  Southampton
island,  returning  to  England  in  the  autumn,
thoroughly  convinced  that  a  northwest  passage
existed. He  was  knighted  for  his  services,

BUTTRE,  John  Chester,  engraver,  b.  in  Au-
burn, N.  Y.,  10  June,  1821.  He  obtained  his  edu-
cation in  the  district-schools  and  in  Auburn  acad-
emy. The  first  drawing-lessons  he  received  were
from  one  Hulaniski,  a  Polish  exile  residing  in  Au-
burn ;  and  afterward,  while  assisting  his  father,  he
devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of  portrait-paint-
ing. In  the  practice  of  this  art  he  was  assisted  by
friends ;  but  he  did  not  succeed  as  well  with  colors
as  in  drawing,  and  his  attention  was  directed  to
wood-engraving.  His  first  attempt  in  this  line
was  a  series  of  small  penny  toy  primers.  By  de-
grees the  work  progressed,  and  in  time  he  did  the


BUTTS


business  of  a  general  engraver,  including  card-
plates,  wood-cuts  for  the  newspapers,  marking  sil-
ver-ware, and  various  kinds  of  simple  work.  In
1841  he  removed  to  New  York,  and  thereafter  gave
his  attention  to  steel-plate  engraving.  His  pro-
ductions were  soon  in  demand,  and  appeared  in
many  of  the  magazines.  About  1858  he  executed
a  full-length  portrait  of  President  Buchanan,  which
was  then  regarded  as  one  of  the  best  specimens  of
that  kind  of  work.  Pie  also  engraved  and  pub-
lished a  successful  full-length  portrait  of  Martha
Washington.  During  the  civil  war  he  published
"The  Empty  Sleeve,"  "Only  a  Little  Brook,"
"  Prayer  in  Camp,"  and  several  similar  pictures,
which  had  an  extensive  sale.  His  work  includes
the  engraving  of  nearly  3,000  plates,  and  it  is  his

Eride  that  orders  have  come  to  him  on  account  of
is  merit,  without  solicitation.  He  has  published
in  parts  "The  American  Portrait  Gallery,"  of
which  the  letter-press  was  prepared  by  his  daugh-
ter, Lillian  C.  Buttre  (3  vols..  New  York.  1880-'81).
BUTTRICK,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  1715;  d.  in
Concord,  Mass.,  16  May,  1791.  He  was  one  of  the
leaders  of  the  Concord  militia  on  the  memorable
19th  of  April,  1775.

BUTTS,  Isaac,  journalist,  b.  in  Washington,
Dutchess  CO.,  N.  Y..  11  Jan.,  1816 ;  d.  in  Rochester,
N.  Y.,  20  Nov.,  1874.  At  the  age  of  twelve  he
removed  with  his  father's  family  to  the  town  of
Irondequoit,  adjoining  the  city  of  Rochester,  where
he  lived  upon  a  farm  and  received  common-school
instruction.  Approaching  to  majority,  he  sought
a  more  liberal  education  and  received  it  under  the
instruction  of  Prof,  Chester  Dewey,  principal  of
the  Rochester  high  school.  After  successfully  fol-
lowing various  pursuits,  he  adopted  the  profession
of  journalism,  and  in  October,  1845,  purchased  and
assumed  editorship  of  the  Rochester  "  Advertiser,"
the  oldest  daily  paper  in  the  L^nited  States  west  of
Albany,  and  the  leading  organ  of  the  Democratic
party  in  western  New  York.  During  the  following
year,  1846,  slavery  became  a  prominent  issue  in  the
politics  of  the  United  States,  as  a  consequence  of
the  war  with  Mexico,  and  the  pending  acquisition
of  territory  by  treaty  of  peace.  The  question  was,
whether  slavery  should  be  allowed  or  prohibited  by
congress  in  the  acquired  territory,  and  discussion
of  it  was  forced  in  August,  1846,"  by  the  introduc-
tion in  the  house  of  representatives  of  the  "  Wilmot
proviso,"  to  the  effect  that  slavery  should  be  ex-
cluded. Mr.  Butts  took  strong  ground  against
both  sides  in  the  controversy,  and  promulgated  the
doctrine  that  the  people  of  the  territories  should
settle  the  question  for  themselves.  Credit  for  the
origin  of  this  principle  of  "  Popular  Sovereignty,"
or  "  Squatter  Sovereignty,"  as  its  opponents  con-
temptuously stigmatized  it,  has  been  erroneously
claimed  for  each  of  three  distinguished  senators-
Daniel  S,  Dickinson,  Lewis  Cass,  and  Stephen  A.
Douglas  —  respectively  from  New  York,  Michi-
gan, and  Illinois,  The  records  prove  that  it  was
first  advocated  by  Mr.  Butts  in  the  daily  "Adver-
tiser "  of  8  Feb.,'  1847 ;  by  Mr.  Dickinson  m  the
senate,  13  Dec,  1847;  by  Gen.  Cass  in  his  Nichol-
son letter,  24  Dec,  1847 ;  and  by  Judge  Douglas
in  the  discussion  of  the  compromise  measures  in
the  senate,  17  June,  1850.  In  the  division  of  the
Democratic  party  that  followed  in  1848,  Mr.  Butts
took  side  with  the  "Barnburners  "  of  New  York  in
support  of  Van  Buren  and  Adams,  against  the
"  Hunkers,"  who  sustained  Cass  and  Butler,  After
the  defeat  of  the  latter  he  sold  the  "  Advertiser
to  a  syndicate  of  "  Hunkers,"  and,  retiring  from


editorial  service,  engaged  in  the  enterprise


of  the


House  printing  telegraph  and  in  the  construction


BUXTON


BYLLYNGE


485


of  lines  in  the  western  states,  converging  at  St.
Louis.  After  the  presidential  election  of  1852  he
returned  to  journalism  by  the  purchase  of  a  half-
interest  in  the  Rochester  daily  "  Union,"  which
had  been  established  in  August  of  that  year  to
support  the  Democratic  candidates,  Pierce  and
King.  In  1857  the  daily  "  Advertiser"  was  joined
with  the  "  Union,"  and  Mr.  Butts  continued  as  edi-
tor until  December,  1804,  when  he  permanently  re-
tired. About  the  beginning  of  this  last  period  of
editorial  service  there  was  a  consolidation  of  tele-
graphic lines  and  interests  by  the  incorporation  of
the  Western  Union  Telegraph  Company,  of  which
Mr.  Butts  was  one  of  the  organizers  and  for  many
years  one  of  the  managers.  Mr.  Butts  never  held
any  public  position  beyond  acting  as  a  delegate
for  his  party  in  several  state  and  national  conven-
tions. He  was  elected  a  delegate  at  large  to  the
New  York  constitutional  convention  of  1866,  but
declined  to  serve.  He  was  a  man  of  marked  talent,
both  natural  and  acquired.  Possessed  of  an  ana-
lytical and  logical  mind,  he  was  a  powerful  con-
troversialist ;  and  he  has  left  brochures  on  finance,
protection,  free-trade,  and  other  subjects,  that  are
remarkable  for  originality  and  force.  His  volume
on  "Protection  and  Free-Trade,"  with  a  memoir,
was  published  posthumously  (New  York,  1875).

BUXTON,  Jarvis  Barry,  clergvman,  b.  in
Newbern,  N.  C,  17  Jan.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Fayetteville,
N.  C,  30  May,  1851.  He  was  ordained  a  "deacon  in
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  at  Elizabeth  City,
N.  C,  in  1827,  and  in  1831  he  removed  to  Fayette-
ville and  was  rector  there  until  his  death,  sustain-
ing a  high  reputation  for  zeal  and  devotion.  A
memoir  by  his  son.  Rev.  Jarvis  Buxton,  accom-
panies a  volume  of  his  discourses  (Raleigh,  1853).

BYERLY,  William  Elwood,  mathematician,
b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  13  Dec,  1849.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1871,  was  assistant  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  at  Cornell  university  in
1873-6,  was  employed  in  the  same  capacity  at
Harvard  in  1876-81,  and  appointed  full  professor
in  1881.  He  has  published  "■  Elements  of  Differen-
tial Calculus  "  (Boston,  1879) ;  "  Elements  of  Inte-
gral Calculus  "  (1881);  syllabi  of  the  Harvard  courses
in  plane  trigonometry,  analytical  geometry,  equa-
tions, and  methods  in  analytic  geometrv.

BYFIELD,  Nathaniel,  jurist,  b.  iri  Long  Dit-
ten,  Surrey,  England,  in  1653 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
6  June,  1733.  Richard,  his  father,  was  one  of  the
Westminster  assembly  divines,  his  mother  a  sister
of  Bishop  Juxon.  He  arrived  in  Boston  in  1764,
became  a  merchant,  and  soon  after  King  Philip's
war  one  of  the  four  proprietors  and  the  principal
settler  of  the  town  of  Bristol,  R.  I.  He  returned
to  Boston  in  1724.  He  was  at  one  time  speaker  of
the  house  of  representatives,  was  for  thirty-eight
years  judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  Bris-
tol, and  for  two  years  in  Suifolk  co.,  for  many
yeai-s  a  member  of  the  council,  and  judge  of  the
vice-admiralty  in  1704^15  and  in  1729.  He  pub-
lished an  "  Account  of  the  late  Revolution  in  New
England  "  (1689).

BYFORD,  William  Heath,  phvsician,  b.  in
Eaton,  Preble  co.,  Ohio,  20  March,  1817.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Ohio  medical  college  in  1844,  be-
came professor  of  anatomy  in  Evansville  medical
college  in  1850,  and  of  the  theory  and  practice  of
medicine  in  1852.  In  1857  he  went  to  Chicago  as
professor  of  obstetrics  in  the  Rush  medical  college,
and  in  1857  took  the  same  chair  in  the  Chicago
medical  college.  In  1862  he  became  president  and
professor  of  obstetrics  and  gynsecologv  in  the
Woman's  medical  college,  Chicago,  and'  in  1880
professor  of  gynascology  in  Rush  medical  college.


He  has  published  "Chronic  Inflammation  of  the
Cervix"  (Philadelphia,  1864);  "Treatise  on  the
Chronic  Inflammation  and  Displacements  of  the
Uterus  "  (1864 ;  new  ed.,  1871) ;  "  Practice  of  Medi-
cine and  Surgery  applied  to  Diseases  of  Women  "
(1865 ;  revised  ed.,  1871) ;  "  Philosophy  of  Domestic
Life  "  (Boston,  1868) ;  and  "  Treatise  on  the  Theory
and  Practice  of  Obstetrics  "  (New  York,  1870).

BYINGTON,  Cyrus,  missionary,  b,  in  Stock-
bridge,  Mass.,  11  March,  1793;  d.  in  Belpre,  Ohio,
31  Dec,  1868.  He  studied  theology  at  Andover,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1819 ;  and,  after  being
for  some  months  in  the  employ  of  the  prudential
committee  of  the  American  board  of  missions,  was
sent  by  them  as  a  missionary  to  the  Choctaws,  then
in  the  southern  states.  He  remained  at  the  Eliot
station  from  1821  till  the  Choctaws,  by  the  treaty
of  1830,  were  compelled  to  remove  to  the  present
Indian  territory,  and  accompanied  them  thither,
remaining  at  the  new  station,  Stockbridge,  till
about  1866,  when  failing  health  compelled  him  to
relinquish  work,  and  he  removed  to  Ohio.  He  pre-
pared several  religious  books  for  the  Indians,  and
translated  portions  of  the  Bible  into  their  language.

BYLES,  Mather,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  15
March,  1707 ;  d.  there,  5  July,  1788.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1725,  ordained  and  took  charge
of  the  Congregational  church  in  Hollis  street,  Bos-
ton, on  20  Dec,  1733.  He  was  especially  distin-
guished among  his  contemporaries  for  his  wit  and
conversational  powers.  He  possessed  literary  taste
and  solid  learning,  was  a  correspondent  of  Pope
and  Swift,  and  published  a  "  Poem  on  the  Death
of  George  I."  (1727),  a  "  Poetical  Epistle  to  Gov.
Belcher  on  the  Death  of  his  Lady"  (1736),  and
"  Miscellaneous  Poems  "  (1744).  He  had  just  claims
to  regard  as  a  pulpit  orator ;  and  his  published
sermons  evince  a  fine  imagination  and  great  com-
mand of  language,  combined  with  terseness  of  ex-
pression. He  maintained  his  loyalty  during  the
troubled  ante-reyolutionary  period  in  Boston.  In
August,  1776,  at  the  age  of  seventy,  his  connection
with  his  parish  was  dissolved  on  this  account.  The
next  year,  in  May,  he  was  denounced  in  town-meet-
ing as  an  enemy  to  the  country,  tried,  and  con-
demned to  imprisonment  in  a  guard-ship,  and  to
be  sent  with  his  family  to  England  within  forty
days ;  but  this  sentence  was  afterward  commuted
to  confinement  in  his  own  house,  from  which  he
was  soon  released.  He  continued  to  reside  in  Bos-
ton until  his  death,  but  held  no  pastoral  charge
from  that  time.  His  two  daughters,  the  last  of
whom  died  in  1837,  remained  staunch  loyalists  to
the  end  of  their  days. — His  son,  Mather,  clergy-
man, b.  12  Jan.,  1735 ;  d.  in  St.  John,  New  Bruns-
wick, 12  March,  1814,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1751,  ordained  a  Congregational ist  minister,  and
for  some  time  pastor  of  a  church  in  New  London,
Conn.  In  1768  he  became  an  Episcopalian,  and
was  called  to  Boston  as  rector  of  Christ  church,
which  charge  he  held  until  the  expulsion  of  the
tories.  A  few  years  after  St.  John  was  founded  by
the  expelled  loyalists  he  became  rector  of  the
parish,  which  charge  he  held  at  the  opening  of
Trinity  church  in  1791,  and  until  his  death.  He
received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Oxford.

BYLLYNGE,  Edward,  colonial  proprietary,  d.
in  England  in  1687.  He  was  associated  with  John
Fenwicke  in  the  purchase  of  a  large  tract  of  land
in  New  Jersey,  embracing,  in  general  terms,  all  the
province  north  of  a  line  drawn  from  Barnegat  to
Burlington.  The  partners  were  Quakers,  but  had  a
falling  out  regarding  the  division  of  the  property;
and  William  Penn,  being  called  upon  to  arbitrate,
assigned  nine tenths  of the  tract to  Byllynge.


486


BYLOT


BYRD


But  the  latter  shortly  afterward  found  himself  in
tinancial  straits,  and  was  obliged  to  make  an  as-
signment for  the  benefit  of  his  creditors.  The
trustees  effected  sales  of  land  to  two  companies  of
Friends,  one  of  which  founded  Burlington  in
1677.  The  estate,  in  its  divisions,  was  long  known
as  "  The  Byllynge  tenths."  In  1081  Byllynge  was
among  the  twenty-four  proprietaries  to  whom  the
Duke  of  York  confirmed  the  sale  of  the  province ;
and  in  1677  he  was  elected  by  the  land-owners
governor  of  the  province  of  West  Jersey,  and,
after  the  manner  of  such  officials,  named  deputies
and  never  visited  his  domain  in  person.  He  was
never  in  harmony  with  his  people,  who  vainly
sought  to  have  him  removed  from  office  shortly  be-
fore his  death.

BYLOT,  or  BYLOR,  Robert,  British  navigator,
lived  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  commanding
officer  of  the  exploring  expeditions  that  William
Baffin  accompanied  as  pilot.  His  name  is  often
spelled  Bylor  in  ancient  and  modern  prints.  To
Baffin  is  properly  ascribed  the  credit  of  the  fa-
mous voyages  of  "l615-'6 ;  but  prior  to  this  Bylot
had  made  three  voyages  of  exploration  to  the
northwest  in  the  "  Discovery,"  a  ship  of  fifty-five
tons.  To  him  was  apparently  intrusted  the  ad-
ministrative and  executive  responsibilities  of  the
voyage,  while  Baffin  was  in  a  sense  the  expert  re-
garding signs  of  sea,  sky,  and  coast-lines.

BYRD,  Harvey  Leonidas,  physician  and  army
surgeon,  b.  in  Salem,  Sumter  co.,  S.  C,  8  Aug.,
1820 ;  d.  29  Nov.,  1884.  He  was  descended  from
the  earliest  settlers  of  the  Carolinas,  and  his  family
has  always  been  prominent  in  the  state.  His  grand-
father was  a  member  of  Marion's  brigade  in  the
revolutionary  war.  After  acquiring  a  classical  edu-
cation in  his  native  state.  Dr.  Byrd  went  to  Phila-
delphia and  entered  the  famous  medical  schools —
Jefferson  college,  Pennsylvania  college,  and  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  took  degrees  from  all
of  them,  and  in  1840  began  practice  in  his  native
town,  but  soon  removed  to  Georgetown,  and  after-
ward to  Savannah,  where  he  became  a  professor  in
the  Medical  college  and  in  Oglethorpe  medical  col-
lege. In  1844  he  married  Adelaide  Dazier,  daugh-
ter of  John  Dazier,  of  Williamsburg,  S.  C.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confed-
erate army  as  a  surgeon,  and  served  until  the  sur-
render, when  he  settled  in  Baltimore  and  began  a
movement  for  the  reopening  of  Washington  uni-
versity, which  had  been  suspended  during  the  war.
He  was  cordially  seconded  by  others  of  the  profes-
sion, was  nominated  dean  of  the  faculty,  and  the
college  entered  almost  at  once  on  a  career  of  suc-
cess. After  several  years  of  service,  he  withdrew,
and  established  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons of  Baltimore.  He  contributed  largely  to
medical  periodicals,  edited  the  "  Oglethorpe  Medi-
cal and  Surgical  Journal"  for  three  years,  and  was
a  member  of  the  leading  medical  societies,  of  the
Aryan  order,  and  of  various  historical  societies.

BYRD,  WiUiam,  colonial  official,  b.  in  London
in  1650;  d.  in  Westover,  Va.,  4  Dec,  1704.  He
was  the  son  of  John  and  Orace  Stegge  Byrd,  of  the
family  of  Brexton,  Cheshire,  England.  He  came
to  America  in  1674  as  the  heir  of  his  uncle,  Capt.
Thomas  Stegge,  "gent."  The  inherited  estate  in-
cluded the  present  site  of  Richmond,  and  some  of
the  best  land  in  Virginia.  He  married  Mary,
daughter  of  Warham  Horsemanden,  Esq.,  of  Len-
ham,  Kent.  Col.  Byrd  settled  near  the  falls  of  the
James,  taking  at  once  a  prominent  part  in  the
affairs  of  the  colony,  and  acquiring  large  wealth
before  the  end  of  the  century.  He  was  a  member
of  the  council ;  of  the  house  of  burgesses,  and  was


commissioned  "  receiver-general  of  his  majesty's
revenues  for  the  colony,"  an  office  whieli  he  retained
until  his  death.  He  was  also,  according  to  the  Latin
inscription  on  his  monument,  "  armiger,"  or  sword-
bearer,  which  has  been  freely  rendered  '"armor-
bearer  to  the  king "  in  some"^  translations  of  the
inscription.  His  wife  died  9  Nov.,  1699.  The
accompanying  illustration  is  a  view  of  the  Byrd


mansion,  known  as  "Westover,"  on  James  river,
which  is  still  in  the  possession  of  his  descendants.
This  mansion — one  of  the  finest  in  historic  Virgin-
ia— was  built  by  Thodorick  Bland,  and  purchased
by  the  head  of  the  Byrd  family.  The  house  is
substantially  constructed  of  red  brick,  and  fortu-
nately escaped  serious  damage  during  the  civil
war.  The  gate-posts  bear  the  ancient  arms  of  the
family,  and  the  interior  of  the  house  is  elaborately
decorated  with  wood-carvings  in  the  early  colonial
style.  Westover  was  for  many  years  the  county
seat  of  Charles  City  county,  and  the  court-house
stood  near  the  residence.  In  1677,  according  to
the  historian  Stith,  Col.  Byrd,  being  in  England,
was  present  at  the  sale  of  the  effects  of  the  Earl  of
Southampton,  and  purchased  for  sixty  guineas  a
folio  copy  in  manuscript  of  the  "  Records  of  the
Virginia 'Company,"  from  28  April,  1619,  till  7
June,  1624.  It  is  the  only  record  known  to  exist,
the  originals  having  been  seized  when  the  charter
of  the  company  was  annulled  in  1624.  The  manu-
script descended  from  father  to  son,  and  was  event-
ually found  among  Thomas  Jefferson's  books  after
his  death,  and  so  came  into  the  possession  of  the
U.  S.  government,  which  purchased  Jefferson's  li-
brary. A  considerable  part  of  the  original  collec-
tion was  sold  after  the  death  of  the  third  CoL
William  Byrd,  and  it  is  probable  that  Jefferson
may  have  been  the  purchaser.  It  has  been  inti-
mated, however,  that  Jefferson  borrowed  the  manu-
script for  consultation,  and  died  before  returning
it  to  its  rightful  owner.— His  son,  William,  b.  in
Westover,  Va.,  16  March,  1674;  d.  there,  26  Aug.,
1744,  was  educated  in  England,  and  read  law  in  the
Middle  Temple.  Returning  to  his  American  estate,
he  took  such  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  affairs
of  the  colony  that  he  became  one  of  the  most
trusted  and  influential  men  of  the  time.  He  w^
thrice  agent  for  the  colony  in  England,  succeeded
his  father  as  receiver  of  its  revenues,  and  in  due
time  was  confirmed  in  the  office  by  the  crown.
For  thirty-seven  years  he  was  a  member  of  the
"  king's  council,"  as  it  was  called,  and  eventuallv
became  its  president.  As  wealth  accumulated  from
his  estate,  he  lived  in  princely  style,  adding  to  his
father's  collection,  and  acquiring  "the  most  valuable
library  then  in  the  state.  It  comprised  3,488  vol-
umes, a  catalogue  of  which  is  still  in  existence.
He  was  a  wit,  and  something  of  a  poet,  as  is  P^o\ed
by  manuscripts  in  the  possession  of  R.  A.  ^^1°^'^'
Esq.,  of  the  Virginia  historical  society. Col.  Byrd


BYRNE


BYRON


487


(second)  was  the  founder  of  Richmond,  Va.,  which
was  laid  out  in  April,  1737,  by  Maj.  Thomas  Mayo,
was  made  a  town  in  1742,  the  capital  of  the  state
in  1779,  and  a  city  in  1782.  He  did  much  to  en-
courage immigration,  especially  among  the  Swiss
and  Germans,  and  to  this  end  he  offered  large
tracts  of  land  in  Virginia  and  North  Carolina
from  1785  till  1740,  making  favorable  terms  to
actual  settlers.  He  was  twice  married:  first  to
Lucy,  daughter  of  Col.  Daniel  Parke,  governor  of
the  Leeward  islands,  and  secondly  to  Marion,
daughter  and  co-heiress  of  Thomas  Taylor,  of
Kensington,  England.  He  was  one  of  the  commis-
sioners for  running  the  boundary-line  between  Vir-
ginia and  North  Carolina,  and  was  the  author  of
important  papers  known  as  the  "  Westover  Manu-
scripts." An  edition  of  these  was  published  in
Petersburg,  Va.,  in  1841  under  the  titles  of  "  The
History  of  the  Dividing  Line,"  "  A  Journey  to  the
Land  of  Eden,"  and  "  A  Progress  to  the  Mines."
The  style  of  these  narratives  has  received  the  high-
est praise,  and  they  are  undoubtedly  among  the
most  remarkable  works  of  early  American  authors.
Col.  Byrd  was  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  Great
Britain,  and  a  liberal  patron  of  the  arts  and  sci-
ences.— The  third  of  the  name  William  was  b.  6
Sept.,  1728 ;  d.  1  Jan.,  1777.  He  was  the  eldest  son
of  the  second  Col.  William  Byrd  by  the  second
marriage.  He  served  as  a  member  of  the  council
of  Virginia,  and  in  1756  was  colonel  of  the  2d  Vir-
ginian regiment  in  the  old  French  war.  He  was
twice  married  .-.first  (in  1748)  to  Eliza,  daughter  of
John  Carter,  of  Shirley,  James  rivei-,  Va. ;  she  died
in  1760;  secondly  to  Mary,  daughter  of  Charles
Willing,  of  Philadelphia,  who  survived  him. — Eve-
lyn, daughter  of  Col.  William  (second),  was  b.  in
Westover,  16  July,  1707 ;  died  there,  13  Nov.,  1737,
was  taken  to  England  by  her  father  at  an  ealrly  age,
and  passed  several  years  there,  moving  in  aristo-
cratic society,  and  winning  fame  for  her  wit,  beauty,
and  accomplishments.  Some  of  her  court  dresses
are  still  preserved,  and  several  portraits  exist  of
her  and  of  her  father.

BYRNE,  Andrew,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Navan,
Ireland,  in  1802 ;  d.  in  Little  Rock,  Ark.,  in  1862.  He
received  his  early  education  in  the  college  of  Navan.
Meeting  with  Bishop  England,  who  was  seeking
recruits  for  his  diocese,  he  agreed  to  accompany
him  to  the  United  States  in  1820.  Having  finished
his  theological  studies  under  that  prelate's  direc-
tion, he  was  ordained  in  1827,  and  was  at  once
sent  on  active  duty  to  several  stations  in  North  and
South  Carolina.  The  long  and  fatiguing  journeys
that  he  was  obliged  to  undertake,  owing  to  the
distance  of  Catholic  families  from  one  another,
undermined  his  health,  and  he  was  recalled  to
Charleston  in  1830.  He  was  appointed  vicar-gen-
eral, and  accompanied  Bishop  England  to  the  coun-
cil of  Baltimore  in  1833  as  his  theologian.  He  re-
moved to  New  York  in  1836,  and  was  assistant
pastor  at  the  cathedral  and  afterward  pastor  of  St.
James's  church.  Archbishop  Hughes  sent  him  to
Ireland  in  1841  to  endeavor  to  procure  Christian
brothers  for  the  parochial  schools  of  New  York,  in
which  he  was  unsuccessful.  Shortly  after  his  return
he  was  appointed  pastor  of  St.  Andrew's  church,
which  had  originally  been  a  building  devoted  to
secular  uses,  but  had  been  acquired  for  religious
purposes  by  the  labors  of  Father  Bvrne.  The  dio-
cese of  Little  Rock,  which  comprised  the  state  of
Arkansas  and  the  Cherokee  and  Choctaw  nations,
haymg  been  created  in  1844,  Father  Byrne  was  ap-
pointed its  first  bishop,  and  immediately  devoted
himself  to  his  Episcopal  duties.  He  had  sometimes
to  travel  on  his  visitation  from one mission  to


another  from  700  to  1,000  miles.  He  next  went  to
Ireland,  and  returned  with  a  number  of  priests,
nuns,  and  catechists  for  his  diocese.  A  second  visit
to  Ireland  resulted  in  his  procuring  a  colony  of
sisters  of  mercy,  who  established  St.  Mary's  acad-
emy at  Little  Rock,  one  of  the  finest  educational
establishments  in  the  west.  He  afterward  founded
four  other  convents  of  the  order,  and  purchased  a
tract  of  land  a  mile  square  at  P'ort  Smith,  on  which
he  intended  building  the  college  of  St.  Andrew
and  other  institutions.  He  attended  the  first  pro-
vincial council  of  New  Orleans  in  1856.  Although
in  failing  health,  he  continued  his  labors  up  to
within  a  short  time  of  his  death.  During  his  min-
istry the  churches  had  increased  from  four  to
seventeen,  with  fifty  stations,  the  priests  from  four
to  thirty,  and  the  Catholic  population  from  5,000
to  more  than  50,000.  His  efforts  to  promote  im-
migration were  of  great  benefit  to  the  southwest.

BYRNE,  William,  educator,  b.  in  the  county
Wicklow,  Ireland,  in  1780  ;  d.  at  St.  Mary's  college,
Kentucky,  in  1833.  His  parents  were  laboring
people,  and,  although  he  had  conceived  the  idea  of
becoming  a  priest  at  an  early  age,  he  was  obliged  to
work  for  the  maintenance  of  his  younger  brothers
and  sisters  till  his  twenty-fifth  year.  Then  he  emi-
grated to  the  United  States  and  applied  for  ad-
mission to  Georgetown  college,  but  was  rejected,  ow-
ing to  deficient  preparation.  He  was  successful  in
gaining  admission  into  St.  Mary's  college.  Emmetts-
burg,  and  there  began  the  study  of  Latin  when
thirty  years  old.  After  some  years  he  was  allowed
to  study  theology  in  St.  Mary's  seminary,  Balti-
more, was  ordained  in  1819,  opened  a  school  in
Marion  co.,  Ky.,  in  1821,  and  then  proceeded  to
erect  St.  Mary's  college  on  Mount  Mary  farm.
When  he  had  made  it  one  of  the  most  flourishing
institutions  in  the  state,  he  transferred  it  to  the
Jesuits  in  1831,  on  the  understanding  that  he  was
to  remain  president  for  a  year,  to  enable  them  to
become  acquainted  with  the  working  of  the  college.
He  died  of  cholera  contracted  while  ministering  to
the  negroes  in  the  neighborhood  of  St.  Mary's.

BYRON,  John,  British  naval  officer,  b.  at  New-
stead  Abbey,  England,  8  Nov.,  1723 ;  d.  in  1786.
He  was  a  son  of  William,  fourth  Lord  Byron.  At
an  early  age  he  entered  the  navy  as  a  midshipman
and  joined  the  "  Wager,"  one  of  the  six  ships  that
sailed  for  the  Pacific  under  Lord  Anson  in  Sep-
tember, 1740.  She  was  wrecked  on  Cape  Horn;
but  Byron  and  the  survivors  were  taken  on  board
the  three  vessels  that  rounded  the  cape.  Of  the  961
men  that  left  England,  only  200  reached  home  in
the  "  Centurion,"  the  only  remaining  ship,  in  1744.
Byron  was  one  of  these.  He  was  promoted  captain,
30  Dec,  1746.  In  1760  he  was  sent  with  a  fleet  to
demolish  the  fortifications  of  Louisburg,  Nova
Scotia,  already  wrested  from  the  French.  On  21
June,  1764,  he  sailed  in  command  of  a  squadron
for  the  south  seas,  and  returned  to  England  in
May,  1766.  During  these  years  he  had  been  so
buffetted  about  on  the  high  seas  that  he  had  won
the  sailor-nickname  of  "  Foul-weather  Jack,"  and
his  grandson,  the  poet,  perpetuated  his  fame  in  the
"  Epistle  to  Augusta  "  :

"  Reversed  for  him  our  grandsire's  fate  of  yore.
He  had  no  rest  at  sea,  nor  I  on  shore."
He  was  appointed  governor  of  Newfoundland  in
1769,  attained  his  flag  rank  in  1775,  and  became
vice-admiral  in  1776,  when  he  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  West  India  squadron.  On  6  July,
1779,  he  engaged  the  Frencli  fleet  under  D'Estaing
off  Grenada;  but  the  action  was  indecisive.  He
soon  afterward  returned  to  England  and  retired
from  active  service.


488


CAAMANO


CABELL


CAAMA5?0,  Jos6  M.  PMcido,  president  of
Ecuador,  b.  in  Guayaquil,  5  Oct.,  1838.  He  began
the  study  of  law  and  theology  in  the  seminary  of
his  native  city,  and  was  educated  in  Quito.  Sub-
sequently he  was  mayor  of  Guayaquil,  and  chief  of
the  custom  -  house  service.  Having  conspired
against  the  dictator-general,  Veintimilla,  he  was
banished  in  1882,  went  to  Lima,  organized  a  revo-
lutionary expedition  with  which  he  left  Callao  on
14  April,  1883,  and  landed  in  Ecuadorian  terri-
tory three  days  afterward.  He  organized  a  di-
vision and  joined  the  forces  that  were  besieging
Guayaquil  about  the  middle  of  May.  The  place
was  taken  by  storm  by  the  combined  forces  under
Caamaiio,  Sarasti,  Alfaro,  and  Salazar.  A  provis-
ional government  was  appointed  until  the  national
convention  could  meet,  and  on  11  Oct.  he  was  elect-
ed president  ad  interim,  and  finally  proclaimed
president  of  the  republic  on  17  Feb.,  1884.  He
is  the  leader  of  the  conservative  party ;  but  even
his  political  opponents  gave  him  their  votes  to  his
election.  On  6  Feb.,  1886,  an  attempt  was  made
to  assassinate  him,  and  he  narrowly  escaped  death
by  throwing  himself  into  a  river.  Under  his  ad-
ministration telegraphs,  railways,  an  institute  of
sciences,  several  colleges,  and  many  new  schools
have  been  added  to  the  resources  of  Ecuador.

CABALLERO,  Jos6  Agustin  (kab-al-lyay'-ro),
Cuban  educator,  b.  in  Havana  in  1771 ;  d.  in  1835.
He  was  for  many  years  director  of  the  theological
seminary  of  Havana  and  one  of  the  founders  of  the
first  newspaper  published  in  Cuba.  He  wrote  in  1797
a  work  on  eclectic  philosophy,  entitled  "  Lecciones
de  Filosofia  Eclectica."  He  translated  also  from
the  Latin  the  "  History  of  America,"  by  Sepiilveda,
wrote  largely  for  the  press  on  educational  topics,
and  did  much  to  propagate  public  instruction  in
Cuba. He  was  a  remarkable  pulpit  orator.

CABALLERO  Y  OCIO,  Juan,  Mexican  philan-
thropist, b.  in  Queretaro  in  1644;  d.  11  April,  1707.
He  studied  theology  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  was  or-
dained priest,  and  filled  several  important  offices,
both  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  but  would  not  accept
that  of  "  adelantado  "  of  California  and  two  bish-
oprics in  Spain  that  were  oifered  him  by  the  king
when  the  fame  of  his  extraordinary  donations  to
the  poor  and  for  religious  institutions  had  reached
the  Spanish  court.  He  inherited  an  immense  for-
tune, amounting  to  millions,  which  he  spent  en-
tirely in  alms  to  the  poor,  in  religious  and  benevo-
lent foundations,  in  building  and  furnishing
churches,  convents,  colleges,  and  infirmaries,  in
finishing  or  improving  many  other  buildings  and
institutions,  in  endowments  for  over  two  hundred
young  girls,  sixty  poor  priests,  and  many  nuns,  in
helping  newly  arrived  foreigners,  and  in  distribut-
ing usef  id  articles  to  the  sick  in  the  hospitals.  He
also  built  and  endowed  a  church  in  Logroilo,
Spain,  his  father's  native  city,  and  gave  the  Mexi-
can Jesuits  $150,000,  church  ornaments,  and  every-
thing they  desired  for  their  mission  in  California.
In  1699  Caballero  finally  distributed  all  that  was
left  of  his  property,  keeping  for  himself  nothing
but  a  crucifix,  and  "lived  humbly  for  the  rest  of  his
days,  always  refusing  to  accept  public  honors.

CABELL,  WiUiaiii,  surgeon,  b.  near  Warmin-
ster, England,  9  March,  1700 ;  d.  near  Warminster,
Nelson  co,,  Va.,  12  April,  1774.  Pie  was  the  son  of
Nicholas,  an  English  gentleman  belonging  to  the
Cabells  of  Devon  and  Somersetshire,  whose  estates
?vere  confiscated,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  because


of  their  allegiance  to  Cromwell.  One  of  the  finest
specimens  of  mediaeval  glass  that  has  survived  the
iconoclasm  of  the  Roundheads  is  in  the  church  of
St.  John  of  Frome  Selwood,  which  preserves  the
Cabell  arms  in  the  four  panels  of  a  chapel-window.
According  to  tradition.  Dr.  William  Cabell  was  a
surgeon  in  the  British  navy,  who  was  captivated  by
the  Virginian  climate,  resigned  his  commission  about
1723,  and  procured  extensive  grants  of  land  alone
James  river,  in  the  present  counties  of  Buckingham,
Nelson,  Appomattox,  and  Amherst.  The  patent
for  these  was  issued  12  Sept.,  1738.  Dr.  Cabell
married  Elizabeth  Birks,  but  whether  in  England
or  America  is  uncertain.  In  1735  he  was  called  to
England  by  the  death  of  his  father,  and  left  his
wife  in  charge  of  the  Virginia  property.  He  re-
mained in  England  for  nearly  six  years,  settling
the  estates  of  his  father  and  other  recently  deceased
relatives  and  practising  his  profession.  On  his  re-
turn he  made  his  home  on  his  patented  lands,  and
was  appointed  assistant  surveyor,  an  office  that  en-
abled him  to  increase  his  already  generous  estate
by  a  large  addition  of  valuable  lands,  though  not
equal  in  fertility  to  those  at  first  obtained.  He
promoted  immigration,  established  a  private  hos-
pital near  his  residence,  and  made  professional
visits  far  and  near,  charging  from  £1  to  £5  for  a
visit,  according  to  the  distance  travelled.  For
amputating  an  arm  the  charge  was  £7  10s.,  or  £12
to  £15  if  "  a  cure  was  guaranteed."  He  had  ap-
parently a  genuine  enthusiasm  for  his  profession,
and  executive  abilities  of  a  high  order  to  carry  on
such  extensive  enterprises  in  a  professional  way  as
well  as  superintending  his  landed  interests  and  fill-
ing acceptably  the  local  offices  that  he  held.  His
first  wife,  by  whom  alone  he  had  issue,  died  21
Sept.,  1756,  and  on  27  Sept.,  1762,  he  married  Mrs.
Margaret  Meredith  (a  widow),  who  died  26  Feb.,
1768.  Dr.  Cabell  had  six  children,  a  daughter  and
five  sons;  and  all  of  the  sons  save  one,  who  died  in
childhood,  attained  eminence. — WillLam,  the  eldest
(commonly  known  as  Col.  William  Cabell,  Sr.,  of
Union  Hill),  b.  at  Licking  Hole,  Goochland  eo.,  Va.,
13  March,  1730 ;  d.  at  Union  Hill,  23  March,  1798,
received  the  best  education  attainable  in  the  colony.
When  he  had  learned  to  read  at  eight  years  of  age
his  father  sent  him  from  England  "a  Bible,  a
prayer-book,  and  a  small  gun."  He  became  sheriff
of  Albemarle  co.  in  1751,  and  from  that  time  was
constantly  in  responsible  positions,  assistant  survey-
or for  the  county  in  1753,  "  his  majesty's  presiding
justice  "  and  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses  in

1757,  commissioner  for  settling  militia  claims  in

1758,  and  first  presiding  magistrate  for  the  United
States  after  the  declaration  of  independence.  Dur-
ing all  this  time  he  was  an  active  promoter  of  schemes
for  improving  James  river  and  for  increasing  the  ed-
ucational and  commercial  advantages  of  the  colony.
About  1773  he  aided  in  establishing  iron-works  on
Hardware  river.  He  was  a  member  of  the  house  of
burgesses  when  the  colonies  revolted  against  Great
Britain,  and  a  delegate  to  all  the  conventions  look-
ing toward  national  independence.  He  was  chosen
first  state  senator  from  the  eighth  district,  and  was  a
member  of  the  committee  that  prepared  the  famous
"  declaration  of  rights."  Throughout  the  revolu-
tion he  was  active,  in  both  public  and  private  ca-
pacitv,  in  promoting  measures  for  an  efficient  cml
and  military  service.  On  7  Jan.,  1789,  he  was  for
the  last  time  a  candidate  for  a  public  office,  that  ol
presidential  elector,  and  received  the  vote  of  every


CABELL


CABEZA  DE VACA


489


man  that  was  polled.  He  east  his  vote  for  Wash-
ington as  first  president  of  the  United  States.  He
left  his  estate  of  20,000  acres  and  a  large  number  of
slaves  "free  from  debt  and  every  other  incum-
brance."—Joseph  (of  Sion  PI  ill),  the  second  son,
b.  19  Sept.,  1732;  d.  at  Sion  Hill,  1  March,  1798.
For  many  years  he  held  important  civil  offices  in
his  native  state,  occupying  a  seat  in  the  house  of
burgesses  and  serving  as  a  member  of  the  different
conventions.  During  the  war  for  independence  he
commanded  the  Buckingham  county  regiment,
and  was  joined,  while  on  the  way  to  take  part  in
the  siege  of  Yorktown,  by  the  students  of  William
and  Mary  college,  who  had  formed  a  company  and
volunteered  to  accompany  him. — William  H.,
youngest  son  of  Dr.  William  Cabell,  b.  at  Boston
Hill,  Cumberland  co.,  Va.,  16  Dec,  1772;  d.  in
Richmond,  17  Jan.,  1853,  was  educated  at  Hamp-
den-Sidney  and  William  and  Mary  colleges,  being
graduated  in  1793.  In  1794  he  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  Richmond.  He  married  Elizabeth,  youngest
daughter  of  Col.  William  Cabell,  in  1795,  who  died
in  1801.  He  was  first  a  member  of  the  house  of
delegates  in  1796,  and  was  frequently  re-elected
until  1805,  when  he  was  chosen  governor.  The
same  year  he  married  Agnes  Sarah  Bell,  daughter
of  Col.  Robert  Gamble,  of  Richmond,  and  sister  of
Mrs.  Wirts,  of  Richmond.  In  the  mean  while  he
had  twice  served  as  a  presidential  elector.  He  was
governor  for  three  years,  when  he  was  elected  a
judge  of  the  general  court,  and  in  1811  a  judge  of
the  court  of  appeals,  of  which  last  he  was  president
at  the  time  of  his  death. — Samuel  Jordan,  eldest
son  of  Col.  William  Cabell,  Sr.,  b.  in  Amherst  co.,
Va.,  15  Dec,  1756 ;  d.  4  Aug.,  1818.  He  received
a  classical  education,  mainly  in  private  schools,  and
entered  William  and  Mary  college  in  1773.  VVhen
the  colonies  revolted  against  Great  Britain  he  was
a  student,  but  at  once  left  college,  raised  a  com-
pany of  riflemen  in  his  native  county,  and  entered
the  continental  service.  This  company  was  in  all
the  northern  campaigns,  and  is  said  to  have  opened
the  engagement  at  the  battle  of  Saratoga.  Capt.
Cabell  was  rapidly  promoted  major  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  when  the  seat  of  war  was  transferred
to  the  south  accompanied  Gen.  Greene  with  his
regiment.  At  the  siege  of  Charleston  he  was  taken
prisoner  and  paroled ;  but,  failing  to  secure  an
exchange,  was  inactive  till  the  close  of  the  war.
During  the  formative  period  of  the  govefi'nment  he
was  almost  continuously  a  member  of  the  state
legislature,  and  in  1788  sat  as  his  father's  colleague
in  the  convention  that  passed  upon  the  proposed  fed-
eral constitution,  and  both  of  them  voted  against  its
adoption.  From  1785  till  1803  he  served  in  con-
gress. He  married  Sarah,  daughter  of  Col.  John
Syme,  of  Hanover  co.,  Va.— George  Craighead,
grandson  of  Joseph  of  Sion  Hill,  was  b.  in  Dan-
ville, Ky.,  25  Jan.,  1837.  He  was  one  of  a  family
of  twenty  children.  His  father  removed  to  Ken-
tucky in  1811.  He  was  educated  at  home  and  at
Danville  academy.  As  his  father  had  suffered  pe-
cuniary losses,  he  engaged  in  teaching  while  he
studied  law  and  saved  the  means  to  complete  his
professional  studies  at  the  University  of  Virginia.
He  began  to  practise  law  in  1858,  and  the  same
year  was  elected  commonwealth's  attorney,  which
office  he  held  until  1861,  when  he  enlisted  as  a  pri-
vate in  the  18th  Virginia  infantry,  and  was  rapidly
promoted  to  major  and  licutenant-cqlonel.  He
took  part  in  most  of  the  hard  fighting  of  the  Army
of  Northern  Virginia  during  the  civil  war  and  w^as
thrice  wounded,  a  bullet  in  the  last  instance  enter-
ing his  face  and  passing  out  at  the  back  of  his  head.
He  was  promoted  colonel  of  cavalry  in  1865. Re-


suming his  law  practice  immediately  after  the  close
of  hostilities,  he  soon  retrieved  his  wrecked  for-
tunes, and  was  elected  to  the  44th  and  45th  con-
gresses, representing  the  conservative  democratic
element  of  his  state.— James  Laurence,  son  of
Dr.  George  Cabell,  Jr.,  b.  in  Nelson  co.,  Va.,  26
Aug.,  1813.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University
of  Virginia  in  1833,  and  after  a  course  of  medical
study  there  and  in  Baltimore  and  Philadelphia
went  to  Paris,  and  while  pursuing  his  studies  there
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  anatomy  and  surgery  in
the  University  of  Virginia.  He  was  chairman  of
the  faculty,  a  place  corresponding  to  that  of  presi-
dent in  other  institutions,  in  1846-7.  During  the
civil  war  he  had  charge  of  military  hospitals  for
the  Confederate  government.  In  the  year  of  the
yellow  fever  epidemic  at  Memphis  he  was  chosen
chairman  of  the  National  sanitary  conference  at
Washington,  and  subsequently  president  of  the  Na-
tional board  of  health.  Dr.  Cabell  is  a  contributor
to  medical  journals,  and  is  the  author  of  "The
Testim.ony  of  Modern  Science  to  the  Unity  of  Man-
kind "  (New  York,  1858).— Edward  Carrington,
third  son  of  William  H.,  was  b.  in  Richmond,  5
Feb.,  1816.  He  received  a  classical  education  in
the  schools  of  Richmond,  and  afterward  studied  at
Lexington  and  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  in-
cluding the  law  section,  in  1834  and  1836.  Re-
moving to  Florida,  he  was  elected  to  congress  by
the  whigs,  serving  during  four  terms  from  1845  till
1853.  In  1852  he  delivered  a  speech  in  congress
on  the  fortification  of  Key  West  and  the  Tortugas,
which  is  said  to  have  secured  the  appropriation  for
the  protection  of  those  important  points.  In  1850
he  married  Anna  Maria  Wilcox,  a  daughter  of  Mrs.
John  J.  Crittenden  by  a  former  husband.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  for  a  time  in  the  Confederate
army.  He  wrote  an  elaborate  account  of  Florida,
which  was  published  first  in  the  "  National  Intelli-
gencer "  and  afterward  in  "  De  Bow's  Review."

CABEZA  DE  YACA,  Alvar  Nunez  (kah-bay  -
thah-de-vah'-ka),  Spanish  explorer,  b.  in  Extrema-
dura,  Spain,  in  1507 ;  d.  in  1559  (according  to  some
authorities,  b.  1490  and  d.  1564).  He  belonged  to  a
noble  Andalusian  family  living  in  Xeres,  and  went
to  the  Indies  as  alguacil  major  and  treasurer  of  the
expedition  of  Panfilo  de  Narvaez  that  left  Spain,
29  June,  1527.  He  landed  with  Narvaez  on  the
coast  of  Florida,  probably  at  Appalachee  bay,  and
accompanied  him  in  his  painful  march  westward,
and  in  the  voyage  along  the  coast  in  boats  con-
structed by  the  men  with  tools  forged  from  their
stirrups  and  spurs.  The  swift  current  of  the  Mis-
sissippi dispersed  the  frail  craft.  Of  the  300  per-
sons that  landed  on  the  Florida  coast,  Cabeza  de
Vaca,  with  two  white  companions  named  Castillo
and  Dorantes  and  Stephen,  a  negro  slave,  alone  re-
turned to  civilization.  They  were  cast  ashore  at
some  point  west  of  Matagorda  bay.  Many  of  the
Spaniards  that  had  escaped  death  from  shipwreck
fell  victims  to  the  cruelty  of  the  Indians  or  to  dis-
ease. After  six  years  of  captivity  in  a  tribe  called
by  him  the  Mariames,  Cabeza  met  on  the  shore  of
Texas  the  three  other  survivors  of  the  expedition,
who,  like  him,  had  been  held  in  slavery  by  roving
tribes.  He  had  acquired  a  prestige  among  the  In-
dians by  learning  the  healing  art,  as  practised  by
them,  and  becoming  a  medicine-man.  He  also  fol-
lowed the  trade  of  a  pedler,  and  travelled  as  far
inland  as  the  Red  river,  south  of  Shreveport,  ex-
changing shells  and  beads  for  skins,  flint,  red-earth,
and  other  products  of  the  north,  but  always  re-
turned to  the  coast  in  hope  of  meeting  some  of  his
lost  companions.  When  the  four  came  together  at
last,  they  took  the  earliest  opportunity  to  escape.


490


CABEZA  DE  VACA


CABLE


They  made  their  way  to  a  tribe  called  the  Avavares,
among  whom  they  passed  eight  months,  and  then
to  the  Arbadaos,  whose  seat  was  near  the  Rio
Grande.  They  shaped  their  course  westward  in
hope  of  falling  in  with  some  Spanish  expedition  on
the  Rio  Panuco  or  the  Pacific  coast.  Cabeza  de
Vaca  taught  the  others  to  treat  diseases,  and  thus
they  were  able  to  travel  as  successful  medicine-men
from  tribe  to  tribe.  Besides  using  curative  herbs,
empirical  methods  of  surgery,  and  the  signs  and
incantations  of  Indian  sorcerers,  they  called  in  the
aid  of  the  cross  and  of  Catholic  prayers.  The  cures
that  they  accomplished  were  attributed  by  them  to
the  miraculous  interposition  of  Providence.  They
followed  a  large  river,  probably  the  Rio  Grrande,
passed  through  tribes  of  bison-hunters,  without
entering  the  bison-range  themselves,  and  traversed
high  mountains,  where  people  lived  in  houses  of
sods  and  clay,  and  were  in  possession  of  turquoises
and  cotton  cloth  obtained  from  the  people  farther
north,  and  finally  fell  in  with  some  Spanish  ex-
plorers on  the  river  Petatlan,  and  on  12  May,  1536,
reached  the  town  of  San  Miguel  de  Caliacan  in
Sinaloa.  Their  course  was  formerly  supposed  to
have  been  through  New  Mexico,  from  Cabeza's
mention  of  bison-hunters  and  people  that  mined  the
turquoise;  but,  since  he  spoke  of  these  tribes  as
living  in  the  north,  and  gives  no  account  of  the
Staked  Plain,  others  have  traced  the  route  through
southern  Texas  and  the  Mexican  states  of  Chi-
huahua and  Sonora.  The  account  that  they  gave
of  nations  dwelling  in  permanent  houses  impelled
Coronado,  the  governor  of  New  Galicia,  to  under-
take the  exploration  of  the  northern  countries,  and
to  send  on  a  preliminary  journey  of  discovery  Fray
Marcos,  of  Nizza,  who,  with  the  negro  Stephen  for
his  guide,  entered  the  kingdom  of  Cibola,  the  coun-
try of  the  civilized  Pueblo  Indians.  A  joint  report
of  the  misfortunes  of  the  Narvaez  expedition,  and
of  the  wanderings  of  the  four  survivors,  was  made
by  Cabeza  de  Vaca,  Castillo,  and  Dorantes,  to  the
royal  audiencia  of  Santo  Domingo,  given  in  Oviedo's
"  Historia  general  y  natural  de  Indias."  A  narra-
tive of  his  adventures  was  published  by  Cabeza  de
Vaca  at  Zamora  in  1543.  The  mysterious  secrecy
that  Cabeza  at  first  observed,  in  regard  to  the  na-
tions he  visited,  excited  the  adventurous  spirit  of
De  Soto  and  his  companions,  who,  in  1538,  left
Spain  to  explore  and  take  possession  of  Florida.
Cabeza  de  Vaca's  relation  of  the  adventures  of  the
Narvaez  expedition  was  reprinted  at  Valladolid  in
1555,  and  under  the  usually  cited  title  of  "  Nau-
fragios  de  Alvar  Nunez  de  Vaca,"  in  Barcia's  col-
lection of  narratives  printed  in  i749.  An  Italian
translation  was  included  in  Ramusio's  collection
(1556),  and  an  English  version  in  Purchas's  "  Pil-
grims." A  French  rendering  was  published  by
Terneaux-Compans.  A  literal  English  translation
was  made  by  Buckingham  Smith  and  privately
printed  at  Washington  in  1857,  and  published,  in
a  revised  form,  in  a  limited  edition  in  1871.  After
his  return  to  Spain,  in  1537,  Cabeza  de  Vaca  was
appointed  administrator  of  La  Plata.  He  sailed
for  that  colony,  was  shipwrecked,  landed  on  the
coast  of  Paraguay,  and  was  the  first  explorer  of
that  country.  He  passed  through  the  country  of
the  Gruaranis,  whom  he  made  his  friends,  and  who
assisted  him  to  descend  the  river  Plata.  On  15
March,  1542,  he  established  his  headquarters  at
Asuncion.  The  next  year  an  insurrection  broke
out  in  consequence  of  a  fire,  his  subordinates  charg-
ing him  with  undue  lenience  toward  the  Indian
incendiaries.  He  arrested  the  leaders  in  the  mu-
tiny, and  sent  them  as  prisoners  to  Spain.  He  re-
duced to  subjection  the  Payagoaes,  who  murdered


Ayolas  and  eighty  of  his  followers,  explored  the
Iguayu  river,  and  subjugated  the  tribes  on  its
banks ;  but  was  beaten  by  the  Socorinis  and  Agaces
who  killed  sixty-three  of  his  men.  On  the  accusa-
tion of  Domingo  de  Irala,  his  lieutenant,  he  was
arrested  in  1544,  taken  to  Spain,  and  condemned
by  the  council  of  the  Indies  to  banishment  to
Africa.  Eight  years  later  he  was  pardoned  and
recalled  by  the  king,  who  assigned  him  an  annual
pension,  and  made  him  judge  of  the  supreme  court
of  Seville,  where  he  resided  until  his  death.

CABEZAS  ALTAMIRANO,  Juan  de  las  (kah-
bay'-thas),  Cuban  prelate,  b.  in  Zamora,  Spain,  in
the  latter  part  of  the  16th  century ;  d,  in  1615.  He
was  appointed  bishop  of  Cuba  and  Florida  in  Feb-
ruary, 1602.  In  April,  1604,  while  visiting  his  dio-
cese in  the  eastern  part  of  Cuba,  he  was  surprised
near  Yara  by  the  French  pirate,  Gilbert  Giron,  who
held  him  and  his  suite  in  captivity  for  eighty  days.
He  was  ransomed,  and  the  peasants  afterward  fell
on  Giron  and  his  troops,  routed  them,  and  killed
the  pirate.  Cabezas  was  the  first  bishop  that  ever
visited  Florida.  He  was  appointed,  in  1610,  bishop
of  Guatemala,  and  afterward  bishop  of  Arequipa,
Peru,  but  died  before  assuming  thiit  office.

CABLE,  George  Washington,  author,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  La.,  12  Oct.,  1844.  On  his  father's
side  he  springs  from  an  old  family  of  colonial  Vir-
ginia. The  Cabells  originally  spelled  the  name
Cable,  and  their  ancient  coats  of  arms  introduce  the
cable  as  an  accessory.  His  mother  was  of  old  New
England  stock.
The  family  re-
moved to  New
Orleans  soon  af-
ter the  financial
crisis  of  1837,  and
for  a  time  the
father  prospered
in  business.  In
1859  he  failed,
and  died  shortly
afterward,  leav-
ing the  family
in  such  strait-
ened circum-
stances that  the
son  was  obliged
to  leave  school
and  seek  employ-
ment as  a  clerk.
He  was  thus  en-
gaged until  1863,
when,  though
very  slight  and  youthful  in  his  appearance  and  but
nineteen  years  of  age,  he  volunteered  in  the  Con-
federate service,  joining  the  4th  Mississippi  cav-
alry. He  employed  the  leisure  of  camp-life  in  study,
but  saw  his  share  of  active  service,  and  is  described
as  a  good  and  daring  soldier.  He  was  wounded  m
the  left  arm,  and  narrowly  escaped  with  his  life.
Returning  penniless  to  New  Orleans,  after  the  over-
throw of  the  Confederacy,  he  began  to  earn  a  living
as  an  errand-boy  in  a  mercantile  house,  and  varymg
fortune  sent  him  to  Kosciusko,  Miss.,  and  subse-
quently, after  he  had  studied  civil-engineermg.  to
the  Te'che  country,  where  he  was  attached  to  a  sur-
veying expedition  on  the  levees  of  the  Atchafalaya.
There  he  caught  the  malarial  fever  peculiar  to  the
region,  and  did  not  fully  recover  for  two  years.
During  this  time  he  collected  material  that  has
since  done  good  literary  service.  He  began  writnig
for  the  New  Orleans  "  Picayune  "  over  the  pen-
name  of  "  Drop  Shot,"  contributing  critical  ami
humorous  papers  and  occasionally  a  poem,  and  ne


^^-f^


CABOT


CABOT


491


was  soon  regularly  attached  to  the  editorial  staff,
which  connection  was  abruptly  ended  on  his  re-
fusal, from  conscientious  motives,  to  write  a  theat-
rical criticism.  Once  more  he  became  a  clerk  and
accountant,  this  time  for  a  cotton-dealer,  and  re-
tained his  place  until  1879,  when  the  sudden  death
of  the  head  of  the  house  threw  him  out  of  employ-
ment. But  in  the  mean  time  his  sketches  of  Cre-
ole life,  published  in  "  Scribner's  Monthly "  (now
the  "  Century")  proved  so  successful  that  he  de-
termined to  give  all  his  time  to  literature.  He  has
opened  a  new  field  in  fiction,  introducing  to  the
outside  world  a  phase  of  American  life  hitherto
unsuspected  save  by  those  that  have  seen  it.  His
rendering  of  the  creole  dialect,  with  its  French  and
Spanish  variants,  is  full  of  originality,  and  his  keen
powers  of  observation  have  enabled  him  to  depict
the  social  life  of  the  Louisiana  lowlands,  creole  and
negro,  so  vividly  that  he  has  given  serious  offence
to  those  whose  portraits  he  has  drawn.  He  has  been
the  means  through  his  publications  of  effecting
reforms  in  the  contract  system  of  convict  labor  in
the  southern  states.  He  has  successfully  entered
the  lecture-field,  reading  selections  from  his  own
writings,  and  unaffectedly  singing  to  northern
audiences  the  strange,  wild  melodies  current  among
the  French-speaking  negroes  of  the  lower  Missis-
sippi. Mr.  Cable's  published  works  are  "  Old  Creole
Days"  (New  York,  1879);  "The  Grandissimes "
(1880);  "Madame  Delphine"  (1881);  "Dr.  Sevier"
(Boston,  1883) ;  "  The  Creoles  of  Louisiana  "  (New
York,  1884) ;  "  The  Silent  South  "  (1885).  He  has
also  prepared  for  the  government  elaborate  reports
on  the  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  Teche
and  Attakapas  country  in  western  Louisiana.

CABOT,  Greorge,  statesman,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,
3  Dec,  1751 ;  d.  in  Boston,  18  April,  1823.  He  re-
ceived a  classical  education  and  entered  Harvard,
but  at  the  end  of  the  sophomore  year  left  his  class
and  went  to  sea  as  a  cabin-boy.  He  was  master  of
a  ship  before  he  was  of  age,  and  made  several  suc-
cessful voyages.  At  twenty-five  he  was  chosen  to
the  Massachusetts  provincial  congress.  In  1788  he
became  a  member  of  the  state  convention  that
adopted  the  federal  constitution.  He  represented
Massachusetts  in  the  U.  S.  senate  from  1791  till
1796,  and  was  the  first  choice  of  Mr.  Adams  for
secretary  of  the  navy  when  that  office  was  created
in  1798.  He  was  a  personal  friend  of  Washington
and  Hamilton,  was  an  able  coadjutor  of  the  latter
in  the  formation  of  his  financial  system,  and  one  of
the  best  authorities  of  the  time  on  political  econo-
my ;  for  this  reason,  mainly,  he  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  the  Hartford  convention  (15  Dec,  1814,  to
3  Jan.,  1815).  See  "History  of  the  Hartford  Con-
vention," by  Theodore  Dwight  (Boston,  1833).

CABOT,  John  (Italian,  Griovanni  Caboto,  or
Zuan  Call)ot,  or  Caboto,  Venetian  dialect),  discov-
erer of  the  mainland  of  North  America.  The  time
and  place  of  his  birth  are  not  positively  known.
His  name  first  occurs  in  the  Venetian  archives,
where  it  appears  he  was  accorded  the  rights  of  a
citizen  on  28  March,  1476.  after  the  required  fif-
teen years'  residence.  It  is  known  that  in  1495  he
was,  and  probably  had  been  for  years,  an  English
subject,  residing  at  Bristol.  Under  date  of  5
March,  1496,  a  patent  was  issued  by  authority  of
the  king,  Henry  VII.,  licensing  Cabot  and  his  three
sons,  or  either  of  them,  their  heirs  or  assigns,  to
search  for  islands,  provinces,  or  regions,  in  the
eastern,  western,  or  northern  seas ;  and,  as  vassals
of  the  king,  to  occupy  the  territories  that  might
be  found,  with  an  exclusive  right  to  their  com-
merce, on  paying  the  king  a  fifth  part  of  all  profits.
Under  this  authority,  Cabot,  with  his  son  Sebas-


tian, sailed  in  May,  1497,  and  held  a  westward
course  for  an  estimated  distance  of  700  leagues.
On  24  June  land  was  sighted,  which  he  believed  to
be  part  of  the  dominions  of  the  Grand  Cham,  but
which  was  really  the  coast  of  Labrador.  This
shore  he  coasted  for  300  leagues,  finding  no  evi-
dences of  human  habitation,  and  then  set  sail  for
home,  reaching  Bristol  in  August.  At  this  time,
owing  mainly  to  the  discoveries  of  Columbus,  the
theory  that  the  earth  is  a  sphere  had  gained  gen-
eral acceptance  among  advanced  thinkers,  and  it
was  believed  that  the  shortest  route  to  the  Indies
lay  westward.  Cabot's  discovery  therefore  caused
much  excitement  among  the  adventurous  spirits  of
the  day,  and  on  3  Feb.,  1498,  the  king  issued  a
special  charter,  granting  to  John  Cabot  authority
to  impress  six  English  ships  at  the  rates  then  cur-
rent for  vessels  required  by  the  royal  navy,  to  en-
list crews,  and  to  follow  up  his  discoveries  of  the
preceding  year.  Under  this  charter  Cabot  made
no  voyages.  It  has  erroneously  been  called  a  sec-
ond charter,  but  did  not  in  any  way  set  aside  that
of  1496,  which  still  remained  valid.  It  is,  how-
ever, the  last  record  of  his  career,  and  it  is  uncer-
tain when  or  where  he  died.  He  was  probably  a
Venetian  by  birth,  as  he  is  named  in  the  charter
of  1498  "  Kabotto,  Venecian,"  and  his  wife  was  a
Venetian.  Had  there  been  any  possibility  of  prov-
ing him  an  Englishman,  the  claim  would  undoubt-
edly have  been  pressed.  The  authorities  concern-
ing his  voyages  are  :  1.  A  letter  from  Lorenzo  Pas-
quaiigo,  a  merchant  residing  in  London,  to  his
brother  in  Venice,  bearing  date  23  Aug.,  1497 ;  2.
The  legend  on  the  map  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  cited  by
Hakluyt  and  giving  24  June,  1497,  as  the  date  of
discovery ;  3.  An  Oxford  copy  of  Sebastian's  map,
on  which  the  date  was  1494,  with  several  other  au-
thorities giving  that  year,  instead  of  1497,  as  the
correct  date.  But  the  only  official  documents —
the  two  charters  of  Henry  VII. — agree  in  fixing  the
date  as  first  given.  Much  light  has  been  shed  upon
the  life  of  Cabot  by  the  researches  of  Rawdon
Brown,  of  England.— His  son,  Sebastian,  dis-
coverer, was
born  proba-
bly in  Venice
between  1475
and  1477;  d.
in  London,
subsequent  to
1557.  Both
places  and
dates  are  un-
certain. Rich-
ard Eden  says
that,  accord-
ing to  Cabot's
own  story,  he
was  born  in
Bristol  and
carried  to
Venice  at  four
years  of  age ;

but  Contarini,  the  Venetian  ambassador  at  the
court  of  Charles  V.,  quotes  Cabot  in  his  diary  as
claiming  Venetian  birth  and  English  education.
It  is  believed,  but  without  positive  proof,  that  he
accompanied  his  father  on  the  voyage  to  the  coast
of  Labrador.  In  May,  1498,  presumably  under  au-
thority of  the  royal  charter  granted  to  John  Ca-
bot, he  sailed  from  Bristol  in  command  of  two
ships  manned  by  volunteers,  in  search  of  a  north-
west passage.  He  went  so  far  north  that,  in  the
early  part  of  July,  daylight  w\as  almost  continuous.
The  sea,  however,  was  so  full  of  icebergs  that  he


492


CABRAL


CACERES


worked  southward,  and  discovered  what  is  gen-
erally believed  to  have  been  Newfoundland.  Pro-
ceeding, he  reached  the  mainland,  made  several
landings,  dealt  with  the  natives,  and  followed  the
coast  southward,  probably  as  far  as  Chesapeake  bay.
In  spite  of  the  discovery  of  a  wide  domain  under
the  temperate  zone,  this  voyage  was  considered  a
failure,  since  it  did  not  open  the  passage  to  the
Indies.  The  contemporary  achievements  of  Vasco
da  Gama  were  so  much  more  brilliant  that  the  Ca-
bots  were  outshone,  and  so  careless  were  they  of
their  chartered  rights  that  the  patent  giving  them
exclusive  privileges  was  lost  or  mislaid.  On  the
death  of  Henry  VII.,  Sebastian  was  invited  to
Spain  by  Ferdinand  V.,  and  after  being  appointed
one  of  the  "  Council  of  the  New  Indies,"  was  in
1518  named  pilot-major  of  the  kingdom.  He  never
abandoned  his  ambition  to  discover  a  direct  route
to  Asia,  and  in  1526  sailed  in  search  of  a  southwest
passage.  In  1527  he  discovered  the  river  Plata,
and  in  1530  returned  to  Spain.  Meanwhile  Ed-
ward VI.  had  come  to  the  throne,  and,  recognizing
the  value  of  Cabot  to  English  maritime  supremacy,
issued  a  warrant  for  his  return,  designating  him  as
"one  Shabot,  a  pilot."  Cabot  answered  the  writ
in  person  in  1548,  still  bent  upon  voyages  of  dis-
covery ;  and  on  6  Jan.,  1549,  the  king  gave  him  a
pension  of  £166  Ids.  4d.  On  19  Jan.,  1550,  Charles
V.  summoned  him  to  return  to  Spain ;  but  Cabot
preferred  to  remain  under  English  colors,  and  re-
ceived additional  emoluments,  secured  a  reissue  of
the  lost  charter  granted  by  Henry  VII.,  and  became
president  of  a  company  of  merchants,  having  ex-
ploration as  its  object.  On  9  Sept.,  1553,  after  the
accession  of  Queen  Mary,  Charles  V.  made  a  final
attempt  to  induce  his  return  to  Spain,  so  great  was
his  personal  influence  even  in  his  old  age.  A  new
company  was  formed  for  discovery  on  23  Feb.,
1556,  with  Cabot  as  president,  and  early  in  the  suc-
ceeding spring  an  expedition  was  sent  off.  The
resignation  of  his  pension  on  27  May,  1557,  and  its
reissue  two  days  later,  are  the  last  authentic  inci-
dents in  the  career  of  this  remarkable  man,  who
was  in  effect  the  discoverer  of  a  very  large  portion
of  both  the  American  continents.  See  "  Jean  and
Sebastian  Cabot,"  by  Henri  Harrisse  (Paris,  1882).

CABRAL,  Pedro  Alvarez  de,  principal  dis-
coverer of  Brazil,  b.  in  Portugal ;  d.  about  1526
King  Emanuel  having  fitted  out  an  expedition  to
Calicut  of  thirteen  ships,  Cabral  was  appointed
commander-in-chief.  After  passing  the  Canaries,
he  took  a  westerly  course,  and  discovered  Brazil,  of
which,  24  April,  1500,  he  took  possession  in  the
name  of  his  king,  and  left  a  small  garrison  there.
He  then  sailed  for  India,  losing  half  his  fleet  in  a
tempest,  landed  at  Calicut,  and  succeeded,  after
negotiating  with  the  Indian  princes,  in  establish-
ing a  factory  there.  Several  other  expeditions
added  to  his  reputation  as  a  navigator.

CABRERA,  Miguel,  artist,  b.  in  Oaxaca,  Mexi-
co ;  d.  there  about  1730.  Little  is  known  of  him,
but  his  works  are  found  in  the  churches  and  con-
vents of  Puebla  and  Mexico.  He  was  a  Zapotec
Indian,  and  was  patronized  by  Salinas,  archbishop
of  Mexico.  There  is  a  fine  "head  of  St.  Peter  by
him  in  the  church  of  San  Hipolito,  and  a  very
large  canvas  in  the  Mexican  cathedral.  His  mas-
terpieces in  the  sacristy  of  the  church  of  Tasco  de-
pict the  whole  life  of  the  Virgin,  the  scene  of  the
nativity  being  considered  particularly  fine.  Count
Beltrani,  an  artist  and  critic  of  distinction,  says
that  his  works  are  the  wonders  of  America.  He
considers  that  the  life  of  St.  Dominick,  painted  in
the  Dominican  convent,  and  the  life  of  St.  Igna-
tius, in  the  cloister  of  La  Prof  esa,  are  equal  to  those


in  the  convent  of  Santa  Maria,  in  Florence,  or  in  the
Campo  Santo  of  Pisa.  Cabrera  was  also  an  archi-
tect and  a  sculptor,  and  has  been  called  the  Michael
Angelo  of  Mexico.

CABRERA  QUINTERO,  Cayetano,  Mexican
author,  b.  in  the  city  of  Mexico  about  the  end  of
the  17th  century;  d.  about  1775.  He  studied  at
the  Seminario  Tridentino  of  Mexico,  was  graduated
at  the  university,  and  held  the  professorship  of
civil  and  canon  law.  By  his  zeal  and  example  he
promoted  the  development  of  the  Academia  de
San  Felipe  Neri.  Being  a  most  accomplished
Latin,  Greek,  and  Hebrew  scholar,  Cabrera  wrote
several  works  in  Latin,  and  translated  from  the
classics,  especially  from  Horace  and  Juvenal,  into
Spanish  verse.  Among  his  numerous  writings
are  •'  Hymni  omnis,  generis  et  mensurae  ad  imi-
tationem  Prudentii,  Christiane  Poetae";  "Liber
voriorum  Epigrammatum  e  Graeco  in  Latinura
translatorum  " ;  "  Letras  laureadas  "  (300  epigrams
selected  from  Latin  classics);  " Disertaciones  y
oraciones  academicas  "  ;  "  Sermones  panegiricos  y
morales  " ;  "  Santa  Cristina,  la  admirable,"  a  poem ;
two  comedies  entitled  "La  Esperanza  malograda"
and  "  El  Tris  de  Salamanca,"  and  many  descriptive
works,  the  best  of  these  being  a  splendid  descrip-
tion of  the  terrible  epidemics  called  "matlaza-
hual,"  that  scourged  Mexico  in  1736-'7.

CABRILLO,  Juan  Rodrig-uez  (cah-breel-lo).
Portuguese  navigator,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the
15th  century;  d.  on  the  island  of  San  Bernardo,
Cal.,  3  Jan.,  1543.  By  order  of  the  king  of  Spain
he  explored  California  in  1542,  and  discovered  the
islands  of  Santo  Tomas  or  Encapa,  Santa  Cruz,
San  Miguel  (also  called  Santa  Rosa),  and  San  Ber-
nardo. He  also  discovered  the  harbors  of  Abreo-
jos,  Santa  Clara,  San  Bartolome,  Canoas,  and  San
Jeronimo,  the  islands  of  Asuncion  and  San  Este-
ban,  and  took  possession  of  the  harbor  of  Virgenes,
and  discovered  those  of  Todos  Santos  and  San
Diego,  Cape  San  Quintin,  islands  Caronadas  and
Concepcion,  sierras  of  San  Martin,  and  Pinos  bay.
He  wrote  a  description  of  his  discoveries  under
the  title  of  "  Viaje  y  descubrimientos  hasta  el
grado  43  de  Latitud,"  which  is  preserved  in  the
"  Archivo  General  de  Indias  "  of  Spain.

CACERES,  Alonso  de  (cah'-the-res),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Palos,  Huelva,  in  1499 ;  d.  in  Arequi-
pa,  Peru,  in  1554.  He  went  to  Santo  Domingo  in
1519,  and  took  part  in  several  expeditions,  con-
quered, with  Pedro  de  Heredia,  the  province  of
(Cartagena,  and  was  alcalde  of  its  capital  in  1534.
In  the  following  year  he  was  present  at  the  discov-
ery of  Genu,  and  assisted  Alonso  de  Heredia,  whose
expeditionary  forces  were  in  distress.  He  then
undertook  the  conquest  of  Tolii  and  the  discovery
of  Urute,  but  was  unsuccessful,  and  left  Cartagena
for  Peru  about  1539.  He  accompanied  Vaca  de
Castro  at  the  battle  of  Chupas,  and  sided  with  the
royalists  during  the  revolts  promoted  by  Gronzalo
Pizarro,  who,  on  his  entering  Lima  after  his  victo-
ries, directed  the  imprisonment  of  Caceres.  After-
ward he  became  friendly  with  Pizarro,  but  left  his
army  during  the  battle  of  Ifiaquito,  and  again
joined  the  king's  troops.  He  also  assisted  in  sev-
eral conquests  in  lower  Peru  or  Bolivia  in  1550.

CACERES,  Andres  Avelino,  Peruvian  soldier,
b.  in  Huanta,  12  April,  1831.  He  was  a  law  stu-
dent at  the  University  of  Lima  in  1852,  when  Cas-
tilla  headed  a  revolt  to  abolish  slavery  in  Pern,  and
joined  the  revolutionary  troops  as  a  second  lieu-
tenant. He  distinguished  himself  in  the  attack
upon  Arequipa,  a  place  verv  well  fortified,  and  de-
fended by  Vivanco,  and  Gen.  Castilla  promoted
him to  the  rank  of  captain  and  appointed  mm


CADENA


CADWALADER


493


militaiy  attache  to  the  Peruvian  legation  at  Paris,
where  he  remained  from  1857  till  1860.  On  his  re-
turn to  Peru  in  the  latter  year  he  defended  the
government  of  Pezet  in  several  revolutions,  and
accompanied  Prado  at  Callao  during  the  attack
against  that  place  by  the  Spanish  fleet  in  1866.
Then  Caceres  won  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  was
given  command  of  the  Zepita  regiment,  at  the  head
of  which  he  fought  against  Pierola  from  1876  till

1878,  During  the  war  with  Chili  he  was  promi-
nent, especially  at  the  battle  of  Dolores,  2  Nov.,

1879,  when  he  successfully  resisted  the  Chilian
troops  and  captured  some  of  their  guns.  At  the
battle  of  Tacna,  won  by the  Chilians,  26 May,

1880,  he  commanded  a  brigade  and  fought  well,
after  which  he  offered  his  services  to  the  dictator
Pierola,  who  gave  him  command  of  a  division
camped  near  Lima,  which  was  attacked  and  de-
feated by  the  Chilians,  14  Jan.,  1881.  When  Lima
was  occupied  by  the  Chilian  army,  Caceres  and
Pierola  retreated  with  the  rest  of  their  forces  to
Arequipa,  the  former  being  appointed  brigadier-
general,  and  authorized  by  congress  to  continue  the
hostilities  against  the  Chilians  as  well  as  against
the  Peruvian  Gen.  Iglesias,  who  had  established  a
government  of  his  own  at  Cajamarca.  He  made
several  unsuccessful  attacks  upon  the  Chilian
troops,  and,  after  much  suffering  in  a  three  months'
march  through  the  Sierras,  could  not  carry  out  the
orders  of  congress  to  destroy  Iglesias's  govern-
ment, for  he  was  defeated  by  a  Chilian  division
under  Gorostiaga  near  Huamacucho,  14  Nov.,  1881.
Caceres  then  went  to  the  interior,  raised  a  revolu-
tion against  Iglesias,  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a
considerable  force,  and  was  again  defeated  near
Lima.  But  he  persistently  worked  to  depose  Igle-
sias, collected more troops,  routed those  of  the

fpvernment,  and  finally  entered  the  capital  in
iarch,  1885,  and  at  once  directed  the  election  of  a
special  board  to  govern  until  a  new  congress  and
president  were  chosen.  He  was  elected  president
on  3  Dec,  1885,  and  his  inauguration  took  place
on  28  July,  1886.

CADENA,  Trinidad  Garcia  de  la  (cah-day-
nah),  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  Zacatecas  in  1832 ;  d.
1  Nov.,  1886.  He  became  noted  during  the  French
ipvasion,  fighting  with  success  at  the  head  of  gue-
rillas. When  the  republic  was  re-established,  and
Juarez  reinstated  as  president,  in  1867,  Cadena
was  appointed  governor  of  Zacatecas ;  but  in  1872
he  declared  against  Juarez,  and  for  Diaz,  revolting
with  5,000  federal  troops  at  San  Luis  Potosi.  They
were  joined  by  the  garrisons  of  Zacatecas  and
Aguascalientes,  and  at  the  head  of  8,000  men  Ca-
dena attacked  the  Tololotlan  bridge,  near  Guada-
lajara, and  then  advanced  upon  that  city  to  lay
siege  to  it ;  but  Gen.  Rocha  forced  him  to  give  up
his  plan  and  retire  to  Lo  de  Ovejo.  Here  Cadena
was  defeated  in  a  fierce  battle,  and  fled  with  700
horsemen  toward  the  northern  frontier.  He  liook
advantage  of  the  amnesty  proclaimed  in  February,
1872,  but  three  years  afterward  again  revolted
against  President  Lerdo  de  Tejada  and  in  favor  of
the  plan  of  Tuxtepec,  advocated  by  Diaz.  He
then  led  a  band  of  guerillas  at  Zacatecas  and
Aguascalientes,  and,  in  an  encounter  with  the  gov-
ernment troops,  killed  Col.  Ordoiiez.  On  the  final
success  of  the  revolutionary  army,  Cadena  met
Diaz  at  Lagos,  and  it  is  said  that  in  their  confer-
ence Diaz  promised  Cadena  to  support  his  candi-
dacy for  the  presidency  of  the  republic  as  soon  as
he  should  be  in  powder;  but  he  was  only  elected
governor  of  Zacatecas,  and  Diaz  openly  supported
Manuel  Gonzalez's  candidacy.  In  March,  1880,  an
attempt  was  made  against  Cadena's  life  by  a  party


of  masked  men  while  he  was  going  to  his  farm,
fifteen  miles  from  Zacatecas.  He  defended  him-
self with  his  rifle,  killed  two  of  the  assailants,  and
dispersed  the  others,  without  being  hurt.  This  and
other  violent  acts  caused  him  to  remove  to  the
city  of  Mexico  and  retire  temporarily  from  public
life.  But,  being  annoyed  by  the  government  of
Diaz,  he  disappeared  from  the  capital  in  the  latter
part  of  October,  1886,  and  on  1  Nov.  was  taken
prisoner  with  his  secretary,  and  immediately  shot
by  order  of  President  Diaz,  whose  arbitrary  action
in  this  matter  was  severely  criticised.

CADILLAC,  Aiitoine  de  la  Mothe,  founder
of  Detroit,  b.  in  Gascony,  France,  in  1657;  d.  18
Oct.,  1730.  He  was  of  noble  birth,  served  in  Aca-
dia as  a  captain  in  the  French  army,  and  in  1680
was  ordered  to  France  by  Louis  XIV.  to  furnish
information  relative  to  New  France  and  the  Eng-
lish colonies,  and  especially  to  the  condition  of  the
harbors  and  defences  on  the  coast.  He  was  made
lord  of  Bouagnat  and  Mount  Desert,  Me.,  in  1691,
and  in  1694  Frontenac  appointed  him  commander
of  Michilimackinac,  then  the  largest  place  in  Cana-
da, next  to  Montreal  and  Quebec.  He  remained
here  until  1697,  and  in  1699  laid  before  the  king  at
Versailles  his  plan  of  establishing  a  permanent
post  to  become  the  commercial  centre  of  the  north-
west. The  king  favored  the  project ;  but  on  his
return  to  Canada  Cadillac  met  with  discourage-
ment from  the  governor-general.  Landing  finally
at  Detroit,  24  July,  1701,  with  fifty  settlers  and
fifty  soldiers,  instead  of  the  200  settlers  and  six
companies  that  he  had  been  promised  by  the  king,
he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  present  city,  which
he  named  Fort  Pontchartrain.  The  little  settle-
ment had  among  its  enemies  the  Iroquois,  the  Jesu-
its, and  all  the  Canadian  officials,  as  Cadillac,  un-
like them,  received  his  commission  directly  from
the  king:  and,  moreover,  this  post  threatened  to
divert  profitable  trade  from  Montreal  and  Quebec.
He  was  arrested  at  Quebec  in  1704  upon  charges  of
official  misconduct,  but,  after  vexatious  delays,  was
triumphantly  acquitted.  He  returned  to  Detroit
in  the  fall  of  1706,  and  in  1707  marched  against
the  Miamis  and  reduced  them  to  terms.  Visiting
the  Illinois  country,  he  reported  the  discovery  of  a
silver  mine,  afterward  called  the  La  Mothe  mine.
He  next  established  a  post  among  the  Indians  of
Alabama.  He  punished  the  hostile  Natchez  tribe,
who  made  peace ;  and  a  fort  was  erected  in  their
country  in  1714,  named  Fort  Rosalie,  in  honor  of
Mme.  "de  Pontchartrain;  another  was  built  at
Natchitoches,  to  prevent  the  Spaniards  approach-
ing the  French  colony.  In  1711  he  was  made
governor  of  Louisiana,  then  an  almost  unknown
wilderness,  but  failed  in  his  endeavor  to  open
trade  with  Mexico.  In  1717,  after  the  perfect-
ing of  John  Law's  "  Mississippi  scheme,"  the  gov-
ernment and  trade  of  Louisiana  passed  into  the
hands  of  his  new  "  western  company,"  and  Cadillac
returned  to  France.  In  1787  the  commonwealth
of  Massachusetts  confirmed  to  his  granddaughter,
Mme.  Gregoire,  so  much  of  Mount  Desert  Island  as
was  not  already  granted  to  others.

CADWALADER,  George,  soldier,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, in  1804 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,  1879.  He  was  a
son  of  Gen.  Thomas  Cadwalader.  His  boyhood
was  passed  in  Philadelphia,  where  he  attended
school,  read  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
practised  his  profession  until  1846,  when  war  with
Mexico  was  declared,  and  he  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  was  present
at  the  battles  of  Molino  del  Rey  and  Chapultepec,
and  for  .gallantry  in  the  latter  engagement  was
brevetted  major-general. Resuming  his  law  prac-


494


CADWALADBR


CAICEDO


tice  in  Philadelphia,  he  followed  it  until  1861,
when  the  governor  appointed  hira  major-general  of
state  volunteers.  In  May  of  that  year  he  was
placed  in  command  of  the  city  of  Baltimore,  then
in  a  state  of  semi-revolt  against  the  national  gov-
ernment. He  accompanied  Gen.  Patterson  as  his
second  in  command  in  the  expedition  against  Win-
chester (June,  1861).  On  25  April,  1862,  he  was
commissioned  major-general  of  volunteers,  and  in
December  of  the  same  year  appointed  one  of  a
board  to  revise  the  military  laws  and  regulations  of
the  United  States.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Ser-
vices in  the  Mexican  Campaign  of  1847  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1848).

CADWALADER,  John,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  10
Jan.,  1742;  d.  in  Shrewsbury,  Pa.,  11  Feb.,  1786.
He  took  part  in  public  affairs  prior  to  the  revolu-
tionary war,  and,  when  the  movement  for  indepen-
dence began,  was  a  member  of  the  Philadelphia
committee  of  safety.  He  was  captain  of  a  military
company  half  derisively  and  half  admiringly
nicknamed  "  The  Silk-Stocking  Company,"  nearly

all  of  whose  mem-
bers afterward
held  commissions
in  the  patriot  ar-
my. On  the  for-
mation of  the  city
battalions,  he  was
placed  in  com-
mand of  one  of
them,  and  shortly
afterward  was  pro-
moted brigadier-
general  and  placed
in  command  of  the
Pennsylvania  mili-
tia. He  co-operated
in  the  capture  of
the  Hessians  at
Trenton,  26  Dec,
1776,  and  was  pres-
ent as  a  volunteer
at  the  battles  of  Brandywine,  Germantown,  and
Monmouth.  In  the  autumn  of  1777,  at  the  request
of  Washington,  he  assisted  in  organizing  the  militia
of  the  eastern  shore  of  Maryland.  In  the  following
winter,  a  combination  against  Washington  was  de-
veloped, which  threatened  to  be  formidable,  and
Gen.  Cadwalader  challenged  the  most  outspoken  of
the  plotters,  Thomas  Conway.  Cadwalader  shot
his  antagonist  in  the  mouth,  and  was  himself  un-
hurt. After  the  independence  of  the  United  States
was  secured,  he  removed  to  Maryland,  and  became
a  member  of  the  state  legislature.  His  daughter
Fanny,  in  1800,  married  David  Montague,  after-
ward Lord  Erskine,  Cadwalader  published  "  A
Reply  to  Gen.  Joseph  Reed's  '  Remarks '  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1783).

CADWALADER,  Lambert,  soldier,  b.  in  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  in  1743 ;  d,  there,  12  Sept.,  1823.  As
colonel  of  a  New  Jersey  regiment  in  the  revolution-
ary army,  he  served  in  the  war  for  independence,
and  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  British  at  the  cap-
ture of  Fort  Washington,  N.  Y.,  16  Nov.,  1776.  He
retired  to  his  estate  near  Trenton,  and  did  not
again  enter  the  military  service.  From  1784  till
1787  he  represented  New  Jersey  in  the  continental
congress,  and  was  a  member,  from  the  same  state,
of  the  1st  and  3d  congresses  of  the  United  States.

CADY,  Albemarle,  soldier,  b.  in  Keene,  N.  H.,
15  Feb.,  1807 ;  d.  in  New  Plaven,  Conn.,  14  March,
1888.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  acad-
emy in  1829,  and  was  on  garrison  and  frontier  duty
until  1838,  when  he  served  against  the  Indians  in


Florida  until  1842,  being  promoted  captain  7  July,
1838.  In  the  war  with  Mexico  he  was  at  the  siege  of
Vera  Cruz  and  in  the  battles  of  Cerro  Gordo,  Churu-
busco,  and  Molino  del  Rey.  In  this  last  engage-
ment he  was  wounded,  and  for  his  conduct  was
brevetted  major.  He  accompanied  the  expedition
against  the  Sioux  Indians  in  1855,  and  was  in  the
action  at  Blue-Water,  Dakota,  3  Sept.  of  that
year.  On  27  Jan.,  1857,  he  was  promoted  major.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  on  duty
on  the  Pacific  coast,  and  remained  there  until  1864,
when  he  was  for  a  time  in  command  of  the  draft-
rendezvous  at  New  Haven,  Conn.  He  was  retired
18  May,  1864,  for  disability  resulting  from  long
and  faithful  service,  and  received  the  brevet  of
brigadier-general  U.  S,  A.,  13  March,  1865.

CADY,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Chatham,  N.  Y.,
29  April,  1773 ;  d.  in  Johnstown,  N.  Y.,  31  Oct.,
1859.  His  education  was  acquired  at  the  public
schools,  after  which  he  learned  the  shoemaker's
trade,  but  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1795,  and  began  practice  in  Johnstown.  He  was
elected  to  the  legislature  in  1809,  and  returned
until  1813,  when  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
federalist,  serving  from  4  Dec,  1814,  until  3  March,
1817.  Resuming  his  law  practice,  he  became  a  jus-
tice of  the  state  supreme  court  in  1847,  and  served
until  1855,  when  he  resigned.

CAFFERTY,  James  H.,  artist,  b.  in  1819;  d.
9  Sept.,  1869.  He  began  his  professional  life  as  a
portrait-painter,  in  which  branch  he  attained  an
excellent  reputation,  but  his  later  years  were  given
for  the  most  part  to  game-pieces  and  still-life.  He
was  chosen  an  associate  member  of  the  national
academy  of  design  in  1849,  and  in  1853  became  an
academician.  His  most  notable  paintings  are  "  My
Girl"  (1868);  "My  Father"  (1869);  and  "Brook-
Trout"  and  several  studies  of  fish  (1869).  With  L.
M.  Wiles  as  his  associate  he  painted  the  graveyard
scene  from  "  Hamlet,"  a  picture  that  added  to  the
reputation  of  both  artists.

CAGGER,  Peter,  politician,  b.  in  Albanv,  N.
Y.,  6  July,  1812 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  6  July,  1868.
His  parents  were  Irish.  He  was  educated  at  the
Roman  Catholic  colleges  in  Fordham,  N.  Y.,  and
Montreal,  Canada,  studied  law,  and  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  firm  of  Hill,  Cagger  &  Porter.  He  be-
longed to  the  powerful,  though  informal,  demo-
cratic association  known  as  the  "  Albany  regency,"
which  for  many  years  dictated  the  policy  of  the
party.  Personally  his  political  power  was  almost
absolute,  but  he  never  sought  office  for  himself.
His  great  wealth  was  freely  used  for  charitable
purposes.  He  was  thrown  from  his  carriage  and
fatally  injured  in  Central  park,  New  York.

CAHOONE,  J.  Benjamin,  naval  pay-director,
b.  in  Rhode  Island,  in  1800;  d.  in  New  York  city,
27  July,  1873.  He  was  appointed  purser  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  12  Nov.,  1830,  and  after  sixteen  years
of  sea  service  and  as  many  of  shore  duty,  he  was
retired  in  1861,  having  reached  the  legal  limit  of
age  for  active  service.  He  was,  however,  assigned
to  duty  during  the  exigencies  of  the  civil  war  at
the  navy-yards  of  Boston  and  Portsmouth,  was
promoted  to  be  pay-director,  and  was  finally  retired
with  the  relative  rank  of  commodore  in  1868,  after
serving  for  thirty-eight  years  with  exemplary  dili-
gence and  faithfulness.

CAICEDO,  Domingo  (cah-e-thay'-do),  Colom-
bian statesman,  b.  in  Bogota  in  1783 ;  d.  near  that
city  in  1843.  In  1809  he  was  sent  to  Spain  by  the
colonists  of  New  Granada  to  remonstrate  against
the  acts  of  the  authorities  of  that  part  of  South
America.  After  arriving  at  Seville  and  discharg-
ins:  his  duties  as  an  envoy,  he  served  in  the  Span-


CAIN


calder6n


495


ish  army  against  the  French,  distinguishing  him-
self greatly  at  the  battle  of  Barrosa.  He  was  a
member  to  the  Cortes  of  1812,  and  acted  as  secre-
tary of  that  assembly.  He  subsequently  returned
to  South  America,  and  joined  the  revolutionists,
fighting  to  the  end  of  the  war.  From  1823  till
1827  he  belonged  to  the  congress  of  Colombia,  and
in  the  latter  year  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of
general.  Afterward  Caicedo  several  times  filled
the  ottiee  of  secretary  of  state,  and  was  president
and  vice-president  of  the  old  republic  of  Colom-
bia, and  finally  of  New  Granada.

CAIN,  Richard  H.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Green-
brier county,  Va.,  12  April,  1825.  Pie  removed  to
Ohio  in  1831,  and  settled  in  Gallipolis.  Though  his
education  was  limited,  he  entered  the  ministry  at
an  early  age.  In  1860  he  entered  Wilberforce  uni-
versity, Xenia,  Ohio,  and  in  1865  went  south  and
engaged  in  the  work  of  reconstruction.  In  1867
he  was  elected  to  the  constitutional  convention  of
South  Carolina,  and  the  year  following  to  the
senate  of  that  state.  He  was  elected  to  congress
for  two  terms,  serving  from  1876  till  1880.  In  1880
he  was  chosen  bishop  by  the  General  conference  of
the  African  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and  was
appointed  to  supervise  its  interests  in  Louisiana
and  Texas.  In  the  latter  state  he  organized  Paul
Quinn  college  at  Waco.  He  is  presiding  bishop  of
the  first  Episcopal  district  of  the  African  Methodist
Episcopal  church,  embracing  the  conferences  of
New  York,  New  Jersey,  New  England,  and  Phila-
delphia. In  1873  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Wilberforce  university.

CAINES,  (xeorge,  legal  writer,  b.  in  1771 ;  d.  in
Catskill,  N.  Y.,  10  July,  1825.  He  was  for  many
years  official  reporter  for  the  supreme  court  of  New
York.  He  published  "  Lex  Mercatoria  Americana  "
(1802) ;  "  Cases  in  the  Court  of  Errors  "  (2  vols.,
1805-'7) ;  "  Forms  of  the  N.  Y.  Supreme  Court "
(1808);  "Summary  of  the  Practice  in  the  N.  Y.
Supreme  Court"  (1808);  "Cases  in  the  Court  for
the  Trial  of  Impeachments,"  etc.  (2  vols.,  1805-'7) ;
"  N.  Y.  Supreme  Court  Reports "  (3  vols.,  1803-5 ;
2d  ed.,  1852).

CAJIGAL,  Francisco  Antonio  (kah-he'-gahl),
raarquis  of  Cajigal,  b.  in  Santander,  Spain,  in  1695 ;
d.  in  Spain  in  1777.  In  1738  he  was  appointed
governor  of  Santiago  de  Cuba,  and  in  1742  he  re-
pelled an  attack  of  the  English  admiral  Vernon,
who  suffered  great  losses.  From  1747  till  1760  he
was  governor-general  of  Cuba.  During  his  admin-
istration the  offices  of  the  marine  department  were
removed  from  Vera  Cruz  to  Havana,  the  latter  port
being  considered  the  safer  of  the  two  on  account
of  its  fortifications.  He  also  established  the  navy-
yard,  where  so  many  ships  were  built  for  the  Span-
ish navy,  and  the  arsenal.  In  1760  Cajigal  was  ap-
pointed viceroy  of  Mexico  ad  interim,  and  in  1761
returned  to  Spain.

CAJIOAL  Y  MONSERRATE,  Juan  Manuel,
Cuban  soldier,  b.  in  Santiago  de  Cuba,  in  1739 ;  d.
in  1811.  He  entered  the  army,  and  in  1762  went
to  Spain.  He  took  part  in  the  Spanish  and  Eng-
lish war  of  1762-'3,  and  in  the  siege  of  Gibraltar  in
1778.  In  1780  he  went  to  Cuba,  and  took  part,  in
1781,  in  the  attack  on  Pensacola,  Florida,  by  the
Spanish  fleet  and  army,  where  his  bravery  was  re-
warded by  a  brevet  of  lieutenant-general.  He  was
appomted,  in  1782,  governor-general  of  Cuba,  and
in  the  same  year  took  from  the  English  the  city  of
-Nassau,  New  Providence.  Cajigal,  though  a  good
soldier,  proved  to  be  an  incompetent  governor,  and
a  tew  months  after  taking  possession  of  his  office,  he
was  recalled  by  the  Madrid  government,  and  was
confined  in  a  castle  near  Cadiz  for  four  vears. In


1789  he  was  reinstated  by  the  king  of  Spain  in  his
former  rank. ^

CALAFQUIN  (cal-af-keen'),  Araucanian  soldier,
cacique  of  Trapan,  Chili,  b.  about  1540 ;  d.  in  1602.
He  succeeded  Colour  in  the  command  of  the  Arau-
canian armies  in  1599,  being  then  somewhat  ad-
vanced in  years  and  having  a  long  experience  in
warfare.  Early  in  1599  he  had  several  encounters
with  the  Spanish  general,  Viscarra,  and  kept  him
at  bay  until,  in  July,  Gen.  Quifiones  routed  the
Indians  in  a  long  and  bloody  battle  on  the  plains
of  Yumpel.  Calafquin  introduced  in  his  army  the
military  training  and  tactics  that  he  had  learned
from  the  Spaniards,  organized  his  cavalry  with
horses  taken  from  the  enemy  in  many  encounters,
and  was  the  first  Indian  chief  that  taught  his
troops  to  use  European  arms.  On  14  Nov.,  1599,
he  arrived  before  the  city  of  Valdivia  at  the  head
of  more  than  4,000  Indians,  among  them  sixty
armed  with  arquebuses  and  200  protected  with
cuirasses,  also  taken  from  the  Spaniards.  He  de-
feated the  defenders  of  the  place,  entered  the  city,
slaughtered  most  of  the  men,  carried  away  all  the
women,  and  ransacked  the  buildings  and  burned
them.  In  the  two  following  years  he  frequently
defeated  the  Spaniards,  and  in  1601  routed  Gen.
Alonso  de  Rivera  near  Concepcion,  and  attacked
the  city,  which  was  entirely  destroyed  by  the  In-
dians. Many  of  the  Spanish  settlements  south  of
the  Biobio  river  were  also  destroyed  by  Calafquin's
troops  in  1602.

CALANCHA,  Antonio  de  la,  b.  in  Spanish
America  about  the  middle  of  the  16th  century.
He  was  a  professor  in  the  theological  college  of
Lima.  He  wrote  the  "  Cronica  moralizada  del
Orden  de  S.  Agustin"  (1639;  Latin  translation,
1650) ;  "  De  los  Varones  ilustres  del  Orden  de  S.
Agustin  "  ;  and  "  De  Immaculatae  Virginis  Marioe
Conceptionis  Certitudine  "  (Lima,  1629).

CALDAS,  Francisco  Jos6  de,  Colombian  nat-
uralist, b.  in  Popayan,  4  Oct.,  1771 ;  d.  29  Oct.,  1816.
He  mastered  the  rudiments  of  astronomy,  botany,
and  medicine,  and  constructed  a  barometer  and
sextant,  although  he  had  not  even  books  to  guide
him  in  his  studies.  He  accompanied  for  some  time
the  Spanish  explorer,  J.  C.  Mutis,  in  Peru  and  New
Granada.  Subsequently  he  explored  the  Andes  and
the  Magdalena  river,  and  in  1804  measured  the
height  of  Chimborazo  and  Tunguragua.  He  was
afterward  director  of  the  observatory  at  Bogota,
and  in  1807  began  the  "  Seminario  de  la  Nueva  Gra-
nada," a  scientific  journal,  republished  in  Paris  in
1849.  He  was  executed  by  order  of  Morillo,  for
espousing  the  cause  of  independence.

CALDAS  PEREIRA  DE  SOUZA,  Antonio,
Brazilian  poet,  b.  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  23  Nov.,  1762;
d.  there,  2  March,  1814.  He  studied  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Coimbra  in  Portugal,  and  spent  most  of  his
life  in  Europe,  returning  to  Brazil  in  1808.  While
at  the  university,  he  gave  umbrage  to  the  inquisi-
tion, and,  on  being  consigned  to  a  convent,  devoted
himself  to  the  clerical  profession.  His  writings
have  a  high  moral  tone,  especially  his  ode  on  "  Man
in  the  State  of  Barbarism."  They  were  published
under  the  title  of  "  Poesias  Sagradas  e  Profanas,"
with  a  commentary  by  Gen.  Stockier  (Paris,  1821;
new  ed.,  Coimbra,  1836).  His  translation  of  the
Psalms  is  noted  for  its  beauty.

CALDERON,  Fernando,  Mexican  dramatist,
b.  in  Guadalajara,  20  July,  1809 ;  d.  in  Ojocaliente,
18  Jan.,  1845.  He  was  a  colonel,  a  state  legislator,
a  judge  and  secretary  in  the  government  of  Zaca-
tecas,  as  well  as  an  industrious  writer.  His  finest
dramas  are :  "  The  Tourney,"  "  Anne  Boleyn,"  and
"  The  Return  of  the  Crusader." Even  his  lyrical


496


calderOn


poetry  is  characterized  by  dramatic  fire.  His  plays
have  gained  him  great  popularity,  not  only  in
Mexico  but  in  all  Spanish  America.

CALDERON,  Francisco  Santiago  (cal-day-
rawn'),  Spanish  prelate,  b.  in  Torralba,  Spain,  in
the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century ;  d.  in  Oaxaca,
Mexico,  13  Oct.,  1736.  He  was  a  friar,  distinguished
himself  for  his  learning,  taught  philosophy  in
Huete  and  theology  in  the  universities  of  Sala-
manca and  Alcala,  and  then  filled  several  impor-
tant offices  of  the  church  in  Castile,  Galicia,  and
Asturias.  In  1728  he  was  proposed  for  the  bishop-
ric of  Oaxaca,  and  his  inauguration  took  place  on

8  June,  1730.  He  finished  the  buildmg  of  the
cathedral,  consecrated  the  church,  established
Spanish  schools  in  the  principal  towns  of  his  dio-
cese, and  gave,  a  large  sum  for  a  college  for  girls.

CALDERON  DE  LA  BARCA,  Frances  Inglis
(cal-da-rawn'-de-lah-bar'-ca),  b.  in  Scotland  about
1818.  Her  youth  was  passed  in  Normandy,  but  she
came  to  this  country  with  her  mother,  and  they  es-
tablished a  school  in  Boston.  She  was  also  for
many  years  a  resident  of  Staten  Island.  She  mar-
ried, in  1838,  Calderon  de  la  Barca,  Spanish  minis-
ter to  the  United  States,  and  subsequently  to  Mexi-
co. She  published  "  Life  in  Mexico,"  with  a  preface
by  William  H.  Prescott  the  historian  (2  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1843).  After  her  husband's  death  she  was
attached  to  the  household  of  ex-Queen  Isabella  II.
of  Spain  at  Seville.

CALDICOTT,  Thomas  Ford,  Canadian  clergy-
man, b.  in  Buckby,  Northamptonshire,  England,
in  1803 ;  d.  in  Toronto,  Canada,  9  July,  1869.  He
emigrated  to  Canada  in  1824,  and,  after  teaching
there  for  seven  years,  removed  to  Hamilton,  Madi-
son CO.,  N.  Y.,  and  thence  successively  to  Lock-
port,  N.  Y.,  Boston,  Mass.,  and  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
which  cities  he  preached  for  twenty-six  years,  also
writing  much  for  the  periodical  religious  press.
He  returned  to  Canada  in  1860,  and  was  settled
as  pastor  of  the  Bond  street  Baptist  church,
Toronto,  retaining  this  charge  until  his  death.  He
was  distinguished  for  his  scholarship,  was  an  able
writer  and  eloquent  preacher,  taking  an  active  part
in  the  promotion  of  the  educational  and  benevolent
institutions  of  the  Canadian  Baptists.

CALDWELL,  Alexander,  jurist,  d.  in  Wheel-
ing, Va.,  8  April,  1839.  He  was  for  several  years
U.  S.  judge  for  the  western  district  of  Virginia.

CALDWELL,  Alexander,  senator,  b.  in  Hun-
tingdon CO.,  Pa.,  1  March,  1830.  He  received  a
common-school  education,  and  in  1847  enlisted  for
the  Mexican  war  in  a  company  commanded  by  his
father,  who  was  killed  at  one  of  the  gates  of  the  city
of  Mexico.  He  returned  in  1848,  became  teller  of  a
bank  in  Columbia.  Pa.,  and  afterward  entered  busi-
ness. He  went  to  Kansas  in  1861,  engaged  in  trans-
porting military  supplies,  and  afterward  became
interested  in  the  building  of  railways  and  bridges.
He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  as  a  republican  in
1871,  and  served  till  1873,  when  he  resigned.  Since
that  time  he  has  been  engaged  in  manufacturing.

CALDWELL,  Charles,  physician,  b.  in  Cas-
well CO.,  N.  C,  14  May,  1772;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,

9  July,  1853.  He  was  the  son  of  an  Irish  officer.
After  teaching  school  for  a  time  in  North  Carolma,
he  went  to  Philadelphia,  and  in  1792  entered  the
medical  school  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
During  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  of  the  following
year  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  professional
zeal.  He  served  as  a  brigade  surgeon  In  Gen.  Lee's
command  during  the  "whiskey  insurrection"  of
1791- '4.  In  1810  he  accepted  the  professorship  of
natural  history  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.
He succeeded Nicholas  Biddle as  editor  of  the


CALDWELL


"  Port-Folio  "  in  1814.  In  1819  he  became  prof  eg.
sor  of  materia  medica  in  Transylvania  university
Lexington,  Ky.,  and  in  1820  visited  Europe  to  pur-
chase books  and  apparatus.  In  1837  he  established
a  medical  institute  in  Louisville,  Ky. ;  but,  owing
to  a  misunderstanding  with  the  trustees,  his  re-
lations therewith  were  abruptly  ended.  He  wrote
a  translation  of  Blumenbach's  "  Elements  of  Phys-
iology" (1795);  edited  Cullen's  "Practice  of  Phys-
ic" (1816);  published  "Life  and  Campaigns  of
Gen.  Greene  "  (1819) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Horace  Holley  "
(1828);  and  "Bachtiar  Narneh,  or  the  Royal
Foundling,"  a  Persian  tale  translated  from  the
Arabic.  His  "Autobiography,"  with  preface  and
notes,  was  issued  in  Philadelphia  in  1855,  and  a
biographical  notice  of  him  was  read  by  Dr.  B.  H.
Coates  before  the  American  philosophical  society.
His  technical  pamphlets,  essays,  etc.,  produced
from  1794  till  1851,  nun.ber  more  than  200  titles.

CALDWELL,  Charles  Henry  Bromedge,
naval  officer,  b.  in  Hingham,  Mass.,  11  June,  1823;
d.  in  Waltham,  Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1877.  He  entered
the  navy  as  midshipman  27  Feb.,  1838,  and  became
lieutenant  4  Sept.,  1852.  With  a  detachment  from
the  "  Vandalia,"  he  defeated  a  tribe  of  cannibals  at
Wega,  one  of  the  Feejee  islands,  and  burned  their
town,  11  Oct.,  1858.  In  1862  he  commanded  the
gun-boat  "  Itasca,"  of  the  western  gulf  blockading
squadron,  and  took  part  in  the  bombardment  of
Forts  Jackson  and  St.  Philip.  On  the  night  of  20
April  his  gun-boat,  with  the  "  Pinola,"  was  sent  on  ,
an  expedition  under  the  command  of  Flect-Capt.
Bell,  to  make  a  passage  for  the  fleet  through  the
chain  obstructions  near  the  forts.  Lieut.  Caldwell
and  his  party  boarded  one  of  the  hulks  that  held
the  chains,  and  succeeded  in  detaching  the  latter,  in
spite  of  the  heavy  fire  to  which  they  were  subjected.
The  "  Itasca  "  was  then  swept  on  shore  by  the  cur-
rent, in  full  sight  of  the  forts,  and  it  was  half  an
hour  before  she  was  afloat  again.  She  was  unable
to  pass  the  forts  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  owing
to  a  shot  that  penetrated  her  boiler.  Lieut.  Cald-
well was  in  the  action  at  Grand  Gulf,  9  June,  1862,
and  was  promoted  to  commander  on  16  July.  He
commanded  the  iron-clad  "  Essex,"  of  the  Missis-
sippi squadron  in  1862-'3,  and  took  part  in  the  op-
erations at  Port  Hudson,  from  March  to  July  of
the  latter  year,  in  command  of  the  "  Essex  "  and
the  mortar  flotilla.  He  commanded  the  "  Glaucus  "
of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron  from
1863  till  1864,  and  the  "  R.  R.  Cuyler,"  of  the  same
squadron,  from  1864  till  1865.  He  became  captain,
12  Dec,  1867,  chief  of  staff  of  the  North  Atlantic
fleet  in  1870,  and  commodore  on  14  June,  1874.

CALDWELL,  Darid,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter CO.,  Pa.,  22  March,  1725 ;  d.  m  North  Carolina,
25  Aug.,  1824.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  and
after  receiving  the  rudiments  of  an  English  educa-
tion, was  apprenticed  to  a  house-carpenter,  and
afterward  worked  at  his  trade  for  four  years.  He
then  determined  to  become  a  minister,  and  was
graduated  at  Princeton  in  1761.  After  teaching
school  in  Cape  May  for  a  year,  and  also  studying
theology,  he  completed  his  studies  in  the  Princeton
seminary,  acting  at  the  same  time  as  an  instructor
in  the  college.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the
New  Brunswick  presbytery,  8  June,  1763,  and,  after
spending  a  year  in  North  Carolina  in  mission-work,
was  ordained  in  Trenton,  N.  J.,  6  July,  1765.  He
was  installed  on  3  March,  1768,  pastor  of  the
churches  at  Buffalo  and  Alamance,  N.  C,  and  con-
tinued there  till  withhi  a  few  years  of  his  death.
As  his  salary  was  only  $200,  he'cultivated  a  small
farm,  and  also  carried  on  a  classical  school  at  his
house. Many  of  his  pupils  became  noted  men.


CALDWELL


CALDWELL


497


Mr.  Caldwell  also  directed  his  attention  to  the
study  and  practice  of  medicine,  and  was  an  inti-
mate friend  of  Dr.  Rush,  with  whom  he  had  be-
come acquainted  at  college.  Mr.  Caldwell  was  an
earnest  patriot  in  the  revolutionary  war.  His
house  was  plundered  by  the  British,  his  library
burned,  and  everything  but  the  buildings  on  his
plantation  destroyed.  Cornwallis  offered  $1,000
to  any  one  who  should  bring  him  into  camp ;  but
all  efforts  to  take  him  were  unsuccessful.  He  was
a  member,  in  1770,  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention, and,  although  clergymen  were  prohibited
by  law  from  entering  the  legislature,  he  had  much
influence  in  public  affairs,  and  earnestly  opposed
the  federal  constitution  in  the  convention  called
for  its  ratification.  In  1791,  when  the  University
of  North  Carolina  was  founded,  he  was  offered  the
presidency,  but  declined  on  account  of  his  advanced
age.  The  trustees  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1810.  A  biography  of  Dr.  Caldwell,  by  E.  W.  Ca-
ruthers,  D.  D.,  was  published  in  1843.

CALDWELL,  George  Chapman,  chemist,  b.
in  Framingham,  Mass.,  14  Aug.,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Har-
vard in  1855,  and  pursued  higher  studies  abroad,
receiving  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  Gottingen  in
1856.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States,  he  was
appointed  professor  of  chemistry  and  physics  in
Antioch  college,  and  filled  that  chair  from  1859  till
1862,  then  became  hospital  visitor  of  the  U.  S.
sanitary  commission  in  charge  of  the  distribution
of  supplies  to  the  hospitals  in  and  around  Wash-
ington until  1804.  Dr.  Caldwell  then  occupied
the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Pennsylvania  agricul-
tural college  from  1804  till  1867,  and  was  vice-
president  of  the  college  in  1867-'8.  Since  1808
he  has  been  professor  of  agricultural  and  ana-
lytical chemistry  at  Cornell,  and  has  become  an
authority  on  chemistry  as  applied  to  agriculture
and  similar  subjects.  He  is  the  author  of  numer-
ous reports  and  many  papers  that  have  been  con-
tributed to  state  reports  and  scientific  journals,
and  has  published  "  Agricultural  Qualitative  and
Quantitative  Chemical  Analysis"  (New  York,
1869) ;  with  A.  A.  Breneman,  "  A  Manual  of  Intro-
ductory Chemical  Practice"  (1875),  and  with  S.  M.
Babcock.  "A  Manual  of  Qualitative  Chemical
Analysis  "  (Ithaca,  1882).

CALDWELL,  Henry  Clay,  jurist,  b.  in  Mar-
shall CO.,  W.  Va.,  4  Sept.,  1835.  He  was  educated
in  the  common  schools  of  Iowa,  where  his  father
had  moved  in  1837,  studied  law  in  Keosauque,
Iowa,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1852.  He
was  prosecuting  attorney  of  Van  Buren  co.,  Iowa,
from  1856  till  1858,  and  a  member  of  the  legisla-
ture from  1859  till  1801.  He  enlisted  in  the  3d
Iowa  volunteer  cavalry  in  the  latter  year,  and  be-
came successively  major,  lieutenant-colonel,  and
colonel  of  his  regiment.  He  was  in  active  militarv
service  from  1801  till  4  June,  1804,  when  he  re-
signed his  commission,  having  been  appointed  U.
S.  judge  for  the  eastern  district  of  Arkansas.

CALDWELL,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Char-
lotte CO.,  Va.,  in  April,  1734;  d.'in  Elizabethtown,
N.  J.,  24  Nov.,  1781.  He  was  graduated  at  the
college  of  New  Jersey,  Princeton,  in  1759,  and
three  years  later  becaine  pastor  of  the  church  in
Elizabethtown.  During  the  political  agitations
preceding  the  revolution  he  took  an  active  part  in
arousing  the  spirit  of  rebellion,  thereby  incurring
bitter  hatred  on  the  part  of  his  tory  neighbors.  As
chaplain  in  the  New  Jersey  brigade,  after  the  be-
ginning of  hostilities,  he  soon  earned  the  nickname
of  the  "soldier  parson,"  and  suffered  for  his  patri-
otic zeal  by  having  his  church  and  house  burned  in
VOL.  I.— 32


1780  by  a  party  of  British  marauders  and  tories.
His  family  sought  refuge  in  the  village  of  Con-
necticut Farms  (now  Union),  N.  J.,  but  before  the
close  of  the  year  a  reconnoitring  force  from  the
British  camps  on  Staten  Island  pillaged  the  place,
and  Mrs.  Caldwell  was  killed  by  a  stray  bullet
while  in  a  room  praying  with  her  two  children.
Her  husband  was  at  the  time  on  duty  with  the
army  at  Morristown.  Shortly  after  this  (23  June,
1780)  he  distinguished  himself  in  the  successful
defence  of  Springfield,  N.  J.,  which  was  attacked
by  a  heavy  force  of  the  British.  During  the  en-
gagement he  supplied  the  men  with  hymn-books
from  a  neighboring  church  to  use  as  wadding,
with  the  exhortation,  "  Now  put  Watts  into  them,
boys ! "  He  was  shot  by  an  American  sentry  dur-
ing an  altercation  concerning  a  package,  which
the  sentry  thought  it  his  duty  to  examine.  The
soldier  was  delivered  to  the  civil  authorities,  tried
for  murder,  and  hanged,  29  Jan.,  1782.  Such  was
the  popular  indignation  at  the  time  that  it  was
commonly  believed  that  the  sentry  had  been  bribed
by  the  British  to  kill  the  chaplain,  A  handsome
monument  commemorating  the  life  and  services  of
Mr.  Caldwell  and  his  wife  was  erected  at  Elizabeth-
town  in  1840,  on  the  sixty-fourth  anniversary  of
his  untimely  death. — His  son,  John  E.,  was  taken
to  France  by  Lafayette,  and  there  educated.  He
became  a  prominent  philanthropist,  edited  the
"  Christian  Herald,"  and  was  one  of  the  founders
of  the  Bible  society.

CALDWELL,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Prince  Ed-
ward CO.,  Va. ;  d.  in  Frankfort,  Ky.,  9  Nov.,  1804.
He  removed  to  Kentucky  in  1781,  served  in  the
conflicts  with  the  Indians,  and  became  a  major-
general  of  militia.  He  W8.«  a  member  of  the  Ken-
tucky state  conventions  tA  1787  and  1788,  and  of
the  state  senate  in  1792  and  1793.  At  the  time  of
his  death  he  was  lieutenant-governor.

CALDWELL,  John  Curtis,  soldier,  b.  in  Low-
ell, Vt.,  17  April,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at
Amherst  m  1855.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war  he  became  colonel  of  the  11th  Maine  volun-
teers. He  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers 28  April,  1802.  and  brevetted  major-general
19  Aug.,  1865.  Gen.  Caldwell  was  in  every  action,
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  from  its  organization
till  Gen.  Grant  took  command,  and  during  the  last
year  of  the  war  he  was  president  of  an  advisory
board  of  the  war  department.  He  was  a  member
of  the  Maine  senate,  adjutant-general  of  the  state
in  1867,  and  in  1869  was  U.  S.  consul  at  Valpa-
raiso, Chill.  From  1873  till  1882  he  was  minister
to  Uruguay  and  Paraguay,  and  in  1885,  having
removed  to  Kansas,  was  president  of  the  board  of
pardons  of  that  state.

CALDWELL,  Joseph,  educator,  b.  in  Lam-
mington,  N.  J.,  21  April.  1773;  d.  in  Chapel  Hill,
N.  C.,  24  Jan.,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1791,  delivering  the  Latin  salutatory,  and
then  taught  school  in  Lammington  and  Elizabeth-
town,  where  he  began  the  study  of  divinity.  He
became  tutor  at  Princeton  in  April,  1795,  and  in
1790  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in
the  University  of  North  Carolina.  He  found  the
institution,  then  only  five  years  old,  in  a  feeble
state,  nearly  destitute  of  buildings,  library,  and  ap-
paratus, and  to  him  is  ascribed  the  merit  of  having
saved  it  from  ruin.  He  was  made  its  president  in
1804,  and  held  the  office  till  his  death,  with  the  ex-
ception of  the  years  from  1812  till  1817.  Princeton
gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1810.  In  1824  he
visited  Europe  to  purchase  ap[)aratus  and  select
books  for  the  library  of  the  university.  A  monu-
ment to  his  memory  has  been  erected  in  the  grove


498


CALDWELL


CALHOUN


surrounding  the  university  buildings.  Dr.  Cald-
well published  "A  Compendious  System  of  Ele-
mentary Geometry,"  with  a  subjoined  treatise  on
plane  trigonometry  (1823),  and  "  Letters  of  Carle-
ton"  (1825).  The  latter  had  previously  appeared
in  a  newspaper  in  Raleigh,  and  were  designed  to
awaken  an  interest  in  internal  improvements.

CALDWELL,  Lisle  Bones,  educator,  b,  in
Wilna,  N.  Y.,  10  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Baldwin's  university,  Berea,  Ohio,  in  1868,  and  has
since  been  engaged  in  teacliing  and  in  charge  of
various  Methodist  Episcopal  churches.  In  1877  he
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  natural  sciences  in  East
Tennessee  Wesleyan  university,  and  later  also  filled
the  chair  of  physics.  In  1886  he  was  elected  pro-
fessor of  applied  chemistry  and  agriculture  in  the
Grant  memorial  university,  in  Athens,  Tenn.  He
has  been  actively  connected  with  the  temperance
movement,  and  has  filled  high  offices  in  the  sons  of
temperance.  Prof.  Caldwell  has  been  a  frequent
contributor  to  periodical  literature,  and  has  pub-
lished "  Wines  of  Palestine ;  or.  The  Bible  De-
fended "  (1859),  and  "  Beyond  the  Grave  "  (1884).

CALDWELL,  Merritt,  educator,  b.  in  Hebron,
Oxford  CO.,  Me.,  29  Nov.,  1806 ;  d.  in  Portland,  6
June,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1828,
and  in  the  same  year  was  appointed  to  succeed  his
brother  Zenas  as  principal  of  the  Maine  Wesleyan
seminary  at  Read  field.  He  was  elected  professor
of  mathematics  and  vice-president  of  Dickinson
college.  Pa.,  in  1834,  and  in  1837  was  transferred  to
the  chair  of  metaphysics  and  English  literature,
which  he  held  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  The  presi-
dent of  the  college  was  often  absent,  and  his  duties
fell  on  Prof.  Caldwell,  who  performed  them  with
great  ability.  He  wrote  much  for  the  press,  and
was  specially  interested  in  the  temperance  reform.
He  visited  England  in  1846  as  a  delegate  to  the
world's  convention  that  formed  the  "evangelical
alliance,"  and  was  also  a  delegate  to  the  world's
temperance  convention  from  the  Pennsylvania  so-
ciety. He  published  "  The  Doctrine  of  the  English
Verb"  (1837);  "Manual  of  Elocution"  (Philadel-
phia, 1846);  "  Philosophy  of  Christian  Perfection  "
(1847) ;  and  "  Christianity  tested  by  Eminent
Men"  (New  York,  1852).  A  memoir  of  him  has
been  published  by  Rev.  S.  M.  Vail,  D.  D. — His  elder
brother,  Zenas,  b.  in  Hebron,  Me.,  31  March,  1800 ;
d.  26  Dec,  1826,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in
1824,  and  was  the  first  principal  of  Maine  Wes-
leyan seminary.  A  volume  containing  some  of
his  writings,  both  prose  and  poetry,  and  a  memoir
by  Rev.  S.  M.  Vail.  D.  D.,  was  published  in  1855.

CALDWELL,  Samuel,  soldier.  He  was  a  ma-
jor of  the  Kentucky  "levies  of  1791,"  and  was  dis-
tinguished in  Wilkinson's  expedition  against  the
Indians  in  August  of  that  year.  He  was  lieuten-
ant-colonel commanding  a  regiment  of  Kentucky
volunteers  from  September  till  November,  1812,
and  again  in  Green  Clay's  brigade  of  six-months
volunteers  under  Gen.  Harrison  in  1813.  He  was
made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  31  Aug.,
1813,  and  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  battle  of
the  Thames,  5  Oct.,  1813.

CALDWJELL,  Samuel  Lunt,  educator,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1820,  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Waterville  (now  Colby  university),  Me.,  in
1839,  and  after  teaching  school  at  Hampton  Falls,
N.  H.,  and  Newburyport,  Mass.,  entered  Newton
theological  institute,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1845.  He  was  pastor  of  Baptist  churches  in  Ban-
gor, Me.,  from  1846  till  1858,  and  in  Providence,  R.
I.,  from  1858  till  1873,  Pie  then  became  professor
of  church  history  in  Newton  theological  institute,
and  on  12  Sept.,  1878,  was  elected  president  of  Vas-


sar  college.  He  resigned  in  1885  and  removed  to
Providence,  R.  I.  Colby  university  gave  him  the
degree  of  D.  D.  in  1858,  and  Brown  that  of  LL.  D.
in  1884.  Dr.  Caldwell  has  published  a  "  Memorial
of  Prof.  R.  P.  Dunn  "  (Cambridge,  1867) ;  an  inde-
pendence-day oration  (Providence,  1861) ;  "  Litera-
ture in  Account  with  Life,"  an  oration  delivered  at
the  commencement  of  Michigan  university  (1885);
and  two  lectures  in  "  The  Newton  Lectures  "  (1886)'
besides  sermons  and  contributions  to  periodicals!
He  edited  volumes  iii.  and  iv.  of  "  Publications  of
the  Narragansett  Club"  (Providence,  1865).

CALDWELL,  William  Warner,  b.  in  New-
buryport, Mass.,  28  Oct.,  1823.  He  was  graduated
at  Bowdoin  in  1843,  and  engaged  in  business  in
his  native  town.  He  has  published  a  volume  of
"Poems,  Original  and  Translated"  (Boston,  1857),
containing  translations  from  the  German  of  Ilebel.
Geibel,  and  Fallersleben.  Since  that  time  many
more  poems  and  translations  of  German  lyrics  by
Mr.  Caldwell  have  appeared  in  the  Boston  "  Tran-
script "  and  other  journals,  and  more  than  fifty  of
them  set  to  music  have  been  published  in  the
"  Normal  Music  Course."

CALEF,  or  CALFE,  Robert,  author,  d.  about
1723.  He  was  a  Boston  merchant,  and  powerfully
attacked  the  witchcraft  delusion  in  a  book  called
"More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World"  (London,
1700 ;  Salem,  Mass.,  1796).  The  title  was  suggested
by  Cotton  Mather's  "  Wonders  of  the  Invisible
World."  Calef's  plain  facts  and  common-sense  ar-
guments had  a  powerful  effect  on  public  opinion,
and  contributed  much  to  the  decline  of  the  delu-
sion. His  book  irritated  Mather,  who  called  Calef
"a  weaver  turned  minister"  and  "a  coal  from
hell,"  and  finally  prosecuted  him  for  slander.  Dr.
Increase  Mather,  president  of  Harvard  college,  or-
dered the  wicked  book  to  be  burned  in  the  college-
yard.  The  members  of  the  Old  North  church  pub-
lished a  defence  of  their  pastors,  the  Mathers,
entitled  "  Remarks  upon  a  Scandalous  Book,"  etc.,
with  the  motto,  "Truth  will  come  off  Conqueror."
Calef's  book  made  him  unpopular,  and  Samuel
Mather,  in  his  life  of  his  father,  says :  "  There  was  a
certain  disbeliever  of  witchcraft  who  wrote  against
this  book ;  but,  as  the  man  is  dead,  his  book  died
long  before  him."

CALHOUN,  John  Caldwell,  statesman,  b.  in
Abbeville  district,  S.  C,  18  March,  1782;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  31  March,  1850.  His  grand-
father, James  Calhoun,  emigrated  from  Donegal,
Ireland,  to  Pennsylvania  in  1733,  bringing  with
him  a  family  of  children,  of  whom  Patrick  Cal-
houn was  one,  a  boy  six  years  old.  The  family
removed  to  western  Virginia,  again  moved  farther
south,  and  in  1756  established  the  "Calhoun  set-
tlement" in  the  upper  part  of  South  Carohna.
This  was  near  the  frontier  of  the  Cherokee  In-
dians ;  conflicts  between  them  and  the  whites
were  frequent  and  bloody,  and  the  Calhovm  family
suffered  severe  loss.  Patrick  Calhoun  was  distin-
guished for  his  undaunted  courage  and  persever-
ance in  these  struggles,  and  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  provincial  rangers  raised  for  the  defence
of  the  frontier.  His  resolute  and  active  character
gave  him  credit  among  his  people,  and  he  was
called  to  important  service  during  the  revolution-
ary war,  in  support  of  American  independence
By  profession  he  was  a  survevor,  and  gained  suc--
cess  by  his  skill.  He  was  a  man  of  studious  and
thoughtful  habits,  and  well  versed  in  English  lit-
erature. His  father  was  a  Presbyterian,  and  he
adhered  to  the  religion  of  his  fathers.  In  1770  he
married  Martha  Caldwell,  a  native  of  \irginia,
daughter of an Irish Presbyterian immigrant,


CALHOUN


CALHOUN


499


whose  family  was  devoted  to  the  American  cause,
and  some  of  "whom  were  badly  treated  by  the  tories.
By  heredity,  John  Caldwell  Calhoun  was  therefore
entitled  lo  manhood  from  his  race,  to  vigorous
convictions  in  faith,  and  to  patriotic  devotion  to
liberty  and  right.  He  was  early  taught  to  read
the  Bible,  and  trained  in  Calvinistic  doctrines;  and
it  is  said  that  he  was  also  devoted  to  history  and
metaphysics,  but  was  compelled  to  desist  from
study  because  of  impaired  health.

His  father  was  a  member  for  many  years,  during
and  after  the  revolution,  of  the  legislature  of  his
state,  and  his  counsels  made  a  deep  impression  on
his  son,  though  he  died  when  the  latter  was  thir-
teen years  of  age.  The  son  remembered  hear-
ing the  father  say  that  "that  government  was
best  which  allowed  the  largest  amount  of  indi-
vidual liberty  compatible  with  social  order,"  and
that  the  improvements  in  political  science  would
consist  in  throwing  off  many  restraints  then
deemed  necessary  to  an  organized  society.  Until
Mr.  Calhoun  was  ready  for  college,  he  was  under
the  instruction  of  his  brother-in-law,  the  Rev.  Dr.
Waddell,  a  Presbyterian  clergyman,  and  went  to
Yale  in  1802.  He  evinced  great  originality  of
thought,  devotion  to  study,  and  a  lofty  ambition,
which  won  him  the  honors  of  his  class,  and  the
prophetic  approval  of  President  Dwight  in  the
declaration,  after  an  earnest  dispute  with  him  on
the  rightful  source  of  political  power,  that  he
would  reach  the  greatest  eminence  in  life,  and
might  attain  the  presidency.  He  studied  law  with
H.  W.  Desaussure,  of  South  Carolina,  for  a  time,  but
was  graduated  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1807.  He  took  part  in  a
meeting  of  the  people  denouncing  the  British  out-
rage on  the  frigate  "  Chesapeake,"  and  was  soon
elected  to  the  legislature,  and  entered  the  house  of
representatives  in  November,  1811,  in  his  thirtieth
year.  Few  men  were  better  trained  for  the  career
before  him.  Simple  and  sincere  in  his  tastes,
habits,  and  manners,  strict  and  pure  in  his  morals,
and  incorruptible  in  his  integrity,  severe  and
logical  in  his  style,  analytic  in  his  studies,  and
tliorough  in  his  investigations,  with  a  genius  to
perceive  and  comprehend  the  mass  of  elements
that  entered  into  the  solution  of  the  problems  of
our  political  life,  and  with  a  capacity  for  philo-
sophic generalization  of  principles  unequalled  by
any  contemporary,  he  began,  continued,  and  ended
his  life,  in  the  manifestation  of  the  highest  quali-
ties for  debate,  for  disquisitions  upon  constitu-
tional government  and  free  institutions,  for  dis-
cussions on  foreign  relations,  for  the  investigation
of  political  and  social  economy,  and  for  the  con-
duct with  ability  of  the  general  aifairs  and  even
for  the  details  of  departmental  administration.

When  Calhoun  entered  congress,  war  with  Great
Britain  was  imminent.  He  was  a  member  of  the
iornmittee  on  foreign  affairs.  He  drew  a  report
which  placed  before  the  country  the  issue  of  war,
ir  submission  to  wrong.  He  urged  a  declaration
)f  war,  and  upheld  the  cause  of  his  country  with
m  eloquence  that  inspired  patriotic  enthusiasm,
md  with  a  logical  force  that  gave  fortitxide  and
:eal  to  the  army  and  navy  as  well  as  to  the  people.
U  the  close  of  the  war  in  1815  the  country  was
ionfronted  with  questions  of  currency,  firiance,
ommercial  policy,  and  internal  development,  which
'ffered  to  the  genius  of  Calhoun  fruitful  subjects
or  his  original  and  patriotic  study.  He  pressed
pon  congress  the  bank  bill,  the  tariff  of  1816,  and

system  of  roads  and  canals.  On  these  questions
e  afterward  modified  his  views  very  greatly,  but
efended  his  real  consistency  of  thought,  under


the  appearance  of  inconsistency,  by  saying  that  the
remedies  proper  for  one  condition  of  things  were
improper  for  others.  A  question  arose  in  the  dis-
cussion of  the  act  to  carry  into  effect  the  treaty  of
peace,  as  to  the  relation  of  the  treaty-making
authority  to  the  powers  of  congress.  He  main-
tained the  supremacy  of  the  treaty  power :  that  it
prevailed  over  a  law  of  congress :  and  that  congress
was  bound  to  pass  a  law  to  carry  a  treaty  into
effect.  The  celebrated  William  Pinkney,  then  in
the  zenith  of  his  fame,  declared  that  Mr.  Calhoun
had  brought  into  the  debate  "  the  strong  power  of
genius  from  a  higher  sphere  than  that  of  argu-
ment." Its  power  was  undoubted,  though  the
truth  of  his  theory  may  well  be  questioned.

In  1817  Mr.  Monroe  called  Mr.  Calhoun  to  the
war  department,  which  he  filled  until  1825.  In
this  new  field  he  won  real  fame ;  to  this  day  the
department,  by  the  testimony  of  recent  secretaries,
feels  the  impress  of  his  genius  for  organization
and  for  the  methodical  adjustment  of  the  functions
of  its  various  branches  to  each  other  and  to  its
head.  In  his  report  to  congress  in  1828  he  truly
said  that  in  a  large  disbursement  of  public  money
through  a  great  number  of  disbursing  agents,
there  had  been  no  defalcation  nor  loss  of  a  cent  to
the  government ;  that  he  had  reduced  the  expenses
of  the  army  from  $451  to  $287  per  man,  with  no
loss  of  efficiency  or  comfort.  He  organized  the
department  by  a  bill  that  he  drew  for  the  purpose ;
and,  under  rules  prescribed  by  him,  introduced  or-
der and  accountability  in  every  branch  of  service,
and  established  a  system  that  has  survived,  in  a
large  degree,  to  this  day.  Mr.  Clay,  in  his  eulogy
on  Mr.  Calhoun,  said :  "  Such  was  the  high  estimate
I  formed  of  his  transcendent  talents,  that  if,  at  the
end  of  his  service  in  the  executive  department  un-
der Mr.  Monroe's  administration,  the  duties  of
which  he  performed  with  such  signal  ability,  he
had  been  called  to  the  highest  office  in  the  govern-
ment, I  should  have  felt  perfectly  assured  that,
under  his  auspices,  the  honor,  the  prosperity,  and
the  glory  of  our  country  would  have  been  safely
placed."  During  his  service  in  the  department,
contention  arose  between  him  and  Gen.  Jackson  as
to  the  conduct  of  the  latter  in  the  Seminole  war,
which  was  the  chief  cause  of  the  breach  between
them  during  Jackson's  administration.

In  1824  there  were  four  candidates  for  the  presi-
dency, which  resulted  in  the  election  of  John  Q,
Adams  by  the  house  of  representatives.  Mr.  Cal-
houn was  elected  vice-president  by  a  large  majority.
His  vice-presidency  marks  the  beginning  of  Mr.
Calhoun's  life  as  a  constitutional  statesman.  He
said  in  1837:  "The  station,  from  its  leisure,  gave
me  a  good  opportunity  to  study  the  genius  of  the
prominent  measure  of  the  day,  called  then  the
American  system,  by  which  I  profited."  From
that  time  he  by  profound  study  mastered  the  prin-
ciples of  our  constitutional  system,  and  may  be
said  to  have  founded  a  school  of  political  philoso-
phy, of  which  the  doctrines  are  maintained  in  his
speeches,  reports,  and  public  writings.  Mr.  Clay's
American  system,  to  which  Mr.  Calhoun  referred,
was  in  full  success.  The  bank,  the  protective
policy,  the  internal  improvement  system,  and  the
'•  general  welfare  "  rule  for  constitutional  construc-
tion, composed  this  celebrated  policy.  In  1828
Gen.  Jackson  was  elected  president  and  IMr.  Cal-
houn re-elected  vice-president.  The  Jackson  ad-
ministration was  the  period  during  which  the
democratic  party  under  Jackson  and  the  whig
party  under  Clay  were  organized  for  their  great
struggle  for  ascendency.

Mr.' Calhoun  took  from  the  beginning  the  most


500


CALHOUN


CALHOUN


prominent  part  in  the  attitude  assumed  by  South
Carolina  against  the  protective  system,  which  had
reached  its  climax  in  the  taritf  law  of  1828.  In
December,  1828,  he  drew  up  the  "Exposition,"
which,  with  amendments,  was  adopted  by  the  legis-
lature of  South  Carolina  ;  also  an  address,  26  July,
1831,  on  the  relations  of  the  states  to  the  general
government;  also  a  report  for  the  legislature  in
November,  1831 ;  also  an  address  to  the  people  of
the  state  at  the  close  of  that  session ;  also  a  letter
to  Gov.  Hamilton  on  state  interposition,  28  Aug.,
1832 ;  also  an  address  to  the  people  of  the  United
States  by  the  convention  of  South  Carolina  in  No-
vember, 1832.  In  these  papers  he  maintained  the
doctrine  of  state  interposition,  or  "  nullification."
During  Jackson's  first  term,  the  influence  of  Mr.
Van  Buren  became  paramount  with  the  president,
and  the  alienation  between  the  latter  and  Mr.  Cal-
houn became  irreconcilable.  Mr.  Van  Buren  was
elected  vice-president  in  1832.  The  South  Carolina
convention  in  November,  1832,  passed  the  ordi-
nance nullifying  the  taritf  laws  of  1828  and  1832,
and  Mr.  Calhoun  was  elected  to  the  senate  and  took
his  seat  in  December,  having  resigned  the  vice-
presidency.  He  appeared  as  the  champion  of  his
state,  and  defender  of  its  ordinance  of  nullifica-
tion, standing  alone,  but  firm  and  undaunted.
Both  parties  were  opposed  to  him,  and  the  admin-
istration menacingly  so.  A  man  of  less  intellect
or  less  courage  would  have  shrunk  from  the  con-


flict. But  he  was  courageous  in  conviction,  and
fearless  of  personal  consequences.  He  gave  up  the
second  and  suiTendered  all  hope  of  the  first  office
in  the  country,  to  defend  his  state  in  her  solitary
attitude  of  opposition  to  the  protective  policy.
The  president's  proclamation  of  November,  1832,
was  followed  by  the  proposed  "  force  bill.'^  Mr.
Calhoun,  in  February,  1833,  made  an  elaborate
speech  against  it.  To  this  Mr.  Webster  replied
with  great  fulness  upon  certain  resolutions  pro-
posed by  Mr.  Calhoun  on  the  general  question,
whereupon  Mr.  Calhoun  called  up  his  resolutions,
and  made,  26  Feb.,  1833,  a  speech  of  extraordinary
force,  to  which  Mr.  Webster  never  replied.  The
issue  in  this  debate  of  the  giants  was  on  the  fi.rst
resolution,  as  follows :

"  That  the  people  of  the  several  states  compris-
ing these  United  States  are  united  as  parties  to  a
constitutional  compact,  to  which  the  people  of  each
state  acceded,  as  a  separate  and  sovereign  commu-
nity, each  binding  itself  by  its  own  particular  rati-
fication ;  and  that  the  union,  of  which  the  said
compact  is  the  bond,  is  a  union  between  the  states
ratifying  the  same."  Mr.  Webster  denied  the
"  compact "  theory,  and  is  said  to  have  made  use  of
much  of  the  tnateruils  gathered  by  Judge  Story  in
the  preparation  of  the  first  volume  of  his  commen-
taries on  the  constitution,  published  in  1833.  Al-
most all  of  the  democratic  party,  and  many  of  the


whigs.  held  that  the  constitution  was  a  compact
but  denied  the  right  of  nullification  by  a  state;
and  soine  of  these  denied  the  right  of  secession  tc
a  state,  holding  the  indissolubility  of  the  union  of
these  states  because  bound  by  a  perpetual  com-
pact. They  admitted  Mr.  Calhoun's  premise  of
"  compact,"  but  denied  his  conclusions.  Mr.  Web-
ster denied  his  premise,  and  therefore  his  conclu-
sion. Many,  also,  who  believed  in  the  right  of
secession,  denied  the  right  of  nullification.  Mr.
Calhoun  stood,  therefore,  alone  in  the  senate,  main-
taining the  premise  of  a  "constitutional  compact."
and  his  conclusion  of  the  right  of  a  state  to  nullify
a  law  while  remaining  in  the  union,  or  to  secede
from  the  union  entirely.  The  true  nature  of  the
doctrine  of  nullification  was  this  :  1.  It  was  claimed
as  a  reniedy  within  the  union,  reserved  to  the  state
according  to  the  constitution ;  a  remedy  for  evils  in
the  union ;  and  to  save,  but  not  to  dissolve,  it.  2.
It  was  claimed  for  the  state,  as  a  party  to  the  com-
pact, to  declare  when  it  was  violated,  and  to  pro-
nounce void  an  unconstitutional  law ;  not  to  annul
a  valid  law,  but  to  declare  void  an  unconstitutional
law.  3.  Its  effect  was  (as  claimed)  to  make  whol-
ly inoperative  the  law  so  declared  void,  because
unconstitutional,  within  the  state,  and  it  seems  that
the  United  States  should,  according  to  the  doctrine,
thereupon  suspend  its  operation  elsewhere,  and  ap-
peal to  the  states  to  amend  the  constitution  by  a
new  grant  of  power  to  make  valid  the  law  so  de-
clared void  by  the  state.  4.  This  declaration  of
nullity  of  a  law  could  not  be  made  by  the  govern-
ment of  a  state,  but  only  by  a  convention  of  its
people ;  that  is,  that  the  people  of  a  state  in  con-
vention, which  had  ratified  in  convention  the  con-
stitution originally,  should  have  power  to  declare
unconstitutional  an  act  done  by  the  government
created  by  that  constitution.  The  genius  of  Mr.
Calhoun  was  equal  to  the  plausible  and  powerful
support  of  this  theory,  which,  however  inconclusive
from  his  premise  of  the  constitutional  compact,
can  not  impair  the  truth  of  that  premise,  which,
with  transcendent  ability  and  accurate  historic  re-
search, he  established  on  an  impregnable  founda-
tion. The  discussion  had  valuable  results.  Mr.
Clay  introduced  his  "  compromise  tariff "  of  1833,
which  was  passed  before  the  session  closed,  with
the  support  of  Mr.  Calhoun.  It  provided  for  a
gradual  reduction  of  duties  during  ten  years,  after
which  duties  should  be  laid  on  a  revenue  basis.
This  issue  ended,  the  re-charter  of  the  bank  of  the
United  States,  and  the  removal  of  the  deposits
therefrom  by  President  Jackson,  and  the  general
question  of  currency,  became  prominent.  Execu-
tive patronage  also  'came  into  the  debates  of  the
last  term  of  President  Jackson.  On  all  these  ques-
tions Mr.  Calhoun  acted  with  the  whig  party.  He
preferred  the  bank  of  the  United  States  to  what
was  called  the  "  pet  bank  system  "  of  the  executive.
He  condemned  what  he  deemed  executive  usurpa-
tion, and  denounced  the  influence  of  patronage  as
tending  to  the  organization  of  parties  upon  the
principle  "of  the  cohesive  power,  of  public  plun-
der." He  claimed  to  belong  to  neither  party,  but
to  lead  the  band  of  "state -rights"  men,,  whose
course  was  directed  by  principle,  and  not  by  the
motives  of  party  triumph  or  personal  ambition.
He  took  no  part  in  the  presidential  election  ci
1836 ;  but  on  the  accession  of  Mr.  Van  Buren  to
the  presidency,  and  in  the  extra  session  called  by
him  in  1837,  to  consider  the  financial  panic  ct
that  year,  he  took  ground  for  a  total  separation  oi
the  government  from  a  bank  or  banks,  favored  the
constitutional  treasury  plan,  and  acted  generally
with  the  democratic  party. Gen.  Harrison  was


CALHOUN


CALHOUN


501


elected  president  in  1840,  but  died  4  April,  1841,
and  was  succeeded  by  Vice-President  John  Tyler.
An  extra  session  of  congress  was  called  in  the  sum-
mer of  1841,  when  the  struggle  of  Mr.  Clay  for  the
restoration  of  his  American  system — including  a
bank,  protective  tariff,  internal  improvements,  and
a  distribution  of  the  proceeds  of  the  public  lands —
brought  on  a  memorable  discussion,  in  which  Mr.
Calhoun  was  a  leader,  and  facile  princeps,  of  the
democratic  party.  If  the  student  of  our  history
will  consult  the  speeches  of  Mr.  Calhoun  in  the
senate,  on  the  bank  question  generally,  and  on
currency,  from  1837  till  1842,  he  will  find  how
thorough  his  analysis  of  these  abstruse  questions
was,  and  how  broad  were  his  generalizations  of
principles.  When  the  tariff  question  came  up
again  in  1842,  the  compromise  of  1838  was  rudely
overthrown,  and  the  protective  system  placed  in
the  ascendent.  Mr.  Calhoun  discussed  the  ques-
tion in  several  able  speeches,  but  delivered  one  5
Aug.,  1842,  of  comprehensive  force,  in  which  he
discriminated  with  analytic  precision  between  a
revenue  and  a  protective  duty,  holding  a  tariff  for
revenue  only  to  be  constitutional  and  right.  He
discussed  the  question  of  wages,  and  closed  his
speech  with  an  animation  not  to  be  forgotten  by
one,  who  heard  him  utter  these  sentences :  "  The
great  popular  party  is  already  rallied  almost  en
masse  around  the  banner  which  is  leading  the
party  to  its  final  triumph.  The  few  that  still  lag
will  soon  be  rallied  under  its  ample  folds.  On  that
banner  is  inscribed :  Free  trade  ;  low  duties ;  no
debt ;  separation  from  hayiks  ;  economy  ;  retrench-
ment, and  strict  adherence  to  the  constitution.  Vic-
tory in  such  a  cause  will  be  great  and  glorious ;  and
long  will  it  perpetuate  the  liberty  and  prosperity
of  the  country."  The  hostility  of  President  Tyler
to  the  American  system  made  its  restoration  dur-
ing his  administration  only  partial ;  but  questions
of  deeper  import  came  before  the  country,  from
which  results  of  great  consequence  have  followed,
Mr.  Tyler  had  frequently  resorted  to  the  veto
power  to  defeat  Mr.  Clay's  measures.  Mr.  Clay
proposed  an  amendment  of  the  constitution  for
the  abrogation  of  the  veto  power,  and  on  28  Feb.,
1842,  Mr.  Calhoun  delivered  a  speech  against  this
proposition.  He  vindicated  and  sustained  the  veto
as  an  essential  part  of  "  the  beautiful  and  profound
system  established  by  the  constitution."  The  prop-
osition never  came  to  a  vote.

In  February,  1844,  the  unfortunate  explosion  of
a  gun  on  the  deck  of  the  "  Princeton,"  near  Wash-
ington, robbed  the  country  of  two  members  of
President  Tyler's  cabinet.  The  vacancy  in  the
state  department  occasioned  by  the  death  of  Judge
Upshur  was  tilled  by  Mr.  Calhoun,  who  had  ceased
to  be  senator,  in  March,  1843.  Two  questions  of
great  importance  were  considered  by  the  new  sec-
retary. At  that  time  the  union  had  no  Pacific
population,  California  had  not  been  acquired,  and
Oregon  was  not  yet  within  our  grasp.  Great  Brit-
ain had  an  adverse  claim  to  Oregon.  Our  title
rested  on  discovery  and  the  French  treaty  of  1803.
Access  to  it  there  was  none  but  by  sea  around  Cape
Horn  or  across  the  isthmus.  Mr.  Calhoun  vindi-
cated our  rights  in  a  diplomatic  correspondence
upon  grounds  on  which  it  was  finally  adjusted  by
treaty  in  1846.  In  his  speech  on  the  Oregon  ques-
tion, 16  March,  1846,  he  spoke  of  the  physical  ele-
ments of  civilization — steam  and  electricity.  As
to  the  latter  (when  the  telegraph  was  in  its  infan-
cy) with  wonderful  prevision  he  said :  "  Magic
wires  are  stretching  themselves  in  all  directions
over  the  earth,  and,  when  their  mystic  meshes  shall
have  been  united  and  perfected,  our  globe  itself


will  become  endowed  with  sensitiveness,  so  that
whatever  touches  on  any  one  point  will  be  instant-
ly felt  on  every  other."  Again :  ''  Peace  is  pre-
eminently our  policy.  .  .  .  Providence  has  given
us  an  inheritance  stretching  across  the  entire  con-
tinent from  ocean  to  ocean.  .  .  .  Our  great  mis-
sion, as  a  people,  is  to  occupy  this  vast  domain ";  to
replenish  it  with  an  intelligent,  virtuous,  and  in-
dustrious population;  to  convert  the  forests  into
cultivated  fields ;  to  drain  the  swamps  and  morass-
es, and  cover  them  with  rich  harvests;  to  build
up  cities,  towns,  and  villages  in  every  direction,
and  to  unite  the  whole  by  the  most  rapid  inter-
course between  all  the  parts.  .  .  .  Secure  peace,  and
time,  under  the  guidance  of  a  sagacious  and  cau-
tious policy,  '  a  wise  and  masterly  inactivity,'  will
speedily  accomplish  the  whole.  .  .  .  War  can
make  us  great ;  but  let  it  never  be  forgotten  that
peace  only  can  make  us  both  great  and  free."

Another  question,  the  annexation  of  Texas,  oc-
cupied his  mind,  and  gave  full  scope  to  his  fertile
genius.  To  our  internal  concerns  it  was  as  im-
portant as  to  our  foreign  relations.  It  can  only  be
fully  comprehended  by  considering  the  slavery
question,  with  which  it  became  involved  in  the  act
of  annexation  and  in  its  consequences.  In  the
federal  convention  of  1787  the  diversity  of  indus-
tries growing  up  in  states  where  slavery  did  and
did  not  exist  was  clearly  foreseen.  Tliis  difference
was  marked  by  the  terms  northern  and  southern,
slaveholding  and  non-slaveholding,  commercial
and  agricultural  states.  The  well-known  antipathy
of  people,  among  whom  slavery  does  not  exist,  to
that  form  of  labor  gave  rise  to  strong  feelings  in
the  northern  states  for  its  abolition.  Among  south-
ern people  there  was  much  of  regret  that  it  had.
ever  been  established ;  but  how  to  deal  with  it  was
to  them  a  practical  question  for  their  most  serious
consideration.  As  has  been  well  said, "  We  had  the
wolf  by  the  ears — to  hold  on,  was  a  great  evil ;  to
let  go,  who  could  estimate  the  consequences?"
It  was  important  as  a  question  of  property,  but  of
far  greater  moment  as  a  social  and  political  prob-
lem. What  relations,  social  and  political,  should
exist  between  these  diverse  races,  when  both  were
free  and  equal  in  citizenship?  One  thing  the
south  felt  most  strongly.  The  solution  of  this  dif-
ficult problem  should  be  left  to  those  who  were
personally  interested  in  the  continuance  of  slavery^
and  involved  in  the  consequences  of  its  abolition.
Accordingly,  the  federal  constitution  left  it  for  the
states  to  deal  with,  threw  around  it  interstate
guarantees,  and  put  it  beyond  the  reach  of  the  fed-
eral government.  Without  these  guarantees,  the
union  could  not  have  been  formed.  The  two  sec-
tions watched  their  respective  growth  in  popula-
tion, and  their  settlement  of  our  territories,  as
bearing  on  their  related  powers  in  the  federal  gov-
ernment. The  north  had  a  large  majority  in  the
house  of  representatives,  and  in  the  electoral  col-
lege. In  the  senate,  by  a  species  of  common  law,  an
equilibrium  was  maintained  between  the  sections,
one  free  state  being  admitted  with  one  slave  state
for  nearly  fifty  years  of  our  history.  In  1820-'l
the  Missouri  agitation  arose,  which  was  quieted
for  the  moment  by  an  agreement  that  no  state
should  be  admitted  north  of  lat.  36°  30'  which  al-
lowed slavery,  while  south  of  that  line  they  might
be  admitted  with  or  without  slavery,  as  the  people
of  the  state  should  decide.  The  constitutionality
of  this  Missouri  compromise  was  always  denied  by
many  constitutional  lawyers,  though  it  is  said  Mr.
Calhoun  admitted  its  constitutionality,  when  ap-
plied to  the  territories,  but  not  as  to  a  state.  With
a  senate  equally  divided  between  the  sections,  the


502


CALHOUN


CALHOUN


southern  states  felt  secure  against  action  hostile  to
slavery  by  the  government.  But  the  equilibrium
of  the  sections  in  that  body  being  overthrown,  they
would  be  subject  to  the  will  of  a  northern  majority
in  both  houses,  limited  only  by  its  interpretation
of  its  constitutional  power  over  slavery.  In  1835,
Texas,  peopled  by  emigrants  from  the  union,  but
chiefly  from  the  southern  states,  carrying  their
slaves  with  them,  won  its  independence  at  San
Jacinto,  which  was  acknowledged  by  the  United
States  in  1836.  The  territory  had  once  been  ours;
its  people  were  of  our  own  flesh  and  blood;  emi-
gration pressed  into  its  fields  from  the  south ;  the
fovernment  of  Great  Britain  was  threatening  to
eep  Texas  independent,  and,  by  procuring  the
abolition  of  slavery  there,  to  operate  to  stop  slavery
extension  toward  the  southwest,  and  place  an
abolition  frontier  upon  the  borders  of  Louisiana
and  Arkansas.  Mr.  Calhoun  was  too  sagacious  not
to  see  the  hostile  policy  of  England.  In  a  series  of
papers  he  exposed  the  scheme,  and  negotiated  a
treaty  with  Texas  for  her  incorporation  into  the
union.  The  treaty  failed,  but  the  annexation  of
Texas  became  a  pivotal  question  in  the  presi-
dential election  of  1844,  and  Mr.  Polk  was  elected
chiefly  upon  that  issue.  Many  people  looked  upon
it  as  an  increase  of  the  slave  power  in  the  union,
but  the  admission  of  Texas  was  made  subject,  as
to  any  new  states  to  be  formed  out  of  it,  to  the

Erovisions  of  the  Missouri  compromise.  Mr.  Cal-
oun  was  elected  to  the  senate  on  retiring  from
the  state  department,  and  did  all  he  could  for  the
peaceable  adjustment  of  the  Oregon  question,  and
also  to  prevent  war  with  Mexico.  He  deprecated
the  war  with  Mexico,  and  in  strong  terms  de-
clared it  was  unnecessary.  When  it  was  finally
determined  on,  he  was  greatly  disturbed,  and  pre-
dicted evils,  which  even  he  could  not  see.  He  said :
"  It  has  dropped  a  curtain  between  the  present  and
the  future,  which  to  me  is  impenetrable ;  and,  for
the  first  time  since  I  have  been  in  public  life,  I  am
unable  to  see  the  future.  It  has  closed  the  first
volume  of  our  political  history  under  the  constitu-
tion, and  opened  the  second,  and  no  mortal  can  tell
what  will  be  written  in  it."  In  his  speech  on  the
"  three-million  bill  "  (9  Feb.,  1847)  he  explained  that
what  constituted  this  "  impenetrable  curtain  "  was
the  acquisition  of  territory  as  the  result  of  the  war,
and  the  slavery  question,  which  would  be  involved
in  the  legislation  respecting  it.  The  slavery  ques-
tion, during  the  administrations  of  Jackson  and
Van  Buren,  had  been  agitated  in  many  forms.
Abolition  petitions  had  poured  in  upon  congress,
and  the  power  of  congress  had  been  invoked  to
prevent  the  transmission  through  the  mails  of
abolition  documents.  On  this  point  Mr.  Calhoun
differed  with  President  Jackson ;  the  former  main-
taining in  an  able  report  (February,  1836)  that  the
mail  could  not  be  the  instrument  for  incendiary
purposes  against  the  laws  of  the  states,  but  that
congress  had  no  power  to  decide  what  should  be
transmitted  and  what  not,  without  state  action.

Soon  after  the  Mexican  war  began,  the  acquisi-
tion of  territory  from  Mexico  was  strongly  insisted
on ;  and  at  once  the  anti-slavery  party  proposed
what  was  known  as  the  Wilmot  proviso,  by  which
it  was  declared  that  slavery  should  never  be  al-
lowed in  any  Mexican  territory  acquired  by  treaty.
The  agitation  convulsed  the  country.  On  19  Feb.,
1847,  Mr.  Calhoun  set  forth  his  views  in  certain
resolutions,  of  which  the  substance  is  in  the  first
two:  "That  the  territories  of  the  United  States
belong  to  the  several  states  composing  the  union,
and  are  held  by  them  as  their  joint  and  common
property; that  congress,  as  the  joint agent  and


representative  of  the  states  of  the  union,  has  no
right  to  make  any  law  or  do  any  act  whatever  that
shall,  directly  or  by  its  effects,  make  any  discrimi-
nation between  the  states  of  this  union  by  which
any  of  them  shall  be  deprived  of  its  full  and  equal
right  in  any  territory  of  the  United  States  ac-
quired or  to  be  acquired."  Chief-Justice  Taney,
delivering  the  opinion  of  the  court,  held  the  same
doctrine  in  the  Dred  Scott  decision  in  1857,  in  which
six  of  the  nine  judges  concurred.  The  agitation
continued  until  the  session  of  1849-'50,  when  the
compromise  measures  were  proposed  and  passed.
Mr.  Calhoun  made  his  last  speech  (read  for  him  bv
Senator  Mason,  of  Virginia)  upon  this  subject,  4
March,  1850.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  remarks
made  afterward  in  reply  to  Mr.  Foote  and  to  Mr.
Webster,  he  never  again  addressed  the  senate.

In  the  last  years  of  his  life  he  prepared  two
works,  the  one  "  A  Disquisition  on  Government,"
and  the  other  "A  Discourse  on  the  Constitution
and  Government  of  the  United  States,"  both  com-
prehended in  a  volume  of  400  pages.  These  me-
thodical treatises  on  the  science  of  government  and
the  federal  constitution  place  him  in  the  highest
position  among  original  thinkers  upon  political
philosophy.  In  estimating  Mr.  Calhoun's  position
absolutely  and  relatively,  he  is  liable  to  a  less  fa-
vorable verdict  than  his  merits  demand.  He  repre-
sented a  southern  state,  defended  her  slave  institu-
tions, belonged  to  a  minority  section,  and  his  views
have  been  condemned  by  the  majority  section  of
the  country.  The  newspaper  and  periodical  press,
therefore,  will  deny  him  the  pre-eminence  which
we  claim  for  him  as  a  broad  and  philosophic  states-
man, as  a  constitutional  lawyer,  and  as  a  leader  of
thought  in  the  field  of  political  philosophy.  His
fame  results  from  the  possession  of  an  ardent,  sin-
cere, and  intense  soul  which  gave  impulse  and  mo-
tive to  a  mind  endowed  wuth  extraordinary  ana-
lytic force,  acute  and  subtile  in  its  insight,  fertile
in  suggestion,  full  of  resources,  careful,  laborious,
and  profound  in  research  and  comprehensive  in  its
deduction  of  general  principles.  He  had  a  large
imagination,  though  he  displayed  little  fancy.
His  vigorous,  compact,  and  clean-cleaving  logic  put
the  objects  of  his  creative  power  into  sharply  de-
fined shapes,  arranged  in  perspicuous  order,  with
a  severe,  trenchant,  and  condensed  rhetoric.

In  his  reply  on  10  Mar<;h,  1838,  to  Mr.  Clay's
personal  attack  he  seems  to  have  defined  his  own
characteristics  while  he  denied  them  to  his  great  op-
ponent. He  said :  "  I  cannot  retort  on  the  senator
the  charge  of  being  metaphysical.  I  cannot  accuse
him  of  possessing  the  powers  of  analysis  and  gen-
eralization, those  higher  faculties  of  the  mind
(called  metaphysical  by  those  who  do  not  possess
them)  which  decompose  and  resolve  into  their  ele-
ments the  complex  masses  of  ideas  that  exist  in
the  world  of  mind,  as  chemistry  does  the  bodies
that  surround  us  in  the  material  world,  and  with-
out which  these  deep  and  hidden  causes  which  are
in  constant  action  and  producing  such  mighty
changes  in  the  condition  of  society  would  operate
unseen  and  undetected.  .  .  .  Throughout  the
whole  of  my  service  I  have  never  followed  events,
but  have  taken  my  stand  in  advance,  openly  and
freely  avowing  my  opinions  on  all  questions,  and
leaving  it  to  time  and  experience  to  condemn  or
approve  my  course."  Pie  believed  the  constitution
to  be  a  "beautiful  and  profound  system,"  a"^*J  JP^
union  under  it  an  inestimable  blessing.  His  "  ^^^'
quisition  "  and  "  Discourse  "  were  devoted  to  show-
ing how  the  true  philosophy  of  government  was
realized  in  that  constitution.  An  epitome  of  nis
philosophy  may  be  attempted,  though  it  will  tail


CALHOUN


CALHOUN


603


to  do  it  justice.  He  believed  in  the  rights  of  the
individual  man,  for  whose  benefit  society  and
government  exist — "society  being  primary,  lo
preserve  and  perfect  our  race;  and  government
secondary  and  subordinate,  to  preserve  and  perfect
society.  Both  are,  however,  necessary  to  the  exist-
ence and  well-being  of  our  race  and  equally  of  di-
vine ordination."  But  government  ordained  to
protect  may,  if  not  guarded,  be  made  a  means  of
oppression.  "  That  by  which  this  is  prevented,  by
whatever  name  called,  is  what  is  meant  by  consti-
tution. .  .  .  Constitution  stands  to  government  as
government  stands  to  society.  .  .  .  Constitution
IS  the  contrivance  of  man,  while  government  is  of
divine  ordination.  Man  is  left  to  perfect  what  the
wisdom  of  the  Infinite  ordained  as  necessary  to
preserve  the  race."  He  then  takes  up  the  ques-
tion. How  shall  government  be  constituted  so  as
by  its  own  organism  to  resist  the  tendency  to  abuse
of  power  ?  The  first  device  is  the  responsibility  of
rulers  through  suffrage  to  the  ruled  under  proper
guards  and  with  sufiicient  enlightenment  of  the
voters  to  understand  their  rights  and  their  duty.
This  secures  those  who  elect  against  abuse  by  those
who  are  elected.  But  this  is  far  from  all  that  is
needed.  When  society  is  homogeneous  in  interests
this  may  suffice,  for  it  insures  a  control  of  no  man's
right  by  any  other  than  himself  and  those  who
have  common  interest  with  him.  But  where,  as  is
generally  the  case,  society  has  diverse  and  inimical
interests,  then  suffrage  is  no  security,  for  each  rep-
resentative speaks  the  will  of  each  constituency,
and  constituencies,  througli  representation,  may  war
on  each  other,  and  the  majority  interests  may  de-
vour those  of  the  minority  through  their  repre-
sentatives. Suffrage  thus  only  transfers  the  pro-
pensity to  abuse  power  from  constituencies  to
representatives,  and  despotism  is  secured  through
that  suffrage  which  was  devised  to  prevent  it.  The
remedy  for  this  evil  is  to  be  found  in  such  an  or-
I  ganism  as  will  give  to  each  of  the  diverse  interests
a  separate  voice  and  permit  the  majority  of  each  to
speak  in  a  separate  branch  of  the  organism,  and
not  take  the  voice  of  the  majority  of  the  whole
community  as  the  only  expression  of  the  people's
will.  To  do  the  last  bases  government  on  the  nu-
merical or  absolute  majority ;  to  do  the  first  is  to
base  it  on  the  "  concurrent  constitutional  majority."
The  latter  is  a  government  of  the  whole  people ;
the  former  only  of  a  majority  of  them.  This  prin-
ciple is  illustrated  by  all  the  so-called  checks  and
bahxnces  in  all  constitutional  governments,  and  by
the  concurrent  majority  of  numbers  in  the  house
of  representatives  and  of  states  in  the  senate  in  our
own  federal  system.  This  principle,  established
with  scientific  precision,  is  the  fruitful  source  of  all
of  Mr.  Calhoun's  doctrines.  His  vindication  of  the
veto  power  was  against  the  claim  for  the  numerical
majority.  His  nullification  was  the  requirement
of  the  concurrent  majority  of  the  several  states  to
a  law  of  doubtful  constitutionality.  His  proposed
amendment  of  the  constitution  by  a  dual  executive,
through  which  each  section  would  have  a  distinct
representation,  was  an  application  of  the  same
principle  ;  and  his  intense  opposition  to  the  admis-
sion of  California,  by  which  the  senate  was  to  be
controlled  by  a  northern  majority,  was  his  protest
against  the  overthrow  of  the  concurrent  consent  of
the  soiith,  through  an  equipoised  senate,  to  the
legislative  action  of  congress.  Mr.  Calhoun  saw
the  south  in  a  minority  in  all  branches  of  the  gov-
ernment, and  he  desired,  by  giving  to  the  south  a
concurrent  and  distinct  voice  in  the  organism  of
our  system,  to  secure  her  against  invasion  of  her
rights  by  a  hostile  majority,  and  thus  to  make  her


safe  in  the  union.  When  the  abolition  party  was
small  in  numbers  and  weak  in  organization,  and
public  men  treated  its  menaces  with  contempt,  Mr.
Calhoun  saw  the  cloud  like  a  man's  hand  which
was  to  overspread  our  political  heavens.  His  pro-
phetic eye  saw  the  danger  and  his  voice  proclaimed
it.  In  looking  at  the  growth  of  the  abolition  feel-
ing in  183G,  he  predicted  that  Mr.  Webster  "  would,
however  reluctant,  be  compelled  to  yield  to  that
doctrine  or  be  driven  into  obscurity."  He  said,
further :  "  Be  assured  that  emancipation  itself
would  not  satisfy  these  fanatics.  That  gained,  the
next  step  would  be  to  raise  the  negroes  to  a  social
and  political  equality  with  the  whites."  In  1849
he  wrote  the  "  Address  to  the  People  of  the  South,"
and,  with  a  precision  that  is  startling,  drew  the  fol-
low^ing  picture  of  the  results  of  abolition :  "  If  it
[emancipation]  ever  should  be  effected,  it  will  be
through  the  agency  of  the  federal  government,
controlled  by  the  dominant  power  of  the  northern
states  of  the  confederacy  against  the  resistance  and
struggle  of  the  southern.  It  can  then  only  be  ef-
fected by  the  prostration  of  the  white  race,  and
that  would  necessarily  engender  the  bitterest  feel-
ings of  hostility  between  them  and  the  north  ;  but
the  reverse  would  be  the  case  between  the  blacks
of  the  south  and  the  people  of  the  north.  Owing
their  emancipation  to  them,  they  would  regard
them  as  friends,  guardians,  and  patrons,  and  cen-
tre accordingly  all  their  sympathy  in  them.  The
people  of  tlie  north  would  not  fail  to  reciprocate,
and  to  favor  them  instead  of  the  whites.  Under
the  influence  of  such  feelings,  and  impelled  by  fa-
naticism and  love  of  power,  they  would  not  stop  at
emancipation.  Another  step  would  be  taken,  to
raise  them  to  a  political  and  social  equality  with
their  former  owners  by  giving  them  the  right  of
voting  and  holding  public  offices  under  the  federal
government.  .  .  .  But  when  once  raised  to  an
equality  they  would  become  the  fast  political  asso-
ciates of  the  north,  acting  and  voting  with  them  on
all  questions,  and  by  this  political  union  between
them  holding  the  sout  h  in  complete  subjection.  The
blacks  and  the  profligate  whites  that  might  unite
with  them  would  become  the  principal  recipients  of
federal  offices  and  patronage,  and  would  in  conse-
quence be  raised  above  the  whites  in  the  south  in
the  political  and  social  scale.  We  would,  in  a  word,
change  conditions  with  them — a  degradation  great-
er than  has  ever  yet  fallen  to  the  lot  of  a  free  and
enlightened  people,  and  one  from  which  we  could
not  escape  but  by  fleeing  the  homes  of  ourselves
and  ancestors,  and  by  abandoning  our  country  to
our  former  slaves,  to  become  the  permanent  abode
of  disorder,  anarchy,  poverty,  misery,  and  wretch-
edness."

The  estimate  we  have  placed  upon  the  genius  of
this  remarkable  man  is  confirmed  by  the  touching
tributes  of  his  great  rivals  at  the  time  of  his  death.
Henry  Clay,  after  paying  a  tribute  to  his  private
character  and  to  his  patriotism  and  public  honor,
said :  "  He  possessed  an  elevated  genius  of  the
highest  order.  In  felicity  of  generalization  of  the
subjects  of  which  his  mind  treated  I  have  seen  him
surpassed  by  no  one,  and  the  charm  and  captivat-
ing influence  of  his  colloquial  powers  have  been
felt  by  all  who  have  conversed  with  him,"  Daniel
Webster,  his  chief  competitor  in  constitutional  de-
bate, said :  "  He  was  a  man  of  undoubted  genius
and  of  commanding  talent.  All  the  country  and
all  the  world  admit  that.  ...  I  think  there  is
not  one  of  us  but  felt,  when  he  last  addressed  us
from  his  seat  in  the  senate,  his  form  still  erect,
with  clear  tones,  and  an  impressive  and,  I  may  say,
an  imposing  manner,  who  did  not  feel  that  he  might


504


CALHOUN


CALL


imagine  that  we  saw  before  us  a  senator  of  Rome
when  Rome  survived.  ...  He  had  the  basis,  the
indispensable  basis  of  all  high  character,  and  that
was  unspotted  integrity,  unimpeached  honor,  and
character.  If  he  had  aspirations^  they  were  high
and  honorable  and  noble.  .  .  .  Firm  in  his  pur-
pose, perfectly  patriotic  and  honest,  aside  from
that  large  regard  for  that  species  of  distinction
that  conducted  him  to  eminent  stations  for  the
benefit  of  the  republic,  I  do  not  believe  he  had
a  selfish  motive  or  selfish  feeling."  Mr.  Everett
once  said :  "  Calhoun,  Clay,  Webster !  I  name
them  in  alphabetical  order.  What  other  prece-
dence can  be  assigned  them  ?  "  Clay  the  great  lead-
er, Webster  the  great  orator,  Calhoun  the  great
thinker.  John  Stuart  Mill  speaks  of  the  great  abili-
ty of  his  posthumous  work,  and  of  its  author  as  "  a
man  who  has  displayed  powers  as  a  speculative
political  thinker  superior  to  any  who  has  ap-
peared in  American  politics  since  the  authors  of
'  The  Federalist.' "  It  has  been  said  that  Calhoun
labored  to  destroy  the  Union,  that  he  might  be  the
chief  of  a  southern  confederacy  because  he  could
not  be  president  of  the  Union.  The  writer  remem-
bers an  interview  that  he  witnessed  between  Cal-
houn and  a  friend  within  a  month  of  his  death,
when  the  hopes  and  strifes  of  his  ambition  were
soon,  as  he  knew,  to  be  laid  in  the  grave.  The
friend  asked  him  if  nothing  could  be  done  to  save
the  Union.  "Will  not  the  Missouri  compromise
do  it  f  "  Pie  replied,  the  light  in  his  great  eyes
expressing  an  intense  solemnity  of  feeling  that  can
never  be  forgotten,  "  With  my  constitutional  ob-
jections I  could  not  vote  for  it,  but  I  would  acqui-
esce in  it  to  save  this  Union ! "

Mr.  Calhoun  in  his  private  life  as  husband,  fa-
ther, friend,  neighbor,  and  citizen,  was  pure,  up-
right, sincere,  honest,  and  beyond  reproach.  He
was  simple  and  unpretending  in  manners,  rigid
and  strict  in  his  morals,  temperate  and  discreet  in
his  habits ;  genial,  earnest,  and  fascinating  in  con-
versation, and  magnanimous  in  his  public  and  pri-
vate relations.  He  was  beloved  by  his  family  and
friends,  honored  and  almost  idolized  by  his  state,
and  died  as  he  had  lived,  respected  and  revered  for
his  genius  and  his  honorable  life  by  his  contem-
poraries of  all  parties.  He  was  stainless  in  private
and  public  life,  as  a  man.  a  patriot,  and  a  philoso-
pher, and  his  fame  is  a  noble  heritage  to  his  country
and  to  mankind.  The  view  on  page  500  represents
the  summer  residence  and  office  of  Mr.  Calhoun  at
Fort  Hill,  to  which  during  his  career  many  men
of  distinction  repaired  to  enjoy  his  society  and
his  liberal  hospitality.  Calhoun's  works  were  col-
lected and  edited  by  Richard  K.  Cralle  (6  vols.,
New  York,  1853-'4).

CALHOUN,  John  Erwin,  senator,  b.  in  1749;
d.  in  Pendleton  district,  S.  C,  26  Nov.,  1802.  When
very  young  he  lost  his  father,  but  was  educated  by
his  uncle.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1774,
studied  law,  began  practice  in  Charleston,  S.  C.  in
1789,  and  became  distinguished  in  his  profession.
He  was  a  commissioner  of  confiscated  estates,  was
for  many  years  a  member  of  the  South  Carolina
legislature,  and  U.  S.  senator  from  11  Dec,  1801,
till  his  death.  He  was  a  member  of  the  committee
to  report  a  modification  of  the  U.  S.  judiciary  sys-
tem. Senator  Calhoun  was  a  supporter  of  Jeffer-
son, and  an  eloquent  and  independent  man.

CALHOUN,  Simeon  Howard,  missionarv,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1804 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  14
Dec,  1876.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1829,
and  was  a  tutor  there  from  1833  till  1836.  He  was
a  laborer  in  the  Holy  Land  for  nearly  forty  years,
was  thoi-oughly  versed  in  the  Arabic  and  Turkish


languages,  and  assisted  Dr.  Goodell  in  making  the
first  translation  of  the  Bible  into  Turkish.  Will-
iams gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1864.

CALHOUN,  William  Barron,  lawyer,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  29  Dec,  1796;  d.  in  Springfield,
Mass.,  8  Nov.,  1865.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1814,  studied  law,  and  by  his  talents  and  integrity
soon  won  his  way  into  public  favor.  In  1825  he
was  sent  to  the  legislature,  and  continued  a  repre-
sentative for  ten  years,  being  speaker  during  the
last  two  years.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
whig  in  1835,  and  continued  there  till  1843.  He
was  president  of  the  state  senate  in  1846  and  1847,
secretary  of  state  from  1848  till  1851,  bank  com-
missioner from  1853  till  1855,  presidential  elector
in  1844,  and  mayor  of  Springfield  in  1859.  In  1861
he  was  again  a  representative  for  Springfield  in  the
legislature.  For  many  years  he  was  an  occasional
editorial  writer  for  the  Springfield  "  Republican,"
and  for  a  long  period  was  a  voluminous  contribu-
tor to  its  columns.  Amherst  gave  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1858.

CALKINS,  Norman  A.,  educator,  b.  in  Gaines-
ville, N.  ¥.,  9  Sept.,  1822.  His  education,  begun
in  a  district  school,  was  continued  in  a  classical
school.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  became  a
teacher  at  Castile,  and  later  at  Gainesville,  where
he  was  ultimately  principal  of  the  central  school
In  1845  he  was  elected  superintendent  of  schools
for  his  native  town,  and  re-elected  in  1846.  He
removed  to  New  York  in  the  autumn  of  1846.  and
for  many  years  following  conducted  teachers'  in-
stitutes in  New  York  and  the  adjoining  states.  In
November,  1862,  he  was  elected  assistant  superin-
tendent of  schools  in  New  York  city,  and  by  sub-
sequent re-elections  has  continuously  held  this
place.  The  official  designation  of  the  office  now  is
superintendent  of  primary  schools  and  primary  de-
partments. From  1870  till  1880  he  was  professor
of  methods  and  principles  of  teaching  in  the  Sat-
urday sessions  of  the  normal  college  of  the  city  of
New  York.  Prof.  Calkins  has  been  prominent  in
the  National  educational  association,  having  been
president  of  the  department  of  elementary  schools
in  1873 ;  president  of  the  department  of  school
superintendence  in  1883  ;  treasurer  in  1883-5 ;  and
president  in  1886.  From  1857  till  1883  he  held
the  treasurership  of  the  American  Congregational
union.  He  is  widely  known  in  connection  with
his  writings  and  lectures  on  object-teaching  and
other  advanced  methods  of  instruction.  For  ten
years  he  published  "  The  Student,"  which  was  used
as  a  school  reader,  and  furnished  fresh  reading
matter  every  month.  His  contributions  to  educa-
tional journals  have  been  very  large,  and  he  is  the
author  of  " Primary  Object  Lessons"  (New  York,
1861;  new  ed.,  1870;  Spanish  ed.,  1879);  "Phonic
Charts"  (1869);  with  Henry  Kiddle  and  Thos.  F.
Harrison,  "  How  to  Teach,  A  Graded  Course  of  In-
struction and  Manual  of  Methods"  (Cincinnati,
1873);  "Manual  of  Object-Teaching"  (New  York,
1881);  and  "From  Blackboard  to  Books"  (1883).
He  selected  and  classified  "  Prang's  Natural  His-
tory Series  "  (Boston,  1873),  and  wrote  the  accom-
panying "  Manual " ;  also  "  Aids  for  Object-Teach-
ing—Trades  and  Occupations,"  with  plates  (1877),
and  "  Natural  History  Series  for  Children  "  (1877).

CALL,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  about  1765;  d.  in
Richmond,  Va.,  20  May,  1840.  He  was  a  brother-
in-law  of  Chief-Justice  John  Marshall,  and  pub-
lished "  Reports  of  the  Virginia  Court  of  Appeals
(6  vols.,  1790-1818 ;  2d  ed.,  edited  by  Joseph  Tate,
1824-'33).— His  brother,  Richard  Keith,  soldier,
b.  in  1757;  d.  in  1792,  was  a  citizen  of  Yirgmia.
and  was  a  major  in  the  revolutionary  army. He


CALLEJA


CALLENDER


505


was  one  of  seven  who  cut  their  way  through  the
British  cavalry  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  6  May,  1780,
and  escaped.  He  commanded  a  rifle  corps  in  the
action  with  Col.  Simcoe  at  Spencer's  Ordinary,
Va.,  25  June,  1781,  and  at  Jamestown,  on  6  July,
served  under  Gen.  Lafayette.  He  was  elected  sur-
veyor-general of  Georgia  in  January,  1784. — Their
nephew.  Richard  Keith,  soldier,  b.  near  Peters-
burg, Va.,  in  1791 ;  d.  in  Tallahassee,  Fla.,  14
Sept.,  1862,  was  appointed  first  lieutenant  in  the
44th  infantry,  15  July,  1814 ;  brevet  captain,  7  Nov.,
1814;  volunteer  aide  to  Gen.  Jackson  in  April,
1818;  captain,  July,  1818;  and  resigned,  1  May,
1822.  He  was  a  member  of  the  legislative  council
of  Florida  in  April,  1822;  brigadier-general  of
west  Forida  militia  in  January,  1823 ;  delegate  to
congress  from  1823  till  1825 ;  and  receiver  of  the
west  Florida  land-office  in  March,  1825.  He  was
governor  of  Florida  from  1835  till  1840,  and  led
the  army  against  the  Seminoles  from  6  Dec,  1835,
till  6  Dec,  1836,  commanding  in  the  second  and
third  battles  of  Wuhoo  Swamp,  18  and  21  Nov.,
1836.  It  is  said  that  at  the  battle  of  Ouithlacoo-
chie  Gov.  Call  personally  saved  Gen.  Clinch  and
his  command  from  being  cut  to  pieces,  contrary  to
the  statement  made  by  the  latter  in  his  history  of
the  Florida  war.  A  controversy  with  Joel  R.
Poinsett,  secretary  of  war  in  Van  Buren's  cabinet,
relative  to  the  misdirection  of  the  war,  cost  Gov,
Call  his  office.  He  consequently  turned  whig,  and
worked  earnestly  for  Harrison's  election,  canvass-
ing the  northern  states  in  his  behalf.  President
Harrison  reappointed  him  governor  of  Florida  in
1841,  and  he  held  the  office  till  1844,  but  was  an  un-
successful candidate  for  the  governorship  in  1845,
when  the  territory  became  a  state.  Although  he
had  sacrificed  fortune,  health,  and  popularity  to
protect  the  citizens  of  Florida  during  the  Seminole
war,  they  could  not  forgive  him  for  turning  whig,
and  he  never  held  political  office  again  in  Florida.
But  he  was  major-general  of  state  militia  from  1
July  to  8  Dec,  1846^  Gov.  Call  took  great  interest
in  the  development  of  his  state.  He  projected  and
built  the  third  railroad  in  the  United  States,  from
Tallahassee  to  St.  Marks,  and  also  located  the  town
of  Port  Leon,  which  was  afterward  destroyed  by  a
cyclone.  He  always  considered  himself  a  Jackson
democrat,  as  opposed  to  later  democracy.  Feeling
that  he  had  fought  at  Jackson's  side  for  every  inch
of  ground  from  Tennessee  to  the  peninsula,  he  re-
garded himself  as  one  of  the  builders  of  the  nation,
and  during  the  civil  war  was  one  of  the  few  men  in
the  south  that  looked  on  secession  as  treason.  On
12  Feb.,  1861,  Gov.  Call  wrote  a  long  letter  to  John
S.  Littell,  of  Pennsylvania,  deploring  secession,  but
defending  slavery.— Gov,  Call's  nephew,  Wilkin-
son, senator,  b.  in  Russellville,  Logan  co.,  Ky.,  9
Jan.,  1834,  went  to  Florida  early  in  life,  and"  be-
came a  lawyer.  He  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate
in  December,  1865,  but  was  not  allowed  to  take  his
seat,  owing  to  the  subsequent  passage  of  the  recon-
struction act.  He  was  again  chosen  in  1879,  and
was  re-elected  for  the  term  ending  in  March,  1891.
CALLEJA,  Emilio,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  about
1830.  He  had  served  with  distinction  as  an  in-
fantry officer  when  Santo  Domingo  was  annexed  to
Spain.  He  made  the  whole  campaign  in  that
island  as  second  in  command  of  a  battalion  of  ma-
rine infantry,  went  to  Porto  Rico  as  lieutenant-
colonel  in  1867,  reached  the  rank  of  colonel  in
1869,  and  was  sent  to  Cuba,  where  he  fought  for
three  years  during  the  war  against  the  separatists.
He  returned  to  Spain  in  1873,  was  made  a  briga-
dier-general, served  under  Lopez  Dominguez  in
the  siege  of  Cartagena  until  the  place  was  surren-


dered, and  then  made  the  campaign  against  the
Carlists,  distinguishing  himself  in  the  battle  of
Minglanilla,  soon  after  which  he  was  promoted  to
the  rank  of  a  general  of  division.  A  few  months
later  Calleja  filled  the  office  of  second  captain-
general  of  Cuba,  and  was  also  military  governor
of  several  Cuban  provinces.  On  his  return  to
Spain  he  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  a  lieutenant-
general,  and,  after  being  captain -general  of  Seville
and  Old  Castile,  again  went  to  Cuba  as  governor-
general  of  that  island,  in  March,  1886.  Pie  has
voluntarily  reduced  his  own  salary  from  |50,000
to  140,000,  and  made  important  reforms  in  the
administration.

CALLEJA,  Felix  del  Key  (kal-la'-ha).  Count
DE  Calderon,  Spanish  general,  b.  in  1750;  d,
about  1821.  After  being  treasurer  of  the  council
of  the  Indies  in  America,  he  commanded,  in  1810,
at  San  Luis  Potosi,  Mexico,  when  he  was  ordered  to
pursue  the  insurgent  Hidalgo,  who  was  advancing
on  the  capital  with  a  large  native  force.  Easily  de-
feating him,  he  carried  Guanajuato  by  assault,  and
on  12  Jan..  1812,  defeated  and  mortally  wounded
him  at  Guadalajara.  He  gained  other  advantages,
but  his  cruelty  caused  the  insurrection  to  become
much  more  formidable ;  and,  under  Father  Morelos,
another  Mexican  chief,  the  success  was  balanced  be-
tween the  two  parties.  Calleja  was  made  viceroy,  4
March,  1813 ;  ordered  Morelos,  who  had  been  made
prisoner,  to  be  shot,  22  Dec,  1815;  was  succeeded
in  his  viceroyship  in  1817,  and,  returning  to  Spain,
was  made  a  count.  In  1819  he  was  given  the  com-
mand of  troops  destined  to  act  against  the  inde-
pendents of  Paraguay,  but  was  taken  prisoner  by
Riego,  and  confined  in  the  isle  of  Leon,  dying  soon
after  recovering  his  liberty.

CALLENDER,  Franklin  D.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  about  1817;  d.  in  Daysville,  111.,  13  Dec,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1839,  assigned  to  duty  as  brevet  second
lieutenant  of  ordnance,  and  in  November  of  the
same  year  was  promoted  second  lieutenant.  Until
1840  he  was  on  duty  at  Watervliet  arsenal.  New
York,  from  1840  till  1842  served  in  the  Florida
war,  and  was  brevetted  first  lieutenant  for  "  active
and  highly  meritorious  services  against  the  Florida
Indians."  Returning  to  ordnance  duty,  he  organ-
ized a  howitzer  and  rocket  battery  at  Fort  Monroe
in  1846,  and  commanded  it  at  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz  in  the  war  with  Mexico,  1847.  He  was  pro-
moted first  lieutenant,  3  March,  1847,  participated
in  the  succeeding  campaigns,  and  was  twice  severely
wounded  at  the  battle  of  Contreras.  For  his  con-
duct during  these  campaigns  he  was  brevetted  cap-
tain of  ordnance.  In  1853  he  was  promoted  cap-
tain of  ordnance,  having  been  on  continuous  duty
at  different  arsenals  for  fourteen  years.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  on  foundry  and  general  ord-
nance duty,  and  was  brevetted  major  in  1862,  re-
ceiving his  promotion  to  the  full  grade,  3  March,
1863.  He  was  engaged  in  the  advance  against  Cor-
inth. Miss.,  in  April  and  May,  1863,  and  was  after-
ward chief  of  ordnance  of  the  department  of  Mis-
souri. In  1865  he  received  successive  brevets  to
include  the  grade  of  brevet  brigadier-general,  and
was  promoted  to  the  full  grades  of  lieutenant-
colonel,  6  April,  1866,  and  colonel  of  ordnance,  23
June,  1874. He  was  retired,  29  May,  1879.

CALLENDER,  James  Thomas,  political  Avriter,
b.  in  Scotland ;  drowned  in  James  river,  near  Rich-
mond, Va.,  in  1813.  His  American  career  began
after  1790,  when  he  came  to  Philadelphia  as  a
political  refugee  from  England,  his  ofi'ence  being
the  publication  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "The  Po-
litical Progress  of Britain" (Edinburgh, 1792),


506


CALLENDER


CALVERT


Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Philadelphia  he  pub-
lished "  The  Political  Register  "  and  the  "  Ameri-
can Register."  Subsequently  he  became  editor  of
the  "  Richmond  Recorder,"  and  violently  denounced
the  administrations  of  Washington  and  Adams.
He  was  at  first  a  supporter  of  Jefferson,  but  be-
came his  opponent.  "  The  Prospect  before  Us "
and  "  Sketches  of  American  History  "  are  among
his  literary  productions.

CALLENDER,  John,  historian,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1708;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  1.,  26  Jan.,
1748.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1723,  and
in  1727  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  1st  Baptist
church  in  Boston,  of  which  his  grandfather,  Ellis
Callender,  and  his  uncle,  Elisha  Callender,  had
been  pastors.  From  August,  1728,  till  February,
1730,  he  had  charge  of  the  Baptist  church  in
Swansey,  Mass..  and  on  13  Oct.,  1731,  was  settled
over  the  1st  Baptist  church  in  Newport,  R.  I.,
where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Soon  after  re-
moving to  Newport  he  joined  a  literary  and  philo-
sophical society,  which  had  been  formed  there  in
1730,  it  is  supposed  at  Berkeley's  suggestion.
This  society  was  incorporated  in  1847  as  the
"Company  of  the  Redwood  Library."  On  24
March,  1738,  the  centennial  anniversary  of  the
purchase  of  Aquidneck  island,  Mr.  Callender  de-
livered an  address  entitled  "An  Historical  Dis-
course on  the  Civil  and  Religious  Affairs  of  the
Colony  of  Rhode  Island  and  Providence  Planta-
tions, from  the  First  Settlement  to  the  end  of  the
First  Century  "  (1739).  This  was  for  over  a  cen-
tury the  only  history  of  Rhode  Island,  and  it  was
reprinted  by  the  State  historical  society,  with  notes,
by  Rev.  Romeo  Elton,  D.  D.,  and  a  memoir  of  the
author  (Providence,  1838).  Mr.  Callender  also  pub-
lished several  sermons  and  made  a  collection  of
papers  relating  to  the  history  of  Baptists  in
America,  afterward  used  by  Rev.  Isaac  Backus.

CALLIERES  BONNEVUE,  Louis  Hector,
Chevalier  de  (deh-kal-leair'),  governor  of  French
Canada,  b.  in  Torigni,  France,  in  1639 ;  d.  in  Que-
bec, 26  May,  1703.  He  entered  the  army  when
quite  young,  and  in  1664  obtamcd  a  captaincy  in
the  regiment  of  Navarre.  He  went  to  Canada  as
a  member  of  the  Montreal  company,  and  in  1684
was  appointed  governor  of  that  city.  In  1687  he
led  the  advance  of  Denonville's  army,  which  had
invaded  the  Seneca  country  in  western  New  York ;
but,  considering  it  impossible  to  retain  Canada
without  the  possession  of  New  York,  he  laid  be-
fore his  government  a  plan  for  its  reduction,  and
went  to  France  in  1689  to  urge  the  project.  His
administration  of  the  government  of  Montreal  was
so  distinguished  for  judgment,  capacity,  and  brav-
ery, that  in  1699  he  was  appointed  governor-gen-
eral of  Canada.  The  ascendency  acquired  by  I^Von-
tenac  he  maintained  unimpaired,  founded  Detroit,
secured  the  western  tribes  by  negotiation,  checked
the  Iroquois,  and  supported  the  friendly  Abenaquis.
He  was  succeeded  in  his  office  by  Vaudreuil.

CALMES,  Marquis,  soldier,  b.  in  1755;  d.  in
Woodford  co.,  Ky.,  27  Feb.,  1834.  He  was  a  cap-
tain in  the  revolution,  and  was  distinguished  at  the
battle  of  Monmouth.  He  became  brigadier-gen-
eral of  Kentucky  volunteers,  31  Aug.,  1813,  served
under  Gen.  Harrison,  and  commanded  a  brigade  at
the  battle  of  the  Thames.

CALTHROP,  Samuel  Robert,  clergyman,  b.
at  Swineshead  Abbey,  Lincolnshire,  England,  9
Oct.,  1829.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Paul's  school,
London,  where  he  remained  ten  years,  and  at
Trinity  college,  Cambridge,  became  a  Unitarian
clergyman,  removed  to  the  United  States,  and
settled  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y. He  has  given  much


attention  to  scientific  studies,  and  invented  and
modelled  a  railroad  train  and  engine  designed  to
minimize  the  atmospheric  resistance.  He  has  pub-
lished a  lecture  on  "  Physical  Education  "  and  an
"  Essay  on  Religion  and  Science,"  presented  at  the
Unitarian  conference  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  in  1886.

CALVERLEY,  Charles,  sculptor,  b.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  1  Nov.,  1833.  He  was  educated  in  his  native
city,  removed  to  New  York  in  1868,  was  chosen  an
associate  of  the  national  academy  in  1872,  and
academician  in  1875.  Among  his  works  are  "  The
Little  Companions";  "Little  Ida,"  a  medallion;
and  bronze  busts,  heroic  size,  of  John  Brown
(1873) ;  Horace  Greeley,  on  his  monument  at  Green-
wood (1876) ;  and  Elias  Howe,  also  at  Greenwood
(1884).  He  sent  a  bas-relief  of  Peter  Cooper  and
his  John  Brown  to  the  centennial  exhibition  of
1876.  The  latter  is  now  the  property  of  the  union
league  club.

CALVERT. See  Baltimore,  Lord.

CALVERT,  Benedict,  governor  of  Maryland,
1727-32;  d.  1  June,  1732,  on  his  passage  to' Eng-
land.—Edward  Henry,  brother  of  Benedict,  and
president  of  the  council,  b.  in  1702 ;  d.  in  Annapo-
lis, 24  April,  1730.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  the
earl  of  Lichfield,  and  sister  of  the  wife  of  Edward
Young  the  poet.

CALVERT,  George  Henry,  author,  b.  in
Prince  George  co.,  Md.,  2  Jan.,  1803 ;  d.  in  New-
port, R.  I.,  24  May,  1889.  He  was  a  great-grand-
son of  Lord  Baltimore.  After  graduation  at  Har-
vard in  1823  he  studied  at  Gottingen,  and  on  his
return  lived  for  some  years  in  the  vicinity  of  Bal-
timore. In  1843  he  removed  to  Newport,  R.  I.,
where  he  afterward  resided.  In  1853,  after  the
revival  of  the  city  charter,  he  was  chosen  mayor  of
Newport.  His  literary  career  began  shortly  after
his  return  from  Germany,  when  he  became  editor
of  the  Baltimore  "American,''  which  journal  he
conducted  for  several  years.  He  was  an  original
thinker  of  a  philosophic  cast  of  mind,  and  master
of  a  pure  and  scholarly  style  in  prose  and  poetry.
He  contributed  largely  to  periodicals.  His  pub-
lished books  are  "  Illustrations  of  Phrenology  "
(Baltimore,  1832) ;  "  A  Volume  from  the  Life  of
Herbert  Barclay  "  (1833) ;  "  Don  Carlos,"  a  metrical
version  from  the  German  (1836):  "Count  Julian,"
a  tragedy  (1840) ;  "  Cabiro  "  (cantos  1  and  2,  1840 ;
3  and  4,  1864) ;  "  Correspondence  between  Schiller
and  Goethe,"  translation  (New  York,  1845);
"Scenes  and  Thoughts  in  Europe"  (two  series,
1846  and  1852) ;  "  Poems  "  (1847) ;  "  The  Battle  of
Lake  Erie,"  an  oration  (1853);  "Comedies"  and
"Social  Science"  (1856);  "Joan  of  Arc"  (Cam-
bridge, 1860) ;  "  The  Gentleman  "  and  "  Anyta  and
other  Poems"  (1863);  "Arnold  and  Andre,"  an
historical  drama  (Boston,  1864):  "  Ellen,"  a  poera
(1869);  "Goethe,  his  Life  and  Works"  (1872);
"Brief  Essays  and  Brevities"  (1874);  "Essays
^sthetical  "  (1875);  "  Wordsworth;  A  Biographic
Esthetic  Study  "  (Boston,  1875).

CALVERT,  Leonard,  governor  of  Maryland,
b.  about  1606 ;  d.  9  June,  1647.  He  was  brother
of  Cecil,  second  Lord  Baltimore,  and  sent  by  him
to  found  the  Maryland  colony  and  act  as  its  gov-
ernor. The  expedition,  consisting  of  two  small
vessels,  the  "Ark"  and  the  "Dove,"  with  about
200  men,  sailed  from  Cowes  on  22  Nov.,  iM6.
After  encountering  some  rough  weather  thev
reached  Point  Comfort,  Va.,  on  24  Feb.,  1634,  and
on  25  March  landed  on  an  island  in  the  Potomac,
which  thev  named  St.  Clement's,  and  there  mass
was  celebrated  by  the  two  Jesuit  priests  that  _ac-
companied  the  expedition.  Two  days  later  tney
founded  a  city,  of  which  scarcely  a  trace  remains,


CALVIN


CAMERON


607


and  which  they  called  St.  Mary's.  Calvert  found
his  authority  opposed  at  the  outset  by  William
Claiborne,  who  had  occupied  Kent  island  in  Chesa-
peake bay,  and  who  now  began  hostilities  against
the  settlers.  On  23  April,  1635,  Claiborne's  force,
which  consisted  only  of  one  armed  pinnace  and
fourteen  men,  was  captured ;  he  fled  to  Virginia,
and  his  property  was  afterward  declared  forfeited.
Gov.  Calvert  wished  to  carry  out  his  brother's  de-
sign and  introduce  the  feudal  system'  into  the
province.  Fortunately  the  charter  contained  a
provision  making  the  consent  of  the  freemen  neces-
sary to  all  laws,  and  the  original  idea  of  creating
an  aristocracy  was  never  carried  out.  Gov.  Calvert
visited  England  in  1643  to  consult  with  his  brother.
The  condition  of  the  province  was  somewhat  un-
settled, and,  in  view  of  the  troubles  between  the  king
and  parliament,  there  was  probably  some  fear  that
the  royalist  proprietor  might  have  his  power  taken
from  him.  In  the  governor's  absence.  Brent,  his
deputy,  incautiously  seized  a  parliamentary  ship
and  imprisoned  its  commander,  Richard  Ingle ;  but
in  1644  Ingle  escaped,  obtained  letters  of  marque
from  parliament,  returned,  and,  joining  Calvert's
old  enemy,  Claiborne,  made  trouble  in  the  colony,
so  that  when  the  governor  returned  in  September,
1044,  he  found  all  in  confusion.  After  some  fight-
ing, Calvert  was  forced  to  take  refuge  in  Virginia,
where,  after  an  appeal  for  aid  had  been  refused  by
the  governor  and  council,  he  finally  succeeded  in
raising  a  force,  and,  in  1647,  regained  possession  of
his  province.  A  few  months  later  he  died,  naming
Thomas  Green  as  his  successor.

CALVIN,  Samuel,  geologist,  b.  in  Wigton-
shire,  Scotland,  2  Feb.,  1840.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1851,  and  studied  at  Lenox  col-
lege, Ilopkinton,  Iowa.  He  served  as  a  private
during  the  latter  part  of  the  civil  war,  and  subse-
quently became  professor  of  geology  and  structural
zoology  at  the  state  university  of  Iowa.  Prof.  Cal-
vin has  travelled  extensively  throughout  the  United
States  for  the  purpose  of  studying  the  above-named
sciences,  and  has  published  papers  descriptive  of
his  investigations.

CALVO,  Carlos,  Argentine  diplomatist,  b,  in  the
Argentine  Republic  in  1824.  He  was  sent  to  Paris
as  Paraguayan  charge  d'affaires  in  June,  1860,  and
also  represented  Paraguay  at  the  court  of  Great
Britain.  He  is  a  corresponding  member  of  the
Historical  institute  of  Paris,  and  also  of  the  French
academy  of  moral  and  political  sciences,  for  which
he  was  elected  in  February,  1869.  Among  his
works,  all  in  French,  are  "Recueil  complet  des
traites,  conventions,  et  autres  actes  diplomatiques
de  tons  los  etats  de  I'Amerique  latine,"  with  statis-
tical atlas,  diplomatic  dictionary,  historical  notes,
etc.  (10  vols.,  1862-'o ;  also  published  in  Spanish) ;
"Une  page  du  droit  international"  (1864);  and
"Annales  historiques  de  la  revolution  de  I'Ame-
rique latine  "  (15  vols.,  1864-'6).

CALVO  DE  LA  PUERTA,  Sebastidn  de  (kahl-
vo),  marquis  of  Casa-Calvo,  b.  in  Havana  in  the  latter
part  of  the  18th  century  ;  d.  in  Paris  in  1820.  He
entered  the  army,  was  governor  of  Louisiana,  and
received  from  Charles  IV.,  of  Spain,  in  1800,  au-
thority to  restore  that  province  to  the  French  re-
public. In  1806  he  went  to  Spain,  and  followed
afterward  the  party  of  Joseph  Bonaparte,  whom
the  first  Napoleon  placed  on  the  Spanish  throne.
After  the  expulsion  of  the  French  invaders  from
the  Spanish  peninsula,  Calvo  went  to  Paris.

CAMACHO  ROLDAN,  Salvador  (cam-ah'-cho),
Colombian  statesman,  b.  in  Munchia,  Colombia,  in
1827.  He  is  distinguished  as  a  lawyer,  has  taken
part  in  political  discussions,  and  has  been  repeat-


edly elected  to  congress.  He  has  been  secretary
of  state  several  times,  and  in  1870  was  president
of  the  republic.  Camacho  is  considered  one  of  the
most  learned  men  of  South  America.

CAMARGrO,  Sergio,  Colombian  statesman,  b.
in  Tiravitoba  in  1833.  For  some  years  he  studied
law,  but  entered  the  army  and  soon  distinguished
himself,  obtaining  rapid  promotions  until  he  at-
tained the  rank  of  general-in-chief.  Then  he  filled
the  olRce  of  secretary  of  war  and  that  of  president
of  the  republic  in  1877,  and  afterward  represented
his  country  as  minister  plenipotentiary  in  the
United  States,  Great  Britain,  France,  Germany,
and  Italy.  In  1883  he  held  a  similar  office  in
V^enezuela  and  Ecuador.  He  has  been  several
times  president  of  the  state  of  Boyaca,  a  member
of  the  legislatures  of  other  states,  and  representa-
tive and  senator  at  the  Colombian  congress.

CAMBRELENG,  Churchill  C,  congressman,
b.  in  Washington,  N.  C,  in  1786 ;  d.  in  West  Neck,
L.  I.,  30  April,  1862.  He  received  an  academical
education  at  Newbern,  N.  C,  removed  in  1802  to
New  York  city,  and  in  1806  was  a  counting-house
clerk  in  Providence,  R.  I.  He  then  returned  to
New  York,  where  he  subsequently  resided.  He  en-
gaged at  an  early  day  in  mercantile  pursuits  with
John  Jacob  Astor,  travelling  extensively  over  the
world.  He  was  member  of  congress  from  New
York  from  1821  till  1839,  and  chairman  of  the  com-
mittees on  commerce,  ways  and  means,  and  foreign
affairs.  He  was  renominated  by  the  democrats  in
1838,  but  was  defeated.  After  leaving  congress,  he
went  abroad,  and,  while  travelling  there,  was  ap-
pointed minister  to  Russia,  serving  from  20  May,
1840,  till  13  July,  1841.  After  his  return  to  this
country  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  constitution-
al convention  of  1846.  Of  his  numerous  reports
and  political  pamphlets,  that  on  commerce  and
navigation  (New  York,  1830)  passed  through  sev-
eral editions,  and  was  republished  in  London.  Will-
iam CuUen  Bryant,  in  a  letter  written  29  Jan.,  1832,
describes  a  call  at  the  White  House  made  with  Mr.
Cambreleng  during  Jackson's  administration.

CAMERON,  Sir  Alan,  British  soldier,  d.  in  Ful-
ham,  England,  9  March,  1828.  He  was  concerned
with  Dr.  John  Connolly,  in  1775,  in  Lord  Dun-
more's  plan  of  arousing  and  combining  the  Indian
tribes  against  the  colonists;  w^as  taken  prisoner
near  Hagerstown,  Md.,  and  remained  for  nearly
two  years  in  the  common  jail  at  Philadelphia.  In
attempting  to  escape  from  this  confinement,  Sir
Alan  had  both  his  ankles  shattered  and  broken ;
and  he  never  perfectly  recovered  from  the  effects
of  those  injuries.  He  was  subsequently  placed  upon
half-pay  as  a  provincial  officer,  but  in  1793  raised
the  79th,  or  Cameron  Highlanders,  at  his  own  ex-
pense. With  this  regiment  as  major,  and  then
colonel  commanding,  he  served  in  the  Netherlands
and  in  the  West  Indies,  and  subsequently  in  the
peninsula,  where  he  distinguished  himself,  particu-
larly at  Talavera  and  Busaco.  He  was  appoint-
ed major-general,  25  July,  1810;  after  the  peace,
K.  C.  B. :  and  on  12  Aug.,  1819,  lieutenant-general.

CAMERON,  Aiig-us,  b.  in  Caledonia,  Livingston
CO.,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1826.  He  received  an  academic
education,  studied  law  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  was
graduated  at  the  national  law  school  in  Ballston
Spa.  He  removed  to  La  Crosse,  Wis.,  in  1857,  was
a  member  of  the  state  senate  in  1863,  1864,  1871,
and  1872,  and  of  the  assembly  in  1866  and  1867,
being  speaker  in  the  last-named  year.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  republican  national  convention  at
Baltimore  in  1864,  and  a  regent  of  the  university
of  Wisconsin  from  1866  till  1875.  In  the  latter
year  he  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  by  the  votes  of


508


CAMERON


CAMERON


democrats,  republicans,  and  liberals,  and  re-elected
in  1S81  to  fill  the  term  of  Senator  Matthew  H.  Car-
penter, deceased,  serving  until  3  March,  1885.

CAMERON,  Hector,  Canadian  lawyer,  b.  in
Montreal,  3  June,  1833,  He  is  of  Scottish  descent,
and  is  the  only  surviving  son  of  the  late  assistant
commissary-general,  Kenneth  Cameron,  He  was
educated  at  King's  college,  London,  and  at  Trinity
college,  Dublin,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1851,
afterward  taking  the  degree  of  M.  A.  at  the  uni-
versity of  Toronto.  He  studied  law  in  that  city,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Ontario  in  1854,
Since  1874  he  has  represented  North  Victoria  in
the  Ilouse  of  Commons.  Mr.  Cameron  is  regarded
as  one  of  the  best  authorities  on  constitutional  law
in  Canada,  and  was  selected  by  the  Dominion  gov-
ernment to  argue  the  question  of  the  boundary  of
Ontario  before  the  Judicial  committee  of  the  Im-
perial privy  council.

CAMERON,  John,  Canadian  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Antigonish,  Nova  Scotia,  in  February,  1827.  He
received  his  preparatory  education  at  home,  and,
when  sixteen  years  of  age.  went  to  Rome,  where  he
spent  ten  years  fitting  himself  for  the  priesthood.
In  1853  he  was  ordained  a  priest,  and  at  the  same
time  received  his  degree  as  doctor  of  philosophy,
and  also  of  divinity.  The  year  following,  he  re-
turned to  Nova  Scotia,  and  was  placed  in  charge
of  St.  Francois  Xavier  college  at  Arichat,  and,  after
the  removal  of  this  seminary  to  Antigonish,  he
acted  as  its  president  and  professor  of  divinity  for
three  years.  He  returned  to  Arichat  in  1863,  and
took  charge  of  a  large  parish,  discharging  at  the
same  time  the  duties  of  vicar-general.  In  1870  he
was  appointed  titular  bishop  of  Titopolis,  and  co-
adjutor to  the  bishop  of  Arichat,  and  was  con-
secrated at  Rome  by  Cardinal  Cullen.  After  at-
tending the  sittings  of  the  ecumenical  council,  he
returned  to  his  diocese  in  the  autumn  of  the  same
year.  Bishop  MacKinnon  becoming  infirm  through
age,  in  1877  Dr.  Cameron,  his  coadjutor,  was  con-
stituted administrator  of  the  diocese  of  Arichat,
becoming  bishop  shortly  afterward,  when  Bishop
MacKinnon  resigned,  immediately  after  his  ap-
pointment he  removed  to  Antigonish,  and  entered
with  such  zeal  and  energy  upon  the  work  before
him  that  he  never  paused  until  he  freed  his  diocese
of  the  heavy  debt  with  which  it  was  encumbered
when  he  entered  upon  his  duties  as  bishop.  He  is
an  eloquent  preacher  and  a  thorough  scholar.

CAMERON,  John  Hillyard,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Beaucaire,  Languedoc,  France,  14  April,
1817;  d.  in  Toronto,  14  Nov.,  1876.  He  was  a  son
of  Capt.  Angus  Cameron,  of  the  79th  Highlanders,
was  educated  at  Kilkenny  college,  Ireland,  and  at
Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto ;  studied  law,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Upper  Canada  in
1838,  and  to  that  of  Lower  Canada  in  1869,  He
was  first  elected  to  parliament  in  1846,  and  ap-
pointed solicitor-general  the  same  year.  He  be-
came a  member  of  the  executive  council  in  1847,
and  had  a  seat  in  parliament  from  1846  till  1876,
with  the  exception  of  four  years.  While  in  parlia-
ment he  introduced  and  carried  the  address  to  the
queen,  praying  for  the  exemption  from  the  income
tax  of  the  property  of  colonists  in  Great  Britain,
which  was  granted.  He  was  also  instrumental  in
securing  increased  postal  facilities  between  the
United  States,  Great  Britain,  and  Canada ;  carried
the  address  to  the  queen,  requesting  the  removal
of  the  disabilities  that  prevented  synodical  action
in  the  church  of  England  in  Canada ;  and  he  also
prepared  and  carried  through  two  church  synod
bills.  He  published  a  "  Digest  of  Cases  determined
in  the Upper  Canada  Court "  (1840) ; "  Rules  of


Court  relating  to  Pleading  in  the  Court  of  Queen's
Bench  " ;  and  "  Reports  of  Cases  determined  in
the  Queen's  Bench,"  He  was  a  bencher  of  the  law
society,  and  treasurer  of  that  body ;  chancellor  of
the  university  of  Trinity  college  (from  which  he
had  received  the  degree  of  D,  C,  L.j,  and  a  member
of  the  senate  of  Toronto  university.  He  was  a
commissioner  for  revising  the  statutes  of  Upper
Canada  in  1840,  and  for  consolidating  the  statutes
in  1856.  ■  He  married,  in  1843,  Elizabeth,  third
daughter  of  H.  J,  Boulton.atone  tune  chief  justice
of  Newfoundland,  She  died  in  1844,  and  in  1840
he  married  Ellen  Madeleine  de  Berrier,  second
daughter  of  Gen,  Mallett,  of  FayetteAdlle,  N,  C.

CAMERON,  Malcolm,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
in  Three  Rivers,  Canada  East,  25  April,  1808 ;  d.
in  Ottawa,  1  June,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  the
hospital  sergeant  of  a  Highland  regiment,  was
entirely  self-educated,  and  served  first  as  a  farm-
boy,  subsequently  as  a  stable-boy  in  Montreal,  then
as  a  clerk  in  a  brewery,  which  he  finally  left  to
open  a  general  store  on  his  own  account.  In  1836
he  began  his  political  career  as  a  representative
for  the  county  of  Lanark  in  the  old  Upper  Canada
assembly.  He  who  had  arisen  from  poverty  and
obscurity  to  a  place  of  honor  and  importance
through  his  own  endeavors,  and  owed  nothing  to
adventitious  circumstances,  was  not  likely  to  favor
oligarchical  privileges,  a  state  church,  or"  the  irre-
sponsible government  of  a  family  compact;  con-
sequently he  opposed  those  abuses  with  all  his
power,  both  in  parliament  and  on  the  hustings,
and  contributed  in  no  slight  degree  to  a  removal
of  disabilities  that  now  leaves  the  government  of
Canada  so  essentially  a  government  of  the  people.
Under  Sir  Charles  Bagot's  regime,  1842-'3,  he  was
appointed  inspector  of  revenue,  and  he  held  a  seat
in  the  cabinet  of  the  Baldwin-Lafontaine  adminis-
tration. He  was  once  president  of  the  council,
and  afterward  commissioner  of  public  works,  was
also  minister  of  agriculture,  as  well  as  postmaster-
general,  at  the  Hincks  reconstruction  in  1851  be-
came again  president  of  the  council,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  represented  South  Ontario  in  the
House  of  Commons,

CAMERON,  Matthew  Crooks,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Dundas,  Ontario,  2  Oct,,  1822,  He  was
educated  at  Upper  Canada  college,  Toronto,  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1849,  and  rapidly  distinguished
himself  in  his  profession.  In  1861  he  was  elected
to  the  assembly  by  the  conservatives  of  North  On-
tario. He  was  defeated  at  the  general  election  in
1863,  but  returned  in  the  following  year.  After
the  confederation  in  1867  he  contested  a  seat  in
the  House  of  Commons,  but  was  not  successful.
He  then  entered  the  Sandfield  Macdonald  cabinet
(Ontario)  as  provincial  secretary  and  registrar,
sitting  for  East  Toronto,  In  Jidy,  1871,  he  ex-
changed his  portfolio  for  that  of  commissioner  of
crown  lands,  and  after  the  fall  of  the  government,
in  December  of  the  same  year,  led  the  Ontario  op-
position for  four  years.  He  was  appointed  j)uisne
judge  of  the  court  of  queen's  bench  in  1878,  and
chief  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in  1884.

CAMERON,  Robert  Alexander,  soldier,  b,  in
Brooklyn,  N,  Y.,  22  Feb,,  1828,  He  was  graduated
at  Indiana  medical  college  in  1850,  and  practised
his  profession  at  Valparaiso,  Ind,,  till  }^^^'^}''
was  a  member  of  the  Indiana  legislature  in  I860-  1.
He  entered  the  national  service  as  a  captain  in  the
9th  Indiana  volunteers  in  1861,  became  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  19th  Indiana  the  same  year,  and
colonel  of  the  34th  in  1862.  He  was  made  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  on  11  Aug.,  1863,  ana
commanded  the  13th  army  corps  after  Gen,  Kan-


CAMERON


CAMERON


509


som  was  wounded  in  Banks's  Red  river  expedition
of  1864.  After  this  he  commanded  the  district  of
La  Fourche,  La.,  till  the  close  of  the  war,  receiving
the  brevet  of  major-general  on  13  March,  1865,
and  it  is  said  that  he  and  Crawford  are  the  only
pliysicians  that  have  attained  the  rank  of  general
officer  since  Dr.  Warren  fell  at  Bunker  Hill.  He
was  superintendent  of  the  colony  that  founded  the
town  of  Greeley,  Col.,  in  1870,  and  of  the  Colorado
springs  and  Manitou  colonies  in  1871.  In  1885
he  was  made  warden  of  the  state  penitentiary  at
Canon  City,  Col.  Cameron  parish,  La.,  Cameron's
cone,  El  Paso  co..  Col.,  and  Cameron's  pass,  Lara-
mie CO..  Col.,  were  named  for  him,

CAMERON,  Sir  Roderick  William,  capitalist,
b.  in  Glengarry  co.,  Canada,  25  July,  1825.  He  was
educated  at  the  grammar-schools  of  Williamstown
and  Kingston,  and  came  to  New  York,  where  he
established,  in  1852,  a  line  of  packet  ships  to  Aus-
tralia, through  the  agency  of  John  Ogden,  who
acted  as  broker.  The  line  continues  to  the  present
day,  and  the  firm  of  R.  W.  Cameron  &  Co.  is
well  and  favorably  known  in  this  country  and  in
Australia.  Sir  Roderick  was  a  delegate  to  Wash-
ington from  Canada  in  1849  and  1850,  to  advocate
a  reciprocity  treaty,  and  has  been  honorary  com-
missioner from  Australia  to  the  International  ex-
hibitions at  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  Paris  in
1878,  and  from  Canada  to  those  of  Sydney  and
Melbourne  in  1880  and  1881.  His  report  on  the
Australian  exhibitions,  and  on  Australian  statis-
tics, has  been  published  as  a  blue  book  by  the  do-
minion government.  He  is  a  member  of  the  geo-
graphical societies  of  New  York  and  England,  and
is  vice-president  of  the  Canadian  club  of  New
York  city.  Sir  Roderick  is  an  advocate  of  out-
door sports  of  all  kinds,  as  contributing  to  im-
prove the  physique  and  health  of  both  sexes,  and
claims  that  there  is  already  apparent  a  great  im-
provement in  the  habits  and  appearance  of  the
present  generation,  resulting  from  a  love  of  such
sports.  Sir  Roderick  has  done  much,  by  his  judg-
ment and  liberality,  for  the  improvement  of  the
thoroughbred  horse  in  this  country.  He  was  the
importer  of  Leamington,  the  sire  of  Iroquois,  win-
ner of  the  Derby  and  St.  Leger  in  England,  and
many  other  well-known  horses.

CAMERON,  Simon,  statesman,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter CO..  Pa.,  8  March,  1799;  d.  there,  26  June,
1889.  He  early  received  a  fair  English  educa-
tion, and  began  to
learn  the  printer's
trade  when  but
nine  years  of  age.
He worked as  a

i'ourneyman  in
jancaster,  Harris-
burg,  and  Wash-
ington, and  so  im-
proved his  oppor-
tunities that  in
1820  he  was  edit-
ing a  newspaper
in  Doylestown,
Pa.,  and  in  1823
one  in  Harrisburg.
As  soon  as  he  had
accumulated  suf-
ficient capital  he
became  interested
in  banking  and  in
railroad  construc-
tion in  the  cen-
tral part  of  the  state.  He  was  for  a  time  adjutant-
general  of  Pennsylvania. He  was  elected  to  the


^i<^<^2>2'«'t^-C-,5»-2/t_^


U.  S.  senate  in  1845  for  the  term  ending  in  1849,
and  during  this  period  acted  with  the  democrats
on  important  party  questions,  such  as  the  Missouri
compromise  bill.  This  was  repealed  in  1854,  and
Mr.  Cameron  became  identified  with  the  "  people's
party,"  subsequently  merged  with  the  republicans.
As  its  candidate  he  was  re-elected  to  the  senate  for
the  full  term  of  six  years  beginning  in  1857,  a  pe-
riod that  covered  the  exciting  crisis  of  secession*


During  this  time  he  was  so  earnest  an  advocate  of
peace  that  his  loyalty  was  suspected. At  the  re-
publican convention  that  nominated  Abraham  Lin-
coln he  was  strongly  supported  for  the  presidency,
and  again  for  the  vice-presidency  ;  but  lack  of  har-
mony in  the Pennsylvania  delegation  prevented
his  nomination  to  the  latter  office. Mr.  Lincoln  at
once  called  him  to  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  war,
and  he  proved  equal  to  the  arduous  duties  of  the
place. He  advocated  more  stringent  and  aggres-
sive war  measures  than  Mr.  Lincoln  was  prepared
to  carry  out,  and  when  Gen.  Butler  asked  for  in-
structions regarding  fugitive  slaves,  directed  him
to  employ  them  "  under  such  organizations  and  in
such  occupations  as  exigencies  may  suggest  or  re-
quire." Similar  instructions  were  given  to  Gen.
Sherman  and  other  officers  in  the  field. In  the
original  draft  of  his  annual  report  to  congress,  in
December,  1861,  he  boldly  advocated  arming  fugi-
tive slaves ;  but  this  was  modified,  on  consultation
with  the  cabinet. Mr.  Cameron  resigned  the  secre-
taryship 11  Jan.,  1862,  was  at  once  appointed  min-
ister  to Russia, and  his influence  undoubtedly
tended  in  a  large  measure  to  secure  the  friendship
of  that  powerful  nation  during  the  civil  war. His
official  conduct  in  a  certain  transaction  was  cen-
sured by  the  house  of  representatives,  30  April,
1862 ;  but  Mr.  Lincoln  immediately  sent  a  message
assuming,  with  the  other  heads  of  departments,  an
equal  share  in  the  responsibility. He  resigned  as
minister  to  Russia  8  Nov.,  1862,  and  remained  at
home  until  1866,  when  he  was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor, and  appointed  chairman  of  the  committee  on
foreign  affairs  on  the  retirement  of  Mr.  Sumner  in
1872. He  was  sent  to  the  senate  for  the  fourth
time  in  1873,  but  resigned  in  favor  of  his  son.
During  the  years  of  his  active  public  life  he  was
a  powerful  political  leader, practically  dictating
the  policy  of  the  republican  party  in  Pennsylvania,
and  wielding  a  strong  infiuence  over  its  policy  in
the  nation  at  large. The  accompanying  view  rep-
resents "  Lochiel,"  the  residence  at  Harrisburg  of
the  "  Czar  of  Pennsylvania  politics,"  as  Cameron
has  been  called. — His  brother,  James,  soldier,  b.
in  Maytown,  Lancaster  co..  Pa.,  1  March,  1801 ;
killed  21  July,  1861. At  nineteen  years  of  age  he
entered  the  printing-office  of  his  brother  Simon,  at
Harrisburg,  and  in  1827  removed  to  Lancaster  and
assumed  the  editorship  of  the  "  Political  Sentinel,"
studying  law  in  the mean  time in  the  office  of


610


CAMINATZiN


CAMPBELL


James  Buchanan.  During  the  Mexican  war  he
accompanied  the  volunteers  of  his  state  as  sutler,
in  January,  1847.  When  the  civil  war  began  he
was  living  in  retirement  upon  his  estate  on  the
banks  of  the  Susquehanna,  but  upon  urgent  en-
treaty accepted  the  appointment  of  colonel  of  the
79th  (Highland)  regiment  of  New  York  state  mili-
tia. He  was  killed  while  gallantly  leading  his  men
in  a  charge  at  Bull  Run. — Simon's  son,  James
Donald,  senator,  b.  in  Middletown,  Dauphin  co..
Pa.,  14  May,  1883,  was  graduated  at  Princeton,  in
1852,  entered  the  Middletown  bank  as  clerk,  be-
came cashier,  and  afterward  president.  He  was  also
president  of  the  Northern  Central  railway  company
of  Pennsylvania  from  1863  until  the  road  was
leased  by  the  Pennsylvania  railroad  in  1874,  and
in  this  place  did  good  service  to  the  national  cause
during  the  civil  war.  The  road,  although  several
times  cut  by  the  Confederates,  was  a  means  of
communication  between  Pennsylvania  and  Wash-
ington, and  after  the  war  it  was  extended,  under
Mr.  Cameron's  administration,  to  Elmira,  N.  Y.,  so
as  to  reach  from  the  great  lakes  to  tide-water.  Mr.
Cameron  has  since  been  connected  with  various
coal,  iron,  and  manufacturing  industries  in  his
state.  He  was  secretary  of  war  under  President
Grant  from  22  May,  1876,  till  3  March.  1877,  and
was  then  chosen  U.  S.  senator  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  his  father's  resignation.  He  was  re-
elected in  1879,  and  again  in  1885,  for  the  term
ending  in  1891.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago
republican  conventions  of  1868  and  1880.  and  chair-
man of  the  national  republican  committee  in  the
latter  vear.

CAMINATZIN  (cah-me-naht-zeen'),  also  called
Cacamatzin,  Cacamaziii,  Cacumatzin,  and  Ca-
cumazin,  Mexican  king,  d.  in  1521.  He  was
nephew  of  Montezuma,  reigned  over  Tezcoco,  the
principal  city  of  Anahuac,  and  made  an  official  visit
to  Cortes  at  Ayotzinco.  When  Caminatzin  sug-
gested a  declaration  of  war  against  the  foreigners,
the  proposal  was  received  with  enthusiasm,  and  he
called  upon  the  Spaniards  to  leave  the  country  im-
mediately. Cortes  was  preparing  to  march  against
Tezcoco.  when  the  representations  of  Montezuma
concerning  the  defences  of  the  town  and  the  dar-
ing of  the  population  induced  him  to  change  his
plan  and  resort  to  treason.  At  his  instigation
Montezuma  invited  his  nephew  to  Mexico  to  be-
come reconciled  with  the  Spaniards.  Caminatzin
answered  that  he  could  enter  Mexico  only  to  de-
stroy the  oppressors  of  his  country.  Montezuma
then  despatched  secret  agents  to  Tezcoco  to  get
possession  of  the  young  prince.  His  officers  and
friends  were  corrupted,  and  he  was  delivered  by
them  to  Cortes,  imprisoned,  and  subsequently  re-
placed on  the  throne  by  his  brother  Cuicuitzcatzin.
He  was  released  after  the  expulsion  of  the  Span-
iards from  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  is  supposed  to
have  perished  soon  after  in  the  siege.

CAMINHA  1)E  MENESES,  Antonio  Telles
da  (cah-meen'-ya),  Marquis  de  Rezende,  Brazilian
diplomatist,  b.  in  Torres-vedras,  Portugal,  22  Sept.,
1790 ;  d.  in  Lisbon,  8  April,  1875.  Being  in  Brazil
during  the  war  of  independence,  he  adhered  to  the
revolutionary  party,  entered  the  diplomatic  ser-
vice, and  was  Brazilian  minister  plenipotentiary  in
Paris,  St.  Petersburg,  and  Vienna.  On  his  return
to  Brazil  he  was  appointed  to  a  high  office  in  the
imperial  household.  He  was  a  member  of  various
European  scientific  societies.  His  principal  works
are  "  Descripgas  e  recorda(;oes  historicas."  "  Elogio
historico  de  Jose  de  Seabra  de  Silva,"  "  Memoria
historica  de  dom  frei  Francisco  de  S.  Luis  Saravia,"
'•  Titulo  de  Augusto,"  "Eclaircissements  historiques


sur  mes  negotiations  relatives  aux  affaires  de  Por-
tugal depuis  la  mort  du  roi  don  Jean  VI.,"  and
translations  from  the  French  and  other  languages

CAMMERHOFF,  John  Frederick,  Moravian
bishop,  b.  near  Magdeburg,  Germany,  28  July,  1721 ;
d.  28  April,  1751.  He  was  educated  at  Jena,  and
when  but  twenty-five  years  of  age  was  consecrated
a  bishop,  25  Sept.,  1746,  in  London,  and  sent  to
America  as  Bishop  Spangenberg's  assistant.  He
began  his  work  with  enthusiasm,  helping  to  super-
intend the  churches,  going  out  to  preach  to  the
settlers  of  Pennsylvania  and  New  York,  and  pro-
moting the  mission  among  the  Indians.  His  friend-
ly ways  and  great  zeal  made  such  an  impression
upon  the  aborigines  that  the  Iroquois  formally
adopted  him  into  the  Turtle  tribe  of  the  Oneida
nation,  giving  him  the  name  of  Gallichwio,  or  "  A
Good  Message."  He  frequently  visited  the  Indian
country,  and  gained  many  converts.  In  1750  he
undertook  a  visit  to  Onondaga,  the  capital  of  the
Six  Nations,  enduring  hardships  and  dangers  with
the  fortitude  of  an  apostle.  His  journal  of  this
tour,  which  occupied  three  months,  and  embraced
a  distance  of  1,600  miles,  is  full  of  startling  in-
cidents and  hair-breadth  escapes.  Cammerhoff's
physical  frame  was  too  weak  to  bear  the  strain  of
such  journeys,  and  he  died  at  the  age  of  twenty-
nine.  When  the  Iroquois  heard  of  his  death,  they
mourned  for  him  as  for  a  brother.  "  He  was,"  they
said,  "  an  honest,  upright  man,  in  whose  heart  no
guile  was  found."  Thirty-one  years  later,  Zeis-
berger,  apostle  of  the  western  Indians,  heard  his
name  mentioned  among  them  with  deep  respect.
He  was  a  fine  scholar  and  a  powerful  orator.

CAMPBELL,  Alexander,  merchant,  b.  in  Scot-
land about  1707;  d.  there  about  1790.  Some  years
before  the  revolution  he  emigrated  to  America  and
was  a  merchant  in  Falmouth,  Va.  On  the  break-
ing out  of  the  war  he  adhered  to  the  cause  of  the
crown,  lost  his  property,  and  returned  to  Scotland
in  1776,  in  a  very  impoverished  condition.  He
settled  in  Glasgow,  and  there  his  son  Thomas,  the
distinguished  poet,  was  born  in  1777.  Archibald
Campbell,  brother  of  Alexander,  an  Episcopal  min-
ister and  a  whig,  remained  in  the  country  and  had
Washington  and  Lee  among  his  parishioners.  An
elder  brother  of  the  poet  married  a  daughter  of
Patrick  Henry.

CAMPBELL,  Sir  Alexander,  Canadian  states-
man, b.  in  Heden,  Yorkshire,  England,  in  1822.
He  is  of  Scottish  descent,  and  came  with  his  par-
ents to  Canada  when  two  years  old.  He  received
his  early  tuition  from  a  Presbyterian  minister  at
Lachine,  where  his  parents  had  settled,  and  subsic-
quently  attended  the  Roman  Catholic  seminary  of
St.  Hyacinthe  in  the  same  place.  His  education
was  completed  at  the  royal  grammar  school  of
Kingston.  He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  John
A.  Macdonald,  and  in  1843  was  admitted  as  an
attorney,  and  at  once  formed  a  partnersliip  with
Mr.  Macdonald.  In  1858  he  was  elected  to  the
legislative  council  in  the  liberal  conservative  inter-
est for  the  Cataraqui  division,  in  1862  was  chosen
speaker  of  the  council,  and  in  1864  was  asked  to
form  a  cabinet,  but  declined.  He  accepted  the
portfolio  of  crown  lands  commissioner  in  the
Tache-Macdonald  ministry  in  1864,  which  he  re-
tained until  the  confederation  in  1867,  at  wnien
date  he  was  called  to  the  senate.  On  1  J"'y  ^^"^
same  year  he  became  postmaster-general,  and  about
six  months  afterward  resigned  this  office  to  become
minister  of  the  interior,  which  office  he  held  until
his  party  went  out  of  power  on  5  Nov.,  1873.  l^rorn
that  time  until  the  resignation  of  the  Mackenzie
ministry  he  was  leader  of  the  opposition  m  tne


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


Oil


senate.  In  1878  he  was  sworn  in  as  receiver-
general,  in  1879  as  postmaster-general,  in  January,
1880,  as  minister  of  militia,  in  May,  1881,  as  minis-
ter of  justice,  and  in  1887  became  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Ontario. In  1879  he  was  knighted.

CAMPBELL,  Alexander  Augustus,  clergy-
man, b.  in  Amherst  co.,  Va.,  30  Dec,  1789:  d.  in
Jackson,  Tenn.,  27  May,  1846.  After  receiving  a
common-school  education,  he  studied  medicine,  and
was  graduated  at  Philadelphia  in  1811.  For  sev-
eral years  he  had  been  an  infldel,  but  became  con-
verted during  an  attack  of  yellow  fever.  After
practising  medicine  in  North  Carolina,  Virginia,
and  Alabama,  he  began  the  study  of  divinity,  was
licensed  to  preach  by  the  North  Alabama  presby-
tery, 22  April,  1822,  and  was  ordained  29  Sept.;
1823.  He  was  pastor  of  churches  in  Tuscumbia,
Ilussellville,  and  Florence,  Ala.,  was  a  missionary
in  west  Tennessee,  and  became  pastor  at  Jackson,
Tenn.,  3  Oct.,  1833,  where  he  also  lectured,  edited
the  Jackson  "  Protestant,"  and  practised  medicine,
chiefly  among  the  Cherokee  and  Creek  mission-
aries. He  published  a  treatise  on  "  Scripture  Bap-
tism "  (1844).

CAMPBELL,  Andrew,  inventor,  b.  near  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  14  June,  1821.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  at  the  age  of  twelve  was  left
an  orphan.  After  a  year's  experience  as  a  farmer's
boy,  he  was  apprenticed  to  learn  the  trade  of  car-
riage-making at  Mattawan,  N.  J.,  but,  as  he  was
only  allowed  to  work  on  stormy  days,  he  ran  away
to  Trenton,  where  he  learned  to  make  brushes.  At
this  time,  early  in  1837,  he  made  his  first  invention,
the  brush-drawer's  vise,  which  is  now  universally
used.  In  April,  1837,  he  started  for  the  west,  and
after  a  journey  lasting  over  five  months,  part  of
which  was  made  on  foot,  he  reached  Alton,  111.,  where
he  again  apprenticed  himself  to  a  carriage-maker.
He  went  to  St.  Louis  in  1842,  and  for  a  time  resumed
the  brush  business.  During  his  residence  there  he
aided  in  the  construction  of  the  first  omnibus  ever
used  in  St.  Louis,  and  also  designed  and  built  in
1846  the  "Great  Western,"  the  largest  omnibus
ever  seen  on  a  common  road,  which  seated  easily
50  and  often  carried  100  at  a  time.  It  was  the
first  monitor  top  vehicle  ever  built.  In  1850  he
removed  to  Paducah,  to  put  into  operation  some
box  machinery,  but  was  induced  to  go  into  bridge-
building,  and  constructed  over  Cedar  river,  Iowa,
the  longest  single-span  wooden  bridge  ever  erected,
it  being  558  feet  between  abutments.  He  removed
in  1851  to  Linneus.  Mo.  Prior  to  this  time  his
attention  had  not  been  specially  devoted  to  print-
ing-presses, although  in  1844,  while  in  St.  Louis,
he  repaired  an  old  press  belonging  to  the  "  Repub-
lican," a,nd  later  the  presses  of  the  "  Statesman  "  in
Columbia,  Mo.,  one  of  which  was  the  first  press
west  of  the  Mississippi,  having  been  taken  originally
to  St.  Louis  in  1808.  At  Linneus,  his  attention
was  called  to  the  fact  that  George  Bruce,  of  New
York,  offered  $1,000  for  a  press  that  would  print
500  copies  an  hour,  and  could  be  sold  for  $500.
The  solution  of  this  problem  occupied  him  for
some  time,  but,  on  corresponding  with  Mr.  Bruce,
be  found  that  the  time  had  expired  in  which  to
submit  his  plans.  The  world's  fair,  held  in  New
York  in  1853,  afforded  him  the  opportunity  of
visiting  the  metropolis,  and  he  devised  a  lathe
capable  of  turning  fifty  match-boxes  a  minute,
which  was  disposed  of  at  the  exhibition.  While  in
New  York  he  submitted  his  plans  to  the  leading
press-builders,  but  failed  to  convince  them  of  their
value.  He  then  invented  a  machine  intended  to
feed  forty  sheets  a  minute,  which  he  persuaded
A  B.  Taylor  &  Co.  to  build  for  him. He  entered


the  employ  of  this  firm  as  foreman  of  the  printing-
press  factory,  and  continued  with  it  until  1858,
meanwhile  becoming  familiar  with  the  details  of
manufacture  and  inventing  numerous  devices,
among  which  was  the  endless  band-fly  used  on  the
Bullock  press.  During  these  years  he  built  presses
for  Harper  Brothers  and  Frank  Leslie,  among
which  were  the  first  ever  produced  in  this  country
with  table  distribution;  and  the  first  automatic
press  ever  built  he  set  up  for  Mr.  Leslie  in  1857.
A  year  later  he  began  business  for  himself,  and  in
1861  brought  out  his  country-newspaper  press,
which  was  the  first  registering  power-printing  press
for  color-work  ever  invented.  This  press,  for  sim-
plicity of  construction,  thorough  distribution,
clearness  and  beauty  of  impression,  and  perfection
of  register,  was  far  superior  to  anything  then
made.  In  1866  he  invented  his  two-revolution
book-press,  and  in  1868  his  art-press  for  fine  illus-
trations. Later  he  constructed  for  J.  C.  Ayer  &
Co.  the  first  super-imposing  press,  with  which  it  was
possible  to  print  120  almanacs  a  minute,  and  on
which  7,000,000  impressions  have  been  taken  from
one  form  without  perceptible  damage  to  the  plates.
In  1876  he  contracted  to  build  for  the  Cleveland
"  Leader  "  a  press  from  which  12,000  copies  could
be  printed  in  an  hour,  and  constructed  the  first
press  ever  built  that  printed,  inserted,  pasted,
folded,  and  cut  in  one  continuous  operation.  He
has  since  made  numerous  improvements  in  his
presses,  and  his  patents,  numbering  nearly  fifty,
are  applied  to  every  branch  of  press-building.

CAMPBELL,  Sir  Archibald,  British  soldier,
b.  in  Invei-ary,  Scotland,  in  1739 :  d.  in  London,
England,  31  March,  1791.  He  was  appointed  cap-
tain in  the  42d  regiment  in  October,  1758;  major
in  December,  1760;  and  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
71st  regiment  in  1775.  While  entering  Boston
harbor  just  after  Gen.  Howe  had  departed,  he  was
taken  prisoner  with  a  portion  of  his  corps,  and
was  made  a  subject  of  retaliation  for  the  cruel
treatment  of  captive  American  officers.  Notwith-
standing this,  he  afterward  displayed  gentleness
and  humanity  toward  his  foes,  when  conducting
active  operations  in  the  south,  where  he  proved
himself  a  brave  and  skilful  commander.  He  led
an  expedition  against  Savannah,  Ga.,  in  1778,  start-
ing from  Sandy  Hook  on  27  Nov.  with  2,000  troops
and  a  small  squadron.  He  landed  his  force  on  29
Dec,  and  on  the  same  day  defeated  Gen.  Robert
Howe  and  took  the  city.  He  issued  orders  to  com-
manders in  the  lower  part  of  the  state  to  treat  the
people  leniently ;  and  in  answer  to  his  proclama-
tion, inviting  them  to  join  the  British  standard,
several  hundred  proclaimed  their  loyalty.  Camp-
bell then  encouraged  the  tories  of  South  Carolina
to  join  him  in  an  attack  on  Augusta,  and  on  29
Jan.,  1779,  marched  on  that  city  with  2,000  men.
He  took  possession  of  it,  but  was  obliged  to  retreat
to  Savannah  on  13  Feb.  He  became  colonel  on  7
Dec,  1779,  and  major-general  20  March,  1782.
He  was  governor  of  Jamaica  from  1781  till  1784,
knighted  in  1785,  and  governor  of  Madras  from
1785  till  1789,  commanding  the  forces  on  the  coast
of  Coromandel,  East  Indies.  He  was  member  of
parliament  for  Sterling  from  1774  till  1780,  and
again  in  1789.

CAMPBELL,  Bartley,  dramatist,  b.  in  Alle-
gheney  Citv,  Pa.,  12  Aug.,  1843;  d.  in  Middletown,
N.  Y.,  30  July,  1888.  In  1856  he  entered  a  Pitts-
burg law  office,  but  was  declared  an  unpromising
student,  and  in  1858  became  a  reporter  for  the  Pitts-
burg "  Leader."  In  1863  and  1864  he  made  public
speeches  in  the  interest  of  the  democratic  party.
He  founded  the  "  Evening  Mail "  in  Pittsburg  in


512


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


18G8,  and  the  "  Southern  Magazine "  in  New  Or-
leans the  following  year,  and  was  the  official
reporter  of  the  Louisiana  house  of  representatives
ill  1870.  His  first  play  was  a  sensational  drama,
'*  Through  Fire,"  written  in  1871,  and  played  for
four  weeks.  His  second  was  "  Peril,"  a  comedy
laid  at  Long  Branch,  brought  out  in  1872.  These
were  followed  by  "  Fate,"  which  was  taken  to
England  by  Carlotta  Leclerq,  "  Risks,"  and  "  The
Virginian,"  played  in  England,  and  afterward
bought  by  Frank  Mayo,  who  changed  its  name  to
"  Van  the  Virginian."  ''Gran  Uale"  was  brought
out  in  1874,  and  "On  the  Rhine,"  at  San  Fran-
cisco, in  1875.  Mr.  Campbell  adapted  the  German
comedy  "  Ultimo,"  under  the  title  of  "The  Big
Bonanza,"  in  1875,  and  in  four  weeks  it  brought  a
profit  of  $16,000  to  a  theatre  in  San  Francisco.
His  "  Heroine  in  Rags  "  and  "  How  Women  Love  "
were  written  in  England  in  1876.  The  latter  was
reconstructed  as  "  The  Vigilantes."  In  1877-8
was  written  "Clio,"  and  in  the  following  spring
"  Fairfax,  or  Life  in  the  Sunny  South,"  brought
out  in  1879.  Earlier  the  same  season  was  played
"  My  Partner,"  the  first  of  Mr.  Campbell's  plays  to
achieve  success  in  New  York.  "  The  Galley  Slave  "
was  also  produced  in  1879,  and  all  three  of  these
were  on  the  metropolitan  boards  the  same  season.
"  Matrimony "  was  also  written  in  the  winter  of
1879-80.  Other  plays  by  Mr.  Campbell  are  "  The
White  Slave,"  "My' Geraldine,"  "Siberia,"  and
"  Paquita."  Mr.  Campbell  leased  the  Fourteenth
street  theatre  in  New  York  city,  but  was  obliged  to
give  it  up  in  1886  on  account  of  failing  health,  and
on  28  Sept.  of  that  year  a  sheriff's  juiy  declared
him  to  be  insane.

CAMPBELL,  Charles,  historian,  b.  in  Peters-
burg, Va.,  1  May,  1807;  d.  in  Staunton,  Va.,  11
July,  1876.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Wilson  Camp-
bell, a  Petersburg  bookseller,  who  published  a
"  History  of  Virginia  to  1781 "  (Philadelphia,  1813).
Charles  Campbell  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in
1825,  kept  a  select  classical  school  in  Petersburg
from  1842  till  1855,  and  was  subsequently  principal
of  the  Anderson  seminary  in  that  city.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Bland  Papers  "  (1840-'3) ;  "  An  Intro-
duction to  the  History  of  the  Colony  and  Ancient
Dominion  of  Virginia"  (Richmond,  1849;  Phila-
delphia, 1859) ;  "  Some  Materials  for  a  Memoir  of
John  Daly  Burk  "  (Albany,  1868) ;  and  "  Genealogy
of  the  Spotsvvood  Family."  He  was  a  member  of
the  Virginia  historical  society,  a  contributor  to  the
"  Historical  Register  "  and  the  "  Southern  Literary
Messenger,"  and  edited  the  "  Orderly  Book  "  of  Gen.
Andrew  Lewis  in  1776  (Richmond,  1860).

CAMPBELL,  Charles  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in
Franklin  county.  Pa.,  10  Aug.,  1828.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Marshall  college,  and  on  18  Feb.,  1847,  be-
came second  lieutenant  in  the  8th  U.  S.  infantry.  He
served  through  the  Mexican  war,  becoming  captain
in  August,  1847,  and  was  mustered  out  in  August,
1848.  In  1852  he  was  a  member  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania legislature.  He  was  commissioned  colonel
of  the  1st  Pennsylvania  artillery  in  May,  1861,  but
resigned  in  December,  and  was  made  colonel  of  the
57th  infantry.  He  was  wounded  three  times  at
Fair  Oaks,  and  twice  at  Fredericksburg,  and  a
horse  was  killed  under  him  in  each  of  these  battles.
He  was  taken  prisoner  with  his  regiment,  but  they
succeeded  in  releasing  themselves  and  carrying
back  more  than  200  of  the  enemy  as  captives.  His
wounds,  seven  in  number,  necessitated  a  long  and
tedious  confinement  in  the  hospital,  and  prevented
him  from  seeing  any  more  active  service.  He  was
})romoted  to  brigadier-general  on  13  March,  1863,
and  after  the  close  of  the  war  removed  to  Dakota.


CAMPBELL,  Cleveland  J.,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  city  in  July,  1836:  d.  in  Castleton,  N.  Y.,  13
June,  1865.  He  was  graduated  successively  at'the
free  academy.  Union  college,  and  the  University  of
Gottingen.  Early  in  the  war  he  enlisted  in  the  44th
N.  Y.  volunteers,  was  soon  promoted  to  be  a  lieuten-
ant on  Gen,  Palmer's  staff,  was  next  adjutant  of  the
152d  N.  Y.  volunteers,  then  captain  in  Upton's  12l5it
N.  Y.  volunteers,  and,  after  passing  a  most  brilliant
examination,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel,
and  finally  colonel,  of  the  23d  regiment  of  colored
troops.  He  led  his  regiment  into  the  hottest  of  the
fight  at  Petersburg,  when  the  mine  exploded,  and
left  in  and  around  the  crater  nearly  400  of  his  men,
killed  or  wounded.  Col.  Campbell' himself  received
injuries  from  a  bursting  shell  that  ultimately
caused  his  death.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral of  volunteers  on  13  March.  1865,

CAMPBELL,  Donald,  British  soldier,  b.  in
Scotland  about  1735;  d.  near  Fort  Detroit  (now
Detroit,  Mich.),  in  1763.  He  became  a  lieutenant
in  the  "Royal  American"  regiment  (then  the  62(1
foot)  on  4  Jan.,  1756.  He  was  promoted  to  captain-
lieutenant  in  the  same  regiment,  then  the  GOth
foot,  and  commanded  by  Sir  Jeffrey  Amherst,  on
14  April,  1759,  and  on  29  Aug.  became  captain.
He  had  been  acting  major  and  commandant  of
Fort  Detroit,  but  had  been  succeeded  by  Maj.
Henry  Gladwin.  Maj.  Campbell  had  gained  the
confidence  of  the  Indians  by  his  fairness,  and,  dur-
ing the  siege  of  the  fort  by'Pontiac,  offered  to  con-
fer with  the  latter  at  his  request.  Campbell  ac-
cordingly set  out,  accompanied  by  Lieut.  McDougal
and  other  Canadians.  He  had  been  several  times
warned  of  treachery,  and  after  his  departure  mes-
sengers were  sent  after  him  by  M.  Gonin,  an  old
and  wealthy  settler,  urging  him  to  return,  but
without  avail.  After  haranguing  an  assemblage
of  impassable  savages,  he  was  about  to  return  to
the  fort,  when  Pontiac  arose  and  said :  "  My  father
will  sleep  to-night  in  the  lodges  of  his  red  chil-
dren." The  captives  were  shielded  by  the  chief
from  the  fury  of  the  Indians,  who  would  have
killed  them,  and  were  protected  for  some  time;
but  Pontiac  refused  to  give  them  up  at  Maj.  Glad-
win's demand.  McDougal  finally  managed  to  es-
cape, but  Campbell,  being  able  neither  to  run  nor
to  see  plainly,  could  not  get  away.  Finally  Was-
sin,  an  Ojibway  chief,  whose  nephew  had  been
killed  in  a  skirmish  and  scalped  by  the  British,
seized  Campbell,  and  he  was  put  to  death  with
torture.  The  savages  are  said  to  have  torn  out  his
heart  and  eaten  it,  that  they  might  gain  courage.
Pontiac  is  said  by  some  to  have  consented  to  this
outrage,  but  is  exculpated  by  others.  See  Park-
man's  "  Conspiracy  of  Pontiac  "  (Boston,  1855),  and
Maj.  Rogers's  "  Diary  of  the  Siege  of  Detroit,"
edited  by  Franklin  B.  Hough  (Albany,  1860).

CAMPBELL,  Duncan  R.,  clergyman,  b.  in
Perthshire,  Scotland,  14  Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  in  Coving-
ton, Ky,,  16  Aug.,  1865.  He  was  educated  for  the
Presbyterian  ministry.  Emigrating  to  the  United
States  in  1842,  he  settled  in  Richmond,  Va.,  where
he  became  a  Baptist,  and  accepted  a  pastorate.  He
afterward  removed  to  Kentucky,  and  was  elected
professor  of  Hebrew  and  biblical  literature  in  the
theological  seminary  at  Covington.  In  1852  he  be-
came president  of  Georgetown  college,  and  ab.y
discharged  the  duties  of  that  office  until  his  death.
The  degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him.

CAMPBELL,  George  Washington,  statesman,
b.  in  Tennessee  in  1768;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  17
Feb.,  1848.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton  m
1794.  He  took  his  seat  as  a  representative  in  con-
gress in  1803,  and  remained  till  1809,  serving  as


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


513


chairman  of  the  ways  and  means  committee  during
his  last  term.  He  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  from
Tennessee  in  1811,  but  resigned  in  1814,  on  being
appointed  secretary  of  the  treasury.  He  was  again
elected  to  the  senate  in  1815,  and'served  till  April,
1818,  when  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Russia.
On  his  way  to  his  post  in  June,  1818,  he  stopped  at
Copenhagen  and  endeavored  to  adjust  the  Danish
spoliation  claims.  He  returned  to  the  United  States
in  July,  1820,  and  in  1881  was  a  member  of  the
French  claims  commission.

CAMPBELL,  Helen  Stuart,  author,  b.  in
Loekport,  N.  Y.,  4  July,  1839,  She  attended  school
in  Warren,  R.  L,  and  from  1850  until  1858  at  Mrs.
Cook's  seminary,  Bloomfield,  X.  J.  She  began  to
contribute  sketches  to  the  magazines  and  news-
papers at  an  early  age,  and  devoted  her  attention
largely  to  housekeeping  on  a  basis  of  scientific
common  sense.  She  has  also  studied  carefully  the
problem  of  the  poor  in  great  cities  and  elsewhere,
and  has  contributed  valuable  papers,  drawn  from
personal  experience,  to  current  publications.  Her
novels  are  all  written  in  an  earnest  spirit,  and  are
yet  full  of  touches  of  wit  and  pathos.  Prom  1881
till  1884  she  was  literary  editor  of  "  The  Continent "
(Philadelphia).  Her  published  books  are :  "  The
Ainslee  Series  "  (New  York,  18G4-'7) ;  "  His  Grand-
mothers" (1877);  "Six  Sinners"  (1878);  "Unto
the  Third  and  Fourth  Generation"  (1880);  "The
Easiest  Way  in  Housekeeping  and  Cooking"
(1881);  "The  Problem  of  the  Poor"  (1882);  "  The
American  Girl's  Home-Book  of  Work  and  Play  "
(1883) ;  "  Under  Green  Apple-Boughs  "  (1883) ;  "  The
What-to-do  Club"  (Boston.  1884):  "Mrs.  Hern-
don's  Income  "  (1885) ;  and  "  Miss  Melinda's  Oppor-
tunity" (1886).  She  began  in  the  New  York  "  Trib-
une,'' in  October,  1886,  a  series  of  articles  on  the
working-women  of  New  York.

CAMPBELL,  Hugh  George,  naval  oiTicer.  b.
in  South  Carolina  in  1760 ;  d.  in  Washington.  D.
C,  11  Nov.,  1820.  In  1775  he  volunteered  on  board
the  first  man-of-war  commissioned  by  the  council
of  South  Carolina.  He  was  made  master  com-
mander, 27  July,  1799,  and  captain,  16  Oct.,  1800.
He  served  in  the  Mediterranean  in  1804- '5,  and  in
1812  commanded  some  gun-boats  in  St.  Mary's
river  during  an  insurrection  against  the  Spanish
rule  in  Florida.

'  CAMPBELL,  Jabez  Pitt,  A.  M.  E.  bishop,  b.
in  Slaughter's  Neck,  Delaware,  6  Feb.,  1815.  He
was  of  African  descent,  but  was  born  free,  and  fled
to  Philadelphia,  in  1828,  to  escape  being  sold  as  a
slave.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  in  1837,  and  in
1856  he  was  elected  publisher  and  editor  of  the
"Christian  Recorder,"  the  organ  of  the  African
Methodist  Episcopal  church.  He  was  elected  a
bishop  in  1864,  and  assigned  the  task  of  organizing
the  church  work  in  Louisiana  and  California,  visit-
ing the  last-named  state  in  1865.  In  1876  he  was
sent  as  a  delegate  to  the  Conference  of  the  Wes-
leyan  connection  of  England.  He  is  presiding
bishop  of  the  third  district  of  the  African  Method-
ist Episcopal  church,  is  president  of  the  board  of
trustees  of  Wilberforce  university,  and  also  of  the
educational  department  of  the' denomination  to
which  he  belongs.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  by  W^ilberforce  university  in  1871.

CAMPBELL,  James,  Jurist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1813.  He  is  the  son  of  an  Irish  emigrant,
and,  after  receiving  a  thorough  education,  was  ad-
mitted, in  1834,  to  the  Philadelphia  bar,  where  he
soon  took  high  rank.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  court
of  common  pleas  from  1842  till  1850,  became  at-
torney-general of  the  state  in  1852,  and  on  4  March,
1853,  was  made  postmaster-general  by  President
VOL.  I.— 33


Pierce,  serving  through  the  entire  administration,
till  4  March,  1857.

CAMPBELL,  James  Valentine,  jurist,  b.  in
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  25  Feb.,  1823;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,
26  March,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  St.  Paul's
college.  College  Point,  L.  I.,  in  1841,  studied  law
in  Detroit,  and  was  admitted  to  practice  in  1844.
He  was  a  master  of  chancery  in  the  state  and  fed-
eral courts,  and  when  a  supreme  court  was  estab-
lished in  Michigan,  in  1857,  was  elected  one  of  the
associate  justices.  During  nearly  thirty  years'  ser-
vice on  the  bench  he  rendered  valuable  decisions,
some  of  which  were  important  contributions-  to
the  body  of  the  law.  In  1859,  when  the  law  de-
partment in  the  University  of  Michigan  was  insti-
tuted. Judge  Campbell  was  given  a  chair  in  the
hiw-school,  and  lectured  for  twenty-five  years.  In
1845  he  edited  Walker's  "  Chancery  Reports."  He
was  politically  a  whig  until  the  whigs  were  merged
in  the  republican  party  in  1854,  when  he  joined  the
republicans,  but  condemned,  in  some  instances,  the
expansion  of  executive  and  judicial  powers  by  the
federal  authorities  under  republican  administra-
tion. He  devoted  his  leisure  to  literary  and  his-
torical studies,  and  gave  special  attentic^n  to  the
history  of  Michigan  and  the  northwest  territory.
In  1876  he  published  "Outlines  of  the  Political
History  of  Michigan"  (Detroit).  Among  his  con-
tributions to  the  press  are  essays  on  the  polity  of
the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  and  on  questions
in  jurisprudence,  and  many  poems  depicting  the
life  of  the  Michigan  pioneers.

CAMPBELL,  Jesse  H.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mc-
intosh county,  Ga.,  10  Feb.,  1807.  He  is  one  of  the
most  laborious  and  useful  preachers  in  his  native
state.  His  chief  literary  work  is  "  Georgia  Bap-
tists— Historical  and  Biographical."

CAMPBELL,  Jolin,  publisher,  b.  in  Scotland
in  1653;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  March,  1728.  He
was  a  Boston  bookseller,  and  on  24  April,  1704,
issued  the  "  Boston  News-Letter,"  the  first  perma-
nent newspaper  published  in  North  America.  He
was  postmaster  of  Boston  for  many  years,  ending
with  1718,  and  was  for  several  years  justice  of  the
peace  for  Suffolk  co.

CAMPBELL,  John,  British  author,  b.  in  Edin-
burgh, 8  March,  1708;  d.  28  Dec,  1775.  He  was
intended  for  the  law,  but  at  the  age  of  twenty-
eight  entered  on  a  literary  career  that  ended  only
with  his  life.  Those  of  his  books  that  appeared
prior  to  1742  were  published  anonymously.  From
1755  until  his  death  he  was  agent  of  the  British
government  for  the  province  of  Georgia.  His
works  relating  to  this  country  are  "  Concise  His-
tory of  Spanish  America "  (1741);  "Voyages  and
Travels,  from  Columbus  to  Anson"  (1744);  "New
Sugar  Islands  in  the  West  Indies  "  and  "  Trade  of
Great  Britain  to  America"  (1772).  He  also  pub-
lished "  Lives  of  the  English  Admirals  "  (1744) ;  "  A
Survey  of  the  Present  State  of  Europe  "  (1750) ;  "  A
Political  Survey  of  Great  Britain  "  (1774) ;  and  nu-
merous other  works.

CAMPBELL,  John,  British  soldier,  b.  in  Stra-
chur,  Scotland ;  d.  early  in  1806.  He  entered  the
army  in  June,  1745,  as  lieutenant  of  Loudon's
Highlanders,  served  through  the  Scotch  rebellioii,
and  made  the  campaign  in  Flanders  in  1747.  He
was  made  captain,  1  Oct.,  1747,  appointed  to  the
42d  Highlanders,  9  April,  1756,  and  wounded  in
the  attack  on  Ticonderoga  in  1758.  He  became
major  of  the  17th  foot,  11  July,  1759,  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  army,  1  Feb.,  1762,  and  commanded
this  regiment  in  the  expeditions  against  Martinico
and  Havana.  He  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the
37th  foot,  1  May,  1773,  and  returned  to  America


614


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


in  1776  with  his  regiment  at  the  outset  of  the
revolution ;  was  appointed  major-general,  19  Feb.,
1779 ;  colonel  of  his  regiment,  2  Nov.,  1780 ;  and
commanded  the  British  forces  in  west  Florida,
where,  after  a  gallant  defence,  he  was  obliged  to
surrender  Pensacola  to  the  Spaniards,  10  May,  1781.
He  became  lieutenant-general,  28  Sept.,  1787,  and
general  in  the  army,  26  Jan.,  1797.

CAMPBELL,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  New  York
state  about  1822,  He  was  appointed  an  assistant
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  in  December,  1847,  served
in  Mexico,  and  was  stationed  successively  in  Texas,
in  California,  at  forts  along  the  western  frontier,
and  at  different  eastern  posts,  including  the  mili-
tary academy  at  West  Point.  He  was  promoted
surgeon  in  May,  1861,  acting  through  the  civil  war
in  that  grade,  and  at  its  close  received  brevets  of
lieutenant-colonel  and  colonel,  U.  S.  A.,  for  faith-
ful and  meritorious  services.  He  was  advanced  to
the  full  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,  8  Nov.,  1877,
colonel,  7  Dec,  1885,  and  placed  on  the  retired
list,  16  Sept.,  1885.

CAMPBELL,  John,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
North  Sherbrooke,  county  Lanark,  Ontario,  10  Feb.,
1839.  He  received  his  early  education  at  the  com-
mon school  in  his  native  place,  and  when  twelve
years  of  age  became  a  clerk.  Subsequently  he  was
a  teacher,  and  studied  at  McGill  medical  college,
Montreal,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1869.  In
1882  he  received  the  degree  of  the  royal  college  of
physicians  from  Edinburgh  medical  university.  He
is  the  author  of  "  The  Land  of  Burns."

CAMPBELL,  John  Allen,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,
Ohio,  8  Oct.,  1885 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C.  14  July,
1880.  After  receiving  a  common-school  education,
he  learned  the  printing  business,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  war  entered  the  army  as  second  lieuten-
ant of  volunteers.  He  became  major  and  assistant
adjutant-general,  27  Oct.,  1862,  and  was  brevetted
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  13  March,  1865,
"  for  courage  in  the  field  and  marked  ability  and
fidelity"  at  Rich  Mountain,  Shiloh,  Perryville,
Murfreesboro,  and  through  the  Atlanta  campaign.
He  was  mustered  out  on  1  Sept.,  1866,  and  for  a
time  assistant  editor  on  the  Cleveland  "Leader,"
In  October,  1867,  he  was  appointed  second  lieuten-
ant in  the  5th  artillery,  regular  army,  and  at  once
brevetted  first  lieutenant,  captain,  major,  and  lieu-
tenant-colonel. He  served  on  Gen.  Schofield's  staff,
but  resigned  in  1869,  and  was  appointed  the  first
governor  of  Wyoming  territory.  He  was  reap-
pointed in  1873,  and  in  1875  became  third  assistant
secretary  of  state  at  Washington.

CAMPBELL,  John  Archibald,  jurist,  b.  in
Washington,  Ga.,  24  June,  1811;  d.  in  Baltimore,
Md.,  12  March,  1889.  His  grandfather  served  in
the  revolution,  and  his  father.  Col.  Duncan  G.
Campbell,  was  a  distinguished  Georgia  lawyer,  and
one  of  the  two  commissioners  appointed  by  Presi-
dent Monroe,  in  1824,  to  treat  with  the  Creek  In-
dians for  the  sale  of  their  lands.  John  A.  Camp-
bell was  graduated  at  the  imiversity  of  Georgia  in
1826,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1829  by  special  act  of  legislature,  as  he  had  not
attained  his  majority.  He  then  moved  to  Mont-
gomery, Ala.,  where  he  practised  law,  and  was  sev-
eral times  a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  was
appointed  associate  justice  of  the  U.  S,  supreme
court  by  President  Pierce,  22  March,  1853,  and  held
this  office  till  1861,  when  he  resigned.  He  exerted
all  his  influence  to  prevent  the  civil  war,  but
though  he  opposed  secession,  he  believed  it  to  be
nght.  He  was  afterward  assistant  secretary  of  war
of  the  Confederate  states,  and  was  one  of  the  peace
commissioners  appointed  to  meet  Mr,  Lincoln  and


Mr,  Seward  at  Fort  Monroe  in  February,  1865,
After  the  war  he  was  arrested  and  lodged  in  Fort
Pulaski,  but  was  discharged  on  parole,  and  after-
ward resumed  his  law  practice  in  New  Orleans.

CAMPBELL,  John  Lyle,  chemist,  b.  in  Rock-
bridge CO.,  Va.,  7  Dec,  1818 ;  d.  in  Lexington,  Va.,
2  Feb.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington
college  (now  Washington  and  Lee)  in  1843.  On
leaving  college  he  became  assistant  in  the  academy
at  Staunton,  Va.,  and  afterward  had  charge  of  a
similar  institution  in  Richmond,  Ky.  In  1851  he
was  called  to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  geology
at  Washington  college,  an  office  which  he  con-
tinued to  occupy  until  his  death.  He  was  a  recog-
nized authority  on  the  geology  of  Virginia,  and
wrote  reports  on  that  subject  as  well  as  frequent
contributions  to  the  scientific  journals.  Among
his  larger  works  were :  "  Geology  and  Mineral  Re-
sources of  the  James  River  Valley "  (1882),  and
"  Campbell's  Agriculture ;  A  Manual  of  Scientific
and  Practical  Agriculture  for  the  School  and
Farm  "  (Philadelphia,  1859).

CAMPBELL,  John  Nicholson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  4  March,  1798 ;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  27  March,  1864.  He  was  a  pupil  of  James
Ross,  a  celebrated  teacher  of  Philadelphia,  and  at
an  early  age  entered  the  University  of  Pennsylva-
nia, but  was  never  graduated.  He  studied  theology
with  Rev.  Ezra  Stiles,  and  afterward  in  Virginia,
where  he  was  for  a  few  months  teacher  of  lan-
guages in  Hampden-Sidney  college.  On  10  May,
1817,  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery
of  Hanover,  Va,,  and  in  1820  was  chosen  chap-
lain to  congress.  After  preaching  in  Petersburg,
Va.,  and  Newbern,  N.  C,  he  became  in  1823  the
assistant  of  Rev.  Dr,  Balch,  of  Georgetown,  D.  C,
and  in  1825  accepted  a  call  to  the  pastorate  of  the
New  York  avenue  Presbyterian  church,  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  where  his  eloquence  and  ability  soon
gathered  a  large  congregation.  He  was  at  this
time  one  of  the  most  active  managers  of  the  Amer-
ican colonization  society.  He  was  called  to  the
1st  Presbyterian  church  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in
1831,  and  remained  there  until  his  death.  He  was
also  for  more  than  twenty  years  one  of  the  regents
of  the  university  of  the  state  of  New  York,  Dr.
Campbell  was  a  man  of  quick  perception,  tenacious
memory,  great  decision  of  character,  and  of  cour-
teous and  dignified  manners.  He  possessed  great
executive  ability,  was  an  eloquent  preacher,  and
an  able  writer.  He  published  sermons  and  ad-
dresses, and  wrote  reports  of  the  board  of  regents.

CAMPBELL,  John  Poage,  clergyman,  b.  in
Augusta  CO.,  Va.,  in  1767;  d.  near  Chillicothe,
Ohio,  4  Nov.,  1814.  He  removed  to  Kentucky  with
his  father  in  1781.  After  receiving  a  good  educa-
tion, he  became,  when  nineteen  years  old,  precep-
tor of  an  academy  at  Williamsburg,  N,  C,  Here  he
adopted  atheistic  views,  but  was  converted  by  read-
ing Jenyns's  "  Treatise  on  the  Internal  Evidence
of  Christianity,"  and,  giving  up  the  study  of  medi-
cine, in  which  he  had  engaged,  resolved  to  become
a  clergyman.  He  was  graduated  at  Hampden-
Sidney  in  1790,  was  licensed  to  preach  in  May,
1792,  and  settled  in  Kentucky  in  1795,  preachuig
in  various  places.  In  1811  he  was  chaplain  to  the
legislature.  As  his  salary  was  insufficient  for  the
support  of  his  family,  he  was  obliged  to  practise
medicine.  His  death  resulted  from  exposure  while
he  was  preaching,  Dr,  Campbell  was  a  graceful
preacher  and  an  accomplished  scholar.  He  pub-
lished "The  Passenger"  (1804);  "Strictures  on
Stone's  Letters  on  the  Atonement"  (1805);  ''^^";
dex  "  (1806) ;  "  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr,  Craighead
(1810); "The Pelagian Detected"  (1811);


An


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


515


Answer  to  Jones"  (1812);  and  many  sermons. He
left  a  manuscript  history  of  the  western  country.

CAMPBELL,  John  Wilson,  jurist,  b.  in  Augus-
ta county,  Va.,  28  Feb.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Delaware,  Ohio,
24  Sept.,'l83;i  His  parents  removed  to  Kentucky,
and  afterward  to  Ohio.  Young  Campbell  received
a  common-school  education,  was  admitted  to  the
bar  in  1808,  and  began  practice  in  West  Union,
Ohio.  He  held  several  local  offices,  was  prosecut-
ing attorney  for  Adams  and  Highland  cos.,  and
a  member  of  the  Ohio  legislature.  He  was  chosen
to  congress  as  a  democrat,  served  from  1  Dec,
1817,  till  3  March,  1827,  and  was  U.  S.  judge  for
the  district  of  Ohio  from  1829  till  his  death.  See
"Biographical  Sketch  and  Literary  Remains,"  by
his  widow  (Columbus,  Ohio,  1838).

CAMPBELL,  Lewis  Davis,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Franklin,  Ohio,  9  Aug.,  1811;  d.  26  Nov.,  1882.
On  leaving  school  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer
in  1828,  and  was  afterward  assistant  editor  of  the
Cincinnati  "  Gazette."  He  published  a  whig  news-
paper at  Hamilton,  Ohio,  from  1831  till  1836,  sup-
porting Henry  Clay,  and  was  then  admitted  to  the
bar  and  began  to  practise  at  Hamilton.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  whig,  and  served  from  8
Dec,  1849,  till  25  May,  1858,  being  chairman  of
the  ways  and  means  committee  during  his  last
term.  He  claimed  to  have  been  elected  again  in
1858,  but  the  house  gave  the  seat  to  C.  L.  Vallan-
digham.  He  served  as  colonel  of  an  Ohio  regiment
of  volunteer  infantry  from  1861  till  1862,  when  he
resigned  on  account  of  failing  health.  President
Johnson  appointed  him  minister  to  Mexico  in  De-
cember, 1865 ;  but,  before  leaving  for  his  post,  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  Philadelphia  union  conven-
tion and  the  Cleveland  soldiers'  convention  of  1866.
He  sailed  for  Mexico,  in  company  with  Gen.  Sher-
man, 11  Nov.,  1866,  authorized  to  tender  to  Presi-
dent Juarez  the  moral  support  of  the  United  States,
and  to  offer  him  the  use  of  our  military  force  to  aid
in  the  restoration  of  law.  Mr.  Campbell  remained
in  Mexico  until  1868,  and  from  1871  till  1873  was
again  a  member  of  congress.

CAMPBELL,  Richard,  soldier,  b  in  the  val-
ley of  Virginia ;  d.  in  Eutaw  Springs,  S.  C,  8  Sept.,
1781.  He  was  commissioned  captain  in  1776,  and
subsequently  major,  served  in  Gibson's  regiment  at
Pittsburgh,  and  on  Mcintosh's  expedition  against
the  Ohio  Indians  in  1778.  In  June,  1779,  he  led  a
relief  party  to  Fort  Laurens,  and  commanded  that
garrison  for  a  time.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-
colonel,  and  commanded  a  Virginia  regiment  at
Guilford,  Ilobkirk's  Hill,  Ninety-Six,  and  Eutaw
Springs,  where  he  was  mortally  wounded  while
leading  the  charge  that  drove  the  British  from  the
field.  Some  hours  after,  hearing  that  the  enemy
were  in  full  retreat,  he  died,  exclaiming,  "  I  die
contented."  Many  writers  have  confounded  him
with  Gen.  William  Campbell,  one  of  the  leaders  at
King's  Mountain.  See  Draper's  "  King's  Mountain
and  its  Heroes,"
^CAMPBELL,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1755;  d.  near  Knoxville,  Tenn.,  in  February,  1832.
He  displayed  great  bravery  in  many  conflicts  with
the  Cherokees,  and  commanded  a  regiment  at  the
battle  of  King's  Mountain,  7  Oct.,  1780.  He  was
nearly  forty  years  a  magistrate  of  Washington
county,  Va.,  and  in  1825  emigrated  to  Tennessee.

CAMPBELL,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Ire-
land, 1  Feb.,  1763 ;  d.  in  Bethany,  W.  Va.,  4  Jan.,
1854.  lie  was  trained  in  scholarship  at  Glasgow
university,  and  for  the  ministry  under  the  Scottish
establishment.  Ho  was  descended  from  the  Camp-
bells of  Argyle.  Entering  the  ministry  in  1798,
he  soon  became  identified  with  the  "  seceders,"  as


they  were  called,  and  emigrated  to  the  United
States  in  1807,  joined  the  associate  synod  of  North
America  at  Philadelphia,  and  ministered  to  desti-
tute congregations  in  western  Pennsylvania.  In
1809  he  was  joined  by  his  son,  Alexander,  and
thenceforward  the  histories  of  father  and  son  were
closely  identified.  On  12  June,  1812,  in  company
with  his  son  and  their  joint  congregation,  they
were  immersed  by  Elder  Luse,  of  the  Baptists,  but
with  a  stipulation  in  writing  that  no  term  of  union
or  communion  should  be  required  other  than  the
holy  Scriptures.  The  son  soon  assumed  the  leader-
ship, which  finally  resulted  in  the  formation  of
the  sect  that  is  inseparably  connected  with  the
family  name.  Thomas  Campbell  labored  zealously
until  age,  and  at  last  total  blindness,  compelled
him  to  desist. — His  son,  Alexander,  theologian,  b.
at  Shaw's  Castle,  county  Antrim,  Ireland,  in  June,
1786;  d.  in  Bethany,  W.  Va.,  4  March,  1866.  He
was  educated  at  the  University  of  Glasgow,  came
to  the  United  States  in  1809,  and  made  his  home
in  Washington  co..  Pa.,  where  he  became  pastor  of
a  Presbyterian  church,  within  which  denomina-
tion he  had  been  reared.  He  soon  became  dissatis-
fied with  the  tenets  of  the  sect,  holding  that  the
Bible  should  be  the  sole  creed.  His  father  joined
him  in  his  belief,  and  in  1810  they  founded  a  new
society  at  Brush  Run,  Pa.  Accepting  the  doctrine
of  immersion,  they  joined  in  a  temporary  union
with  the  Baptists,  but,  persisting  in  their  refusal  to
accept  any  human  creed,  Mr.  Campbell  and  his  con-
gregation were  disfellowshiped  in  1827,  and  began
at  once  to  form  a  sect  of  their  own.  They  called
themselves  '*  The  Disciples  of  Christ,"  but  are
widely  known  as  "  Campbellites,"  or  simply  as
"  Disciples."  They  soon  began  to  gain  recruits,
and  by  1864  numbered  350.000  members,  increased
in  1880  to  500.000.  In  1823  Mr.  Campbell  began
to  publish  "  The  Christian  Baptist,"  which  was
shortly  afterward  merged  in  the  *'  Millennial  Har-
binger." In  1840-'l  he  founded  Bethany  college
and  was  its  first  president.  Mr.  Campbell  held
that  slavery  was  permissible  to  Christians  under
his  creed,  the  Bible.  He  was  a  prolific  writer  for
the  denominational  papers.  His  published  works
number  fifty-two,  all  of  them  bearing  directly
upon  his  views  of  Christian  belief.  He  was  a
man  of  remarkable  intellectual  tind  moral  pow-
ers, and  a  cultivated  scholar.

CAMPBELL,  Thompson,  congressman,  b..  in
Pennsylvania;  d.  in  California,  7  Dec,  1868.  He
received  a  public-school  education,  and  studied
law.  He  then  removed  to  Galena,  111.,  and  became
interested  in  mining.  He  was  elected  secretary  of
state  of  Illinois  by  the  democratic  party  in  1843,
and  served  until  1846.  In  1850  he  was  elected  a
representative  in  congress  from  the  Galena  district,
and  served  from  1851  till  1853 ;  subsequently  he
was  appointed  by  President  Pierce  land  commis-
sioner in  California,  for  the  purpose  of  adjusting
titles  under  the  treaty  with  Mexico,  in  accordance
with  grants  made  l:)y  the  Mexican  government.
He  served  in  the  California  legislature,  and  was  a
supporter  of  the  government  during  the  civil  war.

CAMPBELL,  Lord  William,  governor  of
South  Carolina,  d.  5  Sept..  1778.  He  was  the
youngest  son  of  the  fourth  duke  of  Argyll,  became
a  captain  in  the  British  navy  on  20  Aug.,  1762,
member  of  parliament  in  1764,  and  was  governor
of  Nova  Scotia  from  1766  till  1773.  He  had  mar-
ried, in  1763,  Sarah  Izard,  a  wealthy  lady  of  South
Carolina,  sister  of  Ralph  Izard,  a  well-known  pa-
triot, and  in  1774  was  appointed  royal  governor  of
that  province.  He  entered  on  his  duties  in  June,
1775,  and  was  cordially  welcomed  by  the  people.


516


CAMPBELL


CAMPBELL


for  whom  he  professed  great  attachment.  They
soon  found,  however,  that  he  was  active  in  fo-
menting insurrectionary  movements  favorable  to
the  crown  among  the  border  po[)ulation  and  the
red  men,  and  the  popular  indignation  against  him
increased  daily.  After  he  saw  that  preparations
for  resistance  were  going  on  steadily,  and  that  the
public  military  stores  had  been  secured  by  the  pa-
triots, he  took  refuge  on  board  a  British  man-of-
war,  where  he  was  joined  by  his  wife.  In  this  ves-
sel he  threatened  the  city  of  Charleston,  but  the
guns  of  Fort  Johnson  forced  him  to  retreat.  After
sailing  to  Jamaica,  he  returned  in  the  following
year,  and  was  mortally  wounded  on  board  the
"Bristol  "  during  the  attack  on  Fort  Moultrie.

CAMPBELL,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Augusta
county,  Va.,  in  1745;  d.  at  Rocky  Mills,  Hanover
CO.,  Va.,  22  Aug.,  1781.  After  his  father's  death  in
1767  he  removed  with  his  mother  and  four  sisters
to  the  Holston  valley.  In  1773  he  was  appointed  a
justice  of  the  peace,  and  in  1774  a  captain  of  mili-
tia. He  served  in  Col.  Christian's  regiment  in  the
campaign  against  the  Shawnees,  which  terminated
in  Lord  Dunmore's  treaty  of  peace  at  Camp  Char-
lotte. In  September,  1775,  he  led  a  fine  company
to  Williamsburg,  joining  Patrick  Henry's  regi-
ment. Under  Gen.  Lewis  he  assisted  in  dislodging
Gov.  Dunraore  from  Gwyn's  island  in  July,  1776,
and  at  the  close  of  the  year  resigned,  so  that  he
might  better  protect  his  frontier  home  from  the
encroachments  of  the  Cherokees.  In  1777  he  was
continued  a  justice  of  the  peace  in  the  newly
formed  county  of  Washington,  and  made  lieuten-
ant-colonel of  the  militia.  He  was  one  of  the
commissioners  in  1778  to  run  the  boundary-line
between  Virginia  and  the  Cherokee  country.  In
1779  he  aided  in  driving  the  tories  from  his  region,
having  a  severe  personal  rencounter  with  one  of
their  leaders,  Francis  Hopkins,  in  the  bed  of  the
Holston ;  the  miscreant  was  overcome,  and  hanged
with  his  own  halter  on  the  nearest  sycamore.
Campbell  was  promoted  in  1780  to  the  full
colonelcy  of  the  regiment,  and  chosen  a  member
of  the  legislature.  After  scouring  the  neighboring
country  in  North  Carolina,  routing  and  dispersing
the  tories,  he  led  his  regiment  of  riflemen  in  the
King's  Mountain  campaign,  and  distinguished
himself  by  his  valor  and  good  conduct,  if  the  evi-
dence of  his  own  officers  and  soldiers  is  to  be  cred-
ited. Washington,  Gates,  and  Greene,  together
with  the  Virginia  legislature  and  the  continental
congress,  expressed  their  high  sense  of  his  merits
and  services.  After  serving  on  the  frontiers,  he
responded  to  Gen.  Greene's  appeal,  and  joined
him  with  a  corps  of  riflemen,  sharing  in  the  battle
of  Guilford  Court-House,  in  March,  1781,  where  he
thought  he  was  not  properly  supported  by  Lee's
cavalry,  and  soon  afterward  retired  from  the  ser-
vice. After  a  term  in  the  legislature  he  was  made
a  brigadier-general  in  the  militia,  and  served  un-
der Lafayette  in  the  battle  of  Jamestown,  and
shortly  afterward  sickened  and  died.  Lafayette
asserted  tfiat  his  services  at  King's  Mountain  and
Guilford  would  "  do  his  memory  everlasting  honor,
and  insure  him  a  high  rank  among  the  defenders
of  liberty  in  the  American  cause  "  ;  and  Jefferson
feelingly  declared  that  "  Gen.  Campbell's  friends
might  quietly  rest  their  heads  on  the  pillow  of  his
renown."  His  wife  was  a  sister  of  Patrick  Henry.
— His  nephew,  John  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Kentucky;
d.  28  Aug.,  1814,  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel
of  the  19th  infantry,  12  March,  1812,  and  com-
manded a  detachment  against  the  Mississinewa
Indians  in  December,  1812,  for  which  service  he
was  brevetted  colonel. He  was  made  colonel  of


the  11th  infantry  on  9  April,  1814,  and  distin-
guished himself  in  the  battle  of  Chippewa,  5  July,
1814,  where  he  commanded  the  right  wing  of  the
army  under  Scott,  and  received  fatal  wounds.

CAMPBELL,  Sir  William,  Canadian  jurist,  b.
in  Scotland  in  1758 ;  d.  in  Toronto  in  1834.  He
entered  the  army  as  a  private,  came  to  America  as
a  non-commissioned  officer  in  a  Highland  regiment,
and  took  part  in  the  revolutionary  war,  his  military
career  ending  with  the  surrender  of  Cornwallis  in
1781,  when  he  became  a  prisoner  with  the  rest  of
the  command.  Having  regained  his  freedom,  in
1783  he  removed  to  Nova  Scotia  and  devoted  him-
self to  the  study  of  law.  After  practising  for  nine-
teen years,  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  of
Cape  Breton,  and  elected  to  tlie  assembly  of  that
province.  He  was  promoted  to  a  puisne  judge-
ship in  Upper  Canada,  and  became  chief  justice
upon  the  retirement  of  William  Dummer  Powell
in  1825.  In  1829  he  retired  in  consequence  of  fail-
ing health,  and  was  succeeded  by  the  attorney-gen-
eral at  that  time,  afterward  Sir  John  BeVerley
Robinson,  bart.  On  the  occasion  of  his  retirement
he  was  knighted.

CAMPBELL,  William  Bowen,  governor  of
Tennessee,  b.  in  Sumner  county,  Tenn.,  1  Feb.,  1807 ;
d.  in  Lebanon,  Tenn.,  19  Aug.,  1867.  He  studied
law  in  Abingdon  and  Winchester,  Va.,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  Tennessee,  and  practised  in  Car-
thage. He  was  chosen  district  attorney  for  the
fourth  district  of  his  state  in  1831,  and  became  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1835.  He  raised  a
cavalry  company,  and  served  as  its  captain  in  the
Creek  and  Florida  wars  of  1836,  and  from  1837  till
1843  was  a  whig  member  of  congress  from  Tennes-
see. He  was  elected  major-general  of  militia  in
1844,  and  served  in  the  Mexican  war  as  colonel  of
the  1st  Tennessee  volunteers,  distinguishing  him-
self in  the  battles  of  Monterey  and  Cerro  Gordo,
where  he  commanded  a  brigade  after  Gen.  Pillow
was  wounded.  He  was  governor  of  Tennessee  in
1851-'3,  and  in  1857  was  chosen,  by  uBanimous
vote  of  the  legislature,  judge  of  the  state  circuit
court.  He  canvassed  the  state  in  opposition  to
secession  in  1861,  and  on  30  June,  1862,  without
solicitation,  was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln
brigadier-general  in  the  National  army.  He  re-
signed, 26  Jan.,  1863,  on  account  of  failing  health.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  again  chosen  to  con-
gress, but  was  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat  until
near  the  end  of  the  first  session  in  1866.  He  served
until  3  March,  1867,  and  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee on  the  New  Orleans  riots.

CAMPBELL,  William  Henry,  educator,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  14 Sept.,  1808 ;  d, in NewBrunswiek,
N,  J.,  7  Dec,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  Princeton
theological  seminary  in  1831,  ordained  by  the  Re-
formed Dutch  classis  of  Cayuga  on  1  Sept.,  1831,
was  pastor  of  the  Reformed  church  in  Chittenango,
N.  Y.,  in  1831-'2,  principal  of  Erasmus  Hall,  Flat-
bush,  L.  I.,  in  1833-'9,  held  several  other  charges,
and  was  professor  of  oriental  literature  in  the  Re-
formed Dutch  theological  seminary.  New  Bruns-
wick, N.  J.,  in  1851-'63,  of  moral  pliilosophy  at
Rutgers  in  1862-'3,  and  president  of  Rutgers  m
1863-82.  During  his  administration  more  than
1200,000  was  raised  for  the  college,  six  new  profes-
sorships established.  Die  number  of  pupils  doubled,
and  several  fine  buildings  erected.  His  publica-
tions include,  besides  numerous  addresses,  "Sub-
jects and  Modes  of  Baptism"  (1844);  "Influence
of  Christianity  in  Civil  and  Religious  Liberty
(Proceedings  of  the  Evangelical  Alliance,  18^);
and  "System  of  Catechetical  Instruction'  (Re-
formed church  centennial  discourses,  1876).


CAMPBELL


CANBY


517


CAMPBELL,  William  W.,  jurist,  b.  in  Cherry
Valley,  Otsego  co.,  N.  Y.,  10  June,  1806 ;  d.  there,
7  Sept.,  1881.  He  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1827,  studied  law  with  Judge  Kent,  and  began
practice  in  New  York  city  in  1831.  He  was  elected
to  congress  by  the  national  American  party,  and
served  from  1  Dec,  1845,  till  8  March,  1847.  After
spending  a  year  in  Europe  he  was  appointed,  in
1849,  a  justice  of  the  superior  court  of  New  York
city,  served  till  1855,  and  from  1857  till  18G5  was
a  judge  of  the  state  supreme  court  for  the  sixth
district.  He  published  •'  Annals  of  Tryon  County,
N.  Y"  (New  York,  1831;  revised  ed.,  entitled
"  Border  Warfare,"  1849 ;  3d  ed..  Cherry  Valley,
N.  Y,  1880) ;  "  Memoirs  of  Mrs.  Grant,  Missionary
to  Persia  "  (1840) ;  "  Life  and  Writings  of  De  Witt
Clinton "  (1849) ;  and  '•  Sketches  of  Robin  Hood
and  Captain  Kidd  "  (1853).

CAMPECHE,  Jos^  (cam-pay'-che),  Porto  Rican

Sainter,  b,  in  St.  John,  Porto  Rico,  6  Jan.,  1752;
.  7  Nov.,  1809.  He  belonged  to  an  humble  family,
and  received  no  artistic  education,  but  from  early
childhood  showed  extraordinary  fondness  for
drawing,  and  soon  became  noted  for  his  composi-
tions and  portraits,  drawn  with  charcoal  or  chalk
on  the  walls  and  curbstones.  Without  means  of
any  kind,  he  learned  how  to  prepare  canvas  and
paints,  and  how  to  make  brushes,  varnishes,  and
everything  else  necessary  to  the  use  of  colors.  Only
in  the  second  period  of  his  artistic  career  did  he  re-
ceive some  few  lessons  from  the  Spanish  painter  Luis
Paredes.  Campeche  gained  great  reputation,  and
King  Charles  IV.,  of  Spain,  appointed  him  painter
to  the  royal  household ;  but  he  never  left  Porto  Rico.
His  paintings  numbered  over  400,  many  of  them
being  very  large.  Their  chief  qualities  are  good
composition,  correctness  of  drawing,  and  beauty  of
color.  The  most  remarkable  are  "  St.  Michel  fight-
ing Satan,"  "  Our  Lady  of  Mercy,"  "  The  Siege  of
St.  John  of  Porto  Rico  by  the  English  in  1797,"
"  St.  Stephen,"  "  Our  Lady  of  Sorrows,"  and  the
"  Nativity  of  the  Saviour."  Campeche  also  showed
artistic  power  in  sculpture,  architecture,  and  music.

CAMPUZANO,  Baltasar,  Peruvian  monk,  b.
in  Lima,  Peru,  or  in  Guadalajara,  about  the  end  of
the  16th  century ;  d.  in  Rome,  Italy,  in  1666.  He
was  prefect  of  the  province  of  his  order,  the  Au-
gustinian,  in  Peru.  He  wrote  "  El  sumo  Sacerdote  "
(Rome,  1655) ;  "  Antigiiedad  de  Guadalajara  "  (Mad-
rid, 1661) ;  "  Conversion  de  la  Reina  de  Suecia " ;
and  "Alma  y  Cuerpo  de  las  Cualidades  de  un
Nepote  de  Papa  "  (Rome,  1666).

CANALES,  Servando  (cah-nah'-les),  Mexican
soldier,  b.  in  Matamoros,  Tamaulipas,  28  June,
1830;  d.  7  Oct.,  1883.  When  the  American  army
passed  the  Mexican  frontier  in  1847  he  joined  the
national  troops  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Padi-
erna,  but  left  the  regular  army  and  became  a  gue-
rilla. At  the  end  of  the  war  he  had  reputation  and
influence  in  the  state  of  Tamaulipas,  where  after-
ward he  was  a  rival  of  his  old  friend.  Gen.  Cortina,
in  smuggling  and  similar  pursuits.  From  1852  till
1857  he  served  under  Gen.  Vidaurri  as  a  colonel,  and
then  retired  to  his  ranch  of  Las  Piedras,  but  in
1881  again  organized  a  guerilla  band,  joined  Gen.
Ignaeio  Zaragoza,  and  accompanied  him  at  the
siege  of  Puebla  in  May,  1862.  Canales  escaped
from  that  city,  went  to  "the  frontier,  and  assumed
command  of  a  volunteer  corps  of  cavalry,  contin-
ued the  warfare  against  the  French,  and  in  1867
mcorporated  his  troops  with  those  of  Gen,  Esco-
bedo.  He  took  part  in  the  siege  of  Queretaro,  and
was  present  at  the  execution  of  Maximilian  and
Gens.  Miramon  and  Mejia.  Having  rebelled  with
300  horsemen  in  favor  of  Porfirio  Diaz  in  Febru-


ary, 1874,  he  sustained  his  operations  in  the  states
of  Nuevo  Leon  and  Coahuila  until  1876,  when  the
revolutionists  completed  their  triumph.  In  the  fol-
lowing year  the  new  government  gave  him  the
military  command  of  that  section  of  Mexico,  and
in  1879  he  was  elected  governor  of  Tamaulipas.
He  visited  the  forts  in  Texas,  and  often  prevented
serious  difficulties  on  the  frontier.

CANBY,  Edward  Richard  Spri^^,  soldier,  b.
in  Kentucky  in  1819 ;  killed  in  Siskiyou  co.,  Cal.,
11  April,  1873.  His  parents  removed  to  Indiana,
where  he  went  to  school,  and  whence  he  was  ap-
pointed cadet  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1835.  He  was  graduated  in  1839  in  the  same  "class
with  Gens.  Halleck,  Isaac  Stevens,  Ord,  Paine,  of
Illinois,  and  other  distinguished  officers.  After
graduation  he  was  at  once  commissioned  second
lieutenant,  assigned  to  the  2d  infantry,  and  served
in  the  Florida  war  as  quartermaster  and  commis-
sary of  subsistence  from  October,  1839  till  1842,
and  after  the
close  of  that
war  was  en-
gaged in  the
removal  of
the  Chero-
kees.  Creeks,
and  Choctaws
to  the  present
Indian  terri-
tory. He  was
on  garrison
duty  from
1842  till  1845,
and  on  re-
cruiting ser-
vice during
1845  and  a
lart  of  1846.
March,
1846,  he  was
appointed  ad-
jutant of  his  regiment,  and  three  months  later  was
promoted  to  a  first  lieutenancy.  The  outbreak  of
the  Mexican  war  called  his  regiment  into  active  ser-
vice. Serving  under  Gen.  Riley,  he  was  present  at
the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz,  at  Cerro  Gordo,  Contreras,
and  'Churubusco,  as  well  as  at  the  attack  upon  the
Belen  gate,  city  of  Mexico.  He  received  the  brevets
of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel  for  his  services  in
this  campaign,  and  was  promoted  to  the  full  rank  of
captain  in  June,  1851 ;  but,  having  been  transferred
to  the  adjutant-general's  department  as  assistant
adjutant-general,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colo-
nel, he  relinquished  his  rank  in  the  line.  In  March,
1855,  he  was  appointed  major  of  the  10th  U.  S.  in-
fantry, a  new  regiment,  with  which  he  was  engaged
on  frontier  duty  in  western  Wisconsin  and  Minne-
sota for  the  next  three  years,  and  in  1858  was  or-
dered to  Fort  Bridger,  Utah,  where  his  command
included  portions  of  the  2d  dragoons  and  7th  and
10th  U.  S.  infantry.  He  held  this  post  until  18G0,
when  he  was  appointed  commander  of  the  expedi-
tion against  the  Navajo  Indians,  and  was  in  com-
mand of  Fort  Defiance,  New  Mexico,  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  At  that  critical  period,
wheii  officers  from  the  border  states  were  daily
sending  in  their  resignations,  Maj.  Canby  did  not
leave  his  loyalty  in  doubt  for  a  moment,  and
throughout  the  war  was  one  of  the  most  active  and
conspicuous  defenders  of  the  union.  In  May,  1861,
he  was  made  colonel  of  the  19th  regiment,  U.  S.
infantry,  and  was  acting  brigadier-general  of  the
forces  in  New  Mexico.  In  1862  he  repelled  the
Confederate  Gen.  Sibley  in  his  daring  attempt  to


pai
In


i^c6^1yl^^


L^


518


CAN  BY


CANCER


acquire  possession  ol'  that  territory,  and  had  the
satisfaction  of  seeing  the  invader  retreat,  "  leaving
behind  him,"  as  he  observed  in  his  report,  "  in  dead
and  wounded,  and  in  sick  and  prisoners,  one  half
of  his  original  force."  He  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  31  March,
1862,  and,  after  transferring  the  command  of  the
forces  in  New  Mexico,  he  went  to  Washington,
where  he  rendered  valuable  assistance  to  Sec.
Stanton  in  the  war  department.  He  took  com-
mand of  the  U.  S.  troops  in  New  York  city  and
harbor  during  the  draft  riots  of  July,  1863,  and,  by
his  energetic  measures  and  resolute  bearing,  as-
sisted materially  in  the  suppression  of  the  rioters.
He  remained  there  until  November,  1863,  when  he
resumed  his  place  at  the  war  department.  At  the
opening  of  the  campaign  of  1864,  Gen.  Canby  re-
ceived the  rank  of  major-general  of  volunteers,
and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  military  divi-
sion of  west  Mississippi,  a  place  that  he  held  until
some  months  after  the  close  of  the  war.  His  first
act  in  this  field  of  duty  was  to  take  charge  of  Gen.
Banks's  retreating  forces  at  the  Atchafalaya  and
conduct  them  safely  to  New  Orleans,  where  for
want  of  troops  he  remained  inactive  throughout
the  summer  and  autumn  of  1864.  While  on  a  tour
of  inspection  on  White  river,  Ark.,  4  Nov.,  1864,
he  was  severely  wounded  by  confederate  guerillas ;
but,  as  soon  as  he  was  suflficiently  re-enforced,  he
proceeded,  with  an  army  of  from  25,000  to  30,000
men,  against  Mobile,  which,  with  the  assistance  of
the  fleet,  was  captured,  12  April,  1865.  On  learn-
ing of  the  surrender  of  the  confederate  forces  in
Virginia,  Gen.  Richard  Taylor,  who  commanded
west  of  the  Mississippi,  surrendered  to  Gen.  Canby,
and  hostilities  ceased.  On  13  March,  1865,  Gen.
Canby  received  the  brevets  of  brigadier-  and  major-
general  of  the  regular  army.  He  remained  in  com-
mand of  southern  military'departments  until  1866,
when  he  was  transferred  to  Washington,  and  re-
ceived, 28  July,  1866,  the  full  rank  of  brigadier-
general  in  the  regular  army.  After  the  surrender
he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  different  districts
having  Richmond  as  its  centre,  and  assumed  the
responsibility  of  permitting  the  paroled  cavalry  of
Lee's  army  to  reorganize  for  the  suppression  of
"  bushwhacking,"  which  was  rife  in  the  neighbor-
hood. The  measure  was  entirely  successful,  and
no  bad  results  followed.  Subsequently  he  was  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  special  commission  for
deciding  claims  on  the  war  department,  and  of  the
board  to  prepare  plans  for  a  new  building  for  the
same  department.  Afterward  he  was  placed  in
command  of  the  department  of  Columbia,  and  was
during  the  winter  of  1872-'3  actively  engaged  in
bringing  the  Modocs  to  accept  the  term's  offered
them  by  the  government.  He  was  specially  adapted
for  this  duty.  Pie  had  never  shared  in  the  bitter
hatred  of  the  Indians,  so  common  on  the  border,
but  had  always  leaned  to  the  side  of  humanity  in
his  dealings  with  them.  Only  four  days  before  his
death  he  sent  a  despatch  to  Washington,  which,
read  in  the  tragic  light  of  after-events,  shows  both
his  generosity  to  his  slayers  and  his  sagacious
doubts  of  them  :  "  I  do  not  question  the  right  or
the  power  of  the  general  government  to  make  any
arrangement  that  may  be  thought  proper ;  but  I
think  they  should  make  such  as  to  secure  a  perma-
nent peace,  together  with  liberal  and  just  treat-
ment of  the  Indians.  In  my  judgment,  permanent
peace  cannot  be  secured  if  they  are  allowed  to  re-
main in  this  immediate  neighborhood.  The  Mo-
does  are  now  sensible  that  they  cannot  live  in  peace
on  Lost  river,  and  have  abandoned  their  claim  to
it,  but  wish  to  be  left  in  the  lava-beds. This  means


license  to  plunder  and  a  stronghold  to  retreat  to,
and  was  refused.  Their  last  proposition  is  to  come
in  and  have  the  opportunity  of  looking  for  a  new
home  not  far  away,  and  if  they  are  sincere  in  this
the  trouble  will  soon  be  ended.  But  there  has
been  so  much  vacillation  and  duplicity  in  their
talks  that  I  have  hesitated  about  reporting  until
some  definite  result  was  attained."  On  11  April,
in  company  with  two  other  officers,  he  met  "  Capt!
Jack,"  the  leader  of  the  Modocs,  on  neutral  ground
to  confer  regarding  a  treaty  of  peace.  At  a  pre-
concerted signal  the  Indians  killed  all  the  commis-
sioners before  the  escort  could  come  to  the  rescue,
and  escaped  to  their  stronghold  in  the  lava-beds.
Subsequently  they  were  captured,  and  "  Capt.
Jack,"  with  two  of  his  subordinates,  was  tried  and
executed.  Gen.  Canby  was  a  remarkable  instance
of  an  officer  of  high  rank  and  universal  popularity
without  enemies  in  his  profession.  He  was  so  up-
right that  he  was  very  rarely  criticised  by  his
brother  officers,  save  by  those  who  gave  him  reason
for  official  displeasure.  He  had  little  ambition  be-
yond his  duty,  was  always  satisfied,  or  appeared  to
be,  with  any  position  to  which  he  was  assigned,
and  never  engaged  in  any  of  those  squabbles  or  in-
trigues for  preferment  which  deface  the  record  of
many  able  soldiers.  He  had  a  singular  power  of
inspiring  implicit  confidence  among  those  who
served  under  his  command.  His  assignment  to
any  department  where,  through  incompetence  or
lack  of  zeal  on  the  part  of  the  commander,  affairs
had  drifted  into  confusion,  was  the  signal  for  the
inauguration  of  order  and  discipline.  The  time-
honored  but  often  misapplied  phrase,  "an  officer
and  a  gentleman,"  admirably  describes  this  soldier
of  the  republic.  He  was  tall  and  athletic,  in  man-
ner courteous,  but  rather  reserved  and  silent,  the
ideal  of  a  thoughtful,  studious  soldier.

CANCER,  Luis,  missionary,  b.  in  Saragossa,
Spain  (or  in  Barbastro,  Spain,  according  to  other
authorities) ;  d.  in  Florida  in  1549.  He  entered  the
Dominican  order  in  Spain,  and  went  as  a  missionary
to  America.  He  was  first  stationed  in  Vera  Paz,
but  afterward  took  up  his  residence  in  the  city  of
Mexico.  While  there  his  thoughts  were  directed
to  the  conversion  of  the  natives  of  Florida,  and  he
resolved  to  seek  assistance  in  Spain  for  this  object.
He  sailed  in  1547  with  Las  Casas,  landed  at  Seville,
and  at  once  repaired  to  the  court  at  Valladolid,
The  king  ordered  the  board  of  trade  of  Seville  to
supply  him  with  everything  necessary  for  his  mis-
sion, and  he  also  obtained  a  royal  decree  command-
ing that  all  the  natives  of  Florida  taken  by  De  Soto,
and  held  as  slaves  in  Chiapa  and  Guatemala,  should
be  released.  He  was  unable  to  enforce  this  decree,
as  some  of  the  Florida  Indians  had  become  mixed
with  the  Mexican  tribes,  and  those  he  discovered
were  unwilling  to  return  to  Florida.  The  vessel
that  was  to  take  Father  Cancer  and  his  companions
to  Florida  stopped  at  Havana,  where  he  found  an
Indian  Christian  woman  named  Magdalena,  who
consented  to  accompanv  the  expedition  as  inter-
preter. The  ship  reached  the  coast  of  Florida  on
Ascension  day,  1549,  and  a  boat  was  sent  out  to  i-e-
connoitre.  Father  Cancer  wished  to  land,  but  the
captain  would  not  permit  him,  as  his  destination
was  the  bay  of  Espiritu  Santo.  After  wastingsev
eral  days  in  search  of  it,  the  Dominicans  insisted  on
landing.  The  sailors  refused  to  accompany  them
unless  they  were  allowed  to  take  their  arms  with
them  ;  but,  as  this  was  contrary  to  the  custom  of
the  missionaries,  Father  Cancer  debarked  with  two
companions  and  Magdalena.  He  gained  the  good
will  of  the  Indians  by  presents,  and  explained  his
mission through the interpreter. The natives


CANDfA


CANFIELD


519


seemed  so  friendly  that  after  a  few  days  he  em-
barked for  another  part  of  the  coast,  leaving  his
companions  behind  him.  On  the  return  of  the
vessel  to  the  same  part  of  the  coast,  a  canoe  put
out  containing  a  single  Spaniard,  a  survivor  of  De
Soto's  expedition,  who  assured  Father  Cancer  that
his  companions  had  been  put  to  death.  The  mis-
sionary refused  to  believe  this,  and,  notwithstand-
ing the  entreaties  of  the  sailors,  got  into  a  boat
and  rowed  to  the  shore.  An  Indian  met  him,  kiss-
ing a  cross  that  he  handed  to  a  woman  whom  the
missionary  discovered  to  be  Magdalena.  She  in-
formed him  that  the  two  Spaniards  were  safe  in
the  tent  of  the  cacique,  and  he  followed  her  up  a
hill,  when  he  was  immediately  surrounded  by  In-
dians, who  fell  on  him  and  killed  him.  His  scalp
was  hung  up  in  the  temple  of  the  sun,  and  his  body
eaten  by  the  natives.  Father  Cancer  was  one  of
the  most  ardent  advocates  of  freedom  for  the  In-
dians at  the  special  meeting  of  bishops  and  theo-
logians held  in  Mexico  in  1546.  He  wrote  a  work
in  the  Zapotec  language,  entitled  "  Varias  cancio-
nes  en  verso  zapoteco  sobre  los  Misterios  de  la  Re-
ligion para  uso  de  los  ncofitos  de  la  Vera  Paz."

CANDIA,  Pedro  de,  Greek  adventurer,  b.  in
the  island  of  Crete  in  the  latter  part  of  the  14th
century;  d.  in  Chupas,  Peru,  16  Sept.,  1543.  He
had  served  in  the  Spanish  royal  guard,  and  fought
in  Italy  against  the  Turks,  and  afterward  went  to
America  with  Gov.  Pedro  de  los  Rios.  He  then
accompanied  Diego  de  Almagro  and  Francisco  Pi-
zarro  during  their  first  explorations  along  the
coasts  of  Peru,  and  when  the  landing  at  Tacamez,
north  of  Guayaquil,  was  effected,  he  already  had
command  of  the  artillery.  He  was  one  of  the  thir-
Lcen  men  that  remained' in  the  islands  of  Gallo  and
Gorgona  or  San  Cristobal  with  Pizarro,  and  during
the  subsequent  explorations  of  the  Peruvian  ports
he  undertook  to  go  in  person  to  the  Indian  towns
and  investigate  their  condition.  He  then  visited
Tumbez  (afterward  called  Valencia),  and  returned
to  the  fleet  with  a  map  of  that  city  drawn  on  can-
vas. When  he  accompanied  Pizarro  to  Spain  to
inform  Charles  V.  of  their  discoveries,  the  emperor
made  Candia  a  nobleman,  mayor  of  Tumbez,  and
commander-in-chief  of  artillery  of  the  fleet  sent
out  to  conquer  Peru.  He  was'  present  at  the  de-
feat and  imprisonment  of  Atahualpa,  and  received
a  large  share  of  the  ransom  paid  by  that  Inca.
While  residing  at  Cuzco,  he  made  arms  and  ammu-
nition for  Pizarro,  who  was  then  fighting  against
Almagro.  After  the  defeat  of  Almagro  at  Las
Salinas,  Candia  undertook  the  conquest  of  Ambaya
beyond  the  Andes,  but  was  unsuccessful,  being
finally  arrested  by  order  of  Hernando  Pizarro.  Dis-
gusted at  his  treatment,  and  deserted  by  his  old
friends,  he  then  joined  the  followers  of  Almagro
and,  with  the  aid  of  sixteen  other  Greeks,  cast  the
guns  that  were  taken  by  young  Almagro  to  the
battle  of  Chupas,  where  Candia  used  them  so  badly
that  Almagro  suspected  treason  on  his  part  and
killed  him  with  his  own  hand.

CANDIDUS,  William,  opera-singer,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  23  July,  1840.  In  1861  he  sang  first
bass  in  several  musical  societies  in  his  native  city.
In  the  civil  war  he  served  three  years  in  the  na-
tional artillery,  being  advanced  to  the  grade  of
major.  During  his  military  service  his  voice  gradu-
ally changed  from  first  bass  to  tenor.  After  his
return  from  the  war  he  accepted  the  place  of  tone-
regulator  in  the  piano-forte  factory  of  Steinway  &
Sons,  in  New  York.  He  became  a  member  of  "the
Arion  and  Liederkranz  societies,  but  soon  went
ai)road  and  studied  for  the  operatic  stage  under
Konapazeck,  of  Berlin,  making  his  debut  in  Weimar


as  Stradella.  Subsequently  he  studied  under  Rou-
chetti,  of  Milan,  and  in  1880  became  a  member  of
the  opera  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main,  where  he  re-
mained until  the  autumn  of  1885,  when  he  joined
the  American  opera  company.

CANEDO,  Juan  de  Dios  (cah-nya'-do),  Mexican
statesman,  b.  in  Guadalajara,  18  Jan.,  1786;  d.  in
the  city  of  Mexico,  28  March,  1850.  He  received  a
good  education  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1809.^  He  was  elected  a  deputy  to  the  Spanish
Cortes  in  1813,  and  soon  became  prominent  as  a
parliamentary  orator.  While  in  Madrid  he  pub-
lished a  manifesto  to  the  Spanish  nation  in  defence
of  the  colonial  interests,  which  was  eagerly  read
both  in  Spain  and  her  American  possessions.  On
his  return  to  Mexico  in  1824,  Canedo  took  part  in
the  debate  relative  to  the  new  republican  constitu-
tion. He  was  several  times  deputy  and  senator,
minister  of  foreign  affairs  under  Victoria's  admin-
istration, represented  his  country  as  plenipoten-
tiary in  Brazil,  Peru,  and  Chili,  and  was  in  charge
of  the  foreign  office  and  the  department  of  the  in-
terior under  Bustamante.  Afterward  he  went  to
Europe,  where  he  resided  for  some  years,  and  had
just  returned  to  Mexico  when  he  was  killed  by  an
unknown  assassin.

CANEK,  cacique  of  Itzalan,  Mexico;  d.  about
1532.  The  capital  of  his  kingdom  was  on  an
island  at  the  centre  of  Lake  Itza  (Peten),  and  when
Cortes  visited  the  shores  of  that  lake  on  his  way  to
Hibueras,  Canek  and  his  court  met  him  in  a  most
friendly  manner,  and,  after  entertaining  him  for  a
few  days,  became  a  Christian  and  a  subject  of  the
king  of  Spain.  Afterward  he  made  many  efforts
to  suppress  idolatry  among  his  people,  but  did  not
succeed.  On  his  departure  from  Peten  the  Spanish
conqueror  had  left  a  sick  horse  under  the  care  of
the  Indians,  who  did  their  best  to  cure  him ;  but
the  horse  died  and  the  Itznex  raised  statues  to  him
and  worshipped  them  as  the  representation  of  the
god  of  lightning.

CANEK,  Yucatec  prince  of  the  royal  family  of
Mami,  founder  of  the  Itza  nation,  flourished  in
the  early  part  of  the  15th  century.  He  was  one  of
the  tributary  princes  that  declared  their  independ-
ence of  the  old  Yucatec  or  Maya  monarchy  nearly
100  years  before  the  conquest  of  Mexico  by  the
Spaniards.  Canek  did  not  separate  from  the  old
kingdom  for  political  reasons ;  he  fell  in  love  with
the  betrothed  of  another  prince,  and,  being  unable
to  prevent  her  marriage  by  any  other  means,  gath-
ered some  of  his  followers,  attacked  the  wedding
party  during  the  ceremony,  and  carried  away  the
bride.  The  disappointed  bridegroom  led  a  numer-
ous army  against  Canek,  who  took  refuge  in  the
mountainous  country  between  Chipas,  Yucatan,
and  Guatamala,  and  there  founded  the  Itza  nation.

CANETTA,  Andres  Hiirtado  de  Mendoza
(cah-nay'-tah).  Marquis  of,  Spanish  statesman,  d.
in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1560.  Charles  V.  sent  him  to
Peru  as  viceroy  in  1557.  Canetta  established  peace
among  the  different  parties  that  were  contending
in  the  kingdom  of  Peru,  and  tried  to  gain  the
friendship  of  the  last  Incas.  He  sent  an  expedi-
tion to  the  Amazon  river  under  command  of  Pedro
de  Ursua,  who  died  at  the  hands  of  his  subordi-
nate officers.  Some  persons,  who  had  been  severely
treated  by  Canetta,  sent  their  complaints  to  the
king,  who  immediately  recalled  the  viceroy.

CANFIELD,  Francesca  Anna,  poet.  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  August,  1803;  d.  28  May,
1823.  She  was  a  daughter  of  Dr.  Felix  Pascalis,
an  Italian  physician.  Her  parents  removed  to  New
York  while  she  was  a  child,  and  she  began  at  an
early  age  to  write  verses. Besides  many  original


520


CANFIELD


CANONICUS


poems,  both  in  English  and  Italian,  published  in
various  journals,  she  made  graceful  translations
from  foreign  tongues.  Many  of  her  verses  ap-
peared in  a  commercial  gazette  established  by  her
husband,  a  New  York  broker,  who  died  in  1833
while  preparing  her  poems  for  publication.

CANFIELD,  Henry  Judson,  author,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1789 ;  d.  in  1856.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1806,  contributed  to  the  "  Ohio  Cultivator  "
and  the  "  American  Agriculturist,"  and  published
a  "  Treatise  on  the  Breed,  Management,  Structure,
and  Diseases  of  Sheep."

CANNIFF,  William,  Canadian  physician,  b.
near  Belleville,  Ontario,  in  1830.  He  was  educat-
ed at  Victoria  college,  Cobourg,  studied  medicine
at  the  Toronto  school  of  medicine,  and  at  New
York  university,  and  in  London,  England,  and
took  the  degree  of  M.  li.  C.  S.  In  1856  he  passed
the  army  medical  board,  and  was  on  duty  for  a
time  during  the  Crimean  war  in  the  royal  artillery.
Then  he  returned  to  Canada,  and  was  called  to  the
chair  of  general  pathology  in  Victoria  college,  and
afterward  becan\e  professor  of  surgery  in  the  same
institution.  During  the  civil  war  in  the  United
States  he  visited  the  hospitals  at  Washington,  and
was  for  a  time  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.
After  his  return  to  Canada  he  resumed  the  prac-
tice of  his  profession  at  Belleville,  but  finally  re-
moved to  Toronto.  Dr.  Canniff  was  one  of  the
originators  of  the  "  Canada  First "  movement,  has
been  president  of  the  medical  section  of  the  Cana-
dian institute,  was  invited  by  the  medical  faculty
of  Paris  to  attend  the  International  medical  con-
gress as  a  delegate  to  that  city  in  1867,  and,  with
others,  formed  the  Canadian  medical  association  of
Quebec  in  October,  1807.  He  has  written  for  medi-
cal and  other  periodicals,  and  is  the  author  of  the
"  Principles  of  Surgery  "  and  the  "  Settlement  of
Upper  Canada."

CANNON,  Charles  James,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  4  Nov.,  1800 ;  d.  there,  9  Nov.,  1860.  He
was  of  Irish  parentage,  and  wrote  poems,  dramas,
and  novels.  Among  his  publications  are  "  Poems,
Dramatic  and  Miscellaneous"  (New  York,  1851);
"Ravellings  from  the  Web  of  Life"  (1856);
"  Dramas "  (1857) ;  "  Facts,  Feelings,  and  Fan-
cies," "  The  Poet's  Quest,"  "  Mora  Carmody,"  and
"  Father  Felix,  a  Catholic  Story."  His  dramas  in-
clude "  The  Oath  of  Office,"  "  Tighe  Lifford,"  "  The
Crowning  Hour,"  "  The  Sculptor's  Daughter,"
"  Better  Late  than  Never,"  and  *'  Dolores,  a  Trag-
edy." Mr.  Cannon  also  compiled  a  "  Practical
English  Spelling-Book"  (New  York,  1852)  and  a
series  of  readers.

CANNON,  James  Spencer,  clergyman,  b.  on
the  island  of  Curagoa,  28  Jan.,  1776 ;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  25  July,  1852.  His  father  was  a
sea-captain,  who  was  drowned  when  James  was  a
boy.  He  was  educated  at  the  academy  of  Dr.  Peter
Wilson,  in  Hackensack,  N.  J,,  and  subsequently
under  the  care  of  Rev.  Alexander  Miller.  After
studying  theology  with  Dr.  Froeligh  and  Prof.
John  H.  Livingston,  he  was  licensed  to  preach  by
the  New  Brunswick  classis  in  1796,  and  soon  after-
ward became  pastor  of  the  Dutch  Reformed
churches  of  Millstone,  and  Six-Mile  Run,  N.  J.,
finally  devoting  himself  entirely  to  the  latter
church.  He  was  elected  professor  of  pastoral  the-
ology and  ecclesiastical  history  in  the  Reformed
Dutch  theological  seminary  at  New  Brunswick  in
1826,  and  remained  there  until  his  death,  holding
also  the  chair  of  metaphysics  at  Rutgers.  He  pub-
lished, for  the  use  of  his  students,  "  Lectures  on
Chronology  "  and  "  Lectures  on  Pastoral  Theology."
The  latter,  with  a  memoir  of  the  author,  was  re-


published after  his  death  (New  York,  1853).  Union
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1819.  l)r.
Cannon  was  a  hard  student  and  a  successful
teacher.  His  discussion  of  the  sacraments  was
considered  especially  able.

CANNON,  Newton,  governor  of  Tennessee,  b.
in  Guilford  co.,  N.  C,  about  1781 ;  d.  in  Harpeth,
Williamson  co.,  Tenn.,  29  Sept.,  1842.  After  re-
ceiving a  public-school  education  he  removed  to
Tennessee,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legislature  in
1811-'2.  He  was  colonel  of  the  Tennessee  mount-
ed rifles,  composed  of  three-months'  volunteers,
from  24  Sept.  till  18  Dec,  1813,  and  commanded
the  left  column  in  the  battle  of  Tallushatchee,
with  the  Creek  Indians,  3  Nov.,  1813.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  democrat  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  resignation  of  Felix  Grundy,  and
served  from  1814  till  1817,  and  again  from  1819
till  1823.  In  1819  he  was  appointed  by  President
Monroe  one  of  two  commissioners  to  treat  with  the
Chickasaw  Indians,  and  was  governor  of  Tennes-
see from  1835  till  1839.

CANNON,  William,  governor  of  Delaware,  b.
in  Bridgeville,  Del.,  in  1809;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  1  March,  1865.  He  united  with  the  Methodist
church  in  1825,  became  a  class-leader  and  exhorter
before  he  had  reached  his  twentieth  year,  and  held
these  offices  until  his  death.  He  was  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1845  and  1849,  and  was  afterward
treasurer  of  the  state.  In  1861  he  was  a  member
of  the  peace  congress,  where  he  was  "the  firm
friend  of  the  Crittenden  compromise,  and  of  an
unbroken  union."  In  1864  he  was  elected  governor
of  the  state,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death.
The  legislature  was  against  him  ;  but  he  remained
true  to  the  union.  When,  on  one  occasion,  the
legislature  forbade  compliance  with  a  law  of  con-
gress, the  governor  promptly  announced,  by  proc-
lamation, that  he  would  pardon  every  U.  S.  oificer
convicted  by  a  state  court  for  the  performance  of
his  duty  to  the  union.  In  his  message  to  the  legis-
lature in  1864  he  advised  that  body  to  take  meas-
ures for  the  emancipation  of  slaves  in  Delaware.
The  illness  that  caused  his  death  was  the  result  of
over-exertion  in  assisting  to  extinguish  a  fire  in
Bridgeville.

CANONICUS,  an  Indian  chief,  b.  about  1565;
d.  4  June,  1647.  He  was  king  of  the  Narragansett
tribe  when  the  pilgrim  fathers  landed  at  Plymouth,
and  one  of  the  first  with  whom  they  had  dealings.
In  1622  he  was  inclined  to  wage  war  against  the
colony,  which  was  a  serious  matter,  since  he  could
muster  about  3,000  warriors.  As  an  intimation  of
his  mood,  he  sent  to  the  governor  a  bundle  of  ar-
rows tied  with  a  snake-skin.  By  a  happy  inspira-
tion, the  skin  was  filled  with  powder  and  bullets
and  returned.  Negotiations  followed  this  defiant
answer,  and  peace  was  established  outlasting  the
life  of  Canonicus.  When  Roger  Williams  and  his
company  felt  constrained  to  withdraw  from  the
colony  at  Massachusetts  bay,  they  sought  refuge
at  Narragansett,  where  Canonicus  made  them  wel-
come, and  actually  gave  them  the  neck  of  land
where  Providence  now  stands.  Fifty  years  after-
ward Williams  testified  to  his  uniform  friendliness
and  generosity.  In  1637  an  embassy  sent  to  him
from  Massachusetts  was  received  in  a  lodge  fifty
feet  wide,  made  of  poles  and  covered  with  mats.
Here,  seated  and  surrounded  by  his  savage  court-
iers, Canonicus  received  the  messengers  in  royal
state,  and  provided  a  feast,  among  the  it^ms  of
which  are  enumerated  boiled  chestnuts  and  boiled
Indian  pudding  stuffed  with  "  black  berries,  some-
what like  currants."  During  this  period  Canoni-
cus engaged  in  warfare  with  the  Pequots  and  other


CANOT


CAPERS


521


neighboring  tribes,  but  studiously  maintained
peace  with  the  whites,  and  at  last  (19  April,  1644)
he  made  a  formal  treaty  acknowledging  the  sov-
ereignty of  Britain.  The  influence  of  his  wise
counsels  lasted  for  many  years  after  his  death,  and
the  Narragansett  tribe  maintained  peaceful  relations
with  the  English  until  Philip's  war  in  1675,  when
they  became  hostile,  and  were  exterminated.

CANOT,  Theodore,  adventurer,  b.  in  Florence,
Italy,  about  1807.  He  was  the  son  of  a  captain
and  paymaster  in  the  French  army.  After  an  or-
dinary school  education  he  shipped  as  a  seaman  in
the  American  ship  "  Galatea,"  of  Boston,  from  Leg-
horn to  Calcutta.  He  made  several  voyages  from
Boston,  was  wrecked  near  Ostend,  and  again  on
the  coast  of  Cuba,  where  he  was  captured  by
pirates.  One  of  these  claimed  to  be  his  uncle,  and
sent  him  to  an  Italian  grocer  near  Havana,  who
was  secretly  engaged  in  the  slave-trade.  At  Ha-
vana he  shipped  on  a  slaver,  and  made  his  first
voyage  to  Africa  in  1826,  landing  at  the  slave
factory  of  Bangalang,  on  the  river  Pongo.  Senegam-
bia.  After  quelling  a  mutiny  on  board,  and  aid-
ing to  stow  away  108  slaves  in  a  hold  twenty-two
inches  high,  he  entered  the  service  of  the  owner  of
the  factory.  In  1827  a  friend  in  Havana  consigned
to  him  a  slave  schooner,  which  he  loaded  with  217
negroes,  receiving  |5,565  commission,  while  the
Cuban  owners  realized  a  clear  profit  of  $41,438.
Canot  then  established  a  slave-station  at  Kambia,
near  Bangalang.  He  became  a  favorite  with  the
native  chiefs,  and  by  their  aid  soon  collected  a
stock  of  slaves.  Another  vessel  was  sent  out  to
him  from  Cuba ;  but,  the  captain  dying,  he  took
command  and  sailed  for  Regla,  but  was  soon  cap-
tured by  two  British  cruisers  after  a  severe  fight.
He  made  his  escape  in  a  small  boat,  with  one  com-
panion, and  reached  the  river  Pongo.  After  the
destruction  of  his  factory  and  goods  by  fire  in  May,
1828,  he  purchased  a  vessel  at  Sierra  Leone,  in
which,  with  a  cargo  of  slaves,  he  sailed  to  Cuba.
Three  more  expeditions  soon  followed ;  in  the  first
he  lost  300  slaves  by  small-pox  ;  in  the  last  he  was
taken  by  the  French,  and  condemned  to  ten  years'
confinement  in  the  prison  of  Brest,  but  a  year  after
he  was  pardoned  by  Louis  Philippe.  He  returned
to  Africa,  and  was  the  pioneer  of  the  slave  traffic
at  New  Sestros,  and  in  1840  shipped  749  slaves
froni  there  to  Cuba.  He  established  in  1841  a
trading  and  farming  settlement,  under  the  name  of
New  Florence,  at  Cape  Mount,  where  he  had  ob-
tained a  grant  of  land ;  but  in  March,  1847,  New
Florence  was  destroyed  by  the  British,  w^ho  sus-
pected it  to  be  a  slave-station,  and  Canot  rcinoved
to  South  America,  where  he  engaged  in  commerce.
He  resided  for  some  time  in  Baltimore,  and  finally
received  from  Napoleon  IIL  an  office  in  one  of  the
French  colonies  in  Oceania.  A  narrative  of  his
adventures,  compiled  by  Brantz  Mayer  from  his
own  notes,  and  entitled  "  Captain  Canot,  or  Twenty
Years  of  an  African  Slaver,"  has  been  published
(New  York,  1854).

CAONABO  (cah-o-na'-bo),  one  of  the  principal
caciques  who  ruled  at  Hispaniola  (now  Santo  Do-
mingo) when  Columbus  discovered  and  took  pos-
session of  that  island ;  d.  at  sea  in  1494.  He  was
a  brother  of  the  famous  Indian  queen  Anacaona,
and  determined  to  drive  out  the  invaders.  He  at-
tacked a  small  fort,  that  of  La  Natividad,  erected
by  Columbus  when  he  first  landed  on  the  island,
overpowered  those  who  defended  it  under  the
command  of  Diego  de  Arana,  and  slaughtered  the
whole  garrison.  Soon  afterward  he  was  taken  pris-
oner by  Alonso  de  Ojeda,  and  sent  to  Spain,  but
died  during  the  voyage.


CAPEN,  Elmer  Hewitt,  educator,  b.  in  Stough-
ton,  Norfolk  co.,  Mass.,  5  April,  1838.  He  was
graduated  at  Tufts  in  I860,  and  elected  to  the
legislature  in  1859,  while  still  in  college.  After
spending  a  year  in  the  Harvard  law-school  he  Avas
admitted  to  the  Suffolk  co.  bar  in  1863.  practising
for  a  short  time  in  Stoughton,  Mass.,  when  he  be-
gan the  study  of  theology.  He  was  ordained  in
Gloucester,  Mass.,  in  1865,  as  pastor  of  the  inde-
pendent Christian  church,  and  remained  there  till
1869.  After  preaching  a  year  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,
he  became  in  1870  pastor  of  the  1st  Universalist
church  of  Providence,  R.  I.  He  was  chosen  presi-
dent of  Tufts  college  in  1875.

CAPEN,  Nahuiu,  author,  b.  in  Canton,  Mass.,
1  April,  1804;  d.  in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  in  1886.
At  the  age  of  twenty-one  he  entered  the  publish-
ing business  in  Boston  as  a  member  of  the  firm  of
Marsh,  Capen  &  Lyon.  From  1847  till  1851  he
edited  the  ''  Massachusetts  State  Record."  He  was
among  the  first  to  memorialize  congress  on  the
subject  of  international  copyright,  and  a  letter  of
his,  published  by  the  U.  S.  senate,  led  to  the  organ-
ization of  the  Census  board  at  Washington.  From
1857  till  1861  he  was  postmaster  of  Boston,  and
established  the  custom  of  collecting  letters  from
street-boxes.  He  wrote  many  articles  for  the  press,
and  published  "  The  Republic  of  the  United  States,"
having  special  reference  to  the  Mexican  war  (New
York,  1848),  and  "  Reminiscences  of  Spurzheim  and
Combe  "  (1881).  For  many  years  he  had  been  en-
gaged upon  a  "  History  of  Democracy,"  which  at
the  time  of  his  death  was  nearly  completed.

CAPERS,  William,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  St.
Thomas  parish,  S.  C,  26  Jan.,  1790  ;  d.  in  Ander-
son, S.  C,  29  Jan.,  1855.  His  father,  who  was  of
Huguenot  descent,  served  with  distinction  in  the
revolutionary  army  as  a  captain  under  Gen.  Mar-
ion. After  attending  Dr.  Roberts's  academy  in
Statesburg,  Sumter  district,  from  1801  till  1805,
young  Capers  entered  South  Carolina  college  as  a
sophomore,  but  in  1808  he  left  college  and  began
the  study  of  law  with  Judge  Richardson.  He
joined  the  Methodist  church  in  August,  1808,  and
soon  afterward,  through  the  influence  of  William
Gassoway,  an  itinerant  preacher,  decided  to  accom-
pany him  on  his  rounds.  His  scruples  against
preaching  without  preparatory  study  were  over-
come by  his  friend,  and  he  was  licensed  on  25
Nov.,  1808.  After  filling  various  appointments  he
settled  on  a  farm  in  December,  1814,  but  continued
to  preach  every  week,  and  in  1816  opened  a  school
in  Georgetown,  S.  C,  He  returned  to  active  min-
isterial duties  in  1818,  and  in  1819  was  stationed  at
Savannah,  Ga.,  appointed  missionary  to  the  Creek
Indians  in  1821,  travelled  extensively  among  them,
and  superintended  the  mission  until  1825,  when
he  removed  to  Charleston,  and  edited  there  the
"  Wesleyan  Journal "  till  it  was  merged  in  the
New  York  "  Christian  Advocate  "  in  1826.  He
was  presiding  elder  of  the  Charleston  district  from
1827  till  1831,  and  in  1828  visited  England  as  the
representative  of  his  church  at  the  British  confer-
ence. He  became  in  1829  superintendent  of  the
missions  to  the  plantation  slaves,  and  in  November
of  that  year  declined  the  chair  of  moral  philoso-
phy in  Franklin  college,  Georgia.  He  subsequent-
ly declined  the  presidency  of  three  different  south-
ern colleges,  and  also,  in  1835.  the  chair  of  evidences
of  Christianity  in  South  Carolina  college.  He
was  chosen  by  the  general  conference  in  May,
1836,  to  edit  a  new  paper  called  the  "Southern
Christian  Advocate,"  the  first  number  of  which
was  issued  in  June,  1837.  He  was  secretary  of  the
southern  missionary  district  from  1840  till  1844.


522


CAPERTON


cArdenas


In  the  New  York  conference  of  1844  he  made  a
speech  of  much  power  and  tact,  supporting  the
southern  view  of  the  slavery  question,  and,  in  the
division  of  the  church  that  occurred  in  that  year,
adhered  to  the  southern  branch,  which,  at  its  first
general  conference  in  1846,  elected  him  a  bishop.
He  was  consecrated  on  14  May,  1846,  and  from
that  time  till  his  death  performed  eight  successive
tours  of  visitation  through  the  southern  and  south-
western states.  Dr.  Capers  was  a  graceful  preacher,
and  sometimes  rose  to  eloquence.  His  house  was
one  of  the  homes  of  Asbury  and  the  early  Method-
ist preachers.  He  wrote  an  autobiography,  which
was  published  after  his  death,  with  a  memoir  by
Rev.  Dr.  Wightman  (Nashville,  Tenn.,  1858),  "  Cate-
chisms for  Negro  Missions,"  and  "  Short  Sermons
and  Tales  for  Children."

CAPERTON,  Allen  Taylor,  senator,  b.  near
Union,  Monroe  co.,  Va.  (now  West  Va.),  21  Nov.,
1810 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  26  July,  1876.  Af-
ter attending  school  in  Huntsville,  Ala.,  and  enter-
ing the  University  of  Virginia,  he  went  to  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1832,  and  studied  law
at  Staunton,  Va.  He  was  a  director  of  the  James
river  and  Kanawha  canal,  and  served  in  both
houses  of  the  Virginia  legislature,  his  last  term  in
the  senate  being  in  1859-'60.  He  was  a  member  of
the  constitutional  convention  of  1861,  and  opposed
secession  until  the  beginning  of  hostilities.  He
was  elected  to  the  Confederate  states  senate  in  1863,
and  served  till  the  fall  of  the  Confederacy  in  the
spring  of  1865.  He  was  chosen  to  represent  West
Virginia  in  the  U.  S.  senate  for  the  full  term  begin-
ning 4  March,  1875,  and  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mittees on  claims,  railroads,  and  the  revision  of  the
laws.  After  the  close  of  the  war  Senator  Caperton
took  an  active  part  in  bringing  the  coal,  timber,
and  grazing  lands  of  West  Virginia  to  the  notice
of  distant  capitalists.

CAPILLANA  (cah-peel-yah'-na),  Peruvian  prin-
cess, d.  in  1549.  While  Francisco  Pizarro  was
effecting  the  conquest  of  Peru,  that  princess  fell
in  love  with  the  conqueror,  became  his  mistress,
and  gave  him  valuable  information  and  advice.
She  was  converted  to  the  Catholic  faith  in  1541,
and,  after  her  lover  had  been  assassinated,  lived  a
secluded  life.  There  is  extant  a  most  interesting
manuscript  that  was  written  by  her,  in  which  are
described  many  of  the  old  monuments  and  some  of
the  plants  of  Peru.

CAPPA,  Carlo  Alberto,  band-master,  b.  in  Al-
essandria, Sardinia,  9  Dec,  1834.  At  the  age  of
ten  he  became  a  pupil  of  the  royal  academy  at
Asti  (to  which  only  soldiers'  sons  are  admitted),  his
father  having  been  a  major  in  the  Sardinian  army.
In  1849  he  enlisted  in  the  band  of  the  6th  lancers,
and  six  years  later  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  shipping  on
board  the  frigate  "  Congress  "  at  Genoa.  He  ar-
rived in  New  York  22  Feb.,  1858.  In  1860  he  en-
tered the  7th  regiment  band,  of  which  he  has  been
the  leader  since  1881,  playing  1st  trombone  for
seven  years  during  that  period,  beginning  with  1869,
in  Thomas's  orchestra.

CARADORI,  Anna,  singer,  b.  in  Perth,  Scot-
land, in  1822.  She  was  of  Italian  parentage,  and
made  her  dehit  in  her  native  city  in  "  Robert  le
Diable."  She  appeared  in  Jliondon  as  Norma,  in
September,  1853,  and  on  27  Dec,  1857,  sang  at  the
Academy  of  Music,  New  Yo-rk,  in  Handel's  "  Mes-
siah." She  made  her  operatic  debut  in  New  York
on  30  Dec,  as  Leonora  in  "  Fidelio,"  and  appeared
in  Philadelphia  as  Norma,  on  28  Jan.,  1858. — Ma-
dame Maria  Caradori-Allan,  b.  1800 ;  died  1865,
a  famous  English  singer,  appeared  in  this  country
in  concert  about  1830. She  was  the  daughter  of


Baron  Munck,  an  Alsatian  officer,  and  took  the
name  of  Caradori  from  her  mother's  family.  She
married  Mr.  Allan,  who  was  secretary  of  the*  king's
theatre,  London.

CARBERY,  J.  J.,  Canadian  bishop,  b.  in  Mullin-
gar,  Ireland,  in  1823 ;  d.  in  Cork,  Ireland,  19  Dec.
1887.  He  entered  the  Dominican  order  in  1841,  and
was  elected  provincial  of  Ireland  in  1876.  In  1880
he  became  assistant  to  the  father-general  of  the  so-
ciety. He  was  elected  bishop  of  Hamilton,  Ontario,
in  1883,  and  took  possession  of  his  see  in  1884.

CARDENAS,  Bernardino  de  (kar'-day-nas),
Peruvian  bishop,  b.  in  Chuquisaca,  Peru,  early  in
the  17th  century :  d.  in  Santa  Cruz  de  la  Sierra,
Peru,  in  1668.  He  entered  the  order  of  St.  Francis
when  quite  young,  and  soon  gained  distinction  for
his  talent  as  a  preacher  and  success  as  a  missionary.
He  was  made  bishop  of  Assumption  in  Paraguay
in  1643.  He  resented  the  efforts  of  the  Jesuits  to
keep  Spaniards,  as  well  as  other  Europeans,  out  of
their  missions,  and  accused  them  of  plotting  to
free  the  Indians  from  their  subjection  to  the  king
of  Spain.  The  Jesuits  defended  themselves  and
succeeded  in  bringing  Cardenas  into  odium  with
the  Spanish  authorities.  He  was  not  discouraged,
however,  but  by  his  writings  excited  the  other
South  American  bishops  against  the  Jesuits.  The
court  of  Madrid,  to  which  both  parties  appealed,
sent  out  commissioners,  who  had  much  difficulty
in  arranging  matters.  The  details  of  the  quarrel
may  be  read  in  Charlevoix's  "History  of  Para-
guay." Cardenas  was  translated  to  the  bishopric
of  Popayan,  but  excused  himself  on  account  of  his
great  age.  However,  in  166(5  he  consented,  from  a
desire  of  peace,  to  accept  that  of  Santa  Cruz  de  la
Sierra.  His  principal  works  are  "  Manuel  y  Rela-
cion  de  las  Cosas  del  Peru  "  (Madrid,  1634) ;'  "  His-
toria  Indiana  et  Indigenarum  " ;  and  a  "  Memorial
presented  to  the  King  of  Spain  for  the  Defence  of
D.  Bernardino  Cardenas  against  the  Jesuits."  A
hundred  years  after  the  death  of  Cardenas  was
published  his  "  Documentos  tocantes  a  la  Perse-
cucion  que  los  Regulares  de  la  Compania  de  Je-
sus suscitaron  contra  Don  B.  de  Cardenas,  Ebispo
del  Paraguay'"  (Madrid,  1768).

CARDE>i AS,  Juan  de,  physician,  b.  about  the
middle  of  the  16th  century ;  d.  in  Mexico.  He  was
a  physician,  and  practised  in  Mexico.  He  wrote
"  Problemas  y  Seeretos  de  las  Indias  "  (1591)  and
•'Del. Chocolate  Mexicano"  (1609).

CARDENAS,  Luis  I^nacio  Pefialver  y,  R.  C.
archbishop,  b.  in  Havana,  Cuba,  3  April,  1749 ;
d.  there,  17  July,  1810.  At  an  early  age  he  was
placed  as  a  student  in  the  college  of  the  Jesuit
Fathers  in  Havana,  afterward  studied  at  the  uni-
versity of  St.  Jerome,  and  eventually  entered  the
priesthood,  proving  himself  a  remarkable  man  both
by  his  attainments  and  by  his  natural  gifts.  In
1773  he  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  Santiago
de  Cuba.  This  charge  embraced  Louisiana  and
Florida,  and  he  personally  inspected  all  parts  of
his  diocese.  When  the  diocese  of  Louisiana  and
the  Floridas  was  formed,  in  1793,  Penal ver  was  se-
lected as  its  bishop,  was  consecrated,  and  went  to
New  Orleans  in  1794,  where  the  existing  cathedral
had  just  been  completed.  Religion  was  at  a  very
low  ebb,  and  immorality  and  infidelity  were  rife.
Bishop  Cardenas  found  the  task  of  reformation
well  nigh  hopeless,  but  labored  zealously  for  seven
years,  when  he  was  promoted  to  the  see  of  Guate-
mala, and  left  New  Orleans,  20  July,  1801.  On  the
voyage  his  ship  narrowly  escaped  capture  by  a
British  man-of-war.  In  1806  he  obtained  leave  to
resign,  and,  returning  to  his  native  city,  devotee
the  remainder  of  his  life  to  charitable  works.


CARDENAS Y  RODRfGUEZ


CAREW


523


CARDENAS Y  RODRIGUEZ, Jos6  M.  de,

Cuban  author,  b.  in  Matanzas,  Cuba,  in  1812 ;  d.  in
1882.  He  came  to  New  York  in  1834  to  finish  his
studies,  and  returned  to  Cuba  in  1837.  He  pub-
lished "  Coleccion  de  Articulos,"  sketches  of  Cuban
life  and  manners,  written  with  grace  and  humor
(Havana,  1847).  Some  of  these  sketches  have  been
translated  mto  French,  and  published  in  the
'•  Kevue  des  deux  mondes."  Cardenas  wrote  also
a  good  comedy,  *'  Un  tio  sordo,"  a  collection  of
fables,  and  many  light  and  graceful  poems.  Some
of  his  fables  have  been  translated  into  English.

CARDENAS  Y  RODRIGUEZ,  Nicolas  de,
author,  b.  in  Havana  in  1814 ;  d.  in  1868.  He  pub-
lished "  Ensayos  Poeticos  "  (New  York,  183(5) ;  "  Es-
cenas  de  la  Vida  en  Cuba  "  (Havana,  1841) ;  "  Las
dos  Bodas,"  a  novel  (1844) ;  "  Apuntes  para  la
Historia  de  Nuevitas  " ;  and  *'  Diego  de  Velazquez,"
a  drama.  Cardenas  was  a  constant  contributor  to
the  periodical  press.

CARDINAL,  Joseph  Narcisse,  Canadian  revo-
lutionist, b.  in  St.  Constant,  Canada,  in  1808 ;  d.  in
Montreal,  20  Dec,  1838.  He  was  sent  to  the  College
of  Montreal  in  1818,  and  continued  there  five  years.
He  then  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  practice
in  1829.  In  1834  he  threw  himself  into  the  electoral
struggle  then  going  on  in  Canada,  and.  as  he  took
the  side  of  his  compatriots,  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature.  He  at  once  took  a  leading  part  and
supported  vigorously  the  measures  of  Papineau.
But  he  did  not  approve  of  the  insurrectionary  at-
tempt of  1837.  He  was  exposed  to  so  much  perse-
cution from  his  political  opponents  that  he  left
Canada  in  December  of  that  year  and  settled  in
Covington,  N.  Y.  While  here  he  made  preparations
for  a  general  insurrection  with  other  (Canadian  ex-
iles, having  had  promises  of  support  from  a  large
body  of  Americans.  In  1838,  at  the  head  of  200
Canadians,  he  took  up  a  position  in  a  wood  a  mile
from  the  Indian  village  of  Caughnawauga.  Car-
dinal and  a  companion  named  Duquet  entered  the
village,  but  were  attacked  by  the  Indians,  and  fled
to  the  woods.  Meanwhile  the  200  Canadians  grew
weary  of  waiting  for  them,  and  dispersed.  Some
days  later  Cardinal  and  Duquet  were  captured  and
surrendered  to  the  British  authorities.  They  were
tried  for  high  treason,  and  on  28  Nov.,  with  Lepail-
leur,  another  compatriot,  were  condemned  to  die,  a
sentence  which  was  executed  on  the  two  former.
The  last  named  was  transported  to  Australia.

CARDOSO,  Jos6  Joaquin  (car-tho'-so),  Mexi-
can Jurist,  b.  in  the  city  of  Puebla,  19  March.  1802 ;
d.  hi  Mexico,  6  Feb.,  1878.  He  began  his  studies
in  Puebla,  continued  them  at  the  Colegio  de  San
Ildefonso  of  Mexico,  and  was  graduated  as  a  law-
yer in  1828.  Having  joined  the  advanced  faction
of  the  liberal  party,  he  soon  became  noted  and  was
one  of  President  Gomez  Farias's  advisers.  During
Santa  Anna's  administration,  a  powerful  secret
society  called  "  Los  Polkos"  was  organized  by  the
conservatives,  and  Cardoso  at  once  founded  an
antagonistic  lodge,  "  La  Escocesa,"  with  a  selected
membership.  When  the  war  with  the  United
States  began,  he  retired  from  public  life,  went  to
Puebla,  and  devoted  himself  entirely  to  his  favor-
ite study  of  botany.  He  made  several  scientific  ex-
cursions to  Popocaiapetl  and  Orizaba,  and  discov-
ered, collected,  and  classified  many  plants.  From
1851  till  1854  he  taught  Latin,  until  his  political
friends  called  him  to  the  liberal  convention  pre-
paring the  plan  of  Ayutla  in  1854 ;  and  in  1857
they  elected  him  deputy  to  .the  1st  congress.  Al-
though he  was  a  faithful  friend  and  supporter  of
President  Juarez,  and  had  great  influence  during
his  administration,  he  declined the portfolio of


justice  offered  him  many  times,  and  also  several
high  offices  that  were  offered  him  by  Maximilian.
He  had  written  and  published  several  works,  when
the  government  in  18G8  gave  him  charge  of  the
San  Agustin  library  (now  the  national  librarv),
containing  thousands  of  books  collected  from  the
Mexican  convents.  He  classified  the  books,  made
the  catalogues,  and  completely  organized  the  libra-
ry. Cardoso  also  took  great  interest  in  art  mat-
ters, and  left  a  fine  collection  of  paintings  of  the
old  masters.  The  most  important  of  his  works  are
"  La  herbolaria  mejicana  " ;  "  Virgilio  bajo  el  punto
de  vista  de  la  estetica  " ;  "  Comentarios  sobre  la
vida  de  Voltaire";  " Autobiografias  mejicanas";
"  Propercio  y  Juvenal "  ;  "  El  metodo  de  Hum-
boldt "  ;  "  Linneo  el  Joven  " ;  "  Cual  f  ue  la  primera
planta  medicinal  entre  los  antiguos";  "La  Flora
entre  losAztecas";  and"Estudios  sobre  el  dere-
cho  primitivo."

CARDOZO,  Isaac  N.,  journalist,  b.  in  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  17  June,  1786 ;  drowned  in  James  river,
Va.,  26  Aug.,  1850.  His  family  moved,  about  1794,
to  Charleston,  S.  C,  where  he  received  an  English
education.  He  became  editor  of  the  "Southern
Patriot "  in  Charleston  in  1816,  and  its  sole  pro-
prietor in  1823.  He  had  made  himself  familiar
with  the  principles  of  trade  and  finance,  and  his
paper  became  a  recognized  free-trade  organ.  When
a  public  meeting  was  held  in  Charleston,  in  1822,
to  present  a  memorial  to  congress  against  the  re-
strictions on  trade  with  the  West  Indies,  Mr.  Car-
dozo,  notwithstanding  his  free-trade  principles,
opposed  the  memorial,  holding  that  the  restric-
tions were  right  so  long  as  they  were  intended
merely  to  force  Great  Britain  into  reciprocity.  He
took  an  active  part  in  1823  in  the  establishment
of  the  Charleston  chamber  of  commerce.  After
the  tariff  act  of  1828  was  passed  by  congress,  he
brought  the  matter  before  the  chamber,  and  was
one  of  a  committee  that  drafted  a  memorial  to  con-
gress that  was  afterward  unanimously  adopted  at
a  public  meeting  in  Charleston.  Although  Mr.
Cardozo  continued  to  oppose  the  tariff,  he  did  not
support  the  nullification  movement.  He  sold  his
paper  in  1845,  and  in  the  same  year  established  the
"Evening  News,"  of  which  he  became  the  com-
mercial editor.  He  was  a  contributor  to  the
"  Southern  Quarterly  Review  "  and  other  periodi-
cals, and  published  "  Notes  on  Political  Economy  "
(Charleston,  1826).

CAREW,  Sir  Benjamin  Hallowell,  British
naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1760;  d.  in
Beddington  Park,  England,  2  Sept.,  1834.  He  was
the  son  of  Benjamin  Hallowell,  customs  commis-
sioner at  Boston.  Entering  the  navy  at  an  early
age,  he  became  a  lieutenant  in  August,  1781,  cap-
tain in  1793,  rear-admiral  in  1811,  vice-admiral  in
1819,  K.  C.  B.  in  1819,  and  K.  G.  C.  in  1831.  He
was  with  Rodney  in  the  engagement  with  DeGrasse ;
commanded  a  ship  of  the  line  under  Hotham  in  the
action  off  the  Hieres  islands ;  was  a  volunteer  on
board  the  "  Victory,"  in  the  battle  of  Cape  St.
Vincent;  and,  in  command  of  the  " Swiftsure,"
contributed  essentially  to  the  great  victory  of  the
Nile.  After  the  battle,  Hallowell  had  acofiln  made
from  part  of  the  main-mast  of  "  L'Orient,"  and
sent  it  to  Nelson,  that,  when  his  military  career  was
done,  he  might  be  buried  in  one  of  his  trophies.
Soutliey  says  the  offering  was  received  in  the  spirit
in  which  it  was  sent,  and  Nelson  had  it  set  up  in
his  cabin.  Hallowell  was  with  Hood  at  the  reduc-
tion of  St.  Lucia  and  Tobago,  and  with  Nelson  in
the  West  Indies.  He  succeeded  to  the  estates  of
the  Carews  in  1828.  See  Sabine's  "  Loyalists  of  the
Revolution"  (Boston,  1864).


524


CAREY


CAREY


CAREY,  Mathew,  publisher,  b.  in  Ireland,  28
Jan.,  1760;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  16  Sept.,  1839.
He  received  a  liberal  education,  and  when  he  was
fifteen  years  old  his  father  gave  him  a  list  of
twenty-five  trades  from  which  to  make  the  choice
of  his  life-work.  He  selected  the  business  of
printer  and  bookseller,  and  two  years  afterward
brought  out  his  first  pamphlet,  a  treatise  on  duel-
ling, followed  by  an  address  to  Irish  Catholics,  so
inflammatory  that  young  Carey  was  obliged  to
avoid  prosecution  by  flight  to  Paris.  During  his
stay  there  he  became  acquainted  with  Benjamin
Franklin,  then  representing  the  United  States  at
the  court  of  Versailles,  who  gave  him  employment.
Returning  to  Ireland  after  a  year's  stay,  he  estab-
lished a  new  paper  called  the  "  Volunteer's  Jour-
nal," which,  by  its  bold  and  able  opposition  to  the
government,  became  a  power  in  politics,  and  event-
ually brought  about  the  legislative  independence
of  Ireland.  A  too  violent  attack  upon  parliament
and  the  ministry  led  to  his  arraignment  before  the
house  of  commons  for  libel  in  1784,  and  he  was
imprisoned  until  the  dissolution  of  parliament.
After  his  liberation  he  sailed  for  America,  reaching
Philadelphia,  15  Nov.,  1784,  and  two  months  after-
ward began  to  publish  '•  The  Pennsylvania  Her-
ald," the  first  newspaper  in  the  United  States  that
furnished  accurate  reports  of  legislative  debates,
Carey  acting  as  his  own  reporter.  He  fought  a
duel  with  Col.  Oswald,  editor  of  a  rival  journal,
and  received  a  wound  that  confined  him  to  his
house  for  more  than  sixteen  montlis.  Soon  after
this  he  began  the  publication  of  "  The  American
Museum,"  which  he  conducted  for  six  years.  In
1791  he  married,  and  opened  a  small  bookselling
shop.  During  the  yellow-fever  epidemic  two  years
later  he  was  a  member  of  the  committee  of  health,
and  tireless  in  his  efforts  for  the  relief  of  sufferers.
The  results  of  his  extensive  observation  were  col-
lected and  published  in  his  "  History  of  the  Yel-
low Fever  of  1798."  In  the  same  year  he  founded
the  Hibernian  society.  In  1796  he  was  one  of  a
few  citizens  who,  under  the  direction  of  Bishop
White,  formed  the  first  American  Sunday-school
society.  With  characteristic  vigor  he  engaged  in
the  discussions  concerning  the  United  States  bank,
writing  articles  for  newspapers  and  publishing
pamphlets,  which  he  distributed  at  his  own  ex-
pense. In  1814  appeared  his  "Olive  Branch,  or
Faults  on  Both  Sides,  Federal  and  Democratic,"
designed  to  harmonize  the  antagonistic  parties  of
the  country  pending  the  war  with  Great  Britain.
It  passed  through  ten  editions,  and  is  still  a  rec-
ognized authority  in  regard  to  the  political  history
of  the  period.  In  1819  he  published  his  "  Vindi-
ciae  Hibernicne,"  an  examination  and  refutation  of
the  charges  against  his  countrymen  in  reference  to
the  butcheries  alleged  to  have  been  committed  by
them  in  the  rebellion  of  1641.  From  this  time  he
devoted  himself  almost  exclusively  to  politico-
commercial  pursuits,  publishing  in  1820  the  "  New
Olive  Branch,"  in  which  he  endeavored  to  show
how  harmonious  were  the  real  interests  of  the  va-
rious classes  of  society,  and  in  1822  "Essays  on
Political  Economy."  This  was  followed  by  a  "series
of  tracts  extending  to  more  than  2,000  pages.  The
object  of  all  these  was  to  demonstrate  the  necessity
of  the  protective  system  as  the  only  means  of  ad-
vancing the  real  interests  of  all  classes  in  the  com-
munity. He  was  active  in  the  promotion  of  all
the  public  works  of  the  city  and  state,  and  advo-
cated the  system  of  internal  improvements  that
led  to  the  construction  of  the  Pennsylvania  canals.
He  interested  himself  in  forwarding  education  and
in  establishing  the  charitable  institutions  for  which


Philadelphia  is  now  famous.  In  1833-4  he  con-
tributed his  autobiography  to  the  "  New  England
Magazine."— His  son,  Henry  Charles,  political
economist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  15  Dec,  1793;  d.
there,  13  Oct.,  1879.  He  was  educated  as  a  book-
seller, entering  his  father's  store  at  the  age  of
eight,  and  remaining  there,  pursuing  his  elemen-
tary studies  in  literature  and  learning  the  busi-
ness, till  1814,  when  he  became  a  partner.  This
association  continued  till  his  father  retired  in
1821.  He  then  became  the  leading  partner  in  the
firm  of  Carey  &  Lea,  and  subsequently  in  that
of  Carey,  Lea  &  Carey,  in  their  time  the  largest
publishing-house  in  the  country.  In  1824  he  es-
tablished the  system  of  trade  sales,  as  a  medium
of  exchange  between  booksellers.  In  1835,  after
a  successful  career,  he  withdrew  from  business,
to  devote  him-
self to  political
economy.  He
was  originally  a
zealous  advocate
of  free  -  trade,
but  became  con-
vinced that  real
free -trade  with
foreign  coun-
tries was  impos-
sible in  the  ex-
isting state  of
American  indus-
try, and  that  a
period  of  protec-
tion must  pre-
cede it.  In  this
view,  free-trade
is  the  ideal  to-
ward which  we
ought  to  tend,
and protection

the  indispensable  means  of  reaching  it.  He  is
recognized  as  the  founder  of  a  new  school  of
political  economy,  opposed  to  the  rent  doctrine
of  Ricardo  and  the  Malthusian  theory  of  popu-
lation. The  leading  principles  of  his  sys1;era
are,  briefly,  that  in  the  weakness  of  savage  iso-
lation man  is  subject  to  nature,  and  that  his
moral  and  social  progress  are  dependent  on  his
subjecting  nature  to  himself ;  that  the  land,
worthless  in  itself,  gains  all  its  value  from  hu-
man labor;  that  the  primitive  man,  without
tools  and  without  science,  of  necessity  begins
his  cultivation  upon  the  light,  salubrious,  and
easy  soils  of  sandy  elevations,  and  gradually  ad-
vances to  the  subjugation  of  more  fertile  and  dif-
ficult regions ;  that  the  real  interests  of  classes  and
individuals  are  essentially  harmonious ;  that  there
is  in  the  normal  condition  of  things  a  constant
tendency  to  increase  in  the  wages  of  labor,  and
to  diminution  in  the  rate  of  profit  for  capital,  this
last,  however,  being  balanced  by  an  increase  in  its
aggregate  profits ;  that  the  well-being  and  advance-
ment of  society  correspond  to  the  existing  degrees
of  association  and  of  liberty.  His  eminence  as  a
writer  on  political  economy  was  fully  recognized
the  world  over ;  and  while  his  views  have  not  b'^^n
generally  accepted,  they  have  exerted  a  marke|.
influence  on  modern  thought,  and  have  command-
ed respectful  consideration  even  from  his  most
strenuous  opponents.  His  first  book  was  an  "  bs-
say  on  the  Rate  of  Wages,  with  an  Examina-
tion of  the  Causes  of  the  Difference  of  the  <^ond'-
tion  of  the  Laboring  Population  throughout  the
World"  (Philadelphia,  1835).  This  work  was  re-
produced and  expanded  in  "  The  Principles  of  Po-


t^^^^^^^^^/^^


CARHART


CARLETON


525


litieai  Economy  "  (3  vols.,  •1837-'40).  His  succeed-
ing works  are  "The  Credit  System  in  France,
Great  Britain,  and  the  United  States"  (1838);
'•  Answers  to  the  Questions,  What  constitutes  Cur-
rency ?  What  are  the  Causes  of  its  Unsteadiness  ?
and  What  is  the  Remedy?"  a  pamphlet  (1840);
"The  Past,  the  Present,  and  the  Future"  (1848);
"The  Harmony  of  Interests"  (New  York,  1852);
"  The  Slave-Trade,  Domestic  and  Foreign :  Wliy
it  Exists,  and  How  it  may  be  Extinguished " ;
"Letters  on  International  Copyright"  (Philadel-
phia, 1853 ;  new  ed.,  18G8) ;  "Letters  to  the  Presi-
dent on  the  Foreign  and  Domestic  Policy  of  the
Union,  and  its  Effects,  as  exhibited  in  the  Condi-
tion of  -the  People  and  the  States  "  (1858) ;  "  Prin-
ciples of  Social  Science'  (3  vols.,  1858-'9);  "A
Series  of  Letters  on  Political  Economy"  (I860;
another  series,  1865) ;  "  The  Way  to  Outdo  Eng-
land without  Fighting  her"  (1865);  "Review  of
the  Decade  l857-'67"  (1867);  "Review  of  Wells's
Report"  (1868);  "Shall  we  have  Peace?"  (1869).
For  several  years  he  also  contributed  the  leading
papers  in  "  The  Plough,  Loom,  and  Anvil,"  a
monthly  periodical  published  in  New  York,  some
of  which  were  afterward  collected  in  his  "  Har-
mony of  Interests."  He  wrote  also  frequently  for
the  principal  newspapers  of  the  country,  on  sub-
jects connected  with  his  special  study.  His  "  Mis-
cellaneous Works"  were  published  in  one  volume
in  1869.  His  latest  book  is  "The  Unity  of  Law"
(1872).  The  most  important  of  these  works  have
been  translated  into  German.  French,  Italian,
Russian,  and  Spanish  (the  "  Principles  of  Social
Science"  into  German  by  Adler,  Berlin,  1863-'4;
others  by  Duhring,  1865).*

CARHART,  Henry  Smith,  physicist,  b.  in
Coeyman's,  N.  Y.,  27  March,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Wesleyan  university  in  1869,  and  since  has
studied  variously  at  the  universities  of  Yale,  Har-
vard, and  Berlin.  From  1869  to  1871  he  taught
Latin  in  Claverack  college,  and  in  1872  he  became
instructor  of  civil  engineering  and  physics  in  the
Northwestern  university,  Evanston,  111.  In  1873
he  was  made  full  professor  of  physics,  and  from
1876  till  1886  was  also  professor  of  chemistry.  He
became  in  1886  professor  of  physics  at  the  Universi-
ty of  Michigan.  During  1881-'2  he  studied  in  Eu-
rope, and  was  a  member  of  the  International  jury
of  award  at  the  electrical  exhibition,  Paris.  Prof,
Carhart  has  contributed  to  the  "  Popular  Science
Monthly,''  "American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
other  scientific  periodicals,  and  is  a  member  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  and  of  the  American  electrical  society,  to
whose  proceedings  he  has  frequently  contributed.

CARHART,  Jeremiah,  inventor,  b.  in  Dutchess
county,  N.  Y.,  in  September,  1813  ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  16  Aug.,  1868.  His  first  years  were  spent
upon  a  farm,  and  he  received  no  extended  educa-
tion ;  but  at  the  age  of  fifteen  years  he  learned  the
trade  of  cabinet-making,  and,  being  a  natural  me-
chanic, became  a  skilful  workman,  and  especially
an  adept  in  the  use  of  the  lathe.  He  removed  to
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  and  made  several  inventions  be-
tween the  years  1836  and  1846,  including  the  ex-
haustion-bellows and  tubular  reed-board  that  are
now  used  by  all  American  makers  of  reed-instru-
nients.  Mr.  Carhart  then  formed  a  partnership
with  E.  P.  Noedham,  and  began  to  manufacture
melodeons  in  Buflialo.  The  firm  of  Carhart  and
Needham  afterward  removed  to  New  York  city,
and,  in  addition  to  making  melodeons  and  organs,
manufactured  ingenious  machinery  for  making
reeds  and  reed-boards  for  these  instruments,  the
invention  of  Mr.  Carhart.


CARHEIL,  Etieiiiie  de,  missionarv,  b.  in
France  in  the  first  half  of  the  17th  century ;  d.  in
Quebec  in  1726.  He  arrived  in  Canada  in  1666,
was  sent  to  Cayuga  in  1668,  and  founded  a  mission
among  the  Hurons.  His  converts  among  the  sav-
ages were  few,  although  he  mastered  their  lan-
guage thoroughly,  and  was  regarded  by  them  as  a
saint  and  a  man  of  genius.  He  wrote  a  vocabulary
of  the  Cayuga  language  and  published  a  catechism
in  several  of  the  kindred  dialects,  ^e  was  plun-
dered and  expelled  by  the  Cayugas  in  1684,  and
was  then  sent  to  the 'Ottawa  tribes.  It  was  said
that  he  spoke  the  Iroquois  language  better  than
his  own,  and  there  was  scarcely  a  dialect  in  North
America  with  which  he  had  not  some  acquaintance.
He  was  still  laboring  as  a  missionary  in  1721.

CARLBERG,  Gotthold,  musician,  b.  in  Beriin,
Germany,  13  June,  1838 ;  d.  in  New  York,  27  April,
1881.  In  1857  he  came  to  New  York  city  and  be-
came the  musical  editor  of  the  "  Staats-Zeitung."
In  1861  he  returned  to  Europe  and  served  eight
months  in  the  Prussian  army,  when  he  was  honor-
ably discharged  on  account  of  sickness.  In  1871
he  returned  to  the  United  States,  having  been  en-
gaged by  Prince  George  Galitzin  to  conduct  a  se-
ries of  Russian  concerts.  During  the  season  of
1878-'9  he  was  the  leader  of  a  number  of  symphony
concerts  in  Chickering  hall.  New  York.

CARLETON,  Sir  Guy,  Lord  Dorchester,  Brit-
ish soldier,  b.  in  Strabane,  Ireland,  3  Sept.,  1724;  d.
in  Maidenhead,  10  Nov.,  1808.  He  greatly  distin-
guished himself  at  the  sieges  of  Louisburg,  Quebec,
and  Belle  Isle,  and  was  wounded  at  the  siege  of
Havana  in  1762.  In  1772  he  became  governor  of
Quebec,  which  he  defended  against  the  American
army  in  December,  1775.  He  commanded  the
army  that  invaded  New  York  in  1776,  and  fought
a  battle  against  Arnold  on  Lake  Champlain.  In
1777,  on  the  nomination  of  Burgoyne  to  the  com-
mand, he  threw  up  his  commission,  but  was  ap-
pointed the  same  year  lieutenant-general,  and  in
1781  appointed  commander-in-chief  in  place  of  Sir
Henry  Clinton.  When  peace  was  concluded  in
1783  he  returned  to  England  and  was  raised  to  the
peerage. — His  brother,  Tliomas,  British  soldier,  b.
in  1736 ;  d.  in  Ramsgate,  England,  2  Feb.,  1817.
He  was  appointed  an  ensign  in  Wolfe's  regiment
in  1755,  became  a  captain  in  1759,  was  bre vetted
major  in  1773.  appointed  quartermaster-general  of
the  army  in  Canada  in  November,  1775,  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  19th  regiment  in  1776,  and  colonel
of  the  29th  on  20  Nov.,  1782.  He  was  wounded  in
the  naval  conflict  with  Arnold  on  Lake  Champlain
in  1776.  When  New  Brunswick,  previously  a  county
of  Nova  Scotia,  was  organized  as  a  separate  prov-
ince in  1784,  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-governor
of  the  new  colony,  and  at  the  same  time  governor
and  commander-in-chief  of  Nova  Scotia  and  Cana-
da, taking  the  oath  of  office  on  16  Aug.,  1784.  In
1786  he  was  superseded  as  governor-general  of
British  North  America,  but  retained  the  office  of
lieutenant-governor  of  New  Brunswick  until  his
death.  He  resided  in  the  colony  continuously  for
nineteen  years,  and  then  went  to  England  with  the
intention  of  returning  at  the  end  of  two  years,  but
remained  there,  the  government  being  carried  on
for  fourteen  years  by  eight  administrators.  He
was  advanced  to  the  rank  of  major-general  in  the
armv  in  1793,  lieutenant-general  in  1798,  and  gen-
eral "in  1803.

CARLETON,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Virginia  in
1785;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  March,  1863.  He
was  originally  named  Henry  Carleton  Coxe.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806,  removed  to  Missis-
sippi, and  finally  established  himself  in  New  Or-


626


CARLETON


CARLIN


leans  in  1814.  He  served  as  a  lieutenant  of  in-
fantry under  Gen.  Jackson  in  the  campaign  that
terminated  8  Jan.,  1815,  and  then  actively  engaged
in  the  pi-ofession  of  law.  Soon  afterward,  in  con-
nection with  Mr.  L.  Moreau,  he  began  the  transla-
tion of  those  portions  of  "  Las  Siete  Partidas,"  a
celebrated  Spanish  code  of  laws,  that  were  observed
in  Louisiana.  He  became  U.  S.  district  attorney
for  the  eastern  district  of  Louisiana  in  1832,  and
Was  subsequently  appointed  a  Judge  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  same  state,  but  resigned  in  1839  on
account  of  ill  health.  After  extended  travels  in  Eu-
rope and  in  this  country  he  settled  in  Philadelphia,
where  he  devoted  much  attention  to  biblical,  theo-
logical, and  metaphysical  studies.  Notwithstand-
ing his  early  life  in  the  south  and  the  exposure  of
his  property  to  confiscation  by  the  confederates,  he
adhered  steadfastly  to  the  Union  during  the  civil
war.  He  published" "  Liberty  and  Necessity  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1857),  and  read  an  "  Essay  on  the  Will "
before  the  American  philosophical  society  a  few
days  before  his  death.

CARLETON,  James  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Maine  in  1814;  d.  in  San  Antonio,  Texas,  7  Jan.,
1873.  He  was  a  lieutenant  of  Maine  volunteers
during  what  was  known  as  the  Aroostook  war,  rela-
tive to  the  northeastern  boundary  of  the  United
States,  and  in  February,  1839,  after  the  conclusion
of  that  controvergy,  was  commissioned  second  lieu-
tenant of  the  1st  U.  S.  dragoons.  He  was  pro-
moted to  first  lieutenant  on  17  March,  1845,  and
was  assistant  commissary  of  subsistence  of  Kearny's
expedition  to  the  Rocky  mountains  in  1846.  He
served  on  Gen.  Wool's  staff  in  Mexico,  became
captain  on  16  Feb.,  1847,  and  was  brevetted  major
on  the  23d  of  that  month  for  gallantry  at  Buena
Vista.  After  the  Mexican  war  he  was  engaged
principally  on  exploring  expeditions  and  against
hostile  Indians.  On  7  Sept.,  1861,  he  was  com-
missioned major  of  the  6th  cavalry  and  ordered  to
southern  California.  In  the  spring  of  1862  he
raised  a  body  of  troops  known  as  the  "  California
column,"  and  marched  with  them  across  the  Yuma
and  Gila  deserts  to  Mesilla  on  the  Rio  Grande.  On
28  April  he  was  comnussioned  brigadier-general  of
volunteers  and  ordered  to  relieve  Gen.  Canby  as
commander  of  the  department  of  New  Mexico,
where  he  remained  for  several  years,  taking  part
in  several  engagements.  On  13  March,  1865,  he
was  raised  by  brevet  through  all  ranks  up  to  briga-
dier-general in  the  regular  array  for  his  services  in
New  Mexico,  and  brevetted  major-general,  U.  S.
army,  for  his  conduct  during  the  war.  On  31  July,
1866,  he  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  of
the  4th  cavalry,  and  in  June,  1868,  promoted  to
colonel  of  the  2d  cavalry  and  ordered  with  his  regi-
ment soon  after  to  Texas.  Gen.  Carleton  pub-
lished "  The  Battle  of  Buena  Vista,  with  the  Opera-
tions of  the  Army  of  Occupation  for  one  Month  "
(New  York,  1848),  and  occasionally  contributed  to
military  periodicals.

CARLETON,  Osgood,  mathematician,  b.  in
1742 ;  d.  in  Litchfield,  N.  H.,  in  June,  1816.  He
served  in  the  French  war,  and  was  an  officer  in  the
revolutionary  army.  While  residing  in  Massachu-
setts he  published  valuable  maps  of  that  state  and
of  the  district  of  Maine.  He  also  published  the
"  American  Navigator  "  (1801) ;  "  South  American
Pilot"  (1804);  a  "Map  of  the  United  States"
(1806) :  and  "  Practice  of  Arithmetic  "  (1810).

CARLETON,  Will,  author,  b.  in  Hudson,  Lena-
wee CO.,  Mich.,  21  Oct.,  1845.  He  was  graduated
at  Hillsdale  in  1869.  In  1878,  and  again  in  1885,
he  visited  Europe,  spending  most  of  the  time  in
travel. In  literature  he  is  best  known  by  his  bal-


lads of  domestic  life,  nearly  ell  of  which  have
earned  a  wide  popularity.  Shortly  after  leaving
college  he  began  to  lecture  before  societies  and  lyce-
ums,  visiting  Great  Britain  and  Canada  for  this
purpose,  besides  most  of  the  northern  and  western
states.  His  published  books  are  "  Poems  "  (Chica-
go, 1871);  "Farm  Ballads"  (New  York.  1873);
"  Farm  Legends  "  (1875);  "Young  Folks'  Centen-
nial Rhymes"  (1876);  "Farm  Festivals"  (1881)-
and  "  City  Ballads  "  (1885).

CARLILE,  John  Snyder,  senator,  b.  in  Win-
chester, Va.,  16  Dec,  1817;  d.  in  Clarksburg,  W.
Va.,  24  Oct.,  1878.  He  was  educated  by  his  mother
until  he  was  fourteen  years  old,  when  he  became
salesman  in  a  store,  and  at  the  age  of  seventeen
went  into  business  on  his  own  account.  He  then
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840,  and
began  practice  in  Beverly,  Va.  He  was  a  state
senator  from  1847  till  1851,  a  member  of  the  State
constitutional  convention  of  1850,  and  in  1855
elected  to  congress  as  a  unionist,  and  served  one
term.  Mr.  Carlile  was  a  prominent  union  member
of  the  Virginia  convention  of  1861,  and  did  all  in
his  power  to  prevent  the  secession  of  his  state,  op-
posing any  action  by  which  Virginia  should  place
herself  in  an  attitude  of  hostility  to  the  general
government.  After  the  passage  of  the  secession
ordinance  he  was  a  leader  in  the  union  movement
in  western  Virginia.  He  was  one  of  those  that
issued  a  union  address  to  the  people  of  West  Vir-
ginia on  22  May,  and  was  prominent  in  the  Wheel-
ing convention  of  June,  1861.  He  was  averse,
however,  to  the  formation  of  a  new  state,  prefer-
ring that  congress  should  recognize  the  unionist
government  at  Wheeling  as  the  true  state  govern-
ment of  Virginia.  He  was  again  chosen  to  con-
gress in  1861,  but  kept  his  seat  in  the  house  only
from  4  July  till  13  July,  when  he  was  elected  U.
S.  senator,  and  served  until  1865.  In  the  senate
he  was  uniformly  in  favor  of  a  strict  construction
of  the  constitution,  opposing  all  measures  recog-
nizing that  there  existed  a  rebellion  of  states  in-
stead of  individuals,  and  denying  the  right  of  con-
gress to  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  slaves.

CARLIN,  John,  artist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
15  June,  1813.  He  was  a  deaf-mute  from  infancy,
and,  after  graduation  at  the  Pennsylvania  institute
for  the  deaf  and  dumb  in  1825,  studied  drawing
and  portrait-painting  in  Philadelphia  in  1833-4.
In  1838  he  went  to  London,  studying  the  antique
in  the  National  museum,  and  then  to  Paris,  where
he  was  a  pupil  of  Delaroche.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1841,  and  for  many  years  made  a
specialty  of  painting  miniatures  on  ivory.  After
photography  became  popular  he  turned  his  atten-
tion to  landscapes  and  genre  pictures.  He  became
a  member  of  the  artists'  fund  society  in  1859.  and
has  sent  to  its  annual  exhibitions,  among  other
pictures,  "The  Flight  into  Egypt,"  "Dolce  far
Niente,"  and  "Old  Fort,  St.  Lawrence  River."
Among  his  recent  contributions  to  its  exhibitions
are  "  The  Village  Gossips  "  (1880) ;  "  The  Admirer
of  Nature  "  and  "  The  Twin  Grandchildren  "  (1881) ;
"Old  and  Young"  (1882):  "Going  after  Marsh-
mallows"  (1883);  "Solid  Comfort"  (1884);  and
"The  Grandfather's  Story"  (1885).  Mr.  Carhn
has  also  written  some  poetry.  Among  his  contri-
butions to  the  national  academy  exhibitions  are
"  Playing  at  Dominoes  "  (1870) ;  "  A  View  of  Tren-
ton Falls"  (1873);  "The  Toll-Gate"  (1875):  "Af-
ter Work"  (1878);  and  "The  Orphaned  Grand-
child"  (1886).  ^ .

CARLIN,  Thomas,  governor  of  Illinois,  b.  in
Kentuckv  in  1791 :  d.  4  Feb.,  1852.  He  was  a
pioneer  to  Illinois  in  1813,  served  under  Gen.  How-


CARLIN


CARLISLE


527


ard  in  that  and  the  following  year  during  the  war
of  1812-4,  and  several  times  volunteered  to  per-
form most  perilous  undertakings  against  the  In-
dians. He  was  governor  of  the  state  in  1838-'42.

CARLIN,  William  Passmore,  soldier,  b.  in
Rich  Woods,  Greene  co.,  111.,  24  Nov.,  1829.  He
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1850,  and,  after  serving  on  garrison  duty,  became
first  lieutenant  in  the  6th  infantry,  8  March,  1855,
and  took  part  in  Gen.  Harney's  Sioux  expedition
of  that  year.  Pie  commanded  a  company  in  Col.
Sumner's  expedition  of  1857  against  the  Cheyennes,
and  took  part  in  the  Utah  expedition  of  1858.  He
was  in  California  from  1858  till  1860,  and,  having
been  promoted  to  captain,  2  March,  1861,  served
on  recruiting  duty.  On  15  Aug.,  1861,  he  became
colonel  of  the  B8th  Illinois  volunteers,  and  defeated
Gen.  Jeff.  Thompson  at  Fredericktown,  Mo.,  21
Oct.,  1861.  He  commanded  the  district  of  south-
eastern MissoTiri  from  November,  1861,  till  March,
1862,  led  a  brigade  under  Gen.  Steele  in  the  Arkan-
sas expedition,  and  joined  Pope's  army  in  season
to  aid  in  the  pursuit  of  Beauregard  from  Corinth.
He  distinguished  himself  at  Perryville,  Ky.,  8  Oct.,
1862,  and  was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers
29  Nov.  He  defeated  Wharton's  confederate  cav-
alry in  the  skirmish  at  Knob  Gap,  near  Nolans-
vilie,  26  Dec,  1862,  and  his  brigade  bore  a  promi-
nent part  in  the  battle  of  Stone  River,  31  Dec,  1862,
as  is  shown  by  its  heavy  losses  in  that  conflict.  He
was  in  the  Tullahoma  campaign,  the  battles  of
Chickamauga,  Lookout  Mountain,  and  Missionary
I  Ridge,  and  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  24  Nov.,
.  1863,  for  his  services  in  the  battle  of  Chattanooga.
!  After  a  month's  leave  of  absence  he  became  major
I  of  the  16th  U.  S.  infantry,  8  Feb.,  1864,  and  took
!  part  in  the  invasion  of  Georgia,  being  in  the  ac-
I  tions  at  Buzzard's  Roost  and  Resaea,  the  pursuit
i  of  the  enemy  with  almost  daily  fighting  during
I  May  and  June,  1864,  and  the  siege  and  capture  of
Atlanta.  He  commanded  a  division  in  the  assault
on  the  intrenchments  at  Jonesboro',  1  Sept.,  1864,
and  was  brevetted  colonel  in  the  regular  army  for
his  services  on  that  day.  He  participated  in  the
march  to  the  sea  and  through  the  Carolinas,  and
on  13  March,  1865,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
for  services  at  Benton ville,  N.  C,  and  major-gen-
eral for  services  during  the  war.  From  1867  till
1868  he  was  assistant  commissioner  of  the  freed-
men's  bureau  in  Tennessee.  He  was  made  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  17th  infantry,  1  Jan.,  1872,
commanded  at  various  posts,  and "  became  colonel
of  the  4th  infantry,  11  April,  1882.  See  Wilson's
"  Sketches  of  Illinois  Officers  "  (Chicago,  1863).

CABLING,  John,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  the
township  of  London,  Middlesex,  Ontario,  23  Jan.,
1828.  He  was  elected  as  a  conservative  for  the
city  of  London,  18  Dec,  1857,  and  held  the  seat  for
that  constituency,  in  the  Canada  house  of  assem-
bly, continuously  from  his  first  election  until  the
confederation,  when  he  was  re-elected,  in  August,
1867,  for  the  House  of  Commons,  and  held  the  seat
until  1874.  He  was  also  returned  for  the  Ontario
legislature  in  1867,  and  held  the  portfolio  of  agri-
culture and  public  works  in  the  Sandfield-Mac-
donald  government  from  July,  1867,  till  December,
1871.  He  was  also  receiver-general  in  the  old  gov-
ernment of  Canada  in  1872,  has  been  director  of
several  railwav  companies,  and  held  other  offices.

CARLISLE,  Frederick  Howard,  fifth  earl  of,
British  statesman,  b.  28  May,  1748;  d.  in  Castle
Howard,  England,  4  Sept.,  1825.  He  first  distin-
guished himself  in  the  house  of  lords  by  advocating
conciliatory  measures  toward  the  American  colo-
nists, and  was  one  of  the  three  commissioners  sent


to  America  by  George  III.,  in  1778,  to  endeavor  to
restore  peace.  He  was  viceroy  of  Ireland  from
1780  till  1782,  and  afterward  becamae  lord  privy
seal.  He  was  an  opponent  of  Pitt  in  1791  and
1792,  but  supported  the  war  against  the  French
in  the  latter  year.  He  opposed  the  enactment  of
the  corn  laws  in  1815.  Lord  Carlisle  was  the  uncle
and  guardian  of  Byron,  who  dedicated  to  him  his
"  Hours  of  Idleness."  He  issued  several  pamphlets,
and  numerous  tragedies  and  poems,  which  he  col-
lected and  published  in  one  volume  (1801).

CARLISLE, John  Griffin, statesman,  b.  in
Campbell  (now  Kenton)  county,  Ky.,  5  Sept.,  1835.
He  was  the  youngest  son  in  a  large  family,  re-
ceived a  common-school education,  studied  law,
taught  for  a  time  in  Covington  and  elsewhere,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Kentucky  in  1858. He
served  several  terms  in  the  Kentucky  house  of  rep-
resentatives, acquiring,  in  the  mean  time,  an  ex-
tensive and  lucrative  law  practice. During  the  civil
war  he  was  opposed  to  secession. In  1866  and  1869
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate. He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Na-
tional democratic
convention  held  in
New  York  in  1868,
was  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Kentucky
from  1871  till  1875,
and  in  1876  was  a
presidential  elector.
The  same  year  he
was  elected  to  con-
gress, taking his
seat  in  March,  1877,
and has  been five
times re  -  elected.
He soon became
prominent as a
Democratic  leader,
was appointed a
member  of  the  com-
mittee of  ways  and
means,  and  attracted  attention  by  an  able  speech  on
revenue  reform. This  and  the  revival  of  American
shipping  he  regards  as  the  most  important  questions
before  the  country. On  the  organization  of  con-
gress in  December,  1883,  he  was  elected  speaker  of
the  House  of  Representatives,  to  which  office  he  was
re-elected  in  1885. He  is  one  of  the  most  popular
men  in  his  state,  politically,  and  might  have  had  a
seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate  had  he  not  preferred  to  retain
the  leadership  of  the  house. On  the  vital  question
of  free-trade  he  has  placed  himself  on  record  in
the following  passage,  which is  quoted from a
speech made while  he  was  en the  floor  of  the
house :  "  In  the  broad  and  sweeping  sense  which
the  use  of  the  term  generally  implies,  I  am  not  a
free-trader. Of course,  that  is  understood. At
least,  it  should  be. I  will  add  that,  in  my  judg-
ment, it  will  be  years  yet  before  anything  in  the
nature  of  free-trade  will  be  wise  or  practicable  for
the  United  States. When  we  speak  of  this  subject
we  refer  to  approximate  free-trade,  which  has  no
idea  of  crippling  the  growth  of  home  industries,
but  simply  of  scaling  down  the  iniquities  of  the
tariff  schedule,  where  they  are  utterly  out  of  pro-
portion to  the  demands  of  that  growth. After
we  have  calmly  stood  by  and  allowed  monopolies
to  grow  fat,  we  should  not  be  asked  to  make  them
bloated. Our  enormous  surplus  revenues  are  il-
logical and  oppressive. It  is  entirely  undemocratic
to  continue  these  burdens  on  the  people  for  years
and  years  after  the  requirements  of  protection  have
been  met  and  the  representatives  of  these  Indus-


528


CARLISLE


CARNAHAN


tries  have  become  incrusted  with  wealth.  This  is
the  general  proposition  on  which  1  stand.  The
rest  is  a  mere  matter  of  detail,  to  be  settled  with
judgment,  discretion,  and  caution."

CARLISLE,  Richard  Risley,  athlete,  b.  in
Salem,  N.  J.,  in  1814;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  25
May,  1874.  At  an  early  age  he  became  a  gymnast
in  a  circus,  afterward  trained  his  two  sons  to  per-
form with  liim,  and  the  trio,  as  the  "  Risley  family,"
became  celebrated.  In  1845  they  went  abroad,
performed  at  Diury  lane  theatre,  London,  and
before  the  queen.  In  St.  Petersburg  he  won  six-
teen prize  rifles  by  his  marksmanship,  and  excelled
all  his  competitors  in  skating.  Returning  to  Lon-
don, he  wagered  that  he  could  beat  any  one  else  in
the  city  at  shooting,  wrestling,  jumping,  throwing
the  hammer,  and  playing  billiards ;  and  he  made
good  his  boast  on  the  following  day  in  everything
except  billiard-playing,  in  which  he  was  defeated.
Piqued  at  this,  he  took  with  him  to  London  the
best  American  billiard-player,  wagered  $80,000  on
his  success,  and  lost.  He  then  bought  a  country-
seat  near  Chester,  Pa.,  but  was  afterward  unsuccess-
ful in  his  ventures,  and  finally  died  in  the  lunatic
department  of  the  Blockley  almshouse.  In  1848  he
brought  the  first  troupe  of  Japanese  acrobats  to
this  country,  at  a  cost  of  $100,000.

CARLL,  John  Franklin,  civil  engineer,  b.  in
Bushwick  (now  Brooklyn),  K  Y.,  7  May,  1828.  He
received  his  education  at  Union  Hall  academy  in
Flushing,  L.  I.,  and  in  1846  assisted  his  father  in
farming.  Prom  1849  till  1853  he  was  associated
with  his  brother-in-law,  E.  0.  Crowell,  in  the  edit-
ing and  publication  of  the  Newark  daily  and  weekly
"  Eagle."  These  interests  he  disposed  of  in  1853  and
returned  to  Flushing,  where  for  the  ten  following
years  he  practised  civil  engineering  and  surveying.
In  October,  1864,  he  settled  in  Pleasantville,  and
became  engaged  in  the  development  of  oil.  While
so  occupied  he  devised  the  static  pressure  sand-
pump,  removable  pump-cha)uber,  and  adjustable
sleeve  for  piston-rods,  now  used  in  operating  oil-
wells.  In  1874  he  became  attached  to  the  Geologi-
cal survey  of  Pennsylvania,  and  afterward  was  as-
sistant in  the  oil  and  gas  region.  The  reports  of
the  survey— known  as  I  (1874),  P  (1877),  P  (1880),
I*  (1883),  and  I*  in  the  annual  report  of  1885 — were
prepared  by  him,  and  consist  of  geological  descrip-
tions of  those  counties  containing  petroleum.

CARLTON,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  London-
derry, N.  H.,  26  July,  1808 ;  d.  in  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,
16  April,  1874.  He  entered  the  Genesee  conference
of  the  M.  E.  church  in  1829,  and  was  connected
with  that  conference  for  twenty-three  years,  preach-
ing in  Rochester,  Buffalo,  and  other  places  in  west-
ern New  York.  He  was  agent  of  the  Genesee
Wesleyan  seminary  for  three  years,  and  presiding
elder  of  important  districts  for  seven  years.  In
1852  he  was  elected  by  the  general  conference
senior  agent  of  the  Methodist  book  concern  in  New
York,  which  post  he  retained  until  1872.  He  w^as
also  for  the  same  period  treasurer  of  the  missionary
society  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.

CARMAN,  Captain,  seaman,  d.  at  sea  in  De-
cember, 1645.  He  commanded  a  vessel  that  sailed
from  Now  Haven  in  December,  1642,  for  the  Ca-
nary islands.  During  the  voyage  he  was  attacked
by  a  Turkish  pirate,  and  a  severe  engagement  fol-
lowed, in  which  the  American  vessel  was  boarded
by  a  force  outnumbering  his  own  by  five  to  one ;
yet  he  succeeded  in  driving  them  off,  and  escaped
with  the  loss  of  a  single  man  and  several  wounded.
In  November,  1645,  he  sailed  from  Boston  for  Mal-
aga, and,  running  aground  off  the  coast  of  Spain,
was,  with  manv  others,  drowned.


CARMAN,  Albert,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Matilda
(now  Iroquois),  Ontario,  Canada,  27  June,  1833.
He  was  graduated  at  Victoria  college,  Cobourg,  in
1854,  was  head-master  of  the  Matilda  grammar-
school  in  1854-'7,  professor  of  mathematics  in  Al-
bert college,  Belleville,  Ontario,  in  1858,  and  presi-
dent of  Albert  college  and  university  from  1858
till  1874:  ordained  an  elder  of  the  M.  E.  church
in  1864,  and  in  1874  elected  bishop  of  the  Method-
ist Episcopal  church  of  Canada.  In  1883  he  was
chosen  general  superintendent  of  the  M.  E.  church.
The  church  school  at  Belleville  he  developed  from
a  seminary  into  a  university,  and  he  was  also  the
founder  of  Alma  college  for  ladies  at  St.  Thomas,
and  instrumental  in  forming  the  union  of  the  four
Methodist  churches  of  Canada.

CARMAN,  Robert  Baldwin,  Canadian  jurist,
b.  in  Iroquois,  county  of  Dundas,  Ontario,  23  Oct.,
1843.  He  was  graduated  at  Albert  college,  Belle-
ville, in  1867.  Subsequently  he  studied  in  Law-
rence scientific  school.  Harvard  university,  and  on
his  return  to  Canada  was  for  four  years  professor
of  chemistry  in  Albert  university.  Subsequently
he  studied  law  and  was  admitted  as  a  barrister  in
1873.  He  began  practice  in  Cornwall,  and  was  ap-
pointed deputy  judge  of  Stormont,  Dundas,  and
Glengarry  in  1879,  and  junior  judge  in  1883.

CARMICHAEL,  William,  diplomatist,  b.  in
Maryland;  d.  in  February,  1795.  He  was  a  man
of  fortune  who  resided  in  London  at  the  beginning
of  the  revolution.  He  was  on  his  way  to  America
in  July,  1776,  with  despatches  from  Arthur  Lee,
but  was  detained  in  Paris  by  sickness,  and  assisted
Mr.  Deane  in  his  correspondence  and  transaction
of  business  for  more  than  a  year.  He  communi-
cated to  the  king  of  Prussia,  at  Berlin,  intelligence
concerning  American  commerce,  and  assisted  the
commissioners  at  Paris.  After  his  return  to  Amer-
ica in  1778  he  was  a  delegate  to  congress  from
Maryland  in  1778-'80.  He  was  secretary  of  lega-
tion during  Mr.  Jay's  mission  to  Spain,  and  when
the  latter  left  Spain,  in  June,  1782,  he  remained  as
charge  d'affaires.  In  March,  1792,  William  Short
was  joined  with  him  in  a  commission  to  negotiate
a  treaty  with  Spain  in  relation  to  the  navigation
of  the  Mississippi  river ;  but  they  were  unable  to
make  a  satisfactory  arrangement.  Carmichael  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  May,  1794.  His  let-
ters were  published  in  Sparks's  "  Diplomatic  Cor-
respondence."

CARMIENCKE,  John  Hermann,  artist,  b.  in
Hamburg,  Germany,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  L.  I.,
15  June,  1867.  He  studied  art  in  Germany,  and
came  to  the  United  States  in  1848,  settling  in
Brooklyn.  He  was  industrious  in  the  pursuit  of
his  art,'  and  his  paintings  are  faithful  delineations
of  the  forms  of  nature.  He  was  a  very  successful
teacher,  a  member  of  the  Art  association,  and  one  of
the  earliest  and  most  active  members  of  the  Brook-
lyn academy  of  design,  and  of  the  Artists'  fund
society  of  New  York.

CARMONA,  Alonso  or  Alfonso  (car-mo'-nah),
Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Priego,  Spain,  flourished  in
the  16th  century.  He  was  one  of  the  companions
of  Hernando  de  Soto  during  his  expedition  to
Florida,  and  w^rote  a  description  of  the  discovery
and  conquest  of  that  region,  under  the  title  of
"  Peregrinaciones  a  la  Florida  y  principales  sucesos
de  su  conquista."  His  manuscripts  were  useful  to
the  Inca  Garcilaso  de  la  Vega  when  he  wrote  his
"  Historia  de  la  Florida."  ,

CARNAHAN,  James,  educator,  b.  in  Cumber-
land county.  Pa.,  15  Nov.,  1775;  d.  in  Isewark,
N.  J.,  2  March,  1859.  He  was  graduated  at  Prmce-
ton  in  1800,  and  continued  there  until  1803  as


CARNEGIE


CARON


529


tutor.  After  studying  theology  under  Dr.  John  Mc-
Millan, he  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  New
Brunswick  at  Baskingridge  in  April,  1804,  and
preached  in  the  vicinity  of  Hackettstown,  Oxford,
and  Knowlton,  N.  J.  In  January,  1805,  he  was  or-
dained pastor  of  the  united  churches  of  Whitesboro
and  Utica,  N.  Y.,  and  remained  there  until  1814,
when  he  removed  to  Georgetown,  D.  C,  where  he
taught  school  for  nine  years.  He  was  then  elected
president  of  Princeton  college,  and,  after  being
inaugurated  in  August,  1828,  remained  in  that
capacity  until  June,  1854.  From  1854  until  his
death  he  was  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  college,  and
in  1843  elected  president  of  the  board  of  trustees
of  the  Princeton  theological  seminary.

CARNElxlE,  Andrew,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Dunfermline,  Scotland,  25  Nov.,  1835.  His  father
was  a  weaver,  in  humble  circumstances,  whose  am-
bition to  raise  himself  and  family,  joined  to  his
ardent  republicanism,  led  to  his  coming  to  the
tjnited  States  in  1845.  The  family  settled  in
Pittsburgh,  and  two  years  later  Andrew  began  his
career  by  attending  a  small  stationary  engine.  This
work  was  unsatisfactory,  and  he  became  a  telegraph
messenger  with  the  Atlantic  and  Ohio  company,
and  subsequently  an  operator.  He  was  one  of  the
first  to  read  telegraphic  signals  by  sound.  Later
he  was  sent  to  the  Pittsburgh  office  of  the  Pennsyl-
vania railroad,  as  clerk  to  the  superintendent  and
manager  of  the  telegraph-lines.  While  in  this  po-
sition he  met  Mr.  Woodruff,  inventor  of  the  sleep-
ing-car. Mr.  Carnegie  immediately  recognized  the
great  merit  of  the  invention,  and  readily  joined  in
the  effort  to  have  it  adopted.  The  success  of  this
venture  gave  him  the  nucleus  of  his  wealth.  He
was  promoted  to  be  superintendent  of  the  Pitts-
burgh division  of  the  Pennsylvania  railroad ;  and
about  this  time  he  was  one  of  a  syndicate  who  pur-
chased the  Storev  farm,  on  Od  creek,  which  cost
140,000,  and  yielded  in  one  year  over  |1,000,000  in
cash  dividends.  Mr.  Carnegie  was  subsequently  as-
sociated with  others  in  establishing  a  rolling-mill.
and  from  this  has  grown  the  most  extensive  and
complete  system  of  iron  and  steel  industries  ever
controlled  by  an  individual,  embracing  the  Edgar
Thomson  steel  works,  the  Pittsburgh  Bessemer
steel  works,  the  Lucv  furnaces,  the  Union  iron
mills,  the  Union  mill  '(Wilson,  Walker  &  Co.),  the
Keystone  bridge  works,  the  Ilartman  steel  woi-ks,
the  Frick  coke  company,  and  the  Scotia  ore  mines.
The  capacity  of  these  works  approximates  2,000
tons  of  pig-metal  a  day,  and  he  is  the  largest  manu-
facturer of  pig-iron,  'steel-rails,  and  coke  in  the
world.  Besides  directing  these  great  iron  industries,
he  long  owned  eighteen  English  newspapers,  which
he  controlled  in  the  interests  of  radicalism.  He
has  devoted  large  sums  of  money  to  benevolent  and
educational  purposes.  In  1879  he  erected  commo-
dious swimming-baths  for  the  use  of  the  people  of
Dunfermline,  Scotland,  and  in  the  following  year
gave  $40,000  for  the  establishment  there  of  a  free
library,  which  has  since  received  other  large  dona-
tions. In  1884  he  gave  $50,000  to  Bellevue  hos-
pital medical  college  to  found  a  histological  labora-
tory, now  called  the  Carnegie  laboratory ;  in  1885,
$500,000  to  Pittsburgh  for  a  public  library,  and  in
1886,  $250,000  to  Allegheny  City  for  a  music  hall
and  library,  and  $250,000  to  Edinburgh,  Scotland,
for  a  free  librarv.  He  has  also  established  free
libraries  at  Braddock,  Pa.,  and  at  other  places,  for
the  benefit  of  his  employes.  Mr.  Carnegie  is  a
frequent  contributor  to  periodicals  on  the  labor
Question  and  similar  topics,  and  has  published  in
book-form  "An  American  Four-in-Hand  in  Brit-
ain "  (New  York,  1883) ;  "  Round  the  World  "  (1884) ;
VOL.  I. — 34


and  "  Triumphant  Democracy :  or,  Fifty  Years'
March  of  the  Republic"  (1886),  the  last  being  a
review  of  American  progress  under  popular  insti-
tutions.—His  brother,  Thomas  M.,  b.  in  Dunferm-
line, Scotland,  2  Oct.,  1843 ;  d.  in  Ilomewood,  Pa.,
19  Oct.,  1886,  was  associated  with  Andrew  in  his
business  enterprises.

CARNOCHAN,  John  Mnrray,  surgeon,  b.  in
Savannah,  Ga.,  4  July,  1817;  d.  in  New  York  city,
28  Oct.,  1887.  He  was  taken  to  Scotland  in  early
boyhood,  and  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Edinburgh.  Returning  to  New  York,  he  entered
the  office  of  Dr.  Valentine  Mott  as  a  student,  where
it  became  apparent  that  he  was  destined  for  emi-
nence in  his  profession.  A  second  visit  to  Europe
was  undertaken,  and  he  attended  the  lectures  of
the  leading  surgeons  at  the  great  hospitals  in  Lon-
don, Paris,  and  Edinburgh.  In  1847  he  began,
practice  in  New  York  city,  and  in  a  short  time  his
rare  delicacy  of  touch,  steadiness  of  nerve,  and
his  boldness  as  an  operator,  gave  him  a  high  repu-
tation. In  1852  a  case  of  exaggerated  nutrition
(elephantiasis  arabrum)  was  presented  to  him,  and,
all  milder  remedies  having  failed,  Dr.  Carnochan
severed  and  tied  the  femoral  artery,  effecting  a
cure  by  an  entirely  original  operation.  The  same
year  he  successfully  removed  a  lower  jaw  entire
with  both  condyles.  In  1854  he  exsected  the  whole
ulna,  and  again  the  whole  radius  of  a  patient's
forearm,  the  use  of  the  limb  being  saved  in  both
cases.  In  1856  he  performed  an  original  operation
that  gave  him  a  world-wide  reputation.  A  case  of
chronic  neuralgia  was  brought  to  him,  and.  after
careful  study  of  its  features,  he  cut  down  and  re-
moved the  entire  trunk  of  the  second  branch  of
the  fifth  pair  of  cranial  nerves.  This  nerve  was
cut  from  the  infraorbital  foramen  to  the  foramen
rotundum  at  the  very  base  of  the  skull,  and  in-
volved an  operation  through  the  malar  bone.  He
several  times  performed  amputation  at  the  hip-
joint,  once  during  the  battle  of  Spottsylvania  in
1864.  For  many  years  he  served  as  professor  of
surgery  at  the  New  York  medical  college,  as  sur-
geon-in-chief to  the  State  immigrant  hospital,  and
in  numerous  other  professional  places  involving
great  responsibility.  He  published  numerous  tech-
nical monographs,  a  "  Treatise  on  Congenital  Dis-
locations "  (New  York,  1850),  and  "  Contributions
to  Operative  Surgery,"  nine  parts  published  (New
York,  1877-'86).

CARO,  Mig-nel  Antonio,  Colombian  author,  b.
in  Bogota,  Colombia,  10  Nov.,  1843.  While  very
young  he  became  noted  for  his  knowledge  of  the
Latin  classics.  He  contributed  to  periodicals,  and
edited  several  works.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Poesi-
as  "  (1866) ;  "  Estudios  sobre  el  utilitarismo  "  (1869) ;
"Gramatica  latina,"  in  collaboration  with  R.  J.
Cuervo;  "Tratado  del  participio";  "Horas  de
amor,"  and  other  books.  But  his  reputation  is
chiefly  due  to  his  translation  into  Spanish  verse  of
Virgil's  complete  works  (3  vols.,  1873-5).  He  is  a
corresponding  member  of  the  Royal  Spanish  acad-
emy, and  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Colombian
academy ;  he  has  been  a  representative  and  senator
in  the  Colombian  congress,  and  is  now  (1886)  na-
tional librarian. — His  father,  Jose  Eusebio  Card,
is  a  man  of  some  note  in  Colombian  literature.

CARON,  Ren^  Edward,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  the  parish  of  Ste.  Anne  Cote  de  Baupre,
Lower  Canada,  in  1800;  d.  13  Dec,  1876.  He  re-
ceived his  education  at  the  seminary  of  Quebec,  and
at  the  College  of  St.  Pierre,  Riviere  du  Sud,  studied
law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1826.  The  fol-
lowing year  he  was  elected  mayor  of  Quebec,  re-
taining that  office  until  1837. In  1841  he  became


530


CARPENDER


CARPENTER


a  member  of  the  legislative  council  of  Lower  Cana-
da, and  was  speaker  of  this  body  from  1843  till
1847,  and  subsequently  from  1848  till  1853.  In
1841  he  began  a  correspondence  with  Mr.  Draper,
then  leading  the  government  of  Canada,  the  object
being  to  bring  French  Canadians  into  the  cabinet.
But  this  project  failed,  principally  through  the
opposition  of  M.  Lafontaine,  who  was  then  re-
garded as  the  real  chief  of  the  French  Canadians.
In  1848  he  became  a  member  of  the  Lafontaine-
Baldwin  administration,  and,  on  becoming  judge  of
the  court  of  queen's  bench  in  1853,  he  abandoned
political  life.  On  receiving  the  appointment  of
commissioner  for  codifying  the  laws  of  Lower
Canada  in  1857,  he  temporarily  vacated  his  office
of  judge,  but  returned  to  his  judicial  duties  as  soon
as  his  work  as  a  commissioner  was  completed.  In
February,  1873,  having  been  appointed  lieutenant-
governor  of  the  province  of  Quebec,  he  entered  on
the  duties  of  that  office,  which  he  retained  until  his
death. — His  son.  Sir  Adolplie  (Joseph  Phillippe
Rene  Adolphe),  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in  Quebec
in  1843.  He  was  educated  at  the  Quebec  seminary,
and  at  Laval  and  McGill  colleges,  Montreal,  being
graduated  B.  C.  L.  at  McGill  in  1865.  He  was
called  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada  the  same  year,
and  appointed  queen's  counsel  in  1879.  He  entered
parliament  as  a  conservative  in  1873,  was  sworn  of
the  privy  council,  entered  the  cabinet  of  Sir  John
Macdonald  as  minister  of  militia,  9  Nov.,  1880,  and
knighted  for  his  services  in  this  capacity  during
the  northwest  rebellion  of  1885.  Sir  Adolphe  is  a
director  of  the  Stadacona  bank  of  Quebec,  of  the
Anticosti  company,  and  of  the  Coldbrooke  rolling-
mills  company.

CARPENDER,  Edward  William,  naval  offi-
cer, b.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  28  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in
Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  16  May,  1877.  He  was  appointed
midshipman  from  New  York  in  the  U.  S.  navy  on
10  July,  1813,  and  in  1825  received  his  commission
as  lieutenant.  He  served  in  the  Mediterranean
squadron  in  1827,  on  the  sloop  "  Falmouth  "  in  the
West  India  squadron  in  1829-'30,  at  the  rendezvous
in  Boston  in  1833-4,  and  on  the  frigate  "  Constitu-
tion "  in  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1840.  He  received
his  commission  as  commander  in  1841,  and  was
stationed  at  the  Norfolk  navy-yard  in  1845,  and  at
the  New  York  navy-yard  in  1852.  He  was  placed
on  the  reserved  list  in  1855,  and  became  commodore
in  1862,  During  1864-'5  he  was  prize  commissioner
at  Key  West,  Florida,  subsequent  to  which  he  re-
tired to  Shrewsbury,  N.  J.,  where  he  spent  the  last
years  of  his  life.

CARPENTER,  Benjamin,  patriot,  b.  in  Reho-
both,  Mass.,  in  1726 ;  d.  in  Guilford,  Vt.,  29  March,
1823.  He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  town  of
Guilford  in  1770,  and  served  during  the  revolution-
ary war  as  a  field  officer.  Later  he  was  a  member
of  the  first  constitutional  convention  of  Vermont,
and  also  a  member  of  the  council.  In  1778  he  was
elected  lieutenant-governor  of  the  state,  and  after-
ward became  one  of  the  council  of  censors.

CARPENTER,  Charles  Ketclinm,  farmer,  b.
in  Hornellsville,  N.  Y.,  23  Jan.,  1826 ;  d.  in  Orion.
Mich.,  19  Aug.,  1884.  He  settled  in  Michigan  in
1837.  In  1858  he  was  elected  to  the  lower  branch
of  the  legislature,  and  during  the  civil  war  he  was
an  active  Union  man,  had  charge  of  the  funds  raised
in  his  district,  and  contributed  to  the  expenses  of
the  war.  In  1874  he  was  nominated  as  governor
by  the  prohibition  party  in  Michigan,  and  in  1876
was  again  nominated  for  the  same  office  on  the  first
greenback  ticket.  He  was  prominent  in  the  devel-
opment of  railroad  and  insurance  interests  in  his
portion  of  the  state. Mr.  Carpenter  was  the  author


of  a  series  of  articles  on  practical  farm  life  and  ex-
perience, which  were  published  in  the  Detroit "  Free
Press  "  over  the  signature  of  "  An  Oakland  County
Farmer."— His  son,  Rolla  Clarton,  civil  engineer,
b.  in  Orion,  Mich.,  26  June,  1852.  He  was  grad-
uated at the Michigan agricultural college as

B.  S.  in  1873,  and  at  the  University  of  Michigan  as

C.  E.  in  1875.  After  a  short  experience  in  pro-
fessional work,  he  accepted,  in  1875,  the  chair  of
mathematics  and  civil  engineering  at  the  agricul-
tural college.  Prof.  Carpenter  is  a  member  of  sev-
eral scientific  societies,  and  in  1880  became  secre-
tary of  the  Michigan  engineering  society,  whose
annual  reports  he  has  edited  for  several  years
(1881-'3).  He  has  also  written  a  series  of  articles
on  drainage  for  the  "  Drainage  Magazine  "  (1884-'6),
and  has  contributed  papers  on  "  Tile-Makmg "  to
the  "  Michigan  Grange  Visitor  "  (1884).  He  has  in-
vented a  successful  furnace  for  steam  boilers,  which
produces  but  little  smoke,  and  yields  excellent  re-
sults ;  a  level  for  drainage  purposes,  which  is  now
extensively  used ;  and  has  designed  a  number  of
tools  for  iron- working.  —  Another  son,  Louis
Oeorg-e,  mathematician,  b.  in  Orion,  Mich.,  28
March,  1861,  was  graduated  at  Michigan  agricul-
tural college  in  1879,  and  since  has  followed  post-
graduate courses  at  the  University  of  Michigan
and  at  the  Johns  Hopkins  university,  receiving  the
M.  S.  degree  in  1883  at  the  agricultural  college.
In  1881  he  was  made  instructor  of  mathematics  at
Michigan  agricultural  college.  Prof.  Carpenter  is
a  member  of  the  British  and  of  the  American  asso-
ciations for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  also
of  the  Michigan  engineering  society.

CARPENTER,  Daniel,  police  inspector,  b.  in
New  York  city  about  1815 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
15  Nov.,  1866.  He  joined  the  municipal  police  of
New  York  in  1847,  and  was  appointed  captain  and
assigned  to  the  5th  ward,  which  soon  became  noted,
under  his  management,  for  order  and  quiet.  Plis
services  were  retained  on  the  organization  of  the
Metropolitan  police  district  in  1857,  and  he  became
deputy  superintendent.  Through  his  exertions  the
force  was  rapidly  organized,  and  has  attained  a
high  state  of  efficiency.  For  several  months  dur-
ing 1859  he  was  acting  general  superintendent,
subsequent  to  the  resignation  of  Frederick  A.  Tall-
madge.  In  1860,  on  the  abolition  of  the  deputy
superintendentship,  he  became  senior  inspector,
and  continued  as  such  until  his  death.  During
the  "  draft  riots  "  in  New  York  in  July,  1863,  Supt.
John  A.  Kennedy  having  been  injured,  the  com-
mand of  the  police  again  devolved  upon  Inspector
Carpenter,  and  the  suppression  of  the  riots  was
largely  due  to  the  energy  and  firmness  displayed
by  him  at  that  time.

'  CARPENTER,  Ellen  M.,  artist,  b.  in  Killingly,
Conn.,  28  Nov.,  1830.  She  was  educated  at  Milford
high  school,  and  studied  art  with  Thomas  Edwards,
an  English  artist,  and  at  the  Lowell  institute  in
Boston,  where  she  has  resided  principally  since
1858.  In  1867,  1873,  and  1881  she  visited  Europe
and  studied  under  Lefebre  and  Fleury  in  Pans,
also  sketching  in  England  and  on  the  continent.
At  present  (1886)  much  of  her  time  is  devoted  to
teaching  art  in  Boston.  Among  her  works  are
"  The  Yosemite  Valley  " ;  "  Temples  of  Pa^stuu)
(1871) ;  "Venice,  Grand  Canal "  (1874),  and  numer-
ous portraits.  .

CARPENTER,  Francis  Bicknell,  portrait-
painter,  b.  in  Plomer.  N.  Y.,  in  1830.  He  is  mostly
self-taught,  his  only  instruction  in  art  having  been
received  during  six  months  in  1844  in  the  studio
of  Sanford  Thayer,  Syracuse.  After  painting  por-
traits in  Homer,  he  removed  in  1851  to  ^ew  lorK,


CARPENTER


CARPENTER


531


where  he  was  elected,  in  the  following  year,  an  as-
sociate member  of  the  academy.  He  has  had  many
distinguished  sitters,  among  them  being  Presidents
Fillmore,  Lincoln,  Tyler,  and  Pierce,  William  II.
Seward,  Charles  Sumner,  George  William  Curtis,
James  Russell  Lowell,  Henry  Ward  Beecher,
Schuyler  Colfax,  and  John  C.  Fremont.  In  1804
he  painted  a  large  historical  picture  representing
President  Lincoln  signing  the  proclamation  of  the
emancipation  of  slaves  in  the  United  States,  1
Jan.,  1863.  After  its  exhibition  in  the  principal
northern  cities  in  18(55,  it  was  purchased  by  jMrs.
Elizabeth  Thompson  for  |25,000,  and  presented  to
the  government :  and  it  now  hangs  on  the  stair-
case of  the  house  of  representatives  in  Washing-
ton. Mr.  Carpenter  is  the  author  of  "  Six  Months
in  the  White  House  with  Abraham  Lincoln  "  (New
York,  1866).

CARPENTER,  Oeorge  W.,  scientist,  b.  in  Ger-
mantown.  Pa.,  31  July,  1802  ;  d.  there,  7  June,
1860.  He  was  a  successful  merchant  in  Philadel-
phia, and  devoted  his  leisure  to  the  study  of  sci-
ences. His  opinion  on  subjects  in  geology  was  of
recognized  value.  He  accumulated  a  choice  collec-
tion of  minerals,  and  showed  considerable  interest
in  the  medical  sciences.  Mr.  Carpenter  was  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  scientific  societies  in  this  country
and  Europe,  and  from  1826  till  his  death  was  treas-
urer of  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences  in  Phila-
delphia. His  principal  papers  are  "Experiments
and  Remarks  on  Several  Species  and  Varieties  of
Cinchona  Bark  "  (1825) ;  "  Observations  and  Ex-
periments on  Opium  "  (1828) ;  "  Remarks  on  the
Use  of  Piperine"  (1828);  "On  the  Mineralogy  of
Chester  Co.,  with  an  Account  of  some  Minerals  of
Delaware,  Maryland,  and  other  Localities  "  (1828) ;
"  Observations  on  the  Inefficiency  of  the  Cathartic
Power  of  Rhubarljarine  "  (1828) :  "  On  the  Muriate
of  Soda  or  Common  Salt,  with  an  Account  of  the
Salt  Springs  of  the  United  States  "  (1829) ;  "  Ob-
servations and  Experiments  on  Peruvian  Barks  "
(1829) ;  "  Observations  on  a  New  Variety  of  Peru-
vian Bark  "  (1831) ;  "  The  Vesicating  Principle  of
Cantharides  "  (1832) ;  and  "  Notice  of  New  Medical
Preparations"  (1832),  most  of  which  appeared  in
the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  and  Arts."

CARPENTER,  Matthew  Hale,  senator,  b.  in
Moretown,  Vt.,  22  Dec,  1824 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  24  Feb.,  1881.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1843,  and  two  years  later  he  returned
to  Vermont  and  studied  law  with  Paul  Dilling-
ham (subsequently  governor),  whose  daughter  he
married.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  tried  a  suit  in  a
■justice's  court  in  Moretown,  against  his  grand-
father, and  gained  it.  He  received  a  gold  ring
valued  at  five  dollars  as  his  first  fee.  In  Novem-
ber, 1847,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Vermont,
and,  attracted  by  the  splendor  of  Rufus  Choate's
fame,  set  out  at  once  for  Boston,  to  enter  his  office.
Early  in  1848  he  left  Boston  and  settled  in  Beloit,
Wis.  He  soon  became  prominent,  and  first  at-
tracted attention  by  a  land  suit  involving  several
millions  of  dollars,  which  he  tried  against  James
R.  Doolittle,  Daniel  Cady,  and  Abraham  Lincoln.
His  appearance  in  the  quo-warranto  proceedings
that  removed  William  A.  Barstow  from  the  guber-
natorial chair  of  Wisconsin,  in  January,  1856,  added
materially  to  his  reputation,  and  he  then  settled  in
Milwaukee.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he
left  his  law  practice  and  espoused  the  cause  of  the
Union  as  a  war  democrat,  making  reci-uiting  speech-
es throughout  the  west.  He  was  also  appointed
judge-advocate-general  of  Wisconsin.  In  March,
1868,  by  invitation  of  See.  Stanton,  Carpenter
represented,  with Lyman  Trumbull,  the  govern-


ment in  the  McCardle  case,  brought  to  try  the
validity  of  the  reconstruction  act  of  7  March,  1867,
for  the  government  of  the  states  lately  in  rebellion.
This,  up  to  that  time,  was  the  most  important  case,
not  excepting  that  of  Dred  Scott,  that  had  ever
come  before  the  U.  S.  supreme  court.  Carpenter
gained  it,  though  Jeremiah  S.  Black  was  on  the
other  side ;  and,  when  he  completed  his  argument,
Stanton  clasped  him  in  his  arms  and  exclaimed,
"  Carpenter,  you  have  saved  us."  Later  he  was
spoken  of  by  Judge  Black  as  "  the  finest  constitu-
tional lawyer  in  the  United  States."  His  success
in  this  case  led  to  an  appeal  to  the  republicans  in
Wisconsin  by  Stanton  and  Grant,  advocating  his
election  to  the  U.  S.  senate.  The  advice  was  taken,
and  he  served  from  4  March,  1869,  till  3  March,
1875,  during  which  time  he  was  a  member  of  the
committees  on  judiciary,  patents,  and  revision  of
laws,  also  becoming  president  pro  tern.  At  the
end  of  his  term  he  received  the  caucus  nomination
for  re-election,  but  was  defeated  in  the  legislature
by  a  coalition  of  a  "  bolting "  minority  with  the
democrats.  He  then  retired  to  his  law  practice,
which  had  become  very  great.  Among  other  im-
portant cases,  he  appeared  as  counsel  for  William
W.  Belknap,  then  late  secretary  of  war,  who  was
charged  by  the  house  of  representatives  with  "  high
crimes  and  misdemeanors."  Belknap's  acquittal
was  due  to  Carpenter's  masterly  management  and
great  ability,  as  a  political  campaign  was  pending
and  the  secretary's  sacrifice  was  demanded  to  ap-
pease the  cry  of  corruption.  In  February,  1877,
he  appeared  before  the  electoral  commission  as
counsel  for  Samuel  J.  Tilden,  although  he  had  been
partially  engaged  by  Zachariah  Chandler  to  repre-
sent the  other  side,  and  would  have  done  so  had
not  the  republican  managers  failed  to  complete
their  arrangement  within  the  period  agreed  upon.
In  1879  he  was  again  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate,
and  served  from  4  March  until  his  death.  His
greatest  speeches  in  the  senate  are  those  on  the
French  arms  case ;  his  defence  of  President  Grant
against  the  attack  of  Charles  Sumner ;  on  so-called
loyal  claimants  in  the  south ;  on  the  ku-klux  act ;
on  Charles'  Sumner's  second  civil-rights  bill ;  on
Johnson's  amnesty  proclamation  ;  on  the  bill  to
restore  Fitz  John  Porter;  on  the  iron-clad  oath;
and  on  consular  courts.  For  logic,  that  on  Porter
stands  foremost ;  while  for  eloquence  and  passion,
that  on  Grant  against  Sumner  is  considered  the
greatest.  Senator  Carpenter  opposed  the  fugitive
slave-law,  and,  although  a  democrat,  was  an  advo-
cate of  emancipation  in  1861.  In  1864  he  declared
that  the  slaves  must  be  enfranchised,  and  up  to  his
death  insisted  that  they  must  be  protected  at  every
cost.  As  early  as  1865  he  advocated  state  and  gov-
ernment control  of  railway  and  semi-public  corpo-
rations, and  he  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  all
his  theories  in  that  direction  finally  affirmed  by
the  highest  courts  and  recognized  as  settled  law.
He  was  christened  Decatur  Merritt  Hammond,  but,
his  initials  having  frequently  led  to  the  belief  that
his  name  was  Matthew  Hale,  he  adopted  that  form
about  1852.  See  the  "  Life  of  Matthew  Hale  Car-
penter," by  Frank  A.  Flower  (Madison,  Wis.,  1883).
CARPENTER,  Philip  Pearsall,  naturalist,  b.
in  Bristol,  England,  4  Nov.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  24  May,  1877.  He  was  the  youngest  son
of  Dr.  Lant  Carpenter  and  brother  of  William  B,
Carpenter  and  Mary  Carpenter.  His  education
was  obtained  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh,  and
in  due  time  he  took  his  B.  A.  degree  at  London
university.  He  w^as  fitted  for  the  Unitarian  min-
istry at  Manchester  new  college,  after  which  he
helcl appointments  on Strand,^  near  Manchester,


532


CARPENTER


CARPIO


and  later  in  Warrington.  Here  he  became  widely
known  among  all  classes  by  his  great  philanthropy.
Among  his  efforts  to  give  employment  to  the  poor
was  the  establishment  of  a  printing-office  from
which  were  issued  in  rapid  succession  tracts  with
startling  headings,  which  were  freely  distributed.
He  early  attached  himself  to  the  study  of  conchol-
ogy,  under  the  guidance  of  Dr.  J.  Gray,  of  the
British  museum,  and  attained  great  proficiency  in
that  branch  of  natural  history.  Later  he  made  a
catalogue  of  the  Mazatlan  shells  for  the  British
museum,  and  presented  to  that  institution  his  own
magnificent  collection  of  shells,  consisting  of
8,873  specimens  mounted  on  2,530  tablets,  all  de-
termined and  many  of  them  described  by  him-
self. In  1859  he  visited  the  United  States,  and
while  there  was  occupied  in  arranging  and  de-
termining collections  of  shells  belonging  to  the
Smithsonian  and  other  institutions.  The  Univer-
sity of  New  York  conferred  on  him  at  that  time  the
degree  of  Ph.  D.  in  recognition  of  his  work.  On
his  return  to  England  he  resumed  his  ministerial
duties  in  Warrington,  but  in  1865  moved  to  Mon-
treal, Canada,  which  thenceforth  was  his  home.
For  a  period  he  devoted  himself  entirely  to
scientific  work ;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  fail-
ure of  an  English  bank,  he  was  compelled  to  teach.
He  presented  McGill  university  with  his  general
collection  of  shells,  stipulating  that  it  should  be
preserved  as  a  special  gift.  As  an  authority  on
conchology  and  the  classification  of  mollusca,  he
was  among  the  foremost  in  America.  Besides  his
elaborate  report  on  the  "  Mollusca  of  the  West
Coast  of  North  America,"  prepared  for  the  British
association  for  the  advancement  of  science,  he  pub-
lished, under  the  auspices  of  the  Smithsonian
institution,  "  Check-List  of  the  Shells  of  North
America"  (I860);  "Lectures  on  the  Shells  of  the
Gulf  of  California  "  (1860) ;  "  Lectures  on  Mollusca,
or  Shellfish  and  their  Allies"  (1861);  and  "The
MoUusks  of  Western  North  America  "  (1872).

CAKPENTER,  Stephen  Cutter,  author,  b.  in
England ;  d.  about  1820.  He  was  a  journalist  of
ability,  who  was  engaged  as  reporter  of  the  parlia-
mentary proceedings  during  the  trial  of  Hastings,
and  from  his  personal  knowledge  doubtless  was
enabled  to  make  the  great  speeches  of  Sheridan
on  the  Begum  charge,  as  found  in  the  "  Select
Speeches"  of  Dr.  Nathaniel  Chapman.  In  1803
he  came  to  the  United  States  and  settled  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C,  where,  in  1805,  he  established  and  pub-
lished, with  John  Bristed,  the  "  Monthly  Register,
Magazine,  and  Review  of  the  United  States."
Later  he  edited  the  "  Mirror  of  Taste,  and  Dra-
matic Censor,"  four  volumes  of  which  were  pub-
lished in  Philadelphia  during  1810-'l.  It  contained
some  very  clever  sketches  of  American  actors,
which  were  among  the  earliest  productions  of  the
artist  Charles  Robert  Leslie.  He  was  the  author
of  "Memoirs  of  Jefferson,  containing  a  Concise
History  of  the  United  States  from  the  Acknowl-
edgment of  their  Independence,  with  a  View  of
the  Rise  and  Progress  of  French  Influence  and
French  Principles  in  that  Country  "  (2  vols..  New
York,  1809),  and  "  Select  American  Speeches,  Fo-
rensic and  Parliamentary,  with  Prefatory  Re-
marks ;  a  Sequel  to  Dr.  Chapman's  Select  Speech-
es "  (Philadelphia,  1815).  Under  the  pen-name  of
Donald  Campbell,  he  wrote  "  Overland  Journey  to
India  "  (London,  1795  ;  2d  ed.,  New  York,  1809-'10)
and  "Letter  on  the  Present  Times"  (1798).

CARPENTER,  Stephen  Haskins,  educator,  b.
in  Little  Falls,  N.  Y.,  7  Aug.,  1831 ;  d.  in  Geneva,
N.  Y.,  7  Dec,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Rochester  in  1852. Settling  in  Madison,  |


Wis.,  he  was  for  several  years  tutor  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Wisconsin,  and  then  became  city  clerk  of
Madison.  From  1858  till  1860  he  was"  assistant
superintendent  of  public  instruction  for  Wiscon-
sin, and  inaugurated  the  system  that  is  still  in
use  there.  In  1860  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of
ancient  languages  in  St.  Paul's  college,  Palmyra,
Mo.,  where  he  remained  until  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  caused  the  institution  to  close  its  doors.
Returning  to  Wisconsin,  he  taught  a  select  school
for  a  short  time,  and,  failing  to  find  more  conge-
nial employment,  supported  himself  by  working  at
the  printer's  trade,  but  devoted  his  spare  hours  to
literary  work.  From  1864  till  1868  he  was  again
city  clerk,  after  which  he  became  professor  of
rhetoric  and  English  literature  in  the  University
of  Wisconsin ;  later  the  title  of  the  chair  became
logic  and  English  literature.  In  1875  he  was
chosen  president  of  the  University  of  Kansas,  an
honor  which  he  declined,  and  in  1871  came  within
one  vote  of  being  elected  president  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Wisconsin.  Prof.  Carpenter  was  a  close
and  indefatigable  student  and  a  diligent  writer.
He  contributed  very  largely  to  the  religious  and
educational  press  of  the  country,  and  published
valuable  lectures  and  educational  addresses.  Among
these  are  "  Moral  Forces  in  Education " ;  twelve
lectures  on  the  "  Evidences  of  Christianity " ;
"The  Metaphysical  Basis  of  Science";  and  "The
Philosophy  of  Evolution."  He  was  also  the  au-
thor of  "  English  of  the  Fourteenth  Century  "
(Boston,  1872) ;  "  An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of
Anglo-Saxon  "  (1875) ;  and  "  The  Elements  of  Eng-
lish Analysis  "  (1877).

CARPENTER,  William  Lewis,  soldier,  b.  in
Dunkirk,  N.  Y.,  13  Jan.,  1844.  He  received  a  pub-
lic-school education  in  his  native  city,  and  in  1864
enlisted  as  a  private  in  the  artillery  of  the  Army  of
the  Potomac.  In  1867  he  was  promoted  to  a
second  lieutenancy  in  the  9th  infantry,  U.  S.  army,
and  in  1873  to  the  rank  of  first  lieutenant.  His
attention  was  directed  to  natural  history,  and  he
became  in  1873  naturalist  to  the  U.  S.  geological
survey,  and  two  years  later  was  called  to  a  similar
office  on  the  geographical  survey.  In  connection
with  this  work  he  furnished  valuable  reports,  which
were  published  by  the  government  in  the  annual
reports  of  the  surveys  during  the  years  mentioned.
In  1877  he  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  American
association  for  the  advancement  of  science.

CARPIO,  Manuel,  Mexican  physician,  b,  in
Cosamaloapam,  Vera  Cruz,  1  May,  1791 ;  d.  in  the
city  of  Mexico,  11  Feb.,  1860.  He  studied  philoso-
phy, theology,  and  law  in  Puebla,  but  ended  by
devoting  himself  to  medicine,  the  bishop  of  Pue-
bla giving  him  a  pension  to  finish  his  studies  in  the
city  of  Mexico.  Before  going  to  the  capital,  he
had  associated  with  others  in  Puebla  for  the  study
of  medicine,  and  founded  a  medical  academy,  of
which  he  was  elected  president.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  Mexico  in  1832,  appointed  professor  ot
physiology  and  hygiene  in  1833,  secretary,  and  af-
terward president,  of  the  Academy  of  medicine,
member  of  the  general  commission  of  studies,  vice-
president  of  the  health  council,  and  professor  of
history  of  medical  sciences.  Carpio  was  a  remark-
able classic  scholar,  possessing  a  profound  knovvi-
edge  of  ancient  history,  and  made  Palestine  his
favorite  study.  He  was  a  deputy  to  congress  in
1824,  and  then  became  its  president;  was  again
elected  deputy  in  1846  and  1848,  senator  in  18ol,
and  member  of  the  state  council  in  1858.  But  he
is  best  known  in  Mexico  by  his  poems,  the  first  oi
which  appeared,  when  he  was  over  forty  years  old,
in  1832. From  that  time  many  others  of  his  poet-


CARPMAEL


CARR


533


ical  compositions  were  published,  and  finally  col-
lected in  one  volume  (1849).  Besides  his  poems  he
left  several  works,  among  them  "  La  Tierra  San-
ta," "  Medicina  Domestica,"  and  some  translations
from  Latin  and  French  medical  books.

CARPMAEL,  Charles,  Canadian  meteorologist,
b.  at  Streatham  Hill,  Surrey,  England,  19  Sept.,
1846.  He  was  educated  at  Clapham  grammar-
school,  and  St.  John's  college,  Cambridge,  of  which
institution  he  was  elected  a  fellow  in  November,
1870.  In  December  of  that  year  Mr.  Carpmael,
whose  studies  had  peculiarly  fitted  him  for  such  a
service,  was  a  member  of  the  British  "  Eclipse  "  ex-
pedition to  Spain.  In  October,  1872,  he  was  ap-
pointed deputy  superintendent  of  the  meteoro-
logical service  of  Canada,  and  director  of  the
magnetic  observatory  and  superintendent  of  the
meteorological  service  in  February,  1880.  He  is
attached  to  the  observatory  at  Toronto,

CARR,  Dabney,  patriot,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1744;
d.  in  Charlottesville,  Va.,  16  May,  1773.  He  -moved
and  eloquently  advocated  a  resolution  to  appoint
inter-colonial  committees  of  correspondence  in  re-
sistance to  British  encroachments,  which  was  adopt-
ed on  3  March,  1773.  He  married  a  sister  of  Thomas
Jefferson. — His  son,  Dabney,  b.  in  April,  1773 ;  d.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  8  Jan.,  1837,  practised  law,  was
chancellor  of  Winchester  district  from  1811  till
1824,  and  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  from  1824
till  1837. — Another  son,  Samuel,  commanded  the
IT.  S.  cavalry  at  Norfolk  in  1812-5, — His  grand-
son, Dabney  S.,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1803 ;  d.
in  Charlottesville,  Va.,  24  March,  1854,  was  for
several  vears  naval  officer  at  Baltimore,  and  U.  S.
minister  to  Turkey  from  1843  till  1849.

CARR,  Eug'ene  A;,  soldier,  b.  in  Erie  county,
N.  Y.,  20  March,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1850,  and  entered  the
mounted  rifles.  In  1852-'3  he  accompanied  expedi-
tions to  the  Rocky  mountains.  In  a  skirmish  with
the  Mescalero  Apaches,  near  Diablo  mountain,  10
Oct.,  1854,  he  was  severely  wounded,  and  for  his  gal-
lantry was  promoted  first  lieutenant.  He  took  part
in  the  Sioux  expedition  of  1855,  was  engaged  in  sup-
pressing the  Kansas  border  disturbances  in  1856,  and
was  in  the  Utah  expedition  of  1858,  receiving  promo-
tion as  captain  on  11  June,  1858.  In  1860  he  took
part  in  skirmishes  with  the  Kiowa  and  Comanche
Indians,  and  in  May,  1861,  marched  from  Fort
Washita  to  Fort  Leavenworth,  and  at  once  entered
upon  active  service  in  the  field  in  Gen.  Lyon's
campaign  in  southwestern  Missouri.  He  was  en-
gaged at  Dug  Springs  and  in  the  battle  of  Wilson's
Greek,  where  he  won  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-
colonel  for  gallantry.  In  September,  1861,  he  was
commissioned  colonel  of  the  3d  Illinois  volunteer
cavalry,  was  an  acting  brigadier-general  in  Fre-
mont's hundred  days'  campaign,  served  under
Hunter,  Halleck.  and  Curtis,  was  assigned,  Febru-
ary, 1862,  to  the  command  of  the  fourth  division  of
the  Army  of  the  Southwest,  and  participated  in  the
pursuit  of  the  enemy  into  Arkansas,  holding  the
rank  of  brigadier-general,  having  received  his  com-
mission on  7  March,  1862.  At  Pea  Ridge  he  de-
ployed his  division  on  the  extreme  right  in  the
second  day's  battle,  and,  though  thrice  wounded,
held  his  position  for  seven  hours,  contributing,
in  a  large  measure,  to  the  victory  of  the  day.  For
his  gallantry  he  was  made  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  dating  from  7  March,  and  was  assigned
a  command  under  Gren.  Curtis.  He  participated
in  the  operations  against  Little  Rock,  and  in  the
march  to  Helena  during  the  summer  of  1862,  was
promoted  major  in  the  regular  army  17  July,  and
daring  the  autumn  of  1862  commanded  the  Army


of  the  Southwest.  During  the  Vicksburg  campaign
of  1863  he  commanded  a  division  and  led  the  at-
tack at  Magnolia  Church  and  at  Port  Gibson.  At
Big  Black  River  his  division  led  the  column,  and
opened  and  closed  the  engagement,  for  which  he
was  brevetted  colonel,  U.  S.  army.  He  led  the  as-
sault on  Vicksburg  on  18  May,  and  on  the  22d  his
division  was  the  first  to  effect  a  lodgment  in  the
enemy's  works.  During  the  autumn  of  1863  he
commanded  at  Corinth  the  left  wing  of  the  16th
corps,  was  transferred  in  December  to  the  Army
of  Arkansas,  was  engaged  in  the  expedition  against
Camden  and  in  the  action  at  the  Little  Red  River,
was  in  command  at  Poison  Spring  and  took  part
in  the  engagements  at  Prairie  D'Ane  and  Jen-
kins's Ferry,  He  was  engaged  at  Clarendon,  20
June,  1865,  and  distinguished  himself  at  the  siege
of  Spanish  Fort.  He  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral in  the  U,  S.  army  for  gallantry  at  Little  Rock,
and  major-general  for  services  during  the  war.  He
took  the  field  against  the  hostile  Sioux  and  Chey-
ennes  in  October,  1868,  and  on  18  Oct,  defeated  a
large  party  of  Cheyennes  on  Beaver  Creek,  Kansas ;
routed  them  on  Solomon  River  on  25  Oct.,  and  drove
them  out  of  Kansas ;  commanded  an  expedition  to
the  Canadian  River  in  the  winter  of  1868-'9,  and
one  to  Republican  River  in  June  and  July,  1869,
defeating  Tall  Bull  at  Summit  Springs,  Col,,  on  11
July,  1869,  and  securing  a  lasting  peace  to  the
frontier.  He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel  on
17  June,  1873,  participated  in  a  campaign  against
the  Sioux  in  1876,  afterward  commanded  the  Black
Hills  district,  and  was  chief  officer  of  the  Big  Horn
and  Yellowstone  expedition  in  the  autumn  of  that
year.  He  was  promoted  colonel  of  the  6th  cavalry,
to  date  from  29  April,  1879,  directed  the  field
operations  against  the  hostile  Apaches  in  Arizona
and  New  Mexico  in  1880,  and  commanded  the  ex-
pedition to  Old  Mexico  during  the  Victoria  cam-
paign. In  August,  1881,  he  conducted  with  great
skill  the  defence  of  his  command  against  an  at-
tempted massacre  by  the  White  mountain  Apa-
ches at  Cibicu  Creek.

CARR,  Joseph  B.,  soldier,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
16  Aug.,  1828.  Pie  was  educated  in  the  public
schools,  was  apprenticed  to  a  tobacconist,  entered
the  militia  in  1849,  and  rose  to  be  colonel.  In
April,  1861,  he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel,
and  in  May  colonel,  of  the  2d  New  York  volun-
teers. His  regiment  was  the  first  to  encamp  on
the  soil  of  Virginia,  participated  in  the  battle  of
Big  Bethel,  and  in  May,  1862,  went  to  the  front
and  fought  through  McClellan's  peninsula  cam-
paign, being  attached  to  Gen,  Hooker's  command.
Col.  Carr  was  acting  brigadier-general  in  the  en-
gagements of  the  Orchards,  Glendale,  and  Mal-
vern Hill,  and  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general, 7  Sept.,  1862,  for  services  in  the  field,
especially  at  Malvern  Hill  on  2  July.  He  fought
with  conspicuous  gallantry  at  Bristow  Station  and
Chantilly,  and  participated  in  the  battle  of  Fred-
ericksburg. In  January,  1863,  he  commanded  an
expedition  that  severed  the  communications  of  the
enemy  at  Rappahannock  Bridge.  At  Chancellors-
ville,  '3  May,  1863,  he  took  command  of  the  divis-
ion after  the  fall  of  Gen.  Berry,  and  acted  as  divis-
ion commander  till  1  June.  At  Gettysburg  his
horse  was  killed  under  him  and  he  was  injured  by
the  fall,  but  refused  to  leave  the  field  and  held  his
troops  together,  though  two  thirds  of  them  were
killed  or  wounded.  On  4  Oct.,  1863,  he  was  as-
signed to  the  command  of  the  3d  division  of  the
4th  corps,  participated  in  the  actions  at  Brandy
Station,  Locvist  Grove,  and  Mine  Run,  and  was
then  transferred  to  the  4th  division  in  the  2d  (Han-


S34


CARR


CARRERA


'Cock's)  corps.  On  2  May,  owing  to  a  resolution  of
the  senate  that  caused  him  to  rank  below  some  of
the  brigade  commanders  of  his  division,  he  was  or-
dered to  report  to  Gen.  Butler,  and  was  placed  by
him  in  the  outer  line  of  defence  of  the  peninsula.
He  afterward  commanded  divisions  in  the  1st
corps,  had  charge  of  the  defences  of  James  river,
and  on  1  June,  1865,  was  brevetted  major-gen-
eral for  gallantry  and  meritorious  services  dur-
ing the  war.  Before  he  was  mustered  out,  on  24
Aug.,  1865,  he  was  nominated  as  secretary  of  state
of  New  York  by  the  republican  party.  He  took  a
prominent  part  in  the  politics  of  New  York,  being
elected  secretary  of  state  in  1879,  and  re-elected  in
1881  and  1883.  In  1885  he  was  the  republican
candidate  for  lieutenant-governor.

CARR,  Sir  Robert,  British  commissioner  in
New  England,  b.  in  Northumberland,  England  ;  d.
in  Bristol,  England,  1  June,  1667.  He  was  ap-
pointed commissioner  by  Charles  II.  in  1664,  in
conjunction  with  Nicolls,  Cartwright,  and  Maver-
ick. The  New  Englanders  took  measures  for  re-
sisting any  infraction  of  their  liberties  by  the  com-
missioners, who  were  nominated  by  the  duke  of
York  and  given  extensive  powers  for  regulating
the  affairs  of  New  England.  The  commissioners
arrived  with  a  fleet,  which  was  equipped  for  re-
ducing the  Dutch  settlements  on  the  Hudson.  On
27  Aug.,  1664,  Nicolls  and  Carr  captured  New  Am-
sterdam from  the  Dutch  and  called  it  New  York
in  honor  of  the  duke,  afterward  James  11.  The
garrison  at  Fort  Orange  capitulated  on  24  Sept.,
and  tlie  place  was  renamed  Albany.  Carr  forced
the  Swedes  and  Dutch  on  the  Delaware  into  a
capitulation,  1  Oct.,  1664,  went  to  Boston  in  Feb-
ruary, 1665,  and  with  his  coadjutors  attempted  to
supersede  the  constituted  authorities  of  the  colony :
but  the  colonists  refused  to  recognize  their  com-
mission. They  then  went  to  the  north  and  en-
deavored to  restore  proprietary  government.  The
towns  of  New  Hampshire  obeyed  the  instructions
of  the  governor  of  Massachusetts,  and  refused  to
hold  intercourse  with  the  commissioners.  In  Maine
the  people  welcomed  the  commissioners,  preferring
direct  dependence  on  the  king  to  incorporation  in
Massachusetts.  A  court  was  held  at  Casco  in  July,
1666,  and  a  new  government  under  che  commis-
sioners was  constituted  and  maintained  until  1668.
In  the  mean  time  Carr  returned  to  England  and
died  the  dav  after  his  arrival.

CARRALL,  Robert  William  Weir,  Canadian
physician,  b.  in  Carrall's  Grove,  near  Woodstock,
Ontario,  in  1889.  He  was  educated  at  Trinity  col-
lege, Toronto,  and  was  graduated  in  medicine  at
McGill  college,  Montreal,  in  1859.  He  was  elected
and  represented  Cariboo  in  the  legislative  council
of  British  Columbia  from  1868  until  the  colony
was  admitted  into  the  Canadian  Dominion  in  1871.
He  was  one  of  the  three  delegates  who  went  to  Ot-
tawa in  that  year  to  arrange  the  terms  of  union.
He  was  called  to,the  senate  on  3  Dec,  1871.

CARRATALA,  Jos6  (car-rah-ta-lah'),  Spanish
soldier,  b.  in  Alicante  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th
century;  d.  in  Spain  about  1845.  He  had  just
finished  his  studies  when  Napoleon's  army  invaded
Spain  in  1808,  and  at  once  enrolled  himself  in  a
Spanish  regiment.  He  was  wounded  at  the  battle
of  Tudela  and  the  second  siege  of  Saragossa,  won
several  promotions,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war
was  lieutenant-colonel.  In  September,  1815,  he
went  to  Peru  as  colonel  of  his  regiment,  and  took
part  in  battles  at  Jujuy  and  Salt  a.  occupied  Are-
quipa  in  1820,  burned  several  towns  in  the  province
of  Jauja,  was  promoted  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  and  joined  Canterac,  with  whom  he  won


the  battle  of  Macacona,  and  continued  the  cam-
paign to  the  end.  He  wrote  the  capitulation  after
the  battle  of  Ayacucho,  when  the  royalists  were
finally  defeated  in  South  America.  On  his  return
to  Spain,  he  again  took  part  in  military  operations,
in  1827  was  appointed  lieutenant-general,  and  then
captain-general  of  several  provinces,  and  became
minister  of  war  and  senator  in  1841.

CARRELL,  Coluiuba,  mother  superior,  b.  in
Dublin,  Ireland,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  in
1878.  She  went  to  Louisville  at  an  early  age,  and
entered  a  convent  in  1826.  She  was  directress  of
studies  up  to  1862,  when  she  was  elected  mother
superior.  She  founded  the  hospital  of  SS.  Mary
and  Elizabeth  in  Louisville.

CARRELL,  George  Aloysius,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1803  ;  d.  in  Covington,  Ky.,
in  1868.  At  ten  years  of  age  he  began  his  studies
at  Mount  St.  Mary's  college,  Emmettsburg,  where  he
remained  three  years.  He  studied  in  Georgetown
college  for  four  years  and  then  entered  the  novitiate
of  the  Jesuits  at  White  Marsh,  Md.  He  returned
to  St.  Mary's  to  complete  his  theological  studies,
and  was  ordained  in  1829.  During  the  next  six
years  he  performed  missionary  duty  in  Pennsyl-
vania, New  Jersey,  and  Delaware,  and  founded  an
academy  for  young  ladies,  which  had  more  than
300  pupils,  as  well  as  a  boys'  school.  After  six
years  of  missionary  experience  he  entered  the  So-
ciety of  Jesus,  was  appointed  professor  in  St.  Louis
university,  and  was  rector  of  this  institution  from
1845  till  1848.  Between  1851  and  1853  he  was
president  of  Purcell  mansion  college,  Cincinnati.
On  the  erection  of  the  eastern  portion  of  Kentucky
into  the  see  of  Covington  in  1853,  Dr.  Carrell  was
proposed  for  the  office  of  bishop  by  the  first  na-
tional council  of  Baltimore,  and,  the  recommenda^
tion  having  been  sanctioned  by  the  pope,  he  was
consecrated  the  same  year.  One  of  his  first  under-
takings was  the  erection  of  the  cathedral  of  St.
Mary's,  and  this  he  accomplished  in  less  than  two
years  after  his  installation.  His  diocese  contained
only  ten  churches  and  seven  priests  for  7,000  Cath-
olics, scattered  over  some  hundred  miles  of  terri-
tory, at  the  beginning  of  his  episcopate,  while  there
was  not  an  ecclesiastical  institution  in  the  diocese.
During  the  fifteen  years  that  followed  his  conse-
cration there  was  marked  progress,  the  number  of
churches  increasing  to  thirty-eight  and  the  priests
to  thirty-three.  He  established  a  hospital  for  the
care  of  the  sick  and  an  asylum  for  orphan  children,
and  also  founded  a  priory  of  the  order  of  St.  Bene-
dict, a  convent  of  Benedictine  nuns,  and  one  of  the
nuns  of  the  visitation.  Academies  and  parochial
schools  were  erected  in  every  part  of  his  diocese,
and  he  did  much  to  promote  education  both  in
Kentuckv  and  Ohio.

CARRERA,  Jos6  Miguel  (car-ray'-rah),  Chilian
soldier,  b.  in  Santiago  de  Chili,  19  July,  1783;  d.  m
Mendoza,  Argentine  Republic.  1  Sept.,  1815.  He
studied  in  Madrid,  entered  the  Spanish  cavalry,
served  with  distinction  during  the  war  of  inde-
pendence against  the  French,  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  major  and  given  the  command  of  a  squad-
ron in  1810,  and  escaped  from  Cadiz  when  he
heard  of  the  revolutionary  -movement  in  Chili.
Soon  after  his  arrival  he  was  appointed  colonel  iv
the  revolutionary  army  by  dictator  Rosas,  fought
against  the  Spaniards,  'won  great  reputation
among  the  militarv  chiefs,  which  enabled  him  to
depose  Rosas  (16  Nov.,  1811)  and  to  establish  a
new  government  under  his  own  authority.  He
then  quelled  an  insurrection,  and  dissolved  the
congress,  reorganizing  the  government  on  military
principles. On  19  July,  1812,  he  was  proclaimed


CARRERA


CARRINGTON


635


dictator  and  general  of  the  revolutionary  army,
and  in  1813  the  constitution  of  the  new  republic
was  promulgated.  More  Spanish  troops  having
been  sent  to  Chili  from  Peru  to  continue  the  war,
Carrera  ordered  ev^ery  one  in  communication  with
the  enemy  to  be  sentenced  to  death,  banished  many
royalists,  and  subjected  all  others  remaining  in
the  country  to  a  compulsory  loan.  On  30  April,
1813,  he  defeated  5,000  Spaniards  under  Pareja  on
the  banks  of  the  Maule.  A  few  days  afterward  he
took  the  city  of  Concepcion,  and  laid  siege  to
Chilian,  attacking  it  several  times  unsuccessfully.
He  met  with  reverses  in  October,  and  public
opinion  turned  against  him  and  the  monarchical
constitution  he  had  established.  Then  both  the
people  and  the  army  deposed  Carrera,  giving
O'Higgins  the  supreme  command,  27  Nov.,  1813.
On  23  July,  1814,  he  raised  a  rebellion  that  caused
the  fall  of  Ltetra,  and  again  assumed  power.  A
division  of  the  royalist  troops  under  Osorio  having
jiist  arrived  near  Concepcion,  Carrera  and  O'Hig-
gins fought  a  battle  in  the  Rancagua  valley  (2
Oct.),  were  disastrously  routed  by  the  Spaniards,
and  rook  refuge  in  Mendoza.  In  the  following
year  he  joined  in  a  plot  against  O'Higgins  and  San
Martin,  and  these  two  leaders  caused  him  to  be  im-
prisoned, court-martialed,  and  executed.

CARRERA,  Rafael,  president  of  Guatemala,
b.  in  the  city  of  Guatemala  in  1814 ;  d.  14  April,
1865.  He  was  of  Indian  and  negro  parentage,  and
became  a  drummer-boy  and  herder  in  1829,  when
Morazan  was  president  of  Guatemala.  Subse-
quently he  retired  to  the  small  town  of  Metaguas-
cuintla,  where  he  married  a  woman  of  singular-
ly energetic  character,  his  constant  companion
throughout  his  public  career.  Early  in  January,
1838,  the  city  of  Guatemala  revolted  against  the
president,  and  appointed  a  provisional  govern-
ment; and  on  the  14th  of  the  same  month  the
city  was  attacked  by  troops  from  Sacatepequez  and
Mita.  Carrera  commanded  6,000  Indian  moun-
taineers, and,  after  resisting  four  days,  the  garrison
surrendered.  Carrera's  men  indulged  in  many  acts
of  vandalism,  and  their  leader  only  succeeded  in
restraining  them  after  they  had  murdered  the  vice-
president  of  the  republic,  Jose  Gregorio  Salazar,
and  other  citizens.  Carrera  was  sent  to  Mita.  a
neighboring  district  of  the  interior,  in  an  official
capacity,  but  not  till  Gen.  Salazar  had  defeated
him  at  Villanueva,  11  Sept.,  1838.  In  the  follow-
ing year,  13  April,  Carrera,  being  favored  by  the
so-called  aristocrats  and  the  clerical  party,  again
occupied  the  capital  and  reinstated  Rivera  Paz  as
ruler  of  the  nation.  Carrera  remained  as  general-
in-chief  of  the  army,  defeated  Gen.  Agustin  Guz-
man at  Los  Altos  in  February,  1840,  reincorpo-
rated the  towns  of  this  state  with  that  of  Guate-
mala, again  took  the  same  city  from  Morazan,  who
had  entered  it  with  1.300  Salvadorians  on  18  March,
went  to  Quezaltenango,  and  shot  its  aldermen  be-
cause the  city  had  recognized  Morazan.  Carrera
was  elected  to  the  presidency,  21  March,  1847,  and
at  once  began  a  policy  that  put  an  end  to  the  fed-
eration of  the  Central  American  republics.  Late
in  1847  another  revolution  broke  out  at  Los  Altos,
but  was  quelled  by  Carrera,  who  with  a  large  army
routed  the  insurgents  at  Patzun,  in  July,  1848.
He  tendered  his  resignation  in  the  following  Au-
gust, and  went  to  Mexico,  where  he  resided  for  a
year.  President  Paredes  having  appointed  him
major-general.  The  republics  of  Honduras  and
Salvador  declared  war  on  Guatemala,  and  sent
against  it  4,000  men  under  Vasconcelos,  president
of  Salvador,  in  December,  1850 ;  but  Carrera,  with
'>nly  1,500  men,  defeated  the  invaders  at  "  La  Ara-


da,"  Chiquimula,  2  Feb.,  1851.  A  few  months
later,  22  Oct.,  he  was  re-elected  president,  and,
having  won  several  victories  against  the  Hondu-
rans,  he  was  elected  once  more,  this  time  president
for  life,  21  Oct.,  1854.  In  1861  he  intervened  in
the  contest  that  had  arisen  between  the  ecclesias-
tical authorities  of  Honduras  and  President  Guar-
diola,  and  in  the  following  year  opposed  a  plan  for
a  confederation  of  the  Central  American  nations.
Having  declared  war  on  San  Salvador  in  1863,  he
took  its  capital,  26  Oct.,  and  shot  Trungaray  and
other  prominent  persons.  Guatemala  enjoyed
peace  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  He  was  regarded  as
the  enemy  of  order,  progress,  and  civilization.  His
government  was  absolute.  When  first  elected  to
the  presidency  he  could  not  read  or  write,  but  sub-
sequently learned  to  write  his  name.

CARRIER,  Thomas,  centenarian,  b.  in  the  west
of  England  in  1626 ;  d.  in  Colchester,  Conn.,  16
May,  1735.  He  settled  in  Andover,  Mass.,  and  in
1664  married  Martha  Allen,  who,  19  Aug,  1692,
was  hanged  as  a  witch  at  Salem,  on  testimony
charging  her  with  appearing  before  her  daughter
in  the  shape  of  a  black  cat.  He  passed  the  last
twenty  years  of  his  life  at  Colchester,  and,  shortly
before  his  death,  walked  six  miles  to  see  a  sick
friend.  Notwithstanding  his  extraordinary  age,
his  head  was  not  bald  nor  his  hair  gray.

CARRIGAIN,  Philip,  lawyer,  b.  in  Concord,
N.  II.,  20  Feb.,  1772  ;  d.  there,  16  March,  1842.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1794,  studied  law,
and  practised  successively  at  Concord,  Epsom,  Chi-
chester, and  again  at  Concord.  He  was  secretary
of  state  of  New  Hampshire  four  years,  and  also
clerk  of  the  senate.  He  surveyed  a  great  part  of
the  state,  of  which  he  published  an  excellent  map
in  1816,  and  was  the  first  to  apply  to  New  Hamp-
shire the  name  of  the  "  granite  state." — His  father,
Philip,  b.  in  New  York  city  in  1746;  d.  in  August,
1806,  was  the  son  of  a  Scotch  physician,  who  died
in  New  York,  and  became  himself  an  eminent
physician  and  surgeon,  having  the  largest  practice
in  the  state.

CARRILLO,  Braulio  (kar-reel'-yo),  dictator  of
Costa  Rica,  b.  in  Cartago  in  1800 ;  assassinated  in
1845.  He  was  a  member  of  the  federal  congress
of  Central  America,  was  afterward  elected  gov-
ernor of  Costa  Rica,  and  was  dictator  from  1838
till  1842.  While  he  repressed  all  revolutionary
tendencies,  he  devoted  his  energies  also  to  the  pro-
motion of  the  material  interests  of  the  state.  He
adjusted  its  foreign  debt,  built  roads  and  bridges,
and  introduced  the  culture  of  coffee,  now  the  great
staple  of  the  country,  which  became  from  the  poor-
est the  richest  state  of  Central  America.  He  trans-
acted all  public  affairs  aided  only  by  his  wife.

CARRINGTON,  Edward,  'revolutionary  sol-
dier, b.  in  Charlotte  county,  Va.,  11  Feb.,  1749;  d.
in  Richmond,  Va.,  28  Oct.,  1810.  He  was  commis-
sioned lieutenant-colonel  of  artillery,  30  Nov.,  1776,
was  detached  with  a  portion  of  this  regiment  to
the  south,  and  made  prisoner  at  Charleston.  Car-
rington  was  afterward  employed  by  Gates  and  by
Greene,  who  made  him  his  quartermaster-generaL
Aided  by  Capt.  Smith,  of  the  Maryland  line,  he  ex-
plored the  river  Dan,  and  made  every  preparation
for  Greene  to  cross  it  with  his  army ;  then  joined
him  near  the  Yadkin,  and  was  an  active  and  effi-
cient officer  in  the  memorable  retreat  to  the  Dan.
He  commanded  the  artillerv  and  did  good  service
at  the  battle  of  Hobkirk's  Hill,  24  April,  1781,  and
also  at  Yorktown.  He  was  a  delegate  from  Vir-
ginia to  the  Continental  congress  in  1785-'6.  and
was  foreman  of  the  jury  in  Burr's  trial  for  treason
in  1807. His  brother,  Paul,  is  noticed  below.


536


CARRINGTON


CARROLL


CARRINGTON,  Henry  Beebee,  soldier,  b.  in
Wallingford,  Conn.,  2  March,  1824.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Yale  in  1845,  was  a  teacher  of  chemistry
and  Greek  in  Irving  institute,  NewYork,  in  1846-'7,
studied  in  the  law-school  at  New  Haven,  and  was
for  some  time  a  teacher  in  the  New  Haven  ladies'
collegiate  institute.  In  1848  he  began  the  practice
of  law  in  Columbus,  Ohio,  and  was  active  in  the
anti-slavery  agitation.  He  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  organized  the  republican  party  on
13  July,  1854,  and  chairman  of  the  committee  ap-
pointed to  correspond  with  other  states  and  make
the  movement  national.  As  jadge-advocate-gen-
eral,  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Chase,  he  aided  in  the
organization  of  the  state  militia  in  1857,  in  antici-
pation of  a  civil  war.  He  was  afterward  appointed
inspector-general,  and  was  adjutant-general  of
Ohio  when  the  war  began.  When  President  Lin-
coln issued  the  first  call  for  troops  he  organized
and  placed  in  western  Virginia  nine  regiments  of
militia  before  the  muster  of  the  three-months'  vol-
unteers. On  14  May,  18G1,  he  received  an  appoint-
ment in  the  regular  army  as  colonel  of  the  18th
infantry.  He  commanded  the  camp  of  instruction
at  Camp  Thomas,  Ohio,  took  a  brigade  into  the
field  at  Lebanon,  Ky.,  served  as  chief  muster-
officer  in  Indiana  in  1862,  was  commissioned  briga-
dier-general of  volunteers  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  and  on
the  occasion  of  Morgan's  raid  returned  to  Indiana,
commanded  the  militia  of  that  state,  aided  in  rais-
ing the  siege  of  Frankfort,  Ky.,  and  afterward  ex-
posed the  "  Sons  of  liberty."  He  was  mustered  out
of  the  volunteer  service  in  September,  1865,  and  in
November  was  president  of  a  military  commission
to  try  guerillas  at  Louisville,  Ky.  Joining  his
regiment  on  the  plains,  he  commanded  Fort
Kearny,  Neb.,  and  in  May,  1866,  opened  a  road  to
Montana,  amid  harassing  attacks  from  the  hostile
Sioux.  He  conducted  military  operations  in  Colo-
rado till  the  close  of  1869,  and  on  11  Dec,  1870,
was  retired  from  active  service  on  account  of
wounds  and  exposure  in  the  line  of  duty.  From
the  beginning  of  1870  till  1873  he  was  professor  of
military  science  and  tactics  at  Wabash  college,
Ind.,  and  after  that  devoted  himself  to  literary
labor.  He  published,  in  1849,  "  Russia  as  a  Na-
tion "  and  "  American  Classics,  or  Incidents  of
Revolutionary  Suffering."  Before  the  assault  on
Fort  Sumter  he  delivered  an  address  on  "  The
Hour,  the  Peril,  and  the  Duty,"  which  was  pub-
lished, with  two  other  orations  on  the  war,  in  a
volume  entitled  "  Crisis  Thoughts  "  (Philadelphia,
1878).  He  published,  in  1868,  "  Ab-sa-ra-ka,  Land
of  Massacre,"  embodying  his  wife's  experience  on
the  plains,, extended  in  later  editions  so  as  to  em-
brace an  account  of  Indian  wars  and  treaties  be-
tween 1865  and  1879,  and  in  1876  published  a  work
on  the  "Battles  of  the  American  Revolution"
(New  York).  The  forty  large  maps  accompanying
the  work  were  drawn  by  the  author,  who,  in  1881,
published  separately  "  Battle-Maps  and  Charts  of
the  American  Revolution."  Gen.  Carrington  has
given  much  time  to  a  work  that  will  appear  under
the  title  "  Battles  of  the  Bible."

CARRINGTON,  Paul,  statesman,  b.  in  Char-
lotte county,  Va.,  24  Feb.,  1733;  d.  there,  22  June,
1818.  He  is  a  brother  of  Edward,  noticed  above.
His  maternal  grandfather  and  his  father,  who
came  to  Virginia  by  way  of  Barbadoes,  were  both
engaged  in  the  expedition  of  1736  to  fix  the
boundary-line  between  Virginia  and  North  Caro-
lina. He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary  col-
lege, studied  law  in  the  office  of  Col.  Clement  Read,
clerk  of  the  county  of  Lunnenburg,  about  1748,
married  the  daughter  of  his  preceptor,  began  prac-


tice at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  and  soon  rose  to
eminence.  From  1765  till  1775  he  was  a  member
of  the  house  of  burgesses,  and  voted  against  the
stamp-act  resolutions  of  Patrick  Henry.  He  was
a  member  of  various  conventions  in  1775-'6,  and  of
the  committee  that  reported  the  declaration  of
rights  and  the  state  constitution.  He  then  took
his  seat  in  the  house  of  delegates,  from  which  he
passed  to  the  bench  of  the  general  court  in  May,
1779,  and  to  the  court  of  appeals  in  1789,  in  which
last  he  remained  until  1811.  He  was  a  member  of
the  committee  of  safety  during  the  whole  of  its
existence,  and,  in  the  Virginia  convention,  voted
for  the  adoption  of  the  constitution,  and  was  a
member  of  the  committee  to  report  amendments.—
His  son,  Paul,  b.  in  1764;  d.  8  Jan.,  1816,  served
with  his  two  brothers  in  the  revolutionary  army,
and  was  distinguished  in  the  battles  of  (jruilford
Court-House  and  Green  Spring.  After  the  peace
he  completed  his  studies  at  William  and  Mary  col-
lege, became  a  lawyer,  and  served  in  both  houses
of  the  legislature  and  afterward  on  the  bench  oi
the  superior  court.  His  brother.  Col.  Clement,  was
severely  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Eutaw  Springs.

CARROLL,  Charles,  of  Carrollton,  last  surviv-
ing signer  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  b.
in  Annapolis,  Md.,  20  Sept.,  1737;  d.  in  Baltimore,
14  Nov.,  1832.  The  sept  of  the  O'Carrolls  was
one  of  the  most  ancient  and  powerful  in  Ireland.
They  were  princes  and  lords  of  Ely  from  the  12th
to  the  16th  century. They  sprang  from  the  kings


C>£G:i^r^ys~^..^^^ou^'^y^'^<^^^


of  Munster,  and  intermarried  with  the  great  houses
of  Ormond  and  Desmond  in  Ireland,  and  Argyll  in
Scotland.  Charles .  Carroll,  grandfather  of  Carroll
of  Carrollton,  was  a  clerk  in  the  office  of  Lord
Powis  in  the  reign  of  James  II.,  and  emigrated  to
Maryland  upon  the  accession  of  William  and  Mary
in  1689.  In  1691  he  was  appointed  judge  and  regis-
ter of  the  land-office,  and  agent  and  receiver  for
Lord  Baltimore's  rents.  His  son  Charles  was  born
in  1702,  and  died  in  1782,  leaving  his  son  Charles,
the  signer,  whose  mother  was  Elizabeth  Brook.
Carroll  of  Carrollton,  at  the  age  of  eight  years,  was
sent  to  France  to  be  educated  under  the  care  of
the  Society  of  Jesus,  which  had  controlled  the
Roman  Catholics  of  Maryland  since  its  foundation.
He  remained  six  years  in  the  Jesuit  college  at  St.
Omer's,  one  year  in  their  college  at  Rheims,  and
two  years  in  the  college  of  Louis  Le  Grand.  Thence
he  went  for  a  year  to  Bourges  to  study  civil  law,
and  from  there  he  returned  to  college  at  Paris.  In
1757  he  entered  the  Middle  Temple,  London,  for
the  study  of  the  common  law,  and  returned  to
Maryland in 1765. In  June,  1768,  he  married


CARROLL


CARROLL


587


Mary  Darnall,  daughter  of  Col.  Henry  Darnall,  a
young  lady  of  beauty,  fortune,  and  ancient  family.
6arroll  found  the  public  mind  in  a  ferment  over
many  fundamental  principles  of  government  and
of  civil  liberty.  In  a  province  founded  by  Roman
Catholics  on  the  basis  of  religious  toleration,  the
education  of  Catholics  in  their  own  schools  had
been  prohibited  by  law,  and  Carroll  himself  had
just  returned  from  a  foreign  land,  whither  he  had
been  driven  by  the  intolerance  of  his  home  authori-
ties to  seek  a  liberal  education.  Not  only  were
Roman  Catholics  under  the  ban  of  disfranchise-
ment, but  all  persons  of  every  faith  and  no  faith
were  taxed  to  support  the  established  church,  which


was  the  church  of  England.  The  discussion  as  to
the  right  of  taxation  for  the  support  of  religion
soon  extended  from  the  legislature  to  the  public
press.  Carroll,  over  the  signature  "  The  First  Citi-
zen," in  a  series  of  articles  in  the  "  Maryland  Ga-
zette," attacked  the  validity  of  the  law  imposing
the  tax.  The  church  establishment  was  defend-
ed by  Daniel  Dulany,  leader  of  the  colonial  bar,
whose  ability  and  learning  were  so  generally
acknowledged  that  his  opinions  were  quoted  as
authority  on  colonial  law  in  Westminster  hall,
and  are  published  to  this  day,  as  such,  in  the
Maryland  law  reports.  In  this  discussion  Carroll
acquitted  himself  with  such  ability  that  he  received
the  thanks  of  public  meetings  all  over  the  province,
and  at  once  became  one  of  the  "  first  citizens."  In
December,  1774,  he  was  appointed  one  of  the  com-
mittee of  correspondence  for  the  province,  as  one
of  the  initial  steps  of  the  revolution  in  Maryland,
and  in  1775  was  elected  one  of  the  council  of
safety.  He  was  elected  delegate  to  the  revolution-
ary convention  from  Anne  Arundel  co.,  which  met
at  Annapolis,  7  Dec,  1775.  In  January,  1776,  he
was  appointed  by  the  Continental  congress  one  of
the  commissioners  to  go  to  Canada  and  induce
those  colonies  to  unite  with  the  rest  in  resistance
to  Great  Britain.  On  4  July,  1770,  he,  with
Matthew  Tilghman,  Thomas  Johnson,  William
Paca,  Samuel  Chase,  Thomas  Stone,  and  Robert
Alexander,  was  elected  deputy  from  Maryland  to
the  Continental  congress.  On  12  Jan.,  1776,  Mary-
land had  instructed  her  deputies  in  congress  not  to
consent  to  a  declaration  of  independence  without
the  knowledge  and  approbation  of  the  convention.
Mainly  owing  to  the  zealous  efforts  of  Carroll  and
his  subsequent  colleagues,  the  Maryland  conven-
tion, on  28  June,  1776,  had  rescinded  this  instruc-
tion, and  unanimously  directed  its  representatives
in  congress  to  unite  in  declaring  "  the  united  colo-
nies free  and  independent  states,"  and  on  6  July
declared  Maryland  a  free,  sovereign,  and  independ-
ent state.  Armed  with  this  authority,  Carroll  took
his  seat  in  congress  at  Philadelphia,  18  July,  1776,
and  on  2  Aug.,  1776,  with  the  rest  of  the  deputies


of  the  thirteen  states,  signed  the  Declaration  of
Independence.  It  is  said  that  he  affixed  the  addi-
tion "  of  Carrollton "  to  his  signature  in  order  to
distinguish  him  from  his  kinsman,  Charles  Carroll,
barrister,  and  to  assume  the  certain  responsibility
himself  of  his  act.  He  was  made  a  member  of  th*e
board  of  war,  and  served  in  congress  until  10  Nov.,
1776.  In  December,  1776,  he  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  first  senate  of  Maryland,  in  1777  again
sent  to  congress,  serving  on  the  committee  that  vis-
ited Valley  Forge  to  investigate  complaints  against
Gen.  Washington,  and  in  1788  elected  the  first  sena-
tor from  the  state  of  Maryland  under  the  constitu-
tion of  the  United  States.  He  drew  the  short
term  of  two  years  in  the  federal  senate  in  1791,  and
was  again  elected  to  the  state  senate,  remaining  there
till  1801.  In  1797  he  was  one  of  the  commissioners
to  settle  the  boundary-line  between  Maryland  and
Virginia.  On  23  April,  1827,  he  was  elected  one
of  the  directors  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad
company,  and  on  4  July,  1828,  laid  the  founda-
tion-stone of  the  beginning  of  that  undertaking.
His  biographer,  John  H.  B.  Latrobe,  writes  to  the
senior  editor  of  this  Cyclopa3dia :  "  After  I  had
finished  my  work  I  took  it  to  Mr.  Carroll,  whom
I  knew  very  well  indeed,  and  read  it  to  him,  as  he
was  seated  in  an  arm-chair  in  his  own  room  in
his  son-in-law's  house  in  Baltimore.  He  listened
with  marked  attention  and  without  a  comment
until  I  had  ceased  to  read,  when,  after  a  pause,  he
said :  '  Why,  Latrobe,  you  have  made  a  much
greater  man  of  me  than  I  ever  thought  I  was ;  and
yet  really  you  have  said  nothing  in  what  you  have
written  that  is  not  true.'  ...  In  my  mind's  eye  I
see  Mr.  Carroll  now — a  small,  attenuated  old  man,
with  a  prominent  nose  and  somewhat  receding
chin,  small  eyes  that  sparkled  when  he  was  inter-
ested in  conversation.  His  head  was  small  and  his
hair  white,  rather  long  and  silky,  while  his  face
and  forehead  were  seamed  with  wrinkles.  But,
old  and  feeble  as  he  seemed  to  be,  his  manner  and
speech  were  those  of  a  refined  and  courteous  gen-
tleman, and  you  saw  at  a  glance  whence  came  by
inheritance  the  charm  of  manner  that  so  emi-
nently distinguished  his  son,  Charles  Carroll  of
Homewood,  and  his  daughters,  Mrs.  Harper  and
Mrs.  Caton."  The  accompanying  view  represents
his  spacious  mansion,  known  as  Carrollton,  still
owned  and  occupied  by  his  descendants. — His  son,
Charles,  married  Harriet,  daughter  of  Benjamin
Chew,  of  Philadel-
phia, who,  as  well  ,- ,^^_
as  her  sister,  Mrs.
Philips,  was  a  great  ^^
favorite  of  Gen.
Washington.  In
1796,  when  Gilbert
Stuart  painted  his
portrait  for  Mrs.
William  Bingham,
she  frequently  ac-
companied the  gen-
eral to  the  artist's
house,  "  as  her  con-
versation," said
Washington,  "will
give  to  my  counte-
nance its  most
agreeable  expres-
sion." Her  portrait,  as  Harriet  Chew,  was  executed
by  Col.  John  Trumbull,  who  also  painted  portraits
of  her  sister  Sophia,  Cornelia  Schuyler,  Julia  Sey-
mour, and  many  other  celebrated  beauties  of  that
?eriod.  See  Griswold's  "  Republican  Court "  (New
ork,  1879).— The  granddaughters  of  Charles  Car-


638


CARROLL


CARROLL


roll  of  Carrollton  became  respectively  Marchioness
Wellesley,  Duchess  of  Leeds,  and  Lady  Stafford. —
A  grandson,  John  Lee,  governor  of  Maryland,  b.
at  Horaewood,  near  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1880,  was
educated  in  the  Roman  Catholic  colleges  at  George-
town, D.  C,  at  Emmettsburg,  Md.,  and  at  Harvard
law  school,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1851,  re-
moved to  New  York  in  1859,  where  he  served  as
U.  S.  commissioner,  returned  to  Baltimore  in  1862,
was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1807  and  again
in  1871,  and  in  1875  elected  governor.  He  married
a  daughter  of  Royal  Phelps,  of  New  York.

CARROLL,  Daniel,  patriot,  b.  in  Maryland ;  d.
in  Washington,  I).  C,  in  1829,  at  a  great  age.  He
was  a  member  of  the  old  congress,  in  1780-'4  a
delegate  to  the  convention  that  framed  the  U.  S.
constitution,  a  representative  in  congress  in  1789-
'91,  and  was  in  the  latter  year  appointed  commis-
sioner for  surveying  the  District  of  Columbia.  His
farm  formed  the  site  of  the  present  city  of  Wash-
ington. He  was  a  cousin  of  Charles  Carroll,

CARROLL,  John,  R.  C.  archbishop,  b.  in  Upper
Marlborough,  Md.,  in  1735 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.
C,  in  1817.  He  was  descended  from  the  first
family  of  Carrolls,  whose  representatives  emigrated
to  Maryland  about  1689,  and  whose  members  be-
came possessed  of  vast  landed  estates  in  that  prov-
ince prior  to  the  revolution.  He  was  a  cousin  of
Charles Carroll of Carrollton, and sympathized

with  him  in  his
patriotic  resist-
ance to  the  Brit-
ish crown.  At
the  time  of  his
birth,  as  the  laws
of  Maryland
prohibited  Ro-
man Catholics
from  maintain-
ing schools  for
the  education  of
their  youth  in
the  province,
young  Carroll,
who  had  at-
tached himself
to  the  Society
of  Jesus,  was
sent  to  the  Jes-
uit college  of
St.  Omer's  in
French  Flan-
ders, and  thence
to  Liege  for  his
training  under  the  severe  regimen  of  that  order.
He  was  ordained  priest  at  Liege  in  1759,  having  first
surrendered  his  property  to  his  brother  and  sisters.
Up  to  1771  he  was  professor  of  moral  philosophy  in
St.  Omer's  and  Liege,  and  in  the  same  year  admitted
as  a  professed  father  into  that  society.  The  next
two  years  were  occupied  in  a  tour  through  Europe,
in  company  with  the  son  of  Lord  Stourton,  to
whom  he  was  appointed  tutor.  Father  Carroll
filled  the  office  of  prefect  to  the  Jesuit  college  at
Bruges  in  1778,  having  been  obliged  to  leave  France
by  reason  of  the  decree  of  the  parliament  of  Paris
expelling  the  Jesuits.  The  society  having  been
suppressed  by  the  pope  in  the  same  year,  he  was
forced  to  abandon  the  continent,  and,  in  company
with  the  English  Jesuits  of  Flanders,  took  refuge
in  England,  whence  he  conducted  important  nego-
tiations with  the  French  government  in  reference
to  the  property  held  by  the  society  in  France.  He
was  appointed  chaplain  to  his  kinsman  Lord  Arun-
del, and  performed  missionary  duties  in  the  neigh-


^^y!L£/^=^


borhood  of  Wardour  Castle  up  to  the  middle  of
June,  1774.  The  agitation  in  Maryland  and  Amer-
ica for  resistance  to  the  crown  enlisted  his  earliest
sympathies.  The  condition  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics of  Maryland  was  so  unhappy  that  their  leaders,
the  Carrolls,  were  looking  for  some  other  place  of
refuge.  The  celebration  of  the  mass  was  forbidden
by  law,  Roman  Catholic  schools  for  the  education
of  their  youth  were  prohibited,  and  they  were  de-
nied the  right  to  bear  arms,  at  that  time  the  insig-
niura  of  social  position  and  gentle  breeding.  This,
in  a  province  founded  by  Roman  Catholics,  under
the  patronage  of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  on  the  prin-
ciple of  religious  toleration,  and  as  a  refuge  for
their  co-religionists  from  all  the  world,  was  unbear-
able, and  consequently  Charles  Carroll,  who  repre-
sented great  wealth,  and  John  Carroll,  who  repre-
sented the  church,  applied  to  the  king  of  France
for  a  grant  of  land  beyond  the  Mississippi,  in  the
territory  of  Louisiana,  where  they  might  found  a
new  Roman  Catholic  and  Jesuit  refuge  and  lead  a
second  exodus  as  Ca^cilius  Calvert  had  done  to
Maryland,  The  issue  between  the  crown  and  the
colonies  opened  another  way  of  relief,  and  John
Carroll  returned  at  once  to  his  native  country,
where  he  threw  himself  with  his  whole  heart  into
the  patriotic  cause,  which  was  at  the  same  time  to
his  people  the  cause  of  liberty  of  conscience  and
freedom  of  thought.  He  was  pious,  learned,  elo-
quent, and  patriotic,  and  represented  a  powerful
family  in  Ireland  and  in  Maryland,  the  great  order
which  was  strongly  intrenched  in  landed  estates
and  in  the  affections  of  the  people.  No  greater
power  of  combined  wealth,  intellect,  and  enthusi-
asm existed  anywhere  in  America  than  the  union
of  the  Carrolls  and  the  Jesuits  in  Maryland  in  the
person  of  John  Carroll.  He  quitted  England  26
June,  1774,  and,  on  his  arrival  in  America,  devoted
himself  to  missionary  duty  in  Maryland  and  Vir-
ginia. In  February,  1776,  he  was  appointed  by  the
Continental  congress  commissioner,  with  Carroll  of
Carrollton,  Samuel  Chase,  and  Benjamin  Franklin,
to  go  to  Canada  and  endeavor  to  secure  the  co-op-
eration of  the  French  Roman  Catholics  of  that
province  with  their  friends  and  co-religionists  in
Maryland,  in  the  common  cause.  But  he  was  not
successful  in  this  mission.  The  health  of  Dr.
Franklin  having  become  enfeebled  by  the  journey,
Father  Carroll  returned  with  him,  nursing  him
with  a  care  that  laid  the  foundation  of  their  life-
long friendship.  During  the  struggle  for  inde-
pendence he  rendered  important  services  to  his
country  by  his  letters  to  friends  in  every  part  of
Europe,  explaining  the  situation.  At  the  close  of
the  war  the  Roman  Catholics  of  the  United  States
were  anxious  to  be  freed  from  the  ecclesiastical
jurisdiction  of  the  vicar-apostolic  of  London,  and
the  clergy  petitioned  the  pope  to  appoint  a  superior
over  them  who  would  owe  allegiance  to  the  govern-
ment of  their  country  alone.  The  papal  nuncio  at
Paris  consulted  with  Dr.  Franklin,  and.  at  the  hit-
ter's request.  Father  Carroll  was  appointed  supe-
rior of  the  clergy  of  the  United  States  in  1784.
The  bishopric  of  Baltimore  was  established  in  1788
in  accordance  with  a  second  petition  of  the  clergy,
and.  Dr.  Carroll  being  their  choice  for  bishop,  he
was  consecrated  in  England  in  1790.  The  dioeesp
of  Baltimore  remained  for  years  the  only  Roman
Catholic  diocese  in  the  United  States,  and  em-
braced all  the  states  and  territories  of  the  union.
The  first  care  of  the  new  bishop  was  to  visit  all"  the
towns  of  his  diocese  that  contained  Roman  Catholic
congregations,  and  he  also  gave  attention  to  the
French  settlements  in  the  west,  which  had  hexeto-
fore  depended  on  the  bishop  of  Quebec. His  efforts


CARROLL


CARRUTH


539


were  at  first  impeded  by  the  want  of  priests ;  but
the  French  revolution  resulted  in  the  emigration
of  several  French  priests,  among  them  a  consider-
able body  of  Sulpicians,  by  whose  aid  he  was  en-
abled to  provide  for  the  Indians  and  the  French
inhabitants  of  the  northwest.  The  arrival  of  a
colony  of  English  Dominicans  supplied  him  with
priests  for  such  stations  as  were  most  in  need  of
them,  and  he  also  received  a  community  of  Carme-
lite nuns,  and  another  of  Poor  Clares.  George-
town college,  of  which  he  had  laid  the  foundation
in  1788,  was  completed  in  1791,  principally  through
the  aid  he  received  from  his  English  friends.  He
established  a  theological  seminary  in  connection
with  it,  which  in  1792  was  merged  in  that  of  St.
Mary's,  Baltimore.  Bishop  Carroll  was  appointed
one  of  the  three  commissioners  charged  by  the
state  of  Maryland  to  establish  St.  John's  college  at
Annapolis,  from  whose  faculty  he  afterward  re-
ceived the  degree  of  LL.  D.  On  7  Nov..  1791,  the
first  synod  of  the  Catholic  clergy  of  the  United
States  was  held  under  his  presidency ;  and  the  stat-
utes of  this  assembly  and  the  pastoral  letter  of
Bishop  Carroll  explaining  them  have  made  a  per-
manent impression  on  the  legislation  of  the  Amer-
ican church.  But  the  enormous  extent  of  his  dio-
cese, as  well  as  the  turbulence  and  scandalous  lives
of  some  of  his  clergy,  was  a  serious  obstacle  to  the
spread  of  religion,  and  Dr.  Carroll  solicited  the
pope  either  to  divide  his  see  into  several  dioceses,
or  appoint  a  coadjutor-bishop  of  Baltimore ;  and,
in  compliance  with  this  request,  the  Rev.  Leonard
Veale  was  appointed  his  coadjutor  in  1800.  Con-
gress unanimously  selected  Bishop  Carroll  to  de-
liver a  panegyric  on  Washington  on  22  Feb.,
1800.  In  1808  he  performed  the  marriage  ceremo-
ny between  Prince  Jerome  Bonaparte  and  Miss
Patterson.  By  his  aid  and  encouragement,  Mrs.
Seton  founded  an  institution  of  the  Sisters  of
Charity  at  Emmettsburg  in  1803.  In  1805  he
transferred  Georgetown  college  to  the  Jesuits,  and
restored  to  them  their  former  missions  in  Maryland
and  Pennsylvania.  In  1806  he  laid  the  foundation
of  the  present  cathedral  of  Baltimore,  which  he
was  enabled  to  dedicate  before  his  death.  The
number  of  Catholics  had  increased  so  much  that  it
became  impossible  for  a  single  bishop  to  attend  to
their  wants,  and,  owing  to  his  representation.  Pope
Pius  VII.  erected  Baltimore  into  an  archiepisco-
pal  see  in  1808,  with  four  episcopal  sees  as  suffra-
gans. Dr.  Carroll  was  created  archbishop  in  the
same  year,  consecrated  the  newly  appointed  prel-
ates at  Baltimore,  and,  in  conjunction  with  them,
framed  additional  rules  for  the  government  of  the
growing  church.  The  remainder  of  his  life  was
devoted  to  the  interests  of  his  diocese,  which  now
embraced  Maryland,  Virginia,  and  the  southern
states  as  far  as  the  gulf  and  the  Mississippi.  Al-
though not  taking  an  active  part  in  politics.  Arch-
bishop Carroll  was  an  ardent  federalist,  and  always
voted  ^yith  his  party.  His  writings  are  mostly  con-
troversial. Among"  them  are  "  An  Address  to  the
Roman  Catholics  of  the  United  States  of  America,"
"  A  Concise  View  of  the  Piincipal  Points  of  Con-
troversy between  the  Protestant  and  Roman
Churches,"  "  A  Review  of  the  Important  Contro-
versy between  Dr.  Carroll  and  the  Rev.  Messrs.
Wharton  and  Hawkins,"  and  "A  Discourse  on
General  Washington."

CARROLL,  Samuel  Sprigg,  soldier,  b.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  21  Sept.,  1832.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1856.  En-
tering the  10th  infantry,  he  became  captain  on  1
Nov.,  1861.  He  was  appointed  colonel  of  the  8th
Ohio  volunteers  on  15  Dec,  1861,  and  served  in  the


operations  in  western  Virginia  from  7  Dec,  1861,
till  23  May,  1862.  From  24  May  till  14  Aug.,
1862,  he  commanded  a  brigade  of  Gen.  Shields's
division,  taking  part  in  the  pursuit  of  the  Confed-
erate forces  up  the  Shenandoah  in  May  and  June,
1862,  and  in  the  battle  of  Cedar  Mountain  on  9
Aug.  On  14  Aug.  he  was  wounded  in  a  skirmish
on  the  Rapidan.  He  took  part  in  the  Maryland
campaign,  and  in  the  Rappahannock  campaign
from  December,  1862,  till  June,  1863,  being  en-
gaged in  the  battles  of  Fredericksburg  and  Chan-
cellorsville,  and  receiving  the  brevet  of  major  for
bravery  in  the  latter  action.  In  the  Pennsylvania
campaign  he  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Gettys-
burg, where  he  earned  the  brevet  of  lieutenant-
colonel.  In  the  battle  of  the  Wilderness  he  won
the  brevet  of  colonel,  and  in  the  engagements  near
Spottsylvania  was  twice  wounded  and  disabled  for
service  in  the  field  during  the  rest  of  the  war.  He
was  promoted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on
12  May,  1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  received  the
brevet  of  brigadier-general,  U.  S.  A.,  for  gallantry
at  Spottsylvania,  and  that  of  major-general  for
services  during  the  rebellion.  On  22  Jan.,  1867,  he
became  a  lieutenant-colonel  in  the  regular  army.
In  1868  he  was  acting  inspector -general  of  the
division  of  the  Atlantic,  and  on  9  June,  1869,  re-
tired as  major-generall  for  disability  from  wounds
received  in  battle. — His  father,  William  Thomas,
d.  in  Washington,  1863,  was  appointed  clerk  of  the
supreme  court  of  the  L^nited  States  on  20  Jan.,
1827,  and  held  that  office  thirty-five  years,  until
the  year  before  his  death.  He  was  a  grand-nephew
of  Charles  Carroll.  His  second  daughter  was  twice
'married,  first  to  Gen.  Griffin,  U.  S.  A.,  and  after
his  death  to  Count  Esterhazy.

CARROLL,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  in  1788;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  22  March,
1844.  He  was  engaged  in  the  hardware  business
in  Pittsburg,  whence,  in  1810,  he  went  to  Nash-
ville, and  attracted  the  attention  of  Jackson,  by
whom  he  was  made  a  captain  and  brigade  inspec-
tor in  his  division,  20  Feb.,  1813,  and  advanced  to
colonel  and  inspector-general  in  September,  1813.
In  1813  he  fought  a  duel  with  Jesse,  brother  of
Thomas  H.  Benton.  He  distinguished  himself  at
Enotochopco,  and  was  wounded  in  the  battle  of
the  Horse-shoe  Bend  of  Tallapoosa  river,  27  March,
1814.  He  became  major-general  of  Tennessee  mi-
litia on  13  Nov.,  1814,  and  won  distinction  in  the
defence  of  New  Orleans,  especially  in  the  battle  of
8  Jan.,  1815.  He  was  governor  of  Tennessee  from
1821  till  1827,  and  again  from  1829  till  1835.

CARROLL,  William  H.,  soldier,  b.  about  1820.
He  commanded  a  brigade  in  Gen.  Albert  Sidney
Johnston's  Confederate  army,  and  was  stationed  at
Memphis  when  Gen.  Zollicoffer  was  repelled  at
Wild  Cat.  Anticipating  a  general  revolt  against
the  Confederacy  in  Tennessee.  Gen.  Johnston  or-
dered Carroll  to  march  with  his  brigade  into  the
eastern  part  of  the  state  to  the  support  of  Zolli-
coffer. The  Unionists  rose  in  scattered  bands,  but
dispersed  at  the  approach  of  the  southern  troops.
On  14  Nov.,  1862,  Gen.  Carroll,  commanding  at
Knoxville,  proclaimed  martial  law,  but  on  the  24th
rescinded  the  order.  In  the  rout  at  Fishing  Creek,
otherwise  called  the  battle  of  Logan's  Cross-Roads,
or  of  Mill  S})ring,  where  Zollicoffer  fell,  Carroll's
brigade  formed  the  Confederate  rear,  and  retreated
with  comparatively  slight  losses,  but  abandoned  its
guns  and  supplies. He  resigned  in  February,  1863.

CARRUTH,  James  Harrison,  botanist,  b.  in
Phillipston,  Mass.,  10  Feb.,  1807.  He  studied  at
Amherst  academy  and  college,  and  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1832.  "  After  teaching  for  several  years,


540


CARRUTHERS


CARTER


he  studied  at  the  Auburn  theological  seminary  in
1837,  and  at  the  Yale  theological  seminary  in  1838.
lie  then  had  charge  of  various  churches  until  1842,
when  he  again  became  a  teacher.  In  1855  he  re-
moved to  Kansas,  and  was  made  professor  of  natu-
ral sciences  at  Baker  university,  Baldwin  City,  from
1863  till  1866,  after  which  he  again  entered  the
ministry.  He  was  appointed  state  botanist  of  Kan-
sas in  1873,  and  in  that  capacity  lias  contributed
"Reports  on  Progress  of  Botanical  Discovery  in
Kansas  "  to  the  Kansas  academy  of  sciences  in  1879
and  1880.  Prof.  Carruth  has  lectured  on  "  Spiritu-
alism," and  on  "  A  Plea  for  Man  in  Opposition  to
the  Woman's  Rights  Movement,"  and  has  been  a
frequent  contributor  to  current  literature.

CARRUTHERS,  William  A.,  novelist,  b.  in
Virginia  about  1800;  d,  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  about
1850.  He  was  a  student  at  Washington  college,
Va.,  in  1818,  and  was  educated  as  a  physician.  He
wrote  spirited  romances,  founded  on  American  his-
tory, and,  removing  to  Savannah,  practised  medi-
cine there,  and  contributed  to  the  "  Magnolia  "  and
other  southern  magazines.  In  1838  he  gave  an  ac-
count, in  the  •'  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  of  a  haz-
ardous ascent  of  the  natural  bridge  in  Virginia.
His  published  works  are  "  The  Cavaliers  of  Vir-
ginia, or  the  Recluse  of  Jamestown,  an  Historical
Romance  of  the  Old  Dominion,"  depicting  the
scenes  of  Bacon's  rebellion  and  the  conflict  be-
tween royalists  and  Cromwellians  in  Virginia  (New
York,  1832) ;  "  The  Kentuckian  in  New  York,  or
the  Adventures  of  Three  Southerners,"  a  volume
of  descriptive  sketches  with  romantic  incidents;
"  The  Knights  of  the  Horse-Shoe,  a  Traditionary^
Tale  of  the  Cocked  Hat  Gentry  in  the  Old  Domin-'
ion,"  the  scene  of  which  is  laid  in  Virginia  in  the
time  of  Gov.  Spotswood  (Wetumpka,  Ala.,  1845) ;
and  a  "  Life  of  Dr.  Caldwell."

CARSON,  Christopher,  better  known  as  "  Kit
Carson,"  soldier,  b.  in  Madison  co.,  Kv.,  24  Dec,
1809 ;  d.  at  Fort  Lynn,  Col.,  23  May,  1868.  While
he  was  an  infant  his  parents  emigrated  to  what  is
now  Howard  co..  Mo.,  but  was  then  a  wilderness.
At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  sad-
dler, with  whom  he  continued  two  years,  and  then
he  Joined  a  hunting  expedition,  thus  beginning  the
adventurous  life  that  made  him  one  of  the  most
picturesque  figures  of  western  history.  For  eight
years  he  was  on  the  plains,  leading  the  life  of  a
trapper,  until  he  was  appointed  hunter  for  the
garrison  at  Bent's  Fort,  where  he  remained  eight
years  more.  After  a  short  visit  to  his  family  he
met,  for  the  first  time.  General  (then  Lieutenant)
John  C.  Fremont,  by  whom  his  experience  in  the
backwoods  was  at  once  appreciated,  and  by  whom,
also,  he  was  engaged  as  guide  in  his  subsequent
explorations.  In  this  capacity  he  was  eminently
useful,  and  to  him  is  probably  due  much  of  the
success,  of  those  explorations.  He  was  perhaps
better  known  to  a  larger  number  of  Indian  tribes
than  any  other  white  man,  and  from  his  long  life
among  them  learned  their  habits  and  customs,  un-
derstood their  mode  of  warfare,  and  spoke  their
language  as  his  mother  tongue.  No  one  man  did
more  than  he  in  furthering  the  settlement  of  the
northwestern  wilderness.  In  1847  Carson  was  sent
to  Washington  as  bearer  of  despatches,  and  was
then  appointed  second  lieutenant  in  the  mounted
rifles,  U.  S.  army.  This  appointment,  however,
was  negatived  by  the  senate.  In  1853  he  drove
6,500  sheejD  over  the  mountains  to  California,  a
hazardous  undertaking  at  that  time,  and,  on  his
return  to  Laos,  was  appointed  Indian  agent  in
New  Mexico.  Under  this  appointment  he  was
largely  instrumental  in  bringing  about  the  treaties


between  the  United  States  and  the  Indians.  He
was  an  instinctive  judge  of  character,  and,  know-
ing the  Indians  so  thoroughly,  his  cool  judgment
and  wisdom  in  dealing  with  them,  even  under
the  most  trying  circumstances,  enabled  him  to
render  important  services  to  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment. During  the  civil  war  he  repeatedly  ren-
dered great  service  to  the  government  in  New
Mexico,  Colorado,  and  the  Indian  territory,  and
was  brevetted  brigadier-general  for  his  meritorious
conduct.  At  its  close,  he  resumed  his  duties  as
Indian  agent.  In  this  relation  to  the  Indians  he
visited  Washington,  in  the  winter  and  early  spring
of  1868,  in  company  with  a  deputation  of' the  red
men,  and  made  a  tour  of  several  of  the  northern
and  eastern  states.  Unlike  most  of  the  trappers
and  guides,  Gen.  Carson  was  a  man  of  remarkable
modesty,  and  in  conversation  never  boasted  of  his
own  achievements.  See  "  Life  of  Kit  Carson,  the
Great  Western  Hunter,"  by  Charles  Burdett  (Phila-
delphia, 1809).

CARTER,  Charles  Ig-natius  Hardman,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Lebanon,  Ky.,  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Phila-
delphia in  1879.  He  studied  at  Mount  St.  Mary's,
Emmettsburg,  and  at  St.  Mary's,  Baltimore.  He
was  stationed  at  St.  Mary's,  Philadelphia,  where  he
built  the  church  of  the  Assumption  in  1849,  and
also  erected  a  convent  and  free  schools.  He  after-
ward founded  a  convent  and  academy  of  the  Sis-
ters of  the  Holy  Child  Jesus  at  Sharon  Hill.

CARTER,  D.  M.,  artist,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1827.  He
accompanied  his  parents  to  the  United  States  in
1839,  and,  having  received  a  little  instruction  in  art.,
began  his  career  as  a  portrait-painter  and  travelled
over  a  large  part  of  the  country  in  the  pursuit  of
his  profession.  He  afterward  settled  in  New  York
and  produced  historical  pictures.  He  was  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  artists'  fund  society,
established  in  1859.  About  1850  he  painted  a  se-
ries of  pictures  illustrating  Goldsmith's  "  Deserted
Village."  Among  his  most  successful  works  are
"  Decatur's  Attack  on  Tripoli,"  "  Moll  Pitcher  at
the  Battle  of  Monmouth,"  "  Legend  of  St.  Michael,"
"Death  of  the  Virgin,"  and  portraits  of  Henry
Clay,  Andrew  Jackson,  James  K.  Polk,  and  other
distinguished  persons.

CARTER,  Franklin,  educator,  b.  in  Water-
bury,  Conn.,  30  Sept.,  1837.  He  studied  at  Phil-
lips Andover  academy  and  at  Yale  and  Williams,
was  graduated  in  1862  at  the  latter,  and  afterward
studied  at  the  university  of  Berlin.  From  1865
till  1868  he  was  professor  of  Latin  and  of  French
at  Williams,  then  of  Latin  alone  till  1872,  and  then
of  German  at  Yale  till  1881,  when  he  became  presi-
dent of  Williams.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.D.
from  Union  in  1881.  He  has  published  a  transla-
tion of  Goethe's  "Iphigenie  auf  Tauris"  (1879).

CARTER,  James  Coolid^e,  lawyer,  b.  m  Lan-
caster, Mass.,  14  Oct.,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1850,  and  at  the  law-school  in  ISoS.
Mr.  Carter  was  a  member  of  the  commission  ap-
pointed by  Gov.  Tilden.  of  New  York,  in  187o  to
devise  a  form  of  municipal  government  for  the
cities  of  the  state.  He  ranks  among  the  leading
lawyers  of  New  York.  He  has  published  a  mono-
graph entitled  "  The  Codification  of  our  Common
Law,"  in  which  he  opposes  the  scheme  of  codifaca-
tion  (New  York,  1883).  , ^

CARTER,  James  Gordon,  educational  reform-
er, b.  in  Leominster,  Mass.,  7  Sept.,  179o ;  d.  in
Chicago,  111.,  22  July,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1820,  and  taught  school  at  Leominster
until  1830.  In  1823  he  contributed  to  tlie  Boston
Patriot "  a  series  of  papers,  subsequently  publisliea
under  the  title  of  "  Essays  on  Popular  Education.


CARTER


CARTER


541


In  1823  his  "  Letters  to  William  Prescott  on  the
Free  Schools  of  New  England,  with  Remarks  on
the  Principles  of  Instruction,"  first  developed  the
idea  of  a  normal  school  or  seminary  for  teachers.
In  1824  he  edited  the  "  United  States  Review  "  at
Boston.  In  1830  he  assisted  in  organizing  the
American  institute  of  instruction,  of  which  he  was
long  an  active  member  and  officer.  His  lectures
before  that  body  in  1830-'l  were  valuable  contribu-
tions to  its  transactions.  From  1835  till  1840  he
was  a  member  either  of  the  house  or  senate  of
Massachusetts,  was  chairman  of  the  legislative
committee  on  education,  and  in  1837  drafted  the
bill  establishing  the  board  of  education.  Gov.
Everett  appointed  him  the  first  member  of  the
board.  He  was  the  author  of  a  work  on  the
"  Geography  of  Massachusetts,"  one  on  Middlesex
and  Worcester  counties  (1830),  and  one  on  the
"  Geography  of  New  Hampshire  "  (1831).

CARTER,  John,  pioneer  of  Tennessee.  When
the  district  of  Washington  (now  the  state  of  Ten-
nessee) was  annexed  to  North  Carolina  during  the
revolution,  he  was  elected,  with  John  Sevier  and
Charles  Robertson,  to  the  convention  that  assem-
bled at  Halifax,  N.  C,  in  1785,  and  framed  a  con-
stitution for  the  state  of  Frankland,  which  was  re-
united with  North  Carolina  in  1788.

CARTER,  John  C,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1805 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  24  Nov.,  1870.  He
was  appointed  to  the  naval  service  from  Kentucky,
1  March,  1825,  served  on  the  sloop  "  Lexington  "
in  1827,  and  on  the  frigate  "  Delaware,"  of  the
Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1829-'30,  was  promoted
passed  midshipman,  4  June,  1831,  and  commis-
sioned as  lieutenant,  9  Feb.,  1837.  He  served  on
the  steamer  "  Mississippi,"  of  the  home  squadron,
during  the  Mexican  war.  On  14  Sept.,  1855,  he
was  made  commander.  In  1862  he  commanded
the  steamer  "  Michigan  "  on  the  lakes.  After  the
war  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the  receiving-
ship  '•  Vermont "  and  of  the  naval  rendezvous  at
San  Francisco.  He  was  commissioned  as  commo-
dore on  the  retired  list  on  4  April,  1867.

CARTER,  Josiah  Mason,  lawyer,  b.  in  New
Canaan,  Conn.,  19  June,  1813;  d.  in  Norwalk.
Conn.,  22  March.  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1836,  studied  in  the  law-school  at  New  Haven,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839.  He  prac-
tised in  New  York  city  from  1840  till  1847,  and
afterward  in  Norwalk,  and  served  three  terms  in
the  Connecticut  legislature,  during  the  last  of
which  he  was  speaker  of  the  house.  From  1862
till  his  death  he  filled  the  office  of  state  attorney
for  Fairfield  co.

CARTER,  Lorenzo,  pioneer,  b.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,
in  1767;  d.  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  7  Feb.,  1814.  He
emigrated  in  1796  to  the  western  reserve,  and  set-
tled in  Cleveland  in  the  spring  of  1797.  He  was  a
man  of  great  strength  and  an  expert  hunter,  and
supported  his  family  by  ferrying  people  across  the
river,  by  trading  with  the  Indians,  and  by  hunting.
Through  his  skill  and  courage  he  acquired  an  as-
cendency over  the  red  men.  He  kept  a  hotel  and
a  store  for  the  sale  of  hunting-supplies  in  the  early
days  of  Cleveland,  and  built  the  first  frame  house,
the  first  warehouse,  and  the  first  vessel  constructed
in  that  town.  In  1804  he  was  elected  a  major  in
the  militia.  In  later  life  he  purchased  and  im-
proved a  farm,  which  is  now  a  part  of  the  city  and
covered  with  buildings.

CARTER,  Nathaniel  Hazletine,  author,  b.  in
Concord,  N.  H.,  17  Sept.,  1787;  d.  in  Marseilles,
i  ranee,  2  Jan.,  1830.  He  was  educated  at  Phillips
Exeter  academv  and  at  Dartmouth,  where  he  was
graduated  in  1811,  after  which  he  studied  law  and


taught  school  in  Salisbury,  N.  H.,  and  Portland,
Me.  In  1817  he  was  appointed  professor  of  lan-
guages at  Dartmouth,  which  was  made  a  university
at  that  time  by  the  legislature,  but  lost  his  chair
through  the  decision  of  the  supreme  court  in  the
Dartmouth  college  case.  He  then  removed  to  New
York  state,  and  in  1819  became  editor  and  proprie-
tor of  the  Albany  "  Register,"  afterward  the  "  New
York  Statesman,"  an  organ  of  the  Clinton  faction.
In  1822  he  established  himself  in  New  York  city,
uniting  his  paper  with  another  and  forming  a  co-
partnership with  G.  W.  Prentiss.  He  delivered  a
poem  on  the  "  Pains  of  the  Imagination  "  before
the  Phi  Beta  Kappa  society  of  Dartmouth  in  1824,
and  the  following  year  travelled  in  Europe  and
wrote  descriptive  letters,  published  in  the  "  States-
man "  and  widely  reproduced  in  other  papers.  Af-
ter his  return  he  issued  the  same  letters,  revised
and  enlarged,  comprising  the  journal  of  his  tour  in
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  France,  Switzerland,  and
Italy,  in  two  volumes  (New  York,  1827).  His
health  failing,  he  spent  a  winter  in  Florida,  and
after  his  return  withdrew  from  the  editorship  of
the  "  Statesman."  In  the  autumn  of  1829  he  ac-
companied a  friend  on  a  voyage  to  Marseilles,  and
died  of  consumption  a  few"  days  after  his  arrival.
He  produced  manv  occasional  reflective  poems.

CARTER,  Peter,  publisher,  b.  in  Earlston,
Berwickshire,  Scotland,  19  July,  1825.  He  came
with  his  parents  to  the  United  States  in  May,  1832,
and  received  a  common-school  education  in  Gal-
way,  Saratoga  co,,  N.  Y.  After  spending  eight
years  on  a  farm,  he  entered  a  book-store  as  a  boy
in  1840,  and  in  November,  1848,  became  a  partner
in  the  publishing-house  of  Robert  Carter  &  Broth-
ers, New  York  city.  He  was  superintendent  of  a
colored  Sabbath-school  in  New  York  for  thirty
years,  beginning  in  September,  1856,  became  chair-
man of  the  publication  committee  of  the  National
temperance  society.  New  York,  in  1865,  was  chosen
secretary  of  the  board  of  directors  of  the  New  York
juvenile  asylum  in  1874,  and  became  one  of  the
council  of  New  York  university  in  1882.  He  pub-
lished a  book  of  travels  in  Scotland,  entitled
"  Crumbs  from  the  Land  o'  Cakes"  (Boston,  1851);
selections  froin  Scottish  poets,  with  biographical
sketches,  under  the  title  "  Scotia's  Bards  "  (New
York,  1853) ;  "  Bertie  Lee  "  (1862) ;  *'  Donald  Fra-
zer"  (1867);  and  "Little  Effie's  Home"  (1869).
The  last  three  are  for  children,  and  have  been  re-
printed in  Great  Britain.

CARTER,  Robert,  editor,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
5  Feb.,  1819 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  15  Feb.,
1879.  He  received  a  common-school  education,
and  passed  one  term  in  the  Jesuit  college  of  Cham-
bly,  Canada.  In  his  fifteenth  year  he  was  appoint-
ed assistant  librarian  in  the  state  library  at  Albany,
where  he  remained  till  1838.  At  this  time  he  be-
gan to  publish  poems  and  sketches  in  the  daily
papers,  his  first  contribution  being  a  long  poem,
which  he  dropped  stealthily  into  the  editor's  letter-
box, and  which  appeared  the  next  day  with  flat-
tering comments,  but  so  frightfully  misprinted
that  he  hardly  knew  it.  This  experience  and  a
natural  aptitude  led  him  to  acquire  proof-reading
as  an  accomplishment,  at  which  he  became  very
expert.  In  1841  he  went  to  Boston,  where  he
formed  a  life-long  friendship  with  James  Russell
Lowell,  and  together  they  began  "  The  Pioneer,"  a
literary  monthly  magazine,  which  Duyckinck  says
was  "  of  too  fine  a  cast  to  be  successful."  Never-
theless, its  want  of  success  was  due,  not  to  the
editors,  but  to  the  publisher,  who  mismanaged  it
and  failed  when  but  three  numbers  had  been  issued.
Among  the  contributors  were Poe, Hawthorne,


542


CARTER


CARTER


Whittier,  Neal,  Miss  Barrett  (afterward  Mrs.
Browning),  and  the  sculptor  Story.  Mr.  Carter
began  in  its  pages  a  serial  novel  entitled  "  The
Armenian's  Daughter."  He  next  spent  two  years
in  editing  statistical  and  geographical  works,  and
writing  for  periodicals.  His  story,  "  The  Great
Tower" of  Tarudant,"  ran  through  several  numbers
of  the  "  Broadway  Journal,"  then  edited  by  Poe.
In  1845  he  became  a  clerk  in  the  post-office  at
Cambridge,  and  in  1847-'8  was  private  secretary
to  Prescott  the  historian.  His  elaborate  article  on
the  character  and  habits  of  Prescott,  written  for
the  New  York  "  Tribune  '"  just  after  the  historian's
death  in  1859,  was  re-published  in  the  memorial
volume  issued  by  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety. Mr.  Carter  joined  the  free-soil  party  in
1848,  and  in  1850  wrote  for  the  Boston  "  Atlas  "  a
series  of  brilliant  articles  in  reply  to  Francis  Bow-
en's  attack  on  the  Hungarian  revolutionists.  These
articles  were  re-published  in  a  pamphlet,  "  The
Hungarian  Controversy"  (Boston,  1852),  and  are
said  to  have  caused  the  rejection  of  Mr.  Bowen's
nomination  as  professor  of  history  at  Harvard.  At
the  same  time  Carter  edited,  with  Kossuth's  ap-
proval, a  large
volume  entitled
"  Kossuth  in
New  England  "
(Boston,  1852).
In  1851-'2  he
edited,  at  first
as  assistant  of
John  (>.  Palfrey
and  afterward
alone,  the  Bos-
ton "Common-
wealth," the
chief  exponent
of  the  free-soil-
ers.  For  two
years  he  was
secretary  of  the
state  committee
of  the  free-soil
party,  and  in
the  summer  of  1854  he  obtained  the  consent  of
the  committee  to  call  a  convention,  which  he
did  without  assistance,  sending  out  thousands  of
circulars  to  men  whose  names  were  on  the  com-
mittee's books.'  The  convention  met  in  Worces-
ter, 20  July,  was  so  large  that  no  hall  could  con-
tain it,  and  held  its  session  in  the  open  air.  A
short  platform  drawn  up  by  him  was  adopted,  to-
gether with  the  name  "  Republican,"  and  on  his
motion  a  committee  of  six  was  appointed  to  organ-
ize the  new  party,  John  A.  Andrew  being  made  its
chairman.  In  1855  Carter  edited  the  Boston  "  Tele-
graph," in  conjunction  with  W.  S.  Robinson  and
Hildreth  the  historian ;  in  1856  he  edited  the  "  At-
las " ;  and  in  1857-'9  he  was  Washington  corre-
spondent of  the  New  York  "  Tribune."  His  next
work  was  with  Messrs.  Ripley  and  Dana  on  the
first  edition  of  the  "  American  Cyclopaedia  "  (1859-
'63),  in  which  many  important  articles  were  from
his  pen,  including  "Egypt,"  "Hindostan,"  "Mor-
mons," and  the  history  of  the  United  States.  In
January,  1864,  he  was  appointed  private  secretary
of  the  treasury  agent  whose  headquarters  were  at
Beaufort,  S.  C. ;  and  from  July  of  that  year  till
October,  1869,  he  edited  the  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
"  Democrat,"  doing  such  work  for  it  as  was  seldom
done  on  any  but  metropolitan  journals.  When
news  came  of  the  assassination  of  President  Lin-
coln, he  wrote,  without  consulting  any  book  or
memoranda,  an  article  giving  a  brief  but  circum-


J^^y^^


stantial  account,  with  dates,  of  every  celebrated
case  of  regicide.  He  was  editor  of  "Appletons'
Journal"  in  1870-8,  and  then  became  associate
editor  for  the  revision  of  the  "  American  Cyclopse-
dia."  But  in  1874  impaired  health  compelled  him
to  discontinue  his  literary  work,  and  in  the  next
three  years  he  made  three  tours  in  Europe.  He
was  the  author  of  "  A  Summer  Cruise  on  the  Coast
of  New  England"  (Boston,  1864),  which  passed
through  several  editions ;  and  he  left  unpublished
memoirs,  of  which  only  the  first  volume  was  com-
plete in  manuscript. — His  first  wife.  Aim  Augusta
(Iray,  was  a  successful  writer  of  poems  and  tales
for  the  young. — His  second  wife,  Susan  Nichols,  is
principal  of  the  feinale  art  school  in  Cooper  insti-
tute. New  York,  and  has  published  hand-books  of
art  and  contributed  largelv  to  periodicals.

CARTER,  Riissel  Kelso,  educator,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  19  Nov.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at
the  Pennsylvania  military  academy,  Chester,  in
1867,  and  became  instructor  there  in  1869,  profes-
sor of  chemistry  and  natural  sciences  in  1872,  and
professor  of  civil  engineering  and  higher- mathe-
matics in  1881.  Prof.  Carter  has  contributed  nu-
merous original  investigations  to  the  "  Microcosm  "
(New  York)  during  1881-'3,  and  has  become  widely
known  in  connection  with  the  "  Holiness  "  move-
ment in  the  Methodist  church.  His  religious  pub-
lications include  "Miracles  of  Healing"  (Boston,
1880) ;  "  Pastor  Blumhardt "  (1882);  and  numerous
tracts  on  "  Faith-healing."  In  1886  he  began  the
publication  of  "  The  Kingdom  "  at  Chester,

CARTER,  Samuel  Powhatan,  naval  officer
and  soldier,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,  Carter  co.,  Tenn.,
6  Aug.,  1819.  He  was  educated  at  Princeton,  but
was  never  graduated,  and  on  14  Feb.,  1840,  be-
came a  midshipman  in  the  navy.  He  was  promoted
to  passed  midshipman,  11  July,  1846,  assigned  to
the  "  Ohio,"  and  served  on  the  eastern  coast  of
Mexico  during  the  Mexican  war,  being  present  at
the  capture  of  Vera  Cruz.  From  1851  till  1853  he
was  assistant  instructor  of  infantry  tactics  at  the
naval  academy.  He  was  made  lieutenant  18  April,
1855,  assisted  "in  the  capture  of  the  Barrier  forts
near  Canton,  China,  in  1856,  and  was  compliment-
ed for  gallantry  on  that  occasion.  He  was  ordered
again  to  the  Annapolis  naval  school  as  assistant
instructor  of  seamanship  in  1857.  On  11  July,
1861,  he  was  temporarily  transferred  to  the  war
department,  for  the  special  duty  of  organizing
troops  from  east  Tennessee.  He  was  appointed
colonel  of  the  2d  Tennessee  volunteers,  was  given
the  appointment  of  acting  brigadier-general  of  vol-
unteers in  September,  and  received  his  full  com-
mission 1  Mav,  1862.  He  was  at  Zollicoffer's  re-
pulse at  Wild  X'at,  Ky.,  in  October,  1861,  at  MiU
Spring  in  January,  1862,  commanded  in  the  opera-
tions against  Curnberland  Gap,  and  was  at  its  cap-
ture, on  17  June,  1862.  In  December,  1862,  he  com-
manded a  cavalry  expedition  which  cut  the  east
Tennessee  railroad,  destroying  nearly  100  miles  of
the  track,  besides  inflicting  other  damage,  and  re-
ceived the  thanks  of  the  general-in-chief  of  the
army.  He  commanded  the  division  of  central
Kentucky  in  March,  1863,  was  assigned  to  the  com-
mand of  the  cavalry  division,  23d  army  corps,  in
July,  1863,  and  had  the  advance  when  Burnside
occupied  east  Tennessee.  He  defeated  Morgan,
28  Aug.,  1863,  and  Smith,  29  Aug.,  and  was  pres-
ent at  the  siege  of  Knoxville,  December,  1863.^  He
commanded  a  division  under  Schofield  in  the  Isortn
Carolina  campaign  of  1865,  and  was  brevetted  ma-
jor-general on  13  March.  He  was  mustered  out  or
the  army  in  Januarv,  1866,  and  returned  to  tne
navy,  becoming  commander  23  June,  1865 ;  served


CARTIER


CARTIER


543


as  commandant  of  the  naval  academy  at  Annapolis
from  1869  till  1872,  being  promoted"  to  captain  28
Oct.,  1870  ;  was  a  member  of  the  light-house  board
from  1876  till  1880 ;  was  commissioned  commodore
13  Nov.,  1878,  and  retired  6  Aug.,  1881.  On  16
May,  1882,  he  was  made  a  rear-admiral.

CARTIER,  Sir  George  Etieniie,  Bart.,  Cana-
dian statesman,  b.  in  St.  Antoine,  Quebec,  6  Sept.,
1814;  d.  in  England,  20  May,  1873.  He  was  edu-
cated at  St.  Sulpice  college,  Montreal,  and  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1835.  He  took  part  in  the  Lower
Canada  rebellion  of  1837,  and  was  under  arms  at
the  battle  of  St.  Penis.  He  escaped  to  the  United
States,  but  shortly  afterward  was  permitted  to  re-
turn to  Canada  without  molestation.  He  entered
parliament  in  1848  as  member  for  Vercheres,  in  the
conservative  interest,  and  in  1855  became  provin-
cial secretary  in  the  McNab-Tache  government.
On  the  resignation  of  Sir  Allan  McNab,  in  1856,
Mr.  Cartier  became  attorney-general  for  Lower
Canada  in  the  Tache-Macdonald  ministry,  and  in
this  capacity  effected  the  codification  of  the  civil
laws  of  Lower  Canada  and  accomplished  great  im-
provements in  the  system  of  administering  the
criminal  law.  In  1857  he  proposed  to  leave  the
solution  of  the  question  of  a  permanent  seat  of
government  to  her  majesty.  At  this  time  the
legislative  assembly  had  decided  upon  Quebec,  and
had  authorized  the  erection  of  government  build-
ings in  that  city ;  but  the  legislative  council  had
refused  to  vote  the  supplies.  The  queen  decided
that  Ottawa  should  be  the  permanent  seat  of  gov-
ernment. On  26  Nov.,  1857.  the  cabinet  was  re-
organized, John  A.  Macdonald  becoming  premier
and  Mr.  Cartier  being  the  only  Lower  Canada  min-
ister retained.  On  29  July,  1858,  the  Macdonald-
Cartier  ministry  resigned,  in  consequence  of  the
assembly's  having  passed  a  resolution  that  Ottawa
ought  not  to  be  the  seat  of  government.  George
Brown  having  formed  a  ministry,  and  resigned
after  an  administration  of  two  days,  the  so-called
"  double  shuffle  "  was  performed.  Taking  advan-
tage of  a  clause  of  the  independence  of  parliament
act,  which  provided  that  a  cabinet  minister  resign-
ing one  office  might  accept  another  within  one
month  without  forfeiting  liis  seat  in  parliament,
the  Macdonald-Cartier  ministry  became  the  Cartier-
Macdonald  ministry.  Cartier,  who  had  resigned
the  portfolio  of  attorney-general  on  29  July,  be-
came inspector-general  on  6  Aug.  On  7  Aug.  he
was  again  sworn  in  as  attorney-general.  In  the
interests  of  Lower  Canada,  Cartier  was  a  deter-
mined opponent  of  the  principle  of  representation
by  population  demanded  by  Upper  Canada,  which
had  a  population  of  285,427  more  than  the  sister
province.  The  Cartier-Macdonald  ministry  fell  in
attempting  to  pass  a  militia  bill  in  May,  1862.
Cartier  was  one  of  the  active  promoters  of  confed-
eration, and  became  minister  of  militia  in  the  first
Dominion  cabinet  in  July,  1867.  In  August  of  the
following  year  he  was  created  a  baronet.

CARTIER,  Jacques,  explorer,  b.  in  St.  Malo,
France,  in  December,  1494 ;  d,  about  1555.  He  had
led  a  seafaring  life,  and  made  fishing  voyages  to
the  grand  banks  of  Labrador,  when  he  entered,
about  1534,  upon  his  voyage  of  discovery.  Steer-
ing for  Newfoundland,  he  passed  through  the
straits  of  Belle  Isle  into  the  gulf  of  Chaleurs,  and
planted  a  cross  at  Gaspe,  decorated  with  the  arms
of  France,  and  bearing  the  inscription,  "  Vive  le
Roi  de  France!"  The  native  Indians,  who  sur-
mised no  good  from  its  erection,  he  deceived  by
saying  that  it  "  was  only  set  up  to  be  as  a  light  and
leader  which  ways  to  enter  into  the  port."  He  also
caused  two  young  Indians  to  be  kidnapped,  whom


i^r


he  carried  away  with  him  to  France,  after  ascend-
ing the  St.  Lawrence,  past  the  shores  of  Anticosti,
not  doubting  that  he  had  discovered  the  road  to
Cathay.  In  the  year  ensuing,  19  May,  1535,  he
began  his  second
voyage  with  three
small  vessels,  and,
steering  westward
along  the  coast  of
Labrador,  entered
a  small  bay  oppo-
site the  island  of
Anticosti,  which  he
called  the  bay  of
St.  Lawrence.  He
proceeded  cau-
tiously up  the  river,
past  the  Saguenay
and  Cape  Tour-
mente,  and  an-
chored off  a  wooded
and  vine-clad  isl-
and; he  called  it,
on  account  of  the
rich  clusters  of
grapes,  the  island
of  Bacchus  (the
island  of  Orleans),
and,  after  friendly
converse  with  the
Indians,  notably  with  Donnacona,  their  chief,  de-
scried the  majestic  site  of  the  modern  Quebec,  then
called  Stadaeone,  went  in  a  boat  up  the  St.  Croix
river  (now  the  St.  Charles),  and,  understanding  that
many  days'  journey  up  the  river  Ilochelaga  (for  by
that  name  the  Indians  called  the  St.  Lawrence)  there
was  a  large  town  of  the  same  name,  he  resolved  to
go  thither.  The  Indians  were  averse  to  his  going,
and  tried  to  frighten  him  by  sending  three  of  their
number,  disguised  as  devils,  with  blackened  faces
and  "  horns  on  their  heads  more  than  a  yard  long."
But  Cartier  was  not  dissuaded  from  his  purpose,  and
on  2  Oct.,  1535,  his  vessels  lay  in  the  stream  off  Ho-
chelaga,  the  modern  Montreal.  The  Indians  there
received  the  French  with  demonstrations  of  great
joy,  and  on  the  following  day  introduced  them
into  their  rudely  fortified  city,  containing  fifty  log
houses  about  150  feet  in  lengtli  and  from  12  to  15
feet  in  width ;  they  set  before  Cartier  their  para-
lyzed chief,  that  he  should  touch  and  heal  him ;  a
crowd  of  afflicted  people  came  for  the  same  pur-
pose, "  as  if  a  god  had  come  down  to  cure  them."
He  read,  in  default  of  other  or  better  medicine,  a
portion  of  St.  John's  gospel  over  them,  made  the
sign  of  the  cross,  and,  after  a  prayer,  concluded
with  reading  to  them,  either  in  Latin  or  French
(whereof  they  did  not  understand  a  word),  the  story
of  the  passion,  and  distributed  among  them  knives,
hatchets,  beads,  pewter  rings,  etc.  A  blast  of
trumpets  terminated  the  visit.  Delighted  with  the
country,  Cartier  returned  to  Stadaeone,  and  in  a
fort,  which  he  had  built  on  the  St.  Charles,  passed  a
terrible  winter ;  and,  after  treacherously  possessing
himself  of  the  person  of  Donnacona  and  his  chiefs,
returned,  with  marvellous  stories  of  his  discoveries,
to  St.  Malo,  16  July,  1536.  The  said  chiefs  received
baptism,  but  died  in  the  land  of  their  captivity.
Cartier,  in  the  capacity  of  captain-general,  joined
the  expedition  of  Roberval,  who  was  made  lieuten-
ant-governor and  viceroy  of  the  numerous  Amer-
ican territories,  and  preceded  the  latter,  leaving
St.  Malo,  23  May,  1541.  On  his  return  to  Stada-
eone, Cartier  annoimced  the  death  of  Donnacona,
and  spread  the  false  report  that  the  other  chiefs
had  married  in  France  and  lived  in  great  affluence.


544


CARTTER


CARTWRIGHT


At  Cape  Rouge  he  and  his  companions  landed,
gathered  imaginary  diamonds  in  the  shape  of
quartz,  and  carried  off  some  yellow  glittering  min-
eral, which  they  fancied  to  be  gold.  They  built
two  forts ;  Cartier  explored  the  rapids  atr^ve  Hoche-
laga,  and,  owing  to  the  discontent  occasioned  by
the  non-arrival  of  Roberval,  or  from  other  causes
not  yet  ascertained,  soon  after  his  return  to  the
forts,  appears  to  have  abandoned  the  prosecution
of  the  enterprise,  and  reached  the  harbor  of  St.
John  simultaneously  with  the  arrival  of  Roberval
in  June,  1542.  The  viceroy  was  indignant,  and
ordered  him  to  return;  biit  Cartier  succeeded,
under  cover  of  night,  in  abandoning  the  expedition,
and,  instead  of  proceeding  to  the  St.  Lawrence,
bade  adieu  to  New  France  on  his  way  to  the  old,
steered  eastward,  and  returned  to  St.  Malo.  Of
his  subsequent  fortunes  very  little  is  known.  Plis
merits  as  a  discoverer  were  rewarded  by  a  patent
of  nobility ;  he  owned  a  house  at  St.  Malo,  and  the
seigniorial  mansion  of  Limoilou.  It  is  said  that
Cartier,  at  the  king's  request,  set  out  to  fetch  Ro-
berval home,  and  we  may  infer  that  he  did  so,  if  it
is  true  that  he  lived  for  many  years  at  St.  Malo,
where  Thevet,  the  cosmographer,  the  personal
friend  of  Cartier  and  Roberval,  spent  five  months
with  him.  He  also  says  that  Roberval  died  at
Paris.  Cartier  called  the  St.  Lawrence  the  "  River
of  Hochelaga,"  or  "the  great  river  of  Canada,"
limits  the  designation  of  "  Canada  "  to  a  stretch  of
country  from  the  Isle  de§  Coudres  to  a  point  above
Quebec,  and  says  that  the  Indians  called  the
country  above  Quebec  "  Hochelaga,"  and  that  be-
low the  city  "  Saguenay."  "  Canada,"  according  to
him,  is  an  Indian  word,  and  signifies  a  town.  "  lis
appellent  une  ville,  Canada,"  and  in  the  Indian
origin  of  the  word  he  is  sustained  by  other  early
French  authorities,  one  of  whom,  however,  renders
it  "  terre,"  that  is,  "  land,"  while  another  calls  it  an
Indian  proper  name  of  unknown  meaning.

CARTTER,  David  Kello^^,  jurist,  b.  in  Roch-
ester, N.  Y.,  22  June,  1812;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
16  April,  1887.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  began
practice  in  Masillon,  Ohio,  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  democrat,  and  served  two  terms,  from  3  Dec,
1849,  till  3  March,  1853.  On  27  March.  1861,  he
was  appointed  by  President  Lincoln  minister  to
Bolivia,  and  remained  there  till  10  March,  1862.
In  1863  he  became  chief  justice  of  the  supreme
court  of  the  District  of  Columbia.

CARTWRIOHT,  George,  English  traveller,  b.
in  Marnham,  Nottinghamshire,  in  1739 ;  d.  in  1819,
He  served  in  Germany  in  the  seven  years'  war,  and
attained  the  rank  of  captain.  Subsequently  he
made  several  voyages  to  Labrador,  and  in  1792
published  a  "Journal  of  nearly  Sixteen  Years'
Residence  on  the  Coast  of  Labrador"  (3  vols.,
Newark,  England,  1792).  Coleridge,  the  poet,  says,
relative  to  this  narrative  of  travels  and  adventures,
that  the  annals  of  his  campaigns  among  the  foxes
and  beavers  interested  him  more  than  the  accounts
of  the  exploits  of  Marlborough  or  Frederick. — His
brother,  John,  English  author,  b.  in  Marnham,
Nottinghamshire,  28  Sept.,  1740 ;  d.  in  London,  23
Sept.,  1824.  He  entered  the  royal  navy  in  1758,
and  served  under  Sir  Hugh  Pal'liser  and  Admiral
Byron  on  the  Newfoundland  station.  He  acted  as
chief  magistrate  of  the  settlement  for  five  years,
and  during  this  period  explored  the  interior  of  the
island,  made  the  acquaintance  of  the  aborigines,
and  discovered  Lieutenant's  lake.  In  1771  failing
health  rendered  his  temporary  retirement  from  the
navy  necessary.  In  1774  he  attracted  attention  by
advocating  the  freedom  of  the  colonies,  and  in
1775  published  a  tract  entitled  "American  Inde-


pendence the  Glory  and  Interest  of  Great  Britain."
The  tract  advocated  a  union  between  the  mother
country  and  the  colonies  under  separate  legis-
latures. Its  publication  led  to  a  rupture  of  his
friendly  relations  with  Lord  Howe,  and  completed
the  estrangement  that  had  begun  with  his  refusal
to  accept  a  commission  in  the  army  to  war  against
the  Americans.  On  2  April,  1777,  he  presented  an
address  to  the  king,  in  which  he  recommended
peace  with  the  United  States,  and  reiterated  his
proposal  of  a  union,  as  suggested  in  his  tract  on
American  independence.  He  joined  with  Dr.  Jebb
and  Granville  Sharpe,  in  1780,  in  forming  the
society  for  constitutional  information.  His  zealous
advocacy  of  the  removal  of  parliamentary  abuses,
and  the  bestowal  of  the  franchise  upon  all  male
adults,  together  with  his  active  efforts  in  securing
the  election  of  a  delegate  designated  as  legislatorial
attorney  for  Birmingham,  subjected  him  to  arrest,
trial,  and  the  payment  of  a  fine.  He  published
several  political  tracts,  and  in  his  "  Letters  on  the
Slave-Trade"  favored  making  the  traffic  equally
criminal  with  piracy.  Charles  James  Fox  regarded
him  as  "  one  whose  enlightened  mind  and  profound
constitutional  knowledge  placed  him  in  the  high-
est rank  of  public  character."  His  niece,  Frances
D.  Cartwright,  published  his  life  and  correspond-
ence (2  vols.,  London,  1826).  The  work  also  con-
tains a  map  of  his  discoveries  and  explorations  in
the  interior  of  Newfoundland.

CARTWRIGHT,  Peter,  clergyman,  b.  in  Am-
herst CO.,  Va.,  1  Sept.,  1785 ;  d.  near  Pleasant  Plains,
Sangamon  co..  111.,  25  Sept.,  1872.  His  father  was
a  soldier  in  the  revolutionary  war,  and  about  1790
removed  with  his  family  to  Logan  co.,  Ky.  At
that  time,  according  to  his  own  account,  there  was
not  a  news-
paper printed  ^
south  of  Green
river,  no  schools
worth  the  name,
and  no  mills
within  forty
miles.  Clothing
was  home-made
from  the  cotton
and  flax,  and
imported  tea,
coffee,  and  su-
gar were  un-
known. Meth-
odist preachers
had  just  begun
to  ride  "  cir-
cuits" in that

section,  and  the /) //. ^^ ^ ^^_/ —

Rev.  John  Lur- [J-cCJi  /:^^z<JuCtU.Jw^(

ton obtained

permission  to  hold  public  services  in  Mr.  Cart-
wright's  cabin  when  in  the  neighborhood.  After
a  few  years  a  conference  was  formed,  known  as
the  western  conference,  the  seventh  then  in  the
United  States.  In  1801  a  camp-meeting  was  held
at  Cane  Ridge,  at  which  nearly  2,000  persons  were
converted.  Peter  was  then  a  wild  boy  of  sixteen,
fond  of  horse-racing,  card-playing,  and  dancing.
He  was  soon  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  sinful
ness,  but  fought  against  his  convictions  for  some
time,  plunging  more  recklessly  than  ever  into  his
dissipations,  until,  after  a  night's  dance  and  de-
bauch at  a  wedding  some  miles  from  his  father  s
house,  he  fell  under  conviction  of  sin,  and  began
to  pray.  He  sold  a  favorite  race-horse,  burned  his
cards,  gave  up  gambling,  to  which  he  was  greatly
addicted,  and,  after  three  months'  earnest  seeking.


CART  WRIGHT


CARVAJAL


545


was  converted.  He  immediately  began  to  preach  as
a  "  local,"  but  in  1808  was  received  into  the  regular
ministry,  and  ordained  an  elder  in  1806  by  Bishop
Asbury.  In  1828  Mr,  Cartwright  removed  from
the  Cumberland  district  and  sought  a  home  in  Illi-
nois, settling  the  year  following  in  Sangamon  co.,
then  peopled  only  by  a  few  hardy  and  enterprising
pioneers.  After  a  few  years  he  was  elected  to  the
legislature,  wherein  his  rough-and-ready  wit  and
his  unflinching  courage  made  him  the  victor  in
many  debates.  He  attended  annual  conferences
with  almost  unfailing  regularity  for  a  series  of
years,  and  was  always  a  conspicuous  member.
Year  after  year  he  attended  camp-meetings,  find-
ing his  greatest  happiness  in  them.  He  was  a  dele-
gate to  numerous  general  conferences,  and  retained
his  interest  in  religion  to  the  last.  From  a  very
early  period  he  was  a  zealous  opponent  of  slavery,
and  was  rejoiced  when  the  Methodist  Episcopal
church  was  rid  of  all  complicity  with  it  by  the  di-
vision in  1844.  Nevertheless,  he  retained  his  alle-
giance to  the  democratic  party,  and  was  its  candi-
date for  congress  in  1846,  in  opposition  to  Abraham
Lincoln,  who  defeated  him  by  a  majority  of  1,500.
For  more  than  fifty  years  he  was  presiding  elder
in  the  church,  which  he  saw  rise,  from  72,874  mem-
bers when  he  joined  it,  to  about  1,750,000  when  he
was  called  away.  He  was  a  powerful  preacher  and
a  tireless  worker.  His  quaint  and  eccentric  habits,
and  his  exhaustless  fund  of  stories,  drawn  largely
from  personal  experience,  gained  favor  and  popu-
larity wherever  he  went.  Numerous  stories  are
told  of  his  personal  prowess  in  dealing  with  the
rough  characters  of  the  frontier,  who  often  sought
to  interrupt  his  meetings,  and  whom,  if  report  be
trae.  he  invariably  vanquished  by  moral  suasion  if
possible,  or,  failing  that,  by  the  arm  of  flesh.  In
conference  meetings  he  was  loved,  revered,  and
dreaded,  for  he  hesitated  not  to  arraign  the  house
of  bishops  to  their  face ;  but  his  influence  was  pow-
erful, and  his  strong  good  sense  often  shaped  the
policy  of  the  whole  denomination.  He  published
several  pamphlets,  of  which  his  "  Controversy  with
the  Devil"  (1853)  was  perhaps  the  most  famous.
"  The  Autobiography  of  the  Rev.  Peter  Cartw^right "
(New  York,  1856)  was  edited  by  William  P.  Strick-
land. See  also  Dr.  Abel  Stevens'  "  Observations  on
Dr.  Cartwright,"  and  his  many  books  treating  of
the  history  of  Methodism,  and  "The  Backwoods
Preacher  "  (London,  1869).

CARTWBIGHT,  Sir  Richard  John,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Kingston,  4  Dec,  1835.  He  was
educated  in  his  native  city,  and  in  Trinity  college,
Dublin,  and  entered  parliament  as  a  conservative
in  1863,  but  in  1870  formally  severed  his  con-
nection with  the  conservative  party.  Sir  Francis
Hincks,  minister  of  finance,  brought  forward  a
banking  act,  which  Mr.  Cartwright,  who  was  presi-
dent of  the  commercial  bank  of  Canada  and  at  the
head  of  other  important  financial  institutions,  de-
nounced as  calculated  to  undermine  the  security
of  the  Canadian  banks.  He  voted  against  his  old
party  on  several  questions,  but  was  re-elected  in
1872.  He  then  identified  himself  thoroughly  with
the  reform  party,  and  in  1873  accepted  office  in
Mr.  Mackenzie's  administration  as  minister  of
finance,  and  was  sworn  of  the  privy  council.  In
1878  he  carried  an  important  bill  that  makes  the
auditor-general  removable  only  on  an  address  by
both  houses  of  parliament,  and  not,  as  formerly,  at
the  pleasure  of  the  government  of  the  day.  At  the
general  election  of  1878,  when  the  country  adopted
the  "  national  policy  "  (i.  e.,  protection),  'iNIr.  Cart-
wright's  free-trade  principles  brought  about  his
defeat  at  the  polls.  A  constituency  was  subse-
VOL.  I. — 35


quently  found  for  him  in  Centre  Huron.  On  24
May,  1879,  he  was  knighted.  Sir  Richard  is  a  leader
of  the  liberal  party,  and  a  keen  critic  of  the  finan-
cial policv  of  his  political  opponents.

CARTWRK^JHT,  Samuel  Adolphus,  physi-
cian, b.  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  30  Nov.,  1793;  d.
in  Jackson,  Miss.,  2  May,  1868.  He  studied  medi-
cine at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  began
practice  in  liuntsville,  Ala.,  but  removed  to  Nat-
chez, Miss.,  where  he  labored  for  more  than  a
quarter  of  a  century,  and  served  at  one  time  under
Gen.  Jackson  as  surgeon.  Dr.  Cartwright  removed
to  New  Orleans  in  1848,  and  in  1862  was  appointed
to  improve  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  confeder-
ate soldiers  near  Port  Hudson  and  Vicksburg,  and
while  discharging  this  duty  he  contracted  the  dis-
ease that  caused  his  death. '  He  contributed  largely
to  medical  literature,  and  received  several  medals
and  prizes  for  his  investigations,  especially  those
on  yellow  fever,  cholera  infantum,  and  Asiatic
cholera.  Some  of  his  methods  of  treatment  are
now  in  use  in  the  army  and  in  hospitals.

CARVAJAL,  Ciriaco  Gonzalez  (car-va-hal),
Spanish  jurist,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of  the  18th
century.  After  serving  in  the  Manila  audiencia,
he  was  sent  to  fill  a  similar  office  in  Mexico.  There
he  distinguished  himself  in  many  important  com-
missions, was  director  of  the  Academia  de  juris-
prudencia,  inspector  of  the  Royal  college  of  San
Ildefonso,  and  president  of  the  Junta  de  memorias
historicas  y  antigiiedades  de  Nueva  Espaiia.  He
returned  to  Spain,  was  appointed  a  member  of  the
supreme  council  of  the  Indies,  and  then  of  the  su-
preme council  of  justice,  and  M^as  also  minister  for
the  colonies  in  1812.  His  principal  works  are  "  La
Hacienda,"  "  La  industria  en  las  islas  Filipinas,"
"  Reglamentos  politicos  para  el  mejor  gobierno  de
los  indios,"  "  Principios  de  Derecho,"  ''  Instruc-
ciones  y  ordenanzas  para  la  siembra  y  adminis-
tracion  del  tabaco."  and  "  Memorias."

CARVAJAL,  Francisco  de  (ear-va-hal'),  Span-
ish soldier,  b.  about  1464 ;  d.  in  1548.  He  distin-
guished himself  at  the  battle  of  Pavia,  and  at  the
sack  of  Rome  in  1527;  then  served  in  America,
whither  avarice  had  led  him,  and  contributed  to
the  victory  of  Chupas,  which  Vaca  de  Castro,  gov-
ernor of  Peru,  obtained  over  young  Diego  de  Al-
magro,  and  in  1542  became  a  general.  Ranging
himself  on  the  side  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  he  became
the  soul  of  his  party.  He  was  made  prisoner  with
Pizarro  in  1548,  at  the  battle  of  Cuzco,  and  soon
afterward  taken  and  killed  by  the  populace,  who
dragged  him  through  the  streets  of  Cuzco  and  cut
his^  body  to  pieces.  Carvajal  resembled  the  other
conquerors  of  the  new  world,  both  in  valor  and
cruelty.  More  than  20,000  Indians  whom  he  had
enslaved  are  said  to  have  died  under  the  weight  of
the  labor  he  had  heaped  upon  them.

CARVAJAL,  Gaspar  de,  missionary,  b.  in
Extramadura,  Spain,  early  in  the  16th  century ;  d.
in  Lima,  Peru,  in  1584.  He  entered  the  Domini-
can order  in  Spain,  went  to  Peru  in  1538,  and  de-
voted himself  to  the  conversion  of  the  natives.  In
1538  he  accompanied  the  expedition  of  Gonzalo
Pizarro  to  the  countries  east  of  Quito  as  chaplain.
The  army,  deceived  by  Indians,  was  drawn  into  a
coimtry  destitute  of  provisions,  and  reduced  to
great  suffering.  Gonzalo  Pizarro  oi-dered  Fi'ancis
Orellana,  one  of  his  best  officers,  to  descend  the
Napo  with  Father  Carvajal  and  fifty  men,  to  find
the  place  where  that  river  enters  a  larger  one,  and
to  return  with  whatever  provisions  they  could  get
on  board  their  little  vessel.  Orellana  reached  the
junction  of  the  Napo  and  the  Maraiion,  but  found
no  provisions. He  then  resolved  to  abandon  him-


546


CARVER


GARY


self  to  the  course  of  the  river,  and,  as  Father  Car-
vajal  protested  against  his  treachery,  he  put  him
ashore  and  sailed  away.  Here  the  missionary  was
reduced  to  the  last  extremity,  when  Gonzalo,  im-
patient at  the  delay  of  Orellana,  set  out  in  search
of  his  vessel  and  discovered  hiin.  The  expedition
then  returned  to  Quito,  having  suffered  a  loss  of
320  out  of  400  men.  Father  Carvajal  was  elected
sub-prior  of  the  convent  of  San  Rosario  in  Lima,
and  while  in  this  place  he  was  chosen  to  arbitrate
between  the  viceroy,  Blasco  de  Nuilez,  and  the
auditors  of  the  royal  audience  in  1554,  but  was  un-
successful. After  the  pacification  of  the  country,
he  was  sent  by  his  superiors  to  the  mission  of
Tucuman,  and  appointed  protector  of  the  Indians
in  this  country.  He  labored  for  years  in  this  im-
mense territory  and  converted  most  of  the  natives
to  Christianity.  In  1553  he  was  instituted  preach-
er-general of  the  convent  of  Huamanga,  and  vicar-
national  of  the  province  of  Tucuman.  He  intro-
duced several  bodies  of  Dominicans  into  his  prov-
ince, and  by  their  aid  founded  Indian  towns  and
nine  Spanish  colonies.  He  was  elected  provincial
of  Peru  in  1557,  and  devoted  the  next  two  years  to
the  organization  of  his  province,  and  the  two  fol-
lowing to  the  visitation  of  remote  districts  and  the
founding  of  new  convents.  In  1565  he  was  selected
to  represent  his  province  at  Rome  and  at  the  court
of  Spain,  but  it  is  probable  he  did  not  make  the
journey,  as  he  held  a  chapter  at  Lima  in  1569.

CARVER,  John,  governor  of  Plymouth  colony,
b,  in  England  about  1590  :  d.  in  Plymouth,  Mass.,
in  April,  1661.  Pie  Joined  the  Puritan  colony  at
Leyden,  and  was  evidently  a  person  of  some  promi-
nence, for  about  September,  1617,  he  was  sent  with
Cushman  to  England  as  an  agent  to  secure  from
the  Virginia  company  permission  to  found  a  colony
on  their  territory.  They  took  with  them  the
declaration  of  their  allegiance  to  the  church  and
state  of  England,  "  either  active,  if  the  thing  com-
manded be  not  against  God's  word ;  or  passive,  if
it  be."  To  the  same  agents  was  eventually  in-
trusted the  selection  of  a  ship  and  preparations
for  the  voyage.  Carver  was  probably  elected  gov-
ernor for  the  ensuing  year  in  the  harbor  of  Prov-
incetown,  Mass.,  where  the  "  Mayflower  "  tempo-
rarily anchored,  11  Nov.,  1620.  This  choice  was
the  result  of  long  deliberation  on  the  part  of  his
fellow-pilgrims.  He  was  re-elected  25  March,  1621,
the  beginning  of  a  new  civil  year,  but  died  sud-
denly a  month  afterward.  His  sword  is  preserved  in
the  collection  of  the  Massachusetts  historical  so-
ciety, and  a  chair,  with  other  relics,  is  in  private
collections.  He  managed  the  affairs  of  the  infant
colony  with  great  discretion  during  the  first  trying
winter,  when  nearly  half  of  the  colony  died,  and
his  negotiations  with  the  Indians  laid  the  founda-
tion for  the  generally  peaceful  relations  that  were
maintained  for  many  years.

CARVER,  Jonathan,  traveller,  b.  in  Stillwater,
K  Y.,  in  1732 ;  d.  in  London,  31  Jan.,  1780.  In
the  French  war  he  commanded  a  company  of  pro-
vincials in  the  expedition  against  Canada,  and  in
1763  he  undertook  to  explore  the  vast  territory
claimed  by  Great  Britain  in  North  America.  He
left  Boston  in  1766,  and,  having  reached  Michili-
mackinac,  the  remotest  English  post,  applied  to
Mr.  Rogers,  the  governor,  for  a  supply  of  goods  as
presents  for  the  Indians  on  the  route  he  intended  to
follow.  Having  received  a  part  of  the  required
supply,  with  the  promise  that  the  remainder  should
be  sent  after  him  to  the  falls  of  St.  Anthony,
he  continued  his  journey;  but,  as  the  expected
goods  did  not  reach  him,  he  was  under  the  ne-
cessity of  returnmg  to  Prairie  du  Chien, Thence,


tcu^^^^^a^on^^e/nr


m  the  beginning  of  1767,  he  set  out  northward
with  a  view  of  finding  a  communication  between
the  head-waters  of  the  Mississippi  and  Lake  Supe-
rior. He  reached  Lake  Superior,  and  returned
after  spending  several  '

months  on  its  north-
ern and  eastern  bor-
ders, and  exploring
the  bays  and  rivers
that  flow  into  the
lake.  Soon  after  his
arrival  at  Boston,  in
October  1768,  at  which
date  he  had  travelled
nearly  7,000  miles,  he
set  out  for  England
"  to  announce  his  dis-
coveries." On  his  ar-
rival, he  presented  a
petition  to  the  king,
praying  for  a  re-im-
bursement  of  the  sums  ^
he  had  expended;  and,  ^/'^-t?^
after  undergoing  an
examination  by  the
board  of  trade,  which  ordered  him  to  surrender  his
papers,  he  received  permission  to  publish  his  jour-
nal. But  the  profits  he  derived  from  the  sale  were
insufficient  to  relieve  his  necessities,  and  in  the  win-
ter of  1779  he  obtained  a  subsistence  by  acting  as
clerk  in  a  lottery-office.  Having  sold  his  name  to
a  historical  compilation,  which  was  published  in  a
large  folio  volume,  entitled  "  The  New  U'niversal
Traveller"  (London,  1779),  containing  an  account
of  all  the  empires,  kingdoms,  and  states  in  the
known  world,  he  M^as  abandoned  by  those  whose
duty  it  was  to  support  him.  In  the  early  part
of  1780  he  was  reduced  to  poverty,  and  died  in
a  state  of  destitution.  The  circumstances  were
made  known  to  the  public  by  the  benevolent  Dr.
Lettsom,  who  brought  out  a  new  edition  of  his
travels  for  the  benefit  of  his  widow  and  children,
and  made  such  a  representation  of  the  authors
sufferings  as  finally  led  to  the  institution  of  the
literary  fund.  The  titles  of  his  books  are  "  Trav-
els through  the  Interior  Parts  of  North  America  "
(London,  1778)  and  "  Treatise  on  the  Culture  of
the  Tobacco  Plant "  (1779).

CARY,  Albigence  Waldo,  inventor,  b.  in  Cov-
ventry,  Kent  co.,  R.  L,  23  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Brock-
port,  N.  Y.,  30  Aug.,  1862.  He  was  the  inventor  of
Gary's  rotary  force-pump,  which  was  used  on  the
first  steam  fire-engine  in  the  United  States,  in  recon-
structing the  southern  railway  after  the  civil  war,
and  in  the  mines  of  California.— His  son,  Joseph
Clinton,  b.  in  Alexander,  Genesee  co.,  N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,
1828  ;  d.  in  Martha's  Vineyard,  Mass.,  7  Aug.,  1884.
built  two  steam  fire-engines  about  1860,  to  which
his  father's  pump  was  applied,  for  use  in  New
York  city.  These  engines  propelled  themselves
through  the  streets  by  steam-power,  and  were
capable,  with  ten  men,  of  doing  the  work  of  five
hundred  with  the  hand-engines  at  that  time  in  use.
They  proved  to  be  very  efficient  at  several  large
fires,  and  helped  to  save  many  millions  of  proRff  .V;
About  1864  Mr.  Gary  became  a  speculator  in  Wall
street.  He  was  the  originator  of  the  cross-tonn
railroad  running  from  Christopher-street  ferry  to
the  East  river  at  Twenty-third  street.

CARY,  Alice,  author,  b.  near  Cincinnati,  Ohw,
26  April,  1820 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  12  Feb.,  18 <l.
Her  parents  were  people  of  good  education  ana
training,  but,  from  the  privations  incident  to  a
newlv  settled  country,  her  early  advantages  of  edu-
cation were  very  moderate. So  far  as  regards  tne


GARY


GARY


647


actual  necessities  of  life,  she  was  in  comfortable
circumstances.  Her  mother  died  in  1835,  and  two
years  afterward  her  father  married  again.  The
stepmother  was  wholly  unsympathetic  regarding
the  literary  aspirations  of  Alice  and  her  younger
sister  Phoebe  ;  but  while  they  were  ready  and  will-
ing to  aid  to  the  full  extent  of  their  strength  in
household  labor,  they  persisted  in  a  determination
to  study  and  write  when  the  day's  work  was  done.
Sometimes  they  were  refused  the  use  of  candles  to
the  extent  of  their  wishes,  and  the  device  of  a  sau-
cer of  lard  with  a  bit  of  rag  for  a  wick  was  their
only  light  after  the  rest  of  the  family  had  retired.
Of  the  best  current  periodical  literature  they  saw
little,  and  the  few  newspapers  that  reached  them
were  for  the  most  part  very  unsatisfying.  The
household  library,  according  to  a  list  cited  by
Phoebe  from  memory,  included  only  the  Bible,  a
hymn-book,  "  History  of  the  Jews,"  "  Lewis  and
Clarke's  Travels,"  "  Pope's  Essays,"  "  Charlotte
Temple,"  and  a  novel  called  "  The  Black  Peni-
tents." This  last  was  grievously  tantalyzing  to
the  young  authors,  for  its  concluding  pages  were
missing,  and  they  never  learned  the  ultimate
fate  of  the  "  Penitents."  Alice  began  to  write
verses  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  wrote  largely
and  acceptably  for  the  press  in  prose  and  verse
for  the  next  ten  years  without  compensation.  In
1852,  with  her  sister  Phoebe,  Alice  came  to  New
York  city,  and  the  two  devoted  themselves  thence-
forth to  a  literary  life.  The  sisters  had  some  prop-
erty, a  fair  literary  reputation,  and  habits  of  in-
dustry and  frugality,  which  enabled  them  to  con-
tent themselves  with  a  moderate  income,  and  they
had  just  made  their  first  successful  literary  ven-
ture, a  volume  of  poems,  when  they  decided  to
remove  to  New  York.  They  prospered  in  their
city  career,  with  a  gradual  growth  of  income  that
eventually  secured  a  competence.  Alice  was  an  in-
defatigable worker.  She  wrote  for  the  "  Atlantic
Monthly,"  for  "  Harper's,"  for  "  Putnam,"  for  the
"  New  York  Ledger,"  the  "  Independent,"  and
other  literary  periodicals ;  and  her  articles,  whether
prose  or  poetry,  were  gathered  subsequently  into
volumes,  which  had  a  warm  welcome  both  in  this
country  and  abroad.  She  also  wrote  novels  and
poems,  which  did  not  make  their  first  appearance
in  periodicals.  Her  verses  are  marked  by  a  rare
delicacy  and  finish,  and  easily  entitle  her  to  a  place
very  near  the  head  of  American  female  poets.  Her
prose  is  remarkable  for  its  fresh  grace  and  realistic
character.  Her  descriptions  of  domestic  life  are
delightful,  and  her  plots  well  sustained  and  inter-
esting. It  is  said  that  in  the  series  of  stories  en-
titled "  Clovernook  "  she  depicted  many  passages
in  her  own  home-life ;  that  in  Mary  Milford  she
sketched  herself.  "A  Relic  of  Ancient  Days,"
"  How  Uncle  Dale  was  Troubled,"  and  "  The  Old
i\ran's  Wing,"  are  episodes  in  the  life  of  her  pater-
nal grandfather.  .lohn  Dale  represents  the  father
of  Alice,  and  Joseph  Dale  her  uncle.  With  "  The
Sisters  "  she  begins  her  own  story,  and  it  is  con-
tmued  to  the  end  of  the  book.  Ella  is  herself,
Rebecca  is  her  older  sister  Rhoda,  and  Zoe  her
sister  Phoebe.  The  sisters  lived  a  dual  life :  that
of  their  New  York  home,  and  that  of  the  farm
where  they  naturally  resumed  the  habits  of  their
girlhood  during  their  occasional  visits.  After  the
sisters  had  attained  eminence  in  the  literary  world,
their  house  became  a  centre  of  attraction  for  many
of  the  brightest  people  in  America.  It  was  un-
derstood that  on  Sunday  evenings  they  were  "  at
home,"  and  their  weeklv  receptions  were  for  fifteen
years  among  the  most  delightful  known  to  the  lit-
erary guild  in  New  York. They  were  quite  infor-


mal, and  afforded  small  satisfaction  to  the  merely
fashionable  people  who  now  and  then  attended
them.  The  biographer  of  the  Gary  sisters,  Mrs.
Ames,  tells  the  following  anecdote,  which  illus-
trates the  character  of  the  guests  at  these  recep-
tions :  "  A  young  man,  poor,  without  friends,
unattractive  in  speech  and  manner,  had  found
his  way  to  the  house.  One  evening  a  friend
hinted  to  Phoebe  Gary  that  a  certain  somewhat
fastidious  lady  was  astonished  that  he  was  re-
ceived at  all.  "  He  is  so  pushing  and  presump-
tuous, and  his  family  is  very  common."  "  Tell
her,"  replied  Miss  Gary,  with  a  touch  of  indigna-
tion, "  that  we  like  him  very  much ;  that  he  is
just  as  welcome  here  as  she  is,  and  we  are  always
glad  to  see  /ier."  Of  course  receptions  conducted
on  such  liberal  principles  as  this  could  be  exclu-
sive only  by  a  process  of  natural  selection.  In
point  of  fact,  however,  the  atmosphere  of  the  place
was  agreeable  only  to  persons  of  natural  refine-
ment, and  if  others  occasionally  drifted  in,  they
rarely  repeated  the  visit.  Among  the  more  distin-
guished of  the  frequenters  of  the  Gary  home  were
Horace  Greeley,  Bayard  Taylor  and  his  wife,  Rich-
ard and  Elizabeth  Stoddard,  Robert  Dale  Owen,
Oliver  Johnson,  John  Greenleaf  "Whittier,  Mrs.
Marv  E.  Dodge,  Mrs.  Groly,  Mrs.  Victor,  the  Rev.
Edwin  H.  Chapin,  D.  D.,  Rev.  Henry  M.  Field,
D.  D.,  and  Rev.  Charles  F.  Deems,  D.  D,,  Samuel
Bowles,  Thomas  B.  Aldrich,  Anna  E.  Dickinson,
George  Ripley,  Madame  Le  Vert,  Henry  Wilson,
Justin  McCarthy,  Elizabeth  Cady  Stanton.  In
short,  all  the  noted  contemporary  names  in  the
different  departments  of  literature  and  art  might
fairly  be  added  to  the  list.  Probably  New  York
has  never  seen  assemblies  so  comprehensive  in
their  elements  and  so  harmonious  in  their  dispo-
sition. Alice's  last  illness  was  protracted  for  sev-
eral years,  and  attended  by  much  suffering,  but
was  borne  with  wonderful  patience  and  resigna-
tion, and  she  was  tenderly  cared  for  by  her  stronger
sister.  Her  published  works  are  "Clovernook
Papers "  (two  series,  Boston,  1851-3) ;  " Hagar,  a
Storv  of  To-day  "  (1852) ;  "  The  Clovernook  Chil-
dren" (1854);  "Lyra,  and  other  Poems"  (1853;
enlarged  ed.,  including  "  The  Maiden  of  Tlascala,"
1855);  "Married,  Not  Mated"  (1856);  "Pictures
of  Countrv  Life"  (New  York,  1859);  "Lyrics  and
Hymns  "  (lioston,  1866) ;  "  The  Bishop's  Son  "  (New
York,  1867) ;  "  The  Lover's  Diary  "  (Boston.  1867) ;
"  Snow-Berries  :  a  Book  for  Young  Folks  "  (1869).
— Her  sister.  Phoebe,  b.  near  Cincinnati,  4  Sept.,
1824;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  L,  31  July,  1871.  Her  ad-
vantages for  early  education  were  somewhat  better
than  her  sister's,  whose  almost  inseparable  com-
panion she  became  at  an  early  age.  They  were
very  different  in  temperament,  in  person,  and  in
mental  constitution.  Phoebe  began  to  write  verse
at  the  age  of  seventeen — crudely  and  imperfectly,
she  herself  said ;  and  yet  one  of  "her  earliest  poems,
written  in  1842,  has  literally  won  a  world-wide
reputation.  Its  title  is  "  Nearer  Home,"  and  its  first
line,  "  One  sweetly  solemn  thought."  In  the  joint
housekeeping  in  New  York,  she  took,  from  choice
(Alice  being  for  many  years  an  invalid),  the  larger
share  of  the  household  duties,  and  hence  found  less
leisure  for  literary  labor.  She  wrote  very  little
prose,  and  her  poetry  was  so  different  in  style,  so
much  more  buoyant  in  tone  and  independent  in
manner,  that  the  verses  of  one  sister  were  rarely
ascribed  to  the  other.  To  most  readers  Phoebe's
poems  are,  perhaps,  more  attractive  than  those  of
Alice.  In  society  she  was  brilliant  and  witty,  but
always  kindly  and  genial.  She  wrote  a  beautiful
and  touching  tribute  to  her  sister's  memory,  pub-


548


GARY


GARY


lished  in  the  "  Ladies'  Repository,"  a  few  days  be-
fore her  own  death.  She  had  seemingly  enjoyed
robust  health  till  her  sister's  death  ;  but  her  consti-
tution, weakened  by  intense  sorrow,  was  shattered
by  exposure  to  malarial  influences,  and  she  did
not  rally  from  the  intensity  of  the  attack,  though
removed  to  Newport  in  the  hope  that  a  change  of
air  and  cheerful  surroundings  might  prove  bene-
ficent. Of  the  volume  of  "  Poems  of  Alice  and
Phoebe  Gary  "  (Philadelphia,  1850),  only  about  one
third  were  written  by  Phcebe.  Her  independently
published  books  are  "  Poems  and  Parodies  "  (Bos-
ton, 1854);  "Poems  of  Faith,  Hope,  and  Love"
(1868) ;  and  a  large  share  of  the  "  Hymns  for  all
Christians,"  edited  by  Gharles  F.  Deems  (1869).
See  "Memorial  of  Alice  and  Phoebe  Gary,"  by
Mary  Glemmer  Ames  (Xew  York,  1873).

GARY,  Annie  Louise,  singer,  b.  in  Wayne,  Ken-
nebec CO.,  Me.,  22  Oct.,  1842.  She  is  a  daughter  of
Dr.  Nelson  Howard  Gary  and  his  wife,  Maria  Stock-
bridge.  After  an  early  education  in  the  common
schools,  she  attended  the  female  seminary  at
Gorham,  Me.,  and  was  graduated  in  1862.  In
1866,  her  natural  gifts  as  a  singer  becoming  evi-
dent, she  went  to  Italy  and  studied  in  Milan  with
Giovanni  Gorsi  until  January,  1868.  Thence  she
went  to  Gopenhagen,  and,  under  the  direction  of
Achille  Lorini,  made  her  first  appearance  in  Italian
opera  as  a  profundo  contralto  singer.  During  the
succeeding  winter  and
spring  she  continued
to  sing  in  Gopenhagen
and  in  Gothenburg  and
Ghristiania.  The  fol-
lowing summer  was
spent  at  Baden-Baden
in  study  with  Madame
Viardot-Gareia,  and  in
the  autumn  she  began
an  engagement  for  Ital-
ian opera  at  Stockholm
under  the  direction  of
Ferdinand  Strakosch.
After  two  months  she
engaged  to  sing  at  the
Royal  Swedish  opera,
and  sang  her  part  in
Italian  to  the  Swedish
of  the  other  artists.
The  following  summer  she  spent  in  Paris,  study-
ing with  Signor  Bottesini,  the  famous  contra-bass-
ist.  In  the  autumn  she  went  to  Brussels  to  sing
in  Italian  opera,  and  there  made  a  contract  with
Messrs.  Maurice  and  Max  Strakosch  for  three  vears
in  the  United  States.  In  the  winter  of  1869-'70
she  studied  in  Paris,  and  during  the  spring  in
London  with  Mr.  Henry  G.  Deacon,  and  sang  at
Drury  Lane  theatre  under  the  direction  of  Manager
Wood.  She  returned  to  iVmerica  in  September,
1870,  to  make  her  debut  in  concert  at  Steinway
hall.  New  York,  with  Nilsson,  Yieuxtemps,  and
Brignoli.  For  twelve  years  from  that  time  she  was
constantly  engaged  for  opera  or  concerts,  appear-
ing with  Carlotta  Patti,  Mario,  Albani,  and  others
in  America,  until  the  winter  of  1875-'6,  when  she
visited  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  repeated
the  tour  in  the  following  winter.  Returning  to
America  for  the  seasons  of  1877-'8  and  1878-'9,  she
sang  in  opera  with  Glara  Louise  Kellogg  and
Marie  Rose,  under  the  management  of  director
Strakosch.  The  three  seasons  following  were
given  to  opera  with  the  Mapleson  company,  and  to
concerts  and  festivals  in  great  variety.  '  During
the  most  active  part  of  her  professional  career  she
sang  at  all  the  festivals  given  in  New  York,  Bos-


ton, Gincinnati,  Ghicago,  and  Worcester.  She  also
sang  frequently  in  oratorio,  and  regularly  partici-
pated in  the  concerts  of  the  Brooklyn  (N.*  Y.)  phil-
harmonic  society.  Miss  Gary  was  always  a  favorite
with  the  American  public, 'and,  though  she  har-
vested abundant  honors  wherever  she  went  in  for-
eign lands,  she  always  seemed  especiallv  to  value
the  plaudits  of  her  own  people.  On  29  June,  1882,
she  married  Gharles  Monson  Raymond,  of  New
York  city.  Since  then  she  has  sung  only  in  private
and  for  charity,  though  she  occasionally  assists  the
choir  at  the  church  where,  with  her  husband,  she
is  a  regular  attendant.

GARY,  Archibald,  patriot,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1730  ;  d.  at  Ampthill,  in  September,  1786.  He  early
became  a  member  of  the  house  of  burgesses.  Prior
to  1760  he  undertook  to  revive  the  iron- works  on
Falling  creek,  Va.,  established  by  Gol.  William
Byrd,  and  operated  them  with  pig-iron  imported
from  Maryland ;  but  the  enterprise  was  abandoned
as  unprofitable.  In  1764  he  served  on  the  com-
mittee that  reported  the  address  tc  the  king,  lords,
and  commons.  In  1773  he  was  one  of  the  commit-
tee of  correspondence,  and  he  was  a  member  of  the
convention  of  1776.  As  chairman  of  the  commit-
tee of  the  whole  he  reported  the  resolutions  in-
structing the  Virginia  delegates  in  congress  to  pro-
pose independence.  On  the  organization  of  the
state  government  he  was  returned  to  the  senate,
where  he  presided  until  his  death.  He  was  de-
scended from  Henry,  Lord  Hunsdon,  and  at  the
tiine  of  his  death  was  heir-apparent  of  the  barony.
He  was  a  man  of  singular  courage  and  intrepidity,
short  in  stature,  but  of  remarkably  prepossessing
appearance.  The  title  of  "  colonel "  is  commonly
prefixed  to  his  name.

GARY,  John,  colored  servant  of  Gen.  Washing-
ton, b.  in  Westmoreland  co..  Va.,  in  August,  1729;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  G.,  2  June,  1843.  He  was
with  his  master  in  the  old  French  war  at  Brad-
dock's  defeat,  and  accompanied  him  through  the
revolutionary  struggle.

GARY,  Lott,  negro  slave,  b.  in  Gharles  City
CO.,  Va.,  in  1780;  d.  in  Monrovia,  Africa,  8  Nov.,
1828.  In  1804  he  was  sent  to  Richmond,  and  hired
out  as  a  common  laborer.  Gifted  with  a  high  or-
der of  native  intelligence,  he  soon  taught  himself,
with  slight  assistance,  to  read  and  write,  and.  hav-
ing a  remarkable  memory  and  sense  of  order,  he
became  one  of  the  best  shipping-clerks  in  the  Rich-
mond tobacco  warehouses.  Until  1807  he  was  an
unbeliever,  but  during  that  year  became  converted
to  Christianity,  and  was  ever  afterward  a  leader
among  the  Baptists  of  his  own  color.  In  1813  he
purchased  his  own  freedom  and  that  of  his  two
children  for  $850.  As  a  freeman  he  maintained
his  habits  of  industry  and  economy,  and  when  the
colonization  scheme  was  organized  had  accumu-
lated a  sum  sufficiently  large  to  enable  him  to  pay
his  own  expenses  as  a  member  of  the  colony  sent
out  to  the  African  coast  in  1822.  He  was  with
the  colony  during  its  early  wars  with  the  barbarous
natives,  and  rendered  inv^uable  services  as  a  coun-
sellor, physician,  and  pastor.  He  was  elected  vice-
agent  of  the  colonization  society  in  1826,  and  dur-
ing the  absence  of  Mr.  Ashmun,  the  agent,  acted
in  his  place.  On  the  evening  of  8  Nov.,  1828,  ..e
was  making  cartridges  in  anticipation  of  an  attack
from  slave-traders,  when  an  accidental  explosion
fatally  injured  him  and  seA'en  of  his  companions.

GARY,  Samuel  Fenfon,  congressman,  b.  m
Gincinnati,  Ohio,  18  Feb..  1814.  He  was  gradu:
ated  at  Miami  university  in  1835.  at  the  Cmcmnati
law-school  in  1837,  and  began  practice,  but  retired
in  1845  and  became  a  farmer. He  was  elected  to


CASAL


CASE


549


congress  as  an  independent  republican,  and  served
one  term,  1867-'9.  He  was  the  only  republican  in
the  house  that  voted  against  the  impeachment  of
President  Johnson.  On  18  May,  1876,  he  was
nominated  for  vice-president  of  the  United  States,
with  Peter  Cooper  as  the  candidate  for  president,
by  the  independent  party,  commonly  known  as  the
national  greenback  party.  He  has  been  interested
in  the  temperance  and  labor  reform  movements.

CASAL,  or  CAZAL,  Manuel  Ayres  (le,  Portu-
guese geographer,  b.  after  1750 ;  d.  in  Lisbon,
before  1850.  He  received  a  good  education,  and
took  holy  orders,  but  afterward  devoted  himself
to  the  exploration  of  Brazil,  and  has  been  called
the  "  father  of  Brazilian  geography."  His  "  Coro-
grafia  Brasilica"  (2  vols.,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  1817)
was  much  admired  by  Humboldt.

CASANATE,  Pedro  Porter  de  (cah-sah-nah'-
tay),  Spanish  naval  officer,  flourished  in  the  17th
century.  In  1035  he  explored  the  coasts  of  South
.America,  in  order  to  rectify  the  charts,  and  in  1640
was  given  the  exclusive  right  to  navigate  the  gulf
of  California  and  make  discoveries  on  its  coasts.
After  he  had  held  the  office  of  governor  of  Sinaloa,
and  finished  his  explorations  in  California,  he  was
sent  to  Chili  as  governor  and  re-establishhd  order
in  the  region.  Casanate  left  several  geographical
and  nautical  works  which  are  highly  esteemed,  in-
cluding "  Diccionario  Nautico,"  "  Reparo  a  los  Er-
rores  de  la  Navegacion  Espaiiola,"  "  Relaciones  y
Cartas  de  viajes  a  California,"  "  Relacion  de  la
Campana  de  Chile,"  and  "  Sentencias  notables  de  la
Perfeeta  Razon  de  Estado."

CASAS,  Bartolome  de  las  (bar-tol-o-may'),
missionary,  b,  in  Seville,  Spain,  in  1474;  d.  in
Madrid  in  1566.  His  father  was  one  of  the  adven-
turous spirits  that  accompanied  Columbus  on  his
principal  voyages.  Bartolome  was  a  student  at  the
University  of  Salamanca  until  he  was  nineteen  years
old,  and  had  distinguished  himself  by  his  brilliant
gifts. He  accompanied  his  father  on  all  but  the

first  of  his  voy-
ages with  Co-
lumbus, and,
on  his  return  to
Spain,  became
a  Dominican,
with  a  view  to
devoting  his
life  to  the  con-
version of  the
American  In-
dians. He  was
ordained  at
Santo  Domin-
go in  1510,  and
appointed  to  a
parish  in  Cuba,
where  he  ac-
quired such  no-
table influence
over  the  na-
tives that  he
attracted  the
attention  of  the
governor.  In
1516  he  went  to
Spain  to  obtain  safeguards  for  the  natives  against
their  European  oppressors.  Cardinal  Ximenez,  then
regent,  sent  out  a  commission,  which  proved  inef-
fectual, and  Las  Casas  went  again  to  Spain  on  the
same  errand.  But  his  efforts  produced  no  lasting
result.  After  this  he  essayed  an  independent  col-
ony, receiving  a  grant  of  250  leagues  of  land  from
Charles  V. ;  but  this  too  failed,  and  he  retired  in


despair  to  a  Dominican  convent,  where  his  ener-
getic spirit  would  not  long  suffer  him  to  remain.
He  found  his  true  vocation  as  a  missionary  preacher,
travelling  through  Nicaragua,  Guatemala,  Peru,  and
Mexico,  and  making  numy  alleged  converts,  and
earning  the  title  of  "  the  apostle  to  the  Indians."
Charles  V.,  wishing  to  reward  his  zeal,  appointed
him  to  the  rich  bishopric  of  Cuzeo,  in  Peru,  but
Las  Casas,  possessed  by  the  spirit  of  self-abnega-
tion, refused  a  life  of  luxury,  and  accepted  the
poverty-stricken  see  of  Chiapa,  Mexico.  He  as-
sumed this  charge  at  the  age  of  seventy,  and,  by
his  zeal  in  behalf  of  the  natives,  provoked  hos-
tility from  court  officers  and  from  colonists,  to
whom  he  refused  the  sacrament  if  they  enslaved
the  Indians.  His  enemies  proved  too  strong  for
him,  and  in  1551  he  returned  to  Spain  and  retired
to  a  cloister,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  writing
accounts  of  his  experiences.  As  a  statistician.  Las
Casas  is  untrustworthy.  His  estimates  of  the  na-
tive population  of  the  West  Indies,  and  of  the
number  of  lives  destroyed  by  the  tyranny  of  the
Spaniards,  are  evident  exaggerations,  prompted,  as
the  historian  Prescott  suggests,  by  the  author's
heart  rather  than  by  his  head.  His  untrustworthi-
ness  seems,  however,  to  be  confined  mainly  to  this
department  of  his  work.  His  first  book,  "  Suma-
rio,"  descriptive  of  the  West  Indies,  appeared  in
1526.  In  1535  he  began  to  publish  his  "  Historia
general  de  las  Indias,"  continued  through  a  large
number  of  volumes,  and  never  finished.  These
were  published  in  nearly  all  the  European  lan-
guages as  well  as  in  Latin.  In  1552  the  series  of
nine  tracts  began,  usually  known  as  "  The  Brief
Relation  of  the  Destruction  of  the  Indies  "  (the
title  properly  belongs  only  to  the  first  tract).
This  work,  and  especially  the  statistics  contained
in  it,  are  considered  to  be  apocriphal  by  Montalvo,
Nuix,  Beristain,  and  other  authorities.  Complete
sets  of  these  are  very  rare  and  command  fabulous
prices.  The  original  manuscript  of  the  "  Historia  "
is  still  preserved  in  the  academy  of  history  at  Mad-
rid. See  Sir  Arthur  Help's  "  Spanish  Conquest  of
America  "  and  "  Life  of  Las  Casas,"  Hubert  Howe
Bancroft's  "  Central  America  "  and  "  Mexico,"  and
Winsor's  "  Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  Amer-
ica "(Boston,  1884).

CASAS  ¥  ARAGOKRI,  Luis  de  las,  governor-
general  of  Cuba,  b.  in  Sopuerta,  Spain,  in  1745 ;  d.
in  1800.  He  entered  the  army,  and  in  1769  came
to  Louisiana  under  the  Spanish  Gen.  O'Reilly,
where  he  remained  six  years  as  commander  of  the
garrison.  In  1774  he  returned  to  Spain,  took  part
in  several  wars,  and  was  appointed  in  1790  gov-
ernor-general of  Cuba.  During  his  administration
the  prosperity  and  welfare  of  the  island  had  a  great
development.  To  him  w^as  due  the  creation  of  the
first  newspaper  ever  published  in  Cuba,  the  "  Papel
Periodico,"  the  first  number  of  which  appeared  31
Oct.,  1791.  Casas  himself  was  one  of  the  most  con-
stant contributors.  Under  his  administration  were
established  the  charity  asylum,  the  patriotic  society
for  intellectual,  industrial,  and  agricultural  devel-
opment, the  first  public  library  in  Cuba,  and  the
first  census  was  taken.  He  caused  to  be  con-
structed many  public  roads  and  bridges,  and  found-
ed public  schools,  contributing  with  his  own  purse
toward,  their  support.  He  was  the  first  to  recom-
mend to  the  Madrid  government  the  wise  policy  of
opening  the  ports  of  the  island  of  Cuba  to  foreign
commerce.  Casas  returned  to  Spain  in  1796  as
poor  as  wlien  he  had  first  arrived  at  Havana,  and
died  in  absolute  poverty.

CASE,  Augustus  Ludlow,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Newburg,  N.  Y.,  3  Feb.,  1813. He  entered  the


550


CASE


navy  as  midshipman,  1  April,  1828,  and  became
passed  midshipman,  14  June,  1834.  From  1837  till
1843  he  was  engaged  in  the  South  sea  surveying
and  exploring  expedition,  and  was  promoted  to
lieutenant,  25  Feb.,  1841.  He  served  in  the  gulf
of  Mexico  from  1846  till  1848  during  the  Mexican
war,  and  was  present  at  the  capture  of  Vera  Ciniz,
Alvarado,  and  Tabasco,  superintending  the  landing
of  men,  ordnance,  and  stores  for  the  siege  of  Vera
Cruz.  After  the  capture  of  Laguna  he  was  sent
with  twenty-five  men  up  the  Palisada  river  to  cap-
ture the  town  of  the  same  name  in  the  hope  of  in-
tercepting Gen.  Santa  Anna.  The  town  was  taken
and  held  for  two  weeks  against  a  large  body  of
cavalry.  Lieut.  Case  commanded  the  sloop-of-war
"  Warren  "  in  18o2-'3,  and  was  light-house  inspec-
tor at  New  York  from  1853  till  1857.  He  was  pro-
moted, 14  Sept.,  1855,  and  commanded  the  steamer
"  Caledonia  "  on  the  Paraguay  expedition  in  1859.
At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  Commander
Case  was  appointed  fleet-captain  of  the  North  At-
lantic blockading  squadron,  took  part  in  the  cap-
ture of  Forts  Clarke  and  Hatteras,  28  and  29  Aug.,
1861,  and  was  specially  named  by  flag-officer  String-
ham  in  his  report  of  2  Sept.  At  Hampton  Roads  he
rendered  valuable  assistance  to  Flag-Officer  Golds-
borough  in  manning  and  equipping  the  many  ves-
sels sent  to  him  in  an  unprepared  condition,  and
was  commended  in  a  report,  together  with  Com-
mander Rowan,  for  "marked  ability  and  sound
sense."  He  took  part  in  all  the  operations  of  the
North  Atlantic  fleet  till  January,  1863,  when  he
was  assigned  to  the  "  Iroquois,"  which  was  fitted  to
look  after  the  "  Alabama."  He  had  charge  of  the
blockade  of  New  Inlet,  N.  C,  in  1863.  and  in  Au-
gust of  that  year,  aided  by  the  steamers  "  James
Adger  "  and  "  Mount  Vernon,"  cut  out  the  steamer
"  Kate  "  froiri  under  Fort  Fisher  and  the  other
batteries  at  New  Inlet.  He  became  captain,  2  Jan.,
1863,  and  in  1865-6  was  fleet-captain  of  the  Euro-
pean squadron.  He  was  made  commodore,  8  Dec,
1867,  was  chief  of  the  ordnance  bureau  from  1869
till  1873,  and  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  24  May,
1872.  In  1874  he  commanded  the  combined  Euro-
pean, North  Atlantic,  and  South  Atlantic  fleets
assembled  at  Key  West  at  the  time  of  the  "  Vir-
ginius  "  difficulties  with  Spain.  On  3  Feb.,  1875,
he  was  placed  on  the  I'etired  list,  and  has  since  re-
sided in  Newport,  R.  I.

CASE,  Theodore  Spencer,  physician,  b.  in
Jackson,  Butts  co.,  Ga.,  26  Jan..  1832.  He  was
graduated  at  Marietta  in  1852,  and  at  the  Starling
medical  college,  Columbus,  Ohio,  in  1856.  In  1883
he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
University  of  Kansas.  Subsequent  to  the  receipt
of  his  medical  degree  he  settled  in  Kansas  Citv,
and  from  1860  till  1861  edited  the  "  Medical  Re-
view "  there,  also  holding  the  office  of  alderman
during  1860.  He  became  second  lieutenant  of  the
25th  Missouri  infantry  in  June,  1861,  and  later
captain  and  assistant  quartermaster.  In  February,
1865,  he  was  made  colonel  and  quartermaster-gen-
eral of  Missouri,  and  from  1866  till  1868  was  cura-
tor of  the  University  of  Missouri.  From  1873  till
1885  he  was  postmaster  of  Kansas  City,  and  in  1885
became  professor  of  chemistry  in  Kansas  City  medi-
cal college.  He  edited  the  '•  Kansas  City  Review
of  Science  and  Industry  "  from  1877  till  1885,  and
in  1886  became  president  of  the  Kansas  City  real
estate  and  stock  exchange.

CASE,  William,  missionary,  b.  in  Swansea,
Mass.,  27  Aug.,  1780 ;  d.  at  Alnwick  mission-house,
Canada,  19  Oct.,  1855.  Of  his  youth  and  early
manhood  but  little  is  known.  He  was  converted
in  1803,  began  to  prepare  himself  for  the  ministry,


CASEY


and  was  received  on  trial  in  the  New  York  confer-
ence of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.  His  first
regular  appointment  was  at  the  bay  of  Quinte
Canada.  In  1809  he  was  a  missionary  at  Detroit'
and  from  1810  till  1827  presiding  elder  in  northern
and  western  New  York  and  in  Canada.  In  1828
the  Canadian  Methodists  became  independent  of
the  church  in  the  United  States,  and  he  was  made
superintendent  of  Indian  missions  and  schools.
From  1830  till  1833  he  vsas  general  superintendent,'
without  episcopal  powers,  of  the  Wesleyan  Meth-
odists in  Canada.  In  1837  he  was  placed  in  charge
of  the  native  Wesleyan  industrial  school  at  Aln-
wick, where  he  remained  until  1851.  On  the  com-
pletion of  the  fiftieth  year  of  his  itinerancy  he
pronounced  a  commemorative  discourse  before  the
conference  in  London,  Canada,  which  was  received
with  great  favor  alike  at  the  time  of  its  dehvery
and  in  its  published  form.  His  chief  successes
were  with  the  Indians,  and  he  appeared  to  be  in-
spired with  a  personal  power  that  gave  him  won-
derful influence  over  them.  He  died  suddenly,  in
consequence  of  a  fall  from  his  horse.  See  "  Case
and  his  Contemporaries  "  (Toronto,  1856).

CASEAU,  Charles  Felix,  clergyman,  b.  in  Que-
bec in  1807 ;  d.  there  in  1881.  At  the  age  of  sev-
enteen years  he  was  chosen  secretary  by  Bishop
Plessis.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  1830,"  and  ap-
pointed secretary  to  Bishop  Planet.  He  showed
great  courage  and  devotion  during  the  cholera  epi-
demic of  1832-'3,  and  during  the  fever  epidemic  of
1847  among  the  Irish  immigrants  he  found  homes
for  more  than  400  orphans.  In  1854  he  was  ap-
pointed chaplain  to  the  convent  of  the  Good  Shep-
herd, and  the  rest  of  his  life  was  devoted  to  the
reclaiming  of  fallen  women.  On  account  of  his
successful  exertions  in  this  respect  he  was  made  do-
mestic prelate  of  the  pope.  He  was  also  vicai'-gen-
eral  of  the  diocese  of  Quebec.

CASEY,  Levi,  soldier,  b.  in  South  Carolina  in
1749 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  1  Feb.,  1807.  He
was  an  active  partisan  officer  in  South  Carolina
during  the  revolutionary  war,  and  became  briga-
dier-general of  militia.  He  commanded  a  com-
pany, with  which  he  assisted  in  the  assault  on
Savannah,  and  distinguished  himself  at  Rocky
Mount,  Hanging  Rock,  Musgrove's,  King's  Moun-
tain, Fishing  Creek,  Blackstocks,  and  the  Cowpens,
where  he  performed  services  of  great  importance
to  Gen.  Morgan.  He  represented  the  Newbury  dis-
trict in  the  state  legislature,  and  also  served  in  con-
gress from  17  Oct.,  1803,  till  his  death.

CASEY,  Silas,  soldier,  b.  in  East  Greenwich,
R.  I.,  12  Julv,  1807 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y,  22  Jan.,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1826,  and,  entering  the  2d  infantry,
served  on  frontier  and  garrison  duty  till  1836,  be-  '
coming  first  lieutenant  on  28  June  of  that  year.
He  distinguished  himself  under  Worth  in  the  Semi-
nole war  of  1837-42,  and  was  made  captain  1
Julv,  1839.  In  the  Mexican  war  he  was  brevetted
major,  20  Aug.,  1847,  for  his  gallant  conduct  in  the
battles  of  Contreras  and  (Jhurubusco,  and  was  at
Molino  del  Rey  and  the  storming  of  Chapultepee,
where  he  was  severely  wounded  while  leading  the
assaulting  column.  For  his  conduct  here  he  was
brevetted  lieutenant-colonel,  13  Sept.,  1847,  and  he
was  thanked  bv  the  Rhode  Island  legislature  for
his  services  during  the  war.  After  this  he  was  en-
gaged on  frontier  and  recruiting  service  most  ot
the  time  till  the  civil  war.  He  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  9th  infantrv,  3  IMarch,  1855,  was  a
member  of  the  board  for  examining  breech-loading
arms  in  1854-'5,  and  commanded  Puget  sound  dis-
trict, Washington  territory,  from  1856  tm  1857.  ae


CASGRAIN


CASS


551


was  made  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  31  Aug.,
1861,  and  charged  with  organizing  and  disciplin-
ing the  volunteers  in  and  near  the  capital.  He
was  afterward  assigned  a  division  in  Gen.  Keyes's
corps  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and,  occupying
with  it  the  extreme  advance  before  Richmond,  re-
ceived the  first  attack  of  the  enemy  at  Fair  Oaks,
31  May,  1862,  for  which  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general,  U.  S.  army,  and  made  major-general  of
volunteers.  From  1868  till  1865  he  was  president
of  the  board  for  the  examination  of  candidates  for
officers  of  colored  troops,  and  on  18  March,  1865,
was  brevetted  major-general  in  the  regular  army.
In  1867  he  again  received  the  thanks  of  the  Rhode
Island  legislature  for  his  services  in  the  rebellion,
and  especially  for  his  bravery,  skill,  and  energy  at
the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks.  In  1862  the  southern  pa-
pers published  a  letter  from  Gen.  Casey  to  Sec.
Stanton,  said  to  have  been  found  in  the  former's
tent  at  Fair  Oaks,  and  proposing  a  plan  for  the
permanent  military  occupation  of  the  south  by  an
army  of  160,000  men  after  the  rebellion  should,  be
over.  He  was  retired  from  active  service  on  8
July,  1868,  and  served  on  the  retiring  board.  New
York  city,  till  26  April,  1869.  He  published  "  Sys-
tem of  Infantry  Tactics  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1861)
and  "  Infantry  Tactics  for  Colored  Troops  "  (1863).
—His  son,  Silas,  b.  in  Rhode  Island,  11  Sept.,
1841,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy,
Annapolis,  in  1860,  became  master  in  1861,  lieuten-
ant in  1862,  lieutenant-commander  in  1866,  and
commander  in  1874.  He  was  attached  to  the
steamer  "  Wissahickon "  in  1861,  and  was  in  the
first  attack  on  Fort  Sumter  and  various  engage-
ments with  the  batteries  in  Charleston  harbor.  He
was  equipment  officer  at  the  Washington  navy-
yard  in  1882-'4,  light-house  inspector  in  1885,  and
in  1886  commanded  the  receiving-ship  "  Dale."

CASORAIN,  Abbe  Henry  Raymond,  Cana-
dian author,  b.  at  Riviere  Ouelle,  Quebec,  16  Dec,
1831.  He  pursued  a  course  of  classical  studies  at
Ste.  Anne's  college,  and  studied  medicine  for  a  short
time,  but  finally  took  a  course  in  theology  in  the
seminary  of  Quebec,  and  was  ordained  a  priest
on  5  Oct.,  1856.  He  was  successively  professor  at
Ste.  Anne's  college  until  1859,  vicar  of  Beaufort,
and  afterward  at  Quebec  cathedral  from  1860  till
1873.  He  visited  Europe  in  1858,  1867,  and  1873,
in  quest  of  historical  material.  In  1874,  in  conse-
quence of  a  serious  affection  of  the  eyes,  he  was
compelled  to  retire  from  active  ministerial  work.
His  "  Legends  Canadien  "  (Quebec,  1861)  was  favor-
ably received,  and  followed  by  "  L'histoire  de  la
Marie  de  I'incarnation  "  (1864),  which  was  trans-
lated into  German  by  the  Abbe  Geiger.  of  Munich
(Ratisbon,  1873).  The  most  important  of  his  other
writings  are  "  Ilistoire  d'Hotel  Dieu  de  Quebec "
and  "  Ma  paroisse  Canadienne  au  xviieme  siecle."
A  complete  edition  of  his  works  was  published  in
Montreal  in  1886.

CASILEAR,  John  W.,  painter,  b.  in  New  York,
25  June,  1811.  When  fifteen  years  old  he  began
the  study  of  engraving  under  Peter  Maverick,
after  whose  death  he  became  a  bank-note  engraver.
He  interested  himself  in  oil-painting,  and  visited
Europe  in  1840,  and  again  in  1857,  for  study.  In
1835  he  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National
academy,  and  in  1851  a  full  academician.  His
studio  is  in  New  York.  His  principal  works  are
"  Swiss  Lake  "  (1868) ;  "  Genesee  Meadows  "  (1871) :
"September  Afternoon"  (1874);  "Trout  Brook"
(1875) ;  "  Autumn  "  (1876) ;  "  Scene  in  New  Hamp-
shire "  (1877) ;  "  View  on  Chemung  River  "  (1878) ;
"View  of  the  Rockv  Mountains"  (1881);  "Scene
on  Long  Island  "  (1883) ;  "  Early  Autumn  "  (1884) ;


<=:>^,2.<^^:?p,:^^.


"Genesee  Valley"  (1885);  and  "Early  Summer,
Long  Island  Sound"  (1886).

CASS,  George  N.,  artist.  He  studied  with
Innes,  and  has  painted  landscapes  in  oil-  and
water-colors,  exhil^iting  at  the  Boston  art  club
and  elsewhere.  Among  his  works,  which  are  spe-
cially popular  in  New  England,  are  "  Evening  on
the  Kennebec  River"  and  "View  in  Med  way,
Mass."  (1878).— His  wife  is  also  an  artist,  and  has
painted  fruit,  flowers,  and  still-life,  in  oil.

CASS,  Lewis,  statesman,  b.  in  Exeter,  N.  H.,  9
Oct.,  1782 ;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mick,  17  June,  1866.  He
was  the  eldest  son  of  Jonathan  Cass,  who  at  the
age  of  nineteen  entered  the  Continental  army,  and
served  throughout  the  revolution,  attaining  the
rank  of  captain.  After  the  conclusion  of  peace  he
received  a  commis-
sion in  the  army
as  major,  and  was
assigned  to  duty
under  Gen.  Wayne
in  the  territory
northwest  of  the
Ohio,  his  family
remaining  at  Exe-
ter. During  this
time  Lewis  was  at-
tending the  acad-
emy in  his  native
town.  In  1799
the  family  re-
moved toWilming-
ton,  Del.,  where
Maj.  Cass  was  tem-
porarily stationed,
and  where Lewis

became  a  school-teacher.  The  next  year  the  fam-
ily migrated  westward,  travelling  partly  on  foot
and  partly  by  boat,  and  reaching  Marietta,  the
pioneer  town  of  southern  Ohio,  in  October".  Maj.
Cass  settled  upon  a  tract  of  land,  granted  him  by
the  government  for  his  military  services,  on  Muskin-
gum river,  near  Zanesville,  while  Lewis  remained
at  Marietta  to  study  law  in  the  office  of  Gov.
Meigs.  In  1803  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  Zanesville.  Plis  abilities  as  a
jurist  and  pleader  were  speedily  manifest,  and  soon
secured  him  a  lucrative  business  and  a  wide  repu-
tation in  the  thinly  settled  district  north  of  the
Ohio.  Becoming  well  established  in  his  profes-
sion, in  1806  he  married  Elizabeth  Spencer,  of  Vir-
ginia, and  shortly  afterward  entered  upon  his  pub-
lic career  as  a  member  of  the  Ohio  legislature.
Being  placed  on  the  committee  instituted  to  in-
quire into  the  supposed  treasonable  movements  of
Aaron  Burr,  he  framed  the  law  that  enabled  the
authorities  to  arrest  the  men  and  boats  provided
for  the  expedition  down  the  river.  He  also  drew
up  the  official  communication  to  the  president
embodying  the  views  of  the  Ohio  legislature  on  the
subject.  The  marked  ability  of  this  document  at-
tracted Mr.  Jefferson's  attention,  and  in  1807  Mr,
Cass  was  appointed  marshal  of  the  state,  a  place
which  he  filled  until  1813.  At  the  beginning  of
the  second  war  with  England  he  joined  the  forces
at  Dayton  under  Gen.  Hull,  and  was  made  colonel
of  the  8d  Ohio  volunteers.  He  commanded  the
advanced  guard  when  the  army  crossed  from  De-
troit into  Canada,  drew  up  the  proclamation  ad-
dressed by  the  general  to  the  inhabitants,  and  com-
manded the  detachment  that  drove  in  the  British
outposts  at  the  bridge  of  Aux  Canards.  Sliortly
after  this  Col.  Cass  was  included  in  the  capitula-
tion known  as  Hull's  surrender,  and,  being  paroled,
hastened  to  Washington,  full  of  indignation  against


552


CASS


CASS


Hull,  and  made  the  first  report  of  the  affair  to  the
U.  S.  government.  After  being  exchanged  he
was  appointed  to  the  2Tth  regiment  of  infantry,
and  was  shortly  promoted  to  brigadier-general.
He  took  part  in  the  defeat  of  the  British  under
Gen.  Proctor,  at  the  battle  of  the  Thames  in  Cana-
da, 5  Oct.,  1813.  At  the  close  of  the  campaign  he
was  left  in  command  of  Michigan,  with  his  head-
quarters at  Detroit,  and  almost  immediately  was
appointed  civil  governor  of  the  territory.  In  1814
he  was  associated  with  Ofen.  Harrison  in  a  commis-
sion to  treat  with  the  Indians,  who  had  been  hostile
to  the  United  States  during  the  war.  The  number
of  white  inhabitants  in  the  territory  was  scarcely
6,000 ;  no  land  had  been  sold  by  the  United  States,
and  the  interior  was  a  vast  wilderness,  the  abode,
it  w^as  estimated,  of  40,000  savages.  Settlers  could
not  obtain  sure  titles  to  their  locations,  no  surveys
had  been  made,  no  roads  opened  inland,  and  the
savages  were  relentless  in  their  hostility  to  the
whites.  Under  these  discouraging  circumstances
Cass  assumed  the  responsibilities  of  governor,  and
ex  officio  superintendent  of  Indian  affairs,  his  juris-
diction extending  over  the  whole  territory.  Dur-
ing eighteen  years  his  management  of  Indian
affairs  was  governed  by  remarkable  wisdom  and
prudence.  He  negotiated  twenty-two  distinct
treaties,  securing  the  cession  to  the  United  States,
by  the  various  tribes,  of  the  immense  regions  of
the  northwest,  instituted  surveys,  constructed
roads,  established  military  works,  built  light-houses
along  the  lake  shore,  organized  counties  and  town-
ships, and,  in  short,  created  and  set  in  motion  all
the  machinery  of  civilized  government.  In  the
administration  of  the  extensive  financial  trusts  in-
cident to  his  position.  Gov.  Cass  displayed  the  most
scrupulous  honesty,  never  permitting  even  the
small  sura  allowed  him  by  the  government  for
contingent  expenses  to  be  transferred  to  his  pri-
vate account  until  the  vouchers  had  been  formally
signed  and  transmitted  to  Washington.  As  yet
the  northwestern  territory  was  imperfectly  known,
and  at  his  suggestion  an  expedition  was  planned
in  1820,  in  which  he  himself  bore  a  conspicuous
part.  Accompanied  by  the  ethnologist,  School-
craft, and  six  other  gentlemen,  with  Indian  guides,
they  left  Detroit  in  three  canoes,  for  the  explora-
tion of  the  upper  lakes  and  the  head-waters  of  the
Mississippi,  and  traversed  5,000  miles  before  their
return.  The  results  of  this  and  subsequent  expe-
ditions were  published  in  the  "  North  American
Review "  in  1828-9,  and  added  not  a  little  to  the
fame  of  the  author.  In  1831,  when  President  Jack-
son reconstructed  his  cabinet,  Cass  was  appointed
secretary  of  war,  and  cordially  approved  all  the
distinctive  features  of  that  administration.  Dur-
ing his  incumbency  the  Black  Hawk  war  occurred,
and  was  vigorously  suppressed.  The  Indian  ques-
tion, too,  passed  through  a  dangerous  crisis  in  the
removal  of  the  Cherokees  from  their  hereditary
lands  in  Georgia  and  Mississippi.  In  the  nullifi-
cation troubles  of  1832,  the  nullifiers  derived  no
benefit  from  his  presence  in  the  war  department.
In  1836  Gen.  Cass  submitted  a  celebrated  report  to
congress  upon  the  military  and  naval  defences  of
the  United  States,  embracing  an  elaborate  sum-
mary of  existing  resources,  both  offensive  and  de-
fensive. He  recommended  the  erection  of  a  strong
chain  of  coast  fortifications,  and  the  maintenance
of  a  powerful  navy.  Shortly  after  this,  finding  his
health  impaired,  he  resigned  his  secretaryship,  and
was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to  France.  The
diplomatic  relations  between  the  two  countries
were  at  that  time  in  a  critical  condition,  owing  to
complications regarding the spoliation claims.


Gen.  Cass  temporarily  settled  the  matter  by  pay-
ment of  interest. His  most  important  act  as  min-
ister was  his  vigorous  protest  against  the  quintuple
treaty,  whereby  Britain sought  to  maintain  the
right  of  search  on  the  high  seas. Mainly  owing  to
his  representations,  France  refused  to  ratify  the
treaty. The  protest,  in  pamphlet  form,  had  an
enormous  circulation,  and  the  English  were  greatly
incensed. Lord  Brougham  assailed  him  in  parlia-
ment, and  Cass  replied  very  effectively  in  the  sen-
ate. During  an  interval  of  his  diplomatic  duties
he  made  a  long  voyage  in  the  U.  S.  frigate  "  Con-
stitution," visiting  Constantinople  and  the  Medi-
terranean ports. Resigning  his  mission  to  France,
he  returned  home  in  1842,  and  was  given  a  public
welcome  at  New York  and Philadelphia. The
country  was  greatly  excited  over  the  annexation  of
Texas. He  had  been  talked  of  as  a  democratic
candidate  for  the  presidency,  and  his  opinions  upon
the  important  questions  of  the  day  were  eagerly
sought. In  the  democratic  national  convention  of
1844,  James  K.  Polk  received  the  nomination,  and
was  elected  to  the  presidency  in  the  following  No-
vember, Mr.  Cass  cordially  supporting  him  through-
out the  canvass. In  January,  1845,  he  was  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  which  place  he  resigned  on  his
nomination,  in  May,  1848,  as  democratic  candidate
for  the  presidency. After  the  election  of  his  op-
ponent, Gen.  Taylor,  he  was,  in  1849,  re-elected  to
the  senate  for  the  unexpired  portion  of  his  original
term  of  six  years. Plere  he  wielded  a  powerful  m-
•fluence. He  was  a  strong  advocate  of  compro-
mise, became  the  chief  ally  of  Henry  Clay,  and
opposed  both  the  southern- rights  dogmas  and  the
Wilmot  proviso. The  latter  of  these  he  had  been
instructed  by  the  legislature  to  support;  but  he
declared  in  the  senate  that  he  should  resign  his
seat  in  case  of  a  direct  conflict  between  his  duty
and  his  principles. Originally  Gen.  Cass  was  the
most  prominent  candidate  for  the  chairmanship  of
the  committee  of  thirteen,  but  himself  urged  the
appointment  of  Mr.  Clay  to  that  place. The  pas-
sage of  the  resolution  constituting  that  committee
was,  by  the  testimony  of  its  mover,  Henry  S.  Foote,
chiefly  due  to  his  prompting  and  assistance. He
supported  the  various  measures  that  it  originated,
save  the  fugitive-slave law,  on the passage  of
which,  in  the  senate,  he  declined  to  vote,  though
present  in  his  seat. Being  re-elected  a  senator
from  IVJichigan  for  a  second  term  of  six  years  from
March,  1851,  he  still  continued  a  prominent  demo-
cratic candidate  for  the  presidency,  but,  in  1852,  as
in  1844,  he  was  unsuccessful. This  defeat  termi-
nated Gen.  Cass's  aspirations  for  the  chief  magis-
tracy, and  he  remained  a  member  of  the  senate
until  the  expiration  of  his  term. In  1857,  when
Mr.  Buchanan  entered  upon  his  administration,
Gen.  Cass  accepted  the  office  of  secretary  of  state.
In  the  secession  movements  that  followed  Mr.  Lin-
coln's election,  he  was,  as  in  1850,  a  friend  of  com-
promise, sustaining  what  were  then  known  as  the
Crittenden  resolutions. President  Buchanan's  mes-
sage, denying  the  existence  of  any  power  in  the
constitution  by  which  the  general  government  can
coerce  a  state,  was  not  openly  disapproved  by  Mr.
Cass  in  the  cabinet  meeting  where  it  was  first  read.
Eight  davs  afterward,  however,  he  re-asserted  tho
Jacksonian  principles  of 1832-'3,  and,  when  Mr.
Buchanan refused to re-enforce  Maj.  Anderson
and reprovision Fort Sumter, he  promptly  re-
signed. His  resignation  terminated  a  public  career
of  flfty-six  years'  duration. After  that  period  he
mingled  little  in  society,  save  in  the  exercise  of  the
hospitalities  of  his  own  home. During  the  civU
war  his  sympathies  were  with  the  national  arms.


CASSERLY


CASSIN


653


and  it  was  a  great  satisfaction  to  him  that  his  life
was  spared  to  see  the  ultimate  triumph  of  the  gov-
ernment over  a  rebellion  that  for  a  time  threatened
its  existence.  Gen.  Cass  was  a  man  of  great  natu-
ral abilities,  a  prudent,  cautious  legislator,  a  scholar
of  fine  attainments,  of  the  purest  integrity,  tem-
perate in  all  his  habits,  and  personally  popular
throughout  the  country.  His  wealth  was  largely
the  result  of  his  fortunate  original  investment  in
real  estate ;  but  the  steady  increase  of  his  property
in  value  was  also  due  to  able  management.  His
published  works  are  "Inquiries  concerning  the
History,  Traditions,  and  Languages  of  the  Indians
living  within  the  United  States "  (Detroit,  1823):
"  France,  its  King,  Court,  and  Government "  (New
York,  1840).  See  "  Lewis  Cass,  Outlines  of  his  Life
and  Character,"  by  Henry  Rowe  Schoolcraft  (Al-
bany, 1848);  "Sketches  of  the  Life  and  Public
Services  of  Lewis  Cass,"  by  William  T.  Young.(De-
troit,  1852) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Lewis  Cass,"  by
W.  L.  G.  Smith  (New  York,  1856) ;  and  a  memorial
volume  (Detroit,  1866.) — His  son,  Lewis,  was  ap-
pointed charge  d'affaires  to  the  papal  states  in
1849,  and  in  1854  was  promoted  to  be  U.  S.  minis-
ter resident  in  Italy,  where  he  remained  until  1858.
CASSERLY,  Eugene,  senator,  b.  in  Ireland  in
1822 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  14  June,  1883.  Plis
parents  came  to  New  York  when  he  was  two  years
old,  and,  as  his  father  was  a  teacher,  young  Casser-
ly  received  an  excellent  education.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  entered  a  law-
yer's office  in  New  York,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1844,  and  was  corporation  attorney  in  1846-7.
Three  years  later  he  removed  to  San  Francisco,
where  he  obtained  a  good  practice,  and  took  an
active  part  in  local  and  national  politics.  He  was
an  ardent  democrat,  a  fine  stump-speaker,  and  for
a  time  edited  a  paper  in  San  Francisco.  He  was
elected  state  printer,  but,  in  consequence  of  a
heavy  fire  by  which  his  machinery  and  stock  were
destroyed,  was  compelled  to  retire  from  the  busi-
ness. Thenceforward  he  devoted  himself  to  his
profession.  During  the  civil  war  he  was  a  war
democrat.  In  1869  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
from  California,  and  served  on  the  committees  on

Erinting,  public  lands,  and  foreign  relations.  His
ealth  having  become  infirm.  Senator  Casserly  re-
signed in  November,  1878,  returned  to  San  Fran-
cisco, and  resumed  practice.  In  the  same  year  he
headed  with  Gov.  Booth  the  non-partisan  independ-
ent movement  in  California,  working  successfully
to  prevent  the  legislature  from  falling  into  the  con-
trol of  the  railroads.  His  death  was  the  result  of
nervous  prostration  and  softening  of  the  brain.

CASSIDY,  William,  journalist,  b.  in  Albanv,
N.  Y,  12  Aug.,  1815 ;  d.  there,  23  Jan.,  1873.  His
grandfather  had  settled  in  Albany  when  he  came
from  Ireland  in  1780.  His  father,  John  Cassidy,
sat  for  years  in  the  municipal  board,  and  was  an
intimate  friend  of  DeWitt  Clinton.  William  began
his  education  at  the  Albany  academy  under  Dr.
T.  Romeyn  Beck,  and  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1884.  He  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Judge  James
McKown  and  John  Van  Buren,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar.  In  1840-'2  he  was  state  librarian,  and
at  this  time  began  political  writing,  contributing
anonymously  to  several  papers.  In  the  spring  of
1843  he  became  part  owner  and  sole  editor  of  the
Albany  "Atlas,"  a  democratic  daily,  which  had
been  established  a  short  time  before.  In  that  place
he  speedily  made  a  reputation.  The  "Argus,"
which  was  the  old  organ  of  the  democracy,  found-
ed in  1813,  spoke  for  the  hunkers.  Edwin  Cros-
well  was  editor.  The  "Atlas,"  representing  the
weaker  faction,  struggled  with  poverty  and  hard-


ship. But  the  young  editor  gave  it  his  best  power
and  industry,  and  it  fought  a  vigorous  battle.  He
wrote  often  on  a  poor  table,  in  a  dirty  corner,  amid
the  confusion  of  the  composing-room ;  but  his
articles  bristled  with  sharp  points  and  caustic  wit.
The  battle  was  at  its  height  in  1848,  when  Lewis
Cass  was  the  presidential  candidate  of  the  regular
democracy,  and  Martin  Van  Buren  held  the  stand-
ard of  the  barn-burners.  The  conflict  died  out,
and  in  1856  the  "  Atlas  "  and  "  Argus  "  were  united,
and  Mr.  Cassidy  became  editor  of  the  joint  con-
cern. In  1865  he  changed  the  name  back  to  "  The
Argus,"  and  organized  a  stock  association.  He
was  for  many  years  one  of  the  knot  of  dem.ocratic
politicians  that  ruled  the  destinies  of  that  party  in
New  York  state  and  sometimes  in  the  national
conventions,  and  to  which  had  descended  the  name
of  the  "Albany  Regency,"  formerly  enjoyed  by
Croswell  and  his  associates.  The  principal  mem-
bers were  Dean  Richmond,  Peter  Cagger,  and
William  Cassidy.  On  the  death  of  his  brother-in-
law,  Peter  Cagger,  in  1868,  Mr.  Cassidy  became  his
successor  as  secretary  of  the  democratic  state  com-
mittee, and  held  that  place  till  the  day  of  his
death.  He  was  invariably  on  the  committee  on
resolutions,  and  many  of  the  adroitest  resolutions
that  have  been  attributed  to  others  were,  in  reality,
the  product  of  his  brain.  The  celebrated  anti-
slavery  plank  that  was  read  and  defeated  at  the
Herkimer  convention  was  from  his  pen,  Mr.  Cas-
sidy was  disinclined  to  enter  public  life,  and  the
few  offices  that  he  held  were  forced  upon  him.  In
1846  he  was  nominated  in  the  democratic  legis-
lative caucus  for  state  printer.  In  1867  he  was
elected  to  the  constitutional  convention,  and  in
1872  was  one  of  the  sixteen  appointed  by  Gov.
Hoffman  on  the  commission  to  revise  the  consti-
tution. He  was  a  fine  classical  scholar,  and  con-
versant with  French,  German,  and  Italian.  He
knew  books  and  authors  almost  as  well  as  he  un-
derstood politics  and  politicians,  and  he  was  a  fine
conversationalist.  His  death  evoked  expressions
of  sorrow  even  from  his  political  opponents.

CASSIN,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Philadelphia
about  1758 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  S.  C,  24  March,  1822.
His  father,  an  Irish  gardener  and  dairyman,  came
to  Philadelphia  before  the  revolution.  John  be-
came master  of  a  merchantman  and  was  twice
shipwrecked.  He  was  appointed  from  the  mer-
chant service  a  lieutenant  in  the  navy,  13  Nov.,
1799,  became  master,  2  April,  1806,  and  post-cap-
tain, 3  July,  1812.  He  commanded  the  naval  forces
in  the  Delaware,  for  the  protection  of  Philadel-
phia, in  the  war  of  1812.— His  son,  Stephen,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  16  Feb.,  1783;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D.
C,  29  Aug.,  1857,  entered  the  navy  as  midship-
man, 21  Feb.,  1800 ;  became  a  lieutenant,  12  Feb.,
1807;  master,  11  Sept.,  1814;  captain,  3  March,
1825.  He  served  with  distinction  in  the  war  with
Tripoli,  commanded  the  "  Ticonderoga "  in  Mac-
donough's  victory  on  Lake  Champlain,  and  was  re-
warded by  congress  with  a  gold  medal  for  bravery
in  that  action.  He  was  a  terror  to  the  pirates  that
infested  the  West  Indies,  and  captured  four  of  their
vessels  on  28  and  29  Sept.,  1822.

CASSIN,  John,  ornithologist,  b.  near  Chester,
Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1813;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  10
Jan.,  1869.  He  became  a  resident  of  Philadelphia
in  1834,  and,  after  several  years  spent  in  mercan-
tile pursuits  and  in  official* duties,  devoted  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  to  the  study  of  ornithology.
He  contributed  descriptions  of  new  species  of
birds,  and  synoptical  reviews  of  various  families,
to  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  sciences.  He  is
the  author  of  the  article  on  "  Birds  "  in  "  Outlines


554


CASTILLA


CASTILLO  Y  LANZAS


in  General  Zoology  "  (New  York,  1851),  and  "  De-
scriptions of  all  North  American  Birds  not  given
by  Former  American  Authorities"  (Philadelphia,
1858),  containing  descriptions  of  fifty  species  not
given  by  Audubon.  Much  of  his  work  is  contained
in  the  U.  S.  government  reports,  and  in  that  con-
nection he  wrote  "  Ornithology  of  the  U.  S.  Explor-
ing Expedition  "  (Washington,  1845) ;  "  Ornithology
of  Grillies's  Astronomical  Expedition  to  Chili"
(1855) ;  "  Ornithology  of  the  Japan  Expedition  "
(1856) ;  and  the  chapters  on  rapacious  and  wad-
ing birds  in  the  "  Explorations  and  Survey  for  a
Railroad  Route  from  the  Mississippi  to  the  Pacific
Ocean  "  (1858).  His  works  are  valuable  for  the  de-
scription and  classification  of  many  birds  not  given
in  the  previous  works  of  Audubon  and  Wilson.

CASTILLA,  Ramon  (cas-teel'-ya),  Peruvian
soldier,  b,  in  Tarapaca,  30  Aug.,  1797;  d.  in  Tivi-
liche,  25  May,  1867.  He  entered  the  Spanish  army
in  1816,  and  was  made  lieutenant  in  1820.  Soon
afterward  he  joined  the  army  of  independence,  par-
ticipating in  the  battles  of  Junin  and  Ayacucho,
and  was  made  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1830  he  went
to  Lima,  and  was  appointed  chief  of  staff  of  the
army.  He  was  made  brigadier-general  in  1834  by
Orbegozo,  the  provisional  president,  whom  he  sup-
ported, taking  part  in  the  battles  of  Yanacocha,  13
Aug.,  1835,  and  Socabaya,  7  Feb.,  1836,  until  the
latter  surrendered  his  independence  by  the  treaty
with  Santa  Cruz,  president  of  Bolivia.  He  then
fled  to  Chili,  and  in  1837  joined  the  army  of  the
Peruvian  patriots  who  marched  against  Santa
Cruz.  Castilla  was  second  leader  of  the  vanguard
at  the  attack  on  Lima  and  the  defeat  of  Orbegozo,
and  made  common  cause  with  Gamarra,  who  was
proclaimed  president  by  the  patriots,  while  Castilla
was  appointed  minister  of  war.  In  1841  he  was
second  in  command  of  the  Peruvian  army  that  in-
vaded Bolivia,  and  was  annihilated  at  Ingavi,  18
Nov.,  1841,  where  Gamarra  perished.  On  his  re-
turn he  conspired  against  the  governments  of  Tor-
rico  and  Yidal,  in  1844  overthrew  the  dictator
Vivaneo,  and  in  1845  was  elected  president  of  Peru,
serving  till  1851.  Then,  for  the  first  time,  Peru
experienced  tranquillity  for  six  years,  anarchy
being  crushed,  and  parliamentary  liberty,  individ-
ual rights,  and  the  public  credit  restored.  The
administration  of  his  successor,  Echenique,  having
become  unpopular,  Castilla  began  a  revolution  at
Arequipa,  overcame  Echenique,  and  entered  Lima
in  1854  as  supreme  ruler  of  the  country.  In  this
capacity  he  made  many  reforms,  the  most  impor-
tant of  which  were  the  abolition  of  slavery,  of  the
tribute  of  the  Indians,  special  military  legislation,
ecclesiastical  tithes,  and  the  penalty  of  death.  But
his  rule  was  arbitrary,  and  by  corrupt  means  he
packed  the  congress,  which  re-elected  him  president
in  1858,  and  in  1860  proclaimed  a  new  constitution,
which  established  universal  suffrage  and  prohibit-
ed every  religion  except  the  Catholic.  In  1861  he
made  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  annex  Bolivia  to
Peru.  At  last,  weary  of  government  cares,  he  re-
tired, and  in  1862  was  succeeded  as  president  by
Gen.  San  Roman,  who  was  followed  in  1863  by
Pezet.  Castilla,  having  assumed  a  hostile  atti-
tude toward  the  latter,  was  arrested  in  1865,  but
soon  gained  his  liberty,  and  joined  the  movement
under  Prado.  In  1867  he  headed  an  insurrection
against  Prado  in  Tarapaca,  and  was  on  his  way  to
Arica  when  he  died.

CASTILLO,  Bernardo  Diaz  del,  soldier,  b.  in
Medina-del-Campo,  Spain,  toward  the  end  of  the
15th  century;  d.  in  Mexico.  He  was  one  of  the
adventurers  that  accompanied  Cortes  to  Mexico  in
1519,  where  he  distinguished  himself  by  his  bra-


very. He  remained  in  the  country  after  the  con-
quest, having  been  allotted  extensive  lands.  He
says  in  his  work  that  he  had  taken  part  in  one
hundred  and  nineteen  battles,  and  had  been  so
habituated  to  sleep  in  his  armor  that  even  in  time
of  peace  he  could  not  lay  it  aside  at  night.  On
reading  the  "  Chronicle  of'  Gomara  "  (1552),  he  de-
termined to  become  an  author,  being  indignant
that  that  writer  had  not  mentioned  either  himself
or  his  companions,  biit  had  attributed  all  the  glory
to  Cortes.  His  book  was  not  published  until  long
after  his  death,  when  a  monk  of  the  order  of
Mercy  discovered  it  hidden  away  in  a  library.  Its
title  is  "  Historia  verdadera  de  la  Conquika  de
Nueva  Espana"  (Madrid,  1632).  Although  Cas-
tillo's style  is  that  of  an  unlettered  soldier,  his
work  is  full  of  interesting  details.  He  estimates
the  Indian  population  as  much  less  than  in  the
history  of  Gomara,  and  does  not  diminish  the
losses  of  the  Spaniards.  He  has  been  accused  of
jealousy  of  Cortes,  which  would  render  him  par-
tial ;  but  he  only  blames  that  leader  when  his  acts
were  really  culpable,  and  in  some  cases  he  even
tries  to  defend  them.

CASTILLO,  Juan  de,  monk,  b.  in  Chili  about
1615 ;  d.  in  Santiago,  Chili,  in  1675.  He  entered
the  Dominican  order  at  the  age  of  thirteen,  and
immediately  after  his  ordination  was  sent  to  gov-
ern the  convent  of  Santa  Fe  on  the  banks  of  the
Parana.  On  his  return  from  Santa  Fe,  he  was
unanimously  elected  prior  of  the  great  convent  of
Santiago.  He  rebuilt  the  convent  and  church,
which  had  been  shattered  by  an  earthquake.  In
1654  he  was  elected  provincial.  After  a  visitation
of  all  the  convents  of  his  order  in  Chili,  he  retired
to  the  convent  of  Santiago,  where  the  rest  of  his
life  was  passed  in  asceticism  and  mortification.

CASTILLO  Y  ARTEAGA,  Diego  del,  Span-
ish-American archbishop,  b.  in  Navarre  in  1605;  d.
in  Oviedo,  about  1670.  He  came  to  America  after
his  ordination,  was  first  stationed  at  Carthagena,
and  afterward  appointed  bishop  of  Trujillo,  where
he  remained  until  he  was  created  archbishop  of
Santa  Fe.  He  was  an  accomplished  Indian  scholar,
published  an  "  Alphabetum  Marianum  "  in  1669,
and  was  also  the  author  of  a  work  entitled  "  De
Ornatu  et  Yestibus  Aronis."

CASTILLO  Y  LANZAS,  Joaquin  M.  (cas-
teel'-vo  e  lahn'-thas),  Mexican  diplomatist,  b.  in
Jalapa,  11  Nov.,  1801 ;  d.  11  July,  1878.  He  re-
ceived his  education  in  English  colleges,  the  Uni-
versity of  Glasgow,  and  the  Seminary  of  Yergara,
Spain,  returning  to  Mexico  in  1822.  He  had  al-
ready filled  several  public  offices  when  President
Gomez  Pedraza  appointed  him  his  private  secre-
tary in  1833,  and  at  once  sent  him  to  the  United
States  as  the  representative  of  Mexico.  After  re-
maining in  Washington  as  charge  d'affaires  until
1837,  he  was  elected  to  congress  in  1845,  and  in
the  following  year  was  appointed  secretary  of  state
under  Paredes's  administration,  being  also  Mexi-
can minister  to  England  from  1853  till  1858.  He
represented  the  state  of  Mexico  in  the  Federal
congress  in  1857;  then  joined  Gen.  Tornel  as  pleni-
potentiary to  negotiate  a  treaty  of  neutrality  with
the  U.  S.  minister,  Alfred  Conkling,  on  the  Tehu-
antepec  canal,  and  several  years  afterward  (186(5;
negotiated  a  treatv  of  commerce  and  navigation
with  the  government  of  Great  Britain.  Castillo  y
Lanzas  filled  manv  other  important  offices  in  Mexi-
co, belonged  to  the  Spanish  academy  and  several
Mexican  and  British  learned  societies,  was  the
editor  of  the  first  newspaper  that  was  published
in  Yera  Cruz  after  the  independence  of  1825.  and
left  a  volume  of  poems,  "Ocios  Juveniles"  (Phila-


CASTLE


CASTRO


555


delphia,  1835),  and  a  work  entitled  "  Elementos
de  Geo£:nifia."

CASTLE,  Frederick  Albert,  physician,  b.  in
Fabius,  N.  Y.,  29  April,  1842.  lie  received  a  com-
mon-school education  in  his  native  town,  and  in
the  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  high  school,  after  which  he
matriculated  in  the  Albany  medical  college.  Soon
after  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  became  a  medical
cadet  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  was  stationed  at  the
Carver  general  hospital  in  Washington  during
1862-'3.  From  1863  till  the  close  of  the  war
he  was  acting  assistant  surgeon  in  the  navy,  and
served  on  board  the  "  Gen.  Bragg,"  a  steamer  at-
tached to  the  lower  Mississippi  squadron.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Bellevue  hospital  medical  college
in  1866;  and  soon  afterward  settled  in  New  York
city.  Dr.  Castle  has  held  various  hospital  appoint-
ments, and  has  been  connected  with  the  Bellevue
hospital  medical  college  as  assistant  demonstrator
of  anatomy,  instructor  in  the  summer  course,  as-
sistant to  the  chair  of  obstetrics  and  diseases  of
women  and  children,  lecturer  on  diseases  of  infants
and  obstetric  operations,  and  on  pharmacology.
Besides  being  a  member  of  numerous  medical  and
pharmaceutical  societies,  he  was  one  of  the  com-
mittee of  revision  and  publication  of  the  Pharma-
copcEia  of  the  United  States  in  1880.  He  was  on
the  editorial  staif  of  "  The  Medical  Record  "  from
1872  till  1876,  and  edited  "  New  Remedies  "  from
October,  1873,  until  it  became  the  "  American  Drug-
gist," of  which  he  continues  to  be  the  editor.  He
has  published  papers  and  editorial  articles  in  "  The
Medical  Record,"  "Boston  Medical  and  Surgical
Journal,"  and  other  journals,  and  also,  with  Dr.
Leroy  M.  Yale,  a  "Report  on  the  Epidemic  of
Cholera  on  Blackwell's  Island  in  1866,"  and  has
edited  "  Wood's  Household  Practice  of  Medicine,
Hygiene,  and  Surgery  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,  1880),
and  the  first  and  second  decennial  catalogues  of
Bellevue  hospital  medical  college.

CASTLE,  John  Harvard,  clergyman,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  27  March,  1830.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Lewisburg  university.  Pa.,  in  1851,  and  at
the  Rochester  theological  seminary  in  1853.  In
1866  the  Lewisburg  university  bestowed  upon  him
the  degree  of  D.  D.  After  pastorates  in  Pottsville,
Pa.,  Newburg,  N.  Y.,  and  one  of  fourteen  years  in
Philadelphia,  he  removed  to  Toronto,  Canada,
where  he  became  pastor  of  the  Bond  street  Baptist
church  in  1873,  and  in  1881  was  called  to  the  presi-
dency of  McMaster  hall,  the  Baptist  theological
seminary  founded  in  that  city.  He  has  travelled
extensively  in  Europe.

CASTORENA  Y  UESLA,  Juan  I^nacio  (cas-
to-ray'-nah  e  oor-soo'-ah),  Mexican  bishop,  b.  in
Zacatecas  in  1668 ;  d.  in  Merida,  Yucatan,  in  1733.
He  studied  in  the  College  of  San  Ildefonso,  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Mexico,  went  to
Spain,  and  received  the  degree  of  theological  doc-
tor at  Avila.  On  his  return  to  the  city  of  Mexico
he  was  appointed  canon  of  the  cathedral  and  pro-
fessor of  Holy  Scriptures,  vicar-general  of  the
convents  of  nuns,  and  also  honorary  chaplain  and
preacher  to  Charles  II.  He  was  made  bishop  of
Yucatan  in  1729,  and  his  consecration  took  place
in  the  city  of  Mexico  in  the  following  year.  Cas-
torena  may  be  called  the  first  journalist  of  Mexico,
as  he  really  was  the  first  that  published  a  newspa-
per there  in  1720.  Pie  left  a  large  number  of  print-
ed and  manuscript  works,  all  of  them  on  religious
subjects,  his  *'  Comentaria  in  Evangelicum  Vatem
Esaiam  "  being  the  most  important.

CASTRIES,  Armand  Charles  Augustin,
Due  de  (kas'-tre'),  soldier,  b.  in  April,  1756;  d.  in
1842. He  was  a  son  of  the  Marshal  de  Castries,


and  commanded  a  regiment  under  Rochambeau  in
the  United  States,  where  he  was  known  as  the
Count  de  Charlus.  He  was  made  brigadier-general
in  1782,  and  received  the  title  of  Duke  de  Castries
in  1784.  He  was  deputy  to  the  national  assembly
in  1789,  and  defended  the  monarchy  with  such  en-
ergy as  occasioned  a  duel  with  Charles  Lameth.
In  1794  he  raised  a  corps  of  emigrants  in  the  pay
of  England,  returned  to  France  with  Louis  XVIII.,
and  was  made  a  peer  and  lieutenant-general.  He
was  governor  of  Rouen  when  Napoleon  returned
from  Elba,  in  March,  1815,  and  made  strenuous
efforts  in  the  cause  of  royalty.

CASTRO,  A^ustin,  Mexican  Jesuit,  b.  in  Cor-
dova, state  of  Vera  Cruz,  24  Jan.,  1728 ;  d.  in  Bo-
logna, Italy,  in  1790.  He  studied  in  the  cities  of
Puebla  and  Mexico,  and  was  noted  for  his  extra-
ordinary accomplishments  as  a  student.  Having
entered  the  Jesuit  order  in  1748,  he  was  ordained
priest  at  Puebla,  and  thence  went  to  the  city  of
Mexico,  distinguishing  himself  as  an  orator.  He
then  taught  philosophy  at  Queretaro.  and  intro-
duced in  his  lessons  the  teachings  of  Cartesius,
Leibnitz,  and  Newton.  He  also  served  his  order,
and  was  a  professor  at  Valladolid,  Oaxaca,  Guada-
lajara, and  Merida,  where  he  established  the  first
chair  of  canon  and  civil  law.  After  the  expulsion
of  the  Jesuits  from  the  Spanish  dominions,  Castro
went  to  Italy,  settled  at  Ferrara,  and  was  rector  of
the  Jesuits  for  twenty-three  years.  He  wrote
many  works,  mostly  in  verse,  noted  for  their  clas-
sical character  and  correct  style.  His  works  in
prose  include  "  Tratado  de  la  Prosodia,"  "  Historia
de  la  Literatura  Mejicana  despues  de  la  Conquista,"
and  "  Juicio  sobre  las  Odas  de  Sor  Juana  Ines  de
la  Cruz."  Among  those  in  verse  are  "  Hernan
Cortes,"  an  epic ;  "  Cartas,"  a  treatise  on  the  art
of  poetry,  and  translations  into  Spanish  verse  of
Fenelon's  "  Telemachus,"  Phoedre's  "  Fables,"  Sen-
eca's "  Troades,"  several  tragedies  of  Euripides,
satires  of  Juvenal  and  Horace,  some  odes  of  Ana-
creon.  and  the  two  of  Sappho,  and  many  works  of
Virgil,  Milton,  Young,  Pope,  and  Ossian.

CASTRO,  Andres,  Spanish  grammarian,  b.  in
Burgos  about  1500;  d.  in  Toluca  in  1577.  He  en-
tered the  Franciscan  order,  and  was  for  many  years
a  missionary  in  Spanish  America,  prineipallv  in  New
Spain  (Mexico).  He  made  a  special  and  thorough
study  of  the  languages  used  by  the  Mexican  In-
dians, and  wrote  several  books,  those  better  known
being  "Arte  de  aprender  las  lenguas  mejicana  y
matlazinca";  "Vocabulario  de  la  lengua  matla-
zinca  "  ;  "  Sermones,"  and  "  Doctrina  cristiana,"
these  two  latter  works,  the  sermons  and  the  cate-
chism, in  the  Matlazinca  language.

CASTRO,  Henri,  pioneer,  b.  in  France  in  1786;
d.  in  Monterey,  Mexico,  in  1861.  Pie  was  of  Portu-
guese descent,  was  an  officer  of  the  Paris  national
guard  in  1814,  and,  after  the  overthrow  of  Napo-
leon, came  to  the  United  States,  where  he  was
naturalized,  and  appointed  in  1827  Neapolitan  con-
sul at  Providence,  R.  I.  He  went  to  Paris  in  1838
as  a  partner  in  the  banking-house  of  Lafitte,  and
in  1842  became  consul-general  in  that  city  for
Texas.  Having  received  a  grant  of  land  on  the
banks  of  Medina  river,  he  began  in  1840  to  send
out  emigrants  to  Galveston,  and  in  1844  established
a  settlement  on  the  site  of  the  present  town  of
Castroville.  During  the  next  two  years  founded
Quihi  and  Vandenberg.  The  number  of  his  emi-
grant vessels  amounted  in  1846  to  twenty-six,
which  brought  over  485  families  and  457  single
persons,  chiefly  Alsatians,  In  1847  he  founded
Dhanis.  His  settlements  subsequently  conj^aited
Medina  co.,  with  Casbroville


556


CASTRO


CASWELL


CASTRO,  Juan,  the  assumed  name  of  a  Cuban
poet,  b.  near  Matanzas  in  1799.  His  parents  were
negro  house-servants,  and  he  was  born  in  slavery.
While  still  a  boy  he  exhibited  skill  in  needle-work
and  drawing,  and  produced  some  portraits.  He
became  the  body-servant  of  a  young  gentleman  of
scholarly  habits,  from  whom  he  learned  to  read,  and
then  taught  himself  to  write.  "  I  bought  ink,  pens,
and  penknife,  and  some  very  fine  paper;  then,
taking  some  of  the  bits  of  written  paper  thrown
away  by  my  master,  I  put  a  piece  of  them  under
one  of  my  fine  sheets  and  traced  the  characters,  in
order  to  accustom  my  hand  to  make  letters.  .  .  .
In  vain  I  was  forbidden  to  write ;  for,  when  every-
body went  to  bed,  I  used  to  light  a  piece  of  candle,
and  then  at  my  leisure  I  copied  the  best  verses,
thinking  that,  if  I  could  imitate  these,  I  would
become  a  poet."  Some  of  his  original  sonnets  fell
into  the  hands  of  Dr.  Coronado,  who  called  atten-
tion to  their  merit.  Juan  was  thirty-eight  years
old  when  several  gentlemen,  who  had  become
aware  of  his  talents,  made  up  a  purse  of  $800,
purchased  his  freedom,  and  enabled  him  to  pub-
lish his  poems.  After  that  he  supported  himself
in  Havana  as  a  tailor,  as  a  house-painter,  and
finally  as  a  head  cook.  He  produced  an  autobiog-
raphy, which  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  slave-life  in
Cuba.  The  second  half  of  the  manuscript  was
stolen  and  probably  destroyed :  but  the  first  half
was  published  by  Dr.  R.  R.  Madden  (London,  1840),
together  with  English  translations  of  some  of  his
poems,  the  originals  of  which  are  in  Spanish.  The
finest  of  them  is  "  The  Clock  that  Grains."

CASTRO,  Ramon  de,  Spanish  soldier,  flour-
ished in  the  latter  part. of  the  18th  century.  On
17  April,  1797,  an  English  fleet  of  sixty  vessels,
commanded  by  Admiral  Henry  Harvey,  with  a
landing  force  of  about  7,000  men  under  Sir  Ralph
Abercrombie,  attacked  the  city  of  St.  John  of
Porto  Rico,  laying  siege  to  the  place  by  sea  and
land.  Castro  had  but  a  limited  number  of  Span-
ish troops,  with  hardly  any  military  experience  and
little  ammunition  and  stores :  but  he  displayed  so
much  ability,  bravery,  and  tenacity  during  the  de-
fence that  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  siege,  1
May,  1797,  the  English  were  forced  to  retreat  and
re-embark  in  great  haste,  leaving  their  artillery,  as
well  as  many  wounded  and  prisoners,  in  the  hands
of  the  Spaniards.  The  Spanish  government  re-
warded him  with  great  honors,  and  his  defence  of
Porto  Rico  has  become  a  famous  one  in  the  history
of  the  Antilles.

CASTRO,  Vaca  de,  Spanish  officer,  b.  at  Leon ;
d.  in  1558.  He  was  a  judge  of  the  royal  court  at
Valladolid,  when,  in  1540,  Charles  V.  sent  him  as
governor  to  Peru,  then  disturbed  by  the  rebellion
of  Almagro.  In  1542  a  battle  was  fought  at  Chu-
pas,  in  which  Almagro  was  defeated  and  taken,
and,  by  order  of  Castro,  executed  on  the  spot  with
some  of  his  followers.  Castro  was  superseded  in
1544,  and  returned  to  Spain,  where  he  was  impris-
oned for  five  years  at  the  castle  of  Arevalo.  He
was  declared  innocent  by  the  council  of  Indies,
and  subsequentlv  appointed  counsellor  of  Castile.

CASTRO  LOPES,  Antonio  de,  Brazilian  states-
man, b.  in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  5  Jan.,  1827.  He  fin-
ished his  medical  studies  in  1848,  and  in  1849  was
appointed  professor  of  mathematics  in  the  Impe-
rial college  of  Pedro  II.  He  was  a  member  of  the
provincial  assembly  of  Rio  Janeiro  in  1854,  and
also  minister  of  finance,  and  in  1859  minister  of
foreign  affairs.  He  has  founded  and  organized
several  financial  institutions  and  commercial  asso-
ciations, at  the  same  time  distinguishing  himself
fts  a  scientific,  medical,  and  classical  author. His


works  include  "  Dissertagao  acerca  da  utilidade  da
dor,"  "  Abamoocara,"  "  0  mundo  e  o  progresso  "
"Epitome  historias  sacrae,"  "Musa  latina."  "0
medico  do  povo."  "  Memoria  sobre  a  possibilidade
e  eonveniencia  de  supressao  dos  annos  bisextos,"
"  Conferencia  sobre  a  homeopathia,"  "  Un  sonho
astronomico,"  and  "Diccionario  classico  latino  e
portuguez."

CASWALL,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Yateley,
Hampshire,  England,  in  1810;  d.  in  Franklin,  Pa.'
17  Dec,  1870.  He  was  the  son  of  a  clergyman',
came  to  the  United  States  in  1828,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Kenyon  in  1830.  He  became  a  clergyman
of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church  in  1837,  being
the  first  ordained  graduate  of  the  college.  After
acting  as  minister  and  professor  of  theology  in  the
United  States  and  Canada,  he  returned  to  England
in  1842,  and,  the  validity  of  his  orders  having  been
recognized  by  act  of  parliament,  became  vicar  of
Figheldean,  Wiltshire,  proctor  for  the  diocese  of
Sarum,  and  prebendary  of  Salisbury  cathedral.
He  visited  this  country  in  1854,  and  was  given  the
degree  of  D.  D.  by  Trinity  college,  Hartford.  He
had  previously  been  given  that  of  M.  A.  by  Ken-
yon college  in  1834,  and  by  Oxford  in  1854.  Dr.
Caswall  came  again  to  this  country  about  1868,
"and  remained  here  till  his  death.  Among  his
works  are :  "  America  and  the  American  Church  "
(London,  1839) ;  "  The  City  of  the  Mormons "
(1842) ;  "  The  Prophet  of  the  Nineteenth  Century"
(1843) ;  "  Scotland  and  the  Scottish  Church  "  (1853) ;
and  "The  Western  World  Revisited"  (1854).

CASWELL,  Alexis,  educator,  b.  in  Taunton,
Mass.,  29  Jan.,  1799;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  8
Jan.,  1877.  He  studied  at  the  Bristol  academy  in
Taunton,  and  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1822,
standing  first  in  his  class.  In  1823  he  was  ap-
pointed a  tutor  in  Columbian  university,  Washing-
ton, and  in  1825  became  professor  of  ancient
languages  in  that  institution.  At  this  time  he
also  pursued  a  course  of  theology  under  Dr.  Will-
iam Stoughton,  and,  having  received  a  license  to
preach,  frequently  conducted  services  in  the  col-
lege chapel,  and  occasionally  preached  in  Wash-
ington. In  1827  he  resigned  his  professorship
and,  after  receiving  ordination  in  October  of  that
year,  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  congregation  in
Halifax,  N.  S.  During  the  following  year  he  de-
clined the  professorship  of  mathematics  and  natu-
ral philosophy  in  Waterville  college ;  but  in  July
of  1828  he  accepted  an  invitation  to  the  1st  Bap-
tist church,  Providence,  and  soon  afterward  be-
came professor  of  mathematics  and  natural  phi-
losophy at  Brown.  All  of  the  scientific  instruction
was  then  included  in  this  chair,  which  he  occupied
for  thirty-five  years,  serving  also  in  1840-1  as
president  p-o  tem.  during  the  absence  of  Dr.  Fran-
cis Wayland  in  Europe.  He  resigned  his  profes-
sorship in  1863,  but  five  years  later  was  again  called
into  active  service,  and'  elected  president  of  the
university  on  7  Feb.,  1868.  This  office  he  held
until  1872,  when  he  resigned,  just  fifty  years  from
the  date  of  his  graduation.  On  his  retirement  he
was  at  once  chosen  a  trustee,  and  in  1875  a  fellow
of  the  university.  The  excellent  condition  of  the
library  is  largely  the  result  of  his  earnest  work;
the  museum  of  natural  history  owes  its  establish-
ment to  his  plans  and  efforts ;  the  present  alumni
association  was  founded  by  him,  and  he  became  its
first  president.  He  was  long  associated  in  the
management  of  the  Providence  athenaeum,  for
eight/  years  one  of  its  directors,  and  its  vice-presi-
dent for  a  similar  length  of  time.  For  manv  years
he  was  connected  in  various  capacities  with  Tsewton
theological  institution,  and  was  the  third  president


CASWELL


CATHCART


557


of  its  board  of  trustees.  He  was  prominent  in  the
Baptist  missionary  union,  and  its  president  during
1867-9,  and  also  one  of  the  original  trustees  of
Rhode  Island  hospital,  and  its  president  from  1875
until  his  death.  In  1850  he  became  an  associate
fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and
sciences,  in  1849  was  elected  a  member  of  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  and  in  1857  became  its  vice-president.  He
was  also  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  Nation-
al academy  of  sciences  established  by  act  of  con-
gress in  1863.  Prof.  Caswell  delivered  four  lec-
tures on  astronomy  before  the  Smithsonian  insti-
tution in  1858,  which  were  published  in  the  annual
report  for  that  year.  His  meteorological  observa-
tions, made  at  'Providence,  of  which  monthly  ab-
stracts appeared  in  the  Providence  "  Journal,"  were
published  as  "  Meteorological  Observations  at
Providence,  R.  I.,  1831-1860  "  (Washington,  1860 ;
enlarged  ed.,  1831-1876,  1882).  He  was  also  the
author  of  numerous  addresses,  including  a  Phi
Beta  Kappa  oration  on  "  The  Mathematical  Studies
as  a  Branch  of  Liberal  Education,"  and  also  "  A
Memoir  of  John  Barstow  "  (1864).

CASWELL,  Richard,  soldier,  b.  in  Maryland,
8  Aug.,  1729 ;  d.  in  Fayetteville,  N".  C,  20  Nov.,
1789.  He  removed  to  North  Carolina  in  1746,  was
for  some  years  employed  in  the  public  offices,  and
afterward  practised  law  successfully.  He  was  a
member  of  the  colonial  assembly  from  1754  till
1771,  and  speaker  of  the  house  of  commons  in
1770-1.  Identifying  himself  with  the  patriots  at
the  beginning  of  the  revolution,  he  became  a  colo-
nel of  militia,  was  a  delegate  to  congress  in  1774-'5,
and  treasurer  of  the  southern  district  of  North
Carolina  in  1775.  For  three  years  he  was  president
of  the  provincial  congress,  which  framed  the  state
constitution  in  November,  1776,  and  was  governor
of  the  state  during  1777-9.  On  27  Feb.,  1776,  he
commanded  at  the  battle  of  Moore's  Creek,  defeat-
ing a  large  body  of  loyalists  under  Gen.  McDonald,
who  was  made  prisoner — a  victory  of  great  benefit
to  the  patriot  cause  in  North  Carolina,  for  which
he  received  the  thanks  of  congress  and  the  appoint-
ment of  major-general  for  the  district  of  Newbern.
In  1780  he  led  the  state  troops  in  the  disastrous
battle  of  Camden.  He  was  chosen  speaker  of  the
senate,  and  comptroller-general  in  1782 ;  was  again
governor  in  1784-'6,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the  con-
vention that  framed  the  federal  constitution  in
1787.  In.  1789  he  was  elected  to  the  state  senate
from  Dobbs  co.,  and  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  in  November  ratified  the  federal  consti-
tution. When  the  assembly  met  he  was  chosen
speaker,  and  while  presiding,  5  Nov.,  1789,  was
struck  with  paralysis. — His  son,  William,  served
through  the  war  of  the  revolution,  and  was  a  briga-
dier-general of  militia  in  1781.

CATENHUSEN,  Ernst,  musician,  b.  in  Ratze-
burg,  duchy  of  Lauenburg,  Germany,  in  1841.  He
studied  philosophy  and  history  at  Gottingen,  and
music  under  Ignaz  Lachner.  From  1862  till  1881
he  was  musical  conductor  at  a  number  of  German
opera-houses  successively.  In  the  latter  year  he
became  musical  conductor  of  the  Thalia  theatre  in
New  ?ork.  In  1884  he  accepted  the  place  of  con-
ductor of  the  Milwaukee  musical  societv.

CATESBY,  Mark,  naturalist,  b.  m  England
about  1680 ;  d.  in  London,  England,  24  Dec,  1749.
A  taste  for  natural  history  induced  him,  after
studying  the  natural  sciences  in  London,  to  make
a  voyage  to  Virginia,  where  he  arrived  23  April,
1712,  and  was  occupied  in  collecting  its  various
productions.  He  returned  to  England  in  1719  with
a  rich  collection  of  plants,  but,  at  the  suggestion  of


Sir  Hans  Sloane  and  other  eminent  naturalists,  re-
embarked  for  America  with  the  professed  purpose
of  describing,  delineating,  and  collecting  the  most
curious  natural  objects  in  this  country.  He  ar-
rived on  23  May,  1722,  explored  the  lower  part  of
South  Carolina,  and  afterward  lived  for  some  time
among  the  Indians  at  Fort  Moore,  on  Savannah
river,  300  miles  from  the  sea.  He  made  excursions
into  Georgia  and  Florida,  and,  after  spending  three
years  in  this  country,  visited  the  Bahama  islands.
He  returned  to  England  in  1726,  and  published  in
numbers  "  The  Natural  History  of  Carolina,  Flori-
da, and  the  Bahama  Islands"  (2  vols.,  folio,  1731-
'48 ;  new  ed.,  1754  and  1771).  In  this  work  were
found  the  first  descriptions  of  several  plants  now
cultivated  in  all  European  gardens.  The  figures
were  etched  by  himself  from  his  own  paintings,
and  the  colored  copies  executed  under  his  inspec-
tion. Catesby  was  a  fellow  of  the  royal  society,  to
whose  transactions  he  contributed  a  paper  on
"  Birds  of  Passage  "  (1747),  asserting  the  migration
of  birds  on  his  own  observations.  He  wrote  "  Hor-
tus  Europa3  Americanus  "  (published  posthumous-
ly, 1767),  and  some  other  works  have  been  attribut-
ed to  him.  A  plant  of  the  tetrandrous  class  has
been  called  after  him,  Catesbea,  by  Gronovius.

CATHCART,  Cliarles  W.,  senator,  b.  in  the
island  of  Madeira  in  1809.  After  acquiring  a  good
English  education,  he  followed  the  sea  for  several
years.  In  1831  he  settled  in  La  Porte,  Ind.,  and
became  a  farmer.  For  several  years  he  was  land-
surveyor  for  the  United  States,  and  also  served  as
a  member  of  the  state  assembly.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  on  the  Polk  and  Dallas  ticket  in
1844.  He  was  elected  to  the  29th  congress  on  the
democratic  nomination,  and  re-elected  to  the  30th,
serving  until  March,  1849,  when  he  was  chosen
U.  S.  senator  from  Indiana,  to  fill  the  vacancy
caused  by  the  death  of  James  Whitcomb.  He
served  until  3  March,  1853.

CATHCART,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Lon-
donderry, Ireland,  8  Nov.,  1826.  He  was  nurtured
in  the  Presbyterian  church,  but  became  a  Baptist.
He  received  his  literary  education  at  the  University
of  Glasgow,  Scotland,  and  his  theological  at  Raw-
don  college,  Yorkshire,  England.  He  came  to  the
United  States  in  1853,  and  his  ministerial  work  has
been  performed  chiefly  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.  In
1873  he  received  from  the  University  of  Lewisburg
the  degree  of  D.  D.  He  is  president  of  the  Ameri-
can Baptist  historical  society,  and  is  the  author  of
"  The  Baptists  and  the  American  Revolution."
"  The  Papal  System,"  and  "  The  Baptism  of  the
Ages  and  of  the  Nations."  His  best-known  work
is  "  The  Baptist  Encyclopedia."

CATHCART,  William  Scliaw,  Earl,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Petersham,  England,  17  Sept.,  1755;
d.  in  Cartside,  near  Glasgow,  Scotland,  16  June,
1843.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  ninth  Baron
Cathcart,  and  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Glasgow,  studying  law,  though  without  any  inten-
tion of  practising.  He  entered  the  army  in  June,
1777,  came  to  America,  and  served  with  the  16th
dragoons.  He  was  afterward  aide  to  Gen.  Spencer
Wilson  and  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  served  with  gal-
lantry at  the  storming'  of  Forts  Montgomery  and
Clinton,  and  was  wounded  at  Brandywine  and
Monmouth.  Lord  Cathcart  led  one  section  of  the
"  knights  "  at  the  famous  "  Mischianza  "  or  enter-
tainment given  in  honor  of  Sir  William  Howe  in
Philadelphia  in  May,  1778.  He  raised  and  led  the
Caledonian  volunteers,  afterward  known  as  Tarle-
ton's  British  legion,  became  major  in  the  38th  foot,
13  April,  1779,  and  commanded  that  regiment  in
the  actions  at  Springfield  and  Elizabethtown,  N.J,


558


CATHRALL


CATRON


in  June,  1780.  He  served  as  quartermaster-general
until  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Dalrymple,  was  present  at
the  siege  of  Charleston,  returning  to  England  in
October,  1780.  He  joined  the  Walcheren  expedi-
tion in  1793,  with  the  rank  of  brigadier-general,
served  under  the  Duke  of  York  with  distinction  in
1794,  and  on  his  return  to  England  in  1801  was
made  lieutenant-general.  He  took  his  seat  as  a
representative  Scottish  peer  in  1807,  and  in  the
same  year  became  commander-in-chief  of  the  ex-
pedition against  Copenhagen.  On  its  successful
termination  he  was  made  Viscount  Cathcart  and
Baron  Greenock  in  the  English  peerage,  3  Nov.,
1807.  He  was  made  general  in  1813,  was  minister
to  Russia  from  1813  till  1814,  and  became  Earl
Cathcart  on  16  July,  1814.  He  accompanied  the
Emperor  Alexander  through  the  campaigns  of
1813-'4,  entered  Paris  with  the  allies,  represented
England  at  the  congress  of  Vienna,  and  signed  the
treaty  of  peace  that  followed  Waterloo.  He  was
afterward  again  minister  to  Russia.

CATHRALL,  Isaac,  physician,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1764 ;  d.  23  Feb.,  1819.  He  studied
medicine  in  London,  Edinburgh,  and  Paris,  re-
turned home  early  in  1793,  and  was  taken  with
yellow  fever  in  that  year ;  but,  notwithstanding
this,  remained  at  his  post,  both  at  that  time  and
during  the  prevalence  of  the  disease  from  1797  till
1799,  when  he  even  dissected  the  bodies  of  those
who  had  died  of  the  fever.  He  was  a  surgeon  of
the  city  almshouse  from  1810  to  1816.  He  pub-
lished "Remarks  on  the  Yellow  Fever"  (1794);
"  Buchan's  Domestic  Medicine,  with  Notes  "  (1797) ;
"  Memoir  on  the  Analysis  of  the  Black  Vomit "
(1800,  in  vol.  V.  of  the  "  Transactions  of  the  Ameri-
can Philosophical  Society  "),  and  a  pamphlet  on
yellow  fever  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  Currie  (1802).

CATLIN,  Greorg-e,  painter,  b.  in  Wilkesbarre,
Pa.,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  Jersey  City,  N.  J.,  23  Dec,  1872.
He  studied  law  at  Litchfield,  Conn.,  but  after  a
few  years'  practice  went  to  Philadelphia  and  turned
his  attention  to  drawing  and  painting.  As  an  artist
he  was  entirely  self-taught.  In  1832  he  went  to
the  far  west  and  spent  eight  years  among  the  In-
dians of  Yellowstone  river,  Indian  territory,  Ar-
kansas, and  Florida,  painting  a  unique  series  of
Indian  portraits  and  pictures,  which  attracted
much  attention  on  their  exhibition  both  in  this
country  and  in  Europe.  Among  these  were  470
full-length  portraits  and  a  large  number  of  pictures
illustrative  of  Indian  life  and  customs,  most  of
which  are  now  preserved  in  the  national  museum,
Washington.  In  1852-7  Mr.  Catlin  travelled  in
South  and  Central  America,  after  which  he  lived
in  Europe  until  1871,  when  he  returned  to  the
United  States.  One  hundred  and  twenty-six  of
his  drawings  illustrative  of  Indian  life  were  at  the
Philadelphia  exposition  of  1876.  He  was  the  au-
thor of  "  Notes  of  Eight  Years  in  Europe "  (New
York,  1848) ;  "  Manners,  Customs,  and  Condition
of  the  North  American  Indians"  (London,  1857);
"The  Breath  of  Life,  or  Mai-Respiration"  (New
York,  1861) ;  and  "  0-kee-pa :  A  Religious  Cere-
mony, and  other  Customs  of  the  Mandans  "  (Lon-
don, 1867).

CATON,  John  Dean,  jurist,  b.  in  Monroe,
Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  19  March,  1812.  He  received  an
academical  education  in  Utica  and  Rome,  N.  Y.,  and
in  1833  became  a  lawyer  in  Chicago,  111.  In  1834
he  was  elected  justice  of  the  peace,  the  total  num-
ber of  votes  cast  being  only  229.  He  became  judge
of  the  Illinois  supreme  court  in  1842,  was  made
chief  justice  in  1855,  and  resigned  in  1864,  having
acquired  wealth  in  business.  He  has  travelled  ex-
tensively through  Europe,  China,  and  Japan,  and


^Jf  Oy?^  Ccutcm^


written  "  A  Summer  in  Norway  "  (Chicago,  1875)  •
"Antelope  and  Deer  of  America"  (New  York'
1877);  and  "  Miscellanies  "  (Boston,  1880).  Judge
Caton  has  delivered  many  addresses,  and  contrib-
uted largely  to  the  "Arnerican  Naturalist"  and
other  scientific  journals.  Among  his  papers  is  one
that  was  read  before  the  Chicago  philosophical  so-
ciety on  the  subject  of  "  Matter  and  a  Supreme  In-
telligence "  (Chicago,  1884).

CATON,  Richard,  merchant,  b.  in  England  in
1763 ;  d.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  19  May,  1845. In  1785
he  became  a  merchant  in  Baltimore,  and  in  1790
entered  into  an  association  for  the  manufacture  of
cotton. He  was  par-
ticularly interested  in
geological researches,
and was one of  the  -^^  -

founders  in  1795  of
the  library  company,
whose  collection  was
merged  in  the  library
of  the  Maryland  his-
torical society.  In  No-
vember, 1786,  Mr.  Ca-
ton, who  was  a  tall,
handsome  man  of  fine
presence  and  dignified
carriage,  married  Ma-
ry, daughter  of  Charles
Carroll  of  Carrollton,  a
social  f  avorite,admired
by  Washington  as  her
eldest  daughter  was
admired  by  the  "  Iron  Duke."  Of  their  daughters,
Mary  became  Marchioness  of  Wellesley ;  Elizabeth,
Lady  Stafford;  Louisa,  Duchess  of  Leeds;  and  a
fourth,  the  wife  of  Mr.  John  McTavish,  British  con-
sul at  Baltimore,  whose  son  married  Ella,  youngest
daughter  of  Gen.  Winfield  Scott.  The  three  sisters,
who  resided  in  England,  were  celebrated  for  their
fascination  of  manners,  and  Lady  Wellesley  for
her  beauty  also.  There  is  in  Baltimore  a  portrait
of  Lady  Wellesley  by  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence,  which
is  admirable  alike  in  execution  and  likeness.  Mrs.
Caton's  portrait  is  presented  above.

CATRON,  John,  jurist,  b.  in  Wythe  county,  Va.,
in  1778 ;  d.  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  30  May,  1865.  He
was  educated  in  the  common  schools  of  Virginia,
and  early  developed  a  fondness  for  history.  He
removed  to  Tennessee  in  1812,  and  entered  upon
the  study  of  law,  devoting  to  this  purpose  sixteen
hours  of  the  day  for  nearly  four  years.  After
serving  in  the  New  Orleans  campaign  under  Gen.
Jackson,  he  was  elected  state  attorney  by  the  Ten-
nessee legislature.  He  removed  to  Nashville  in
1818,  and  soon  attained  high  rank  as  a  chancery
lawyer.  He  was  especially  famous  for  enforcing
the  seven  years'  act  of  limitations  in  real  actions.
In  December,  1824,  he  was  chosen  one  of  the  su-
preme judges  of  the  state,  and  was  its  chief  justice
from  1830  till  1836,  when  he  was  retired  in  accord-
ance with  a  provision  of  the  new  state  constitution.
While  on  the  bench  he  did  his  utmost  to  suppress
the  practice  of  duelling,  although  he  had  been  him-
self a  noted  duellist.  He  was  made  an  associate
justice  of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court  in  March,  183 /,
and  held  the  office  till  his  death.  He  was  notea
for  his  familiarity  with  the  laws  applicable  to  cases
involving  titles  to  western  and  southern  lands.
Judge  Catron  was  a  democrat,  but  strongly  op-
posed secession  in  1861,  and  used  his  influence
with  members  of  congress  and  others  to  prevent
the  civil  war.  When  it  came,  he  was  virtuany
banished  from  his  state  for  his  opinions,
turned  and  reopened  court  in  1862.


but  re-


CATTELL


CAUPOLICAN


559


CATTELL,  Alexander  trilmore,  senator,  b.  in
Salem,  N.  J.,  12  Feb.,  1810,  He  received  an  aca-
demical education,  and  when  a  boy  was  a  clerk  in
his  father's  store.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature
in  1840,  was  clerk  of  the  house  of  assembly  in
1841-'2,  and  in  1844  a  delegate  to  the  State  consti-
tutional convention.  He  became  a  merchant  in
Philadelphia  in  1846,  a  director  of  the  mechanics'
bank,  and  a  member  of  the  city  council  from  1848
till  1858.  He  returned  to  New  Jersey  in  1855,  but
continued  his  business  in  Philadelphia.  He  was
one  of  the  first  presidents  of  the  corn  exchange
association  there,  organized  the  corn  exchange
bank  in  1858,  and  was  its  president  from  that  year
till  1871.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  from  New
Jersey  in  1866,  in  place  of  John  P.  Stockton,  who
had  been  unseated,  and  served  till  3  March,  1871,
declining  a  re-election  on  account  of  impaired
health.  He  was  appointed  by  President  Grant  a
member  of  the  first  civil-service  commission,  and
served  two  years.  He  was  financial  agent  of  the
government  in  London  from  1873  till  1874,  and  en-
gaged there  in  refunding  the  government  loans  at
a  lower  rate  of  interest.  While  holding  this  office,
he  opened  negotiations  with  the  governing  com-
mittee of  the  royal  exchange,  and  succeeded  in
altering  the  method  of  quotations  of  exchange
between  the  two  countries,  and  also  of  American
securities,  from  the  old,  inaccurate,  and  confusing
method  to  the  present  simple  and  approximately
accurate  system.  During  the  same  year  he  sug-
gested to  a  syndicate  of  eminent  English  bankers
a  plan  for  the  payment  of  the  Geneva  award  of
$15,500,000  without  disturbance  to  the  rate  of  ex-
change. The  plan  was  adopted  by  both  govern-
ments, and  the  amount  successfully  transmitted
through  Mr.  Cattell's  hands.  He  is  one  of  the
New  Jersey  state  board  of  assessors  charged  with
the  taxation  of  railroad  and  corporate  property,
and  is  the  author  of  the  two  exhaustive  reports  on
railroad  and  other  corporate  taxation,  submitted
to  the  legislature  in  1884  and  1885. — His  brother,
William  Cassidy,  educator,  b.  in  Salem,  N.  J.,
30  Aug.,  1827,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1848,
and  at  Princeton  theological  seminary  in  1852,
where  he  remained  a  year  longer,  pursuing  oriental
studies  under  Prof.  J,  Addison  Alexander.  Dur-
ing 1853-5  he  was  associate  principal  of  Edgehill
seminary,  and  from  1855  till  1860  professor  of
Latin  and  Greek  in  Lafayette  college.  He  then
accepted  a  call  to  the  Pine  street  Presbyterian
church  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  where  he  remained  for
three  years.  In  1863  he  returned  to  Lafayette  as
its  president,  and  in  that  capacity  accomplished  his
great  life-work  as  a  successful  educator.  Through
his  exertions  more  than  $1,000,000  was  obtained
for  the  institution,  extensive  grounds  were  added,
and  commodious  buildings  were  erected.  The
equipments  were  made  of  the  highest  order,  and
the  system  of  instruction  much  enlarged  and  made
thoroughly  elficient.  In  1880  he  was  appointed
superintendent  of  public  instruction  for  Pennsyl-
vania, but  declined  the  oifice.  In  1864  he  became
a  director  of  Princeton  theological  seminary.  He
has  received  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  from
Hanover  college  and  frorn  Princeton,  and  that  of
LL.  D.  from  Wooster.  Dr.  Cattell  has  published
numerous  articles  on  educational  topics,  and  also
many  sermons  and  addresses.  Since  1883  he  has
niade  Philadelphia  his  residence,  where  he  holds
the  office  of  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Presby-
terian board  of  ministerial  relief.

CAUCHON,  Joseph  Edward,  Canadian  au-
thor, b.  in  St.  Rochs,  Quebec,  31  Dec,  1816 ;  d.  in
whitewood,  Northwest territory, 23 Feb.,  1885.


His  ancestor  was  a  member  of  the  "  Conseil  Supe-
rieur,"  who  came  to  Canada  in  1636,  and  whose  son
was  a  judge  of  the  *'  Cour  Royale,"  at  the  Isle  of
Orleans.  Joseph  was  educated  at  the  seminaiy  of
his  native  city,  and  admitted  to  the  bar,  but  never
practised.  He  edited  "  Le  Canadien  "  from  1841  till
1842,  and  in  the  latter  year  founded  "  Le  Journal
de  Quebec,"  which  he  has  conducted  ever  since.
He  was  elected  for  the  county  of  Montmorency  to
the  Canadian  assembly  in  1844,  and  represented
that  constituency  until  the  union  in  1867.  In  1851
he  was  offered  a  seat  in  the  cabinet,  but  declined,
and  in  1852  his  attempt  to  organize  a  French-
Canadian  opposition  failed.  He  was  a  member  of
the  executive  council  and  commissioner  of  crown
lands,  Canada,  from  January,  1855,  till  April,  1857,
in  the  MacNab-Tache  administration,  and  under
his  signature  a  report  was  published  about  the
time  of  his  appointment  attacking  the  monopoly
of  the  Hudson  s  bay  company.  He  was  commis-
sioner of  public  works  in  the  Cartier-Macdonald
administration  from  June,  1861,  till  May,  1862.  In
1867  he  was  called  upon  to  form  a  government  for
the  province  of  Quebec,  a  duty  that  he  failed  to
accomplish,  and  the  same  year  resigned  his  seat  in
the  assembly  on  being  called  to  the  senate,  of  which
body  he  was  speaker  from  November,  1867,  till  July
1872,  when  he  resigned  to  re-enter  the  House  of
Commons.  He  became  a  member  of  the  privy
council  of  Canada,  and  was  president  of  that  body
from  7  Dec,  1875,  till  8  June,  1877,  when  he  was
appointed  minister  of  inland  revenue,  an  oifice
which  he  held  until  his  appointment  as  lieutenant-
governor  of  Manitoba,  on  8  Oct.,  1877.  His  pub-
lished works  are :  "  Notions  elementaires  de  phy-
sique "  (Quebec,  1841) ;  "  ]&tudes  sur  I'union  projectie
des  provinces  de  Britannique  de  I'Amerique  du
Nord "  (1858) ;  and  "  L'union  des  provinces  de
I'Amerique  Britannique  du  Nord  "  (1865).

CAULKINS,  Frances  Mainwaring-.  author,  b.
in  New  London,  Conn.,  in  1796 ;  d.  there,  3  Feb.,
1869.  She  received  the  best  education  the  country
afforded,  and  her  tastes  led  her  to  improve  every
opportunity  for  the  cultivation  of  her  intellectual
faculties.  She  gave  especial  attention  to  historical
research,  and  was  considered  the  best  authority
regarding  the  local  traditions  and  relics  of  New
London  and  Norwich  and  their  vicinity,  a  region
rich  in  colonial  tradition  and  in  mementos  of  the
Indian  tribes.  She  was  for  some  time  editor  of
the  "  Christian  Almanac,"  and  of  other  publica-
tions of  the  American  tract  society.  She  wrote
tracts  for  the  society,  and  "  A  History  of  Norwich,
Conn."  (Norwich,  1845),  and  "  A  History  of  New
London,  Conn.",(New  London,  1852).

CAUPOLICAN  (cow-po-le-can'),  Chilian  ca-
cique, b.  in  Chili  in  the  early  part  of  the  16th
century  ;  d.  in  February,  1558.  During  the  Chilian
war  of  conquest,  several  indecisive  encounters  had
taken  place  between  the  Spaniards  and  the  native
warriors,  when  Caupolican  waited  for  the  Spanish
troops  under  Valdivia  at  the  Tucapel  valley,  and
completely  routed  them,  after  a  long  and  fierce
battle,  2-3  Dec,  1553.  All  the  prisoners  were
sacrificed  by  the  Indians,  and,  in  spite  of  Caupoli-
can's  endeavors  to  save  Valdivia  from  the  massa-
cre, his  Indians  took  the  Spanish  chief  and  cruelly
put  him  to  death.  In  April,  1554,  Caupolican
gained  another  victory  against  Villagran,  who  was
the  successor  of  Valdivia,  and  afterward,  in  the
same  year,  took  several  places  occupied  by  the
Spaniards,  burned  Concepcion,  and  laid  siege  to
Imperial,  but  Villagran  forced  him  to  raise  it.
Garcia  de  Mendoza,  who  succeeded  Villagran  as
governor  of  Chili  in  1557,  continued  the  war,  rout-


660


CAVEN


CELORON  DE  BIENVILLE


ing  Caupolican  at  Mount  Pinto,  near  Coneepcion,
and  in  another  battle,  in  which  the  Indians  lost
over  6,000  men.  Again  Caupolican  attacked  the
Spaniards,  but  was  twice  defeated  at  the  Puren
passes,  January  and  February,  1558.  He  took
refuge  in  the  mountains,  but  was  discovered  and
made  a  prisoner  with  some  other  Indian  chiefs,
sent  to  Caiiete,  and  executed.

CAVEN,  William,  educator,  b.  in  Kirkcolm,
Wigtonshire,  Scotland,  26  Dec,  1830.  He  emi-
grated to  Canada  with  his  father  in  1847,  studied
for  the  ministry  of  the  United  Presbyterian  church
in  their  seminary  at  London,  Ontario,  and  was  or-
dained in  1852.  He  was  appointed  professor  of
exegetical  theology  and  biblical  criticism  in  Knox
college,  Toronto,  in  1866,  and  chairman  of  the  col-
lege board  in  1870.  This  title  was  changed  to  that
of  "principal"  in  1873.  Principal  Caven  was
elected  moderator  of  the  Canada  Presbyterian
church  in  1875,  and  in  1877  he  succeeded  Prof.
Goldwin  Smith  as  president  of  the  Ontario  teach-
ers' association.  He  was  a  promoter  of  the  union
of  the  Presbyterian  churches  in  Canada.

CAVENDISH,  Thomas,  English  navigator,  b.
in  1564 ;  d.  in  1593.  He  inherited  wealth  from  his
father,  who  lived  at  Trimley  St.  Martin,  Suffolk,
but  reduced  himself  to  a  state  of  comparative  pov-
erty by  living  at  court  and  by  his  extravagance.
He  then  determined  to  improve  his  estate  at  the
expense  of  the  Spanish-American  colonists,  and
with  this  purpose,  aided  by  others  who  ha*d  become
interested  in  his  design,  he  fitted  out  three  vessels
of  forty,  sixty,  and  one  hundred  and  twenty  tons,
and  sailed  on  22  July,  1586,  having  the  year'before
gained  experience  by  accompanying  the  expedition
under  Lane  and  Sir  R.  Grenville  to  colonize  Vir-
ginia. They  entered  the  straits  of  Magellan,  6
Jan.,  1587,  and  after  thirty-three  days  succeeded
in  clearing  the  straits,  having  examined  the  coast
during  that  time  and  taken  observations.  On  the
Pacific  coast  they  captured  and  burned  Payta,
Acapulco,  and  other  towns.  Cavendish  secured
his  richest  booty  in  the  capture  of  the  Spanish  gal-
leon "  Santa  Anna,"  of  700  tons,  which,  together
with  a  valuable  cargo,  had  122,000  Spanish  dollars
in  its  stores.  He  then  sailed  from  California,
crossed  the  Pacific  to  the  Ladrone  islands,  went
through  the  Indian  archipelago  and  strait  of  Java,
and  around  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  reaching  Eng-
land on  9  Sept.,  1588,  having  circumnavigated  the
globe  in  a  shorter  time  than  any  preceding  navi-
gator. He  was  knighted  by  Queen  Elizabeth
soon  after  reaching  home,  and  on  26  Aug.,  1591,
sailed  on  another  expedition,  but  stormy  weather,
sickness,  and  a  mutinous  crew  were  the  principal
incidents  until  his  death,  on  the  coast  of  Brazil,  or
on  his  passage  home.  He  rendered  some  service
to  geography  and  topography,  and  wrote  an  ac-
count of  his  first  expedition,  entitled  "  Voyage  to
Magellanica  in  1586."  See  "  Callander's  Voyages  "
(London,  1776).

CAXIAS,  Luis  Alves  de  Lima  (kah-she'-as),
Duke  de,  Brazilian  soldier,  b.  in  Rio  de  Janeiro
about  1800.  He  entered  the  army  while  a  boy,  and
rapidly  rose  to  the  ranks  of  general  and  baron,  and
subsequently  became  marshal,  marquis,  senator,
and  aide-de-camp  of  the  emperor.  He  was  twice
minister  of  war  and  also  president  of  the  council,
exerting  great  political  influence  as  a  conservative
leader.  He  defeated  Rossa  in  1851,  and  command-
ed against  Lopez,  1866-'9.  He  was  superseded  by
the  Count  d'Eu  after  the  capture  of  Asuncion,  and
received  the  title  of  duke.

CEBALLOS,  Jos6  (thay-bal'-yos),  Mexican
soldier,  b.  in  the  city  of  Durango,  i5  March,  1830.


He  first  came  into  notice  during  the  revolution
favoring  the  plan  of  Ayutla.  When  Benito  Juarez
was  president  of  Mexico,  he  gave  Ceballos,  in  1869,
the  command  of  a  regiment  garrisoning  Yucatan'
with  headquarters  at  Merida.  A  few  months
afterward  a  revolt  occurred  among  his  soldiers,
who  divided  into  two  parties.  With  those  who
adhered  to  him  he  overpowered  the  rebels  in  a
three  days'  fight.  Some  merchants  and  property-
owners  appeared  to  have  been  ijnplicated  in  the
revolt,  and  Ceballos,  without  consulting  President
Juarez,  had  them  shot.  Next  year  he  was  ap-
pointed brigadier-general,  and  as  such  commanded
the  federal  troops  of  the  1st  division  in  the  west-
ern states,  continued  the  campaign  against  the
bandit  Losada.  who  had  again  gathered  10,000
Indians  after  his  defeat  by  Corona  at  La  Mojonera.
Lerdo  de  Tejada  having  become  president,  Ceba-
llos was  empowered  to  effect  the  deposition  of
Camarena,  governor  of  Jalisco,  by  force,  which
was  accomplished  after  a  bloody  fight  that  lasted
three  days  between  the  federal  and  state  troops.
Ceballos  remained  at  Jalisco  as  governor  and  mili-
tary chief  till  late  in  1876,  when  Lerdo's  govern-
ment was  deposed  by  Gen.  Diaz;  then  he  joined
Iglesias,  who  had  revolted  against  Lerdo  while
chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court.  Iglesias,
Prieto,  and  Velasco  left  Mexico,  and  Ceballos  went
to  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  but  soon  afterward  departed
for  Guatemala,  where  he  found  himself  in  reduced
circumstances.  President  Barrios  appointed  him
director  of  the  military  school.  While  in  Guate-
mala he  plotted  a  revolution  against  Diaz,  but
suddenly  turned  to  the  side  of  Diaz,  went  to  Mex-
ico, was  restored  to  his  rank,  and  given  the  gover-
norship of  the  federal  district,  which  in  Mexico  is
the  highest  office  after  that  of  president.  Ceballos
is  also  a  senator,  and  is  noted  for  his  enmity  to  the
press,  having  imprisoned  a  number  of  journalists
and  ^students  in  1885-6.

CELESTE  (sa-laysf),  or  CELESTE-ELLIOT
(Madame),  danseuse  and  actress,  b.  in  Paris,  G
Aug.,  1814 ;  d.  in  London  in  1882.  In  childhood
she  became  a  pupil  at  the  Royal  academy,  and  when
but  fifteen  years  of  age  made  a  successful  debut  in
the  United  States,  where  she  married  Henry  EUiot
soon  after  her  arrival.  After  her  husband's  death
she  went  to  England  and  achieved  success  in  Lon-
don. She  subsequentlv  passed  several  years  in  the
United  States  between' 1834  and  1865.  After  1837
she  made  London  her  home,  and  took  part  in  the
dramas  at  Drury  Lane,  the  liaymarket,  Adelphi,
and  other  theatres,  and  also  attained  success  as  a
theatrical  manager.  She  was  noted  as  an  actress
of  pantomime.  Her  most  popular  parts  were  La
Bayadere,  the  French  Spy,  Miami  in  "Green
Bushes,"  Miriam,  and  the  Woman  in  Red.  The
poet  Fitz-Greene  Halleck  was  among  her  admirers,
and  made  her  the  subject  of  several  highly  com-
plimentary stanzas.

CELORON  DE  BIENVILLE,  French  explorer,
b.  about  1715.  He  was  sent,  bv  the  Marquis  de  la
Galissoniere,  governor  of  Canada,  with  subordinate
officers,  cadets,  20  soldiers,  180  Canadians,  and  4o
Cherokees  and  Abanakes,  to  take  possession  for
France  of  the  Ohio  valley  and  prevent  the  English
Ohio  companv  from  acquiring  it  by  right  of  pror
settlement.  The  expedition  left  Lachme  on  lo
June,  1749,  ascended  the  St.  Lawrence,  crossed
Lake  Ontario,  reached  Niagara  on  6  July,  sailea
along  the  south  shore  of  Lake  Erie,  marched  to
the  head- waters  of  the  Alleghany,  and  ascended  Uiar
river  and  the  Ohio.  Finding  English  traders  at  dU-
ferent  points,  Celoron  warned  them  to  withdiaM,
and  wrote  to  the  governor  of  Pennsylvania,  claiming


CENTENO


the  country  as  a  French  possession,  in  accordance
with  the  preliminaries  of  peace  signed  six  months
before.  They  buried  in  different  places  six  leaden
tablets,  with  inscriptions  recording  the  formal  oc-
cupation in  the  name  of  the  French  king.  They
descended  the  Ohio  to  the  mouth  of  the  Great  Mi-
ami, and  thence  crossed  by  land  to  Lake  Erie,  and
reached  Fort  Niagara  on  19  Oct.,  1749.

CENTENO,  I)ie§:o  (then-tay'-no),  Spanish  sol-
dier, b.  in  1505;  d.  in  1549.  He  accompanied  Pi-
zarro  as  an  otllcer  in  the  conquest  of  Peru  and
amassed  a  very  large  fortune,  Centeno  distin-
guished himself  in  the  battle  of  Chupas,  gained  by
Vaca  de  Castro  in  1542  against  young  Almagro,
the  assassin  of  Francisco  Pizarro.  Afterward  he
made  war  against  Gonzalo  Pizarro  for  the  posses-
sion of  Peru,  but  was  utterly  routed  at  Guarina,  or
Huarina,  in  1547.  Four  years  later  he  died  from
the  effects  of  poison  given  to  him  at  a  banquet.

CEPEDA,  Fernando  de  (thay-pay'-da),  author,
b.  near  the  end  of  the  IGth  century^  He  published
in  Mexico,  in  1G87,  an  account  in  Spanish  of  the
foundation  of  that  city,  of  the  great  inundations
that  it  suffered,  and  of  the  canals  designed  and
executed  between  the  years  1558  and  1637.  Its
title  is  "Relacion  del  Sitio  en  que  esta  fundada
la  Ciudad  de  Mexico."  Leon,  in  his  ''  Bibliotheca
Indica,"  says  that  it  was  probably  the  same  author
that  wrote  a  useful  work  entitled  "De  la  Plata
Ensavada,  y  Barras  de  las  Indias."

CERDA,  Alfonso  do  la,  Peruvian  R.  C.  bish-
op, b.  in  Caceres,  Spain ;  d.  in  Chuquisaca,  Peru,
in  1592.  He  emigrated  to  America,  seeking  his
fortune ;  but  the  crimes  of  his  fellow-adventurers
disgusted  him  with  the  world,  and  he  entered  the
convent  of  San  Rosario  in  Lima,  and  took  the
habit  of  the  Dominican  order  in  1545.  He  was
elected  successively  prior  of  the  convents  of  Porto
Bello,  Arequipa,  and  Lima,  then  preacher-general,
and  finally  provincial.  In  this  latter  capacity  he
made  a  thorough  visitation  of  his  province,  and
established  a  rule  that  all  candidates  for  missionary
duty  who  had  not  a  knowledge  of  the  Indian  lan-
guages -  should  be  rejected.  In  1573  he  was  deputed
by  the  Dominicans  of  Peru  to  defend  their  inter-
ests at  Rome.  Pie  was  successful  in  his  mission,
and  returned  to  Spain.  Pie  was  on  the  point  of
embarking  for  Peru  when  news  arrived  of  the
death  of  the  bishop  of  Plonduras.  Philip  II.  nomi-
nated Father  de  la  Cerda  to  the  vacant  see,  and  he
was  consecrated  before  his  departure  for  America.
He  did  not  remain  long  in  Honduras,  as  the  bish-
opric of  Chuquisaca  fell  vacant  and  he  was  trans-
ferred to  it.  Shortly  after  his  elevation  he  found-
ed a  convent  of  his  order  in  Chuquisaca.

CERRACHI,  Guiseppe  (cher-rah'-kee),  Italian
sculptor,  b.  about  1760;  executed  in  1801.  He
came  to  Philadelphia  in  1791  and  made  busts  of
Washington,  Hamilton,  and  other  eminent  men.
Pie  also  made  a  bust  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in
1796,  when  Italy  was  invaded  by  that  general.  In
1800,  having  formed  with  Arena  and  others  a  de-
ign to  assassinate  the  first  consul,  he,  with  the
intention  (as  is  supposed)  of  carrying  out  this  de-
sign, proposed  to  undertake  another  statue  of  him;
JUt  the  plot  was  detected  and  he  was  guillotined.

CESNOLA,Luigi  Palmadi  (ches-no'-la),  archae-
ologist, b.  near  Turin,  Italy,  29  July,  1832.  He
*vas  educated  at  the  Royal  militarv  academy,  and
lerved  in  the  Sardinian  army  during  the  war  in
849,  and  also  was  engaged  in  the  Crimean  war.
n  1860  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  volun-
eered  m  the  militarv  service,  becoming  colonel  of
i^he  4th  New  York  cavalry.  Pie  was  in  the  battle
>i  Aldie,  m  June,  1862,  where  he  was  wounded  and
VOL.  1. — 36


CHABANEL


561


captured.  Afterward  he  was  appointed  U.  S.  con-
sul at  Cyprus,  where  he  made  extensive  archa>o-
logical  examinations  and  acquired  a  large  collec-
tion of  antiquities,  which  in  1873  became  the  jjrop-
erty  of  the  Metropolitan  nmseum  of  art.  During
the  latter  part  of  1873  he  again  visited  Cvi)rus,
and  added  much  to  the  collections  already"  gath-
ered, and  on  his  return  to  New  York  in  1877  was
made  director  of  the  museum.  About  1879  many
adverse  judgments  by  eminent  art  critics,  reflect-
ing on  the  integrity  of  his  collections,  appeared
in  the  New  York  art  journals  and  in  the  daily
press.  These  charges  were  referred  to  a  commit-
tee of  five  well-known  gentlemen,  who,  after  care-
ful examination,  declared  them  groundless.  The
matter  was  afterward  brought  into  the  courts,  and
a  libel  suit  against  Col.  Cesnola  was  instituted  by
Gaston  L.  Feuardent,  which,  after  a  prolonged
trial,  resulted  in  a  disagreement  of  the  jury.  This
case  attracted  great  attention  on  account  of  the
extreme  partisanship  shown  by  the  newspapers
during  the  trial.  He  married  a  daughter  of
Capt.  Samuel  C.  Reid,  who  repelled  with  great  loss
to  the  enemy  the  British  attack  on  his  ship,  the
"  General  Armstrong,"  in  the  harbor  of  Fayal,  in
September,  1814.  Columbia  college  conferred  on
Col.  Cesnola  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1880.  He  is
the  author  of  "  Researches  and  Discoveries  in  Cy-
prus "  (New  York,  1878).

CESPEDES,  Carlos  Manuel  de  (thes'-pay-des),
Cuban  revolutionist,  b.  in  Bayamo,  Cuba,  18  April,
1819;  d.  22  March,  1874.  He  studied  in  Havana
and  in  Spain,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Ma-
drid in  1842.  After  being  implicated  with  Gen.
Prim  in  a  conspiracy  for  the  overthrow  of  the  gov-
ernment, he  returned,  in  1844,  to  his  native  city,
where  he  practised  his  profession  and  cultivated
literature.  Pie  wrote  a  comedy,  "  Las  dos  Dianas,"
and  made  a  metrical  translation  of  several  books
of  Virgil's  "^neid."  In  1852,  on  account  of
political  disturbances,  he  was  confined  for  some
time  in  a  Spanish  man-of-war  at  Santiago  de  Cuba,
and  then  banished  to  a  small  inland  town.  He
was  allowed  to  return  to  Bayamo,  where  he  resided
until  October,  1868.  On  the  9th  of  this  month  he
headed  an  insurrection  in  the  town  of  Yara  against
the  Spanish  government,  and  published  a  manifesto
in  justification  of  his  course.  Soon  the  whole
eastern  part  of  the  island  was  in  arms.  On  18
Oct.,  Cespedes  entered  Bayamo,  which  became  the
seat  of  the  revolutionary  government;  but  on  16
Jan.,  1869,  he  had  to  abandon  it  at  the  approach  of
a  strong  force  under  Gen.  Valmaseda,  and  burned
the  city  before  the  arrival  of  the  Spanish  troops.
Cespedes  went  then  to  the  CamagUey  district,  and
established  the  seat  of  the  revolutionary  govern-
ment in  Guaimaro.  On  10  April,  1869,  a  Cuban
congress  assembled  there  and  framed  a  constitu-
tion for  the  republic  they  were  trying  to  found.
Cespedes  was  made  president  by  acclamation,  and
remained  with  his  cabinet  in  Guaimaro  until  1870,
when  he  was  dislodged  by  the  Spanish  forces  under
Gen.  Puello.  He  then  retired  to  a  more  secluded
and  safe  place,  lost  much  of  his  prestige,  and  in
October,  1873,  was  deposed  from  the  presidency  by
the  Cuban  congress  after  a  short  trial.  The  man-
ner of  his  death  has  never  been  explamed.

CHABANEL,  Natalis,  missionary,  b.  in  France
in  1613.  He  was  ordained  priest,  and  acted  as
professor  of  rhetoric  in  several  colleges  of  the
province  of  Toulouse.  He  was  sent  to  Canada  in
1643,  where  he  studied  the  Algonquin  language,
and  settled  as  a  missionary  among  the  Ilurons.
As  he  felt  a  strong  repugnance  to  the  habits  of  the
Indians,  and  fearing  that  this  disgust  might  result


562


CHABERT


CHADBOURNE


in his  abandoning the  mission,  he made  a  vow-
never  to  leave  them,  which  vow  he  kept  to  the  end.

CHABERT,  Joseph  Bernard,  Mnrquis  de(sha-
bayr),  French  naval  officer,  b.  in  Toulon,  28  Feb.,
1724;  d.  in  Paris,  1  Dec,  1805.  He  entered  the  navy
in  1741,  and  served  wdth  the  P^rench  during  the
American  revolutionary  war,  greatly  distinguish-
ing himself.  In  1781  he  was  made  commander  of
a  squadron,  and  in  1792  became  vice-admiral  of  the
navy.  During  the  French  revolution  he  retired  to
England,  but  returned  to  Paris  in  1802,  when  he
received  a  pension  from  Bonaparte,  by  whom,  in
1804,  he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  board  of
longitudes.  He  was  an  accurate  observer  and  in-
dustrious hydrographer.  He  planned  and  executed
maps  of  the  shores  of  North  America,  the  Mediter-
ranean, and  especially  of  Greece.  In  1758  he  was
elected  a  member  of  the  French  academy.  His
published  works  include  "Voyages  sur  les  cotes
de  I'Amerique  septentrionale  "  (Paris,  1753).

CHABRAT,  Guy  Ignatius  (sha-brah'),  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Chambery,  France,  in  1787;  d.  in
Mauriac,  France,  in  1868.  He  was  educated  in  a
Sulpician  seminary,  and  ordained  sub-deacon  in
1809.  He  volunteered  for  the  American  mission,
was  ordained  priest  in  1811,  and  appointed  pas-
tor of  St.  Michael's,  Nelson  county,  Ky.  He  had
charge  of  several  other  congregations  in  this  state
up  to  1824,  when  he  was  selected  as  superior  of  the
community  of  Loreto.  In  1834  he  received  from
Rome  the  bulls  for  his  consecration  as  bishop  of
Bolina  and  coadjutor  to  the  bishop  of  Bardstown.
Being  threatened  with  loss  of  sightj  he  visited  Eu-
rope, and,  as  the  most  eminent  oculists  gave  him
on  hope  of  recovery,  he  resigned  his  see  in  1847  and
retired  to  his  father's  house  in  France.  Eventually
he  became  totally  blind,  but  recovered  his  health.

CHACE,  Georg-e  Ide,  physicist,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter, Mass.,  19  Feb.,  1808 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,
29  April,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in
1830,  and,  after  a  year  spent  as  principal  of  the
preparatory  classical  school  in  Waterville,  Me.,  was
appointed  tutor  in  the  department  of  mathematics
and  natural  philosophy  at  Brown,  and  shortly  after-
ward he  became  adjunct  professor  with  Dr.  Cas-
well. For  fifteen  years  he  occupied  the  chair  of
chemistry,  physiology,  and  geology,  and  for  five
years  the  chair  of  moral  philosophy  and  metaphys-
ics. On  the  resignation  of  Dr.  Sears  he  discharged
the  duties  of  president  for  one  year.  His  entire
service  at  Brown  covered  a  period  of  forty-one
years.  In  1872  he  retired  from  the  university  and
spent  a  year  and  a  half  in  foreign  travel.  In  the
closing  years  of  his  life  he  was  a  member  of  the
municipal  government  of  Providence,  and  presi-
dent of  the  Rhode  Island  state  board  of  charities
and  corrections.  In  1853  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  was
conferred  upon  him  by  Lewisburg,  and  that  of
LL.  D,  by  Brown.  The  most  important  of  his  lec-
tures and  reviews  were  published  with  a  life  by
James  O.  Murray  (Boston,  1886).

CHACE,  Jonathan,  senator,  b.  in  Fall  River,
Mass.,  22  July,  1829.  He  became  a  cotton-manu-
facturer, was  a  member  of  the  Rhode  Island  senate
in  1876-'7,  and  was  elected  to  congress  in  1880,  and
re-elected  for  the  following  term.  He  was  elected
by  the  legislature  to  serve  out  the  senatorial  term
of  Henry  B.  Anthony,  w'hich  will  expire  in  1889,
and  took  his  seat  on  26  Jan.,  1885.

CHADBOURNE,  Paul  Ansel,  educator,  b.  in
North  Berwick.  Me.,  21  Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  23  Feb.,  1883.  After  the  death  of  his  mother,
in  1836,  he  entered  the  family  of  an  acquaintance,
on  whose  farm  he  worked  in  the  summer,  and  in
whose  shop  he  learned  the  carpenter's  trade  in  the


^^


winter,  when  not  attending  school.  Afterward,
when  sixteen  years  old,  he  was  employed  as  a  clerk
in  a  drug-store
in  Great  Falls,
N.H.,andthere
gained  a  famil-
iarity with  the
names  and  na-
ture of  the  va-
rious articles
on  sale,  which
aided  him  in
his  later  chemi-
cal studies.  He
was  prepared
for  college  at
Phillips  Exe-
ter academy,
where  he  sup-
ported himself
by  copying  law
papers  in  term
timeand  teach-
ing in  vaca-
tion, and  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1848,  with
the  valedictory.  He  then  taught,  and  studied  the-
ology in  Freehold,  N.  J.,  where  a  serious  illness
nearly  ended  his  life,  and  entered  the  seminary  at
East  Windsor,  Conn.,  in  1848,  but  continued  ill
health  forced  him  to  leave  after  a  year's  study.
He  was  principal  of  Great  Falls  high  school  in
1850,  tutor  at  Williams  in  1851,  and,  after  another
attack  of  illness,  took  charge  of  East  Windsor
academy.  He  was  licensed  to  preach  on  19  Oct.,
1853.  In  the  same  year  he  was  appointed  professor
of  chemistry  and  botany  at  Williams,  and  in  1858
was  elected  to  a  similar  professorship  in  Bowdoin
college.  He  performed  the  duties  of  both  profess-
orships, and  was  also,  during  the  same  period,  pro-
fessor in  the  medical  school  of  Maine  and  in  Berk-
shire medical  college.  He  also  lectured  at  Western
Reserve  college,  the  Smithsonian  institution,  the
Lowell  institute  at  Boston,  and  at  Mount  Holyoke
seminary.  He  conducted  several  successful  scien-
tific expeditions  for  the  students  of  Williams,  visit-
ing Newfoundland  in  1855,  Florida  in  1857,  the
north  of  Europe  and  the  geyser  region  of  Iceland  in
1859,  and  Greenland  in  186i.  In  1859  he  was  trans-
ferred to  the  chair  of  natural  history,  where  he
remained  till  1867.  In  that  year  he  became  first
president  of  the  State  agricultural  college  at  Am-
herst, Mass.,  but  left  it  for  the  presidency  of  Wis-
consin university.  He  resigned  in  1870,  and,  after
two  years  among  the  mines  in  the  Rocky  moun-
tains, became,  in  1872,  the  successor  of  Mark  Hop-
kins as  president  of  Williams.  Under  his  over-
sight the  college  prospered  greatly,  the  number  of
its  students  was  increased,  and  funds  were  liberally
contributed  for  its  support.  He  resigned,  in  1881,
to  attend  to  important  literary  work,  and  in  1882
again  became  president  of  Massachusetts  agricul-
tural college.  Dr.  Chadbourne  took  much  interest
in  public  affairs.  He  was  state  senator  from  north-
ern Berkshire  in  1865  and  1866,  was  a  delegate  to
the  national  republican  convention  in  Cincinnati
in  1876,  and  a  presidential  elector  in  1880.  He
was  actively  interested  in  manufacturing  entei-
prises,  and  was  a  marvel  to  those  who  knew  the
number  of  works  that  he  carried  through  success-
fully. He  was  a  member  of  various  learned  so-
cieties in  this  countrv  and  abroad.  Williams  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1868,  and  Amherst
that  of  D.  D.  in  1872.  He  published  "  Relations
of  Natural  History  to  Intellect,  Taste,  Wealth,  and
Religion,"  four  lectures  before  the  Smithsonian  in-


CHAD  WICK


CIIALKLY


563


stitution  (New  York,  1860) ;  "  Natural  Theology  "
and  "  Instinct  in  Ahimals  and  Men,"  two  courses  of
lectures  before  the  Lowell  institute,  Boston  (1867
and  1872);  "Strength  of  Men  and  Stability  of
Nations."  five  baccalaureate  sermons;  (1878-'7);
"  Hope  of  the  Righteous  "  (1877);  and  edited  "  Pub-
lic Service  of  the  State  of  New  York  "  (3  vols.,  Bos-
ton, 1881).  A  full  list  of  his  articles  can  be  found
in  the  "  Williams  Obituary  liecord  "  for  1883.

CHADWICK,  George"  W.,  musician,  b.  in  Low-
ell, Mass.,  13  Nov.,  1854.  In  1877  he  went  to  Ger-
many, where  for  two  years  he  studied  under  Jadas-
sohn and  lieinecke.  Then  he  settled  in  Munich
and  studied  theory  and  organ-playing  under  Rhem-
berger  for  nearly  a  year.  He  now  resides  in  Bos-
ton. His  overture,  "  Rip  Van  Winkle,"  was  per-
formed at  the  Handel  and  Haydn  festival  in  Bos-
ton in  May,  1880,  and  his  symphony  in  C  in  1882,
at  a  concert  of  the  Harvard  musical  association.
He  has  composed  several  less  important  works.

CHADWICK,  John  White,  clergyman,  b.  in
Marblehead,  Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  divinity  school  in  1864,  and  dur-
ing the  same  year  was  called  to  the  pastorate  of
the  2d  Unitarian  society  in  Brooklyn.  His  ser-
mons have  attracted  attention,  and  he  is  known  as
a  radical  teacher  of  the  doctrines  of  his  church.
Mr.  Chadwick  was  elected  Phi  Beta  Kippa  poet  at
Harvard  in  1885,  and  in  the  following  year  preached
the  alumni  sermon  at  the  Harvard  divinity  school.
He  has  published  many  of  his  discourses,  which
for  some  time  were  issued  serially,  and  is  a  fre-
quent contributor  to  the  Unitarian  journals.  His
publications  in  book- form  are:  '"Life  of  N.  A.
Staples"  (Boston,  1870);  "A  Book  of  Poems"
(1875);  "The  Bible  of  To-day"  (New  York,  1878);
"The  Faith  of  Reason"  (Boston,  1879);  "Some
Aspects  of  Religion  "  (New  York,  1879) ;  "  The  Man
Jesus"  (Boston,  1881);  "Belief  and  Life"  (New
York,  1881) ;" Origin  and  Destiny"  (Boston,  1883);
"  In  Nazareth  Town :  A  Christmas  Fantasy  "  (1884) ;
and  "A  Daring  Faith"  (1885).

CHAFFEE,  Jerome  Bunty,  senator,  b.  in
Niagara  county,  N.  Y.,  17  April,  1825 ;  d.  in  Salem
Centre,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.,  9  March,  1886.  His
education  was  limited,  but  his  energy  and  common
sense  largely  compensated  for  the  lack  of  school
training.  He  was  for  several  years  a  clerk  in  a
country  grocery  store,  and  when  he  came  of  age
had  saved  enough  money  to  remove  to  Adrian,
Mich.,  and  begin  business  for  himself  as  a  dry-
goods  merchant.  He  lived  in  Adrian  for  about
six  years,  married,  and  became  the  father  of  four
daughters.  His  wife  died  at  Adrian,  and  he  re-
moved to  St.  Joseph,  Mo.  At  this  period  he  be-
came interested  in  public  matters,  and,  through
his  acquaintance  with  Zachariah  Chandler,  fa-
miliar with  the  machinery  of  party  politics.
After  establishing  an  extensive  frontier  trade,  Mr.
Chaffee  opened  a  bank  in  St.  Joseph,  and  carried
it  on  for  three  years,  when  he  removed  to  Elm-
wood,  Kansas,  and  became  president  of  a  land
company.  In  1859  the  gold-mining  fever  tempted
him  to  Colorado,  and  he  was  one  of  the  first  set-
tlers of  Denver.  As  early  as  1861  he  had  estab-
lished a  small  stamp-mill,  and  laid  the  foun-
dation of  a  large  fortune,  which  was  acquired
mainly  in  mining  ventures.  His  previous  political
experience  enabled  him  to  take  a  prominent  part
in  the  civil  organization  of  the  territorv,  and  he
represented  it  in  congress  until  1876,  when  Colo-
rado became  a  state,  and,  with  Henry  M.  Teller  as
his  colleague,  he  was  elected  to  represent  it  in  the
U.  S.  senate.  F'rom  the  first  he  was  prominent  as
a  republican  leader,  but  was  very  independent  in


his  ideas,  and  so  bitterly  opposed  some  of  President
Grant's  measures  that  their  personal  friendship
was  for  a  time  interrupted.  After  the  marriage  of
his  daughter  with  U.  S.  Grant,  Jr.,  in  1882,  the
friendship  was  renewed.  While  his  health  per-
mitted, Mr.  Chaffee  maintained  his  active  interest
in  politics,  and  he  was  chairman  of  the  republican
national  executive  committee  during  the  presiden-
tial canvass  of  1884.

CHAILLE,  Stanford  Emerson,  physician,  b.
in  Natchez,  Miss,,  9  July,  1830.  He  is  of  Hugue-
not descent,  and  the  great-grandson  of  Col.  Peter
Chaille,  of  revolutionary  times.  His  education
was  received  at  Phillips  Andover  academy  and  at
Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1851.  He
then  studied  in  the  medical  department  of  the
University  of  Louisiana,  and  received  his  degree  in
1853.  Subsequently  he  spent  three  years  studying
in  Paris  and  elsewhere  in  Europe.  Dr.  Chaille  held
numerous  hospital  appointments  before  the  war,
and  was  medical  inspector  of  the  Confederate  army
of  Tennessee  in  1862-'3,  and  subsequently  in  charge
of  various  military  hospitals.  He  was  demonstrator
of  anatomy  in  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Louisiana  from  1858  till  1867,  lecturer  on
obstetrics  in  1865-'6,  professor  of  physiology  and
pathological  anatomy  from  1867  till  1886,  and  dean
of  the  medical  department  and  professor  of  physi-
ology and  hygiene  in  the  collegiate  department  of
Tulane  university  in  1884-6.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  Louisiana  state  board  of  health  in
1877.  In  1879  he  became  associated  with  the  work
of  the  National  board  of  health  as  president  of  the
Havana  yellow-fever  commission,  from  1880  till
1883  he  was  supervising  inspector  at  New  Orleans,
and  in  1884  was  made  a  member  of  the  board.  He
is  a  member  of  many  medical  societies,  and  was  an
honorary  member  of  the  International  medical  con-
gress held  in  Philadelphia  in  1876,  and  chosen  to
deliver  one  of  the  eight  addresses  on  that  occasion.
flis  contributions  to  medical  literature  are  numer-
ous, and  many  of  them  have  appeared  in  the  "  New
Orleans  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,"  of  which
he  was  co-editor  and  proprietor  from  1857  till
1868.  In  addition  to  his  report  on  "  Yellow  Fever
in  Havana  and  Cuba,"  published  by  the  National
board  of  health,  he  has  prepared  several  congres-
sional reports,  and  is  the  author  of  pamphlets  on
the  "  Laws  of  Population  and  Voters "  (1872) ;
"  Living,  Dying,  Registering,  and  Voting  Popula-
tion of  Louisiana,  1868  and  1874"  (1875);  "In-
timidation and  Voters  in  Louisiana"  (1876).

CHALKLY,  Thomas,  preacher,  b.  in  London,
England,  3  March,  1675 ;  d.  in  Tortola,  West  In-
dies, 4  Sept.,  1741.  His  parents  belonged  to  the
sect  of  Friends,  and  he  was  brought  up  in  that
faith.  He  was  sent  to  school  in  the  suburbs  of
London,  at  some  distance  from  his  home,  and  was
frequently  beaten  and  stoned  by  those  of  opposing
beliefs.  In  1695  he  was  pressed  on  board  of  a  man-
of-war,  but  on  being  asked  to  fight,  refused,  say-
ing :  "  As  for  war  and  fighting,  Christ  forbade  it
in  his  excellent  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  for  that
reason  I  could  not  bear  arms  nor  be  instrumental
to  destroy  or  kill  men."  After  serving  an  ap-
prenticeship of  seven  years  to  his  father,  he  fol-
lowed his  calling  for  a  short  time,  and  then  be-
gan his  career  as  an  itinerant  preacher,  travelling
throughout  England.  He  determined  to  visit
America,  landed  in  Maryland  in  1608,  and  spent
a  year  preaching  in  Virginia  and  New  England.
Subsequently  he  returned  to  England,  married,
and,  after  journeying  through  Ireland,  he  de-
cided to  settle  permanently  in  America.  He  se-
lected Philadelphia  as  his  home,  and  made  preach-


564


CHALMERS


CHAMBERLAIN


ing  tours  to  the  Barbadoes,  and  through  Mary-
land, North  Carolina,  and  Rhode  Island,  at  times
riding  1,000  miles  on  horseback.  He  continued  his
work  till  1707.  and  in  that  year  again  visited  the
Barbadoes,  sailing  thence  to  Great  Britain,  and,
after  a  visit  to  Holland  and  Germany,  returned  to
Philadelphia.  His  death  was  the  result  of  a  fever
contracted  while  on  one  of  his  visits  to  the  West
Indies.  The  library  of  the  four  monthly  meetings
of  Friends  in  Philadelphia  was  founded  by  a  be-
quest from  him.  He  left  an  interesting  journal  of
his  "  Life,  Labors,  and  Travels,"  which  was  pub-
lished with  a  collection  of  his  tracts  (Philadel-
phia, 1747 ;  New  York,  1808).

CHALMERS,  Ueorge,  British  historian,  b.  in
Fochabers,  Scotland,  in  1742;  d.  in  London,  Eng-
land, 21  May,  1825.  He  was  educated  at  King's
college,  Aberdeen,  after  which  he  studied  law  in
Edinburgh.  In  1763  he  emigrated  to  America  and
settled  in  Baltimore,  where  he  practised  his  profes-
sion for  several  years  with  great  success.  He  op-
posed the  action  of  the  colonists  at  the  beginning
cf  the  Revolutionary  war,  and,  being  unsuccessful  in
this,  he  returned  to  England,  where  in  1786  he
became  chief  clerk  of  the  board  of  trade.  He  pub-
lished political,  historical,  biographical,  and  mis-
cellaneous works,  among  which  are :  '•  A  Collection
of  Treaties  between  Great  Britain  and  other  Pow-
ers" (London,  1780);  "Political  Annals  of  the
Present  United  Colonies"  (1780;  2d  ed.,  2  vols.,
Boston,  1845),  a  work  interesting  for  its  legal  bear-
ings ;  "  An  Estimate  of  the  Comparative  Strength
of  Great  Britain  during  the  Present  and  four  Pre-
ceding Reigns  "  (1782 ;  revised  ed.,  1810) ;  "  Opin-
ions on  Interesting  Subjects  of  Public  Laws  and
Commercial  Policy,  arising  from  American  Inde-
pendence "  (1784) ;  "  Life  of  Thomas  Ruddington  "
(1794) ;  "  Apology  for  the  Believers  of  the  Shake-
speare Papers"  (1797);  "Supplementary  Apology"
(1799) ;  "  Appendix  "  (1800) :  "  Life  of  Sir  David
Lyndsay,  and  a  Glossary  of  his  Poetical  Works "
(1806);  "Life  of  Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  from  the
State  Papers"  (2  ed.,  1822);  "Churchyard  Chips
Concerning  Scotland  " ;  "  Life  of  Daniel  Defoe,"
and,  under  the  pen-name  of  Francis  Oldys  of  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  "  Life  of  Thomas
Paine  "  (1791-2).  His  principal  work  is  "  Cale-
donia," a  comprehensive  historical  account  of  Scot-
land from  the  earliest  period  (8  vols.,  1807-'24).
This  was  to  have  been  extended  to  six  volumes.
The  fourth  was  left  in  manuscript.

CHALMERS,  Joseph  W.,  senator,  b.  in  Hali-
fax county,  Va.,  in  1807 ;  d.  in  Holly  Springs,
Miss.,  in  June,  1853.  He  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy
planter,  who  came  from  Scotland,  being  related  to
Thomas  Chalmers,  the  celebrated  divine.  The  son
was  trained  to  mercantile  pursuits,  but,  after  the
death  of  his  father,  determined  to  be  a  lawyer,  and,
after  spending  two  years  in  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia, studied  law  in  the  office  of  Benjamin  W.
Leigh  in  Richmond.  In  1835  he  removed  to
Jackson,  Tenn.,  and  in  1840  to  Holly  Springs,
Miss.  In  1842-3  he  was  vice-chancellor.  In  1846
he  was  appointed  to  the  seat  in  the  U.  S.  senate
rendered  vacant  by  the  appointment  of  Robert  J.
Walker  to  the  head  of  the  treasury  department,
and  was  subsequently  elected  for  the  remainder  of
the  term,  but  at  its  close  he  declined  re-election
and  resumed  the  practice  of  law,  being  succeeded
bv  Jefferson  Davis.  He  served  in  the  senate  from
7*^Dec.,  1845,  till  3  March,  1847.  He  was  a  zealous
state -rights  democrat,  and  warmly  supported
Gen.  Cass  for  president  in  1848,  and  John  A.  Quit-
man and  Jefferson  Davis  in  their  contests  with
Henrv  S.  Foote  in  1851.


CHALMERS,  Lionel,  physician,  b.  in  Cara-
bleton,  Scotland,  about  1715;  d.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  in  1777.  He  studied  medicine  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Edinburgh,  and  then  settled  in  South
Carolina,  where  he  practised  for  more  than  forty
years,  first  in  Christ  church  parish  and  then  in
Charleston.  Dr.  Chalmers  recorded  observations
on  the  weather  of  South  Carolina  for  ten  successive
years,  beginning  with  1750,  and  the  results  were
published  as  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Weather  and  Dis-
eases of  South  Carolina  "  (London,  1776).  He  also
wrote  a  paper  on  "Opisthotonus  and  Tetanus,"
which  he  communicated  to  the  London  medical
society,  and  it  was  published  in  their  "Transac-
tions "  in  1754.  He  was  also  the  author  of  a  valu-
able "  Essay  on  Fevers  "  (Charleston,  1767).

CHAMBERLAIN,  Daniel  Henry,  governor  of
South  Carolina,  b.  in  West  Brookfleld,  Mass.,  23
June,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1862,
and  at  Harvard  law-school  in  1863.  He  entered
the  army  in  1864  as  lieutenant  in  the  5th  Massa-
chusetts colored  cavalry,  was  promoted  to  be  cai>
tain,  and  served  in  Maryland,  Louisiana,  and  Texas.
He  went  to  South  Carolina  in  1866,  and  became  a
cotton-planter.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  constitu-
tional convention  of  1868,  and  in  the  same  year
became  attorney-general  of  the  state.  On  his  re-
tirement from  this  office  in  1872  he  resumed  his
law  practice  at  Columbia,  S.  C,  and  in  1874  was
elected  governor  of  the  state.  In  1875  he  refused
to  issue  commissions  to  two  judges  who  had  been
elected  by  the  legislature,  and  who  were  condemned
as  corrupt  by  the  best  men  of  both  parties.  For
this  action  the  governor  was  publicly  thanked  by
prominent  citizens  of  Charleston.  Gov.  Chamber-
lain was  renominated  by  the  republicans  in  Septem-
ber, 1876.  The  year  had  been  marked  by  several
serious  conflicts  between  whites  and  negroes,  and
it  was  reported  that  more  than  16,000  of  the  for-
mer, in  all  parts  of  the  state,  had  organized  "  rifle-
clubs."  On  7  Oct.,  1876,  the  governor  issued  a
proclamation  commanding  these  clubs  to  disband,
on  the  ground  that  they  had  been  formed  to  in-
timidate the  negroes  and  influence  the  coming
election.  An  answer  to  this  proclamation  was
made  by  the  democratic  executive  committee,  de-
nying the  governor's  statements.  Gov.  Chamber-
lain then  applied  to  President  Grant  for  military
aid,  and  the  latter  ordered  U.  S.  troops  to  be  sent
to  South  Carolina.  After  the  election,  the  return-
ing-board,  disregarding  an  order  of  the  state  su-
preme court,  whose  authority  they  denied,  declared
the  republican  ticket  elected",  throwing  out  the  vote
of  Edgefield  and  Laurens  counties,  on  account  of
alleged  fraud  and  intimidation.  The  members
from  these  counties  were  refused  admission  to  the
house,  whereupon  the  democratic  members  of  the
legislature  withdrew,  and,  organizing  by  them-
selves, declared  Wade  Hampton,  the  democratic
candidate  for  governor,  elected,  as  he  had  received
a  majority  of  the  votes  cast,  counting  those  of  the
two  disputed  counties.  The  republican  members
declared  Chamberlain  elected,  and  he  refused  to
give  up  his  office  to  Hampton,  who  was  supported
by  the  raajoritv  of  white  people  in  the  state.  After
the  inauguration  of  President  Hayes,  both  claim-
ants were  invited  to  a  conference  in  Washington,
the  result,  of  which  was  that  the  president  with-
drew the  troops  from  South  Carolina,  and  Cham-
berlain issued  a  proclamation  declaring  that  he
should  no  longer  assert  his  claims.  He  then  re-
moved to  New  York  city,  where  he  resumed  the
practice  of  his  profession.

CHAMBERLAIN,  Jeremiah,  educator,  b.  near
Great  Conewago,  York  co.,  Pa.,  5  Jan.,  1794;  d.  m


CHAMBERLAIN


CHAMBERLIN


5Q5


Claiborne  county.  Miss.,  5  Sept.,  1850.  He  was  of
Irish  descent,  and  his  father,  James  Chamberlain,
was  a  colonel  in  the  Revolutionary  army.  Jeremiah
worked  on  his  father's  farm  till  1809,  when  he
was  sent  to  school  at  Gettysburg,  Pa.,  and  in  1814
was  graduated  at  Dickinson.  He  was  licensed  to
pi-each  by  Carlisle  presbytery  in  1817,  and,  after
a  year  spent  in  missionary  work  in  the  west  and
south,  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian
church  in  Bedford,  Pa.  Here  he  remained  till
1822,  when  he  became  president  of  Centre  college,
Danville,  Ky.,  then  in  its  infancy.  In  a  short  ad-
ministration of  three  years  he  placed  the  college
on  a  firm  basis,  filled  it  with  students,  and  ob-
tained a  new  charter,  authorizing  the  establish-
ment of  a  theological  seminary  in  connection  with
it.  In  1825  he  accepted  the  presidency  of  Louisi-
ana college,  at  Jackson,  La.  He  found  this  insti-
tution in  an  unorganized  state,  and,  receiving  little
aid  from  the  state  authorities,  he  resigned  his  office
in  1828  and  established  an  academy  of  his  own
in  the  same  town,  also  organizing  a  Presbyterian
church  there.  He  now  formed  the  project  of  estab-
lishing a  Presbyterian  college  in  the  south.  The
presbytery  of  Mississippi  favored  his  plans,  and  in
1830  "he  became  president  of  the  newly  founded
Oakland  college,  Claiborne  co..  Miss.  Here  he  la-
bored with  great  success  for  twenty  years.  He
was  stabbed  to  the  heart  by  a  student  for  some
fancied  grievance.  The  murderer  was  found  dead
two  days  afterward,  and  was  supposed  to  have
poisoned  himself.

CHAMBERLAIN,  Joshua  Lawrence,  soldier,
b.  in  Brewer,  Me.,  8  Sept.,  1828.  His  grandfather,
Joshua  Chamberlain,  was  a  colonel  in  the  war  of
1812,  and  his  father,  of  the  same  name,  was  second
in  command  of  the  troops  on  the  Maine  frontier
in  tiie  "Aroostook  war."  He  attended,  in  his  boy-
hood, the  military  academy  of  Maj.  Whiting  at
Ellsworth,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1852,  and
at  Bangor  theological  seminary  in  1855.  He  was
licensed  to  preach,  but  never  assumed  the  minis-
terial office,  as  he  was  called  in  that  year  to  a  tu-
torship at  Bowdoin.  He  was  professor  of  rhetoric
there  from  1856  till  1862,  became  also  instructor
in  modern  languages  in  1857,  and  in  1861  was
made  professor  in  this  department,  holding  the
chair  till  1865.  In  1862  he  obtained  leave  of  ab-
sence from  the  trustees,  intending  to  go  abroad
for  study,  but  with  their  permission  entered  the
National  army  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  20th
Maine  infantry.  He  became  colonel  in  1863,  and
was  promoted  brigadier-general  on  the  field  by
Gren.  Grant,  18  Jime,  1864,  for  his  gallantry  on
that  occasion.  Gen.  Grant,  in  his  "  Memoirs,"  de-
scribing the  movement  against  Petersburg,  says:
"Col.  J.  L.  Chamberlain,  of  the  20th  Maine,  was
wounded  on  the  18th.  He  was  gallantly  leading
his  brigade  at  the  time,  as  he  had  been  in  the
habit  of  doing.  He  had  several  times  been  recom-
mended for  a  brigadier-generalcy  for  gallant  and
meritorious  conduct.  On  this  occasion,  however,  I
promoted  him  on  the  spot,  and  forwarded  a  copy
of  my  order  to  the  war  department,  asking  that
my  act  might  be  confirmed  and  Chamberlain's
name  sent  to  the  senate  for  confirmation  without
any  delay.  This  was  done,  and  at  last  a  gallant
and  meritorious  officer  received  partial  justice  at
the  hands  of  his  government,  which  he  had  served
so  faithfully  and  so  well."  Gen.  Chamberlain  was
again  wounded  at  Quaker  Road,  on  29  March,  1865,
and  on  the  same  day  was  brevetted  major-general
of  volunteers  for  his  conduct  in  the  first  successful
assault  on  Lee's  right  flank.  He  commanded  two
brigades  of  the  1st  division  of  the  5th  corps,  lead-


ing the  advance,  in  the  operations  that  ended  in
Lee's  surrender,  9  April,  1865,  and  was  designated
by  the  commissioners  in  charge  of  the  ceremonial
to  receive  the  formal  surrender  of  the  arms  and
colors  of  the  Confederate  army.  He  was  engaged
in  twenty-four  pitched  battles,  including  Antie-
tam,  Fredericksburg,  Chancellorsville,  Gettysburg,
Spottsylvania,  Cold  Harbor,  Petersburg,  and  Five
Forks,  and  was  six  times  wounded,  thrice  severely.
After  resuming  his  professorship  for  a  few  months,
he  was  elected  governor  of  Maine  in  1866,  and
thrice  re-elected,  serving  till  1871.  He  was  chosen
president  of  Bowdoin  college  in  1871,  and  also
held  the  professorship  of  mental  and  moral  phi-
losophy from  1874  till  1879.  He  was  made  major-
general  of  the  state  militia  in  1876,  and  by  his  wise
and  vigorous  action  in  January,  1880,  did  much
toward  averting  civil  war,  which  had  become  im-
minent on  account  of  the  contest  between  the  re-
publicans and  "  f usionists,"  and  the  total  absence
of  a  state  government.  In  1878  he  visited  Europe
as  a  member  of  the  U.  S.  commission  to  the  Paris
exposition  of  that  year.  He  resigned  the  presidency
of  Bowdoin  in  1883,  but  continued  to  lecture  there
on  public  law  and  political  economy  until  1885.
He  has  delivered  numerous  public  addresses,  sev-
eral of  w^hich  have  been  published,  including  that
at  the  centennial  exhibition,  entitled  "  Maine ;  Her
Place  in  History  "  (Augusta,  Me.,  1877).  A  special
edition  of  his  Paris  report  on  "  Education  in  Eu-
rope "  was  published  by  the  government  (Wash-
ington, 1879).

CHAMBERLAIN,  Selah,  engineer,  b.  in  Brat-
tleboro,  Vt.,  4  May,  1812.  He  is  the  son  of  a
farmer,  received  a  common-school  education,  spent
two  years  in  a  store  in  Boston,  and  then  went  to
western  Pennsylvania  and  became  a  contractor
for  the  construction  of  the  Erie  extension  of  the
Pennsylvania  canal,  and  afterward  of  the  Ohio  and
Pennsylvania  and  Wabash  and  Erie  canals,  and  in
1845  of  the  canal  improvements  along  the  St.  Law-
rence river  in  Canada.  He  next  built  the  Rutland
and  Burlington  railroad  in  Vermont,  and  parts  of
the  Lake  Champlain  railroad,  and  then  engaged
in  the  construction  of  the  Cleveland  and  Pitts-
burg road,  which  was  completed  in  1851.  He
constructed  the  La  Crosse  and  Milwaukee  railroad,
and  operated  it  until  his  claims  for  construction
were  satisfied.  He  also  built  the  Minnesota  Cen-
tral railroad,  and  was  its  president  for  several
years.  The  interest  on  bonds,  taken  by  him  in
payment  for  railroads  built  in  Minnesota,  was
repudiated  by  the  state  government,  but  in  1882
the  claims  were  compromised  by  the  payment  of
half  of  the  obligation.  He  aided  in  the  consoli-
dation of  the  lines  composing  the  Chicago,  Mil-
waukee, and  St.  Paul  system.  In  1871  he  began
the  Cleveland,  Lorain,  and  Wheeling  road,  of
which  he  was  president.  He  also  engaged  in  bank-
ing and  the  manufacture  of  iron  in  Cleveland.

CHAMBERLIN,  Brown,  Canadian  journalist,
b.  in  Frelighsburg,  province  of  Quebec,  26  March,
1827.  He  was  graduated  at  McGill  college,  Mon-
treal, in  1850,  and  received  from  it  the  degree  of
D.  C.  L.  in  1867.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of
Lower  Canada  in  1850,  and  began  practice  in  Mon-
treal. Conjointly  with  this,  he  entered  upon  jour-
nalistic work  on  the  Montreal  "Gazette."  In  1867
he  was  elected  to  the  house  of  commons  for  Missis-
quoi,  and  represented  that  constituency  till  1870,
when  he  was  appointed  queen's  printer.  He  has
been  a  colonel  of  militia,  and  for  repelling  a  body
of  Fenian  invaders  at  Eccles  Hill,  in  1870,  he  was
created  a  companion  of  the  order  of  St.  IMichael
and  St.  George.


566


CHAMBERLIN


CHAMBERS


CHAMBERLIN,  Thomas  Crowder,  geologist,
b.  near  Mattoon,  111.,  25  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Beloit  in  18G6,  and  took  a  course  in  science
at  Michigan  university  in  1868-9.  He  was  professor
of  natural  science  at  the  state  normal  school,
Whitewater,  Wis.,  from  1809  till  187-i,  when  he
was  given  the  chair  of  geology  at  Beloit.  This  he
retained  till  1884,  and  lectured  at  the  college  two
years  longer,  also  filling  the  chair  of  geology  at
the  Corcoran  school  of  science.  Columbian  univer-
sity, Washington,  D.  C,  from  1885  till  1886.  In
1886  he  was  chosen  president  of  the  University  of
Wisconsin,  to  enter  on  duty  in  June,  1887.  Prof.
Chamberlin  was  assistant  state  geologist  of  Wis-
consin from  1873  till  1876,  and  chief  geologist
from  1876  till  1881,  when  he  took  charge  of  the
quaternary  department  of  the  U.  S.  geological  sur-
vey. He  "was  sent  to  Paris  in  1878  by  special  act
of  "the  Wisconsin  legislature  to  take  charge  of  edu-
cational exhibits  and  to  attend  the  international
congress  of  geologists.  While  abroad  he  made  a
special  study  of  the  Alpine  glaciers  and  their  de-
posits. In  1886  he  was  chosen  vice-president  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science  for  the  section  of  geology  and  geography.
He  has  published  "  Outline  of  a  Course  of  Oral  In-
struction" (Whitewater,  Wis.,  1872);  Annual  Re-
ports of  the  Wisconsin  Geological  Survey  for  the
years  1876  to  1879  inclusive  (Madison,  Wis.,  1877-
'80) ;  and  "  Geology  of  Wisconsin  "  (4  vols.,  with  3
folio  atlases  of  colored  maps,  Madison,  1877-83).
Among  his  numerous  scientific  papers  are :  "  Extent
and  Significance  of  the  Wisconsin  Kettle-Moraine  "
("Transactions  of  the  Wisconsin  Academy,"  1876-'7);
"  Le  kettle-moraine  et  les  mouvements  qui  lui
ont  donne  naissance "  (Paris,  1878) ;  "  Requisite
and  Qualifying  Conditions  of  Artesian  Wells "
("  Fifth  Annual  Report  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,"
1883-'4) ;  and  "  An  Inventory  of  Our  Glacial
Drift "  (the  vice-presidential  address  before  the
American  association  at  Buffalo,  1886).

CHAMBERS,  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  in  New
York  state  about  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1853,  and  made  second
lieutenant  of  infantry.  He  served  first  in  garrison
at  Fort  Columbus,  N.  Y.,  in  1853-4,  and  on  fron-
tier and  other  duty  until  3  March,  1855,  when  he
was  promoted  second  lieutenant,  took  part  in  hos-
tilities in  Florida  against  the  Seminoles,  1856-'7,
was  promoted  first  lieutenant,  19  Jan.,  1859,  and
participated  in  the  march  to  New  Mexico  in  1860.
He  became  captain  in  the  18th  infantry,  14  May,
1861,  and  colonel  of  the  16th  Iowa  volunteers,  24
March,  1862 ;  served  in  the  Tennessee  and  Missis-
sippi campaign,  4  April  to  19  Sept.,  1862,  having
been  twice  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Shiloh,  and
was  promoted  brevet  major  7  April  for  his  merito-
rious services  during  that  action.  He  was  present  at
the  siege  of  Corinth,  and  brevetted  lieutenant-colo-
nel, 19  Sept.,  1862,  for  gallant  conduct  at  the  bat-
tle of  luka,  where  he  was  wounded  severely ;  took
part  in  the  Vicksburg  campaign,  and  was  promoted
brevet  colonel,  4  July,  1863,  for  meritorious  ser-
vices during  the  siege ;  was  a  brigadier-general  of
volunteers,  11  Aug.,  1863,  and  was  in  garrison  at
Vicksburg  from  August,  1863,  till  1  Feb.,  1864,
when  he  participated  in  Gen.  Sherman's  march  to
Meridian.  He  was  at  Omaha  as  judge-advocate  of
the  district  of  Nebraska  from  January  till  7  June,
1866,  and  in  the  department  of  the  Platte  from  7
June,  1866,  till  transferred  to  the  27th  infantry,  21
Sept.,  1866.  On  5  March,  1867,  he  became  major
of  the  22d  infantrv.

CHAMBERS,  "Charles  Julius,  author,  b.  in
Bellefontaine,  Ohio,  21  Nov.,  1850. He  was  gradu-


ated at  Cornell  in  1870,  and  soon  became  engaged
in  journalism,  travelling  as  a  special  correspond-
ent of  the  New  York  "Herald"  in  the  West  In-
dies, Europe,  the  United  States,  and  Canada.  In
1872  he  equipped  and  led  a  canoe  expedition  to
Itasca  lake,  the  supposed  source  of  the  Mississippi
river,  of  which  he  published  an  interesting  ac-
count. In  1875,  during  a  period  of  popular  ex-
citement concerning  alleged  abuses  of  the  insane
in  certain  public  and  private  institutions,  Mr.
Chambers  volunteered  to  simulate  insanity,  and
personally  observe  the  workings  of  one  of  the  sus-
pected institutions  from  the  inmate's  point  of
view.  He  was  pronounced  insane  by  two  reputable
physicians  who  were  not  in  the  "plot,  and  pre-
sumably acted  in  good  faith.  He  was  admitted  as
a  patient  to  the  institution  in  question,  spent
several  weeks  there,  and  published  an  account  of
his  experiences,  under  the  title  of  "A  Mad
World"  (New  York,  1876).  This  excited  much
interest,  and  provoked  bitter  rejoinders  on  the
part  of  those  interested.  He  is  the  author  of  two
novels:  "On  a  Margin"  (New  York,  1884),  and
"  Lovers  Four  and  Maidens  Five  "  (Philadelphia,
1886). He  is  a  frequent  writer  for  periodicals.

CHAMBERS,  Ezekiel  F.,  senator,  b.  in  Kent
county,  Md.,  28  Feb.,  1788 ;  d.  in  Charleston,  Md.,
30  Jan.,  1867.  He  was  graduated  at  Washington
college,  Md.,  in  1805,  studied  law,  and  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1808.  He  performed  military
service  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  subsequently  at-
tained the  rank  of  brigadier-general  of  militia.
Though  elected  in  1822  to  the  state  senate  against
his  will,  he  took  an  active  part  in  the  legislation  of
that  body,  and  in  1825  arranged  a  system  for  the
more  effectual  recovery  of  slaves.  In  1826  lie  was
elected  U.  S.  senator  from  Maryland,  and  in  1832
re-elected.  He  distinguished  himself  as  one  of  the
ablest  debaters  and  antagonists  in  that  body.  In
1834  he  was  appointed  chief  judge  of  the  second
judicial  district  and  a  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals,
which  places  he  held  till  1857,  when  the  Maryland
judiciary  became  elective.  In  1850  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  constitutional  convention  of  the  state.
In  1852  President  Fillmore  offered  him  the  post  of
secretary  of  the  navy  on  the  resignation  of  Sec.
Graham,  but  the  condition  of  his  health  compelled
him  to  decline.  Yale  conferred  on  him  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1833,  and  Delaware  in  1852.

CHAMBERS,  George,  jurist,  b.  in  Chambers-
burg,  Pa.,  in  1786 ;  d.  there,  25  March,  1866.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1804,  studied  law
under  Judge  Duncan,  of  Carlisle,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1807,  and  at  Charabersburg  soon  rose  to
the  front  rank  of  his  profession.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  congress  in  1833,  and  re-elected  in  1835.
He  was  also  a  member  of  the  convention  that
formed  the  present  constitution  of  Pennsylvania.
In  1851  Gov.  Johnston  appointed  him  one  of  the
judges  of  the  supreme  court  of  Pennsylvania.  He
was  much  interested  in  the  early  history  of  his
state  and  coimty.  and  published  some  of  his  re-
searches in  his  "  Tribute  to  the  Scotch-Irish,"  and
had  embodied  othei-s  in  a  manuscript  history  pre-
pared for  the  Pennsylvania  historical  society,  which
was  destroyed  when  "the  Confederates  burned  Chani-
bersburg  in  1864.  In  1861  he  received  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  from  Washington  college.  Pa.

CHAMBERS,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Lunenburg
county,  Va.,  about  1785;  d.  in  Mecklenburg  county,
25  Jan.,  1826.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and
Mary  college  in  1808,  studied  medicine,  and  settled
in  Alabama,  where  he  practised  until  the  war  of
1812,  when  he  served  as  surgeon  on  Gen.  Jackson's
staff. Later  he  settled  in  Huntsville,  and  in  1819


CHAMBERS


CHAMORRO


567


was  a  member  of  the  constitutional  convention  of
Alabama.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  and  served
from  5  Dec,  1835,  until  his  death,  which  took  place
at  the  residence  of  his  brother,  Judge  Edward
Chambers,  of  the  superior  court  of  Virginia,  while
on  his  way  to  Washington.

CHAMBERS,  John,  Jurist,  b.  about  1710;  d.
in  New  York,  10  April,  17G5.  He  was  a  member
of  the  executive  council  in  1754,  and  attended  as
one  of  the  commissioners  the  congress  at  Albany
on  14  June  of  that  year.  He  was  soon  afterward
appointed  judge,  and  still  later  became  the  chief
justice  of  New  York.

CHAMBERS,  John,  governor  of  Iowa,  b.  in
New  Jersey,  4  Dec,  1779 ;  d.  near  Paris,  Ky.,  21
Sept.,  1853.  When  thirteen  years  of  age  he  re-
moved to  Kentucky,  and,  settling  in  Washington,
Mason  co.,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
and  obtained  a  lucrative  practice.  He  served  in
the  war  of  1812,  and  in  1818  became  volunteer  aide
to  Gren.  Harrison,  whose  election  to  the  presidency
in  1840  he  earnestly  promoted.  He  was  frequently
a  member  of  the  Kentucky  legislature,  was  a  mem-
ber of  congress  in  1837-'9  and  1835-'9,  and  gov-
ernor of  Iowa  in  1841-'5.  While  acting  in  this
latter  capacity  he  acquired  great  influence  among
the  discordant  Indian  tribes.

CHAMBERS,  Talbot  Wilson,  clergyman,  b.
in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  35  Feb.,  1819.  He  was  graduated
at  Rutgers  in  1834,  after  which  he  studied  theology
there,  and  at  Princeton.  He  was  licensed  to  preach
in  Clinton,  Miss.,  in  1838,  and  subsequently  was
ordained  in  the  Reformed  Dutch  classis  at  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in  January,  1840,  meanwhile
having  become  pastor  of  the  3d  Reformed  Dutch
church  in  Somerville,  N.  J.,  where  he  remained
until  1849.  In  December  of  the  latter  year  he
was  installed  as  one  of  the  pastors  f  the  collegiate
Dutch  chui-ch,  New  York,  and  has  since  regularly
preached  in  the  Lafayette  place  church.  He  was
the  Vedder  lecturer  at  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  in
1875,  chairman  of  the  committee  on  versions  of
the  American  Bible  society,  and  member  of  the
American  Bible  revision  committee,  Old-Testament
company.  In  1868  he  was  appointed  a  trustee  of
Rutgers,  and  in  1881  became  a  trustee  of  Colum-
bia, from  which  institution,  in  1853,  he  received
the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  His  publications  include,  be-
sides numerous  pamphlets  and  magazine  articles,
"The  Noon  Prayer  Meeting  in  Fulton  Street"
(New  York,  1857) ;  "  Memoir  of  Theodore  Freling-
huysen  "  (1863) ;  "  Exposition  of  the  Book  of  Zach-
ariah"  in  Lange's  "Commentary"  (1874);  '"The
Psalter  a  Witness  to  the  Divine  Origin  of  the  Bible  "
(Vedder  lectures,  1875);  and  "Companion  to  the
Revised  Version  of  the  Old  Testament "  (1885).

CHAMBERS,  William,  Scottish  author  and
publisher,  b.  in  Peebles,  Scotland,  in  1800 ;  d.  in
Edinburgh,  30  May,  1883.  He  was  apprenticed  to
a  printer  in  Edinburgh,  afterward  opened  a  book-
stall, and  in  1839,  with  his  brother  Robert,  estab-
lished a  publishing-house,  which  became  the  most
extensive  in  Scotland.  They  founded  the  "  Edin-
burgh Journal"  in  1833,  and  compiled  and  pub-
lished numerous  works  adapted  to  tlie  wants  of
the  people.  In  1865  William  was  made  lord-pro-
vost of  Edinburgh.  He  gave  his  impressions  of
the  United  States  in  "  Things  as  they  are  in
America  "  (New  York,  1854)  and  "  Slavery'and  Col-
or in  America"  (London,  1857),  and  compiled  a
"  Hand-book  of  American  Literature  "  (1857).  See
"  Memoir  of  William  and  Robert  Chambers  "  (Edin-
burgh, 1873:  13th  ed.,  1883).
^  CHAMBLISS,  John  Randolph,  soldier,  b.  in
Hielcsford,  Greenville  co.,  Va.,  33  Jan.,  1833;  d.  in


Deep  Bottom,  near  Richmond,  Va.,  16  Aug.,  1864.
His  father,  John  R.  Chambliss,  was  a  delegate  to
.the  Virginia  secession  convention  of  1861.  Young
Chambliss  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1853,  and  served  at  the  cavalry  school,
Carlisle,  Pa.,  till  4  March,  1854,  when  he  resigned.
He  then  became  a  planter  at  Hicksford,  Va.,  was
major  on  the  staff  of  the  governor  from  1856  till
1861,  and  colonel  in  the  militia  from  1858  till  1861.
He  joined  the  Confederate  army  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  as  colonel  of  an  infantry  regiment,-
and  afterward  became  colonel  of  the  13th  Virginia
cavalry.  He  was  subsequently  made  a  brigadier-
general,  and  was  killed  in  action  while  leading  a
brigade  of  cavalry.

CHAMBLISS,  William  Parham,  soldier,  b.  in
Chamblissburg,  Bedford  co.,  Va.,  30  March,  1837.
After  attending  a  private  school  in  Giles  co.,  Tenn.,
he  served  through  the  Mexican  war  as  second  lieu-
tenant in  the  1st  Tennessee  volunteers  from  June,
1846,  till  July,  1847,  and  afterward  as  captain  of
the  3d  Tennessee  volunteers.  From  1850  till  1855
he  practised  law  in  Pulaski,  Tenn.,  and  from  1852
till  1855  edited  there  the  "Citizen,"  a  democratic
weekly  newspaper.  He  was  also  a  member  of  the
legislature  from  1853  till  1854.  He  entered  the
regular  army  as  first  lieutenant  in  the  2d  cavalry,

3  March,  1855,  and  was  engaged  in  Texas  against
hostile  Indians  most  of  the  time  till  March,  1861.
He  was  made  captain  in  the  5th  cavalry,  6  April,
1861,  and  served  through  the  Manassas  and  penin-
sular campaigns,  receiving  the  brevet  of  major,

4  May,  1862,  for  gallantry  at  Hanover  Court-House,
Va.  At  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills,  27  June,  1862,
he  was  wounded  in  several  places,  lay  four  days
and  four  nights  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  was
then  taken  to  Libby  prison,  Richmond.  For  his
conduct  at  Gaines's  Mills  he  was  brevetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel on  38  June,  1862.  The  w^ounds  that  he
received  on  this  occasion  nearly  caused  his  death,
and  have  partially  disabled  him  for  the  rest  of
his  life.  After  his  release  from  Libby  prison  he
underwent  treatment  in  St.  Luke's  hospital.  New
York,  and  then  served  as  instructor  of  cavalry  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  from  October,  1862,  till
June,  1864.  He  was  made  major  in  the  4th  caval-
ry, 30  March,  1864,  served  as  special  inspector  of
cavalry,  division  of  the  Mississippi,  from  August,
1864,  till  April,  1865,  and  with  his,  regiment  in
Texas  till  1  Nov.,  1867,  when  he  resigned  and  be-
came president  and  general  manager  of  the  Co-
bourg  railway  and  mining  company,  Cobourg,
Canada.  He  has  published  a  pamphlet  on  "  Gen.
McClellan  and  the  Presidency  "  (1864).

CHAMBODLT,  Lonis  Claude  Marie  (sham-
bo-dew),  clergyman,  b.  in  St.  Just-en-Chevalet,
France,  in  1821 :  d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  in  1880.'
He  studied  theology  in  the  seminary  of  Lyons,  and,
after  being  ordained  deacon,  came  to  the  United
States  in  1845.  He  was  made  a  priest  in  St.  Louis
in  1846,  and  in  1847  erected  a  chui'ch  in  Nacog-
doches, of  which  he  became  pastor.  In  1851  he
was  summoned  to  the  cathedral  of  Galveston,  ap-
pointed vicar-general  of  the  diocese,  and  made  ad-
ministrator of  the  diocese,  when  Bishop  Odin  was
transferred  to  New  Orleans.  During  the  war  he
w^as  unremitting  in  his  care  of  the  wounded,  and
founded  several  charitable  institutions.

CHAMORRO,  Frutos  (chah-mor-ro).  Central
American  statesman,  b.  in  Guatemala  in  1806;
d.  12  March,  1855.  He  belonged  to  an  old  and
wealthy  Spanish  family,  but  joined  the  national
cause,  and  became  a  member  of  the  legislature  of
Nicaragua  and  of  the  constituent  assembly,  and  a
senator  (1838- '43) ;  and  when,  in  1843,  an  attempt


568


CHAMPE


CHAMPLAIN


was  made  for  a  partial  confederation  of  San  Sal-
vador, Honduras,  and  Nicaragua,  he  was  chosen
supreme  delegate  with  executive  power.  He  avert-
ed a  war  declared  against  Gruatemala,  and  retired
in  1844.  Subsequently  he  became  civil  and  mili-
tary governor  of  Nicaragua,  and  in  1851  secretary
ot  the  treasury ;  and,  after  the  outbreak  in  August
which  drove  Pineda  from  power,  he  succeeded  him
as  general-in-chief.  Being  the  leader  of  the  con-
servative party,  then  powerful,  he  was  elected  chief
magistrate  or  supreme  director  in  April,  1853.  A
few  months  afterward  Bishop  Viteri,  of  Nicaragua,
died  suddenly,  and  rumors  were  spread  to  the
eifect  that  the  prelate  had  been  poisoned  by  con-
spirators of  the  liberal  party.  Chamorro  believed
it,  and  caused  some  of  the  prominent  liberals  to
be  persecuted  and  banished.  These  went  to  Hon-
duras, organized  an  army,  gained  several  victories,
and  besieged  Chamorro  at  Granada,  but  he  resisted
them  for  nine  months,  and  the  besiegers  retired
from  the  contest,  10  Feb.,  1855.

CHAMPE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Loudon  county,
Va.,  in  1752 ;  d.  in  Kentucky,  about  1798.  He  was
sergeant-major  of  Henry  Lee's  cavalry  legion,  and,
just  after  Arnold's  treason,  was  sent  to  New  York
as  a  spy  by  Lee,  at  Washington's  request.  His
mission  was*  to  discover  whether  another  American
officer  (supposed  to  have  been  Gen.  Gates)  was  also
a  traitor,  and  to  capture  Arnold,  if  possible,  and
bring  him  before  Washington.  Champe  fled  as  a
deserter  from  the  American  camp  at  Tappan,  at
eleven  o'clock  in  the  night,  was  hotly  pursued,  and
gained  the  British  galleys  at  Paulus  Hook.  He
was  taken  to  New  York,  and,  after  being  examined
by  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  was  sent  by  him  to  Arnold,
who  made  him  sergeant-major  in  a  legion  he  was
raising.  Champe  was  able  to  send  to 'Washington
complete  proofs  of  the  suspected  general's  inno-
cence, but  he  was  not  so  successful  in  the  other  part
of  his  mission.  Discovering  that  Arnold  walked
in  his  garden  every  night,  he  formed  a  plan  with  a
comrade  to  seize  and  gag  him,  to  drag  him,  as  a
drunken  soldier,  to  a  boat  on  the  Hudson,  and  de-
liver him  to  a  party  of  horsemen  on  the  New  Jer-
sey shore.  On  the  appointed  night,  however,
Arnold  moved  his  quarters,  and  the  legion  to  which
Champe  belonged  was  sent  to  Virginia.  Champe
afterward  escaped  from  the  British  army  and
joined  Greene's  troops  in  North  Carolina.  Wash-
ington discharged  him  from  further  service,  lest
he  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  British  and
be  hanged.  In  1798  Washington  wished  to  make
him  captain  of  an  infantry  company,  but  learned
that  he  had  died  in  Kentucky  some  time  before.
See  Henry  Lee's  "  Memoirs  of  the  War  in  the
Southern  Department  of  the  United  States  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1813 ;  2d  ed.,  Washington,  1827).

CHAMPLAIN,  Samuel  de,  French  navigator,
b.  in  Brouage,  Saintonge,  on  the  bay  of  Biscay,  in
1567;  d.  in  Quebec,  25  Dec,  1635.  His  father  was
a  ship-captain,  and  the  son  received  a  careful  edu-
cation as  a  navigator.  Early  in  life  he  entered  the
army  and  became  quartermaster  of  cavalry.  His
uncle,  acting  as  pilot-general  of  the  Spanish  fleets,
conducted  back  to  their  own  country  the  Spanish
soldiers  who  had  served  in  France,  and  was  accom-
panied by  his  nephew,  who  took  command  of  the
"St.  Julien."  In  January,  1599,  he  sailed  in  com-
mand of  this  vessel  for  the  West  Indies,  and  dur-
ing two  years  and  a  half  visited  many  of  the
islands,  landed  at  Vera  Cruz,  proceeded  inland  as
far  as  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  returned  by  way  of
Panama,  where  he  conceived  the  plan  of  a  ship-
canal  across  the  isthmus,  reaching  Spain  in  March,
1601. A  record  of this  voyage,  with  views  and


charts,  was  written  by  him,  and  was  first  printed
under  the  title  of  "  Bref  discours  "  (Quebec,  1870).
though  a  translation  had  been  previously  printed
in  the  publications  of  the  Hakluyt  society.  On
his  return  to  France  he  received  "a  pension  from
Henry  IV.,  and,  upon  being  urged  by  commander
De  Chaste,  governor  of  Dieppe,  to  explore  territory
granted  to  him  in  North  America  by  the  king,
with  a  view  to  founding  a  colony,  he  sailed,  on  15
March,  1603,  in  the  ship  of  Pontgrave.  On  24  May
they  anchored  at  Tadoussac,  where  the  Saguenay
joins  the  St.  Lawrence;  and  soon  afterward  he,
Pontgrave,  and  a  few  men,  proceeded  up  the  river
in  a  boat,  until  stopped  by  the  rapids  of  St.  Louis
above  Montreal,  which  was  the  limit  of  Cartier's
discoveries  in  1535.  Returning  to  Tadoussac,
Champlain  examined  both  sides  of  the  river,  and
subsequently  explored  the  St.  Lawrence  down  to
Gaspe.  He  sailed  for  France  in  August,  and  pub-
lished the  same  year  his  first  volume,  "  Des  sau-
vages,"  giving  an  account  of  his  explorations  and
discoveries.  The  commander,  De  Chaste,  having
died  in  the  mean  time,  his  privileges  were  trans-
ferred to  Du  Guay,  Sieur  de  Monts,  who  made  an
engagement  with  Champlain,  with  the  intention  of
founding  a  settlement  in  Acadia,  and  they  sailed
together,  arriv-
ing at  Sable
island  1  May,
1604.  Coast-
ing along  No-
va Scotia,  they
finally  deter-
mined to  form
a  settlement  on
the  island  of
St.  Croix,  so
named  by  De
Monts,  in  the
river of the


same
which


name,
divides


{^/7dmp^7?'


New  Bruns-
wick from  the
United  States.
Not  finding  the

place  suitable,  after  passing  a  winter  there  they  re-
moved to  Port  Royal,  adjacent  to  the  present  An-
napolis. During  1604-'6  Champlain  explored  the
coast  as  far  as  Cape  Cod,  making  careful  surveys
and  maps  as  he  progressed.  He  returned  to  France
in  1607,  and,  having  suggested  to  De  Monts  the  im-
portance of  establishing  a  trading-post  on  the  St.
Lawrence,  he  and  Pontgrave  were  sent  out  in  1608,
and,  after  reaching  Tadoussac,  they  continued  up
the  St.  Lawrence  to  a  place  called  by  the  Algon-
quins  Quebec,  or  the  Narrows.  Champlain  decided
upon  forming  a  settlement  here,  but  had  scarcely
begun  to  clear  the  ground  for  the  erection  of  build-
ings when  a  plot  to  assassinate  him  was  discovered.
At  Quebec  he  erected  houses,  sowed  grain,  and  did
all  he  could  to  develop  the  fur  trade,  and  in  a  short
time  the  settlement  began  to  grow.  Having  be-
come friendly  with  the  Montagnais,  an  Indian
tribe  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  in  1609  he  joined  them
in  an  expedition  against  the  Iroquois.  While  in
pursuance  of  this  project,  thev  were  met  by  a  parcy
of  Algonquins  and  Hurons,  and,  accompanied  by
them,  ascended  Sorel  river  until  they  arrived  at
the  Chambly  rapids.  Having  at  this  point  sent
back  his  boat  and  crew,  Champlain  proceeded  in  a
canoe,  and  entering  a  lake,  gave  it  his  own  name.
Champlain  and  his  Indians  meeting  a  large  torcj
of  the  Iroquois  on  the  lake,  both  parties  Janaea
and  threw  up  barricades  of  trees. On  the  follow-


CHAMPLAIN


CHAMPLIN


569


ing  day  they  engaged  in  battle,  which  resulted  in
the  defeat  of  the  hostile  Indians.  This  result  was
largely  due  to  Chainplain.  who  killed  two  Iroquois
chiefs  with  his  arquebus,  and  mortally  wounded
another.  The  war,  thus  begun  by  the  French  and
their  allies  against  the  Iroquois,  continued  with
occasional  intermissions  until  the  French  suprem-
acy in  Canada  was  ended.  In  September,  Cham-
plain  returned  to  France,  and  in  March,  1610,
sailed  again  for  America,  taking  with  hira  a  num-
ber of  mechanics.  Soon  after  his  arrival  he  and
his  Montagnais  allies  made  war  again  upon  the
Iroquois,  but,  while  attacking  and  demolishing
their  fort  on  the  Sorel,  he  was  severely  wounded
by  an  arrow.  Leaving  Du  Pare  in  his  place,  he  re-
turned to  France  in  1(311,  and  while  there  married
Helen  BouUe,  a  Protestant,  who,  after  his  death,
became  an  Ursuline  nun.  De  Monts  having  lost
his  influence  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  Henry
IV.,  and  the  merchants  who  had  previously  inter-
ested themselves  in  the  colonization  scheme  having
concluded  to  spend  no  more  money  on  it,  Cham-
plain  induced  the  Count  de  Soissons  to  take  an  in-
terest in  the  project.  That  nobleman  obtained,
8  Oct.,  1612,  a  commission  appointing  him  governor
and  lieutenant-general  of  New  France,  and  Cham-
plain  was  appointed  his  lieutenant,  which  office  he
retained,  when  the  Prince  de  Conde  succeeded
shortly  afterward  to  the  rights  of  De  Soissons.  A
short  time  after  his  appointment  he  sent  several
vessels  to  Canada,  and  in  1613  sailed  himself,  prin-
cipally with  the  intention  of  exploring  the  Ottawa,
which  a  sailor  named  Vignaud  had  claimed  to  have
ascended  to  a  lake  and  thence  reached  the  North
sea.  On  27  May,  1613,  he  left  St.  Helen's  island
near  Montreal,  and,  upon  entering  the  Ottawa,
discovered  that  Vignaud's  statements  were  false.
After  arranging  more  favorable  terms  for  the  fur
trade,  he  returned  to  France,  formed  a  trading
company,  and  returned  to  the  colony  in  1615,
taking  with  him  Pere  Denis  Jamay  and  two  other
Recollect  priests,  together  with  a  lay  brother.
Pere  Caron,  one  of  these  ecclesiastics,  soon  after
his  arrival,  proceeded  to  the  country  of  the  Hurons
on  the  Georgian  bay.  Champlain  the  same  year
ascended  the  Ottawa  for  some  distance,  and,  leaving
the  river,  went  partly  overland  and  partly  by
canoe  to  the  eastern  shore  of  Lake  Huron,  where,
embarking,  he  sailed  to  its  southern  extremity ;
then  going  overland  to  the  western  extremity  of
Lake  Ontario,  he  explored  that  lake  and  the  St.
Lawrence  until  he  arrived  at  the  Sorel.  Soon
afterward,  on  territory  now  included  in  the  state
of  New  York,  he  attacked  a  town  held  by  a  tribe
belonging  to  the  Iroquois  league ;  but,  through  the
insubordination  of  the  Hurons.  was  repelled  and
received  two  severe  wounds.  He  was  carried  back
to  a  town  of  the  Hurons,  and  after  his  recovery
visited  several  tribes  of  Indians,  and  returned  to
France  in  the  spring.  Notwithstanding  the  en-
deavors of  Champlain,  both  in  Canada  and  in
France,  the  colony  did  not  flourish,  and  the  indif-
ference of  the  authorities  at  home  threatened  it
with  ultimate  extinction.  At  this  critical  period
(1620)  the  Duke  de  Montmorency  succeeded  Conde,
and  Champlain,  becoming  more  hopeful,  brought
over  his  wife,  who  remained  with  him  until  1624,
though  often  forced  to  submit  to  great  hardships.
The  trade  had  now  been  acquired  by  the  merchants,
and  Quebec  was  fortified,  began  to  enlarge  its
boundaries,  and  increased  in  population,  entering
upon  a  career  of  prosperity.  In  1625  the  Duke  de
Ventadour  became  viceroy,  and  at  once  set  to
work  to  develop  the  country,  and  sent  over  the
first  Jesuit  missionaries  to  aid  in  converting  the


natives.  In  July,  1628,  a  British  fleet  under  Sir
David  Kirk  and  his  two  brothers  appeared  before
Quebec  and  summoned  Chan)plain  to  surrender.
His  answer  was  a  defiance,  and  the  British  retired,
after  committing  some  depredations.  The  Canada
company,  which  had  been  organized  by  Cardinal
Richelieu,  sent  out  provisions  and  settlers  at  this
time ;  but  the  fleet  conveying  them  was  captured
by  Kirk,  and,  as  Champlain  had  depended  upon  the
intercepted  vessels  for  his  supplies,  he,  after  pass-
ing the  winter  in  great  distress  in  Quebec,  sur-
rendered to  Louis  and  David  Kirk  on  19  July,
1629.  Champlain  was  conveyed  to  England  as  a
prisoner,  and  was  not  set  at  liberty  until  1632.  By
the  treaty  of  St.  Grcrmain-en-Laye,  concluded  in
that  year,  between  Great  Britain  and  .France,
Canada,  together  with  Acadia  and  Cape  Breton,
was  restored  to  France,  and  Champlain,  being  at
once  reinstated  as  governor,  in  1633  sailed  with
three  well-equipped  vessels  from  Dieppe.  On  his
arrival  he  was  warmly  welcomed  by  the  settlers
and  Indians,  and,  the  Jesuit  missionaries  having
resumed  their  labors  among  the  natives,  he  did  all
in  his  power  to  strengthen  and  develop  the  colony,
and  creel  ed  a  fort  at  Richelieu  island  and  founded
Three  Rivers.  He  also  established  a  college  at
Quebec,  in  which  the  children  of  the  Indians  were
trained  and  taught  the  use  of  the  French  lan-
guage. In  addition  to  the  volume  "  Des  sauvages  "
(1603)  and  his  '^Voyages  "  (1613  and  1619),  he  pub-
lished a  volume  containing  an  indifferently  exe-
cuted abridgment  of  his  previous  voyages,  which
included  a  continuation  from  1619  to  1632.  Inter-
esting features  of  this  volume  were  prayers  and  a
catechism  in  two  of  the  languages  of  the  aborigi-
nes. Some  copies  bear  the  date  of  1640.  In  1830
it  was  reprinted  in  Paris.  The  Abbes  Laverdier
and  Casgrain,  of  Quebec,  have  published  the  whole
series  of  his  works,  including  his  Mexican  voyage,
with  notes  and  fac-similes  of  all  the  maps  and
illustrations  (4  vols.,  4to,  1870).  The  "  Mercure
Fran9ais,"  vol.  xix.,  contains  also  what  is  appar-
ently an  account  of  the  voyage  of  1633.

CHAMPLIN,  Christopher  Grant,  senator,  b.
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  12  April,  1768 ;  d.  there,  28  March,
1840.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1786,  and
lived  several  years  in  Europe,  where  he  studied  in
the  college  of  St.  Omer,  France.  He  served  in  con-
gress as  a  representative  from  Rhode  Island  from
15  May,  1797,  till  3  March,  1801,  and  was  afterward
chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of  Francis  Malbone,
deceased.  He  took  his  seat  12  Jan.,  1810,  and  re-
signed it  in  1811.  He  was  for  many  years  presi-
dent of  the  Rhode  Island  bank,  and  held  that  office
when  he  died. — His  uncle,  Georg'e,  b.  in  1738;  d.
in  1809,  was  a  merchant  of  Newport,  an  officer  of
the  revolution,  member  of  the  Continental  congress
from  1785  to  1786.  and  of  the  convention  that
adopted  the  federal  constitution.

CHAMPLIN,  James  Tift,  educator,  b.  in  Col-
chester, Conn.,  9  June,  1811 ;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,
15  March,  1882,  He  was  graduated,  with  the  vale-
dictorv,  at  Brown  in  1834,  and  was  a  tutor  there
from  1835  till  1838.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Federal
street  Baptist  church  in  Portland,  Me.,  from  1838
till  1841,  when  he  was  chosen  professor  of  ancient
languages  at  Waterville  (now  Colby  university).
He  became  president  of  that  institution  in  1857,
and  held  the  office  till  1873,  when  he  removed  to
Portland  and  devoted  himself  to  literary  work  till
his  death.  He  published  a  large  number  of  edu-
cational works,  among  them  English  and  Greek
grammars,  and  editions  of  "  Demosthenes  on  the
Crown"  (1843);  "Demosthenes'  Select  Orations"
(1848);  and  'Mi^schines  on  the  Crown"  (1850);  a


570


CHAMPLIN


CHAMPNEY


"  Text-Book  of  Intellectual  Philosophy  "  (Boston,
18(50);  "First  Principles  of  Ethics"  (1801);  a
"  Text-Book  of  Political  Economy "  (New  York,
1808) ;  "  Scripture  Reading  Lessons,"  with  notes
(Hartford,  Conn.,  1870);  and  "Constitution  of  the
United  States,  with  Brief  Comments"  (Boston,
1880).  He  was  a  contributor  to  the  "  Christian
Review"  from  1850.

CHAMPLIN,  John  Denison,  author,  b.  in
Stoning:ton,  Conn.,  29  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Hopkins  grammar-school,  New  Haven,
and  at  Yale,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1850.  In
the  following  year  he  began  the  study  of  law  in
the  office  of  Gideon  H.  Hollister,  Litchfield,  Conn.,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859-,  and  subsequently
became  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Hollister,  Cross
&  Champlin,  in  New  York  city. In  the  autumn  of

1800,  what  seemed  an  advantageous  business  offer
took  him  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  was  a  witness
during  the  following  spring  of  the  opening  scenes
of  secession  in  that  city.  Satisfied  that  New  Or-
leans was  no  place  for  the  practice  of  his  profes-
sion, he  returned  to  the  north  in  the  autumn  of

1801,  and  after  some  desultory  literary  work  be-
came, in  1804,  associate  editor  of  the  Bridgeport,
Conn.,  "  Standard,"  with  special  charge  of  the  lit-
erary department.  In  1805  he  established,  in
Litchfield,  a  weekly  newspaper  in  the  interest  of
the  Democratic  party,  entitled  "  The  Sentinel,"
which  he  edited  until  1809,  when  he  sold  it  and
removed  to  New  York  to  enter  upon  other  literary
pursuits.  He  wrote  for  several  periodicals  until
1873,  when  he  edited,  from  the  papers  of  Joseph
P.  Loubat,  secretary  to  Gustavus  V.  Fox  in  his
mission  to  present  the  congratulations  of  congress
to  the  Emperor  Alexander  II.  on  his  escape  from
assassination,  the  work  entitled  "  Fox's  Mission  to
Russia"  (New  York,  1873).  In  the  same  year  he
became  a  reviser  and  in  1875  associate  editor  of
the  "  American  Cyclopaedia,"  having  special  charge
of  the  maps  and  engravings  till  the  revision  was
completed.  Mr.  Champlin  is  the  author  of  "  Young
Folks'  Cyclopaedia  of  Common  Things"  (New
York,  1879) ;  "  Young  Folks'  Catechism  of  Com-
mon Things "  (1880) ;  "  Young  Folks'  Cyclopaedia
of  Persons  and  Places"  (1880);  "Young  Folks'
Astronomy"  (1881);  and  "Young  Folks'  History
of  the  War  for  the  Union"  (1881).  In  1884  he
visited  Europe,  and  accompanied  Andrew  Carnegie
in  a  coaching  trip  through  southern  England,
which  he  has  described  in  his  "  Chronicle  of  the
Coach"  (New  York,  1880).  He  is  now  editor  of
Scribner's  art  cyclopaedias,  of  which  two  volumes
of  the  first  part,  "  Cyclopaedia  of  Painters  and
Paintings,"  were  published  in  1880.

CHAMPLIN,  Stephen,  naval  officer,  b.  in
South  Kingston,  R.  I.,  17  Nov.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Buffalo,
N.  Y.,  20  Feb.,  1870.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Com.
Perry.  When  he  was  five  years  old  his  parents  re-
moved to  Lebanon,  Conn  ,  where  he  was  employed
on  his  father's  farm,  and  received  a  common-school
education.  At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  ran  away  from
home  to  become  a  sailor,  and  at  twenty-two  was
captain  of  a  fine  brig  in  the  West  India  trade.  He
was  appointed  a  sailing-master  in  the  U.  S.  navy,
22  May,  1812,  placed  in  command  of  a  gun-boat
under  Com.  Perry  at  Newport,  and  soon  after  or-
dered to  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  where  he  soon
attracted  the  attention  of  his  superior  officers  by
his  remarkable  promptness.  On  18  July,  1813,  he
was  ordered  to  take  charge  of  seventy-four  officers
and  men  and  report  to  Com.  Perry  at  Erie,  Pa.,
going  by  way  of  Lakes  Ontario  and  Erie,  and
marching  across  the  country  from  Niagai-a  to  Buf-
falo. He  made  the  entire  distance,  using  only  set-


ting-poles and  oars  for  propulsion,  in  five  days.
He  was  ordered,  on  25  July,  to  take  command  of
the  "  Scorpion,"  and  engaged  with  that  vessel  in
the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  10  Sept.,  1813,  being  at
that  time  under  twenty-four  years  of  age.  The
"  Scorpion  "  fired  the  first  shot  on  the  American
side,  and  was  fought  with  great  bravery,  keeping
its  place  near  the  Lawrence  throughout  the  en-
gagement. At  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  13
Sept.  Champlin  captured  the  "  Little  Belt,"  and  in
so  doing  fired  the  last  shot  in  the  battle.  He  was
afterward  placed  in  command  of  two  of  the  cap-
tured prize-ships,  the  "Queen  Charlotte"  and  the
"  Detroit."  In  the  spring  of  1814  he  commanded
the  "  Tigress,"  and  blockaded,  with  Capt.  Turner
in  the  "  Scorpion,"  the  port  of  Mackinac.  They
cruised  for  some  months  in  the  service,  cutting  off
the  supplies  of  the  British  garrison ;  but  botli  ves-
sels were  surprised  and  captured  at  nine  o'clock  on
the  evening  of  3  Sept.  by  a  superior  force  of  In-
dians and  British,  sent  from  Mackinac  in  five  boats
to  raise  the  blockade.  Every  American  officer  was
severely  wounded,  and  Champlin  was  crippled  for
life  by  a  canister-shot,  wliich  passed  through  the
fieshy  part  of  the  right  thigh  and  embedded  itself
in  the  left  thigh,  shattering  the  bone  and  remain-
ing lodged  in  the  limb  for  eighteen  days.  He  was
taken  prisoner  and  carried  to  Mackinac,  where  he
lay  suffering  for  thirty-eight  days,  and  was  then
paroled  and  sent  to  Erie,  and  then,  by  easy  stages,
to  Connecticut,  arriving  there  in  March,  1815.  He
was  prevented  by  his  wounds  from  seeing  much
active  service  after  this.  He  had  been  made  lieu-
tenant on  9  Dec,  1814,  and  in  1815  was  attached
to  Perry's  flag-ship,  the  "  Java."  He  commanded
the  schooner  " Porcupine"  from  1810  till  1818, and
was  employed  during  1810  in  surveying  the  Canada
boundary-line.  He  then  retired  to  Connecticut,
still  suffering  from  his  wound,  and  undergoing
several  operations  without  relief.  He  lived  here,
with  the  exception  of  a  short  service  on  the  recoiv-
ing-ship  "  Fulton,"  from  1828  till  1834,  when  he
removed  to  Buffalo,  and  remained  there  til!  his
death.  He  was  promoted  to  commander,  22  June,
1838,  put  in  charge  of  the  rendezvous  at  Buffalo  in
1842,  and  commanded  the  "  Michigan  "  from  1845
till  1848.  He  was  made  captain,  4  Aug.,  1850,  and
placed  on  the  retired  list  in  1855.  He  was  raised
to  the  rank  of  commodore,  10  July,  1802,  and  was
the  last  survivor  of  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie.

CHAMPLIN,  Stephen  Gardner,  soldier,  b.  in
Kingston,  N.  Y.,  1  July,  1827 ;  d.  in  Grand  Rapids,
Mich.,  24  Jan.,  1804.  He  was  educated  in  the  com-
mon schools,  and  at  Rhinebeck  academy,  N.  Y.,
studied  law,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Albany  in
1850.  He  removed  to  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.,  in
1853,  where  he  became  judge  of  the  recorder's
court  and  prosecuting  attorney  of  Kent  co.  He
entered  the  array  in  1801,  as  major  in  the  3d
Michigan  infantry,  and  became  its  colonel  on  22
Oct.  Among  the  battles  in  which  he  took  part
were  Williamsburg,  Fair  Oaks,  Groveton,  and
Antietam.  He  received  at  Fair  Oaks  a  severe
wound,  which  prevented  him  from  seeing  active
service  after  his  promotion  to  the  rank  of  briga-
dier-general, 29  Nov.,  1802,  and  he  was  placed  on
detached  duty  in  command  of  the  recruiting-sta-
tion at  Grand  Rapids,  dying  in  the  service,  from
the  effects  of  his  wound.

CHAMPNEY,  Benjamin,  painter,  b.  in  New
Ipswich,  N.  H.,  20  Nov.,  1817.  He  was  graduated
at  Appleton  academy,  in  his  native  town,  in  1834.
He  went  to  Boston  iii  that  vear,  worked  in  Pendle-
ton's lithographic  establishment  in  1837-40,  studied,
and  painted  at  the  Louvre,  Paris,  in  1841-0,  then


CHAMPNEY


CHANDLER


571


visited  Italy  with  Kensett,  and,  revisiting  Europe
in  1847-'8.  painted  a  panorama  of  the  Rhine.  Since
1853  he  has  passed  his  summers  at  North  Conway,
N,  H.,  where  he  has  a  cottage  and  studio,  and  has
painted  many  White  mountain  views,  as  well  as
those  of  Switzerland,  which  are  owned  in  and
around  Boston.  He  was  president  of  the  Boston
art  club  in  1858,  and  in  18G5-'6  he  again  visited
Europe,  spending  a  summer  in  Brittany.

CHAMPNEY,  James  Wells,  painter,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  16  July,  1848.  When  sixteen  years  old
he  began  his  art  education  under  a  wood-engraver
in  Boston.  In  1863  he  served  a  short  time  in  the
45th  Massachusetts  volunteers,  and  later  taught
drawing  in  Lexington,  Mass.  In  1866  he  went  to
Europe,  and  studied  in  1867-8  in  Paris  under
■fidouard  Frere,  and  in  Antwerp  at  the  academy.
After  spending  the  winter  of  1869-'70  in  Rome,  he
returned  to  the  United  States  and  opened  a  studio
in  Boston,  but  was  in  Europe  again  in  1871-'2.  In
1873  he  travelled  in  the  southern  United  States  to
make  sketches  for  Edward  King's  "  New  South,"
and  in  1874r-'5  went  again  to  Europe  and  sketched
in  Spain  during  the  Carlist  war.  In  1876  he  built
a  studio  in  Deerfiekl,  Mass.,  where  he  has  since
spent  most  of  his  suinmers,  his  winter  studio  be-
ing in  New  York  city.  Mr.  Champney  is  a  mem-
ber of  the  American  society  of  painters  in  water-
colors,  and  in  1882  was  elected  an  associate  member
of  the  National  academy.  His  works  include
"Which  is  Umpire?"  (1871);  "  Sear  Leaf"  (1874);
"Not  so  Ugly  as  he  Looks "  (1875) ;  '"Your  Good
Health"  (1876);  "Where  the  Two  Paths  Meet"
(1880);  "Indian  Summer"  (1881);  "Bonny  Kil-
meny,"  "  Boarding-School  Green-Room  "  (1882) ;
"Pamela,"  " Hide-and-Seek,"  "Eunice"  (1884);
"  In  May  Time,"  "  He  Loves  Me  "  (1885) ;  "  Satur-
day Eve,"  "  Griselda,"  "  Song  without  Words "
(1886).— His  wife,  Lizzie  Williams,  b.  in  Ohio  in
1850,  is  the  author  of  "  In  the  Sky-Garden,"  a  book
of  astronomical  fables  (Boston,  1876) ;  "  All  Around
a  Palette  " ;  "  Bourbon  Lilies  " ;  and  other  tales
and  sketches,  besides  a  novel  called  "  Sebia's  Tan-
gled Web,"  and  "Three  Vassar  Girls  in  South
America  "  (1885).  Most  of  these  books  were  illus-
trated by  her  husband.

CHAMPNEYS,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Bridge-
ton,  Cumberland  co.,  N.'  J.,  in  January,  1800 ;  d.  in
Lancaster,  Pa.,  9  Aug..  1871.  After  studying
under  a  private  tutor  in  New  York  city  he  entered
Princeton,  but  left  college  on  his  father's  death,
and  studied  law  with  Chief-Justice  Ewing,  of  New
Jersey,  and  afterward  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  where  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar  on  2  April,  1818.  He  was
deputy  attorney-general  of  the  mayor's  court,  Lan-
caster, from  1824  till  1830,  deputy  attorney-general
of  the  county  till  1833,  and  president-judge  of  the
second  judicial  district  from  1839  till  1842.  He  had
served  in  the  lower  house  of  the  legislature  in  1825
and  1828,  and  from  1843  till  1846  was  a  member
of  the  state  senate.  He  was  attorney-general  of
the  state  from  1846  till  1848,  when  he  resigned.
He  was  sent  to  the  state  house  of  representatives
again  in  1863,  and  to  the  senate  in  1864,  1865,  and
1866.  Judge  Champneys  was  a  democrat  till  the
civil  war,  when  he  became  a  republican.

CHANCELLOR,  Charles  Williams,  physician,
b.  m  Spottsylvania  county,  Va.,  19  Feb.,  1833.  He
was  educated  at  Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  and  at
the  University  of  Virginia,  and  was  graduated  at
Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadelphia,  in  1853.
He  practised  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  till  1861,  and  dur-
mg  the  civil  war  was  medical  director  on  the  staff
of  Gen.  Pickett,  in  the  Confederate  army.  After
the  war  he  practised  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,  "till  1868,


when  he  was  elected  professor  of  anatomy  in  Wash-
ington university,  Baltimore,  Md.  He  was  made
dean  of  the  faculty  in  1869,  and  transferred  to  the
chair  of  surgery  in  1870.  He  resigned  in  1873,
was  elected  secretary  of  the  State  board  of  health
in  1876,  and  president  of  tlie  State  insane  asylum
in  1877.  He  has  published  a  "Report  upon  the
Condition  of  the  Prisons,  Reformatories,  and  Char-
itable Institutions  of  Maryland,"  made  to  the
governor  of  the  state  (Frederick,  Md.,  1875);  a
treatise  on  "  Mineral  Waters  and  Sea-side  Re-
sorts "  (Baltimore,  1883) ;  and  a  large  number  of
monographs  on  medical  and  sanitary  subjects,  in-
cluding "Contagious  and  Infectious  Diseases"
(Baltimore,  1878) ;  "  Drainage  of  the  Marsh  Lands
of  Maryland  "  (1884) ;  "  A  Sanitary  Inspection  of
Elkton,  Md."  (1886);  "Pleredity"  (Philadelphia,
1886) ;  and  the  "  Sewerage  of  Cities  "  (Baltimore,
1886).  He  has  also  read  papers  before  the  Ameri-
can public  health  association  on  "The  Squalid
Dwellings  of  the  Poor"  (1884);  and  "Impure  Air
and  Unhealthy  Occupations  as  Predisposing  Causes
of  Pulmonary  Consumption "  (1885).  Dr.  Chan-
cellor is  a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  London.

CHANCHE,  John  Mary  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,
b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1795 ;  d.  in  Frederick,  Md.,
in  1853.  He  was  educated  at  St.  Mary's  seminary,
Baltimore,  ordained  in  1819,  appointed  professor
in  St.  Mary's,  and  subsequently  vice-president,  and
in  1834  succeeded  Dr.  Eccleston  as  president.  He
was  offered  the  place  of  coadjutor  to  the  archbishop
of  Baltimore  and  to  the  bishop  of  Boston  succes-
sively, but  declined.  He  was  chosen  as  master  of
ceremonies  to  the  second  provincial  council  of  Bal-
timore, and  was  chief  promoter  of  the  first  national
council.  On  the  formation  of  the  see  of  Natchez,
Dr.  Chanche  was  nominated  bishop,  and  conse-
crated in  1841.  He  found  his  diocese  without
church  or  priest;  but  the  Catholics  in  Natchez
were  generous  and  zealous,  and  by  their  aid  he  was
enabled  to  begin  the  building  of  a  cathedral  in
1842.  He  also  opened  an  academy  for  young  ladies,
and  conducted  missions  among  the  colored  people
with  success.  He  visited  Havana  in  1844  with  the
object  of  examining  documents,  which,  he  thought,
would  prove  the  title  of  the  Catholic  church  to
property  in  Mississippi,  at  the  time  in  possession
of  the  United  States,  but  was  unsuccessful.  In
1848  he  introduced  the  sisters  of  charity  from  Em-
mettsburg,  and  founded  St.  Mary's  orphan  asylum
and  school.  He  embarked  for  France  toward  the
end  of  the  year  1848,  with  the  purpose  of  uniting
the  sisters  of  charity  of  the  United  States  with  the
same  order  in  that  country,  and  his  efforts  were
crowned  with  success.  During  his  occupation  of
the  see  of  Natchez  he  built  eleven  churches  and  es-
tablished thirty-two  missionary  stations.

CHANDLEiR,  Abiel,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Con-
cord, N.  H.,  26  Feb.,  1777 ;  d.  in  Walpole,  N.  H.,
22  March,  1851.  Pie  was  occupied  in  agricultural
labors  until  twenty-one  years  of  age,  and  subse-
quently attended  Harvard,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1806.  From  this  time  until  1817  he  was  a
teacher  in  Salem  and  Newburyport.  He  was  after-
ward engaged  for  many  years  in  business  in  Bos-
ton as  the  head  of  the  firm  of  Chandler,  Howard  &
Co.,  from  which  he  retired  in  1845  with  a  fortune.
He  bequeathed  |50,000  to  establish  a  scientific
school  in  connection  with  Dartmouth  college,  $1,600
for  the  establishment  of  a  scientific  agricultural
school,  and  the  remainder  of  his  estate  to  the  New
Hampshire  asylum  for  the  insane.

CHANDLER,  Charles  Frederick,  chemist,  b.
in  Lancaster,  Mass.,  6  Dec,  1836.  He  studied  at
Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard,  and  abroad


572


CHANDLER


CHANDLER


at  the  universities  of  Gottingen  and  Berlin,  receiv-
ing in  1850  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  at  Gottingen. On
his  return  to  the  United  States  in  1857  he  became
assistant  in  chemistry  at  Union  college  under  Prof,
Charles  A.  Joy,  and  a  few  months  later  succeeded
to  the  duties  of  the  full  professorship. Here  he  re-
mained until  18(J4.  when  he  went  to  New  York  and
was  associated  with  Profs.  Thomas  Egleston  and
Francis  L.  Vinton  in  the  establishment  of  the  Co-
lumbia school  of  mines. Dr.  Chandler  was  elected
to  fill  the  chair  of  analytical  and  applied  chemis-
try, and  was  also  dean  of  the  faculty. In  1877,  on
the  reorganization  of  the  school,  he  was  made  pro-
fessor of  chemistry,  lecturing  thenceforth  in  both
the  scientific  and  literary  departments  of  Colum-
bia. He  became  adjunct  professor  of  chemistry
and  medical  jurisprudence  in  the  College  of  physi-
cians  and surgeons (the medical  department  of
Columbia  college)  in  1872,  and  in  1876  succeeded
to  the  full  professorship. His  connection  with  the
College  of  pharmacy  as  professor  of  chemistry  dates
from  1860,  and  largely  through  his  active  interest
this  institution  has  become  one  of  the  most  flour-
ishing colleges  of  pharmacy  in  the  United  States.
In  1866  he  was  invited  by  the  Metropolitan  board
of  health  to  make  scientific  studies  of  sanitary
questions  affecting  the  health  of  New  York  city.
This  work  was  performed  gratuitously,  but  with
such  satisfaction  that  the  place  of  chemist  to  the
board  was  created  for  him. In  this  capacity  he
continued  until  1873,  when  he  was  appointed  presi-
dent of  the  Board  of  health  and  again  in  1877.
One by one  important sanitary questions were
taken up, thoroughly investigated, and placed
on  a  scientific  basis. The  milk-supply  was  found
to  be  shamefully  adulterated,  and  frauds  by  the
milkmen  amounting  to  $10,000  a  day  were  preva-
lent. After  some  years  of  contention,  the  rigid
inspection  of  the  milk  became  a  recognized  pro-
ceeding. The  sale  of  inferior  qualities  of  kero-
sene, with  resulting  accidents,  was  among  the  sub-
jects thoroughly  investigated,  and,  in  consequence,
restrictive  legislation  was  enacted. Great  improve-
ments in connection  with  the  sanitary  arrange-
ments of  the  markets  and  food-supply  were  intro-
duced during his administration. Originally,
slaughter-houses  were scattered throughout tlie
city ;  but  they  were  now  compelled  to  locate  with-
in narrow  precincts  on  the  river  fronts  and  placed
under  thorough  sanitary  supervision. He  obtained
the  passage  of  a  tenement-house  act,  which  pro-
vided  that plans of  every  such building  to be
erected  must  first  be  submitted  to  the  health  au-
thorities. In  this  manner  improved  accommoda-
tions, with  adequate light  and  ventilation,  have
been  secured  for  the  poorer  classes. It  has  been
shown  that  the  death-rate  of  children  under  five
years  of  age  has  been  reduced  5,000  yearly  in  direct
consequence  of  the  reforms  and  improvements  ef-
fected by  Dr.  Chandler  and  his  associates. He  was
also  connected  with  the  New  York  state  board  of
health,  and  much  of  the  excellent  work  performed
by  that  body  on  the  adulteration  of  food  during
the  first  years  of  its  existence  was  executed  under
his  direction. His  name  has  been  associated  with
others  on  important  reports  sent  out  by  the  Na-
tional board  of  health. His  time  has  necessarily
been  largely  occupied  with  his  duties  as  a  teacher
and  in  his  public  capacity,  hence  it  could  hardly
be  expected  that  any  original investigations in
pure  chemistry  would  be  carried  on  by  him ; yet
he  has  done  much  in  that  direction  worthy  of  the
highest  praise. His  elaborate  investigations  on  the
water-supply  of  the  cities  of  Albany  in  1872  and
1885,  Brooklyn  in  1868  and  1870,  New  York  in


1866  {et  seq.),  and  Yonkers  in  1874,  his  analyses  of
the  springs  and  artesian  wells  at  Ballston  in  1869
Chittenango  in  1870,  Florida  in  1871,  Saratoga
Springs  in  1863  and  repeatedly  since,  Staten  Island
in  1871,  and  elsewhere,  and  his  reports  on  waters  for
locomotives  in  1865,  are  valuable,  and  date  from  a
period  when  but  little  of  that  class  of  w^ork  was  per-
formed in  the  United  States.  Many  of  the  analvses
executed  for  the  geological  surveys  of  MicJiigan,
Wisconsin,  and  elsewhere  were  made  in  his  labora^
tory.  His  earlier  investigations  were  published  in
the  "  American  Journal  of  Science  "  and  in  "  The
American  Chemist,"  a  journal  that  he  established
with  his  brother.  W.  H.  Chandler,  in  1870,  but  which
was  discontinued  in  1877.  He  has  frequently  testi-
fied as  an  expert  in  courts,  and  in  that  capacity  has
been  retained  in  some  of  the  most  important  patent
cases.  Dr.  Chandler  has  lectured  before  New  York
audiences  on  "Water"  in  1874,  "Photography"  in
1879,  and  kindred  topics.  He  received  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  from  the  University  of  New  York  in
1873,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  from  Union  college  during
the  same  year.  He  is  a  life  member  of  the  CMiemical
societies  of  London,  Berlin,  Paris,  and  New  York,
and  a  member  of  numerous  other  scientific  societies.
In  1874  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  to  whose  reports  on  sorghum
(1882),  glucose  (1884),  and  other  subjects  in  applied
chemistry,  he  has  been  a  regular  contributor,  and
during  the  same  year  he  presided  over  tlie  conven-
tion of  chemists' that  met  at  Northumberland  to
celebrate  the  anniversary  of  the  discovery  of  oxvgen
by  Dr.  Priestley.— His  brother,  William  Henry,
chemist,  b.  in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  13  Dec,  1841,
was  educated  at  Union,  and  from  1861  to  1867  was
chemist  to  various  companies,  and  from  1868  to
1871  instructor  in  chemistry  at  the  Columbia  school
of  mines.  In  1871  he  became  professor  of  chemis-
try at  Lehigh  university,  and  in  1878  was  made
director  of  the  library.  He  has  received  the  de-
gree of  A.  M.  from  Union,  and  that  of  Ph.  D.  from
Hamilton  college.  Prof.  Chandler  is  a  fellow  of
the  Chemical  society  of  London,  and  a  member  of
the  Chemical  societies  of  Paris  and  New  York.  In
1876  he  was  a  juror  at  the  Philadelphia  centennial
exhibition,  and  in  1878  at  the  Paris  exhibition.  His
contributions  to  chemical  literature  have  appeared
principally  in  the  "  American  Chemist,"  of  which
from  1870  till  1877  he  and  his  brother,  Charies  F.
Chandler,  were  editors.

CHANDLER,  Charles  Henry,  journalist,  b.  in
Prescott,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1840;  d.  in  Boston,  4  Jan.,
1885.  He  entered  Amherst  in  1860,  but  in  1861
volunteered' in  the  army,  served  until  October,  1802,
in  the  31st  Massachusetts  infantry,  when  failing
health  led  to  his  return  home.  He  was  graduated
at  Amherst  in  1866,  and  taught  in  Williston  semi-
nary and  similar  institutions  until  1872.  Subse-
quently he  was  connected  with  the  Springfield
"Republican,"  and  later  with  the  Boston  "Her-
ald" as  an  editorial  writer.  He  published  "At-
tractions of  Northampton  "  (1871).

CHANDLER,  Charles  Henry,  educator,  b.  in
New  Ipswich,  N.  H.,  25  Oct.,  1840.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1868,  taught  in  various  acad-
emies, and  was  principal  at  Thetford  and  St.  Johns-
bury,  Vt.  From  1871  till  1877  he  was  professor  oi
physics  and  chemistry,  and  from  1877  till  1881
professor  of  mathematics  and  phvsics  at  Antioch
college.  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio.  In  1881  he  was  ap-
pointed to  the  chair  of  chemistry  and  physics  at


Ripon,  Wis.,  college,  and  in  1883  was  transferred
to  the  professorship  of  mathematics  and  physics.

CHANDLER,  Edward  Barron,  Canadian  ju-
rist, b.  in  Amherst,  Nova  Scotia,  in  1800;  d.  m


CHANDLER


CHANDLER


573


Fredericton,  N.  B.,  6  Feb.,  1880.  He  was  a  grand-
son of  Joshua  Chandler,  of  New  Haven,  Conn.,
a  well-known  loyalist,  who  went  to  Nova  Scotia
in  1788  and  thence  to  England  to  obtain  com-
pensation for  losses  sustained  during  the  Ameri-
can revolution.  He  studied  law  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  of  New  Brunswick  in  October,  1823,
was  judge  of  probates  for  Westmoreland  co.,  N.
B  from  1823  till  1862,  a  member  of  the  executive
council  from  1844  till  1858,  and  from  18G7  till
1869,  when  he  resigned  to  take  the  office  of  inter-
colonial railway  commissioner.  He  has  been  a  dele-
gate on  various  important  missions  to  London,
Washington,  and  elsewhere,  and  in  July,  1878,  was
appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  New  Brunswick,
which  office  he  held  till  his  death.

CHANDLER,  EHzabeth  Margaret,  author,  b.
in  Centre,  near  Wilmington,  Del.,  24  Dec,  1807;
d.  22  Nov.,  1834.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Thomas
Chandler,  a  Quaker  farmer,  was  educated  at  the
Friends'  school  in  Philadelphia,  and  began  at  an
early  age  to  write  verses.  Her  poem  "  The  Slave-
Ship,"  written  when  she  was  eighteen  years  old,
gained  the  prize  offered  by  the  '•  Casket,"  a  month-
ly magazine.  She  became  a  contributor  to  the
"Genuisof  Universal  Emancipation,"  a  Philadel-
phia periodical  favoring  the  liberation  of  the  slaves,
and  in  it  nearly  all  her  subsequent  writings  ap-
peared. In  1830,  with  her  aunt  and  brother,  she
remov^ed  to  a  farm  near  Tecumseh,  Lenawee  co.,
Mich.,  and  from  there  continued  her  contributions
in  prose  and  verse  on  the  subject  of  slavery.  A
collection  of  her  poems  and  essays  was  edited,  with
a  memoir,  by  Benjamin  Lundy  (Philadelphia,  1836).
CHANDLER,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Epping,
N.  H.,  in  1760:  d.  in  Augusta,  Me.,  25  Sept.,  1841.
He  was  a  blacksmith,  and  finally  became  wealthy ;
was  a  counsellor  and  senator  from  1803  till  1805,
and  a  member  of  congress  from  1805  till  1808.  At
the  beginning  of  the  war  with  Great  Britain  in
1812  he  was  commissioned  brigadier-general,  8  July,
and  was  wounded  and  made  a  prisoner  at  the  battle
of  Stoney  Creek,  Upper  Canada.  From  1820  till
1829  he  was  U.  S.  senator  from  Maine.  He  was  col-
lector of  Portland  from  1829  till  1837,  trustee  of
Bowdoin  college,  and  sheriff  of  Kennebec  co.

CHANDLER,  Joseph  Ripley,  journalist,  b.  in
Kingston,  Mass.,  25  Aug.,  1792 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  10  July,  1880.  After  receiving  a  common-
school  educa-
tion, he  became
clerk  in  a  store
in  Boston,  but
continued  to
read  and  study,
and  soon  be-
gan to  teach.
About  1815  he
married  and
moved  to  Phil-
adelphia,where
for  some  years
he  and  his  wife
kept  a  success-
ful school.  He
became  con-
nected with  the
"United  States
Gazette,"  then
in  a  moribund
condition,  in
1822,  and  in
1826,  having  given  it  renewed  life,  he  gave  up  his
school.  The  "Gazette"  became  prominent  as  a
whig  journal  and  an  advocate  of  national  and  local


progress.  Mr.  Chandler's  connection  with  it  ceased,
owing  to  his  health,  in  1847,  when  it  was  merged  in
the  "  North  American."  He  was  a  member  of  the
Philadelphia  city  council  from  1832  till  1848,  and
in  1836  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional
convention.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  whig
in  1848,  and  served  three  terms,  from  1849  till
1855.  Much  of  his  time  between  1855  and  1858
was  spent  abroad,  and  in  the  latter  year  President
Buchanan  appointed  him  minister  to  the  Two
Sicilies.  He  was  in  Naples  at  the  time  of  the  ex-
pulsion of  the  Bourbons,  and  returned  in  Novem-
ber, 1860,  to  Philadelphia.  He  took  much  interest
in  prison  reform,  was  one  of  the  inspectors  of
prisons,  and  a  prominent  member  of  the  Philadel-
phia society  for  the  relief  of  public  prisons.  He
published  a  "  Grammar  of  the  English  Language  "
(Philadelphia,  1821),  and  many  essays,  addresses,
and  pamphlets  on  prison  di.<cipline  and  other  sub-
jects of  general  interest.

CHANDLER,  Ralph,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York,  23  Aug.,  1829;  d.  in  Hong  Kong.  China,  11
Feb.,  1889.  He  was  appointed  midshipman,  27
Sept.,  1845,  served  on  the  west  coast  of  Mexico
during  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  engaged  in  skir-
mishes. He  became  passed  midshipman,  6  Oct.,
1851,  master  in  1855,  and  was  commissioned  as
lieutenant  on  16  Sept.  of  that  year.  He  was  on
the  "Vandalia"  at  the  battle  of  Port  Royal,
7  Nov.,  1861,  and  in  1862  was  assigned  to  the  "  San
Jacinto,"  of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron, on  which  he  was  present  at  the  capture  of
Norfolk.  He  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-command-
er, 16  July,  1862,  commanded  the  "Maumee"  at
both  attacks  on  Fort  Fisher,  and  was  made  com-
mander, 25  July,  1866.  He  became  captain,  5  June,
1874,  and  commodore,  1  March,  1884,  and  in  the
same  year  was  appointed  commandant  of  the
Brooklyn  navy-yard.  He  w^as  promoted  to  rear-
admiral  on  6  Oct.,  1886,  succeeded  in  command
of  the  navy-yard  by  Commodore  Gherardi  on  15
Oct.,  and  was  ordered  to  relieve  Rear- Admiral  Davis
in  command  of  the  Asiatic  squadron. — His  daugh-
ter Bessie  (Mrs.  Leroy  Parker)  has  contributed  nu-
merous poems  to  the  "  Century,"  "  St.  Nicholas,"
and  other  periodicals.

CHANDLER,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Lexington,
Mass.,  in  1794;  d.  there,  20  July,  1867.  He  became
third  lieutenant  in  the  9th  Massachusetts  infantry,
11  May,  1814,  and  went  into  service  on  the  Cana-
dian frontier,  taking  part  in  the  battle  of  Lundy's
Lane,  and  in  other  engagements  during  the  war
with  Great  Britain.  He  was  made  second  lieuten-
ant in  September,  1814,  and  discharged  in  June,
1815.  He  then  went  into  trade  in  his  native  town,
and  thenceforward  took  an  active  part  in  town
and  county  affairs.  After  being  a  member  of  both
branches  of  the  legislature,  he  was,  in  1840,  elected
sheriff  of  Middlesex,  and  held  that  office  until  1855.
He  was  also  major-general  of  the  state  militia  for
many  years,  but  lived  in  retirement  on  his  farm
during  the  latter  part  of  his  life.

CHANDLER,  Thomas  Bradbury,  clergyman,
b.  in  Woodstock,  Conn.,  26  April,  1726;  d.  in
Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  17  June,  1790.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1745,  taught  school  while  study-
ing for  the  ministry,  and  was  appointed  catechist
and  lay-reader  at  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  by  the  So-
ciety for  propagating  the  gospel  in  foreign  parts.
He  went  to  England  in  1751,  was  admitted  to  or-
ders by  the  bishop  of  London,  and  returned  the
same  year.  His  missionary  labors  in  Elizabeth-
toAvn  and  vicinity  were  unceasing.  As  he  was  on
principle  a  lover  and  admirer  of  the  orderly  ways
of  the  church  of  England,  he  refused  his  pulpit  to


574


CHANDLER


CHANDLER


the  celebrated  Whitefield,  who  made  a  visit  to
Elizabethtown  in  the  winter  of  17G3-'4.  He  re-
ceived, in  1766,  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Oxford.
The  year  following  he  published  an  earnest  and
spirited  "  Appeal  in  Behalf  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land in  America,"  and  urged  the  appointment  of
bishops  for  the  colonies.  A  controversy  arose  in
consequence,  Dr.  Chauncy,  of  Boston,  being  the
chief  opponent  of  Dr.  Chandlers  views,  which  was
conducted  on  both  sides  with  acknowledged  ability.
On  the  approach  of  the  Revolution,  Dr.  Chandler,
not  being  in  sympathy  with  his  countrymen  in  the
matter  at  issue,  went  to  England  in  1775,  and  re-
mained there  for  ten  years,  being  occupied  chiefly
in  study  and  writing.  He  was  offered  the  bishopric
of  Nova  Scotia,  but,  on  the  score  of  infirm  health,
declined  the  appointment.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1785,  and  resumed  his  relations
with  the  church  in  Elizabethtown,  but  was  unable
to  engage  in  public  service.

CHANDLER,  William  Eaton,  cabinet  minis-
ter, b.  in  Concord,  N.  H.,  28  Dec,  1835.  He  studied
law  in  Concord,  and  at  the  Harvard  law-school,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1855.  For  several  years
after  his  admission  to  the  bar  in  1850  he  practised
in  Concord,  and  in  1859  was  appointed  reporter  of
the  New  Hampshire  supreme  court,  and  published
five  volumes  of  reports.  From  the  tiine  of  his
coming  of  age  Mr.  Chandler  was  actively  con-
nected with  the
republican  par-
ty, serving  first
as  secretary,  and
afterward  as
chairman  of  the
statecommittee.
In  1802  he  was
elected  to  the
New  Hampshire
house  of  repre-
sentatives, of
which  he  was
speaker  for  two
successive  terms
in  1863-'4.  In
November,  1864,
hewaseinployed
by  the  navy  de-
partment as  spe-
cial counsel  to
prosecute  the
Philadelphia  navy-yard  frauds,  and  on  9  March,
1865,  was  appointed  first  solicitor  and  judge-advo-
cate-general of  that  department.  On  17  June,  1865,
he  became  first  assistant  secretary  of  the  treasury.
On  30  Nov.,  1867,  he  resigned  this  place  and  re-
sumed law  practice.  During  the  next  thirteen
years,  although  occupying  no  official  position  ex-
cept that  of  member  of  the  Constitutional  conven-
tion of  New  Hampshire  in  1876,  he  continued  to
take  an  active  part  in  politics.  He  was  a  delegate
from  his  state  to  the  Republican  national  conven-
tion in  1808,  and  was  secretary  of  the  national
committee  from  that  time  imtil  1876.  In  that
year  he  advocated  the  claims  of  the  Hayes  electors
in  Florida  before  the  canvassing  board  of  the  state,
and  later  was  one  of  the  counsel  to  prepare  the
case  submitted  by  the  republican  side  to  the  elec-
toral commission.  Mr.  Chandler  afterward  became
an  especially  outspoken  opponent  of  the  southern
policy  of  the  Hayes  administration.  In  1880  he
was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  conven-
tion, and  served  as  a  member  of  the  committee  on
credentials,  in  which  place  he  was  active  in  secur-
ing the  report  in  favor  of  district  representation.


(JP^  S^^o-.-^^^


which  was  adopted  by  the  convention.  During  the
subsequent  campaign  he  was  a  member  of  the
national  committee.  On  23  March,  1881.  he  was
nominated  for  U.  S.  solicitor-general,  but  the
senate  refused  to  confirm,  the  vote  being  nearly
upon  party  lines.  In  that  year  he  was  again  a
member  of  the  New  Hampshire  legislature.  On
7  April,  1882,  he  was  appointed  secretary  of  the
navy.  Among  the  important  measures  carried  out
by  him  were  the  simplification  and  reduction  of
the  unwieldy  navy-yard  establishment ;  the  limita-
tion of  the  number  of  annual  appointments  to  the
actual  wants  of  the  naval  service ;  the  discontinu-
ance of  the  extravagant  policy  of  repairing  worth-
less vessels ;  and  the  beginning  of  a  modern  navy
in  the  construction  of  the  four  new  cruisers  recom-
mended by  the  advisory  board.  The  organization
and  successful  voyage  of  the  Greoly  relief  expedi-
tion in  1884  were  largely  due  to  his  personal  efforts.
Mr.  Chandler  was  a  strenuous  advocate  of  uniting
with  the  navy  the  other  nautical  branches  of  the
federal  administration,  including  the  light-house
establishment,  the  coast  survey,  and  the  revenue
marine,  upon  the  principle,  first  distinctly  set  forth
by  him,  that  "  the  officers  and  seamen  of  the  navy
should  be  employed  to  perform  all  the  work  of  the
National  government  upon  or  in  direct  connection
with  the  ocean."  Mr.  Chandler  is  controlling  owner
of  the  daily  "  Monitor,"  a  republican  journal,  and
its  weekly,  the  ''Statesman,"  published  in  Concord,
N.  H.  In  June,  1887,  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator.
CHANDLER,  Zacliariali,  senator,  b.  in  Bed-
ford, N.  H.,  10  Dec,  1813 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  1
Nov.,  1879.  After  receiving  a  common-school  edu-
cation he  taught  for  one  winter,  at  the  same  time
managing  his  father's  farm.  He  was  noted  when
a  youth  for  physical  strength  and  endurance.
It  is  said  that,  being  offered  by  his  father  the
choice  between  a  collegiate  education  and  the  sum
of  |1,000,  he  chose  the  latter.  He  removed  to  De-
troit in  1833  and  engaged  in  the  dry-goods  busi-
ness, in  which  he  was  energetic  and  successful.  He
soon  became  a  prominent  whig,  and  was  active  in
support  of  the  so-called  "  underground  railroad,"
of  which  Detroit  was  an  important  terminus.  His
public  life  began  in  1851  by  his  election  as  mayor
of  Detroit.  In  1852  he  was  nominated  for  gov-
ernor by  the  whigs,  and,  although  his  success  was
hopeless,  the  large  vote  he  received  brought  him
into  public  notice.  He  was  active  in  the  organiza-
tion of  the  republican  party  in  1854,  and  in  Janu-
ary, 1857,  was  elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  suc-
ceed Gen.  Lewis  Cass.  He  made  his  first  im-
portant speech  on  12  March,  1858,  opposing  the
admission  of  Kansas  under  the  Lecompton  consti-
tution, and  continued  to  take  active  part  in  the
debates  on  that  and  allied  questions.  In  1858,
when  Senator  Green,  of  Missouri,  had  threatened
Simon  Cameron  with  an  assault  for  words  spoken
in  debate,  Mr.  Chandler,  with  Mr.  Cameron  and
Benjamin  F.  Wade,  of  Ohio,  drew  up  a  written
agreement,  the  contents  of  which  were  not  to  be
made  public  till  the  death  oi  all  the  signers,  but
which  was  believed  to  be  a  pledge  to  resent  an  at-
tack made  on  anv  one  of  the  three.  On  11  teb.,
1861,  he  wrote  the  famous  so-called  "  blood  letter
to  Gov.  Blair,  of  Michigan.  It  received  its  name
from  the  sentence,  "  Without  a  little  blood-letting
this  Union  will  not,  in  my  estimation,  be  worth  a
rush."  This  letter  was  widely  quoted  through  the
country,  and  was  acknowledged  and  defended  b)
Mr.  Chandler  on  the  floor  of  the  senate,  m.
Chandler  was  a  firm  friend  of  President  Lincoln,
though  he  was  more  radical  than  the  latter  in  ms
ideas,  and  often  differed  with  the  president  as  to


CHANEY


CHANG  AND  ENG


675


matters  of  policy.  When  the  first  call  for  troops
was  made,  he  assisted  by  giving  money  and  by  per-
sonal exertion.  He  regretted  that  500,000  men
had  not  been  called  for  instead  of  75,000,  and  said

that  the  short-
term  enlistment
was  a  mistake.
At  the  begin-
ningoftheextra
session  of  con-
gress in  Julv,
1861,  he  intro-
duced a  sweep-
ing confisca-
tion-bill, think-
ing that  stern
measures  would
deter  wavering
persons  from
taking  up  arms
against  the  gov-
ernment ;  but  it
was  not  passed
in  its  original
form,  though
congress  ultimately  adopted  his  views.  On  16
July,  1862,  Mr.  Chandler  vehemently  assailed  Gen.
McClellan  in  the  senate,  although  he  was  warned
that  such  a  course  might  be  politically  fatal.  He
was,  however,  returned  to  the  senate  in  1863,  and
in  1864  actively  aided  in  the  re-election  of  Presi-
dent Lincoln.  He  was  again  elected  to  the  senate
in  1869.  During  all  of  his  terms  he  was  chairman
of  the  committee  on  commerce  and  a  member  of
other  important  committees,  including  that  on
the  conduct  of  the  war.  In  October,  1874,  Presi-
dent Grant  tendered  him  the  post  of  secretary  of
the  interior,  to  fill  the  place  made  vacant  by  the
resignation  of  Columbus  Delano,  and  he  held  this
office  until  President  Grant's  retirement,  doing
much  to  reform  abuses  in  the  department.  He
was  chairman  of  the  Republican  national  com-
mittee in  1876,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the
presidential  campaign  of  that  year.  He  was  again
elected  to  the  senate  in  February,  1879,  to  fill
the  vacancy  caused  by  the  resignation  of  Isaac
P.  Christiancy,  who  had  succeeded  him  four  years
before.  On  2  March,  1879,  he  made  a  speech  in  the
senate  denouncing  JelTerson  Davis,  which  brought
him  into  public  notice  again,  and  he  \^as  regarded
in  his  own  state  as  a  possible  presidential  candi-
date. He  went  to  Chicago  on  31  Oct.,  1879,  to  de-
liver a  political  speech,  and  was  found  dead  in  his
room  on  the  following  morning.  During  tlie
greater  portion  of  his  life  Mr.  Chandler  was  en-
gaged in  large  business  enterprises,  from  which  he
realized  a  handsome  fortune.  He  was  a  num  of
commanding  appearance,  and  possessed  an  excel-
lent practical  judgment,  great  energy,  and  indom-
itable pesseverance.

CHANEY,  Liician  West,  Jr.,  naturalist,  b.  in
Heuvelton,  N.  Y.,  26  June,  1857.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Carleton  college  in  1878,  after  which  he
taught  in  public  schools  at  Mankato  and  Faribault,
Minn.,  until  1880.  During  the  years  1880-'2  he  was
superintendent  of  the  city  schools  in  Glencoe,  Minn.,
and  in  1882  became  professor  of  biology  and  ge-
ology in  Carleton  college.  The  biological  depart-
ment of  this  institution,  under  his  management,
has  been  thoroughly  equipped  with  modern  appa-
ratus, and  brought  to  a  state  of  perfection  un-
equalled in  the  state  of  Minnesota,  and  probably
unsurpassed  in  the  west.  He  has  adapted  and  im-
proved inany  laboratory  appliances,  such  as  section-
cutters,  injection  apparatus,  etc.,  in  common  use,


and  has  contributed  papers  on  biological  subjects
to  the  "  Bulletin  of  the  Minnesota  Academy  of
Sciences,"  the  "Sidereal  Messenger,"  and  other
publications.  He  is  also  author  of  "  Guides  for  the
Laboratorv  "  (Northfield,  1886).

CHANFRAU,  Frank  S.,  actor,  b.  in  New  York,
22  Feb.,  1824 ;  d.  in  Jersey  City,  2  Oct.,  1884.  His
father  was  a  French  oiiicer  in  the  vessel  that
brought  Lafayette  to  the  United  States.  He  en-
joyed but  few  educational  advantages.  At  an
early  age  he  attempted  to  earn  a  livelihood  as  a
hatter,  subsequently  was  employed  as  a  ship-builder
at  Cleveland,  and  helped  to  build  the  first  steam-
boat that  ever  left  that  port.  Returning  to  New
York,  he  lived  precariously  for  a  year  or  two,  and
during  this  period  his  talent  as  a  mimic  became
first  known,  and  put  him  in  the  way  that  ultimate-
ly led  to  fortune.  His  first  theatre  engagement
was  as  a  supernumerary  at  the  old  Bowery  theatre ;
subsequently  he  became  utility-man  at  the  same
place,  and  after  some  years  played  second  juvenile
parts  at  the  old  Park  theatre,  and  in  1848  was  en-
gaged as  leading  comedian  at  Mitchell's  Olympic
theatre.  He  gained  great  popularity  as  a  comic
actor  at  this  house,  his  impersonation  of  Mose  the
fireman  in  Benjamin  Baker's  play,  "  A  Glance  at
New  York,"  being  regarded  as  inimitable.  Chan-
frau's  success  as  Mose  made  him  rich.  On  20
Sept.,  1849,  he  first  appeared  in  the  Arch  street
theatre,  Philadelphia,  and  soon  afterward  he  pro-
vided Brooklyn  with  a  theatre ;  but  the  undertak-
ing did  not  succeed,  and,  after  sinking  $22,000  in
the  venture,  he  accepted  an  invitation  from  Charles
R.  Thorne  to  sail  for  California.  After  a  most
successful  tour  there  he  returned  to  New  York  and
added  Thomas  B.  de  Walden's  Sam  to  his  reper-
tory, and  during  the  winter  of  1870  appeared  in  the
leading  part  in  "  Kit,  the  Arkansas  Traveller,"  a
play  written  by  Edward  Spencer,  and  then  pro-
duced for  the  first  time.  As  Kit  Redding,  Chan-
frau  achieved  his  most  signal  success.  In  this  role
he  exhibited  all  his  gifts  and  attainments  to  the
best  advantage,  and  though  the  character  of  his
acting  was  never  elevated,  it  was  invariably  amus-
ing and  never  hurtful.  He  was  a  genei-ous  and
noble-minded  man,  correct  in  his  habits,  and  a
model  husband,  father,  and  son.  He  died  worth
about  $300,000,  having  considerable  property  at
Long  Branch,  N.  J.,  which  he  had  made  his  resi-
dence for  nineteen  years. — His  wife,  Henrietta
Baker,  actress,  b.  in  Philadelphia  in  1837,  made
her  debut  during  the  summer  of  1854  at  the  assem-
bly buildings,  Philadelphia,  under  the  manage-
ment of  Prof.  Mueller,  as  a  vocalist.  Her  first  ap-
pearance on  the  boards  of  a  regular  theatre  was  at
the  city  museum  in  her  native  place,  9  Sept.,  1854,
as  Miss  Apsley  in  "  The  Willow  Copse."  A  short
time  afterward  she  became  a  member  of  the  Arch
street  theatre,  where  she  remained  nearly  two  sea-
sons. When  the  National  at  Cincinnati  was
opened  by  Lewis  Baker  for  the  season  1857-'8,  she
became  a  member  of  the  company  and  achieved
success.  She  married  Mr.  Chanfrau  in  July,  1858.
After  a  long  absence  from  New  York,  in  the  au-
tumn of  1886  she  appeared  at  the  reopening  of  the
Fourteenth  street  theatre  as  Linda  Colmore  in
"The  Scapegoat."  Her  acting  is  entirely  free
from  affectation  or  mannerisms.

CHANCr  and  ENO,  Siamese  twins,  b.  in  Banga-
seau,  Siam,  15  April,  1811 ;  d.  near  Mount  Airy,
N.  C,  17  Jan.,  1874.  Their  father  was  Chinese  and
their  mother  Chino-Siamese.  They  came  to  the
United  States  in  1829,  and  were  exhibited  here  and
in  Europe  for  nearly  twenty-five  years.  Having
accumulated  a  fortune  of  about  |80,000,  they  set-


576


CHANNING


CHANNING


tied  as  farmers  in  North  Carolina,  and  at  the  age
of  forty-four  or  forty-five  married  two  sisters,  by
whom  they  had  children  (Chang  six  and  Eng  five),
of  whom  eight,  with  the  two  widows,  survived
them.  Two  of  the  children  were  deaf  and  dumb ;
the  rest  had  no  malformation  or  infirmity.  They
lost  a  part  of  their  property,  which  consisted  par-
tially of  slaves,  by  the  war,  and  were  very  bitter  in
their  denunciation  of  the  government  in  conse-
quence. After  the  war  they  again  resorted  to  pub-
lic exhibitions,  but  were  not  very  successful.  Their
lives  were  embittered  by  their  own  quarrels  and
the  bickering  of  their  wives;  and  they  returned
home,  with  their  tempers  much  soured  and  their
spirits  depressed,  after  a  decision  by  the  most  emi-
nent European  surgeons  that  the  severing  of  the
band  (which  both  desired)  would  prove  fatal.  Not-
withstanding this,  they  always  maintained  a  high
character  for  integrity  and  fair  dealing,  and  were
much  esteemed  by  their  neighbors.  In  1870  Chang
had  a  paralytic  stroke,  and  was  subsequently  weak
and  ill,  while  Eng's  health  was  much  improved.
Chang  died  first,  probably  of  cerebral  clot,  during
the  night ;  and  when  Eng  awoke  and  found  his
brother  dead,  his  fright  and  the  consequent  nerv-
ous shock,  acting  upon  an  enfeebled  heart,  produced
a  syncope,  which  resulted  fatally  two  hours  and  a
half  after  Chang's  death.  Their  bodies  were  taken
to  Philadelphia  and  carefully  examined  by  eminent
physicians.  The  connection  of  the  two  was  by  a
fleshy  and  partly  cartilaginous  band  extending
from  the  xiphoid  region  of  the  sternum  down  to  a
point  below  the  umbilicus  of  each.  There  had
been  but  a  single  umbilical  cord  attached  to  the
middle  of  the  under  side  of  this  band,  and  while
the  band  (which  was  eight  or  nine  inches  in  length,
about  eight  in  circumference,  and  two  and  a  half
in  diameter — its  upper  or  outer  surface  being  con-
vex, and  the  under  or  inner  concave)  was  cartilagi-
nous and  nearly  insensible  except  at  its  median
point,  there  was  evidently  some  inter-communica-
tion through  it  to  the  viscera  of  both.  The  breast-
bones were  so  nearly  joined  that  they  were  natural-
ly face  to  face,  and  could  never  have  occupied  the
position  of  back  to  back.  It  was  then  found  that
there  were  no  direct  blood-vessels  or  nerves  connect-
ing either  the  circulation  of  the  blood  or  the  nerv-
ous fluid  through  both  bodies,  but  that  the  perito-
naeum or  membrane  covering  the  bowels  was
extended  in  two  pouches  from  the  abdomen  of
Chang  passing  through  the  band  into  the  abdomen
of  Eng,  and  that  one  similar  pouch  from  the  peri-
tonaeum of  Eng  passed  through  the  band  lying  be-
tween the  two  from  Chang,  into  the  abdomen  of
Chang.  These  pouches  contained  small  blood-ves-
sels coming  from  the  livers  of  each  (which  were  in
both  close  to  the  cord),  and  these  blood-vessels
were  covered  with  a  thin  layer  of  genuine  liver-
tissue.  A  separation  or  division  of  the  cord  would
therefore  have  been  almost  certainly  fatal  to  both.
The  twins  differed  considerably  in  size  and  strength
as  well  as  in  disposition,  Chang  being  considerably
the  larger  and  stronger,  but  also  the  more  irritable
and  intemperate.

CHANNING,  William  Ellery,  clergyman,  b.
in  Newport,  R.  I.,  7  April,  1780 ;  d.  in  Benning-
ton, Vt.,  2  Oct.,  1842.  His  boyhood  was  passed  in
Newport,  where  his  first  strong  religious  impres-
sions were  received  from  the  preaching  of  Dr.  Sam-
uel Hopkins.  As  a  youth,  he  appears,  though  small
in  person  and  of  a  sensibility  almost  feminine,  to
have  been  vigorous,  athletic,  and  resolute,  show-
ing from  childhood  a  marked  quality  of  moral
courage  and  mental  sincerity.  In  his  college  life
at  Harvard,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1798,  he


showed  a  singular  capacity  to  win  the  ardent  per-
sonal attachment  of  his  i'ellows;  and,  though  he
was  very  young,  his  literary  qualities  seem  even
then  to  have  been  fully  developed,  his  style  being
described  by  his  classmate.  Judge  Story,  as  "racy,
flowing, full, glowing with life, chaste in or-
nament, vigorous  in  structure,  and  beautiful  in
finish." He  was  also  conspicuous  in  the  students'
debating-clubs,  and  shared fully  in the  political
enthusiasms  of  the  day,  refusing  the  commence-
rnent  oration  assigned  him  until  granted  permis-
sion to  speak  on  his  favorite  theme. Among  the
authors  of  his  choice  at  this  time,  Hutcheson  ap-
jjears  to  have  inspired  his  profound  conviction  of
"  the  dignity  of  human  nature,"  Ferguson  ('*  Civil
Society")  his faith  in  social progress and his
"enthusiasm  of  humanity^' and  Price  ("Disserta-
tions ")  that  form  of  idealism  which  "  saved  me,"
he  says,  "  from  Locke's  philosophy." As  a  private
instructor  in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  the  family  of  D.
M.  Randolph,  in  1798-1800,  he  felt  "the  charm
of  southern  manners  and  hospitality,"  and  at  the
same  time  acquired  an  abhorrence  of  "^the  social  and
moral  aspects  of  slavery,  then  equally  abhorred  by
the  most  intelligent  men  and  women  at  the  south.
Here  he  became  eagerly  interested  in  political  dis-
cussions growing  out  of  the  revolutionary  move-
ments in  Europe,  and  a  keen  admirer  of  such  writ-
ers as  Godwin,  Mary  Wollstonecraft,  and  especially
Rousseau ;  but,  as  if  by  a  certain  unconscious  re-
action against these  infiuences, he  gave  special
study  to  the  historical  evidences  of  Christianity,
to  which  class  of  evidences  he  ever  after  strongly
adhered,  and  was  confirmed  in  his  purpose  to  pre-
pare for  the  ministry. He  also  disciplined  himself
by  a  vigorously  ascetic  way  of  life— exposure  to
cold,  hardship,  and  fatigue,  with  scant  diet  (lead-
ing to  permanent  "contraction  of  the  stomach"
with  painful  dyspepsia),  insufficient  clothing,  and
excessive  devotion  to  study. The  ill-effect  of  these
practices,  aggravated  by  the  exposures  of  his  return
voyage  to  Newport,  followed  him  through  life,  and
"  from  the  time  of  his  residence  in  Richmond  to
the  day  of  his  death  he  never  knew  a  day  of  un-
impaired vigor." After  a  short  stay  in  Newport,
where  the  influences of  early  life  were  renewed
and  deepened,  he  returned  to  Cambridge  as  a  stu-
dent of  theology,  with  the  title  and  petty  income
of  "  regent,"  a  "sort  of  university  scholarship. At
this  period  Bishop  Butler  and  William  Law  were
the  writers  that  chiefly  influenced  his  opinions:
and  he  is  represented  as  having  had  a  tendency
to  Calvinistic  views,  though  "  never  in  any  sense  a
Trinitarian." His  first  and  only  pastoral  settlement
was  over  the  church  in  Federal  street,  Boston,  1
June,  1803,  which  he  accepted,  in  preference  to  the
more  distinguished  place  in  Brattle  square,  partly
on  the  ground  that  a  smaller  and  feebler  congre-
gation might  not  overtax  his  strength. Here  he
was  shortly  known  for  a  style  of  religious  eloquence
of  rare  "  fervor,  solemnity,  and  beauty." His  views
at  this  time — and  indeed,  prevailingly,  during  his
later  life — are  described  as  "  rather  mystical  than
rational "  ; in  particular, as  to  the  controverted
doctrine  of  Christ's  divinity,  holding  "  that  Jesus
Christ  is  more  than  man,  that  he  existed  before
the  world,  that  he  literally  came  from  heaven  to
save  our  race,  that  he  sustains  other  offices  than
those  of  a  teacher  and  witness  to  the  truth,  and
that  he  still  acts  for  our  benefit,  and  is  our  inter-
cessor with  the  Father." Early  in  his  ministrv,
however,  Mr.  Channing  was  closely  identified  with
that movement  of thought, literary  and  philo-
sophic as  well  as  theological,  which  gave  birth  to
the  "Anthology  Club,"  and  to  a  series  of  journals.


CHANNING


CHANNING


577


of  which  those  longest-lived  and  of  widest  repute
were  the  "North  American  Review"  and  the
'•Christian  Examiner."  Essays  published  in  these
journals,  especially  those  on'  Milton  and  on  the
character  of  Napoleon,  gave  him  literary  reputa-
tion in  Europe  as  well  as  at  home.  The  intel-
lectual movement  in  question  was  marked  by  an
increasing  interest  in  questions  of  theological  and
textual  critieisjn,  and  by  a  leaning  toward,  if  not
identification  with,  the  class  of  opinions  that  began
about  1815  to  be  currently  known  as  Unitarian.
Though  Mr.  Channing  was  disinclined  to  sectarian
names  or  methods,  though  he  never  desired  to  be
personally  called  a  Unitarian,  and  would  have
chosen  that  the  movement  of  liberal  theology
should  go  on  within  the  lines  of  the  New  Eng-
land Congregational  body,  to  which  he  belonged
from  birth,  yet  he  became  known  as  the  leader
of  the  Unitarians,  and  may  almost  be  said  to  have
fii-st  given  to  the  body  so  called  the  consciousness
of  its  real  position  and  the  courage  of  its  convic-
tions by  his  sermon  delivered  in  Baltimore,  5  May,
1819,.  at  the  ordination  of  Jared  Sparks.  This
celebrated  discourse  may  be  regarded  less  as  a
theological  argument,  for  which  its  method  is  too
loose  and  rhetorical,  than  as  a  solemn  impeach-
ment of  the  Calvinistic  theology  of  that  day  at  the

bar  of  popular
reason  and  con-
science. And  a
similar  judgment
may  be  passed,  in
general,  upon  the
series  of  contro-
versial discourses
that  he  delivered
in  the  succeeding
years.  For  about
fifteen  years,  mak-
ing the  middle
period  of  his  pro-
fessional life  —  a
life  interrupted
only  by  a  few
months'  stay  in
Europe  (1822-'3)
and  a  winter  spent
in  Santa  Cruz
(1830 -'31)  — Mr.
Channing  was
best  known  to  the  public  as  a  leader  in  the  Uni-
tarian body,  and  the  recoi-d  of  this  time  survives
in  several  volumes  of  eloquent  and  noble  sermons,
which  constitute  still  the  best  body  of  practical
divinity  that  the  Unitarian  movement  in  this
country  has  produced.  Very  interesting  testimony
to  the  habit  and  working  of  his  mind  at  this  pe-
riod is  also  to  be  found  in  the  volume  of  "  Remi-
niscences "  by  Miss  E.  P.  Peabody  (Boston,  1880).
A  sermon  on  the  "  Ministry  at  Large  "  in  Boston
(1835)  strongly  illustrates  the  sympathetic  as  well
as  religious  temper  in  which  he  now  undertook
those  discussions  of  social  topics— philanthropy,
moral  reform,  and  political  ethics — by  which  his
later  years  were  most  widely  and  honorably  distin-
guished. From  organized  charity  the  way  was  open
to  questions  of  temperance  and  public  education,
"Which  now  began  to  take  new  shapes;  and  from
these,  again,  to  those  that  lie  upon  the  border-
ground  of  morals  and  politics — war  and  slavery.
Regarding  the  last,  indeed,  which  may  be  taken  as
a  type  of  the  whole,  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever
adopted  the  extreme  opinions,  or  approved  the
characteristic  modes  of  action,  of  the  party  known
as  abolitionists.  But  his  general  and  very  intense
VOL.  I. — 37


sympathy  with  their  aims  was  of  great  moral  A'alue
in  the  anti-slavery  movement,  nov,^  taking  more  and
more  a  political  direction.  Of  this  the  earliest  testi-
mony was  a  brief  but  vigorous  essay  on  slavery
(1835),  dealing  with  it  purely  on  grounds  of  mora'l
argument ;  followed  the  next  year  by  a  public  letter
of  sympathy  to  James  G.  Birney  ("The  Abolition-
ists "),  who  had  just  been  driven  from  Cincinnati
with  the  destruction  of  his  press  and  journal;  and
again,  in  1837,  by  a  letter  to  Henry  Clay  on  the
annexation  of  Texas,  a  policy  which  the  writer
thought  good  ground  to  justify  disunion.  The
event  that,  more  than  any  other,  publicly  associ-
ated his  name  and  influence  with  the  anti-slavery
party  was  a  meeting  held  in  Faneuil  Hall,  8  DecC,
1837,  after  the  death  of  Elijah  P.  Lovejoy,  who  was
shot  while  defending  his  press  at  Alton,  111.,  when
for  the  first  time  Mr.  Channing  stood  side  by  side,
upon  the  public  platform,  with  men  in  whom  he
now  saw  the  champions  of  that  freedom  of  discus-
sion which  must  be  upheld  by  all  good  citizens.
His  later  writings  on  the  subject  are  a  letter  on
"The  Slavery  Question"  (1830)  addressed  to  Jona-
than Phillips;  a  tract  on  "Emancipation"  (1840),
suggested  by  a  work  of  J.  J.  Gurney's  on  emanci-
pation in  the  British  West  Indies;  and  an  argu-
ment (1842)  on  "The  Duty  of  the  Free  States,"
touching  the  case  of  the  slaves  on  board  the  brig
"  Creole,"  of  Richmond,  who  had  seized  the  vessel
and  carried  her  into  the  port  of  Nassau.  His  last
public  act  was  an  address  delivered  in  Lenox,
Mass.,  1  Aug.,  1842,  commemorating  the  West  In-
dia emancipation.  A  few  weeks  later,  while  on  a
journey,  he  was  seized  with  an  attack  of  autumn
fever,  of  which  he  died.  Interesting  personal  recol-
lections remain,  now  passing  into  tradition,  of
Channing's  rare  quality  and  power  as  a  pulpit
orator,  of  which  a  single  trait  may  here  be  given :
"  From  the  high,  old-fashioned  pulpit  his  face
beamed  down,  it  may  be  said,  like  the  face  of  an
angel,  and  his  voice  floated  down  like  a  voice  from
higher  spheres.  It  was  a  voice  of  rare  power  and
attraction,  clear,  flowing,  melodious,  slightly  plain-
tive, so  as  curiously  to  catch  and  win  upon  the
hearer's  sympathy.  Its  melody  and  pathos  in  the
reading  of  a  hymn  was  alone  a  charm  that  might
bring  men  to  the  listening,  like  the  attraction  of
sweet  music.  Often,  too,  when  signs  of  physical
frailty  were  apparent,  it  might  be  said  that  his
speech  was  watched  and  waited  for  with  that  sort
of  hush  as  if  one  was  waiting  to  catch  his  last
earthly  words."  Numerous  writings  of  Dr.  Chan-
ning were  published  singly,  which  were  gathered
shortly  before  his  death  (5  vols.,  Boston,  1841),  to
which"  a  sixth  volume  was  added  subsequently,  and
also,  in  1872,  a  volume  of  selected  sermons  entitled
"  The  Perfect  Life."  All  are  included  in  a  single
volume  published  by  the  American  Unitarian  as-
sociation (Boston).  A  biography  was  prepared  by
his  nephew,  W.  H.  Channing  (3  vols.,  Boston,  1848).
Translations  of  Channing's  writings  "  have  been,
either  wholly  or  in  part,  published  in  the  Ger-
man, French,  Italian,  Hungarian,  Icelandic,  and
Russian  languages."  While  in  America  he  is  best
known  as  a  theologian  and  preacher,  his  influence
abroad  is  said  to  be  chiefly  as  a  writer  on  subjects
of  social  ethics. — His  brother,  Walter,  physician,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  15  April,  1780 ;  d.  in  ISoston,
Mass.,  27  July,  1876.  entered  Harvard  in  1804,  but
left  in  1807  on  account  of  the  "rebellion"  of  that
year,  and  afterward  received  his  degree  out  of
course.  After  studying  medicine  in  Boston  and
Philadelphia,  he  received  his  diploma  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  then  studied  in
Edinburgh,  and  at  Guy's  and  St.  Thomas's  hospir


578


CHANNING


CHANNING


tals  in  London.  He  began  to  practise  in  Boston
in  1812,  and  in  tlie  same  year  became  lecturer  on
obstetrics  at  Harvard.  He  was  appointed  in  1815
to  fill  the  new  chair  of  obstetrics  and  medical  ju-
risprudence, and  held  it  till  his  resignation  in  1854.
He  became,  in  1821,  Dr.  James  Jackson's  assistant
as  physician  of  the  newly  established  Massachusetts
general  hospital,  and  continued  there  for  nearly
twenty  years.  He  published  "  Address  on  the  Pre-
vention of  Pauperism  "  (1843) ;  a  "  Treatise  on
Etherization  in  Childbirth,  illustrated  by  581
Cases,"  which  attracted  much  attention  both  here
and  abroad,  and  had  a  marked  effect  on  that
branch  of  medical  science  (Boston,  1848) ;  ''  Pro-
fessional Reminiscences  of  Foreign  Travel,"  "  New
and  Old,"  and  "Miscellaneous  Poems"  (1851);  "A
Physician's  Vacation,  or  a  Summer  in  Europe"
(1856) ;  "  Reformation  of  Medical  Science  "  (1857) ;
and  has  contributed  largely  to  periodical  literature.
— Another  brother,  Edward  Tyrrel,  educator,  b.
in  Newport,  R.  L,  12  Dec,  1790;  d.  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  8  Feb.,  1856.  He  studied  at  Harvard,  but,
like  his  brother  Walter,  became  involved  in  the
college  rebellion  of  1807,  and  was  not  graduated
with  his  class,  but  afterward  received  his  degree.
He  subsequently  opened  a  law-office  in  Boston,  but
gave  his  attention  chiefly  to  literature,  and  was  a
member  of  the  club  of  young  men  who,  in  the  win-
ter of  1814-'5,  projected  a  bimonthly  magazine,
whose  chief  managers  were  to  be  Pres.  Kirkland,
Jared  Sparks,  George  Ticknor,  Mr.  Channing,
Richard  Henry  Dana,  and  John  Gallison.  About
this  time  William  Tudor  returned  from  Europe
with  a  matured  plan  for  a  quarterly  review,  and,
the  two  projects  having  been  imited,  the  first  num-
ber of  the  "  North  American  Review  "  appeared  in
May,  1815.  Mr.  Channing  succeeded  Jared  Sparks
as  its  editor  in  1818,  and  conducted  it  with  the  aid
of  his  cousin,  R.  H.  Dana,  till  October,  1819,  when
he  was  appointed  Boylston  professor  of  rhetoric
and  oratory  in  Harvard.  This  post  he  held  till
1851,  and  during  that  time  had  great  influence
over  the  literary  taste  of  the  students,  giving  di-
rection to  the  reading  of  an  entire  generation  of
prominent  men  in  all  departments  of  thought.
He  continued  to  be  one  of  the  foremost  contribu-
tors to  the  "North  American  Review"  till  his
death.  His  style  was  much  admired  for  its
strength  and  purity;  his  taste  was  severe  and
critical,  and  he  was  a  brilliant  conversationalist.
He  published  a  life  of  his  grandfather,  William
Ellery,  in  Sparks's  "  American  Biographies,"  and
a  volume  of  lectures  on  rhetoric  and  oratory,  given
to  the  senior  class  at  Harvard,  appeared  after  his
death,  with  a  memoir  by  R.  H.  Dana,  Jr.  (Boston,
1856).— William  EUery's  son,  William  Francis,
physician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  22  Feb.,  1820,  stud-
ied at  Harvard,  but,  determining  to  follow  medi-
cine, was  graduated  in  that  department  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1844.  During  1841-'2
he  was  assistant  on  the  first  geological  survey  of
New  Hampshire,  and  in  1847  served  in  a  similar
capacity  to  the  survey  of  the  copper  region  of
Lake  Superior.  From  1842  till  1843  he  was  asso-
ciated with  Dr.  Henry  L  Bowditch  in  the  editor-
ship of  "  The  Latimer  Journal "  in  Boston.  Dr.
Channing  has  devoted  considerable  attention  to
inventing,  and  he  was  connected  with  Moses  G.
Farmer  in  the  perfecting  of  the  American  fire-
alarm  telegraph  from  1845  till  1851,  and  the  pro-
cess patented  in  1857  is  now  in  general  use.  In  1865
he  patented  a  ship-railway  for  the  inter-oceanic
transit  of  ships,  and  in  1877  invented  a  portable  elec-
tro-magnetic telephone.  He  has  contributed  vari-
ous articles  to  the  "American  Journal  of  Science,"


and  has  published,  with  Prof.  John  Bacon,  Jr.,
"  Davis's  Manual  of  Magnetism  "  (Boston,  1841)';
"  Notes  on  the  Medical  Application  of  Electricity"'
(1849)  ;  and  "  The  American  Fire-alarm  Tele-
graph," a  lecture  delivered  before  the  Smithsonian
institution  (1855). — William  Ellery's  nephew,  Will-
iam Henry,  clergyman,  son  of  Francis  Dana  (^'han-
ning,  b.  in  Boston,  25  May,  1810 ;  d.  in  London,  23
Dec,  1884,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1829,  and
at  the  divinity-school  in  1833.  He  was  settled  as
Unitarian  minister  in  Cincinnati  in  1839,  and  be-
came warmly  interested  in  the  schemes  of  Fourier
and  others  for  social  reorganization.  He  removed
to  Boston  about  1847,  afterward  to  Rochester  and
to  New  York,  where,  both  as  preacher  and  editor,
he  became  a  leader  in  a  movement  of  Christian  so-
cialism, while  he  tended  toward  a  very  elevated
and  somewhat  mystical  interpretation  of  the  lib-
eral theology  of  his  day.  In  opinion  he  was  prob-
ably more  rationalistic  than  his  uncle,  the  editing
of  whose  life  and  correspondence  (1848)  made  his
chief  literary  task,  but  was  even  more  rapt  and
fervent  in  his  pulpit  exercises.  These,  on  princi-
ple, he  always  conducted  without  notes,  to  which
practice  may  be  ascribed,  in  part,  not  only  an  elo-
quence of  singular  spontaneity  and  power,  but  a
style  that  frequently  became  rather  rhapsody  than
argument.  As  a  platform-speaker,  on  the  numer-
ous occasions  which  (about  1840-'50)  created  a  new
era  in  American  oratory,  his  eloquence  has  never
been  surpassed.  He  was  also  a  frequent  contribu-
tor to  public  journals,  representing  different  phases
of  the  intellectual  or  social  interests  he  had  at
heart,  including  the  "  Present,"  which  was  his  per-
sonal organ  of  communication  with  the  public.
Besides  the  memoir  of  his  uncle,  he  published  a
translation  of  Jouffroy's  "  Ethics  "  and  a  memoir
of  his  cousin,  James  II.  Perkins,  of  Cincinnati,  and
was  chief  editor  of  the  memoirs  of  Margaret  Fuller
d'Ossoli  (Boston,  1852).  During  a  stay  in  England,
about  1854,  he  became  greatly  distinguished  and
admired  as  a  preacher,  and  in  1857  was  established
as  successor  to  Rev.  James  Martineau  in  the  min-
istry of  Hope  street  chape],  Liverpool.  In  1862,
being  powerfully  drawn  to  America  by  the  civil
war,  in  which  the  fate  of  southern  slavery  was  then
clearly  seen  to  be  involved,  he  accepted  the  charge
of  the  Unitarian  church  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and
afterward,  when  the  church  building  was  offered
and  employed  as  a  military  hospital,  he  was  chosen
chaplain  of  the  house,  in  which  capacity  he  served
about  two  years.  After  the  war  his  life  was  chiefly
spent  in  England,  his  last  visit  in  America  being
in  1880,  the  centenary  of  his  uncle's  birth.  Mr.
Channing  was  a  singularly  fervid  and  consistent
idealist,  with  a  buoyant  hopefulness  of  tempera-
ment, a  sympathetic  sweetness  and  warmth  of  dis-
position, and  a  native  piety,  which  class  him  rather
among  saints  or  mystics  than  with  the  active
agents  of  practical  reform ;  yet  nothing  could  be
more  definite,  or,  in  his  own  view,  more  practical,
than  the  specific  objects  for  which  he  labored.
The  strongest  personal  impression  of  himself,  ex-
cept with  those  who  were  close  and  near  friends  in
his  earlier  life,  he  has  probably  left  in  England.
His  only  son,  who  had  a  distinguished  record  at
Oxford,  is  a  member  of  parliament.  His  elder
daughter  is  the  wife  of  Edwin  Arnold,  the  poet
and  journalist.  His  life  has  been  written  by
Octavius  B.  Frothingham  (Boston,  1886).— Wal-
ter's son,  William  Ellery,  author,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  10  June,  1818,  was  educated  in  Round
Hill  school,  Northampton,  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  where  he  had  Charles  Sumner  for  an  m-
structor,  and  at  Harvard,  but  was  not  graduated.


CHAPAIS


CHAPIN


579


lie  went  to  Illinois  in  1839,  and,  after  living  for
eighteen  niontns  in  a  log  hut  built  by  himself  on  a
prairie,  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he  was
for  a  short  time  connected  with  the  "Gazette."
He  returned  to  Massachusetts  in  1842,  married  a
sist'^"  of  Margaret  Fuller,  and  settled  in  Concord,
Mass,  He  was  on  the  editorial  stati  of  the  New
York  " Tribune  "  in  1844-'5,  and  in  1855-6  was
one  of  the  editors  of  the  New  Bedford  "  Mercury."
He  began  in  1886  to  write  verses  for  the  Boston
"Journal,"  in  which  he  also  published  a  series  of
essays  on  Shakespeare.  His  contributions  to  the
"  Dial,"  in  1841-4,  include  an  unfinished  series  of
psychological  essays,  called  "The  Youth  of  the
Poet  and  Painter."  Pie  has  published  five  volumes
of  poems  (1843-7) ; "  The  Woodman  "  (Boston,  1849) ;
•'  Near  Home  "  (1858) ;  and  "  The  Wanderer  "  (1872).
He  has  also  written  two  volumes  of  prose,  "  Conver-
sations in  Rome  between  an  Artist,  a  Catholic,  and
a  Critic  "  (Boston,  1847) ;  and  "  Thoreau,  the  Poet
Naturalist "  (1873).— Edward,  the  son  of  William
Ellery  Channing,  the  younger,  b.  in  Dorchester
(now  Boston),  15  June,  1856,  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1878.  In  1883  he  was  appointed  instructor
in  history  in  Harvard  college.  He  is  the  author  of
the  following  books :  "  Town  and  County  Govern-
ment in  the  English  Colonies  of  North  America  "
(Baltimore,  1884) ;  " Narragansett  Planters"  (Bal-
timore, 1886) ;  and  the  article  "  Companions  of  Co-
lumbus "  in  Justin  Winsor's  "  Narrative  and  Criti-
cal History  of  America."  He  is  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  historical  society,  of  the  American
antiquarian  society,  and  of  the  Military  historical
society  of  Massachusetts.

CHAPAIS,  Jean  Charles,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Riviere  Quelle,  Canada  East,  about  1825.  He
was  educated  at  Nicolet  college,  is  a  merchant,  and
was  a  member  of  the  executive  council  and  com-
missioner of  public  works  in  Canada  from  March,
1864,  until  the  union  in  1867.  He  was  sworn  of
the  privy  council,  1  July,  1867,  and  was  minister
of  agriculture  from  that  date  until  16  Nov.,  1870,
when  he  became  receiver-general,  which  ofllee  he
resigned  in  1873.  He  has  been  a  government  di-
rector of  the  Grand  Trunk  railway,  and  represent-
ed several  constituencies  in  the  legislature  of  Que-
bec. He  is  a  conservative,  and  was  called  to  the
senate  on  13  Jan.,  1868.

CHAPIN,  Aaron  Lncius,  educator,  b.  in  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  6  Feb.,  1817.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1837,  and  subsequently  at  Union  theologi-
cal seminary.  He  was  professor  in  the  New  York
institution  for  deaf-mutes  from  1838  till  1843,  and
pastor  of  the  1st  Presbvterian  church  in  Milwau-
kee from  1843  till  1849.  when  he  was  elected  the  first
president  of  Beloit  college,  which  he  retained  from
that  date  until  1886,  when  he  resigned.  He  was
for  a  number  of  years  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"  Congregational  Review,"  and  published  a  work,
"  First  Principles  of  Political  Economy,"  in  1880.

CHAPIN,  Alonzo  Bowen,  clergyman,  b.  in
Somers,  Conn.,  10  March,  1808 ;  d.  in  Hartford,  9
July,  1858.  He  left  the  study  of  theology  for  the
law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1831,  and  estab-
lished himself  at  Wallingford.  He  edited  the
"  Chronicle  of  the  Church,"  an  Episcopal  paper  at
New  Haven,  for  eight  years,  and,  resuming  his
theological  studies,  was  ordained  in  1838 ;  was  rec-
tor of  Christ  church.  West  Haven,  until  1850,  and
of  St.  Luke's,  Glastenbury,  until  1855,  when  he  re-
moved to  Hartford  and  edited  the  "Calendar."
Dr.  Chapin  is  the  author  of  a  "  Classical  Spelling-
Book " ;  "A  View  of  the  Organization  and  Order
of  the  Primitive  Church  "  (1845) ;  "  Views  of  Gos-
pel Truth";  "Glastenbury  for  200  Years"  (1853);


"  Puritanism  not  Protestantism  "  (1847).  He  also
contributed  to  the  "Knickerbocker,"  "Christian
Spectator,"  "American  Quarterly  Review,"  "  Church
Review,"  and  "  New  York  Review."

CHAPIN,  Edwin  Hubbell,  clergyman,  b.  in
Union  Village,  Washington  co.,  N.  Y.,  29  Dec,
1814 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  27  Dec,  1880.  He  re-
ceived his  early  training  at  the  Bennington,  Vt.,
seminary,  his  parents  having  removed  to  that  town,
and,  after  com-
pleting the  semi-
nary course,
studied  law  in
Troy,  N.  Y.,  but
soon  went  to  Uti-
ca  and  became
editor  of  "  The
Magazine  and
Advocate,"  a  pe-
riodical devoted
to  the  interests
of  Universalism.
About  the  same
time  he  deter-
mined to  study
for  the  minis-
try, and  was  or-
dained in  1837.
His  first  pastoral  duties  were  in  Richmond,  Va.,
where  he  remained  for  three  years,  and  then  removed
to  Charlestown,  Mass.  After  six  years  spent  there,
he  was  invited  to  take  charge  of  the  School  street
Universalist  church  in  Boston,  as  the  colleague  of
the  venerable  Hosea  Ballou.  In  1848  he  accepted
an  invitation  from  the  4th  Universalist  church  of
New  York  city,  then  situated  near  City  Hall  park.
His  preaching  proved  so  attractive  that  a  larger
building  became  necessary,  and  within  four  years
two  changes  were  made  to  more  spacious  quarters.
In  1850  Dr.  Chapin  went  to  Europe  as  a  delegate
to  the  peace  congress  at  Frankfort-on-the-Main.
In  the  period  preceding  the  civil  war  he  was  con-
spicuous among  the  opponents  of  negro  slavery,
and  during  its  continuance  lent  his  great  influence
to  the  support  of  the  government.  At  the  close  of
the  war,  when  the  flags  of  the  New  York  regi-
ments were  delivered  to  the  keeping  of  the  state,
Dr.  Chapin  was  appointed  orator  for  the  occasion,
and  made  an  address  of  remarkable  power  and  elo-
quence. In  1866  his  congregation  removed  to  the
"  Church  of  the  Divine  Paternity,"  45th  street  and
5th  avenue.  New  York  city,  where  it  has  since  re-
mained. Dr.  Chapin  had  long  been  one  of  the  most
prominent  of  metropolitan  preachers,  and  the  new
church  became  one  of  the  points  to  which  throngs
of  church-goers — and,  which  is  more  important,
throngs  of  non-church-goers — resorted  whenever  it
was  known  that  the  pastor  would  speak.  Although
he  was  zealous  and  diligent  in  his  church  duties,
he  was  among  the  most  popular  of  public  lectur-
ers, and,  while  his  health  permitted,  his  services
were  constantly  in  demand.  He  was  not  a  pro-
found student  in  the  scholarly  acceptation  of  the
term,  but  as  a  student  and  interpreter  of  human
nature,  in  its  relations  to  the  great  questions  of  the
time,  he  had  few  superiors.  His  denominational
religious  associations  were  with  the  Universalisis ;
but  his  sympathies  were  of  the  broadest  character,
and  he  numbered  among  his  personal  friends
many  of  the  staunchest  advocates  of  orthodoxy,
who  could  not  but  admire  his  eloquence,  however
much  they  may  have  dissented  from  his  religious
teaching.  In  creeds  Dr.  Chapin  did  not  believe;
but  he  preached  a  wise  conduct  in  life,  and  in-
cluded in  the  range  of his  pulpit  themes  every


580


CHAPIN


CHAPLIN


topic,  social  or  political,  that  affects  the  well-being
of  mankind.  In  1850  he  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  Plarvard,  and  in  1878  that  of  LL.  D.
from  Tufts.  He  was  a  trustee  of  Bellevue  medical
college  and  hospital  and  a  member  of  many  so-
cieties. The  Chapin  Home  for  aged  and  indigent
men  and  women,  named  in  his  honor,  remains  a
monument  to  his  memory.  In  1872  he  succeeded
Dr.  Emerson  as  editor  of  the  "  Christian  Leader."
The  closing  years  of  his  life  were  marked  by  failing
physical  powers,  though  his  mind  was  as  brilliant
as  ever.  He  travelled  in  Europe,  but  was  unable
to  regain  his  wonted  vigor,  and  for  a  long  time
before  his  death  he  suffered  from  nervous  depres-
sion that  no  doubt  hastened  the  end.  Most  of  his
sermons  and  lectures  were  collected  and  published
in  book  form.  The  titles  are  "  Hours  of  Com-
munion" (New  York,  1844);  "Discourses  on  the
Lord's  Prayer  "  (1850) ;  "  Characters  in  the  Gos-
pels "  (1852) ;  "  Moral  Aspects  of  City  Life  "  (1858) ;
"  Discourses' on  the  Beatitudes"  (1853);  "True
Manliness  "  (New  York,  1854) ;  "  Duties  of  Young
Men"  (1855);  "The  Crown  of  Thorns— a  Token
for  the  Suffering,"  probably  the  most  widely  read
of  his  books  (1860);  "Living  Words"  (Boston,
1861);  "  The  Gathering  "—memorial  of  a  meeting
of  the  Chapin  family  (Springfield,  Mass.,  1862);
"  Humanity  in  the  City  " ;  "  Providence  and  Life  " ;
and  "  Discourses  on  the  Book  of  Proverbs."  With
James  G.  Adams  as  his  associate,  he  compiled
"  Hymns  for  Christian  Devotion  "  (1870).

CHAPIN,  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Upton,  Mass.
13  May,  1811  ;  d.  in  Worcest^er,  Mass.,  13  Oct.,
1878,  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1835,  and  at
Harvard  law-school  in  1838,  after  which  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar.  From  1838  till  1846  he  prac-
tised in  Uxbridge,  Mass.,  and  then  in  Worcester,
where  he  became  a  partner  of  Rejoice  Newton.
He  took  an  active  interest  in  politics,  and  rep-
resented Uxbridge  in  the  state  legislature  during
1845.  In  1849-'50  he  was  mayor  of  Worcester,  and
in  1853  a  member  of  the  constitutional  convention.
He  besame  a  commissioner  under  the  "personal
liberty  law "  in  1855,  later  a  commissioner  of  in-
solvency, and  in  1858  was  appointed  judge  of  the
court  of  probate  and  insolvency.  For  many  years
he  was  a  meinber  of  the  State  board  of  education,
also  one  of  the  trustees  of  the  State  lunatic  asylum
in  Worcester,  and  a  director  of  the  City  national
bank.  He  was  president  of  the  American  Unita-
rian association  during  several  terms,  and  a  mem-
ber of  the  council  of  the  national  conference.

CHAPIN,  Stephen,  clergyman,  b.  in  Milford,
Mass.,  4  Nov.,  1778;  d.  1  i3ct.,  1845.  He  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1804,  and  studied  theolo-
gy with  the  Rev.  Nathaniel  Emmons,  Franklin,
Mass.  He  was  ordained  as  a  Congregational  min-
ister in  1805,  but  subsequently  changed  his  views
on  the  mode  and  subjects  of  baptism  and  entered
the  Baptist  ministry,  at  North  Yarmoui  i.  Me.,  in
1819.  In  1822  he  accepted  the  professorship  of
theology  in  Water ville  (now  Colby  university).  Me.
In  1828  he  was  called  to  the  presidency  of  Colum-
bian college,  Washington,  D.  C,  an  oflice  which
he  held  until  1841,  when  he  retired  on  account  of
declining  health.  In  Washington,  Dr.  Chapin  was
intimately  associated  with  many  of  the  distin-
guished statesmen  of  his  day.  A  few  published
sermons,  tracts,  and  essays  are  all  that  remain  to
show  his  ability  and  culture.  Among  these  are
"  Letters  on  the  Mode  and  Subjects  of  Baptism  " ;
"  The  Duty  of  Living  for  the  Good  of  Posterity  "  ;
a  discourse  in  commemoration  of  the  "second  cen-
tennial of  the  landing  of  the  forefathers  of  New
England ;  "  An  Inaugural  Address,"  which  he  de-


livered as  president  of  Columbian  college  ;  and  a
letter  to  President  Van  Buren  "  On  the  Proper  Dis-
position of  the  Smithsonian  Bequest."  He  had  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.

CHAPLEAU,  Joseph  Adolphe,  Canadian
statesman,  b.  in  Ste.  Therese  de  Blainville,  Terre-
bonne, Quebec,  9  Nov.,  1840.  On  leaving  college
at  Terrebonne,  he  went  to  Montreal,  and  was  one
of  the  brilliant  young  men  of  the  period.  He
became  private  secretary  to  D.  B.  Viger,  a  promi-
nent Lower  Canada  statesn)an,  and  afterward
founded  a  newspaper  in  Montreal  called  the  "  Colo-
nisateur."  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower
Canada  in  1861,  and  rapidly  distinguished  himself
in  the  criminal  courts.  He  has  always  remained
a  staunch  adherent  of  the  conservative  party.
The  question  of  Canadian  confederation  caused
many  of  the  young  members  of  the  party  to  "  bolt " ;
but  Chapleau  became  a  strong  advocate  of  confed-
eration. In  1867  he  set  out  for  his  native  county
of  Terrebonne,  with  only  ten  shillings  in  his  pocket,
to  contest  the  representation  of  the  county  in  the
first  legislature  of  the  province  of  Quebec.  His  friend
and  political  leader.  Sir  George  Cartier,  supported
his  opponent,  fearing  that  "  C'hapleau  would  be
spoiled  "  by  a  victory.  Yet  Chapleau  by  his  elo-
quence carried  the  county.  As  an  orator  he  has
no  equal  among  French-Canadians;  and  on  the
occasion  of  a  banquet  given  to  him  by  the  mer-
chants of  Bordeaux,  France,  his  oratory  was  de-
clared by  French  critics  to  be  equal  to  that  of
Gambetta  in  his  best  days.  He  became  Queen's
counsel  in  1873,  and  in  1874  achieved  some  celeb-
rity as  counsel  for  the  rebels  Lepine  and  Nault,
Louis  Riel's  associates,  charged  with  the  nmrder
of  Scott.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  solicitor-gen-
eral in  Mr.  Ouimet's  cabinet.  During  the  provin-
cial elections  of  1875  he  was  deputed  as  the  cham-
pion speaker  of  the  conservatives,  to  meet  the
liberal  leader,  Mr.  Joly,  in  a  meeting  at  St.  Croix,
and  achieved  such  success  that  he  was  innuediate-
ly  called  into  the  De  Boucherville  ministry  as  pro-
vincial secretary  and  registrar.  When  the  govern-
ment was  dismissed  by  Lieut.-Gov.  Luc  Letellier
De  St.  Just  in  1878,  and  Mr.  Auger,  the  conserva-
tive leader,  was  defeated  at  the  subsequent  elec-
tions, a  great  caucus  was  held  in  Montreal,  and
Mr.  Chapleau  was  elected  leader  of  the  party.  He
led  it  in  opposition  until  the  defeat  of  the  Joly
government  in  1879,  when  he  became  premier  of
Quebec  and  minister  of  agriculture  and  public
works.  A  few  months  later  he  was  invited  to
enter  the  Dominion  cabinet,  but  declined  on  the
ground  that  the  party  was  not  strong  enough  in
Quebec  for  him  to  leaVe  it.  In  1882  the  offer  was
renewed,  and  the  partv  being  stronger  in  Quebec,
and  his  health  failing,  he  resigned  the  premiership,
his  portfolio,  and  his  seat  in  the  Quebec  legisla-
ture, to  enter  Sir  John  A.  Macdonald's  govern-
ment. On  29  July,  1882,  he  was  sworn  of  the
privy  council,  and"^  became  secretary  of  state  of
Canada.  He  was  elected  to  the  house  of  commons
for  the  countv  of  Terrebonne  in  the  following
month.  The  French-Canadian  conservatives  in  the
Dominion  parliament  are  divided  into  two  sec-
tions, the  ultramontanes  in  religion,  commonly
called  the  Castors,  following  Sir  Hector  Langeyi:.,
Mr.  Chapleau  is  the  leader  of  the  other  section.
He  was  at  one  time  a  professor  of  criminal  juris-
prudence, and  now  (1886)  holds  the  chair  of  inter-
national law  in  Laval  university,  Montreal  section.

CHAPLIN,  Ada  C,  author,  b.  in  Falmouth,,
Mass.,  25  Jan.,  1842 ;  d.  in  :\Iansfield,  Conn.,  9  Dec,
1883.  In  1860  she  married  the  Rev.  A.  (-y^^K
lin. Her  published  works  include  "A  Mina  oi


CHAPLIN


CHAPMAN


581


My  Own";  "Little  Nobody";  "Two  Half-Dol-
lars"; "Widow  Maynard's 'Cow " ;  "Eight  Years
Old  " ;  "  Annie  Lincoln's  Lesson  "  :  "  Little  Watch-
man " ;  "  Edith's  Two  Account-Books  " :  "  Grace
Harland  " ;  "  Happy  New  Year  " ;  "  Christ's  Ca-
dets " ;  and  "  Charity  Hurlburt."

CHAPLIN,  Christine  (Mrs.  Brush),  artist,  b.
in  Bangor,  Me.,  in  1842.  In  prosecuting  her  art
studies,  she  spent  about  a  year  in  Europe,  where
she  painted  with  Charles  Chaplin  and  Harpignies,
of  Paris,  and  Bom  ford,  of  London.  Her  specialty
is  painting  wild-flowers  in  water-colors.  Her  pic-
tures have  been  exhibited  at  the  water-color  so-
ciety of  New  York,  in  Brooklyn,  and  at  the  Bos-
ton art  club.  She  has  written  several  little  books
of  verse,  illustrated  by  herself.

CHAPLIN,  Jeremiah,  educator,  b.  in  Rowley
(now  Georgetown),  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  177(5;  d.  in  Ham-
ilton, N.  Y.,  7  May,  1841.  He  worked  on  his  father's
farm  till  he  was  nearly  of  age,  but  at  the  same
time  prepared  for  college,  and  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1799.  After  spending  a  year  there  as
tutor  he  studied  theology,  and  in  1802  became  pas-
tor of  the  Baptist  church  in  Dan  vers,  Mass.  He
resigned  this  charge  in  1817,  and  accepted  an  invi-
tation to  become  principal  of  a  newly  established
Baptist  literary  and  theological  seminary  at  Water-
ville.  Me.  This  was  chartered  as  Waterville  col-
lege in  1820  (now  Colby  university),  and  in  1821
Dr.  Chaplin  became  its  first  president.  His  admin-
istration was  wise  and  efficient,  and  laid  the  foun-
dation for  the  prosperity  of  the  college.  He  re-
signed his  office  in  1838,  returned  to  his  pastoral
labors,  for  which  he  had  a  strong  preference,  and,
after  preaching  in  Rowley,  Mass.,  and  Wilmington,
Conn.,  went  to  live  in  Hamilton,  N.  Y.  Dr.  Chap-
hn  was  a  learned  theologian.  Though  he  held
strictly  to  the  Calvinistic  doctrines,  his  manner  of
stating  them  was  original.  He  published  a  small
volume  entitled  "  The  Evening  of  Life  "  (new  eds.,
Boston,  1865  and  1871). — His  son,  Jeremiah,  b.  in
Danvers,  Mass.,  in  1813 ;  d.  in  New  Utrecht,  N.  Y.,
5  March,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Waterville  in
1833,  and,  after  holding  pastorates  in  Bangor,  Me.,
and  Newton  Centre,  Mass.,  engaged  in  literary
pursuits  in  Boston.  He  published  "The  Memo-
rial Hour "  (Boston,  1864) ;  "Riches  of  Bunyan";
"The  Hand  of  Jesus"  (1869);  "  Life  of  Rev.  Dun-
can Dunbar  " ;  "  Life  of  Charles  Sumner  " ;  "  Life
of  Franklin";  "Life  of  Galen";  and  "Life  of
Henry  Dunster,  First  President  of  Plarvard  Col-
lege" (Boston,  1872).  The  last-mentioned  work
has  much  historical  value.— His  wife,  Jane  Dnn-
bar,  author,  b.  in  Scotland,  11  Feb.,  1819 ;  d.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  17  April,  1884,  came  to  the  United
States  in  1821  with  her  father,  Duncan  Dunbar,
who  was  for  many  years  a  Baptist  clergyman  in
New  York  city.  She  was  educated  in  New  York,
and  married 'Dr.  Chaplin  in  1841.  Her  literary
work  comprises  numerous  contributions  to  religious
periodicals  and  the  following  Sunday-school  story-
books :  "  The  Convent  and  the  Manse.'"  "  The  Trans-
planted Shamrock,"  "Black  and  White,"  "Kitty
Foote,"  "  Morning  Gloom,"  "  The  Old  Gentleman
and  His  Friends,"  "G^ms  of  the  Bog,"  "Out  of
the  AYilderness,"  "  Donald  McBride's  Lassie,"  and
"  Wee  Maggie  IPorsythe."

CHAPMAN,  Alvan  Wentworth,  botanist,  b.
m  Southampton,  Mass.,  28  Sept.,  1809.  He  was
graduated  at  Amherst  in  1830,  and  then  studied
medicine  at  Savannah  and  Washington,  Ga.,  and
at  Quincy,  Fla.,  until  1836,  after  which  he  prac-
tised at  Quincy  and  in  Jackson  county,  Fla.,  and  in
1846  removed'  to  Apalachicola,  where  he  was  col-
lector of  internal  revenue  in  1865-6,  and  collector


of  customs  from  1866  till  1869.  He  has  attained
high  rank  as  a  botanist,  and  the  genus  "  Chapman-
nia"  was  named  in  his  honor.  Dr.  Chapman  is
the  author  of  "Flora  of  the  Southern  United
States  "  (New  York,  1860).

CHAPMAN,  George  H.,  soldier.  He  served
during  the  civil  war  in  the  volunteer  army,  and
was  appointed  a  brigadier-general  on  21  July,
1864.  On  13  March,  1865,  he  received  the  brevet
of  major-general,  and  was  mustered  out  of  service
on  7  Jan.,  1866.

CHAPMAN,  George  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in
Pilton,  Devonshire,  Enghvnd,  21  Sept.,'"  1786 ;  d.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  18  Oct.,  1872.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  1795,  and  was  graduated  at
Dartmouth  in  1804.  Settling  in  Bucksport,  Me.,
he  practised  law  until  1815;  but  meanwhile  he
studied  theology,  and  was  ordained  in  the  Episco-
pal church  in  January,  1818.  From  1820  till  1830
he  was  rector  of  Christ  church,  Lexington,  Ky.,
and  among  his  parishioners  was  Henry  Clay,  with
whom  he  formed  a  life-long  friendship.  He  sub-
sequently had  charge  of  parishes  in  Portland,  Me.,
Newark  'and  Belleville,  N.  J.,  Pittsfield  and  New-
buryport, Mass.  From  1825  till  1827,  while  in
Lexington,  he  filled  the  chair  of  history  and  an-
tiquities in  the  Transylvania  university,  from  which
he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1824.  Dr.  Chap-
man published  "  Sermons  to  Presbyterians,"  "  Ser-
mons on  Doctrines  of  the  Episcopal  Church  "  (1828;
3d  ed.,  1844),  and  "Sketches  of  the  Alumni  of
Dartmouth  College"  (Cambridge,  1867).

CHAPMAN,  John  Gadsby,  painter,  b.  in  Alex-
andria, Va.,  in  1808 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  28  Nov.,
1889.  He  early  went  to  Italy  to  study,  and  on  his
return  settled  in  New  York,  where  he  was  elected
a  member  of  the  National  academy  in  1836.  He
became  a  successful  etcher  and  wood-engraver,
made  illustrations  for  many  books,  among  others
Harper's  illustrated  Bible,  and  published  a  "  Draw-
ing-Book," which  has  passed  through  many  edi-
tions in  this  country  and  in  England.  In  1848  he
returned  to  Italy,  after  which  his  studio  was  in
Rome.  He  visited  the  United  States  in  1859
and  again  in  1878.  Mr.  Chapman  was  one  of  the
three  survivors  among  the  original  members  of
the  Sketch  club,  established  in  New  York  about
1830,  the  others  being  a  sister  of  Robert  C.  Sands,
and  Prof.  Robert  W.  Weir.  Among  his  works  in
oil  are  "  Baptism  of  Pocahontas,"  in  the  capitol  at
Washington,  "Etruscan  Girl,"  "Sunset  on  the
Campagna,"  "  Vintage  Scene,"  "  Stone  Pines  in
the  Barberini  Valley,"  and  "  Valley  of  Mexico."

CHAPMAN,  Maria  Weston,' reformer,  b.  in
Weymouth,  Mass.,  in  1806;  d.  there  in  1885.  She
was  a  daughter  of  Warren  Weston,  of  Weymouth.
After  being  educated  in  her  native  town  and  in
England,  she  was  principal  of  the  newly  estab-
lished Young  ladies'  high-school  in  Boston  in
1829-'30.  She  was  married  in  1830,  and  in  1834
became  an  active  abolitionist.  Her  husband  died
in  1842,  and  in  1848  she  went  to  Paris,  France,
where  she  aided  the  anti-slavery  cause  with  her
pen.  She  returned  to  this  country  in  1856,  and  in
1877  published  the  autobiography  of  her  intimate
friend,  Harriet  Martineau.

CHAPMAN,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.  in  Sum-
mer Hill,  Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  28  May,  1780;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  1  July,  1853.  After  receiving
an  excellent  classical  education  at  the  academy  in
Alexandria,  Va.,  he  went  to  Philadelphia,  and  was
graduated  at  the  medical  department  of  the  Uni-
versity of  Pennsylvania  in  1800.  While  a  student,
he  attracted  the  "notice  of  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  and
became  one  of  his  private  pupils. At  his  sugges-


582


CHAPMAN


CHARLEVOIX


tion  Chapman  presented  an  inaugural  thesis  on
hydrophobia  in  answer  to  an  attack  on  Dr.  Rush's
favorite  theory  on  the  pathology  of  that  disease.
Subsequently  he  went  abroad,  studying  for  a  year
in  London  under  Dr.  Abernethy,  and  then  for  two
years  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  He  returned
to  the  United  States  in  1804  and  began  practice  in
Philadelphia,  where  he  soon  became  eminent.  In
1810  he  assisted  Dr.  Thomas  C.  James,  then  pro-
fessor of  midwifery,  and  three  years  later  he  be-
came professor  of  materia  medica  in  the  University
of  Pennsylvania.  In  1816  he  was  elected  to  the
chair  of  theory  and  practice  of  medicine,  which  he
held  until  1850.  He  founded  the  medical  institute
in  1817,  and  for  more  than  twenty  years  delivered
a  summer  course  of  lectures  in  that  institution,  also
for  many  years  gave  clinical  lectures  in  the  hospital
of  the  Philadelphia  almshouse.  For  some  time  he
was  president  of  the  Philadelphia  medical  society,
president  of  the  American  philosophical  society
(1840-'8),  and  the  first  president  of  the  American
medical  association.  In  1820  he  began  the  publi-
cation of  "  The  Philadelphia  Journal  of  the  Medical
and  Physical  Sciences,"  which  he  edited  for  several
years.  Many  of  his  lectures  appeared  in  the  "  Medi-
cal Examiner "  of  Philadelphia  during  1838-'40,
and  afterward  were  issued  in  book  form.  His  pub-
lished works  include  "Select  Speeches,  Forensic
and  Parliamentary"  (Philadelphia,  1808);  "Ele-
ments of  Therapeutics  and  Materia  Medica  "  (1828) :
"  Lectures  on  Eruptive  Fevers,  Hasmorrhages,  and
Dropsies,  and  on  Gout  and  Rheumatism  "  (1844) ;
and  "  Lectures  on  the  Thoracic  Viscera."  A  com-
pendium of  his  lectures  was  published  by  Dr.  N.
D.  Benedict. — His  grandson,  Henry  CadWalader,
physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  17  Aug.,  1845.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1863,  and  at  the  medical  department  in  1867,
after  which  he  spent  three  years  in  Europe.  He
then  settled  in  Philadelphia,  was  for  some  time
lecturer  on  anatomy  and  physiology  in  the  L'ni-
versity  of  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1877  became  lec-
■turer  on  the  physiology  of  the  nervous  system  in
Jefferson  medical  college.  He  is  curator  of  the
Philadelphia  academy  of  natural  sciences,  and  a
member  of  the  American  philosophical  society.
To  the  proceedings  of  these  organizations  he  is
a  frequent  contributor,  and  has  also  published  pa-
pers in  the  "  Medical  Times,"  and  also  "  Evolution
of  Life  "  (Philadelphia,  1873),  and  "  History  of  the
Discovery  of  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood  "  (1884).

CHAPMAN,  Reuben,  governor  of  Alabama,  b.
in  Randolph  co.,  Va.,  15  July,  1799;  d.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Ala.,  17  May,  1882.  He  received  an  academic
education  in  Virginia,  and  then  removed  to  Ala-
bama, settling  in  Somerville,  Morgan  co.,  where  he
practised  law.  For  many  years  he  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  legislature,  and  subsequently  was
elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,  serving  continu-
ously from  7  Dec,  1835,  till  3  March,  1847.  He  was
then  elected  governor  of  his  state,  and  held  that
office  until  1849,  after  which  he  retired  to  private
life  in  Huntsville.  But  for  many  years  he  contin-
ued to  be  consulted  on  all  matters  of  political  im-
portance, and  was  a  delegate  to  the  national  demo-
cratic conventions  of  Cincinnati  in  1856,  of  Charles-
ton in  1860,  and  of  New  York  in  1868.

CHAPMAN,  Reuben  Atwater,  jurist,  b.  in
Russell,  Hampden  co.,  Mass.,  20  Sept.,  1801 ;  d.  at
Fluellen,  Switzerland,  28  June,  1873.  He  was  a
New  England  farmer's  son,  and  received  but  a
limited  education.  At  the  age  of  nineteen  he  be-
came a  clerk  in  a  country  store  in  Blanford,  where
he  attracted  the  attention  of  a  lawyer,  who  invited
hini  to  become  a  student  in  his  office. This  offer


was  gratefully  accepted,  and  after  his  admission  to
the  bar  he  practised  successively  in  Westfleld,  Mon-
son.  Ware,  and  Springfield.  Later  he  became  as-
sociated with  George  Ashmun,  and  during  its
twenty  years'  continuance  the  firm  of  Chapman  &
Ashmun  was  among  the  most  successful  in  the
state.  In  1860  he  was  appointed  an  associate  jus-
tice of  the  supreme  judicial  court,  and  in  1868  was
advanced  to  the  chief  justiceship.  He  received  the
degrees  of  A.  M.  from  Williams  in  1836  and  from
Amherst  in  1841,  and  LL.  D.  from  Amherst  in
1861  and  from  Harvard  in  1864.

CHAPMAN,  Robert  Hett,  educator,  b.  in
Orange,  N.  J.,  2  March,  1771 ;  d.  in  Winchester,
Va.,  18  June,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1789,  and,  after  studying  theology,  was
licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  New  York  in  1793.
From  1796  till  1799  he  was  pastor  in  Rahway,  N.
J.,  and  from  1801  till  1812  preached  in  Cambridge,
N.  Y.  He  then  became  president  of  the  University
of  North  Carolina  at  Chapel  Hill,  where  he  re-
mained until  1816,  after  which  he  officiated  vari-
ously in  Virginia,  North  Carolina,  and  Tennessee.

CHAPMAN,  Warren  Hosea,  physician,  b.  in
Tolland,  Conn.,  5  May,  1821.  He  was  graduated
at  Illinois  college.  Jacksonville,  in  1821,  after  which
he  studied  medicine  and  settled  in  Peoria,  where  he
became  eminent  in  his  profession.  Dr.  Chapman
was  prominent  in  the  arrangements  that  led  to  the
establishment  of  a  summer  school  of  science  in  Peo-
ria, and  was  president  of  the  scientific  association
under  whose  direction  the  school  was  formed.  He
is  a  member  of  several  medical  and  scientific  socie-
ties, to  whose  proceedings  he  has  contributed  valu-
able papers.  Among  these  are  ''  Geology  of  Peoria
County,"  "  Chemistry  of  the  Rocks,"  and  "  Sys-
tems of  Stratified  Rocks."

CHAPMAN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  St.  Johns,
Md.,  22  Jan.,  1810.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1831,  and  promoted  to  lieuten-
ant in  the  5th  infantry,  after  which  he  served  on
frontier  duty  at  Fort  Mackinac,  Mich,,  in  1831-2,
on  the  Black  Hawk  expedition  in  1832,  as  in-
structor at  West  Point  in  1832-'3,  and  with  his
regiment  at  various  posts  on  the  frontier  until
1845.  In  1845-6  he  was  in  Texas  during  the  mili-
tary occupancy  of  that  country,  and  in  the  Mexican
war  was  present  at  the  principal  engagements.  He
received  the  brevet  rank  of  major  in  August,  1847,
and  that  of  lieutenant-colonel  in  September,  for
gallant  conduct  during  the  war.  Subsequently  he
again  served  on  garrison  duty  in  Texas  and  New
Mexico,  becoming  major  of  the  2d  infantry  in  Feb-
ruary, 1861.  During  the  civil  war  he  had  com-
mand of  a  regiment  in  the  defences  of  Washington
in  1862.  andVas  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
during  the  peninsular  campaign,  being  engaged  in
the  siege  of  Yorktown  and  at  Malvern  Hill,  and
afterward  at  Manassas,  where  he  received  the  brevet
of  colonel.  He  was  retired  from  active  service  in
August,  1863,  with  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel,
and  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  draft  ren-
dezvous at  jMadison,  Wis,

CHARLEVOIX,  Pierre  Francois  Xayierde,
French  traveller,  b.  in  Saint-Quentin,  29  Oct.,  1682 ;
d.  in  La  Fleche,  1  Feb.,  1761.  He  entered  the
Jesuit  society  in  1698,  and  while  a  scholar  was  sent
to  Quebec  in  1705,  and  during  the  four  years  fol-
lowing his  arrival  taught  in  the  college  in  that
place.  After  completing  his  divinity  studies,  he
became  a  professor  of  belles-lettres  in  France,  pub-
lished a  history  of  Christianity  in  Japan,  and  re-
turned to  Canada  in  1720,  For  some  time  after  his
arrival  he  was  at  Sault  St.  Louis.  Then  he  ascend-
ed the  St.  Lawrence,  and.  reaching  the  Mississippi  by


CHARLTON


CHASE


683


A^'^'  •2t-^>i^«*»Tl*'<"^


way  of  the  Illinois,  descended  the  river  to  New
Orleans,  thence  proceeding  to  France  by  way  of
Santo  Domingo,  after  an  absence  of  two  years.  He
published,  in  1724,  a  "  Life  of  Mother  Mary  of  the
Incarnation," first superior  of  the Ursulines  at

Quebec.  From
1733  till  1755  he
was  one  of  the
directors  of  the
"  Journal  de  tre-
voux."  He  pub-
lished in  siicces-
sion  histories  of
Santo  Domingo
and  Japan,  and  in
1744  his  "Histoire
de  la  nouvelle
France,"  which
had  been  kept
back  for  twenty
years.  Simulta-
neous with  the
latter  appeared
the  journal  that
he  wrote  while  in
America,  which  was  addressed  to  the  Duchess  de
Lesdiguiere,  and  was  soon  translated  into  English.
Though  his  history  was  praised  and  quoted  as  an
authority  by  scholars,  it  was  not  translated  until
recently,  when  an  edition  in  English  was  published
by  John  Gilmary  Shea  (New  York,  6  vols.,  1865-
're).  The  last  work  written  by  Charlevoix  was  a
history  of  Paraguav  (1756).

CHARLTON,  Robert  M.,  jurist,  b.  in  Savan-
nah, Ga.,  19  Jan.,  1807;  d.  there,  18  Jan.,  1854.
He  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
in  1828  was  elected  to  the  Georgia  legislature.  He
was  subsequently  appointed  U.  S.  district  attorney
by  President  Jackson,  and  in  1834  was  appointed,
and  afterward  elected,  judge  of  the  supreme  court
for  the  eastern  district  of  Georgia.  He  was  U.  S.
senator  in  1852-'3.  and  was  twice  elected  mayor  of
Savannah.  In  1839  he  published  a  volume  of
poems,  including  those  of  a  deceased  brother.  He
also  contributed  largely,  both  in  prose  and  verse,
to  the  pages  of  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"
the  best  known  of  his  writings  for  periodicals  being
"  Leaves  from  the  Portfolio  of  a  Georgia  Lawyer."
He  was  distinguished  as  an  orator.

CHARNISE,  Aiilnay  de,  Charles  de  Menoii,
Seigneur  d',  French  proprietor  in  Acadia,  b.  in
Vannes,  France,  in  1605 ;  drowned  24  May,  1650.
Tn  1632  he  accompanied  Razilly,  who  had  been  se-
lected by  the  government  to  restore  to  France  her
Acadian  possessions.  Razilly  brought  with  him
forty  families  and  settled  at  Le  Have,  on  the  south-
ern coast  of  the  island,  dispossessing  a  Scotchman
who  was  too  weak  to  resist.  In  1635  Charnise
went  as  Razilly's  lieutenant  to  Penobscot  river
and  despoiled  the  fort  held  by  the  Plymouth  peo-
ple. He  gave  the  men  that  had  charge  of  the  fort
their  liberty,  but  bade  them  tell  their  people  at  the
English  plantations  that  he  would  come  the  next
year  and  displace  them  as  far  south  as  the  40th
degree  of  north  latitude.  He  then  took  full  pos-
session of  the  place,  and  strengthened  the  defences.
The  Plymouth  people  manned  a  vessel,  and  went
to  Penobscot  to  drive  out  the  French,  whom  they
found  only  eighteen  in  number,  but  strongly  in-
trenched. Charnise  permitted  them  to  expend  all
tlieir  ammunition,  and  then  go  home.  In  1636
Razilly  suddenly  died,  and,  although  his  property
and  territorial  rights  passed  to  the  possession  of
his  brother  Claude,  Charnise,  being  a  relative,
gamed  control. He  went  immediately  to  Port


Royal,  erected  a  new  fort,  removed  the  Le  Have
colonists,  and  sent  to  France  for  twenty  additional
families,  making  Port  Royal  the  principal  settle-
ment in  Acadia,  which  at  that  time  embraced  not
only  Nova  Scotia,  but  a  portion  of  New  Brunswick,
extending  as  far  west  as  the  Penobscot.  At  the
mouth  of  the  St.  John  was  a  fort  commanded  by
Le  Tour,  who  held  a  commission  precisely  similar
to  Charnise's.  Accusations  and  complaints  were
preferred,  and  Charnise,  by  reason  of  superior  ad-
vantages at  court,  obtained  an  order  from  the
king,  13  Feb.,  1641,  for  arresting  Le  Tour  and
sending  him  to  France.  But  the  military  forces  of
the  two  rivals  were  almost  equal.  Charnise  could
not  dispossess  Le  Tour,  and  was  obliged  to  send
back  the  ship  that  brought  the  order,  with  Le
Tour's  refusal  instead  of  his  body.  In  the  early
winter  of  1641  Charnise  returned  to  France  to
obtain  additional  power,  and  Le  Tour  sought  the
aid  of  his  New  England  neighbors.  As  a  result  of
negotiations  with  the  New  England  governor,  a
body  of  Boston  merchants  made  a  visit  to  Fort  La
Tour  for  purposes  of  trade,  and  while  at  sea,  on
their  return,  met  Charnise  himself,  who  informed
them  that  Le  Tour  was  a  rebel,  and  showed  them
a  confirmation  of  the  order  issued  the  year  before
for  his  arrest.  With  500  men  in  armed  ships,
Charnise  laid  siege  to  Fort  La  Tour :  but  aid  came
from  New  England,  and  he  was  driven  away.  At
a  later  date,  learning  that  Le  Tour  had  taken  a
journey  to  Quebec,  he  again  laid  siege  to  the  fort ;
but  Madame  La  Tour,  who  had  no  more  disposition
to  yield  than  her  husband,  inspired  the  garrison
with  her  determined  spirit,  directed  from  the  bas-
tions the  cannonade  on  the  enemy's  ships,  and
compelled  Charnise  to  retire.  By  the  aid  of  a
treacherous  sentry,  he  was  enabled,  on  his  third
attack,  to  enter  the  fort,  but  the  resistance  led  by
Madame  La  Tour  was  so  fierce  that  he  proposed
terms  of  capitulation,  pledging  life  and  liberty  to
all  in  the  garrison.  His  terms  being  accepted,  he
basely  broke  his  faith,  hanged  every  member  of
the  garrison,  and  compelled  Madame  La  Tour  to
witness  the  execution  with  a  rope  around  her  own
neck.  The  atrocities  broke  her  heart,  and  she  died
in  a  few  days.  Charnise's  booty  was  valued  at
£10,000.  He  now  had  the  whole  of  Acadia  to  him-
self, and  improvements  were  made,  marshes  were
diked,  mills  erected,  and  ship-building  begun.  In
1645  he  went  to  France,  and  received  honors  from
the  king.  In  1647  a  commission  was  issued  mak-
ing him  governor  and  lieutenant-general  in  Acadia.
Le  Tour,  immediately  on  his  return  from  Quebec,
discovering  the  devastation  made  in  his  absence,
sailed  for  France,  laid  the  facts  before  the  court,
and  not  only  secured  a  restoration  of  his  title  and
privileges,  but  was  made  Charnise's  successor.  The
widow  of  Charnise,  with  her  children,  was  still
living  in  Acadia,  and  was  alarmed  at  the  turn
aifairs  had  taken,  and  preparations  offensive  and
defensive  were  entered  upon  ;  but  all  hostilities
suddenly  ceased.  The  leaders  of  the  opposing
forces  concluded  to  end  their  troubles  by  marriage,
24  Feb.,  1653.

CHARTRES,  Robert  PhiHppe  Louis  Eu-
gene Ferdinand. See  Orleans.

CHASE,  Ann,  patriot,  b.  in  Ireland  in  1809;
d.  in  Brooklyn,  L.  I.,  24  Dec,  1874.  She  came
to  the  United  States  in  1818,  and  acquired  an  ex-
cellent mercantile  education  while  assisting  her
brother  in  his  business.  In  1832  she  settled  in
New  Orleans,  but  during  the  following  year  re-
moved to  Tampico,  Mexico,  where  she  met  Frank-
lin Chase,  U.  S.  consul  at  that  place,  whom  she
married  in  1836. While  the  Mexican  war  was  in


584


CHASE


CHASE


progress,  Mrs,  Chase  remained  at  the  consulate  to
protect  the  American  records  during  the  enforced
absence  of  her  husband.  On  one  occasion  an  in-
furiated mob  attempted  to  pull  down  the  flag  that
floated  over  her  residence ;  but,  with  revolver  in
hand,  she  defied  the  crowd,  and  declared  that  no
one  should  touch  the  flag  except  over  her  dead
body.  Later  she  succeeded  in  communicating  with
Com.  Connor,  then  commanding  the  U.  S.  fleet  in
the  Gulf  of  Mexico,  and  through  her  instrumental-
ity the  city  of  Tampico  was  taken,  without  ex-
penditure of  life  or  treasure.  In  honor  of  her
heroism,  the  army  named  the  fortress  of  the  city
Fort  Ann,  and  the  ladies  of  New  Orleans  presented
her  with  a  service  of  plate.  In  1871  her  husband
resigned  his  office  and  she  removed  to  Brooklyn,
where  the  remainder  of  her  life  was  spent.  Dur-
ing the  voyage  to  the  United  States,  while  rescuing
a  child  from  danger,  she  received  injuries  that  re-
sulted in  a  cancer  of  the  breast,  causing  her  death.

CHASE,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  New
Hampshire  in  1789 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  11  Oct.,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1814,
and,  after  studying  theology,  was  ordained  in  the
Presbyterian  church.  His  ministerial  life  was
spent  entirely  in  the  southwest,  where  he  did  a
noble  missionary  work  in  circulating  the  Scrip-
tures. He  was  also  a  geologist,  and  presented
Oakland,  Miss.,  college  with  a  valuable  collection
of  fossils,  which  he  had  gathered  during  his  jour-
neys. In  1857  Washington  college  conferred  upon
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.

CHASE,  Carlton,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Hopkin-
ton,  N.  H.,  20  Feb.,  1794;  d.  18  Jan.,  1870.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1817,  studied  for
the  ministry  in  the  Episcopal  church,  and  was  or-
dained deacon  in  Bristol,  R.  I.,  by  Bishop  Griswold,
9  Dec,  1818,  and  priest,  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  27  Sept.,
1820.  He  accepted  a  call  to  Bellows  Falls,  Vt.,
and  was  pastor  there  for  twenty-four  years.  He
was  consecrated  the  first  bishop  of  New  Hampshire,
in  Philadelphia,  -20  Oct.,  1844,  after  which  he  re-
moved to  Claremont,  N.  H.,  and  was  rector  of
Trinity  church  there  for  several  years.  During
the  interim,  when  New  York  was  without  a  bishop
capable  of  action.  Bishop  Chase  made  three  visita-
tions in  that  diocese  between  December,  1849,  and
September,  1852.  He  published  a  few  single  ser-
mons and  addresses.

CHASE,  Dudley,  statesman  and  jurist,  b.  in
Cornish,  N.  H,,  30  Dec,  1771 ;  d.  in  Randolph,  Vt.,
23  Feb.,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1791,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1793.  He  was
attorney  for  Orange  county  from  1803  till  1811,  and
a  member  of  the  constitutional  conventions  of  1814
and  1822.  From  1805  till  1812  he  was  a  member
of  the  legislature,  and  speaker  of  the  house  from
1808  till  1812.  He  was  U.  S.  senator  trom  1813
till  1817,  and  again  from  1825  till  1831.  From
1817  till  1821  he  was  chief  justice  of  the  Vermont
supreme  court.  In  1831  he  retired  and  devoted
himself  to  farming,  of  which  he  was  very  fond.

CHASE,  Frederic  Augustus,  clergyman,  b.  at
King's  Ferry,  Cayuga  co.,  N.  Y.,  29  Jan.,  1833.  He
studied  at  Union  college  and  the  University  of
Michigan,  paying  special  attention  to  engineering
and  the  sciences,  and  then  at  the  Auburn  theo-
logical seminary.  After  being  ordained  as  a  Pres-
byterian clergyman,  he  had  charge  of  churches  in
Parishville  and  Lyndonville,  N.  Y.  From  1868
till  1870  he  was  president  of  a  female  seminary  in
Lyons,  Iowa,  and  in  1872  became  professor  of  natu-
ral sciences  in  Fisk  university,  Nashville,  Tenn.
He  has  made  several  minor  inventions  of  improved
forms  of heating  apparatus,  has contributed to


periodical  literature,  and  published  a  sermon  on  the
death  of  President  Lincoln  (1865).

CHASE,  George,  lawyer,  b.  in  Portland,  Me.,
29  Dec,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1870,
being  the  valedictorian  of  his  class,  and  at  Colum-
bia law-school,  New  York  city,  in  1873.  He  became
assistant  professor  of  municipal  law  in  Columbia  in
1875,  and  in  1878  was  made  professor  of  criminal
law,  torts,  and  procedure.  He  has  published  the
"American  Student's  Blackstone"  (New  York,
1876),  and  edited  the  "  Ready  Legal  Adviser  "  (1881)
and  an  edition  of  Stephens's  *'  Digest  of  the  Law  of
Evidence  "  (1886).

CHASE,  Harry,  painter,  b.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,
in  1853.  He  studied  at  the  Hague  under  Mesdag,
at  the  Munich  academy  under  Kaulbach,  and  in
Paris  under  Soyer.  He  was  elected  an  associate
of  the  national  academy  in  1883.  His  studio  is  in
New  York.  His  principal  works  are  "Breezy
Afternoon  off  the  Battery  in  New  York";  "Pe-
cheurs  Anglais,"  "  Low  Tide  on  the  Welsh  Coast "
(1878) ;  "  Herring-Fishers  of  Scheveningen  "  (1880) ;
"  Outward-bound  Whaler,"  "  Dutch  Boats  at  An-
chor "  (1881) ;  "  Departure  of  a  French  Brig,"
"Bringing  the  Fish  Ashore"  (1882);  "Coast  of
Holland,"  "Summer  Morning  on  French  Coast"
(1883) ;  "  Near  Dordrecht,"  "  Battery  Park  in  New
York"  (1884);  "Rising  Tide  on  the'Dutch  Coast,"
and  "  New  York  Harbor— North  River  "  (1885).

CHASE,  Irah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Stratton,  Vt.,
5  Oct.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Newton,  Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1864.
He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1814,  and  at
Andover  theological  seminary  in  1817.  He  was
ordained  as  a  Baptist  minister  at  Danvers,  Mass.,
17  Sept.,  1817,  and  spent  a  year  in  missionary  labor
in  western  Virginia.  While  at  Andover,  he  had
become  impressed  with  the  need  of  a  special  theo-
logical school  for  his  denomination,  and  in  1818
was  associated  with  Dr.  William  Staughton  in  the
establishment  at  Philadelphia  of  the  first  Baptist
theological  school  in  the  country.  This  was  re-
moved in  1822  to  Washington,  D."  C,  and  made  a
part  of  the  newly  chartered  Columbian  college,  in
which  Dr.  Chase  held  the  chair  of  biblical  litera-
ture till  1825,  when  he  resigned.  He  then  removed
to  Massachusetts  and  took  a  prominent  part  in
the  establishment  of  Newton  theological  institu-
tion, where  he  was  the  first  professor,  holding  the
chair  of  biblical  theology  till  1836,  when  he  was
transferred  to  that  of  ecclesiastical  history.  He
resigned  in  1845,  to  devote  himself  to  theological
and  literary  investigations.  He  had  spent  a  year
in  Europe  "while  holding  his  Washington  profes-
sorship, and  in  1830  made  a  second  visit,  and  was
instrumental  in  founding  the  Baptist  mission  in
France.  He  published  "  Remarks  on  the  Book  of
Daniel"  (Boston,  1844);  " Life  of  John  Bunyan "  ;
"  The  Design  of  Baptism,  viewed  in  its  Relation
to  the  Christian  Life  "  (1851) ;  "  The  Work  claim-
ing to  be  the  Constitution  of  the  Holy  Apostles,
including  the  Canons,  revised  from  the  Greek";
and  "  Infant  Baptism  an  Invention  of  Man  "  (Phila-
delphia, 1863) ;  together  with  a  large  number  of
sermons,  essays,  and  contributions  to  reviews.

CHASE,  Lucien  B.,  author,  b.  in  Vermont,  9
Aug.,  1817;  d.  14  Dec,  1864.  He  removed  to
Clarksville,  Tenn.,  and  served  as  a  representative
in  congress  from  1  Dec,  1845,  till  3  March,  1849,
declining  a  re-election.  He  published  a  "History
of  the  Polk  Administration  "  (New  York,  1850).

CHASE,  Philander,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Cor-
nish, N,  H.,  14  Dec,  1775;  d.  at  Jubilee  college,
111.,  20  Sept.,  1852,  He  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1795.  Although  of  Congregational  ori-
gin and  training,  he  was  led  into  the  Episcopal


CHASE


CHASE


585


church  by  having  met  with  a  prayer-book  and  ex-
amined its  contents,  and  thereupon  studied  for
the  ministry  and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Provoost,
in  New  York,  deacon,  10  June,  1798,  priest.  10
Nov.,  1799.  For  several  years  he  was  occupied  in
missionary  labors  in  northern  and  western  New
York,  and  also  in  teaching  school.  In  1805,  on
account  of  his  wife's  delicate  health,  he  went  to
New  Orleans,  La.,  where  he  labored  zealously  and
successfully  in  behalf  of  the  P.  E.  church.  Re-
turning to  the  north  in  1811,  he  became  rector  of
Christ  church,  Hartford,  Conn.,  which  prospered
under  his  ministrations.  For  years  past,  however,
as  his  heart  and  mind  were  deeply  concerned  in
the  position  and  prospects  of  the  west,  he  felt  the
urgent  call  to  make  that  part  of  the  country  his
field  of  labor.  Accordingly,  in  1817,  he  went  to
Ohio  and  began  the  work  of  establishing  the
church  in  that  region.  He  organized  several  par-
ishes, assuming  the  rectorship  of  three  himself,
and  taking  charge  of  the  academy  at  Worthing-
ton,  Ohio,  and,  having  been  elected  bishop,  was  con-
secrated in  Philadelphia,  11  Feb.,  1819.  He  toiled
on,  amid  trials  and  discouragements,  and  finally
resolved  to  go  to  England  to  ask  for  aid.  He
met  with  great  success,  collecting  about  $30,000,
with  which  on  his  return  he  purchased  8,000  acres
of  land  and  laid  the  foundations  of  a  college  and
theological  seminary.  These,  in  grateful  acknowl-
edgment of  the  generous  kindness  of  two  English
noblemen,  were  named  Kenyon  college  and  Gam-
bier  theological  seminary.  Disputes  having  arisen
between  the  bishop  and  some  of  his  clergy  in  re-
gard to  the  proper  use  of  the  funds  obtained  from
England  and  his  power  of  jurisdiction,  he  resigned,
in  September,  1831,  both  the  diocese  and  tlie  presi-
dency of  the  college.  Still  intent  upon  missionary
labor,  he  removed  farther  west,  took  possession  of
a  large  tract  of  land  in  Michigan,  and  did  mission-
ary duty  in  the  vicinity  for  three  years,  and  in
1835  was  chosen  bishop  of  Illinois.  He  again  vis-
ited England,  with  the  same  object  as  before,  and
collected  about  $10,000  for  educational  work.  His
labors  culminated  in  the  founding  of  Jubilee  col-
lege, in  1838,  at  Robin's  Nest,  111.  A  charter  was
obtained  in  1847,  placing  the  college  entirely  in
the  hands  of  the  church.  He  was  presiding  bishop
from  1843  till  1852.  He  was  a  man  of  indomita-
ble perseverance  and  great  strength  of  will,  and
was  the  most  energetic  and  successful  pioneer  of
the  Episcopal  church  in  the  west.  He  published
"  A  Plea  for  the  West "  (1826) ;  "  The  Star  in  the
West,  or  Kenyon  College"  (1828);  "Defence  of
Kenyon  College  "  (1831) ;  and  "  Reminiscences :  an
j\utobiography,  comprising  a  History  of  the  Prin-
cipal Events  in  the  Author's  Life  to  1847"  (2  vols.,
New  York,  1848).

CHASE,  PHny  Earle,  scienti'=;t,  b.  in  Worces-
ter, Mass.,  18  Aug.,  1820;  d.  in  Haverford,  Pa.,  17
Dee.,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1839,  and  for  many  years  a  teacher  in  Philadel-
phia, and  later  occupied  in  mercantile  pursuits.
In  1871  he  became  professor  of  philosophy  and
logic  in  Haverford  college,  near  Philadelphia.
Much  of  his  time  has  been  devoted  to  scientific
research,  and  his  investigations  include:  1.  The
confirmation  of  Faraday's  conjecture  that  gravity
must  be  capable  of  an  experimental  relation  to
electricity,  magnetism,  and  the  other  forces,  so  as
to  bind  it  up  with  them  in  reciprocal  action  and
equivalent  effect.  For  this  investigation  he  re-
ceived in  1864  the  Magellanic  gold  medal  of  the
American  philosophical  society.  2.  Estimate  of
the  mass  and  distance  of  the  sun,  from  the  influ-
ence upon  the  barometer  of  the  constrained  rela-


tive motions  of  the  earth  and  sun.  8.  The  discov-
ery that  "  V,"  which  is  the  ratio  between  the  elec-
trostatic and  electro-magnetic  units,  is  also  the
time  integral  of  stellar  rotation,  thus  completing
the  demonstration  of  Faraday's  conjecture.  4.
Extension  of  planetary  and  stellar  harmonies,  so
as  to  show  that  all  the  bodies  of  the  solar  system
are  so  arranged  as  to  indicate  harmonic  vibrations
in  an  interstellar  elastic  medium.  5.  Demonstra-
tion that  the  phyllotactic  law,  which  Pierce,  Hill,
and  Wright  had  extended  to  planetary  cycles,  is
also  operative  in  the  vibrations  of  chemical  atoms
6.  Application  of  the  principle  of  conservation  ol
areas  to  all  cases  of  nebular  condensation,  so  as  tc
show  that  the  maximum  gravitating  acceleration
at  the  centre  of  a  stellar  system  is  always  deter-
mined by  luminous  undulation.  7.  Correction  of
an  error  in  regard  to  the  density  of  the  luminifer-
ous  ether.  8.  Correction  of  an  error  in  regard  to
the  elasticity  of  the  luminiferous  ether.  9.  Dem-
onstration of  the  Chase-Maxwell  ratio.  The  re-
sults of  these  and  other  investigations  have  been
contributed  to  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  American
Philosophical  Society"  and  other  scientific  jour-
nals, and  have  also  appeared  in  the  transactions  of
the  Royal  society,  French  academy,  and  elsewhere.
He  is  a  member  of  scientific  societies  both  in  the
United  States  and  Europe,  and  has  been  vice-presi-
dent of  the  American  philosophical  society.  His
published  works  include  several  arithmetics  and
"  Elements  of  Meteorology  "  (Philadelphia,  1884).

CHASE,  Salmon  Portland,  statesman,  b.  in
Cornish,  N.  H.,  13  Jan.,  1808  ;  d.  in  New  York  city,
7  May,  1873,  He  was  named  for  his  uncle,  Sal-
mon, who  died  in  Portland,  and  he  used  to  say
that  he  was  his  uncle's  monument.  He  was  a  de-
scendant in  the  ninth  generation  of  Thomas  Chase,
of  Chesham,  England,  and  in  the  sixth  of  Aquila
Chase,  who  came
from  England  and
settled  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  about  1640.
Salmon  Portland
was  the  eighth  of
the  eleven  children
of  Ithamar  Chase
and  his  wife  Jan-
nette  Ralston,  who
was  of  Scottish
blood.  He  was  born
in  the  house  built
by  his  grandfather,
which  still  stands
overlooking  Con-
necticut river  and
in  the  afternoon
shadow  of  Ascut-
ney  mountain. Of

his  father's seven

brothers,  three  were  5

lawyers,  Dudley  be-
coming a  U.  S.  senator :  two  were  physicians ;  Phi-
lander became  a  bishop  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church ;  and  one,  like  his  father,  was  a  farmer.  His
earliest  teacher  was  Daniel  Breck,  afterM'ard  a  jurist
in  Kentucky.  When  the  boy  was  eight  years  old
his  parents  removed  to  Keene,  where  his  mother
had  inherited  a  little  property.  This  was  invested
in  a  glass-factory ;  but  a  revision  of  the  tariff,  by
which  the  duty"^on  glass  was  lowered,  ruined  the
business,  and  soon  afterward  the  father  died^
Salmon  was  sent  to  school  at  Windsor,  and  made
considerable  progress  in  Latin  and  Greek.  In
1820  his  uncle,  the  bishop  of  Ohio,  offered  to  take
him  into  his  family,  and  the  boy  set  out  in  the


586


CHASE


CHASE


spring,  with  his  brother  and  the  afterward  famous
Henry  R.  Schoolcraft,  to  make  the  journey  to
what  was  then  considered  the  distant  west.  They
were  taken  from  Buffalo  to  Cleveland  by  the
"  Walk-in-the- Water,"  the  first  steamboat  on  the
great  lakes.  He  spent  three  years  in  Worthington
and  Cincinnati  with  his  uncle,  who  attended  to
his  education  personally  till  he  went  to  England
in  1828,  when  the  boy  returned  home,  the  next
year  entered  Dartmouth  as  a  Junior,  and  was
graduated  in  1826.  He  at  once  established  a
classical  school  for  boys  in  Washington,  D.  C,
which  he  conducted  with  success,  at  the  same  time
studying  law  with  William  Wirt.  Mr.  Chase  gave
much  of  his  leisure  to  light  literature,  and  a  poem
that  was  addressed  by  him  to  Mr.  Wirt's  daughters
was  printed  and  is  still  extant.  In  1830,  having
completed  his  studies,  he  closed  the  school,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  Washington,  and  settled
in  Cincinnati,  where  he  soon  obtained  a  large  prac-
tice. In  politics  he  did  not  identify  himself  with
either  of  the  great  parties ;  but  on  one  point  he
was  clear  from  the  first :  he  was  unalterably  op-
posed to  slavery,  and  in  this  sentiment  he  was  con-
firmed by  witnessing  the  destruction  of  the  "  Phi-
lanthropist "  office  by  a  pro-slavery  mob  in  1836.
In  1837  he  defended  a  fugitive  slave  woman,
claimed  under  the  law  of  1793,  and  took  the  high-
est ground  against  the  constitutionality  of  that
law.  One  of  the  oldest  lawyers  in  the  court-room
was  heard  to  remark  concerning  him  :  "  There  is  a
promising  young  man  who  has  Just  ruined  him-
self." In  1837  Mr.  Chase  also  defended  his  friend
James  G.  Birney  in  a  suit  for  harboring  a  negro
slave,  and  in  1838  he  reviewed  with  great  severity
a  report  of  the  Judiciary  committee  of  the  state
senate,  refusing  trial  by  Jury  to  slaves,  and  in  a
second  suit  defended  Mr.  Birney.  When  it  became
evident,  after  the  brief  administration  of  Harrison
was  over  and  that  of  Tyler  begun,  that  no  more  ef-
fective opposition  to  the  encroachments  of  slavery
was  to  be  expected  from  the  Whig  than  from  the
Democratic  party,  a  Liberty  party  was  organized
in  Ohio  in  December,  1841,  and  Mr.  Chase  was  fore-
most among  its  founders.  The  address,  which  was
written  by  Mr.  Chase,  contained  these  passages,
clearly  setting  forth  the  issues  of  a  mighty  strug-
gle that  was  to  continue  for  twenty-five  years  and
be  closed  only  by  a  bloody  war :  "  The  constitution
found  slavery,  and  left  it,  a  state  institution — the
creature  and  dependant  of  state  law — wholly  local
in  its  existence  and  character.  It  did  not  make  it
a  national  institution.  .  .  .  Why,  then,  fellow-citi-
zens, are  we  now  appealing  to  you  ?  .  .  .  Why  is  it
that  the  whole  nation  is  moved,  as  with  a  mighty
wind,  by  the  discussion  of  the  questions  involved
in  the  great  issue  now  made  up  between  liberty  and
slavery  ?  It  is,  fellow-citizens — and  we  beg  you  to
mark  this — it  is  because  slavery  has  overleaped  its
prescribed  limits  and  usurped  the  control  of  the
national  government.  We  ask  you  to  acquaint
yourselves  fully  with  the  details  and  particulars
belonging  to  the  topics  which  we  have  briefly
touched,  and  we  do  not  doubt  that  you  will  concur
with  us  in  believing  that  the  honor,  the  welfare,
the  safety  of  our  country  imperiously  require  the
absolute  and  unqualified  divorce  of  the  govern-
ment from  slavery."  Writing  of  this  late  in  life
Mr.  Chase  said  :  "  Having  resolved  on  my  political
course,  I  devoted  all  the  time  and  means  I  could
command  to  the  work  of  spreading  the  principles
and  building  up  the  organization  of  the  party  of
constitutional  freedom  then  inaugurated.  Some-
times, indeed,  all  I  could  do  seemed  insignificant,
while  the  labors  I  had  to  perform,  and  the  demands


upon  my  very  limited  resources  by  necessary  con-
tributions, taxed  severely  all  my  ability.  ...  It
seems  to  me  now,  on  looking  back,  that  I  could  not
help  working  if  I  would,  and  that  I  was  Just  as
really  called  in  the  course  of  Providence  to  my  la-
bors for  human  freedom  as  ever  any  other  laborer
in  the  great  field  of  the  world  was  called  to  his  ap-
pointed work."  Mr.  Chase  acted  as  counsel  for  so
many  blacks  who  were  claimed  as  fugitives  that
he  was  at  length  called  by  Kentuckians  the  "  at-
torney-general for  runaway  negroes,"  and  the  col-
ored people  of  Cincinnati  presented  him  with  a  sil-
ver pitcher  "  for  his  various  public  services  in  be-
half of  the  oppressed."  One  of  his  most  noted
cases  was  the  defence  of  John  Van  Zandt  (the
original  of  John  Van  Trompe  in  "  Uncle  Tom's
Cabin  ")  in  1842,  who  was  prosecuted  for  harboring
fugitive  slaves  because  he  had  overtaken  a  party  of
them  on  the  road  and  given  them  a  ride  in  his
wagon.  In  the  final  hearing,  1846,  William  H.
Seward  was  associated  with  Mr.  Chase,  neither  of
them  receiving  any  compensation.

When  the  Liberty  party,  in  a  national  convention
held  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1843,  nominated  James  G.
Birney  for  president,  the  platform  was  almost  en-
tirely the  composition  of  Mr.  Chase.  But  he  vigor-
ously opposed  the  resolution,  offered  by  John  Pier-
pont,  declaring  that  the  fugitive-slave-law  clause  of
the  constitution  was  not  binding  in  conscience,  but
might  be  mentally  excepted  in  any  oath  to  support
the  constitution.  In  1840  the  Liberty  party  had  cast
but  one  in  360  of  the  entire  popular  vote  of  the
country.  In  1844  it  cast  one  in  forty,  and  caused
the  defeat  of  Mr.  Clay.  The  free-soil  convention
that  met  in  Buffalo  in  1848  and  nominated  Martin
Van  Buren  for  president,  with  Charles  Francis
Adams  for  vice-president,  was  presided  over  by  Mr.
Chase.  This  time  the  party  cast  one  in  nine  of  the
whole  number  of  votes.  In  February,  1849,  the
Democrats  and  the  free-soilers  in  the  Ohio  legisla-
ture formed  a  coalition,  one  result  of  which  was
the  election  of  Mr.  Chase  to  the  U.  S.  senate.
Agreeing  with  the  Democracy  of  Ohio,  which,  by
resolution  in  convention,  had  declared  slavery  to  be
an  evil,  he  supported  its  state  policy  and  nominees,
but  declared  that  he  would  desert  it  if  it  deserted
the  anti-slaver)'  position.  In  the  senate,  26  and  27
March,  1850,  he  made  a  notable  speech  against  the
so-called  "  compromise  measures,"  which  included
the  fugitive-slave  law,  and  offered  several  amend-
ments, all  of  which  were  voted  down.  When  the
Democratic  convention  at  Baltimore  nominated
Franklin  Pierce  for  president  in  1852,  and  ap-
proved of  the  compromise  acts  of  1850,  Senator
Chase  dissolved  his  connection  with  the  Demo-
cratic party  in  Ohio.  At  this  time  he  addressed  a
letter  to  Hon.  Benjamin  F.  Butler,  of  New  York,
suggesting  and  vindicating  the  idea  of  an  inde-
pendent democracy.  He  made  a  platform,  which
was  substantially  that  adopted  at  the  Pittsburg
convention,  in  the  same  year.  He  continued  his
support  to  the  independent  democrats  until  the
Kansas-Nebraska  bill  came  up,  when  he  vigorously
opposed  the  repeal  of  the  Missouri  compromise,
wrote  an  appeal  to  the  people  against  it,  and
made  the  first  elaborate  exposure  of  its  character.
His  persistent  attacks  upon  it  in  the  senate  thor-
oughly roused  the  north,  and  are  admitted  to  have
influenced  in  a  remarkable  degree  the  subsequent
struggle.  During  his  senatorial  career  Mr.  Chase
also  advocated  economy  in  the  national  finances,  a
Pacific  railroad  by  the  shortest  and  best  route,  the
homestead  law  (which  was  intended  to  develop  the
northern  territories),  and  cheap  postage,  and  held
that  the  national  treasury  should  defray  the  ex-


CHASE


CHASE


587


pense  of  providing  for  safe  navigation  of  the  lakes,
as  well  as  of  the  Atlantic  and  Pacific  oceans.

In  1855  he  was  elected  governor  of  Ohio  by  the
opponents  of  the  Pierce  administration.  His  in-
augural address  recommended  single  districts  for
legislative  representation,  annual  instead  of  bien-
nial sessions  of  the  legislature,  and  an  extended
educational  system.  Soon  after  his  inauguration
occurred  the  Garner  tragedy,  so  called,  in  which  a
fugitive  slave  mother,  near  Cincinnati,  attempted
to  kill  all  of  her  children,  and  did  kill  one,  to  pre-
vent them  from  being  borne  back  to  slave-life  in
Kentucky.  This  and  other  slave-hunts  in  Ohio  so
roused  and  increased  the  anti-slavery  sentiment  in
that  place  that  Gov.  Chase  was  re-nominated  by
acclamation,  and  was  re-elected  by  a  small  ma-
jority, though  the  American  or  know-nothing
party  had  a  candidate  in  the  field.  In  the  nation-
al Republican  convention,  held  at  Chicago  in  1860,
the  vote  on  the  first  ballot  stood:  Seward,  173^;
Lincoln,  102;  Cameron,  50^; Chase,  49. On  the

I third  ballot  Mr.  Lincoln  lacked  but  four  of  the

I  number  necessary  to  nominate,  and  these  were
given  by  Mr.  Chase's  friends  before  the  result  was
declared.  When  Mr.  Lincoln  was  inaugurated
president,  4  March,  1861,  he  made  Gov.  Chase
secretary  of  the  treasury.  The  difficulty  that
he  was  immediately  called  upon  to  grapple  with
is  thus  described  by  Mr.  Greeley :  "  When  he
accepted  the  office  of  secretary  of  the  treasury
the  finances  were  already  in  chaos;  the  current
revenue  being  inadequate,  even  in  the  absence  of
all  expenditure  or  preparation  for  war,  his  prede-
cessor (Cobb, of Georgia) having  attempted to

,  borrow  $10,000,000,  in  October,  1860,  and  obtained
only  $7,022,000— the  bidders  to  whom  the  balance

I  was  awarded  choosing  to  forfeit  their  initial  de-
posit rather  than  take  and  pay  for  their  bonds.
Thenceforth  he  had  tided  over,  till  his  resignation,
by  selling  treasury  notes,  payable  a  year  from  date,
at  6  to  12  per  cent,  discount ;  and  when,  after  he
hq,d  retired  from  the  scene.  Gen.  Dix,  who  suc-
ceeded him  in  Mr.  Buchanan's  cabinet,  attempted
(February,  1861)  to  borrow  a  small  sum  on  twenty-
year  bonds  at  6  per  cent.,  he  was  obliged  to  sell
those  bonds  at  an  average  discount  of  Qi^  per  cent.
Hence,  of  Mr.  Chase's  first  loan  of  $8,000,000,  for
which  bids  were  opened  (2  April)  ten  days  before
Beauregard  first  fired  on  Fort  Sumter,  the  offer-
ings ranged  from  5  to  10  per  cent,  discount ;  and
only  $3,099,000  were  tendered  at  or  under  6  per
cent,  discount— he,  in  the  face  of  a  vehement
clamor,  declining  all  bids  at  higher  rates  of  dis-
count than  6  per  cent.,  and  placing  soon  after-
ward the  balance  of  the  $8,000,000  in  two-year
treasury  notes  at  par  or  a  fraction  over."  When
the  secretary  went  to  New  York  for  his  first  loan,
the  London  "  Times  "declared  that  he  had  "  coerced
$50,000,000  from  the  banks,  but  would  not  fare  so
well  at  the  London  Exchange."  Three  years
later  it  said  "  the  hundredth  part  of  Mr.  Chase's
embarrassments  would  tax  Mr.  Gladstone's  inge-
nuity to  the  utmost,  and  set  the  [British]  public
mind  in  a  ferment  of  excitement."  In  his  con-
ference with  the  bankers,  the  secretary  said  he
hoped  they  would  be  able  to  take  the  loans  on  such
terms  as  could  be  admitted.  "If  you  can  not,"
said  he,  "  I  shall  go  back  to  Washington  and  issue
notes  for  circulation ;  for  it  is  certain  that  the  war
must  go  on  until  the  rebellion  is  put  down,  if  we
have  to  put  out  paper  until  it  takes  a  thousand
dollars  to  buy  a  breakfast."  At  this  time  the
amount  of  coin  in  circulation  in  the  country  was
estimated  at  $210,000,000;  and  it  soon  became
evident  that  this  was  insufficient  for  carrying  on


the  war.  The  banks  could  not  sell  the  bonds  for
coin,  and  could  not  meet  their  obligations  in  coin,
and  on  27  Dec,  1861,  they  agreed  to  suspend
specie  payment  at  the  close  of  the  year.  In  his
first  report,  submitted  on  the  9th  of' that  month,
Sec.  Chase  recommended  retrenchment  of  ex-
penses wherever  possible,  confiscation  of  the  prop-
erty of  those  in  arms  against  the  government,  an
increase  of  duties  and  of  the  tax  on  spirits,  and  a
national  currency,  with  a  system  of  national
banking  associations.  This  last  recommendation
was  carried  out  in  the  issue  of  "greenbacks,"
which  were  made  a  legal  tender  for  everything  but
customs  duties,  and  the  establishment  of  the  na-
tional banking  law.  His  management  of  the
finances  of  the  government  during  the  first  three
years  of  the  great  war  has  received  nothing  but
the  highest  praise.  He  resigned  the  secretaryship
on  30  June.  1864,  and  was  succeeded  a  few  days
later  by  William  P.  Fessenden.  On  6  Dec,  1864,
President  Lincoln  nominated  him  to  be  chief  jus-
tice of  the  United  States,  to  fill  the  vacancy  caused
by  the  death  of  Roger  B.  Taney,  and  the  nomina-
tion was  immediately  confirmed  by  the  senate.  In
this  office  he  presided  at  the  impeachment  trial  of
President  Johnson  in  1868.  In  that  year  his  name
was  frequently  mentioned  in  connection  with  the
Democratic  nomination  for  the  presidency,  and  in
answer  to  a  letter  from  the  chairman  of  the  demo-
cratic national  committee  he  wrote :

"  For  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  I  have
been,  in  my  political  views  and  sentiments,  a  Demo-
crat, and  I  still  think  that  upon  questions  of
finance,  commerce,  and  administration  generally,
the  old  Democratic  principles  afford  the  best  guid-
ance. What  separated  me  in  former  times  from
both  parties  was  the  depth  and  positiveness  of  my
convictions  on  the  slavery  question.  On  that  ques-
tion I  thought  the  Democratic  party  failed  to  make
a  just  application  of  Democratic  principles,  and
regarded  myself  as  more  democratic  than  the
Democrats.  In  1849  1  was  elected  to  the  senate  by
the  united  votes  of  the  old-line  Democrats  and  in-
dependent Democrats,  and  subsequently  made  ear-
nest efforts  to  bring  about  a  union  of  all  Democrats
on  the  ground  of  the  limitation  of  slavery  to  the
states  in  which  it  then  existed,  and  non-interven-
tion in  these  states  by  congress.  Had  that  union
been  effected,  it  is  my  firm  belief  that  the  country
would  have  escaped  the  late  civil  war  and  all  its
evils.  I  never  favored  interference  by  congress
with  slavery,  but  as  a  war  measure  Mr.  Lincoln's
proclamation  of  emancipation  had  my  hearty  as-
sent, and  1  united,  as  a  member  of  his  administra-
tion, in  the  pledge  made  to  maintain  the  freedom
of  the  enfranchised  people.  I  have  been,  and  am,
in  favor  of  so  much  of  the  reconstruction  policy  of
congress  as  based  the  re-organization  of  the  state
governments  of  the  south  upon  universal  suffrage.
I  think  that  President  Johnson  was  right  in  re-
garding the  southern  states,  except  Virginia  and
Tennessee,  as  being,  at  the  close  of  the  war,  with-
out governments  which  the  U.  S.  government  could
properly  recognize — without  governors,  judges,
legislators,  or  other  state  functionaries;  but  wrong
in  limiting,  by  his  reconstruction  proclamations,
the  right  of  suffrage  to  whites,  and  only  such
whites  as  had  the  qualification  he  required.  On
the  other  hand,  it  seemed  to  me,  congress  was  right
in  not  limiting,  by  its  reconstruction  acts,  the  right
of  suffrage  to  the  whites ;  but  wrong  in  the  exclu-
sion from  suffrage  of  certain  classes  of  citizens,  and
of  all  unable  to  take  a  prescribed  retrospective
oath,  and  wrong  also  in  the  establishment  of  arbi-
trary military  governments  for  the  states,  and  in


588


CHASE


CHASE


authorizing  military  commissions  for  the  trial  of
civilians  in  time  of  peace.  There  should  have  been
as  little  military  government  as  possible ;  no  mili-
tary commissions,  no  classes  excluded  from  suf-
frage, and  no  oath  except  one  of  faithful  obedience
and  support  to  the  constitution  and  laws,  and  sin-
cere attachment  to  the  constitutional  government
of  the  United  States.  I  am  glad  to  know  that
many  intelligent  southern  Democrats  agree  with  me
in  these  views,  and  are  willing  to  accept  universal
suffrage  and  universal  amnesty  as  the  basis  of  re-
construction and  restoration.  They  see  that  the
shortest  way  to  revive  prosperity,  possible  only  with
contented  industiy,  is  universal  suffrage  now,  and
universal  amnesty,  with  removal  of  all  disabilities,
as  speedily  as  possible  through  the  action  of  the
state  and  national  governments.  I  have  long  been
a  believer  in  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  securing
the  right  of  suffrage  to  all  citizens  by  state  consti-
tutions and  legislation.  It  is  the  best  guarantee  of
the  stability  of  institutions,  and  the  prosperity  of
communities.  My  views  on  this  subject  were  well
known  when  the  Democrats  elected  me  to  the  sen-
ate in  1849.  I  have  now  answered  your  letter  as  I
think  I  ought  to  answer  it.  I  beg  you  to  believe
me — for  I  say  it  in  all  sincerity — that  I  do  not  de-
sire the  office  of  president,  nor  a  nomination  for  it.
Nor  do  I  know  that,  with  my  views  and  convic-
tions, I  am  a  suitable  candidate  for  any  party.  Of
that  my  countrymen  must  judge."

Judge  Chase  subsequently  prepared  a  declara-
tion of  principles,  embodying  the  ideas  of  his  let-
ter, and  submitted  it  to  those  Democrats  who  de-
sired his  nomination,  as  a  platform  in  that  event.
But  this  was  not  adopted  by  the  convention,  and
the  plan  to  nominate  him,  if  there  was  such  a  plan,
failed.  In  June,  1870,  he  suffered  an  attack  of
paralysis,  and  from  that  time  till  his  death  he  was
an  invalid.  As  in  the  case  of  President  Lincoln
and  Sec.  Stanton,  his  integrity  was  shown  by  the
fact  that,  though  he  had  been  a  member  of  the
administration  when  the  government  was  spend-
ing millions  of  dollars  a  day,  he  died  comparative-
ly poor.  His  remains  were  buried  in  Washington ;
but  in  October,  1886,  were  removed,  with  appro-
priate ceremony,  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  and  depos-
ited in  Spring  Grove  cemetery  near  that  city.  Be-
sides his  reports  and  decisions,  Mr.  Chase  pub-
lished a  compilation  of  the  statutes  of  Ohio,  with
annotations  and  an  historical  sketch  (3  vols.,  Cin-
cinnati, 1833).  See  "  Life  and  Public  Services  of
Salmon  Portland  Chase,"  by  J.  W.  Schuckers
(New  York,  1874).

CHASE,  Samuel,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Somerset  co.,  Md.,  17  April,
1741 ;  d.  19  June,  1811.  His  father,  an  Episcopa-
lian clergyman  of  English  birth,  and  a  fine  classi-
cal scholar,  had  chai'ge  of  his  early  education,  and
sent  him,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  to  study  law  at
Annapolis,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1761  and  began  practice.  He  was  soon  prominent
in  his  profession,  and  became  a  member  of  the  co-
lonial legislature,  where  he  distinguished  himself
by  his  indeiJendent  bearing  and  by  his  opposition
to  the  royal  governor.  He  voted  at  one  time  for  a
resolution  rehiting  to  the  support  of  the  clergy,
by  which  his  father,  then  rector  of  St.  Paul's,  Bal-
timore, lost  half  his  income.  He  was  an  ardent
patriot,  vehemently  resisted  the  stamp-act,  and  was
prominent  in  an  assemblage  of  the  "  Sons  of  lib-
erty" at  Annapolis  that  forcibly  opened  the  public
offices,  destroyed  the  stamps,  and  burned  the  col-
lector in  effigy.  He  afterward  published  a  letter
to  the  authorities,  avowing  and  defending  his  con-
nection with  this  affair. The  Maryland  conven-


tion sent  him  as  one  of  five  delegates  to  the  Con-
tinental congress  of  1774,  and  he  continued  a
member  of  successive  congresses  until  the  end  of
1778.  The  Maryland  delegates  were  restricted,  by
special  instructions  of  the  convention,  from  voting
for  independence,  and  Mr.  Chase,  chafing  at  being
obliged  to  withhold  open  support  from  a  measure
he  so  enthusiastically  favored,  gladly  accepted
from  congress  a  mission  to  Canada,  in  companv
with  Benjamin  Franklin  and  Charles  Carroll.  The
mission,  the  object  of  which  was  to  persuade  Cana-
da to  join  the  colonies,  was  fruitless ;  and  on  his
return  Mr.  Chase  canvassed  the  state  of  Maryland,
and  obtained  from  county  meetings  expressions  of
patriotic  sentiment  that  the  convention  could  not
resist.  It  now  voted  for  independence,  and  Mr.
Chase  returned  to  Philadelphia  just  in  time  to
join  in  adopting  the  decisive  resolution.  He  was
appointed  on  most  of  the  important  committees  in
congress,  where  his  industry  was  unwearied.  In
1778  he  drafted  an  eloquent*  address  to  the  people
of  the  country,  in  answer  to  papers  that  had  been
circulated  by  the  tories.  During  the  last  two  or
three  years  of  the  war  he  devoted  himself  to  his
private  law  business,  which  he  had  not  hesitated
to  neglect,  while  in  congress,  for  his  public  duties.
In  1783  he  was  sent  to  England  by  the  Maryland
legislature,  as  agent  of  the  state,  to  recover  money
that  had  been
invested  by  it
in  the  bank  of
England  before
the  war.  He
remained  there
for  nearly  a
year,  succeeded
in  recovering
$650,000,  and
made  the  ac-
quaintance of
many  eminent
lawyers,  includ-
ing Pitt,  Fox,
and  Edmund
Burke,  whose
guest  he  was  for
a  week.  Chase
was  thanked  by
the  legislature
for his "  zeal

and  fidelity,  diligence  and  ability  "  in  this  mission.
He  removed  to  Baltimore  in  1786,  became  chief  jus-
tice of  a  newly  established  criminal  court  there  in
1788,  and  also  a  member  of  the  Maryland  convention
that  adopted  the  federal  constitution.  Although  he
did  not  think  this  instrument  democratic  enough.
lamented  the  "  monarchical  principles  "  that  had
come  into  vogue,  and  was  an  admirer  of  France,  he
was  throughout  his  life  an  earnest  federalist.  In
1791  he  became  chief  justice  of  the  general  court
of  Maryland,  and  in  1794  distinguished  himself  by
his  course  on  the  occasion  of  a  riot.  He  had
caused  the  arrest  of  two  popular  men  as  leaders ;
but  they  refused  to  give  bail,  and  the  sheriff  was
apprehensive  of  a  rescue  should  he  take  them  to
prison.  "  Call  out  the  posse  comitatus,  then,"  said
the  judge.  "Sir,"  was  the  reply,  "no  one  w'.il
serve."  "  Summon  me,  then ;  I  will  be  the  posse
comitatus:  I  will  take  them  to  jail."  Such  was
the  state  of  the  public  mind  that  the  grand  jury,
instead  of  presenting  the  rioters,  presented  the
judge  for  holding  a  place  in  two  courts  at  the
same  time.  Pie  simplv  told  them  that  they  hacl
meddled  with  topics  beyond  their  province.  Wash-
ington made  Judge  Chase  an  associate  justice  oi


CHASE


CHASSERIEAU


589


the  U.  S.  supreme  court  in  1796,  and  in  1804  his

Solitical  opponents  in  congress,  led  by  John  Ran-
olph,  of  Virginia,  secured  his  impeachment  by
the  house  for  misdemeanor  in  the  conduct  of  the
trials  of  Fries  and  Callender  for  sedition,  five
years  before,  and  for  a  recent  address  to  a  Mary-
land grand  jury.  The  requisite  two  thirds  not
being  obtained,  "he  was  discharged  by  the  senate
on  5  March,  1805.  resumed  his  seat  on  the  bench,
and  retained  it  till  his  death.  The  impeachment
of  Judge  Chase  excited  much  sympathy,  even
among  his  opponents,  on  account  of  his  age,  his
services  to  the  country,  and  the  purity  of  his  judi-
cial record.  There  is  no  doubt,  however,  that  it
did  good  in  checking  the  overbearing  conduct
prevalent  at  that  time  on  the  bench.  Judge  Chase
was  better  fitted  for  an  advocate  than  for  a  judge.
He  was  somewhat  irascible,  free  in  censure  where
he  thought  it  deserved,  and  always  ready  to  express
his  political  opinions,  even  on  the  bench ;  but  the
purity  of  his  motives  seems  beyond  question.

CriASE,  Squire,  missionary,  b.  in  Scipio,  Ca-
yuga CO.,  N.  Y.,  15  Feb.,  1802 ;  d.  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,
26  July,  1848.  He  was  licensed  as  a  local  preacher
in  the  Methodist  church  in  June,  1822,  and  in  July
was  received  as  a  probationer  into  the  Genesee  con-
ference. He  labored  in  various  circuits  till  1836,
but  was  twice  compelled  to  discontinue  work  on
account  of  his  health.  In  1831  he  was  presiding
elder  of  the  St.  Lawrence  district.  On  15  Oct.,
1836,  he  sailed  as  a  missionary  to  Liberia ;  but  the
climate  impaired  his  health,  and  he  was  obliged  to
return  in  1837.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  general
conference  of  1840,  and  then  appointed  pastor  at
Watertown,  N.  Y.,  where  he  had  been  stationed  for
a  few  months  in  1834.  But  his  inclination  and
desire  were  for  missionary  work,  and  in  January,
1842,  his  health  havmg  been  partially  restored,  he
sailed  again  to  Liberia.  He  was  superintendent  of
the  mission  there,  and  edited  "  Africa's  Luminary,"
a  semi-monthly  Methodist  paper  published  at  Mon-
rovia. He  also  made  extensive  journeys  into  the
interior  of  the  country,  acquiring  much  knowledge
about  the  condition  of  the  native  tribes.  The  state
of  his  health  compelled  him  to  return  the  second
time  to  the  United  States  in  May,  1843.  He  pub-
lished "  Doctrine,  History,  and  I^lorai  Tendency  of
Roman  Catholic  Indulgences  "  (1840).  See  Rev.  P.
D.  Gorrie's  "  Black  River  Conference  Memorial."

CHASE,  Thomas,  a  brother  of  Pliny  Earle,
educator,  b.  in  Worcester,  Mass.,  16  June,  1827,  was
graduated  with  honor  at  Harvard  in  1848,  and  was
tutor  there  from  1850  till  1853.  when  he  spent  two
years  abroad  in  travel  and  study,  exploring  the
classic  sites  of  Italy  and  Greece,  and  attending  the
lectures  of  Boeckh,  Curtius,  and  other  eminent
scholars  at  Berlin.  He  returned  in  1855,  became
professor  of  philology  and  classical  literature  at
Haverford  college,  near  Philadelphia,  and  was
chosen  its  president  in  1875.  Prof.  Chase  was  a
member  of  the  American  company  of  revisers  of  the
translation  of  the  New  Testament.  Harvard  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1878.  As  senior  edi-
tor of  Chase  and  Stuart's  classical  series,  he  has
prepared  many  Latin  and  Greek  text-books,  and
htis  published  "  Hellas :  her  Monuments  and  Sce-
nery "  (Cambridge,  1861),  several  literary  and  bio-
graphical essays,  among  them  an  oration  on  the
character  of  Abraham  Lincoln,  and  an  address  on
"  Liberal  Education ;  its  Aims  and  Methods."  de-
livered at  Bryn  Mawr  college.  Pa.

CHASE,  WiUiaiii  Heiiry^  soldier,  b.  in  Massa-
chusetts in  1798;  d.  in  Pensacola,  Fla.,  8  Feb.,
1870.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1815,  and  was  at  once  assigned  to  the


engineer  corps.  He  was  employed  in  repairing
Fort  Niagara  from  1817  till  1818,  and  in  1819  was
assigned  to  duty  in  constructing  defences  for  New
Orleans  and  the  gulf  ports,  which  the  war  of  1812
had  shown  to  be  vulnerable  points.  His  first  works
were  Forts  Pike  and  Macomb.  He  was  made  first
lieutenant,  31  March,  1819,  and  from  then  till  1828
was  superintending  engineer  of  various  important
works,  including  the  forts  at  Rigolets,  Chef  Men-
teur,  Bienvenue,  and  the  Bayou  Dupre  passes  to
New  Orleans.  He  was  promoted  to  captain,  1  Jan.,
1825,  and  from  1828  till  1854  was  in  charge  of  the
construction  of  the  defences  in  Pensacola  harbor,
P'la.  He  was  also  in  charge  of  Fort  Morgan,  Ala.,
of  Fort  Jackson,  La.,  and  of  the  improvement  of
the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  from  1836  till  1839.
He  was  promoted  to  major,  7  July,  1838,  and
served  on  special  boards  of  engineers  for  the  exam-
ination of  various  points.  He  superintended  the
improvement  of  Mobile  bay.  His  last  work  was
Fort  Taylor,  Key  West,  Fla.,  of  which  he  had
charge  in  1854-'6,  when  he  was  appointed  by
President  Pierce  superintendent  of  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy,  but  resigned  from  the  army  on  31
Oct.,  before  entering  upon  his  duties  there,  and  be-
came president  of  the  Alabama  and  Florida  railroad
company.  Maj.  Chase  took  an  influential  part  in
all  projects  connected  with  the  development  of  the
region  about  Pensacola,  where  he  made  his  home.
When  the  civil  war  began,  he  joined  the  Confed-
erates, and  was  active  in  the  seizure  of  Pensacola
navv-yard,  but  after  this  took  no  prominent  part.

CHASE,  William  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  25  April,  1844 ;  d.  there,  21  June,  1871.
He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in
1865,  became  a  first  lieutenant  in  the  engineer
corps,  and  served  at  Willett's  Point,  N.  Y.,  St.  Paul,
Minn.,  and  San  Francisco,  Cal.  While  at  St.  Paul,
he  was  directed  by  Gen.  Warren  to  make  a  topo-
graphical survey  of  the  battle-field  of  Gettysburg.
The  survey  was  completed  in  1869,  and  is  a  valua-
ble contribution  to  the  military  history  of  the  war.

CHASE,  William  Merritt,  painter,  b.  in
Franklin,  Ind.,  1  Nov.,  1849.  He  began  the  study
of  art  in  1868  under  B.  F.  Hays,  a  portrait-painter
of  Indianapolis,  but  in  1869  removed  to  New  Y^ork,
where  he  became  a  pupil  at  the  National  academy,
and  of  J.  0.  Eaton.  In  1872  he  went  to  Europe
and  studied  several  years  in  the  Munich  acad-
emy under  Wagner  and  Piloty,  winning  three
medals.  He  also  studied  a  year  in  Venice,  especial-
ly the  works  of  Tintoretto.  He  returned  to  the
United  States  in  1878.  In  1882  he  received  honor-
able mention  at  the  Paris  salon.  His  studio  is  in
New  York.  His  principal  works  are  portraits  of
the  five  children  of  Piloty,  painted  for  that  artist ;
"  Venetian  Fish  Market " ;  "  The  Dowager  "  (1875) ;
"Boy  finding  a  Cockatoo,"  "Broken  Jug"  (1877);
"Ready  for  a  Ride,"  "The  Apprentice"  (1878);
"  Interior  of  St.  Mark's  in  Venice,"  "  Court  Jester,"
portrait  of  Duveneck  (1879);  portrait  of  Gen.
Webb  (1880);  portrait  of  Peter  Cooper  (1882);
"Interior  of  Artist's  Studio"  (1883);  and  "The
Coquette"  (1884).

CHASS^RIAU,  Theodore,  artist,  b.  in  Sama-
na,  Santo  Domingo,  in  1819 ;  d.  in  Paris,  8  Oct.,
1856.  He  studied  painting  with  Ingres  in  Paris,
and  followed  him  to  the  E'rench  school  of  Rome,
but  afterward  left  him,  having  given  rein  to  his
own  original  ideas,  and  next  attached  himself  to
the  school  founded  by  Delaroche.  He  executed
several  of  the  mural  paintings  in  the  palace  of  the
council  of  state,  Paris,  and  his  works  are  found  in
some  of  the  principal  Parisian  churches.  His  chief
works  are  the  "Tepidarium  at  Pompeii,"  in  the


690


CHASTELLUX


CHATEAUBRIAND


museum  at  the  Luxembourg ;  "  Arab  Cavaliers  car-
rying away  their  Dead  " ;  "  Susanna  and  the  El-
ders " ;  "  Christ  in  the  Garden  of  Olives  " ;  and  "  Mary
Stuart  defending  Rizzio  against  his  Assassins."
He  left  fifteen  etchings  of  subjects  from  Shake-
speare's "  Othello,"  and  thirtv  from  "  Hamlet."

CHASTELLUX,  Francois  Jean,  Chevalier  de,
French  author,  b.  in  Paris  in  1734;  d.  there,  28
Oct.,  1788.  He  entered  the  army  when  fifteen
years  of  age,  and  distinguished  himself  in  Germany
as  colonel  of  a  regiment  in  the  seven  years'  war.
He  afterward  served  in  America  as  major-general
under  Rochambeau,  and  gained  the  friendship  of
Washington  by  his  amiable  character.  He  made  a
literary  reputation  by  publishing  "  De  la  felicite
publique"  j(1772),  a  work  noted  for  its  bitterness
against  Christianity,  and  now  known  only  as  a
literary  curiosity.  His  "  Voyage  dans  I'Amerique
septentrionale  dans  les  annees  1780-2"  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1786 ;  English  translation  by  George  Grieve,
London,  1787)  contains  notices  of  the  natural  his-
tory of  the  country,  interesting  details  of  the  locali-
ties and  events  of  the  war,  and  observations  on  the
character  of  the  chief  actors  in  it.  It  includes  his
journal  written  when  travelling  from  Newport,
R.  I.,  to  Philadelphia,  thence  to  Saratoga,  and  in
Virginia,  and  its  style  is  agreeable,  though  some-
times frivolous.  His  "  Discours  sur  les  avantages
et  les  dessavantages  qui  resultent  pour  I'Europe  de
la  decouverte  de  I'Amerique"  (1787)  is  praised  by
La  Harpe  as  his  best  work.  He  concludes  that  the
advantages  of  the  discovery  outweigh  the  disad-
vantages. He  also  translated  into  French  David
Humphreys's  "  Address  to  the  Army  of  the  United
States."  Chastellux  married  Miss  Plunket,  a  iady
of  Irish  descent,  the  year  before  his  death.  He  was
made  a  member  of  the  French  academy  in  1775.

CHATARD,  Francis  Silas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Mount  St.  Mary's,  Emmettsburg,  in  1853,  and
adopted  the  profession  of  medicine,  but,  after  fin-
ishing his  course,  he  decided  to  enter  the  church.
With  this  view  he  became  a  student  of  the  Ur-
ban college,  Rome,  in  1857,  and  at  the  end  of  six
years  won  the  cap  of  a  doctor  of  divinity  in  public
theses.  He  was  shortly  afterward  appointed  vice-
rector  of  the  American  college,  and,  on  the  eleva-
tion of  Dr.  McCloskey  to  the  episcopate,  became
rector.  In  this  place,  which  he  held  for  ten  years,
he  rendered  excellent  service  not  only  to  the
American  college,  but  to  the  American  bishops
that  visited  Rome.  His  efforts  during  the  Vati-
can council  were  recognized  by  Pius  IX.,  who.  as  a
token  of  his  appreciation,  presented  him  with  a
gold  medal  of  exquisite  workmanship.  Dr.  Cha-
tard  visited  the  United  States  in  1878,  and  obtained
large  sums  for  the  American  college.  On  his  re-
turn to  Rome,  he  was  notified  of  his  appointment
to  the  bishopric  of  Vincennes.  He  was  conse-
crated the  same  year,  and  took  up  his  residence
at  Indianapolis.  He  is  the  author  of  several  devo-
tional and  controversial  works.

CHATEAUBRIAND,  Francois  An^uste,  Vis-
count de,  French  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Malo  in  Sep-
tember, 1768 ;  d.  in  Paris,  4  July,  1848.  He  sprang
from  a  noble  family  of  Brittany,  and  received  his
education  at  the  colleges  of  Dole  and  Rennes.  Pie
was  destined  for  the  church,  but  preferred  the  army,
and  received  a  commission  as  second  lieutenant
in.  1785.  His  first  production,  an  idyllic  poem,
"  L'amour  de  la  campagne,"  revealed  nothing  of
the  genius  he  afterward  manifested.  He  had  no
sympathy  with  the  revolutionary  movements  in
Paris,  and  in  the  spring  of  1791  embarked  for  the
United  States,  ostensibly  in  search  of  the  north-


west passage.  In  Philadelphia  he  dined  with
Washington,  and  when  the  president  alluded  to
the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  polar  expedition,  the
young  traveller  said  :  "  Sir,  it  is  less  difficult  than
to  create  a  nation,  as  you  have  done."  Chateau-
briand then  visited  New  York,  Boston,  and  Albanv,
and  went  among  the  Indian  tribes,  living  with
them,  and  exploring  the  country  bordering  on  the
great  lakes.  He  afterward  travelled  through  Flor-
ida, and  spent  some  time  among  the  Natchez.
These  wanderings  among  the  savages,  the  strange
beauties  of  the  American  continent,  the  size  of  its
rivers,  the  solitude  of  its  forests,  made  a  powerful
impression  upon  his  imagination.  Hearing  of  the
flight  and  arrest  of  Louis  XVI.,  he  returned  to
France,  but,  finding  that  he  could  not  benefit  the
royal  cause,  joined  the  emigrants  at  Coblentz,  and
afterward  enlisted  in  a  company  that  followed  the
Prussian  army  in  their  invasion  of  France.  He
was  wounded'  and  left  for  dead  near  Thionville,
taken  to  Jersey  by  a  charitable  person,  and  from
1793  till  1800  was  an  exile  in  England,  where  he
was  reduced  to  extreme  poverty.  He  was  convert-
ed from  materialism  by  the  dying  appeal  of  his
mother,  and  in  1798  began  to  compose  his  "  Genie
du  Christianisme."  He  returned  to  France  under
an  assumed  name,  and  completed  this  work,  pub-
lishing it  in  1802.  The  romance  of  "  Atala,"  a
picture  of  life  among  the  American  aborigines,
which  was  incorporated  in  this  work,  had  pre-
viously appeared  in  the  "  Mercure  de  France  in
1801,  and  attracted  much  attention.  His  work
gained  him  a  diplomatic  appointment  from  Bona-
parte :  but  after  the  execution  of  the  Due  d'En-
ghien  he  resigned  it,  and  afterward  bitterly  assailed
the  emperor,  Chateaubriand's  political  career  was
somewhat  wayward.  He  called  hmiself  "  a  Bour-
bonist  from  the  point  of  honor,  a  royalist  by  rea-
son, a  republican  by  taste  and  disposition."  lie
had  published  a  political  pamphlet  entitled  "  De
Buonaparte  et  des  Bourbons"  (1814),  which  did
good  service  in  the  king's  cause,  and  after  the  res-
toration he  became  minister  of  state  and  a  peer  of
France.  Forfeiting  the  royal  favor,  he  lost  his
office,  but,  becoming  reconciled,  he  was  minister  to
Berlin  in  1821,  to  London  in  1822,  and,  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  congress  of  Verona,  was  instrumental  in
bringing  about  the  French  expedition  to  Spain.  On
his  return  he  was  made  minister  of  foreign  affairs.
Throughout  this  time  he  remained  a  royalist,  till,
on  being  dismissed  from  office  by  the  prime  minis-
ter, de  Villete,  in  1824,  he  joined  the  liberals.  He
made  himself  popular  by  advocating  Greek  inde-
pendence, but  after  1830  ceased  to  be  active  in
politics,  and  gave  himself  up  to  literary  pursuits.
Among  his  numerous  works,  besides  those  already
noticed,  are  "  Les  martvrs  "  (1809) ;  "  Itineraire  de
Paris  a  Jerusalem"  (1811);  "Etudes,  ou  discours
historiques,"  an  introduction  to  a  history  of  France
on  a  gigantic  plan  (1831);  "Voyage  en  Amerique,
en  France  et  en  Italic  "  (1834) ;  "  Essai  sur  la  lit-
terature  anglaise  "  (1836) ;  and  "  Memoires  d'outre-
tombe,"  an  autobiography  (12  vols.,  1849-50 ;  new
ed.,  illustrated,  8  vols.,  1856 ;  6  vols.,  1861 ;  Ger-
man translation,  2d  ed.,  Jena,  1852).  This  work
he  sold  in  advance  in  1836,  and  lived  on  an  an-
nuity secured  by  the  proceeds.  His  life  was  sponc
in  retirement,  'the  drawing-room  of  his  friend,
Mme.  Recamier,  being  almost  the  only  place  he
visited.  There  he  could  be  seen  every  evening
among  the  elite  of  the  literary  world.  But  a  pro-
found melancholy  clouded  his  latter  years.  Most
of  his  works  have  been  translated  into  the  Englisn,
German,  and  other  languages.  The  complete  ami
separate  editions  are  numerous. The  best  ot  tne


CHATFIELD


CHATHAM


691


former  is  by  Sainte-Beuve  (12  vols.,  1859-61),  with
a  review  of  his  literary  labors.  A  new  and  com-
plete illustrated  edition,  to  consist  of  fourteen  vol-
umes, was  begun  in  18G4.  Marin's  "  Histoire  de  la
vie  et  des  ouvrages  de  M.  de  Chateaubriand"'  ap-
peared in  1883,  and  M.  Villemain's  "  Chateau-
briand, sa  vie,  ses  ecrits,  son  influence  sur  son
temps  "  in  1858.

CHATFIELD,  Julia,  educator,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Brown  county,  Ohio,  in  1878.
She  was  educated  by  the  Ursulines  of  Boulogne,
and  became  a  nun  of  that  order  in  1884.  In  1845
she  conducted  a  body  of  Ursulines  from  Boulogne
to  the  United  States.  When  she  visited  Cincinnati
she  was  offered  three  different  sites  for  the  convent
and  academy  she  purposed  founding.  She  selected
that  in  Brown  co.,  Ohio,  and  erected  the  convent
and  academy  of  St.  Martin's,  which  became  a  lead-
ing Catholic  institution  in  the  west.  She  acted  as
president  of  the  academy  for  over  thirty  years.

CHATHAM,  William  Pitt,  Earl  of,  British
statesman,  b.  in  Boconnoc,  Cornwall,  England,  15
Nov.,  1708;  d.  in  Hayes,  Somerset,  11  May,  1778.
His  grandfather,  Thomas  Pitt,  was  governor  of
Madras,  and  brought  from  India  the  celebrated
Pitt  diamond,  which  he  had  purchased  for  £24,000.
The  Regent  Orleans  bought  it  of  him  for  £185,000,
and  it  was  esteemed  the  most  precious  of  the  crown
jewels  of  France  as  long  as  the  monarchy  lasted.
Gov.  Pitt  used  his  wealth  in  buying  rotten  bor-
oughs until  he  acquired  for  his  family  a  vast  par-
liamentary influence.  He  sat  in  the  House  of  Com-
mons for  ithe  famous  rotten  borough  of  Old  Sarum,
which  had  no  inhabitants.  His  son,  Robert,  who
afterward  represented  this  same  borough,  married
Harriet  Villiers,  and  had  two  sons,  of  whom  the
elder,  Thomas,  inherited  the  estate.  The  younger
son,  William,  was  educated  at  Eton,  and  entered
Trinity  college,  Oxford,  at  the  age  of  seventeen.
He  already  began  to  feel  the  tortures  of  gout,  so
that  he  left  college  without  taking  a  degree,  and
travelled  in  France  and  Italy  for  his  health.  On
his  return  home  he  obtained  a  cornetcy  in  the
Blues;  but  in  1735  his  family  interest  gained  him
a  seat  in  parliament  as  member  for  Old  Sarum.
His  first  speech,  in  April,  1786,  made  a  profound
impression.  He  was  in  the  opposition  during  Wal-
pole's  ministry,  and  during  that  of  his  successor
Carteret.  He  fiercely  denounced  the  prevailing
custom  of  subsidizing  with  British  gold  petty  Ger-
man states  for  the  benefit  of  the  German  domin-
ions of  the  Guelph  family.  This  earned  for  him
the  enmity  of  George  II.,  who  seems  to  have  cared
more  for  Hanover  than  for  Great  Britain ;  but  it
won  the  patriotic  heart  of  the  old  Duchess  of
Marlborough,  who,  on  her  death  in  1744,  left  Pitt
a  legacy  of  £10,000  as  a  testimonial  of  her  admira-
tion for  his  conduct.  In  that  same  year  Henry
Pelham  became  prime  minister,  and  would  have
had  Pitt  in  his  cabinet  but  for  the  king's  opposi-
tion. Pelham  made  an  issue  of  this,  and  in  Feb-
ruary, 1746,  in  the  very  crisis  of  the  Jacobite  re-
bellion, the  ministry  resigned,  and  the  obstinate
king  found  himself  suddenly  deserted  by  the  whole
party  that  had  placed  his  family  on  the  throne.
Carteret,  now  Lord  Granville,  tried  in  vain  to  form
a  ministry ;  he  could  not  count  on  more  than  thirty
lords  and  eighty  members  of  the  lower  house.  The
ministers  therefore  returned  in  triumph,  with  Pitt
as  vice-treasurer  of  Ireland,  and  shortly  afterward
as  paymaster  of  the  forces.  In  this  office  one  of
Pitt's  leading  traits  of  character  soon  showed  itself,
xhe  salary  was  small,  but  the  various  perquisites
made  it  the  most  lucrative  office  in  the  gift  of  the
government. Pitt  refused  to  take  a  farthing  be-


yond his  stated  salary,  thus  setting  an  example
that  proved  to  be  of  great  effect  in  purifying  Eng-
lish politics.  Such  conduct  was  considered  idiotic
by  the  politicians  of  the  time,  but  it  won  the  hearts
of  the  English  people.  In  1754  Pitt  married  Lady
Hester  Grenville,  sister  of  Earl  Temple  and  of
George  Grenville.  In  that  year  the  death  of  Henry
Pelham  threw  the  government  into  confusion.
His  elder  brother,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  became
prime  minister,  and  Pitt  remained  for  a  time  as
paymaster ;  but  in  the  following  year,  as  war  on
the  continent  was  threatened,  the  king  became
alarmed  for  Hanover,  and  proposed  to  subsidize
the  Hessian  princes  and  to  bribe  the  Russian  gov-
ernment to  browbeat  Frederick  of  Prussia.  Against
these  stupid  measures,  which  might  have  ruined
England's  chances  for  victory,  both  in  Europe  and
in  America,  in  the  great  war  that  was  coming,  the
far-sighted  Pitt  most  resolutely  set  his  face,  and
was  accordingly  turned  out  of  office.  War  began
in  1756  between  England  and  France,  and  it  began
with  disasters  for  England.  The  vast  ability  and
the  lofty  character  of  Pitt  had  already  won  such
recognition  that  there  was  a  popular  demand  that
he  should  enter  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  state
for  foreign  affairs.  He  refused  to  serve  with  New-
castle, who  was  a  political  intriguer  of  the  worst
type.  Newcastle  then  resigned,  and  the  Duke  of
Devonshire  became  nominal  prime  minister,  with
Pitt  as  secretary  of  state  and  wielding  the  real
power.  During  this  short  ministry  occurred  the
Judicial  murder  of  Admiral  Byng  for  his  error  of
judgment  in  failing  to  relieve  Minorca.  At  the
risk  of  his  power  and  popularity,  Pitt  thundered
against  this  wickedness,  and  did  all  that  he  could
to  save  the  gallant  Byng,  but  in  vain.  The  minis-
try lasted  only  five  months.  In  April,  1757,  Pitt
and  his  brother-in-law.  Lord  Temple,  were  dismissed
by  the  hostile  king,  but  the  great  cities  took  pains
to  express  their  disapproval  of  this  action  and  their
unbounded  confidence  in  Pitt.  For  eleven  weeks,
in  the  midst  of  one  of  the  greatest  wars  of  modern
times,  England  was  without  a  government,  while
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  was  vainly  trying  to  form
a  ministry  that  should  not  include  Pitt.  At  length
the  king  was  obliged  to  give  way,  and  in  forming
the  new  ministry  Pitt  dictated  the  terms  upon
which  he  would  consent  to  serve  with  Newcastle.
The  latter  became  prime  minister,  with  Pitt  for
secretary  of  state,  but  for  the  next  four  years  "  the
Great  Commoner,"  as  he  was  now  called,  was  the
real  ruler  of  England.  These  four  years  were  the
most  glorious  in  English  history.  They  decided
the  contest  for  supremacy  in  the  world  between
the  French  and  English  races,  and  between  des-
potic and  liberal  ideas  in  religion  and  politics.
They  laid  the  foundations  of  modern  Germany,  of
the  British  empire  in  India,  and  of  American  do-
minion over  the  Mississippi  valley.  They  made
England  mistress  of  the  sea,  and  at  the  same  time
prepared  the  way  for  the  independence  of  the
United  States.  In  the  combinations  that  led  to
these  magnificent  results,  Pitt  showed  himself  the
greatest  war  minister  and  one  of  the  greatest
statesmen  that  ever  lived.  The  year  1757  was
made  illustrious  by  the  victories  of  Frederick  at
Rossbach  and  Leuthen,  and  of  Clive  at  Plassey.
The  following  year  saw  the  capture  of  Louisburg
and  Fort  Duquesne,  and  the  naval  victories  of
Basque  Roads  and  Carthagena.  Next  followed  in
1759  the  capture  of  Guadeloupe,  the  overthrow  of
the  French  at  Minden,  the  naval  victories  at  Lagos
and  Quiberon,  and  the  memorable  triumph  of
Wolfe  at  Quebec.  Finally,  in  1760  the  great  vic-
tory of  Wandiwash  completed  the  downfall  of  the


690


CHASTELLUX


CHATEAUBRIAND


museum  at  the  Luxembourg ;  "  Arab  Cavaliers  car-
rying away  their  Dead  " ;  "  Susanna  and  the  El-
ders " ;  "  Christ  in  the  Garden  of  Olives  " ;  and  "  Mary
Stuart  defending  Rizzio  against  his  Assassins."
He  left  fifteen  etchings  of  subjects  from  Shake-
speare's "  Othello,"  and  thirty  from  "  Hamlet."

CHASTELLUX,  Francois  Jean,  Chevalier  de,
French  author,  b.  in  Paris  in  1734;  d.  there,  28
Oct.,  1788.  He  entered  the  army  when  fifteen
years  of  age,  and  distinguished  himself  in  Germany
as  colonel  of  a  regiment  in  the  seven  years'  war.
He  afterward  served  in  America  as  major-general
under  Rochambeau,  and  gained  the  friendship  of
Washington  by  his  amiable  character.  He  made  a
literary  reputation  by  publishing  "  De  la  felicite
publique  "  j(1772),  a  work  noted  for  its  bitterness
against  Christianity,  and  now  known  only^  as  a
literary  curiosity.  His  "  Voyage  dans  I'Amerique
septentrionale  dans  les  annees  1780-'2"  (2  vols.,
Paris,  1786 ;  English  translation  by  George  Grieve,
London,  1787)  contains  notices  of  the  natural  his-
tory of  the  country,  interesting  details  of  the  locali-
ties and  events  of  the  war,  and  observations  on  the
character  of  the  chief  actors  in  it.  It  includes  his
journal  written  when  travelling  from  Newport,
R.  I.,  to  Philadelphia,  thence  to  Saratoga,  and  in
Virginia,  and  its  style  is  agreeable,  though  some-
times frivolous.  His  "  Discours  sur  les  avantages
et  les  dessavantages  qui  resultent  pour  I'Europe  de
la  decouverte  de  I'Amerique"  (1787)  is  praised  by
La  Harpe  as  his  best  work.  He  concludes  that  the
advantages  of  the  discovery  outweigh  the  disad-
vantages. He  also  translated  into  French  David
Humphreys's  "  Address  to  the  Army  of  the  United
States."  Chastellux  married  Miss  Plunket,  a  lady
of  Irish  descent,  the  year  before  his  death.  He  was
made  a  member  of  the  French  academv  m  1775.

CHATARD,  Francis  Silas,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1834.  He  was  graduated  at
Mount  St.  Mary's,  Emmettsburg,  in  1853,  and
adopted  the  profession  of  medicine,  but,  after  fin-
ishing his  course,  he  decided  to  enter  the  church.
With  this  view  he  became  a  student  of  the  Ur-
ban college.  Rome,  in  1857,  and  at  the  end  of  six
years  won  the  cap  of  a  doctor  of  divinity  in  public
theses.  He  was  shortly  afterward  appointed  vice-
rector  of  the  American  college,  and,  on  the  eleva-
tion of  Dr.  McCloskey  to  the  episcopate,  became
rector.  In  this  place,  which  he  held  for  ten  years,
he  rendered  excellent  service  not  only  to  the
American  college,  but  to  the  American  bishops
that  visited  Rome.  His  efforts  during  the  Vati-
can council  were  recognized  by  Pius  IX.,  who.  as  a
token  of  his  appreciation,  presented  him  with  a
gold  medal  of  exquisite  workmanship.  Dr.  Cha-
tard  visited  the  United  States  in  1878,  and  obtained
large  sums  for  the  American  college.  On  his  re-
turn to  Rome,  he  was  notified  of  his  appointment
to  the  bishopric  of  Vincennes.  He  was  conse-
crated the  same  year,  and  took  up  his  residence
at  Indianapolis.  He  is  the  author  of  several  devo-
tional and  controversial  works.

CHATEAUBRIAND,  Francois  An^iiste,  Vis-
count de,  French  statesman,  b.  in  St.  Malo  in  Sep-
tember, 1768 ;  d.  in  Paris,  4  July,  1848.  He  sprang
from  a  noble  family  of  Brittany,  and  received  his
education  at  the  colleges  of  Dole  and  Rennes.  He
was  destined  for  the  church,  but  preferred  the  army,
and  received  a  commission  as  second  lieutenant
in.  1785.  His  first  production,  an  idyllic  poem,
"  L'amour  de  la  campagne,"  revealed  nothing  of
the  genius  he  afterward  manifested.  He  had  no
sympathy  with  the  revolutionary  movements  in
Paris,  and  in  the  spring  of  1791  embarked  for  the
United  States,  ostensibly  in  search  of  the  north-


west passage.  In  Philadelphia  he  dined  with
Washington,  and  when  the  president  alluded  to
the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  a  polar  expedition,  the
young  traveller  said  :  "  Sir,  it  is  less  difticult  than
to  create  a  nation,  as  you  have  done."  Chateau-
briand then  visited  New  York,  Boston,  and  Albanv,
and  went  among  the  Indian  tribes,  living  with
them,  and  exploring  the  country  bordering  on  the
great  lakes.  He  afterward  travelled  through  Flor-
ida, and  spent  some  time  among  the  Natchez.
These  wanderings  among  the  savages,  the  strange
beauties  of  the  American  continent,  the  size  of  its
rivers,  the  solitude  of  its  forests,  made  a  powerful
impression  upon  his  imagination.  Hearing  of  the
flight  and  arrest  of  Louis  XVI.,  he  returned  to
France,  but,  finding  that  he  could  not  benefit  the
royal  cause,  joined  the  emigrants  at  Coblentz,  and
afterward  enlisted  in  a  company  that  followed  the
Prussian  army  in  their  invasion  of  France.  He
was  wounded"  and  left  for  dead  near  Thionville,
taken  to  Jersey  by  a  charitable  person,  and  from
1793  till  1800  was"  an  exile  in  England,  where  he
was  reduced  to  extreme  poverty.  He  was  convert-
ed from  materialism  by  the  dying  appeal  of  his
mother,  and  in  1798  began  to  compose  his  "  Genie
du  Christianisme."  He  returned  to  France  under
an  assumed  name,  and  completed  this  work,  pub-
lishing it  in  1802.  The  romance  of  "  Atala,"  a
picture  of  life  among  the  American  aborigines,
which  was  incorporated  in  this  work,  had  pre-
viously appeared  in  the  "  Mercure  de  France  in
1801,  and  attracted  much  attention.  His  work
gained  him  a  diplomatic  appointment  from  Bona-
parte :  but  after  the  execution  of  the  Due  d'En-
ghien  he  resigned  it,  and  afterward  bitterly  assailed
the  emperor,  Chateaubriand's  poiiticai  career  was
somewhat  wayward.  He  called  himself  "  a  Bour-
bonist  from  the  point  of  honor,  a  royalist  by  rea-
son, a  republican  by  taste  and  disposition."  He
had  published  a  political  pamphlet  entitled  "  De
Buonaparte  et  des  Bourbons"  (1814),  which  did
good  service  in  the  king's  cause,  and  after  the  res-
toration he  became  minister  of  state  and  a  peer  of
France.  Forfeiting  the  royal  favor,  he  lost  his
office,  but,  becoming  reconciled,  he  was  minister  to
Berlin  in  1821,  to  London  in  1822,  and,  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  congress  of  Verona,  was  instrumental  in
bringing  about  the  French  expedition  to  Spain.  On
his  return  he  was  made  minister  of  foreign  affairs.
Throughout  this  time  he  remained  a  royalist,  till,
on  being  dismissed  from  office  by  the  prime  minis-
ter, de  Villete,  in  1824,  he  joined  the  liberals.  Be
made  himself  popular  by  advocating  Greek  inde-
pendence, but  after  1830  ceased  to  be  active  in
politics,  and  gave  himself  up  to  literary  pursuits.
Among  his  numerous  works,  besides  those  already
noticed,  are  "  Les  martyrs  "  (1809) ;  "  Itineraire  de
Paris  a  Jerusalem"  (1811);  "Etudes,  on  discours
historiques,"  an  introduction  to  a  history  of  France
on  a  gigantic  plan  (1831);  "Voyage  en  Amerique,
en  France  et  en  Italic  "  (1834) ;  "  Essai  sur  la  ht-
terature  anglaise  "  (1836) ;  and  "  Memoires  d'outre-
tombe,"  an  autobiography  (12  vols.,  1849-'50;  new
ed.,  illustrated,  8  vols.,  1856 ;  6  vols.,  1861 ;  Ger-
man translation,  2d  ed.,  Jena,  1852).  This  work
he  sold  in  advance  in  1836,  and  lived  on  an  an-
nuity secured  by  the  proceeds.  His  life  was  spe.it
in  retirement,  'the  drawing-room  of  his  friend,
Mme.  Recamier,  being  almost  the  only  place  he
visited.  There  he  could  be  seen  every  evening
among  the  elite  of  the  literary  world.  But  a  pro-
found melancholy  clouded  his  latter  years^  Most
of  his  works  have  been  translated  into  the  Lnglisn,
German,  and  other  languages.  The  complete  ami
separate  editions  are  numerous. The  best  ot  tne


CHATFIELD


CHATHAM


591


former  is  by  Sainte-Beuve  (12  vols.,  1859-61),  with
a  review  of  his  literary  labors.  A  new  and  com-
plete illustrated  edition,  to  consist  of  fourteen  vol-
umes, was  begun  in  1804.  Marin's  "  Histoire  de  la
vie  et  des  ouvrages  de  M.  de  Chateaubriand  *'  ap-
peared in  1833,  and  M.  Villemain's  "  Chateau-
briand, sa  vie,  ses  ecrits,  son  influence  sur  son
temps  "  in  1858.

CHATFIELD,  Julia,  educator,  b.  in  London,
England,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Brown  county,  Ohio,  in  1878.
She  was  educated  by  the  Ursulines  of  Boulogne,
and  became  a  nun  of  that  order  in  1834.  In  1845
she  conducted  a  body  of  Ursulines  from  Boulogne
to  the  United  States.  When  she  visited  Cincinnati
she  was  offered  three  different  sites  for  the  convent
and  academy  she  purposed  founding.  She  selected
that  in  Brown  co.,  Ohio,  and  erected  the  convent
and  academy  of  St.  Martin's,  which  became  a  lead-
ing Catholic  institution  in  the  west.  She  acted  as
president  of  the  academy  for  over  thirty  years.

CHATHAM,  William  Pitt,  Earl  of,  British
statesman,  b.  in  Boconnoc,  Cornwall,  England,  15
Nov.,  1708;  d.  in  Hayes,  Somerset,  11  May,  1778.
His  grandfather,  Thomas  Pitt,  was  governor  of
Madras,  and  brought  from  India  the  celebrated
Pitt  diamond,  which  he  had  purchased  for  £24,000.
The  Regent  Orleans  bought  it  of  him  for  £135,000,
and  it  was  esteemed  the  most  precious  of  the  crown
jewels  of  France  as  long  as  the  monarchy  lasted.
Gov.  Pitt  used  his  wealth  in  buying  rotten  bor-
oughs until  he  acquired  for  his  family  a  vast  par-
liamentary influence.  He  sat  in  the  House  of  Com-
mons for  the  famous  rotten  borough  of  Old  Sarum,
which  had  no  inhabitants.  His  son,  Robert,  who
afterward  represented  this  same  borough,  married
Harriet  Villiers,  and  had  two  sons,  of  whom  the
elder,  Thomas,  inherited  the  estate.  The  younger
son,  William,  was  educated  at  Eton,  and  entered
Trinity  college,  Oxford,  at  the  age  of  seventeen.
He  already  began  to  feel  the  tortures  of  gout,  so
that  he  left  college  without  taking  a  degree,  and
travelled  in  France  and  Italy  for  his  health.  On
his  return  home  he  obtained  a  cornetcy  in  the
Blues;  but  in  1735  his  family  interest  gained  him
a  seat  in  parliament  as  member  for  Old  Sarum.
His  first  speech,  in  April,  1736,  made  a  profound
impression.  He  was  in  the  opposition  during  Wal-
pole's  ministry,  and  during  that  of  his  successor
Carteret.  Pie  fiercely  denounced  the  prevailing
custom  of  subsidizing  with  British  gold  petty  Ger-
man states  for  the  benefit  of  the  German  domin-
ions of  the  Guelph  family.  This  earned  for  him
the  enmity  of  George  II.,  "who  seems  to  have  cared
more  for  Hanover  than  for  Great  Britain ;  but  it
won  the  patriotic  heart  of  the  old  Duchess  of
Marlborough,  who,  on  her  death  in  1744,  left  Pitt
a  legacy  of  £10,000  as  a  testimonial  of  her  admira-
tion for  his  conduct.  In  that  same  year  Henry
Pelham  became  prime  minister,  and  would  have
had  Pitt  in  his  cabinet  but  for  the  king's  opposi-
tion. Pelham  made  an  issue  of  this,  and  in  Feb-
ruary, 1746,  in  the  very  crisis  of  the  Jacobite  re-
bellion, the  ministry  resigned,  and  the  obstinate
king  found  himself  suddenly  deserted  by  the  whole
party  that  had  placed  his  family  on  the  throne.
Carteret,  now  Lord  Granville,  tried  in  vain  to  form
a  ministry ;  he  could  not  count  on  more  than  thirty
lords  and  eighty  members  of  the  lower  house.  The
ministers  therefore  returned  in  triumph,  with  Pitt
as  vice-treasurer  of  Ireland,  and  shortly  afterward
as  paymaster  of  the  forces.  In  this  office  one  of
Pitt's  leading  traits  of  character  soon  showed  itself.
Ihe  salary  was  small,  but  the  various  perquisites
made  it  the  most  lucrative  office  in  the  gift  of  the
government. Pitt  refused  to  take  a  farthing  be-


yond his  stated  salary,  thus  setting  an  example
that  proved  to  be  of  great  effect  in  purifying  Eng-
lish politics.  Such  conduct  was  considered  idiotic
by  the  politicians  of  the  time,  but  it  won  the  hearts
of  the  English  people.  In  1754  Pitt  married  Lady
Hester  Grenville,  sister  of  Earl  Temple  and  of
George  Grenville.  In  that  year  the  death  of  Henry
Pelham  throw  the  government  into  confusion.
His  elder  brother,  the  Duke  of  Newcastle,  became
prime  minister,  and  Pitt  remained  for  a  time  as
paymaster ;  but  in  the  following  year,  as  war  on
the  continent  was  threatened,  the  king  became
alarmed  for  Hanover,  and  proposed  to  subsidize
the  Hessian  princes  and  to  bribe  the  Russian  gov-
ernment to  browbeat  Frederick  of  Prussia.  Against
these  stupid  measures,  which  might  have  ruined
England's  chances  for  victory,  both  in  Europe  and
in  America,  in  the  great  war  that  was  coming,  the
far-sighted  Pitt  most  resolutely  set  his  face,  and
was  accordingly  turned  out  of  office.  War  began
in  1756  between  England  and  France,  and  it  began
with  disasters  for  England.  The  vast  ability  and
the  lofty  character  of  Pitt  had  already  won  such
recognition  that  there  was  a  popular  demand  that
he  should  enter  the  cabinet  as  secretary  of  state
for  foreign  affairs.  He  refused  to  serve  with  New-
castle, who  was  a  political  intriguer  of  the  worst
type.  Newcastle  then  resigned,  and  the  Duke  of
Devonshire  became  nominal  prime  minister,  with
Pitt  as  secretary  of  state  and  wielding  the  real
power.  During  this  short  ministry  occurred  the
judicial  murder  of  Admiral  Byng  for  his  error  of
judgment  in  failing  to  relieve  Minorca.  At  the
risk  of  his  power  and  popularity,  Pitt  thundered
against  this  wickedness,  and  did  all  that  he  could
to  save  the  gallant  Byng,  but  in  vain.  The  minis-
try lasted  only  five  months.  In  April,  1757,  Pitt
and  his  brother-in-law.  Lord  Temple,  were  dismissed
by  the  hostile  king,  but  the  great  cities  took  pains
to  express  their  disapproval  of  this  action  and  their
unbounded  confidence  in  Pitt.  For  eleven  weeks,
in  the  midst  of  one  of  the  greatest  wars  of  modern
times,  England  was  without  a  government,  while
the  Duke  of  Newcastle  was  vainly  trying  to  form
a  ministry  that  should  not  include  Pitt.  At  length
the  king  was  obliged  to  give  way,  and  in  forming
the  new  ministry  Pitt  dictated  the  terms  upon
which  he  would  consent  to  serve  with  Newcastle.
The  latter  became  prime  minister,  with  Pitt  for
secretary  of  state,  but  for  the  next  four  years  "  the
Great  Commoner,"  as  he  was  now  called,  was  the
real  ruler  of  England.  These  four  years  were  the
most  glorious  in  English  history.  They  decided
the  contest  for  supremacy  in  the  world  between
the  French  and  English  races,  and  between  des-
potic and  liberal  ideas  in  religion  and  politics.
They  laid  the  foundations  of  modern  Germany,  of
the  British  empire  in  India,  and  of  American  do-
minion over  the  Mississippi  valley.  They  made
England  mistress  of  the  sea.  and  at  the  same  time
prepared  the  way  for  the  independence  of  the
United  States.  In  the  combinations  that  led  to
these  magnificent  results,  Pitt  showed  himself  the
greatest  war  minister  and  one  of  the  greatest
statesmen  that  ever  lived.  The  year  1757  was
made  illustrious  by  the  victories  of  Frederick  at
Rossbach  and  Leuthen,  and  of  Clive  at  Plassey.
The  following  year  saw  the  capture  of  Louisburg
and  Fort  Duquesne,  and  the  naval  victories  of
Basque  Roads  and  Carthagena.  Next  followed  in
1759  the  capture  of  Guadeloupe,  the  overthrow  of
the  French  at  Minden,  the  naval  victories  at  Lagos
and  Quiberon,  and  the  memorable  triumph  of
Wolfe  at  Quebec.  Finally,  in  1760  the  great  vic-
tory of  Wandiwash  completed  the  downfall  of  the


CHATHAM


CHAUMONOT


sh


French  power  in  India.  In  October,  1760,  the  king
died,  and  was  succeeded  by  George  HI.;  the  min-
istry disagreed  on  the  question  of  war  with  Spain,
and  Pitt  resigned  in  1761.  The  next  year  New-
castle followed  hiin,  and  Lord  Bute  became  prime
minister,  to  be  succeeded  after  a  year  by  George
Grenville.  In  order  to  raise  money  toward  defray-
ing the  cost  of  the  war,  Grenville's  stamp-act  was
passed  in  1765,  and  troubles  with  the  American
colonies  began.  In  July  of  that  year  the  king
uarrelled  with  Grenville,  and  offered  the  premier-
ip  to  Pitt,  but  he  declined  it.  The  Marquis  of
Rockingham  then  took  the  government,  and  re-
pealed the  stamp-act.  In  the  debate  on  the  repeal,
Pitt  made  the  famous  speech  in  which  he  rejoiced
that  the  Americans  had  resisted.  In  July,  1766,
the  Rockingham  ministry  fell,  and  Pitt  formed  a
government  under  the  nominal  lead  of  the  Duke
of  Grafton.  As  he  was  now  much  broken  in
health,  he  accepted  the  earldom  of  Chatham,  and
passed  into  the  house  of  lords.  For  a  moment
this  diminished  his  popularity,  as  it  was  feared
that  he  was  surrendering  his  independence ;  but
the  fear  soon  proved  to  be  groundless.  In  1767,
while  Chatham  was  very  ill,  his  chancellor  of  the
exchequer,  Charles  Townshend,  passed  the  act  for
taxing  tea  and  other  American  imports,  and  de-
voting the  revenue  thus  obtained  to  establishing  a
civil  list  in  the  colonies.  As  soon  as  he  heard  of
this,  Chatham  tried  to  dismiss  Townshend  and
have  the  act  repealed ;  but  his  illness  increased  so
that  he  was  unable  to  do  anything.  Townshend
died,  and  was  succeeded  by  North,  and  the  next
year  Chatham  resigned.  His  malady  had  assumed
a  singular  form.  When  he  ceased  to  suffer  from
gout,  he  became  melancholy  and  nearly  insane;
when,  after  many  weeks,  the  excruciating  pain  re-
turned, his  mind  became  clear  again,  and  he  was
enabled  to  attend  to  business.  In  1770  Grafton
resigned,  and  Lord  North  became  prime  minister.
The  king,  through  his  influence  over  North,  now
had  everything  as  he  wished,  and  pushed  on  the
measures  that  drove  the  Americans  to  armed  re-
sistance. In  these  critical  times  Chatham  was  the
steadfast  and  eloquent  defender  of  the  liberties  of
America.  In  a  brilliant  speech  in  1775,  alluding
to  the  Boston  port  bill  and  the  regulating  act,  he
exclaimed :  "  You  must  repeal  these  acts,  and  you
will  repeal  them.  I  pledge  myself  for  it  that  you
will  repeal  them.  I  stake  my  reputation  on  it.  I
will  consent  to  be  taken  for  an  idiot  if  they  are  not
finally  repealed."  Soon  after  this  he  withdrew  his
eldest  son,  Lord  Pitt,  from  the  army,  that  he  might
not  be  called  upon  to  serve  in  the  wicked  war
against  America.  In  1777  he  made  the  famous
speech  against  the  employment  of  Indian  auxilia-
ries and  German  mercenaries,  in  which  he  boldly
declared,  "  If  I  were  an  American,  as  I  am  an  Eng-
lishman, so  long  as  a  foreign  foe  remained  upon
the  soil  of  my  country,  I  would  never  lay  down  my
arms,  never,  never,  never  ! "  In  February,  1778,
the  ministry  repealed  the  acts  that  Chatham  had
denounced  three  years  before ;  but  it  was  now  too
late.  The  Americans  were  already  completing
their  treaty  of  alliance  with  France.  The  Rock-
ingham whigs  were  in  favor  of  conceding  Ameri-
can independence,  but  Chatham  was  not  ready  for
such  a  step,  especially  just  after  a  declaration  of
war  with  France :  it  would  look  too  much  like  hu-
miliating England  before  the  house  of  Bourbon.
Chatham  would  have  withdrawn  the  British  troops
from  America,  and  endeavored  to  bring  about
something  like  a  federal  association  between  the
colonies  and  the  mother  country.  There  was  now
a  strong  popular  demand  for  Chatham  as  prime


minister.  Men  of  all  parties,  beginning  with  Lord
North  himself,  were  desirous  that  he  should  take
the  reins  of  government  and  pacify  America  while
punishing  France.  The  task  of  pjicifying  America
without  conceding  full  independence  might  prob-
ably-have  proved  impracticable;  but  if  there  was
any  man  tlien  living  who  could  have  undertaken
such  a  task  with  some  hope  of  success,  it  was  Chat-
ham. The  king  raved  and  stormed  at  the  idea  of
calling  him  to  the  head  of  the  government ;  but
the  popular  pressure  was  so  strong  that,  but  for
Chatham's  sudden  death,  a  few  more  weeks  would
undoubtedly  have  seen  him  prime  minister.  On  7
April  the  Duke  of  Richmond  moved  that  Great
Britain  should  recognize  the  independence  of  the
United  States.  Chatham  had  got  up  from  his  sick-
bed and  come  to  the  House  of  lords  to  take  part
in  the  discussion.  While  speaking,  he  fell  in  a
swoon,  and  was  taken  to  his  home  at  Hayes,  where,
after  lingering  several  weeks,  he  died.  'Although
he  never  came  to  this  country.  Lord  Chatham
must  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  foremost  figures  in
American  history.  It  was  he  that  drove  the  French
from  America  and  won  for  us  the  valley  of  the
Mississippi.  Besides  this,  he  was  the  first  British
statesman  whose  political  ideas  were  of  an  Ameri-
can type.  He  was  pre-eminently  the  man  of  the
people.  He  was  the  father  of  parliamentary  re-
form, and  the  advocate  of  every  liberal  measure.
Alike  in  public  and  in  private  life,  his  purity  was
spotless.  He  was  a  man  of  intense  earnestness,
and  fond  of  grand  and  stirring  thoughts.  These
qualities,  joined  with  his  commanding  presence,
his  rich  and  powerful  voice,  and  his  warmth  of
temperament,  gave  to  his  eloquence  its  peculiar
character.  As  a  master  of  the  Etiglish  language
he  was  inferior  to  Burke  and  Webster ;  as  a  mas-
ter of  debate  he  could  not  be  compared  with  Fox
or  with  his  own  son :  yet  for  power  of  moving  an
audience  he  must  probably  be  counted  the  greatest
orator  since  Demosthenes ;  while  among  those  men
of  action  who  have  shaped  the  destinies  of  nations
he  will  rank  with  the  foremost.

CHAUMONOT,  Peter  Joseph  Marie,  French
missionary,  b.  near  Chatillon  sur  Seine  in  1611 ;  d.
near  Quebec,  21  Feb.,  1693.  His  parents  were  poor
vine-dressers ;  but  he  had  an  uncle,  a  priest,  who
took  charge  of  him  and  sent  him  to  school,  where
he  learned  Latin  and  plain  chant;  but  he  fell
among  evil  companions,  who  persuaded  him  to  see
the  world  in  their  company,  and,  with  this  object
in  view,  he  stole  100  sols  (about  a  dollar)  from
his  uncle  and  set  out  on  his  travels  when  he  was  a
little  over  ten  years  of  age.  His  adventures  in
France  and  Italy  during  the  next  eight  or  nine
years  are  related  in  his  autobiography,  which  he
was  ordered  to  wn-ite  by  his  superiors  when  over
eighty.  Although  the  aged  missionary  looks  back
on  them  with  horror,  they  are  amusing  rather  than
criminal.  After  a  varied  career  as  beggar,  valet,
and  tutor,  he  was  noticed  by  some  Jesuits  in  Rome,
and  sent  to  their  college  of  Fermo.  He  afterward
returned  to  Rome  to  study  theology,  and  while
there  he  met  with  a  Jesuit  "relation"  which
treated  of  Father  Brebeuf,  and  appealed  for  mis-
sionaries. He  felt  the  force  of  the  appeal  as  a
personal  call,  and  petitioned  his  superiors  to  allo\*
his  studies  to  be  abridged  and  his  ordmation  to
take  place  at  once,  so  that  he  might  take  passage
in  a  vessel  that  was  about  to  sail  for  Canada  from
Dieppe.  After  a  three  months'  voyage  he  arnyed
in  Quebec  in  August,  1639,  and  set  out  tor  tne
Huron  country.  Journeying  for  a  month,  ne
reached  Lake  tsirorgi,  and  began  his  labors  among
the  Wyandot  tribes,  but  was  not  very  successiuL


CHAUNCEY


CHAUNCEY


593


The  Indians  looked  upon  him  as  a  sorcerer,  and
this  idea  was  strengthened  when  the  small-pox
broke  out  among  them  after  his  arrival.  Still  he
succeeded  in  establishing  St.  Mary's  on  the  Wye,
the  first  missionary  settlement  in  the  west.  He
was  next  sent  to  Ossossane,  from  which  the  mis-
sionaries had  been  driven.  He  spent  a  year  among
the  Indians  of  this  settlement,  and  was  then
ordered  to  Arendaendronnon.  Here  he  formed  a
vocabulary  of  the  dialect  of  the  tribe,  collecting
the  words  in  the  cabins,  and  gathering  materials
for  a  philological  work.  He  then  started  with
Brebeuf  on  a  journey  eastward,  intending  to  preach
the  gospel  among  the  Attewandaronks,  a  tribe  of
the  neutral  nation  dwelling  on  both  sides  of  Ni-
agara. A  journey  of  four  days  brought  him  to  the
first  village  of  that  nation,  named  Kandoucho.  He
was  well  received ;  but  the  arrival  of  pagan  Hu-
rons,  who  said  he  was  a  magician,  changed  the
feeling  of  the  people,  and  he  very  narrowly  es-
caped death.  He  left  Kandoucho,  and  visited
eighteen  Indian  towns,  but  met  with  no  success,
and  so  determined  to  return  to  Kandoucho.  He
fell  sick  on  the  way,  and  was  cared  for  by  an  In-
dian woman  in  a  snow  village.  He  stayed  with
her  twenty-five  days,  learning  the  language  of  the
place,  and  was  successful  in  adapting  the  diction-
ary and  grammar  of  the  Hurons  to  the  dialect  of
this  nation.  On  his  return  to  the  neutral  nation
his  labors  were  not  successful,  and  he  left  them
after  a  stay  of  five  months.  He  then  went  to  the
settlement  of  St.  Michael,  where  he  labored  suc-
cessfully until  1648,  when  the  Christian  Indians
were  defeated  and  their  tribe  nearly  extermi-
nated by  the  Iroquois.  He  accompanied  the  sur-
vivors of  the  disaster  to  St.  Joseph's  island  in
Lake  Huron,  where  they  endured  fearful  suffering.
The  French  government  gave  them  the  island  of
Orleans,  and  thither  Father  Chaumonot  accompa-
nied them.  He  now  compiled  his  grammar  and
dictionary  for  the  Huron  and  all  kindred  languages.
The  grammar  was  published  in  1870  by  the  Que-
bec literary  and  historical  society.  When  he  hpd
organized  the  Indians  of  Orleans  he  went  among
the  Iroquois  of  Onondaga  in  1655  and  preached
with  great  success,  having  won  the  women  by  his
denunciation  of  polygamy.  He  left  this  mission
in  1658  and  went  to  Montreal,  where  he  founded
in  1663  the  Society  of  the  holy  family.  He  was
then  sent  as  military  chaplain  to  Fort  Kichelieu  at
the  mouth  of  the  Sorel.  He  shortly  returned  to
his  Hurons,  however,  and  the  rest  of  his  life  was
spent  among  them.  He  built  the  chapel  of  Notre
Dame  de  Foye  for  their  benefit,  and  some  years
later  the  Santa  Casa  of  Loretto.

CHAUNCEY,  Charles,  jurist,  b.  in  Durham,
Conn.,  11  June.  1747 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  28
April,  1823.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  No-
vember, 1768,  removed  to  New  Haven,  and  became
state's  attorney  in  1776.  He  was  a  judge  of  the
superior  court  from  1789  till  1793,  and  was  for
forty  years  a  lecturer  on  jurisprudence.  Judge
Chauncey  was  the  principal  founder  and  the  presi-
dent of  the  first  agricultural  society  in  Connecti-
cut. He  was  given  the  degree  of  A.  M.  by  Yale  in
1779,  and  that  of  LL.  D.  by  Middlebury  in  1811.—
His  son,  Charles,  b.  in  NeW  Haven,  17  Aug.,  1777;
d.  m  Burlington,  N.  J.,  30  Aug.,  1849,  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1792,  and  received  the  degree  of
Lh.  D.  from  the  same  college  in  1827.  He  removed
to  Philadelphia,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  there  in
1799,  and  soon  attained  distinction,  though  he  had
tor  competitors  such  men  as  John  Sargeant  and
Horace  Binney.  He  declined  various  civil  and  ju-
dicial offices,  preferring  to  practise  law.
VOL.  I. — 38


CHAUNCEY,  Isaac,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Black
Rock,  Conn.,  20  Feb.,  1772;  d.  in  Washington,  D.
C,  27  Jan.,  1840.  Entering  the  merchant  service
very  young,  he  commanded  a  ship  at  nineteen,  and
made  several  successful  voyages  to  the  East  Indies
in  the  ships  of  John  Jacob  Astor.  On  the  organi-
zation of  the
navy  he  was
made  a  lieuten-
ant, 17  Sept.,
1798,  and  was
acting  captain
of  the  frigate
"  Chesapeake  "
early  in  1802.
He  distin-
guished him-
self in  sever-
al actions  off
Tripoli,  was
thanked  by
congress  for
his  services,
and  voted  a
sword,  which
he  never  re-
ceived. He  be-
came master,

23  May,  1804,
and captain,

24  April,  1806. At  the  beginning  of  the  war  of

1812,  Capt.  Chauncey,  then  in  command  of  the
navy-yard  at  New  York,  was  appointed  to  com-
mand on  all  the  lakes  except  Champlain,  and  en-
tered on  his  duties  at  Sackett's  Harbor  on  6  Oct.
From  that  time  till  the  close  of  the  war  vessels
were  built  and  equipped  with  unequalled  rapidity.
The  "  Mohawk,"  a  42-gun  frigate,  was  launched  in
thirty-four  days  after  her  keel  was  laid,  and  the
corvette  "Madison"  was  launched  in  nine  weeks
from  the  day  when  the  first  tree  composing  her
frame  was  cut  in  the  forest.  Chauncey  co-oper-
ated with  the  land  forces  under  Pike  in  April,

1813,  in  capturing  York  (now  Toronto),  and,  on  27
May,  in  the  capture  of  Fort  George,  which  caused
the  evacuation  of  the  entire  Niagara  frontier,  and
in  the  same  year  superintended  the  building  of
ships  at  Sackett's  Harbor,  On  27  Sept.,  Chaun-
cey attacked  and  put  to  flight,  in  York  bay,  the
British  fleet  under  Sir  James  Yeo,  whom  he  had
hitherto  been  unable  to  bring  to  action.  The
"Pike,"  his  flag-ship,  was  on  this  occasion  man-
oeuvred and  fought  in  a  manner  ever  since  a  theme
of  admiration  in  the  navy.  Before  the  whole
American  squadron  could  get  into  action,  the  en-
emy bore  up,  Chauncey  following.  A  heavy  gale
stopped  the  chase,  and  prevented  the  destruction
of  the  British  fleet.  On  5  Oct..  Chauncey  cap-
tured five  vessels,  with  part  of  a  regiment  of  sol-
diers. In  August  and  September,  1814,  he  block-
aded Sir  James  Yeo's  fleet  for  six  weeks.  He
afterward  commanded  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  and
the  Mediterranean  squadron,  and  with  William
Shaler,  consul,  negotiated  a  treaty  with  Algiers.
He  served  on  the  board  of  navy  commissioners  at
Washington,  and  became  its  president  in  June,
1833,  holding  the  office  till  his  death.  He  was  a
model  of  gallantry,  energy,  and  skill.  His  remains
were  buried  in  the  congressional  cemetery  at  Wash-
ington, where  a  marble  monument  has  been  erected
to" his  memory. — His  son,  John  S.,  naval  officer,
was  b.  in  New  York  about  1800;  d.  in  Brooklyn,
N.  Y.,  10  April.  1871.  He  entered  the  service  as
midshipman,  1  Jan.,  1812,  became  passed  midship-
man in  1821,  and  in  1822,  while  on  the  sloop  "  Pea-


594


CHAUNCY


CHAUVEAU


cock,"  was  engaged  in  the  capture  of  eight  pirate
schooneis,  one  of  them  heavily  armed,  otf  Bahia
Honda,  Cuba.  He  was  ordered  to  command  one
of  the  prizes.  Having  been  appointed  acting  lieu-
tenant in  1823,  he  was  assigned  to  the  "Ontario,"
of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,  in  1824,  and  re-
ceived his  commission  as  lieutenant,  13  Jan.,  1825.
He  became  commander,  8  Sept.,  1841,  and  was  in-
spector of  ordnance  at  Washington  from  1847  till
1850.  He  was  promoted  to  captain,  14  Sept.,  1855,
assigned  to  the  "  Susquehanna  "  in  1861,  and  en-
gaged at  Forts  Hatteras  and  Clark.  He  com-
manded the  blockade  of  the  sounds  of  Virginia
and  North  Carolina  in  September,  1861,  became
commodore,  16  July,  1862,  and  was  on  special  ser-
vice for  the  rest  of  the  war.  He  was  retired  from
active  service  on  4  April,  1869.

CHAUNCY,  Charles,  educator,  b.  in  Yardley-
bury,  Hertfordshire,  England,  in  1592 ;  d.  19  Feb.,
1672.  He  came  of  an  old  English  family,  was  at
Westminster  school  at  the  time  of  the  gunpowder-
plot,  and  would  have  perished  had  it  been  success-
fid.  He  was  graduated  at  Cambridge  in  1613,  be-
came a  fellow  of  his  college,  and  was  professor  of
Hebrew,  and  afterward  of  Greek,  there.  He  left
this  place  to  become  pastor  at"  Marston-Laurence,
Northamptonshire,  but  in  1627  became  vicar  of
Ware,  where  his  puritanical  opinions  soon  made
him  obnoxious  to  his  ecclesiastical  superiors.  In
1629  he  was  accused  of  asserting  in  a  sermon  that
"  idolatry  was  admitted  into  the  church,"  and  that
"  there  was  a  great  increase  of  atheism,  popery,  and
Arminianism  "  there.  He  was  required  by  Bishop
Laud  to  make  a  submission  in  Latin ;  but  whether
this  order  was  obeyed  or  not  is  uncertain.  He  was
again  brought  before  the  high  commission  court  in
1635,  charged  with  opposing  the  erection  of  an
altar-rail  as  "  a  snare  to  men's  consciences."  For
this  he  was  sentenced  to  suspension  and  imprison-
ment until  he  should  publicly  acknowledge  his
offence,  and  made  to  pay  the  costs  of  the  trial,
which  were  heavy.  His  courage  failing  him,  he
made  recantation  in  open  court,  a  step  that  he
never  ceased  to  regret.  He  wrote  a  long  "  Retrac-
tation "  in  1637,  which  was  published  in  London  in
1641.  He  was  finally  silenced  in  1637  for  refusing
to  read  Laud's  book  of  "  Lawful  Sunday  Sports,"
and  took  refuge  in  New  England,  arriving  at
Plymouth  in  May,  1638.  His  peculiar  views  on
baptism  and  the  communion  alone  prevented  his
being  called  there  as  a  pastor,  and  about  1641  he
was  settled  as  minister  in  Scituate,  Mass.  Here  he
remained  about  twelve  years,  suffering  from  inade-
quate support,  when,  ecclesiastical  affairs  in  Eng-
land having  undergone  a  change,  he  resolved  to
accept  the  invitation  of  his  congregation  at  Ware
to  resume  his  pastorate  there.  He  went  to  Boston
to  embark  for  England,  but  was  offered  the  presi-
dency of  Harvard,  made  vacant  by  the  death  of
the  first  president.  Dr.  Dunster,  and  accepted,  27
Nov.,  1654.  He  held  this  office  till  his  death,  and
many  of  his  pupils  became  distinguished  men.  He
was  held  in  high  estimation  at  Cambridge,  and
Cotton  Mather  says  that  when  he  had  been  a  year
or  two  in  the  town  "  the  church  kept  a  whole  day
of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the  mercy  which  they
had  enjoyed  in  his  being  there."  President
Chauncy  is  supposed  to  be  the  ancestor  of  all  in
this  country  that  bear  his  name  (spelled  either
Chauncey  or  Chauncy).  He  was  a  man  of  great
industry  and  learning,  and  possessed  some  skill  as
a  physician.  In  one  of  his  sermons  he  speaks  of
the  wearing  of  long  hair  as  "  a  heathenish  prac-
tice," and  as  "  one  of  the  crying  sins  of  the  land,"
He  had  six  sons,  all  graduates  of  Harvard. He


published  numerous  sermons,  including  "  Twenty-
six  Sermons  on  Justification  "  (1659),  some  Latin
and  Greek  verses,  and  "  Antisynodalia  Ameri-
cana," in  opposition  to  the  synod  of  1662,  which
sanctioned  the  admission  to  the  church  of  all  bap-
tized persons,  even  if  they  had  not  professed  a
"  change  of  heart."— His  grandson,  Nathaniel,  b.
in  Hatfield,  Mass.,  26  Sept.,  1681 ;  d.  1  Feb.,  1756,
was  graduated  in  1702  at  Yale,  of  which  his  uncle]
Rev.  Israel  Chauncy,  was  one  of  the  founders.  He
was  the  first  graduate  that  had  not  previously
taken  a  degree  elsewhere,  and  the  only  one  in  that
year.  He  held  various  pastorates,  became  a  fellow
of  Yale,  and  published  several  sermons.  President
Chauncy's  great-grandson,  Charles,  clergyman,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  1  Jan.,  1705;  d.  10  Feb.,  1787,
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1721,  and  studied
theology.  He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  first
church  in  Boston,  as  the  colleague  of  Mr.  Fox-
croft,  and  remained  there  till  his  death.  In  1742
he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Edinburgh
university.  Dr.  Chauncy  sternly  opposed  the
religious  excitement  attending  the  preaching  of
Whitefield,  and  combated  the  proposed  establish-
ment of  the  episcopacy  in  the  colonies.  He  was
an  earnest  patriot  during  the  revolution,  a  man
of  much  learning  and  piety,  and  an  active  contro-
versialist. He  adopted  a  studied  plainness  in  his
sermons,  being  averse  to  all  effort  of  the  imagina-
tion, and  is  said  to  have  expressed  a  wish  that  some
one  would  translate  "  Paradise  Lost "  into  prose,  so
that  he  could  understand  it.  Among  his  numer-
ous publications  are  "  Discourse  on  Enthusiasm  "
(1742);  "Thoughts  on  the  State  of  Religion  in
New  England  "  (1743) ;  "  Letters  to  the  Rev.  George
Whitefield"  (1744  and  1745);  "  Dudleian  Lecture
at  Harvard  College "  (1762);  "Thanksgiving  Ser-
mon on  the  Repeal  of  the  Stamp-Act "  and  "  Re-
marks on  the  Bishop  of  Llandaft''s  Sermon  "(1767);
"Complete  View  of  Episcopacy"  (1771);  "The
Mystery  hid  from  Ages,  or  the  Salvation  of  all
Men"  and  "  Benevolence  of  the  Deity,  Fairly  and
Impartially  Considered  "(1784);  and  "Five  Disser-
tations on  the  Fall  and  its  Consequences"  (1785).

CHAUVEAU,  Pierre  Joseph  Olivier,  Cana-
dian statesman,  b.  in  Quebec,  30  May,  1820.  He  was
educated  at  the  seminary  of  Quebec,  studied  law,
and  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1841.  In  1844  he  en-
tered parliament  as  a  reform  member  for  Quebec
county ;  in  1851  became  solicitor-general  for  Lower
Canada  in  the  Hincks-Morin  administration,  in
1853  accepted  the  office  of  provincial  secretary;
became  a  member  of  the  executive  comicil  in  1853,
and  superintendent  of  education  for  the  province
of  Quebec  in  1855.  After  the  confederation  in
1867,  Mr.  Chauveau  was  elected  by  Quebec  county
to  both  the  Dominion  house  of  commons  and  the
Quebec  house  of  assembly.  He  became  premier  of
Quebec  in  1867,  and  resigned  in  1873,  owing  to
differences  with  his  cabinet.  He  was  appointed
speaker  of  the  senate,  21  Feb.,  1873,  and  remained
in  that  office  until  the  conservatives  went  out  of
power  in  1874,  when  his  commission  was  revoked
by  the  Mackenzie  administration.  Mr.  Chauveau
resigned  his  seat  in  the  senate  in  order  to  contest
the  representation  of  Charlevoix  in  the  house  ot
commons,  but  was  defeated.  In  1876  he  became
president  of  the  Quebec  harbor  commission,  and
in  1877  sheriff  of  Montreal.  In  1849  he  moved  for
the  appointment  of  a  committee  to  investigate  the
subject  of  French-Canadian  emigration  to  the
United  States,  and,  with  a  colleague,  prepared  the
report  of  the  committee,  many  of  the  recommen-
dations of  which  have  been  carried  out.  During
his term  of  office as  superintendent of public


CHAUVENET


CHAVERO


595


mstruction  he  established  normal  schools  and
French  and  English  educational  journals,  and  ob-
tained the  passing  of  important  school  acts.  In
1866,  commissioned  by  the  government,  he  visited
the  schools  and  colleges  of  Great  Britain,  France,
Germany,  Italy,  and  Belgium.  In  1878  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  Roman  law  at  Laval  univer-
sity, and  he  was  subsequently  elected  dean  of  the
faculty.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Royal  society  of
Canada,  and  has  been  its  president,  as  well  as  presi-
dent of  several  other  learned  societies  in  Canada.
Mr.  Chauveau  has  also  had  a  brief  military  career.
While  superintendent  of  public  instruction,  and
during  the  "Trent"  difficulty  in  November,  1861,
he  raised  among  the  officials  of  his  department  and
the  pupils  of  the  Jacques  Cartier  normal  school  a
company  of  chasseurs  Canadiens,  of  which  he  was
gazetted  captain.  This  company  formed  the  nu-
cleus of  one  of  three  battalions  formed  in  Montreal
daring  the  Fenian  invasion,  of  which  Mr.  Chau-
veau became  lieutenant-colonel.  At  an  early  age
he  wrote  poetry,  which  was  favorably  received.
Among  his  most  popular  poems  are  "Joives
nai'ves,"  "  Donnaconna."  and  "  £lpitre  a  M.  de
Puibusque."  His  best-known  prose  works  are
"  Charles  Guerin,  Roman  de  Mceurs  Canadiennes  "
(1852);  "Voyage  de  S.  A.  le  Prince  de  Galles  en
Amerique  "  (1861) ;  "  L'instruction  publique  au
Canada  "  (1876) ;  "  Souvenirs  et  legendes,"  partly  in
prose  and  partly  in  verse  (1877) ;  "  Frangois  Xavier
Garneau,  sa  vie  et  ses  ceuvres"  (1888);  and
"  Notice  sur  le  publication  des  registers  du  conseil
souverain  et  du  conseil  superieur."  He  has  also  been
a  prolific  contributor  to  current  literature.

CHAUVENET,  William,  mathematician,  b.  in
Milford,  Pa.,  24  May,  1820 ;  d.  in  St.  Paul,  Minn.,
13  Dec,  1870.  After  preliminary  studies  in  Phila-
delphia, he  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840.  Soon
after  leaving  college,  he  became  assistant  to  Prof.
Alexander  I).  Bache,  and  aided  him  in  his  meteor-
ological observations  at  Girard  college,  Philadel-
phia. In  1841  he  was  appointed  professor  of
mathematics  in  the  navy,  and  for  a  few  months
served  on  the  (J.  S.  steamer  "  Mississippi,"  and  a
year  later  succeeded  to  the  chair  of  mathematics
at  the  naval  asylum  in  Philadelphia.  He  was  very
active  in  the  movement  that  led  to  the  establish-
ment of  the  J.  S.  naval  academy  at  Annapolis.
At  first  he  was  professor  of  mathematics  and  as-
tronomy there,  and  later  of  astronomy,  navigation,
and  surveying,  and  always  the  most  prominent  of
the  academic  statf.  In  1855  he  was  ofl'ered  the
professorship  of  mathematics,  and  in  1859  that  of
astronomy  and  natural  philosophy  at  Yale,  but
both  honors  were  declined.  During  the  same  year
he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  mathematics  in
Washington  university,  St.  Louis,  Mo.  Here  he
at  once  gained  the  esteem  and  confidence  of  those
with  whom  he  was  associated,  and  in  1862  he  was
chosen  chancellor  of  the  university.  In  1864  his
health  began  to  fail,  and  he  spent  some  time  in
Wisconsin  and  Minnesota,  but  again  resumed  duties
in  1865.  He  was  obliged  to  resign  the  offices  held
by  him  in  1869,  and  then  spent  some  time  in  travel,
but  without  avail.  He  was  a  member  of  numerous
scientific  societies,  and  in  1859  general  secretary  of
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  with  which  he  had  been  connected  since
its  first  meeting.  He  was  also  one  of  the  original
members  of  the  National  academy  of  sciences,  and
at  the  time  of  his  death  its  vice-president.  Besides
numerous  contributions  to  the  "  American  Journal
of  Science,"  *'  Proceedings  of  the  American  Asso-
ciation for  the  Advancement  of  Science."  Gould's
"  Astronomical  Journal,"  and  the  "  Mathematical


Monthly,"  he  was  the  author  of  "  Binomial  Theo-
rem and  Logarithms  for  the  Use  of  Midshipmen
at  the  Naval  School"  (Philadelphia,  1843);  "Trea-
tise on  Plane  and  Spherical  Trigonometry  "  (1850) ;
"  Manual  of  Spherical  and  Practical  Astronomy  "
(1863);  and  "Treatise  of  Elementary  Geometry"
(1870).  See  the  "  Memoir  of  Williain  Chauvenet."
with  full  bibliography,  contained  in  the  "Bio-
graphical Memoirs  of  the  Academy  "  (Washington,
1877).— His  son,  Regis,  chemist,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  7  Oct.,  1842,  was  graduated  at  Washington
university  in  1862,  and  at  Lawrence  scientific
school  of  Harvard  in  1867,  after  which  he  settled
in  St.  Louis,  and,  with  Andrew  A.  Blair,  estab-
lished an  analytical  laboratory.  In  the  practice
of  his  profession  he  soon  became  distinguished,
and  was  called  to  act  as  chemical  expert  to  numer-
ous corporations.  From  1872  till  1875  he  was
chemist  to  the  Missouri  geological  survey,  and  for
some  time  held  a  similar  relation  to  the  city  of
St.  Louis.  In  the  year  1883  he  became  professor
of  chemistry  and  president  of  the  Colorado  state
school  of  mines  in  Golden.

CHAVANNES,  Jean  Baptiste  (shav-ans),  Hay-
tian  patriot,  b.  in  La  Grand  Riviere  du  Nord  about
1748 ;  d.  in  Port  au  Prince,  23  Feb.,  1791.  He  was
the  son  of  rich  mulatto  parents,  and  received  a
good  education.  In  1778  the  expedition  under
d'Estaing,  sent  to  assist  the  American  army,  was
in  Hayti,  and  Chavannes  joined  it  as  a  volunteer.
He  distinguished  himself  during  the  operations  in
Virginia  and  New  York,  and  specially  during  the
retreat  from  Savannah  in  December,  1778.  The
independence  of  the  American  colonies  having
been  accomplished.  Chavannes  returned  to  his  own
country.  When  Vincent  Oge  landed  near  Cape
Frangais,  23  Oct..  1790,  intending  to  create  an  agi-
tation amongst  the  colored  people  in  favor  of  their
political  rights,  ChaA^annes  sided  with  him  and
wanted  all  the  slaves  to  be  declared  free ;  but  Oge
did  not  dare  to  follow  his  advice,  and  informed
the  assembly  of  his  intention  to  take  the  opposite
course.  The  mulattoes  raised  a  force  of  about
1,000  men,  which  was  defeated  by  the  colonists.
Oge,  Chavannes,  and  a  few  others  took  refuge  in
the  Spanish  part  of  the  island,  and  the  Haytian
assembly  asked  for  their  extradition,  according  to
treaty.  The  jurist  Vicente  Faura  made  a  power-
ful plea  in  their  favor,  and  the  king  of  Spain  gave
him  a  decoration ;  but  the  audiencia  of  Santo  Do-
mingo decided  against  the  refugees,  who  were
delivered  to  the  Haytian  authorities,  21  Dec,  1790.
Two  months  later  Chavannes  and  Oge  were  sen-
tenced to  be  hammered  to  death,  and  the  sentence
was  executed  in  the  presence  of  the  provincial
assembly  and  authorities  of  Port  au  Prince.  Cha-
vannes showed  great  courage  during  his  terrible
torture,  and  protested  to  the  last  moment  against
the  oppression  of  the  colored  people.

CHAYERO,  Alfredo  (chah-vay'-ro),  Mexican
archaeologist.  He  has  made  many  interesting  in-
vestigations relative  to  Mexican  antiquities,  and
written  "  Historia  Antigua  de  Mexico,"  also  several
works  on  Aztec  archteology,  especially  on  old
monuments.  While  making  excavations  in  the
pyramids  of  Cholula,  he  discovered  some  idols
that  are  now  in  the  National  museum  of  Mexico.
He  has  been  a  member  of  congress  since  1869,  and
has  also  supported  Presidents  Juarez,  Lerdo,  Gon-
zalez, and  Diaz  in  succession,  notwithstanding  their
ditt'erent  policies.  On  25  June,  1879,  the  govern-
ment of  Diaz  ordered  the  execution  of  nine  citizens
of  Vera  Cruz  who  were  suspected  of  conspiracy.
This  act  was  severely  criticised,  and  great  indig-
nation was  shown  against  Mier  y  Teran,  who  had


596


CHAVEZ APARICIO


CHEEVER


executed  the  order,  and  against  Diaz,  Chavero
then  was  grand  master  of  a  masonic  lodge,  and  ex-
pelled Mier  y  Teran  from  the  brotherhood,  and  sus-
pended Gen.  Diaz  from  his  masonic  rights.  This
action  gave  Chavero  great  popularity.  In  congress
Chavero  also  made  a  strong  speech  against  Mier  and
Diaz,  but  afterward  became  one  of  his  adherents.
Chavero  was  elected  senator  in  1886,  and  is  profes-
sor of  the  mining-school  and  law-school  of  Mexico,
He  is  the  author  of  the  dramas  "  La  Reina  Xo-
chitl "  and  "  La  tempestad  de  un  beso,"  "  Quetzal-
coatl,"  "  Los  amores  de  Alarcon,"  "  La  hermana
de  los  Avilas,"  "  El  mundo  de  ahora,"  and  others.
His  books  relative  to  Father  Sahagun  and  to  the
Sun-Stone  are  often  referred  to,  and  well  known
to  antiquaries.

CHAVEZ  APARICIO,  Fray  Trinidad  (chah-
veth),  Spanish  missionary,  b.  in  Segovia,  Spain,
23  Feb.,  1508 ;  d.  in  Cuba,  in  August,  1582.  He
studied  at  the  University  of  Alcala,  was  ordained
priest  at  Toledo  in  1530,  and  at  once  joined  some
missionaries  coming  to  America.  After  his  arrival
at  Vera  Cruz,  in  April,  1531,  Chavez  travelled  along
the  Papaloapan  river,  and  began  his  missionary
work  in  company  with  Fathers  Diego  and  Jeronimo
de  la  Cruz.  They  converted  many  Indians,  erected
several  rustic  buildings  and  dedicated  them  as
churches,  and  Chavez  remained  among  the  natives
after  De  la  Cruz  had  died  of  fever  in  1540,  He
continued  his  mission  alone,  baptized  many  ca-
ciques, taugiit  them  Spanish,  and  greatly  improved
their  morals  and  customs.  According  to  Cardoso,
he  noticed  that  the  members  of  the  Indian  nobility
drank  a  special  frothy  beverage  called  "xocotl"
tried  it,  and  gathered'  information  about  its  com-
position and  origin,  studied  the  cacao-plant  and
its  culture,  and,  on  his  return  to  Spain  in  1570,
made  the  "  chacolatl,"  which  was  called  "  choco-
late," a  corruption  of  the  Indian  name.  Chavez
was  returning  to  Mexico  when  he  died  in  Cuba.
He  left  a  work  entitled  "  Origenes  y  cultivo  de  la
planta  del  cacao."

CHEATHAM,  Benjamin  Franklin,  soldier,
b,  in  Nashville,  Tenn.,  20  Oct.,  1820 ;  d,  there,  4
Sept.,  1886.  He  served  as  captain  of  volunteers  in
the  Mexican  war,  distinguished  himself  at  Monte-
rey, Medelin,  and  Cerro  Gordo,  and,  after  the  ex-
piration of  his  twelve  months'  term  of  service,  was
again  mustered  in  as  colonel  of  the  3d  Tennessee
regiment,  and  served  till  the  end  of  the  war.  He
was  major-general  of  Tennessee  militia  after  his
return,  and  was  a  farmer  until  1801,  when  he  en-
tered the  army  of  the  seceded  states,  being  one  of
the  first  Tennesseeans  to  enlist  in  the  Confederate
service,  and  was  early  appointed  a  brigadier-gen-
eral. He  commanded  at  Mayfield,  Ky.,  in  Septem-
ber, 1861,  and  at  the  battles  of  Belmont  and  Shiloh,
served  subsequently  at  Columbus,  Ky.,  was  a  di-
vision commander  in  Bragg's  army  when  it  entered
Kentucky  in  September,  1862,  was  soon  afterward
promoted  major-general,  and  was  engaged  at
Perryville,  Stone  River,  being  wounded  and  having
three  horses  shot  in  the  second  battle,  and  at
Chickamauga  and  Chattanooga,.  Nashville,  and
other  places.  President  Grant,  who  was  his  per-
sonal friend,  offered  him  an  appointment  in  the
civil  service,  but  he  declined.  He  devoted  himself
chiefly  to  agriculture  after  the  war,  but  served
four  years  as  superintendent  of  state  prisons,  and
in  October,  1835,  became  postmaster  of  Nashville.

CHECKLEY,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1680;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  L,  in  1753.
He  published  in  London,  in  1723,  a  reprint  of  Les-
lie's '•  Short  and  Easy  Method  with  the  Deists,"  to
which  he  added  a  ''  Discourse  Concerning  Episco-


pacy, in  Defence  of  Christianity  and  the  Church
of  England,"  consisting  of  a  riide  attack  on  the
clergy  and  people  of  New  England.  For  this  he
was  tried  before  the  supreme  court  in  Boston  in
1724,  and  fined  £50  for  libel.  He  went  to  England
to  take  orders  in  1727,  intending  to  settle  at  Mar-
blehead,  but  the  bishop  of  London  refused  to  or-
dain a  man  who  had  rendered  himself  so  obnoxious
to  the  New  Englanders,  and  was  a  foe  to  Christians
of  other  persuasions  in  the  community.  Afterward
he  was  ordained  by  the  bishop  of  Exeter,  and  sent
to  Narragansett.  He  settled  in  Providence  in
1739.  He  was  a  man  of  eccentric  and  irascible
conduct,  but  witty,  learned  in  the  classics,  and
familiar  with  the  Narragansett  language.  He
published,  in  1715,  "Choice  Dialogues  about  Pre-
destination," which  were  answered  by  Thomas
Watter,  who  defended  the  Calvinistic  doctrine,
and  were  republished  with  an  "  Answer  by  a  Strip-
ling" in  1720.  In  1727  appeared  "The  Modest
Proof  of  the  Order  of  the  Churches,"  the  authorship
of  which  was  accredited  to  him,  introducing  the
Episcopal  controversy  into  Nev^  England,  and
eliciting  replies  from  Martin  Mar-Prelate  and
Wigglesworth,  He  published  also  his  speech  upon
his  trial,  and  reissued  it  in  London  in  1738,

CHEESHAHTEAUMUCK,  Caleb,  Indian,  b.
in  Massachusetts  in  1646 ;  d.  in  Charlestown,  Mass.,
in  1666,  He  was  the  only  Indian  that  was  ever
graduated  at  Harvard  college,  having  received  his
degree  there  in  1665,

CHEESMAN,  John  Cunimings,  physician,  b.
in  New  York  city,  20  July,  1788;  d.  there,  11  Oct,.
1862,  He  was  graduated  at  the  medical  depart-
ment of  Queen's  college  (now  Rutgers)  in  1812,
having  for  his  preceptor  Dr,  Valentine  Seaman,
Subsequently  he  resided  in  New  York,  where  he
became  known  as  one  of  the  most  eminent  physi-
cians in  the  United  States,  and  practised  there  for
almost  half  a  century.  He  held  many  important
offices,  among  which  were  surgeon  to  the  public
institutions  (now  Charity  hospital)  on  Blackwell's
island,  and  surgeon  to  Bellevue  hospital.  F'or
forty  years  he  was  professionally  connected  with
the  New  York  hospital.  Dr.  Cheesman  was  a  mem-
ber of  numerous  medical  societies.

CHEETHAM,  James,  journalist  and  author,  b.
in  Manchester,  England,  in  1772 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  10  Sept,,  1810,  He  was  an  English  radical,  a
trenchant  writer,  with  a  talent  for  invective,  who,
escaping  from  the  Manchester  riots,  came  to  New
York  in  1798,  and  became  editor  of  the  "  American
Citizen."  In  1803  he  published  "  Nine  Letters  on
Burr's  Defection";  in  1804  a  volume  entitled
"  Reply  to  Aristides  " ;  in  1809  a  "  Life  of  Thomas
Paine,"  reprinted  in  England  in  1817.  He  was
originally  a  friend  of  Paine's,  but  became  embit-
tered against  him,  and  in  writing  the  last-named
work  was  inspired  by  enmity.  A  corrected  copy,
with  revisions  in  the  author's  hand-writing,  is  pre-
served by  the  New  York  historical  society.

CHEEVER,  Ezekiel,  educator,  b.  in  London,
England,  25  Jan.,  1614;  d,  in  Boston,  Mass,,  31
Aug,,  1708,  He  was  the  son  of  a  linen-draper,  re-
ceived a  classical  education,  and  emigrated  to
America  in  June,  1637,  in  order  to  enjoy  freedom
of  worship.  In  1638,  with  Davenport  and  Eaton-,
he  founded  New  Haven,  Conn,  He  was  school-
master there,  and  afterward  at  Ipswich  and  Shanes-
town,  Mass,,  and  subsequent  to  6  Jan,,  1671,  nacl
charge  of  the  Latin"  school  in  Boston,  Many  oi
the  leading  citizens  of  the  colony  were  his  pupiis.
He  published  a  volume  of  essays  on  the  millennium,
entitled  "  Scripture  Prophecies  Explained,  and  a
"  Latin  Accidence,"  of  which  twenty  editions  were


CHEEVER


CHENEY


597


issued,  and  which  was  for  more  than  a  liundrcd
years  the  introductory  text-book  of  the  Latin  \an-
guage  used  in  New  P^ngland.  His  funeral  sermon
by  Cotton  Matlicr,  who  was  one  of  his  pupils,  was
published,  together  with  Latin  poems  from  his
manuscripts,  in  1828. — His  son,  Samuel,  b.  in  New
Haven,  Conn.,  23  Sept.,  lGo9 ;  d.  in  Marblchead,
Mass.,  29  May,  1724,  was  the  first  minister  of  Mar-
blehead.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1G59,
and  began  to  preach  in  Marblehead  in  1668.

CHEEVER.  (xeor^e  BarreU,  clergyman,  b.  in
Hallowell,  Me.,  17  April,  1807;  d.  in  Englewood,
N.  J.,  1  Oct.,  1890.  He  was  the  son  of  Nathaniel
Cheever,  who  removed  to  Hallowell  and  established
the  "  American  Advocate,"  was  graduated  at  Bow-
doin  in  1825,  at  Andover  seminary  in  1830,  and
was  ordained  pastor  of  Howard  street  Congre-
gational church,  Boston,  in  1882.  While  at  An-
dover and  Salem  he  contributed  prose  and  verse  to
the  "  North  American  Review,"  "  Biblical  Reposi-
tory," and  other  periodicals.  Engaging  in  the
Unitarian  controversy,  he  wrote  a  *'  Defence  of  the
Orthodoxy  of  Cudworth,'  and,  espousing  the  tem-
perance cause,  published  in  a  Salem  newspaper  in
1835  an  allegory  entitled  "  Inquire  at  Deacon
Giles's  Distillery."  The  friends  of  the  deacon
made  a  riotous  attack  on  Mr.  Cheever,  and  he  was
tried  for  libel  and  imprisoned  thirty  days.  Re-
signing his  pastorate,  he  went  to  Europe,  contrib-
uted letters  to  the  "  New  York  Observer."  and  on
his  return  in  1839  took  charge  of  the  Allen  street
Presbyterian  church,  New  York  city.  He  deliv-
ered lectures  on  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  and  on
"Hierarchical  Despotism,"  the  latter  being  in  an-
swer to  a  discourse  of  Bishop  Hughes.  In  1843,  in
three  public  debates  with  J.  L.  O'Sullivan,  he  ar-
gued for  capital  punishment.  He  was  in  Europe
in  1844  as  corresponding  editor  of  the  New  York
"Evangelist,"  of  which  he  was  principal  editor
after  his  return  in  1845,  From  1846  until  he  re-
tired in  1870  he  was  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the
Puritans,  which  was  organized  for  him,  in  New
York,  and  was  distinguished  as  a  preacher  for  his
rigorous  and  forcible  application  of  orthodox  prin-
ciples to  questions  of  practical  moment,  such  as
the  Dred  Scott  decision,  the  banishment  of  the
Bible  from  the  public  schools,  the  operation  of
railroads  on  Sundays,  the  war  with  Mexico,  intem-
perance, and  slavery.  On  retiring  from  the  pulpit.
Dr.  Cheever  gave  his  house  in  New  York  to  the
American  board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  mis-
sions and  the  American  missionary  association,
to  be  held  jointly,  and  fixed  his  residence  at  En-
glewood, N.  J.  He  contributed  much  to  the
"Independent"  and  the  "  Bibliotheca  Sacra."
Among  his  publications  are  "Commonplace  Book
of  Prose  "  (Cooperstown,  1828) ;  "  Studies  in  Poet-
ry" (Boston,  1830);  an  edition  of  the  "Select
Works  of  Archbishop  Leighton  "  (1832):  "Com-
monplace Book  of  Poetry"  (Philadelphia,  1839):
"God's  Hand  in  America"  (New  York,  1841):
"Lectures  on  Hierarchical  Despotism  " ;  "  Lectures
on  the  'Pilgrim's  Progress'"  (1844):  "Wander-
ings of  a  Pilgrim  in  Switzerland  "  (1845-6) ;  "  De-
fence of  Capital  Punishment "  (1846) ;  with  J.  E.
Sweetser,  "Christian  Melodies,  a  Selection  of
Hymns  and  Tunes  " ;  "  Poets  of  America  "  (Hart-
ford, 1847);  "The  Hill  of  Difficulty"  (1847);
"Journal  of  the  Pilgrims,  Plymouth,  New  Eng
land,  1620,"  reprinted  from  the  original  volumes,
with  illustrations  (1848) ;  "  Punishment  bv  Death,
Its  Authority  and  Expediencv  "  (1849) ;  '"  Wind-
ings of  the  River  of  the  Wa'ter  of  Life"  (New
)ork,  1849);  "The  Voice  of  Nature  to  her  Foster-
Child,  the  Soul  of  Man  "  (1852) ;  "  Powers  of  the


World  to  Come"  (1853);  "Thoughts  for  the  Af-
flicted "  ;  "  The  Right  of  the  Bible  in  our  Public
Schools  "  (1854) ;  "  Lectures  on  the  Life,  Genius,
and  Insanity  of  Cowper"  (1856);  "God  against
Slarvery,  and  the  Freedom  and  Duty  of  the  Pulpit
to  Rebuke  it  "  (1857) ;  "  Guilt  of  Slavery  and  Crime
of  Slaveholding  "  (1860) ;  "  Faith,  Doubt,  and  Evi-
dence "  (1881).— His  brother,  Henry  Theodore,
clergyman,  b.  in  Hallowell,  Me.,  6  Feb.,  1814,  was
graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1834,  and  in  1835-'6  cor-
responded with  the  New  York  "  Evangelist  "  from
Spain,  France,  and  Louisiana.  He  then  studied
theology  at  Bangor,  Me.,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1840,  travelled  in  the  South  seas  and  the  Sand-
wich islands,  was  correspondent  and  associate  edi-
tor of  the  New  York  " Evangelist "  in  1843-4.  set-
tled as  pastor  in  various  places,  and  from  1859  till
1864  was  secretary  and  agent  for  the  church  anti-
slavery  society.  He  has  published  popular  books
of  travel  and  biography  under  the  following  titles :
"The  Whale  and  His  Captors"  (New  York,  1849);
"  A  Reel  in  a  Bottle  for  Jack  in  the  Doldrums,"
an  allegory  (1851) ;  "  The  Island  Worid  of  the  Pa-
cific "  (1852);  "  Memoirs  of  Nathaniel  Cheever,  M.
D.,"  his  father,  to  which  his  brother  wrote  an  in-
troduction (1853) ;  "  Life  and  Religion  in  the  Sand-
wich Islands"  (1854);  "Autobiography  and  Me-
morials of  Capt.  Obadiah  Congat"  (1855);  "The
Sea  and  the  Sailor,"  from  the  literary  remains  of
Walter  Colton  (1855) ;  "  Short  Yarns  for  Long
Voyages"  (1855);  "Life  and  Writings  of  the  Rev.
Walter  Colton,  U.  S.  N."  (1856) ;  "  The  Pulpit  and
the  Pew-Trials  and  Triumphs  of  a  Year  in  the
Old  Parsonage,  from  Leaves  of  a  Pastor's  Jour-
nal "  (1858) ;  "  Way-Marks  in  the  Moral  War  with
Slavery  between  the  Opening  of  1859  and  the  Close
of  1861 "  (1862) ;  "  Autobiograhhy  and  Memorials
of  Ichabod  Washburn  "  (Boston,  1878) ;  and  "  Cor-
respondencies of  Faith  and  Views  of  Madame
Guyon  "  (New  York,  1886).

CHEL-AB-KUKIL,  or  AB-KUKIL-CHEL,
Indian  priest  of  Yucatan,  flourished  early  in  the
15th  century.  Almost  every  Yucatec  legend  men-
tions his  name  repeatedly,  and  several  proverbs  in
the  Maya  language  are  at^tributed  to  him.  Many
fragments  of  a  history  composed  by  Chel-Ab-Ku-
Kil  are  found  in  the  documents  of  Yucatan  and
Central  American  missions,  and  nearly  all  the
chroniclers  of  the  conquest  of  America  mention
Chel-Ab-Ku-Kil,  who  left  this  prophecy :  "  You
who  look  at  things  to  come,  what  do  you  think
will  happen  at  the  end  of  this  age?  Let  it  be
known  by  you  that  such  things  will  come  from
north  and  east,  and  for  our  woe.  that  you  may
think  they  are  before  your  eyes.  In  the  ninth  age
no  priest  or  prophet  will  reveal  to  you  the  script-
ure, of  which  you  are  generally  ignorant."

CHENEY,  Charles,  manufacturer,  b.  in  what  is
now  South  Manchester,  Conn.,  in  1804;  d.  there,
20  June,  1874.  He  went  to  Tolland  as  a  clerk
when  he  was  about  fourteen  years  old,  and  before
he  was  of  age  engaged  in  mercantde  business  on
his  own  account  in  Providence.  About  1837  he
removed  to  Ohio  and  established  himself  as  a  farm-
er at  Mount  Healthy,  near  Cincinnati,  where  he  re-
mained eleven  years,  during  which  period  lie  be-
came interested  in  the  anti- slavery  movement.
About  the  time  of  his  removal  to  Ohio,  Ward
Cheney  and  some  of  his  other  brothers  had  estab-
lislied  a  small  silk  factory  in  South  Manchester,
Conn.  They  had  many  obstacles  with  which  to
contend,  and  the  factory  was  suspended  after  three
or  four  years,  but  was  revived  in  1841,  and  in  1847
Charles  Cheney  joined  his  brothers  in  the  under-
taking. He  spent  a  considerable  portion  of his


598


CHENEY


CHENEY


time  in  Hartford,  where  they  had  also  extensive
manufactories.  He  served  in  the  legislature  for
one  or  two  terms,  and  was  distinguished  for  his
public  spii'it  and  generous  charities. — Plis  brother,
Setli  Wells,  artist,  b.  in  South  Manchester,  Coiln.,
2G  Nov.,  1810 ;  d.  there,  10  Sept.,  1856,  received  a
common-school  education,  studied  art  in  Paris  and
Rome,  began  his  professional  career  as  an  engraver
in  1880,  and  from  1840  gave  his  attention  to  crayon
drawing.  He  was  one  of  the  earliest  American
artists  in  black  and  white,  and  excelled  in  giving
spirituality  to  his  portraits  and  ideal  female  faces,
which  are  still  sought  by  collectors.  Among  his
works  are  portraits  of  Theodore  Parker  with  his
wife,  James  Walker,  president  of  Harvard,  W.  C.
Bryant,  and  Ephraim  Peabody,  "Rosalie,"  and
"A  Roman  Gii-1."  When  the  poet  Halleck  ex-
pressed surprise  that  his  portrait  was  not  finished,
the  choleric  Cheney  said,  "I  will  finish  it,"  where-
upon he  put  his  foot  through  it. — Another  brother,
John,  excelled  as  an  engraver  of  heads.  His  prin-
cipal work  is  a  print  of  the  Madonna  di  San  Sisto
of  Raphael— Ednah  Dow,  wife  of  Seth  Wells,
author,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  27  June,  1824,  was  a
daughter  of  Sargent  Smith  Littlehale.  She  was
educated  at  private  schools  in  her  native  city,  and
married  in  1853.  She  was  secretary  of  the  School
of  design  for  women  from  1851  till  1854,  and  in
18G2  became  secretary  of  the  New  England  hos-
pital for  women  and  children.  In  18G3  she  was
secretary  of  the  committee  on  aid  for  colored
regiments  and  of  tiie  teachers'  committee  of  the
Freedmen's  aid  society.  She  has  been  vice-presi-
dent of  the  New  England  women's  club  and  of  the
Massachusetts  woman  suffrage  association.  Mrs.
Cheney  went  south  to  visit  the  Freedmen's  schools
in  1860,  1868,  and  1869.  She  has  visited  Europe
several  times,  spoken  before  lyceums  in  the  west  in
1873,  1875,  and  1876,  and  has  lectured  before  the
Concord  school  of  philosophy.  She  has  published
"Hand- Book  of  American  History,"  for  colored
people  and  schools  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  Patience,"  a
set  of  games  (1869);  "Faithful  to  the  Light"
(1870);  "Social  Games"  (1871);  "Sally  Williams,
the  Mountain  Giri  "  (1872) ;  "  Child  of  the  Tide  "
(1874);  "Life  of  Dr.  Susan  Dimock "  (1875);
"  Gleanings  in  the  Fields  of  Art "  (1881) ;  and  "  Se-
lected Poems  from  Michelangelo  Buonarotti "  (1885).
— Another  brother.  Ward,  b.  in  South  Manchester
in  1813 ;  d.  there,  22  March,  1876,  principal  found-
er of  the  house  of  Cheney  Brothers,  was  the  most
active  in  its  business  management.  He  first  en-
gaged in  the  dry-goods  business  in  Providence,  R.
I.,  then  in  the  culture  of  silk  at  Burlington,  N.  J.,
and  in  1836  established  with  his  brothers  the  manu-
facturing firm  of  Cheney  Brothers  in  South  Man-
chester. The  business  was  afterward  organized  as
a  joint-stock  company,  retaining  the  firm  name,
and  Ward  became  president  of  the  corporation.
He  was  also  president  of  the  Silk  association  of
America.  The  brothers  worked  harmoniously  in
building  up  by  slow  steps  an  extensive  business,
with  mills  at  South  Manchester  and  Hartford,  em-
ploying 2,500  operatives.  The  sewing-silks  manu-
factured by  them  were  considered  by  competent
judges  superior  to  the  best  qualities  made  in  Eu-
rope, and  found  a  special  demand  for  use  in  sew-
ing-machines on  account  of  strength,  uniformity
of  twist,  and  fine  finish.  They  afterward  made
great  progress  in  weaving  silk  goods  with  power-
looms,  and  made  printed  as  well  as  plain-dyed
fabrics.  On  their  father's  farm  they  established
the  model  manufacturing  village  of  South  Man-
chester, with  cottage  homes,  a  spacious  and  archi-
tecturally elegant  luill  and  theatre,  where  dramatic


and  other  entertainments  are  given  gratis  and  re-
ligious exercises  are  held  on  Sundays,  a  school,  a
library  and  reading-room,  boarding-houses,  and
pleasure-grounds.  Here  all  the  brothers  had  their
homes,  and  their  relations  with  their  workmen  af-
forded a  rare  instance  of  cordiality  and  affection.
From  time  to  time  skilled  operatives  were  brought
over  from  England  and  settled  in  South  Manches-
ter. Mr.  Cheney  was  known  in  business  circles  as
a  generous  and  progressive  man,  and  frequently
aided  young  men  beginning  mercantile  life.  He
left  an  only  son,  Charles,  of  Boston. — Another
brother,  Arthur,  b.  in  South  Manchester,  14  Jan.,
1837 :  d.  there  in  December,  1878,  also  a  member  of
the  firm,  interested  himself  in  the  drama  and  built
the  Globe  theatre,  Boston,  originally  called  Selwyn's
theatre,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  the  best  plays  in
a  thorough  and  artistic  way.  It  was  managed  with
varying  success  by  Selwyn,  Floyd,  and  others,  and,
when  it  was  burned,  was  rebuilt  by  Mr.  Cheney  and
carried  on  at  a  loss. — Frank  Woodbridge,  n'lanu-
facturer,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  5  June,  1832.
After  graduation  at  Brown  in  1854  he  engaged  in
business  in  Hartford,  in  connection  with  the  silk
manufacturing  interests  of  the  Cheney  Brothers  at
Manchester.  He  volunteered  for  the  civil  war  in
1862,  and  became  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  16th
Connecticut  volunteers.  The  regiment  went  to  the
front,  29  Aug.,  1,010  strong,  but  undisciplined  and
almost  wholly  ignorant  of  drill.  The  Confederates
were  beginning  the  invasion  of  Maryland  that
ended  in  repulse  at  Antietam,  and  all  available
troops  were  hurried  forward  to  meet  them  irre-
speciive  of  experience  as  soldiers.  On  12  Sept.,
Lieut.-Col.  Cheney  led  his  regiment  of  recruits  in
a  skirmish  that  proved  preliminary  to  the  battle
of  Antietam,  in  which  engagement  he  was  severe-
ly wounded,  late  in  the  afternoon,  while  endeav-
oring to  rally  liis  men,  who,  never  having  had  a
battalion-drill,  had  been  thrown  into  disorder  by
the  enemy's  fire.  Col.  Cheney's  wound  proved  so
serious  that  he  was  obliged  to  retire  from  the  ser-
vice, 24  Dec,  1862.  He  travelled  in  Europe,  China,
and  Japan,  studying  the  silk  industries  of  those
countries,  and  became  a  member  of  the  house  of
Cheney  Brothers,  and  its  treasurer.

CHENEY,  Charles  Edward,  clergyman,  b.  in
Canandaigua,  N.  ¥.,  12  Feb.,  1836.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Hobart  in  1857,  and  immediately  began  to
study  for  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  "Episcopal
church.  Soon  after  his  ordination  he  became  rector
of  Christ  church,  Chicago,  and  was  prominent
among  those  who,  under  the  leadership  of  Assist-
ant Bishop  Cummins,  of  Kentucky,  organized  a  Re-
formed Episcopal  church  in  1873.  Mr.  Cheney
was  elected  missionary  bishop  of  the  northwest,  for
the  new  organization,  and  was  consecrated  in  Christ
church,  14  Dec,  1873.

CHENEY,  Harriet  V.,  author,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts about  1815.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Hannah
Foster,  an  early  American  novelist.  She  published
"Confessions  of  an  Eariy  Martyr"  (1840);  "A
Peep  at  the  Pilgrims  in  1636"  (Boston,  1850);
"The  Rivals  of  Acadia"  ;  and  "Sketches  from  the
Life  of  Christ."  Her  sister,  Mrs.  Cushmg,  pub-
lished "  Esther,"  a  dramatic  poem,  and  works  for
the  young.  The  two  sisters  wrote  in  conjunction
"  The  Sundav-School."  .

CHENEY;  Theseus  Apoleon,  historian,  b.  in
Leon,  Cattaraugus  co.,N.  Y.,  16  March,  1830;  d.  in
Starke V,  N.  Y.,  2  Aug.,  1878.  He  was  educated  at
Oberiin,  founded  the  Georgic  society  and  library,
and  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  the  history  of
southern  New  York.  In  a  speech  at  Conewango,
N.  Y.,  20  Aug.,  1854,  he  suggested  the  name  repub-


CHENIER


CHESTER


099


lican  foi'  the  new  party  that  was  forming.  He
published  "  Report  on  the  Ancient  Monuments  of
Western  New  York  "  (1860) ;  "  Historical  Sketch  of
the  Chemung  Valley"  (18G6);  "Historical  Sketch
of  Eighteen  Counties  of  Central  and  Southern
New  York"  (1868);  "Laron";  "Relations  of
Government  to  Science  " ;  and  "  Antiquarian  Re-
searches."

CHENIER,  John-Oliver,  Canadian  physician,
b.  in  Longueil,  Canada,  in  1806 ;  d.  in  1837.  He
studied  medicine  at  Montreal,  receiving  his  degree
in  1828,  and  settled  at  St.  Benoit,  but  removed  to
St.  Eustache  in  1831,  and  began  to  take  part  in
politics.  In  1833  his  name  appeared  at  the  head  of
a  protest  against  the  alleged  robbery  of  the  pub-
lic lands,  and  he  acted  as  secretary  to  an  assembly
convoked  to  censure  the  conduct  of  the  English
troops  that  had  slain  several  Canadians  in  a  riot
on  21  May.  He  was  one  of  the  most  vehement
speakers  at  the  revolutionary  meetings  that  took
place  in  1837,  and  a  reward  of  $2,000  was  offered
by  the  Governor-general  for  his  arrest.  He  gath-
ered a  large  force  of  insurgents  at  St.  Eustache,  in
the  county  of  Deux-Montagnes ;  but  they  were  de-
feated by  the  English  troops,  and  Chenier  was
killed  in  attempting  to  cut  his  way  through  the
opposing  ranks.

CHESBROUGH,  Ellis  Sylvester,  civil  engi-
neer, b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,  6  July,  1813;  d.  in  Chi-
cago, ni.,  19  Aug.,  1886.  His  father  met  with
business  reverses,  and  the  boy  was  taken  from
school  at  the  age  of  thirteen  and  became  chainman
to  an  engineering  party  engaged  in  the  prelimi-
nary survey  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  railroad.
Later  he  was  engaged  on  the  Alleghany  and  Port-
age railroad,  and  in  1831  became  associated  with
William  Gibbs  McNeill  in  the  construction  of  the
Paterson  and  Hudson  River  railroad.  In  1837  he
was  appointed  senior  assistant  on  the  building  of
the  Louisville,  Cincinnati,  and  Charleston  railroad,
and  in  1846  became  chief  engineer  of  the  Boston
water-works,  planning  the  important  structures  on
it,  including  the  Brookline  reservoir.  He  was  ap-
pointed sole  commissioner  in  the  Boston  water  de-
partment in  1850,  and  during  the  following  year
city  engineer,  having  charge  of  all  the  water-works
under  the  Cochituate  water  board,  besides  being
surveyor  of  the  streets  and  harbor  improvements.
In  1855  he  became  engineer  for  the  Chicago  board
of  sewerage  commissioners,  and  in  that  capacity
planned  the  sewerage  system  of  the  city.  In  1879
he  resigned  the  office  of  commissioner  of  public
works.  The  river  tunnels  were  planned  by  him,
and,  despite  much  criticism,  have  proved  success-
ful. He  achieved  a  high  reputation  as  an  author-
ity on  the  water-supply  and  sewage  of  cities,  and
in  that  capacity  was  consulted  by  the  officials  of
New  York,  Boston,  Cambridge,  Toronto.  Detroit,
Memphis,  Milwaukee,  and  other  cities.  Mr.  Ches-
brough  was  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Amer-
ican institute  of  architects,  and  from  November,
1877,  till  November,  1878,  was  president  of  the
American  society  of  civil  engineers.

CHESEBRO,  Caroline,  author,  b.  in  Canan-
daigua,  N.  Y.,  about  1828 ;  d.  in  Piermont,  N.  Y.,  16
Feb.,  1873.  She  was  educated  in  a  female  semi-
nary in  her  native  village,  and  began  writing  for
the  magazines  about  1848,  contributing  at  first  to
"Graham's  Magazine"  and  "  Holden's  Dollar
Magazine."  A  volume  of  her  stories  and  sketches
was  published  with  the  title  of  "  Dream-Land  by
Daylight "  (New  York,  1851).  This  was  followed
in  1852  by  "  Isa,  a  Pilgrimage,"  in  1853  by  "  The
Children  of  Light "  and  "  The  Little  Cross-Bear-
ers" (Auburn), in  1855 by  "Susan,  the  Fisher-


man's Daughter  "  (New  York),  and  in  subsequent
years  she  published  numerous  other  novels,  en-
titled "  Philly  and  Kit  "  (1856) ;  "  Victoria,  or  the
World  Overcome"  (1856);  -"Amy  Carr"  (1863);
"  Peter  Carradine  "  (1863) ;  "  The  Foe  in  the  House-
hold "  (1871) ;  and  a  collection  of  stories  entitled
"  The  Beautiful  Gate,  and  other  Tales  "  1863).  She
was  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  various  literary
magazines,  and  had  a  novel  passing  through  the
press  at  the  time  of  her  death.  For  eight  years
previous  to  her  death  she  had  been  teacher  of
rhetoric  and  composition  in  the  Packer  collegiate
institute  in  Brooklyn.  Her  novels  are  reflective
and  grave  in  tone,  and  contain  impressive,  emo-
tional, and  descriptive  passages.

CHESNEY,  Charles  Cornwallis,  English
soldier,  b.  29  Sept.,  1826 ;  d.  19  March,  1876.  He
was  a  professor  at  Sandhurst  military  college,  and
the  author  of  a  number  of  works  on  military  sub-
jects, including  "Military  View  of  Recent  Cam-
paigns in  Virginia"  (1863-'5).  and  "Military
Biographies,"  including  several  of  generals  in  the
American  civil  war  (New  York,  1873).  He  is  al-
most the  only  Englishman  that  has  written  fairly
and  intelligently  of  military  affairs  in  the  United
States.  He  was  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled
"  The  Battle  of  Dorking  "  (London,  1871),  which
created  a  great  sensation.

CHESTER,  Albert  Huntington,  chemist,  b.
in  Saratoga  Springs,  N.  Y.,  22  Nov.,  1843.  He
studied  at  Union,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Co-
lumbia school  of  mines  in  1868,  with  the  degree  of
E.  M.  After  some  professional  experience  he  be-
came in  1871  professor  of  chemistry,  mineralogy,
and  metallurgy  at  Hamilton  college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.
Since  1882  he  has  been  connected  with  the  State
board  of  health  as  chemist.  When  not  occupied  in
lecturing,  his  time  has  been  devoted  to  the  active
pursuit  of  his  profession  as  a  mining  engineer,  and
during  the  years  1875  to  1880  he  was  engaged
in  exploring  the  great  iron  deposits  of  the  Ver-
milion district  in  Minnesota.  A  full  account  of
this  work  is  given  in  the  "  Tenth  Annual  Report .
of  the  Geology  of  Minnesota."  Besides  contribu-
tions to  the  scientific  press.  Prof.  Chester  has  pub-
lished a  "Catalogue  of  Minerals,  with  Chemical
Composition  and  Synonyms"  (New  York,  1886).
In  1878  he  received  \he  degree  of  Ph.  D.  from  the
School  of  mines.

CHESTER,  Colby  M.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Con-
necticut in  1845.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy,  assigned  in  1863  to  the  steam  sloop
"Richmond,"  of  the  western  gulf  squadron,  and
participated  in  the  operations  against  Mobile  on
5  Aug.,  1864.  He  was  promoted  master,  10  Nov.,
1866,  commissioned  lieutenant,  21  Feb.,  1867,  lieu-
tenant-commander, 12  March,  1868,  became  com-
mander, 15  Oct.,  1881,  and  was  hydrographic  in-
spector of  the  coast  survey  from  1881  till  1885.

CHESTER,  Frederick  BixonWalthall,  geolo-
gist, b.  in  Porte  au  Platte,  Santo  Domingo,  8  Oct.,
1861.  He  studied  at  Washington  university,  St.
Louis,  was  graduated  at  Cornell  in  1882,  and  be-
came professor  of  geology  in  the  Delaware  state
college.  His  papers  include  "Boulder  Drift  in
Delaware"  (1883);  "Lecture  Notes  on  Dvnamical
Geology"  (1883);  "Stratified  Drift  in  Delaware"
(1883);  "Volcanoes  and  Earthquakes"  (1884);
"The  Quaternary  Gravels  of  Northern  Delaware
and  Eastern  Maryland"  (1884);  "Preliminary
Notes  on  the  Geology  of  Delaware"  (1884);  "A
Review  of  the  Geology  of  Delaware"  (1884);
"The  Quaternary  Gravels  of  the  Southern  Dela-
ware Peninsula'' (1885);  "The  Gabbros  and  Am-
phibole Rocks  of Delaware "  (1885) ; and  a  full


600


CHESTER


CHEVERUS


memoir  on  this  subject  published  by  the  United
States  geological  survey  (Washington,'  1886).

CHESTER,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  Wethersfield,
Conn.,  29  Jan.,  1749 ;  d.  there,  4  Nov.,  1809.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1766,  a  representative  in
the  legislature  in  1772,  served  with  distinction  as  a
captain  at  the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  became  a
colonel,  and  continued  in  the  Continental  army
vmtil  1777.  Afterward  he  sat  in  the  Connecticut
legislature,  in  which  he  was  chosen  speaker,  was
a  member  of  the  council  in  1788-'91  and  1803,
supervisor  of  the  district  of  Connecticut  from  1791
until  the  accession  of  President  Jefferson  in  1801,
and  for  some  time  was  county  judge  of  probate.

CHESTER,  Joseph  Lemuel,  antiquarian,  b.
in  Norwich,  Conn.,  80  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  London,
England,  28  May,  1882.  He  was  engaged  in  trade
in  Philadelphia  until  1852,  and  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  the  press,  principally  under  pen-
names,  of  which  the  best  known  is  "  Julian  Cra-
mer." He  then  became  connected  with  the  Phila-
delphia press,  and  was  some  time  an  assistant  clerk
in  the  U.  S.  house  of  representatives.  After  1858
he  resided  in  London,  where  he  devoted  himself  to
searching  out  the  genealogy  and  history  of  the
early  settlers  of  New  England.  He  compiled  an
abstract  of  the  registers  of  Westminster  Abbey,
and  collected  from  other  sources  much  valuable
material  for  local  and  family  histories.  In  1869  he
assisted  in  forming  at  London  the  Harleian  society
for  the  publication  of  inedited  manuscripts  relat-
ing to  genealogy  and  heraldry,  and  was  chosen  a
member  of  its  council.  In  1870  he  was  made  one
of  the  council  of  the  historical  society  of  Great
Britain,  recently  organized.  He  published  "  Green-
wood Cemetery  and  other  Poems  "  (1843) ;  "  A
Preliminary  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  Repulsion  "
(1853) ;  "  Educational  Laws  of  Virginia,  the  Per-
sonal Narrative  of  Mrs.  Margaret  Douglas  "  (1854) ;
"  J  ohn  Rogers,"  with  a  genealogy  of  the  family (1854),
and  numerous  papers  in  historical  and  genealogical
journals.  The  "  Marriage,  Baptismal,  and  Burial
Registers  of  the  Collegiate  Church,  or  Abbey,  of
St.  Peter,  Westminster,"  with  copious  biographical
notes  by  the  editor,  was  published  in  London  in
1876.  A  tablet  to  his  memory  was  placed  by  Dean
Bradley  in  Westminster  abbey.

CHESTNUT,  James,  Jr.,  senator,  b.  near  Cam-
den, S.  C,  in  1815.  He  was  graduated  at  Prince-
ton in  1835.  From  1842  till  1852  he  served  in  the
South  Carolina  legislature,  and  from  1854  till  1858
was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  A  vacancy  oc-
curring in  the  U.  S.  senate,  he  was  appointed  to
fill  the  unexpired  term,  and  was  formally  elected
senator  on  5  Jan.,  1859.  He  resigned  onlO  Nov.,
1860,  in  anticipation  of  the  secession  of  South
Carolina;  but  his  resignation  was  not  accepted,
and  he  was  formally  expelled,  11  July,  1861.  In
tha  mean  time  he  had  been  appointed  a  delegate  to
the  Confederate  provisional  congress.  He  was
commissioned  colonel  in  the  Confederate  army,
and  detailed  as  aide-de-camp  on  the  staff  of  Jeffer-
son Davis.  In  1864  he  was  promoted  brigadier-
general  and  assigned  to  a  command  on  the  coast
of  South  Carolina.  In  1868  he  was  a  member  of
the  National  democratic  convention  that  nomi-
nated Horatio  Seymour  for  the  presidency.

CHETLAIN,  Augustus  Louis,  soldier,  b.  in  St.
Ijouis,  Mo.,  26  Dec,  1824.  His  parents,  of  French
Huguenot  stock,  emigrated  from  Neufchatel,
Switzerland,  in  1823,  and  were  members  of  the  Red
river  colony.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, became  a  merchant  in  Galena,  and  was  the
first  volunteer  at  a  meeting  held  in  response  to  the
president's  call after  the  bombardment  of Fort


Sumter  in  1861.  He  was  chosen  captain  of  the  com-
pany when  Gen.  (then  Captain)  Grant  declined,
and  on  16  April,  1862,  was  commissioned  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  12th  Illinois  infantry.  He  was  in
command  at  Smithland,  Ky.,  from  September,  1861,
till  January,  1862,  and  then  participated  in  Gen!
Smith's  campaign  on  the  Tennessee  river  to  Fort
Henry,  and  led  his  regiment  at  Fort  Donelson.
He  was  engaged  at  Shiloh,  distinguishing  himself
at  Corinth,  being  left  in  command  of  that  post
until  May,  1863,  and  while  there  organized  the
first  colored  regiment  raised  in  the  west.  On  13
Dec,  1863,  he  was  promoted  brigadier-general,
placed  in  charge  of  the  organization  of  colored
troops  in  Tennessee,  and  afterward  in  Kentucky,
and  by  1  Jan.,  1864,  had  raised  a  force  of  17,000
men,  for  which  service  he  was  brevetted  major-
general.  From  January  to  October,  1865,  he  com-
manded the  post  of  Memphis,  and  then  the  district
of  Talladega,  Ala.,  until  5  Feb.,  1866,  when  he  was
mustered  out  of  service.  He  was  assessor  of  inter-
nal revenue  for  the  district  of  Utah  in  1867-9,
then  U.  S.  consul  at  Brussels,  and,  after  his  return
to  the  United  States  in  1872,  established  himself
in  Chicago  as  a  banker  and  stock-broker.  In  Sep
tember,  1886,  Gen.  Chetlain  delivered  the  annual
address  before  the  society  of  the  Army  of  the
Tennessee,  at  Rock  Island,  111.

CHETWOOD,  John  J.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Elizabeth,
N.  J.,  18  Jan.,  1800 ;  d.  there,  18  Nov.,  1861.  He  was
for  fourteen  years  surrogate  of  Essex  county,  first
prosecutor  of  Union  county,  a  member  of  the  state
council,  and  interested  in  railroad  projects  and  in
promoting  educational  and  religious  enterprises. —
His  ancestor,  WilHam,  b.  in  Elizabethtown  in
1769;  d.  there,  18  Dec,  1857,  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1792,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1798,  was
aide  to  Gen.  Lee  during  the  whiskey  rebellion,  and
served  in  congress  in  1836-7.

CHEVALIER,  Michel,  French  political  econo-
mist, b.  in  Limoges,  13  Jan.,  1806 ;  d.  28  Nov.,  1879.
He  entered  the  Polytechnic  school  in  1824,  was  ap-
pointed an  engineer  in  the  department  du  Nord  in
1828,  became  a  St.  Simonian,  assumed  the  editor-
ship of  the  "  Globe,"  and  was  condemned  to  twelve
months'  imprisonment  for  an  article  on  marriage.
After  serving  six  months  he  was  pardoned,  and
sent  by  Thiers  to  investigate  the  railroads  and
canals  of  the  United  States.  While  on  that  mis-
sion he  travelled  extensively  over  this  country,
Mexico,  and  Cuba  in  1833-5,  and  published  in  the
"  Journal  des  Debats  "  a  series  of  letters,  afterward
collected  ijito  a  volume  entitled  "  Lettres  sur
I'Amerique  du  Nord."  In  1840  he  became  pro-
fessor of  national  economy  in  the  College  of
France.  In  1848  he  published  replies  to  Louis
Blanc,  in  1860  became  a  senator,  and  in  1867  was
charged  with  preparing  the  official  report  of  the
international  exposition,  and  in  an  "  Introduction
aux  rapports  du  jurv  international "  gave  a  philo-
sophical survey  of  modern  industry.  Among  his
other  works  are  "Histoire  et  description  des  voies
de  communication  aux  Etats-Unis  et  des  travaux
qui  en- dependent "  (1840-2) :  "  Cours  d'economie^^
(1842-'50;  new  ed.,  1866);;'L'Isthme  de  Panama
(1844);  "La  liberte  aux  Etats-Unis"  (1849);  "De
la  baisse  probable  de  I'or"  (1859);  "  L'expedition
du  Mexique  "  (1862) ;  and  "  Le  Mexique  ancien  et
moderne  "  (1863).  .

CHEVERUS,  Jean  Louis  Anne  Magdeleine
Lefebvre  de,  R.  C.  prelate,  b.  in  Mayennet  ranee
28  Jan.,  1768;  d.  in  Bordeaux,  19  July,  183b.  tie
received  his  preparatory  education  in  Mayenne,  en-
tered the  College  Louis  le  Grand  in  1780,  and  was
ordained  in  1790.  After  suffering  iirprisonmentanu


CHEVES


CHEW


601


narrowly  escaping  death,  he  went  to  England  in
1793.  In  1790  he  offered  himself  for  the  American
mission,  and,  having  previously  surrendered  his
patrimony  in  France  to  his  brother  and  sisters,
sailed  for  Boston.  Here  he  became  so  noted  for
his  eloquent  preaching  that  he  attracted  audiences
mainly  composed  of  those  who  did  not  accept  his
religious  views.  During  an  epidemic  of  yellow
fever  in  the  city,  he  was  constantly  employed  in
nursing  the  sick,  without  distinction  of  rank  or
creed.  The  legislature  of  Massachusetts,  having
prepared  the  form  of  an  oath  to  be  taken  by  all
citizens  before  voting  at  elections,  submitted  it  to
Father  Cheverus  for  revision,  and  enacted  it  into
a  law  with  the  changes  he  suggested.  He  founded
the  Church  of  the  Holy  Cross  in  1808,  being  enabled
to  do  so  principally  through  the  subscriptions  of
Protestant  citizens,  among  whom  the  most  liberal
was  President  Adams.  He  was  frequently  invited
to  preach  in  the  Protestant  churches  of  the  state,
and  lecture  before  the  learned  societies  of  Boston,
and  was  one  of  the  principal  founders  of  the  Athe-
naeum. In  1810  he  was  consecrated  first  bishop  of
Boston,  and  soon  after  his  consecration  he  founded
the  Ursuline  convent  at  Charlestown.  Nearly  all
the  early  Roman  Catholic  churches  in  New  Eng-
land were  to  some  extent  his  work.  On  the  acces-
sion of  Louis  XVIII.,  repeated  efforts  were  made
by  that  monarch  to  persuade  him  to  accept  a  bish-
opric in  France.  At  this  time  he  had  become  en-
feebled by  attacks  of  asthma,  and  his  physicians
assured  him  that  he  could  not  live  much  longer  if
he  remained  in  Massachusetts.  Thereupon  he  dis-
tributed all  he  possessed  among  the  clergy  and  the
poor,  and  sailed  from  Boston  in  1823.  Pie  was
promoted  to  the  see  of  Montauban  by  Louis  XVIIL,
was  afterward  archbishop  of  Bordeaux  and  peer  of
France  under  Charles  X.,  and  made  a  cardinal  at  the
request  of  Louis  Philippe,  1  Feb.,  1836.  See  Huen
Du  Bourg's  "  Vie  du  Cardinal  Cheverus  "  (English
translations,  Philadelphia,  1842.  and  Boston,  184G).
CHEVES,  Langdon  (cheevz),  statesman,  b,  at
Rocky  River,  S.  C,  17  Sept.,  1776;  d.  in  Colum-
bia, 25  June,  1857.  His  father,  Alexander,  was  a
native  of  Scotland ;  his  mother,  Mary  Langdon,
was  a  Virginian.  At  the  age  of  ten  he  went  to
Charleston  to  earn  a  living,  and  at  sixteen  had  be-
come confidential  clerk  in  a  large  iTiercantile  house.
In  spite  of  the  advice  of  his  friends,  who  thought
him  "  born  to  be  a  merchant,"  he  began  the  study
of  law  when  eighteen  years  old.  In  1797  he  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  very  soon  became  eminent
in  his  profession.  Before  1808  his  yearly  income
from  his  practice  exceeded  $20,000,  a  great  figure
in  those  days.  In  1806  he  married  Miss  Mary
Dallas,  of  Charleston.  In  1810  he  was  elected  1o
congress,  along  with  William  Lowndes  and  John
C.  Calhoun,  and  soon  distinguished  himself.  His
speech  on  the  merchants'  bonds  in  1811  was  espe-
cially remarkable  for  its  learning  and  eloquence.
Washington  Irving,  who  was  present,  said  it  gave
him  for  the  first  time  an  idea  of  the  manner  in
which  the  great  Greek  and  Roman  orators  must
have  spoken.  Mr.  Cheves  was  a  zealous  supporter
of  the  war  with  England ;  he  was  chairman  of  the
naval  committee  in  1812,  and  of  the  committee  of
ways  and  means  in  1813.  On  19  Jan.,  1814,  Henry
Clay,  having  been  sent  as  commissioner  to  Ghent,
Mr.  Cheves  was  chosen  to  succeed  him  as  speaker
of  the  house,  being  elected  by  a  combination  of
tederalists  with  anti-restriction  democrats,  over
1^ elix  Grundy,  the  administration  candidate.  His
u^?  "memorable  act  as  speaker  was  the  defeat  of
L)allas  s  scheme  for  the  re-charter  of  the  LI.  S.  bank.
After  peace  had been  declared in  1815,  he de-


clined a  re-election,  and  returned  to  the  Charles-
ton bar.  In  the  following  year  he  was  made  a
judge  of  the  superior  court  of  South  Carolina.  In
1816  the  national  bank  was  rechartered,  but  within
three  years  had  been  nearly  ruined  by  mismanage-
ment. In  1819  Mr.  Cheves  was  elected  president
of  its  board  of  directors,  and  during  the  next  three
years  succeeded  in  restoring  its  credit.  In  1822  he
resigned  this  post,  in  which  he  was  succeeded  by
Nicholas  Biddle,  and  became  chief  commissioner
of  claims  under  the  treaty  of  Ghent.  He  lived  for
a  time  in  Philadelphia,  and  afterward  in  Lancas-
ter, Pa.,  but  in  1829  returned  to  South  Carolina,
and  lived  in  retirement  on  his  plantation  for  the
remaining  twenty-eight  years  of  his  life.  He  wrote
occasional  essays  and  reviews.  In  the  excitement  of
1832  he  condemned  the  scheme  of  nullification  as
not  sufficiently  thoroughgoing.  He  considered  it
folly  for  South  Carolina  to  act  alone ;  but  he  was
strongly  in  favor  of  secession,  and  in  1850,  as  a
delegate  to  the  Nashville  convention,  he  declared
himself  friendly  to  the  scheme,  then  first  agitated,
of  a  separate  southern  confederacy.

CHEW,  Robert  S.,  chief  clerk  of  the  state  de-
partment at  Washington,  b.  in  Virginia  in  1811 ;
d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  3  Aug.,  1873.  He  entered
the  service  of  the  government  in  his  youth,  and
had  served  in  the  state  department  more  than  forty
years,  when  he  was  advanced  to  the  chief  clerkship
on  the  appointment  of  William  Hunter  as  second
assistant  secretary  of  state  in  July,  1866. — His
eldest  son,  Richard  S.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia,  7  Sept.,  1843 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  10  April,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  the
naval  academy  in  1861,  commissioned  lieutenant,
22  Feb.,  1864,  and  lieutenant-commander,  25  July,
1866,  served  on  board  the  frigate  "  Minnesota,"
participating  in  the  actions  with  the  "  Merrimac  "
on  8  and  9  April,  1862,  being  attached  to  the  west-
ern gulf  blockading  squadron  in  18C3-'4,  and  be-
ing present  at  the  battle  of  Mobile  Bay.  On  2
Feb.,  1875,  he  was  retired  for  disability.

CHEW,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Maryland  about
1690;  d.  16  June,  1744.  He  was  a  son  of  Col.
Samuel,  from  Chewton,  in  Somersetshire,  England,
who  came  to  Maryland  with  Lord  Baltimore  in
1671.  The  son  embraced  the  Quaker  doctrines,
was  for  a  time  a  practising  physician,  and  after-
ward became  a  judge,  and  was  chief  justice  of  the
district  of  Newcastle.  He  was  influential  among
the  Quakers,  but  provoked  criticism  by  an  address
to  the  grand  jury  of  Newcastle  on  the  lawfulness
of  resistance  to  an  armed  enemy  (1741 ;  reprinted
in  1775). — His  son,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  at  West
River,  Anne  Arundel  co.,  Md.,  29  Nov.,  1722;  d.
20  Jan.,  1810.  He  studied  law  with  Andrew  Ham-
ilton, an  eminent  Philadelphia  lawyer,  and  in  Lon-
don, settled  in  1743  on  the  Delaware,  removed  to
Philadelphia  in  1745,  was  recorder  from  1755  till
1772,  register  of  wills,  attorney-general,  resigning
in  1766,  and  in  1774  became  chief  justice  of  Penn-
sylvania. He  was  also  for  several  years  speaker  of
the  house  of  delegates  of  the  three  lower  counties
in  Delaware.  When  the  revolution  began,  both
parties  courted  his  support,  but  after  the  Declara-
tion of  Independence  he  opposed  the  patriots,  and,
because  he  declined  to  give  a  parole  in  1777,  was
imprisoned  in  Fredericksburg,  Va.  From  1790
until  the  abolition  of  that  court  in  1806  he  was
president  of  the  high  court  of  errors  and  appeals.
Chief-Justice  Chew  resided  in  Germantown,  in  a
spacious  stone  mansion,  still  standing  (1886),  which
is  represented  in  the  accompanying  illustration.
During  the  battle  of  (lermantown,  4  Oct.,  1777,
the  doors  of  the  house  were  riddled  by  bullets,  and


602


CHI-AH-KIN


CHiaNAVITCELUT


cannon-balls  passed  through  its  walls  and  shattered
the  statuary  in  the  surrounding  grounds.  At  the
opening  of  the  battle,  when  the  central  American
column,  under  Washington,  descended  the  main
street,  they  first  overwhelmed  a  small  British  out-
post under  Col.  Musgrave.  Most  of  the  British
were  scattered,  but  Musgrave,  with  a  small  party
of  infantry,  took  refuge  in  Chew's  house,  and  set


?i4^;. '

i^

,.,:■  f

^m-

^^1

i ,v^

t^'M

^M

m

-f^  -^4^

f.  "::^«

up  a  fire  from  the  windows.  The  Americans  opened
an  artillery-fire  upon  the  house,  but  its  stone  walls
were  too  solid  to  be  beaten  down  by  the  three-
pound  and  six-pound  field-pieces  of  that  day ;  and
so  Maxwell's  brigade  was  left  to  besiege  the  house,
while  the  main  American  column  pressed  on.  The
chief  effect  of  this  incident  was  to  retard  and
weaken  the  American  charge,  and  to  give  the  Brit-
ish time  to  prepare  for  it.

CHIAH-KIN,  or  AH-KIN-CHI  (chee-ah-
keen'),  Yucatec  prince,  d.  about  1541.  He  was
general-in-chief  of  the  army  of  Tutul  Xin,  king  of
Slani,  and  won  a  good  military  reputation  during
the  war  against  the  Spaniards,  whom  he  defeated
in  several  battles.  When  Tutul  Xin  submitted  to
the  Spanish  conquerors,  he  sent  envoys  to  all  the
caciques  in  Yucatan,  to  invite  them  to  make  peace
also ;  and  for  this  purpose  Chi-Ah-Kin  and  other
noblemen  were  directed  to  visit  King  Cocom  at
Zotuta,  and  this  chief  received  them  with  apparent
regard,  entertaining  them  with  a  splendid  hunting-
party  and  banquet,  at  the  end  of  which  all  the
envoys  were  beheaded  by  order  and  in  presence  of
Cocom.  Chi-Ah-Kin  was  the  only  one  spared,  in
order  to  make  him  suffer  what  they  considered  the
most  ignominious  punishment,  that  of  cutting  his
eyes  out  and  scalping  him.  In  this  condition  he
was  taken  to  the  Mani  frontier  and  left  there  until
some  Indians  took  him  before  his  king.  He  died
a  few  months  afterward.  In  1599  the  king  of
Spain  gave  a  pension  of  $200  to  Gaspar  Chin,  son
of  Chi-Ah-Kin  and  grandson  of  Tutul  Xin.

CHIALIQUICHIAMA  (chee-ah-lee-kee-chee-
ah'-ma),  Peruvian  soldier,  b.  in  the  latter  part  of
the  15th  century ;  d.  at  Cajamarca,  Peru,  in  1538.
He  had  won  five  battles  against  the  Spaniards  be-
fore his  king,  Atahualpa.  was  defeated  and  made  a
prisoner  by  Pizarro,  and  had  great  influence  among
the  otlier  Indian  warriors.  Atahualpa,  while  in
prison  at  Cajamarca,  called  that  general  to  that
place,  and  the  Spaniards  also  made  him  a^risoner,
fearing  he  would  begin  war  again.  After  the  exe-
cution of  Atahualpa,  29  Aug.,  1533,  Pizarro  went
with  his  troops  toward  Cuzco ;  but  the  natives  at-
tacked them  several  times  in  such  a  good  order
and  concert  that  they  suspected  Chialiquiehiama
was  in  secret  communication  with  the  Indians  and
directing  their  operations.  That  suspicion  was
enough  to  decide  his  fate,  and  Pizarro  sentenced
him  to  be  burned  alive.  Chialiquiehiama  was  of-
fered a  less  painful  death  if  he  would  become  a


Christian  ;  but  he  refused  to  be  baptized,  and  died
according  to  the  sentence,  remonstrating  to  the
last  moment  against  the  actions  of  Pizarro.

CHICKERING,  Jesse,  political  economist,  b
in  Dover,  N.  H.,  31  Aug.,  1797;  d.  in  West  Rox-
bury,  Mass.,  29  May,  1855.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1818,  studied  theology,  and  became  a
Unitarian  minister.  He  afterward  pursued  a  medi-
cal course,  receiving  his  diploma  in  1833,  and  prac-
tised medicine  for  about  ten  years  in  Boston  and
West  Roxbury.  He  was  the  author  of  a  "  Statistical
View  of  the  Population  of  Massachusetts  from
1765  to  1840"  (Boston,  1846);  "Emigration  into
the  United  States  "  (1848) ;  "  Reports  on  the  Cen-
sus of  Boston  "  (1851) ;  and  a  "  Letter  addressed  to
the  President  of  the  United  States  on  Slavery,  con-
sidered in  Relation  to  the  Principles  of  Constitu-
tional Government  in  Great  Britain  and  in  the
United  States  "  (1855).

CHICKERING,  Jonas,  piano-manufacturer,  b.
in  New  Ipswich,  N.  PI.,  5  April,  1797;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  8  Dec,  1853.  He  was  the  son  of  a
blacksmith,  and,  after  receiving  a  common-school
education,  learned  the  trade  of  cabinet-making.
In  1818  he  went  to  Boston,  and  a  year  afterward
became  a  workman  in  John  Osborne's  piano  manu-
factory. In  1823  he  began  business  with  a  partner,
and  subsequently  carried  it  on  alone.  He  associ-
ated himself  in  1830  with  John  Mackay,  a  retired
ship-master,  and  from  that  time  imported,  by  the
cargo,  the  fine  woods  used  in  the  construction  of
piano-forte  cases.  In  1841  his  partner  was  lost  at
sea.  He  gradually  extended  his  facilities  until  his
factory  in  Boston  made  2,000  pianos  a  year.  In  1852
the  workshops  were  burned,  and  before  the  new
and  more  spacious  building,  erected  around  a  quad-
rangle on  a  lot  five  acres  in  extent,  was  completed,
he  died.  He  had  introduced  various  improvements
in  the  manufacture  and  construction  of  the  piano-
forte, notably  the  circular  scale.  In  1825  Alpheus
Babcock,  of  Boston,  patented  a  cast-iron  frame  for
a  square  piano.  Mr.  Chickering  greatly  improved
this  frame,  including  in  it  the  pin-britige  and
damper  socket  rail.  This  construction  he  patented
in  1840.  At  the  London  exhibition  in  1851  he  ex-
hibited a  complete  frame  for  grand  pianos  in  one
casting.  In  1853  he  adopted  the  system  of  over-
stringing,  which  he  combined  with  a  metal  frame
of  one  casting,  in  a  square  piano,  finished  after  his
death  by  his  sons.  The  Chickering  instrument  has
a  high  reputation  among  musicians  of  all  countries.
After  the  death  of  Jonas  Chickering,  who  was  re-
spected for  his  public  spirit  and  benevolence  not
less  than  for  his  progressive  enterprise,  the  busi-
ness was  continued  by  his  three  sons,  who,  after  re-
ceiving their  education  in  the  public  schools,  were
taken  into  the  manufactorv.— His  son,  Thomas
Edward,  b.  in  Boston,  22  Oct.,  1824;  d.  there,  14
Feb.,  1871,  succeeded  his  father  as  head  of  the  firm,
of  which  he  became  a  member  when  but  twenty-
one  years  of  age.  For  many  yeai's  before  the  war
he  was  interested  in  the  state  militia,  and  in  1862
he  left  Boston  in  command  of  the  41st  Massachu-
setts volunteers.  The  regiment  was  sent  to  New
Orleans  in  December  of  that  year,  and  performed
efficient  service  in  the  field.  In  April,  1863,  Col.
Chickering  was  appointed  military  governor  ot
Opelousas.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  was  brevet-
ted  brigadier-general.  . ,

CHIGNAVITCELUT,  Oxiqiiieb  (chig-nah-
beet-sa-loot'),  king  of  Cumarcaah,  Central  America,
flourished  early  in  the  16th  century.  After  the
Quiche  army,  ilnder  their  king,  Tecum-Uman,  mu
been  routed  by  the  forces  of  Alvarado,  who  killeu
Tecum- Uman  himself  in  battle  between  iotonica-


CHIGUAIHUE


CHILD


603


pdn  and  Utatlan  (1524),  the  Indians  intended  to
rid  themselves  of  the  invaders  by  treason.  They
feigned  to  be  peaceful,  and  called  Alvarado  into
the  city  of  Utathin.  But  when  he  saw  that  the
women'  and  children  were  not  there,  and  that  the
fortifications  were  prepared  for  immediate  service,
he  was  suspicious,  discovered  the  plot,  and  left  the
city.  He  ordered  Chignavitcelut  and  another  king,
Beiegetzi,  to  be  put  to  death,  and  subsequently  de-
feated the  Quiches  again,  when  Utatlan  was  de-
stroyed by  fire.

ChKxtJAIHUE  (chee-gwah-ee'-oo-ay),  Arauca-
nian  cacique  of  the  Biobio  tribe  in  the  Moluches
region,  Chili,  b.  in  that  valley  about  1566 ;  d.  near
Chilian  in  1606,  He  became  noted  as  a  warrior  at
the  head  of  a  tribe,  and  was  elected  chief  of  all  the
Araucanian  forces.  He  attacked,  captured,  and
destroyed  tlie  city  of  Chilian  in  August,  1604,  and
defeated  Rivera  near  Santa  Cruz,  also  destroying
this  city  in  September  of  the  same  year,  as  well  as
the  cities  of  Frontei-a,  Villarriea,  and  Valdivia  in
the  two  following  months.  Subsequently  he  over-
ran the  country  south  of  Biobio  river  and  drove
out  all  the  Spanish  colonists,  their  forts  and  gar-
risons surrendering  to  the  Indian  chieftain.  On
7  Feb.,  1605,  Chiguaihue  attacked  the  city  of  Im-
perial, defended  by  a  large  number  of  Spaniards
under  command  of  the  heroine  Ines  de  Aguilera,
and,  after  two  days'  fighting,  the  place  surrendered
to  the  Indians,  who  pillaged  and  burned  it.  Then
he  defeated  Gen.  Ramon  while  the  Spaniards  were
engaged  in  battle  with  the  "  toqui "  Huenecura  in
the  Santa  Cruz  valley,  had  other  successful  en-
counters with  the  same  Spanish  general  in  1606,
and  finally  was  routed  near  Chilian,  made  a  pris-
oner, and  executed.

CHILAM  BALAM  (che-lam'-bah-lam'),  Indian
philosopher,  great  priest  of  Tixcacayon  Cavich  at
Mani,  Yucatan,  d.  about  1430.  He  left  several
works,  of  which  a  few  fragments  only  have  reached
us,  and  composed  narratives  in  verse  that  are  still
sung  by  the  Yucatec  Indians.  He  predicted  that
foreigners  from  the  east  would  conquer  them  and
teach  them  the  true  religion  imder  the  symbol  of
tue  cross.  Herrera,  Ramesal,  Diaz  del  Castillo,
Torquemada,  and  other  authorities  refer  to  Chilam
Balam,  whose  prophecy  reads  thus :  "  At  the  end
of  the  thirteenth  age,  when  Itza  is  at  the  height  of
its  power,  as  also  the  city  of  Tancan,  .  .  .  the  sig-
nal of  God  will  appear  on  the  heights,  and  the
cross,  with  which  the  world  was  enlightened,  will
be  manifested.  There  will  be  variance  of  men's
will  in  future  tiines,  when  this  signal  shall  be
shown.  Ye  priests,  before  coming  even  a  quarter  of
a  league,  ye  shall  see  the  cross,  which  will  appear
and  lighten  up  the  sky  from  north  to  south.  The
worship  of  vain  gods  shall  cease.  Your  father
Cometh,  0  Itzalans!  Y'our  father  cometh,  0
lantumites !  Receive  your  bearded  guests  from
the  east,  who  bring  the  signal  of  the  God  who
cometh  to  us  in  mercy  and  pity.  The  time  of  our
life  is  coming.  Ye  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the
world.  Thou  art  the  living  God,  who  created  us
m  mercy.  The  words  of  God  are  good.  Let  us
lift  up  His  signal,  to  see  it  and  adore  it.  We  must
mise  the  cross  in  opposition  to  the  falsehood  we
now  see.  Before  the  first  tree  of  the  world  now  is
a  manifestation  made  to  the  world  ;  this  is  the  sig-
nal of  a  God  on  high.  Adore  this,  ye  people  of
Itza.  Let  us  adore  it  with  uprightness  of  heart.
Let  us  adore  Him  who  is  our  God,  the  true  God.
IKeceive  the  word  of  the  true  God,  for  He  who
peaketh  to  ye  cometh  from  heaven. Ponder  this

^^  u  ^"^^  ^^  ^^^®  ^"^"  °*  ^^^^'  "^^^^y  ^^'^°  believe
'hall  have  light  in  the  age  that is  to come. 1


your  teacher  and  master,  Balam,  warn  and  charge
you  to  look  at  the  importance  of  my  words.  Thus
have  I  finished  what  the  true  God  commanded  me
to  sav,  that  the  w^orld  might  hear  it."

CHILCOTT,  George  Miles,  senator,  b.  at
Trough  Creek,  Huntingdon  co..  Pa.,  2  Jan.,  1828;
d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  6  March,  1891.  He  studied
medicine  for  a  short  time,  but  adoj)ted  the  life  of
a  farmer  and  stock-raiser.  He  was  elected  sheriff
of  Jefferson  county  in  1853,  removed  to  Nebraska
in  1856,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  the
same  year  from  Burt  county.  In  1859  he  went
to  Denver,  Col,  and  in  1860  settled  in  southern
Colorado.  He  was  a  member  of  the  constitutional
convention  and  of  the  territorial  legislature  during
the  first  two  sessions,  1861-2,  In  1863  he  was  ap-
pointed register  of  the  U.  S.  land-office  for  the
Colorado  district,  and  served  four  years.  He  was
elected  a  representative  in  congress  in  1865  under
the  state  organization,  but  was  not  admitted.  In
1866  he  was  again  elected  to  congress  as  a  republi-
can, and  served  from  4  March,  1867,  till  3  March,
1869.  In  1872-4  he  was  a  member  of  the  territo-
rial council,  in  1878  of  the  legislature,  and  on  11
April,  1882,  was  appointed  U.  S.  senator  to  succeed
Henry  M.  Teller  for  the  term  expiring  in  1883.

CHILD,  David  Lee,  journalist,  b.  in  West
Boylston,  Mass.,  8  July,  1794;  d.  in  Wayland,
Mass.,  18  Sept.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1817,  and  was  for  some  tinie  sub-master  of
the  Boston  Latin-school,  He  was  secretary  of
legation  in  Lisbon  about  1820,  and  subsequently
fought  in  Spain,  "  defending  what  he  considered
the  cause  of  freedom  against  her  French  invaders."
Returning  to  this  country  in  1824,  he  began  in
1825  to  study  law  with  his  uncle,  Tyler  Bigelow,  in
Watertown,  Mass.,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar.
He  went  to  Belgium  in  1836  to  study  the  beet-
sugar  industry,  and  afterward  received  a  silver
medal  for  the  first  manufacture  of  the  sugar  in
this  country.  He  edited  the  "  Massachusetts  Jour-
nal," about  1830,  and  while  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature denounced  the  annexation  of  Texas,  after-
ward publishing  a  pamphlet  on  the  subject,  en-
titled "  Naboth's  Vineyard."  He  was  an  early
member  of  the  anti-slavery  society,  and  in  1832  ad-
dressed a  series  of  letters  on  slavery  and  the  slave-
trade  to  Edward  S.  Abdy,  an  English  philanthro-
pist. He  also  published  ten  articles  on  the  same
subject  (Philadelphia,  1836).  During  a  visit  to
Paris  in  1837  he  addressed  an  elaborate  memoir  to
the  Societe  pour  I'abolition  d'esclavage,  and  sent  a
paper  on  the  same  subject  to  the  editor  of  the
"  Eclectic  Review "  in  London.  John  Quhicy
Adams  was  much  indebted  to  Mr.  Child's  facts  and
arguments  in  the  speeches  that  he  delivered  in  con-
gress on  the  Texan  question.  With  his  wife  he
edited  the  "  Anti-Slavery  Standard  "  in  New  York
in  1843-4.  He  was  distinguished  for  the  inde-
pendence of  his  character,  and  the  boldness  with
which  he  denounced  social  wrongs  and  abuses. —
His  wife,  Lydia  Maria,  author,  b.  in  Medford,
Mass.,  11  Feb.,  1802;  d.  in  Wayland,  Mass.,  20
Oct.,  1880,  was  descended  from  Richard  Francis,
who  came  from  England  and  settled  in  Cambridge
in  1636.  Miss  Francis  attended  the  common
schools,  jand  studied  with  her  brother,  Rev.  Con-
vers  Francis,  D.  D.,  afterward  professor  in  the
divinity-school  at  Cambridge.  When  seventeen
years  of  age  she  chanced  to  read  an  article  in  the
"North  American  Review,"  discussing  the  field
offered  to  the  novelist  by  early  New  England  his-
tory. Although  she  had  never  thought  of  becoming
an  author,  she  immediately  wrote  the  first  chapter
of  a  novel  entitled  "  Hobomok,"  and,  encouraged


604


CHILD


CHILDS


by  her  brother's  commendation,  finished  it  in  six
weeks,  and  published  it  (Cambridge,  1821).  From
this  time  until  her  death  she  wrote  continually.
She  had  taught  for  one  year  in  a  seminary  in  Med-
ford,  Mass.,  and  kept  a  private  school  in  Watertown,
Mass.,  from  1824  till  1828,  when  she  was  married.
She  began,  in  1826,  the  publication  of  the  "  Juvenile
Miscellany,"  the  first  monthly  periodical  for  chil-
dren issued  in  the  United  States,  and  supervised  it
for  eight  years.  In  1831  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Child
became  deeply  interested  in  the  subject  of  slavery,
through  the  writings  and  the  personal  influence
of  William  Lloyd  Garrison.  Mrs.  Child's  "  Appeal
for  that  Class  of  Americans  called  African"  (Bos-
ton, 1888)  was  the  first  anti-slavery  work  printed
in  America  in  book-form,  and  was  followed  by
several  smaller  works  on  the  same  subject.  The
"  Appeal "  attracted  much  attention,  and  Dr.  Chan-
ning,  who  attributed  to  it  part  of  his  interest  in
the  slavery  question,  walked  from  Boston  to  Rox-
bury  to  thank  Mrs.  Child  for  the  book.  She  had  to
endure  social  ostracism,  but  from  this  time  was  a
conspicuous  champion  of  anti-slavery.  On  the  es-
tablishment by  the  American  anti-slavery  society
of  the  "  National  Anti-Slavery  Standard  "  in  New
York  city,  in  1840,  she  became  its  editor,  and  con-
ducted it  till  1848,  when  her  husband  took  the
place  of  editor-in-chief,  and  she  acted  as  his  assist-
ant till  May,  1844.  During  her  stay  in  New  York,
Mrs.  Child  was  an  inmate  of  the  family  of  Isaac
T.  Hopper,  the  Quaker  philanthropist.  After  leav-
ing New  York,
Mr.  and  Mrs.
Child  settled  in
Wayland,  Mass.,
where  they  spent
the  rest  of  their
life.  In  1859
Mrs.  Child  wrote
a  letter  of  sym-
pathy to  John
Brown,  then  a
prisoner  at  Har-
per's Ferry,  of-
fering her  ser-
vices as  a  nurse,
and  enclosing
the  letter  in  one
to  Gov.  Wise.
Brown  replied,
declining  her  offer,  but  asking  her  to  aid  his  family,
which  she  did.  She  also  received  a  letter  of  cour-
teous rebuke  from  Gov.  Wise,  and  a  singular  epistle
from  the  wife  of  Senator  Mason,  author  of  the
fugitive  slave  law,  threatening  her  with  future
damnation.  She  replied  to  both  in  her  best  vein,
and  the  whole  series  of  letters  was  published  in
pamphlet-form  (Boston,  1860),  and  had  a  circula-
tion of  300,000.  Mrs.  Child's  anti-slavery  writings
contributed  in  no  slight  degree  to  the  formation  of
public  sentiment  on  the  subject.  During  her  later
years  she  contributed  freely  to  aid  the  national
soldiers  in  the  civil  war,  and  afterward  to  help  the
freedmen.  Wendell  Phillips,  in  his  address  at
Mrs.  Child's  funeral,  thus  delineated  her  character :
"  She  was  the  kind  of  woman  one  would  choose
to  represent  woman's  entrance  into  broader  life.
Modest,  womanly,  sincere,  solid,  real,  loyal,  to  be
trusted,  equal  to  affairs,  and  yet  above  them ;  a
companion  with  the  password  of  every  science  and
all  literature."  Mrs.  Child's  numerous  books,  pub-
lished during  a  period  of  half  a  century,  include,
besides  the  works  already  mentioned, "  The  Rebels,
or  Boston  before  the  Revolution,"  a  novel  contain-
ing an  imaginary  speech  of  James  Otis,  and  a  ser-


cL ,  ^jQA^XX^ {f?litoC.


mon  by  Whitefield,  both  of  which  were  received
by  many  people  as  genuine  (Boston,  1822);  "The
First  Settlers  of  New  England"  (1829);  "The
American  Frugal  Housewife,"  a  book  of  kitchen
economy  and  directions  (1829;  38d  ed.,  1855);
"  The  Mother's  Book,"  "  The  Girl's  Own  Book,"  and
the  "  Coronal,"  a  collection  of  verses  (1881) ;  "  The
Ladies'  Family  Library,"  a  series  of  biographies
(5  vols.,  1882-'o);  "Philothea,"  a  romance  of
Greece  in  the  days  of  Pericles  (1835);  "Letters
from  New  York,"  written  to  the  Boston  "  Courier  "
(2  vols.,  1843-'o) ;  "  Flowers  for  Children  "  (3  vols
1844-'6) ;  "  Fact  and  Fiction  "  (1846) ;  "  The  Power
of  Kindness  "  (Philadelphia,  1851) ;  "  Isaac  T.  Hop-
per, a  Tiue  Life"  (1858);  "The  Progress  of  Relig-
ious Ideas  through  Successive  Ages,"  an  ambitious
work,  showing  great  diligence,  but  containing
much  that  is  inaccurate  (8  vols..  New  York,  1855);
"Autumnal  Leaves"  (1856);  "Looking  Toward
Sunset"  (1864);  the  "Freedman's  Book"  (1865);
"  Miria,  a  Romance  of  the  Republic  "  (1867) ;  and
"  Aspirations  of  the  World  "  (1878).  A  volume  of
Mrs.  Child's  letters,  with  an  introduction  by  John
G.  Whittier  and  an  appendix  by  Wendell  Phillips,
was  published  after  her  death  (Boston,  1882).

CHILD,  Francis  James,  educator,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  1  Feb.,  1825.  He  was  graduated  al
Harvard  in  1846,  and  became  tutor  there,  first  ol
mathematics  and  afterward  of  rhetoric  and  his-
tory. In  1849-'50  he  studied  and  travelled  in  Eu-
rope, and  in  1851  succeeded  Prof.  E,  T.  Channing
as  professor  of  rhetoric  and  oratory  at  Harvard,
which  chair  he  exchanged  for  that  of  English  lit-
erature in  1876.  He  has  specially  distinguished
himself  as  a  scholar  of  Anglo-Saxon  and  early
English  literature.  He  superintended  the  Ameri-
can edition  of  the  British  poets,  and  edited  himself
the  works  of  Spenser  and  the  collection  of  English
and  Scottish  ballads  (Boston,  1857-8),  besides  pre-
paring notes  and  biographical  sketches  for  other
volumes  of  the  series.  Prof.  Child  has  spent  much
time  in  English  libraries  in  studying  especially  the
text  of  Chaucer  with  reference  to  a  new  edition  of
his  poems.  He  has  also  devoted  much  labor  to
improving  and  enlarging  his  principal  work,  the
"English  and  Scottish  Ballads,"  now  (1886)  in
course  of  publication.  His  other  published  works
are  "  Four  Old  Plays  "  (1848) ;  a  collection  of  "  Po-
ems of  Sorrow  and  Comfort  "  (Boston,  1865);  and
"Observations  on  the  Language  of  Chaucer  and
Gower"  in  the  first  part  of  Ellis's  "Early  English
Pronunciation"  (London,  1869).

CHILDS,  George  WilHam,  publisher,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  12  May,  1829.  He  was  educated
at  private  schools  in  his  native  city,  and  when  but
fourteen  years  of  age  removed  to  Philadelphia.
Soon  afterward  he  became  a  clerk  in  a  book-store.
and  after  a  service  of  four  years  opened  a  small
store  of  his  own  in  the  old  "  Ledger ''  building,  at
Third  and  Chestnut  streets.  In  due  time  Mr.
Childs  became  a  publisher  of  books,  and  at  the  age
of  twenty-one  was  the  head  of  the  firm  of  Childs
&  Peterson.  He  was  successful  as  a  publisher,
and  many  works  of  intrinsic  excellence—among
them  Dr.  Allibone's  "  Dictionary  of  English  and
American  Authors " — were  given  to  the  public.
In  1863  he  retired  from  the  firm,  and  on  3  Dee.,
1864,  became  the  proprietor  of  the  "  Public  Ledger.
Philadelphia.  When  Mr.  Childs  became  owner  of
the  paper  it  was  unremunerative  and  its  circula-
tion was  small ;  but  soon  after  it  sprang  sudden  y
into  public  favor  and  became  the  most  profitable
paper  in  Philadelphia.  Mr.  Childs  has  made  lib-
eral use  of  his  wealth  for  benevolent  purposes.  At
his  own  expense  he  caused  a  stained-glass  window


CHILDS


CHILOMACON


605


to  be  placed  in  Westminster  Abbey,  in  commemo-
ration of  the  poets  William  Cowper  and  George
Herbert,  and  he  also  caused  a  monument  to  be
placed  over  the  hitherto  unmarked  grave  of  Leigh
Hunt  in  Kensal  green.  He  rendered  a  similar
service  to  the  memory  of  P^dgat  Allan  Poe,  and
was  the  largest  subscriber  to  the  funtl,  collected  in
this  country  by  Gen.  Wilson  and  in  England  by
Samuel  C.  Hall,  for  the  purpose  of  placing  a  me-
morial window  for  the  poet  Thomas  Moore  in  the
church  at  Bromham,  where  he  and  "  Bessie  "  are
Imried.  In  1868  he  gave  to  the  Philadelphia  typo-
graphical society  the  printers'  cemetery,  Wood-
lands, with  a  liberal  sum,  the  interest  of  which  is
to  be  expended  in  keeping  the  grounds  in  order.
He  presented  a  Shakespeare  memurial  fountain  to
the  city  of  Stratford-on-Avon,  England,  which
was  dedicated  in  1887,  the  ceremonies  including
a  poem  written  by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes.  Mr.
Childs's  residence  in  Philadelphia  is  one  of  the  finest
in  the  city,  and  his  generous  hospitality  is  well
known. He  was  an  intimate  friend  of  Gen.  Grant.

CHILDS,  Orville  Wliitmore,  engineer,  b.  in
Stillwater,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  Dec,  1802 ;  d.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1870.  He  was  engaged
in  the  survey  and  construction  of  the  Cham  plain
canal  improvement  in  1824-'o,  and  in  building  the
Oswego  canal  in  1826-'8,  and  in  1829-'30  made  the
survey  and  plans  for  the  improvement  of  the
Oneida  river,  which  were  subsequently  adopted,
the  work  being  finished  in  1850.  He  aided  in  the
construction  of  the  Chenango  canal  in  1833-6,  and
in  1836  began  his  labors  on  the  enlargement  of  the
Erie  canal,  acting  as  chief  engineer  of  the  middle
division,  which  extended  from  Syracuse  to  Roches-
ter. He  was  chief  engineer  of  New  York  state
works  in  1840-7,  and  in  1848  was  the  unsuccessful
democratic  candidate  for  the  office  of  state  engi-
neer, then  first  created.  He  was  chief  engineer  in
the  survey  and  construction  of  the  New  York  cen-
tral railroad,  from  Syracuse  to  Rochester,  in  1848-'9,
and  in  the  latter  year  accepted  a  like  position  at
the  instance  of  the  American  Atlantic  and  Pacific
ship  canal  co.,  of  which  Com.  Cornelius  Vander-
bilt  and  others  were  the  promoters,  and  which  had
a  grant  of  land  from  the  government  of  Nicaragua
to  build  a  ship  canal  across  that  country.  Mr.
Childs's  reports,  maps,  surveys,  and  estimates  for
this  work,  made  in  1850-2,  attracted  much  atten-
tion in  this  country  and  in  Europe,  and  have  been
of  much  use  in  subsequent  surveys.  His  route  is
still  regarded  by  many  as  the  most  feasible  one
for  a  ship  canal  across  that  isthmus.  It  extended
from  the  harbor  of  Greytown  on  the  Atlantic,
through  Lake  Nicaragua,' to  Brito  on  the  Pacific
coast.  Mr.  Childs  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Terre
Haute  and  Alton  railroad  in  1855-'8,  and  was
afterward  employed  by  the  state  to  fix  the  bounda-
ries of  the  city  and  county  of  New  York.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  was  chairman  of  the
board  of  commissioners  for  providing  proper  har-
bor defences  for  New  York.  He  removed  in  1860
from  Syracuse,  which  had  been  his  home  up  to
that  time,  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  was  interest-
ed in  the  manufacture  of  sleeping-cars,  and  in
other  railroad  enterprises.  He  was  president  of
the  Central  transportation  company  and  of  the
Philadelphia  car-works.  Mr.  Childs  contributed
nuich  to  the  literature  of  his  profession,  and  pre-
pared most  of  the  canal  reports  during  his  time.

CHILDS,  Timothy,  physician,  b.  In  Deerfield,
Mass.,  in  February,  1748;  d.  25  Feb.,  1821.  He
entered  Harvard  in  1764,  but  was  obliged  from
poverty  to  leave  in  1767,  and,  retui-ning  to  Deer-
field,  studied  medicine,  and  in  1771  began  pi-actice


I  in  Pittsfield.  He  was  commissioned  in  a  company
of  minute-men,  with  which  he  marched  to  Boston
in  April,  1775,  and  was  soon  after  appointed  surgeon
of  Col.  Patterson's  regiment,  with  which  he  went  to
New  York,  and  in  the  expedition  to  Montreal.  In
1777  he  left  the  army  and  resumed  practice  at
Pittsfield,  where  he  continued  till  his  death.  In
1792  and  for  several  years  after  he  was  a  repre-
sentative and  also  a  senator  in  the  general  court,
and  was  a  member  of  the  executive  council.  In
1811  he  was  granted  several  honorary  degrees  by
Harvard.  He  was  a  warm  supporter  of  the  demo-
cratic party. — His  son,  Henry  Halsey,  physician,
b.  in  Pittsfield,  Mass.,  7  June,  1783;  d*.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  22  March,  1868,  was  graduated  at  Williams,
studied  medicine  with  his  father,  and  was  in  part-
nership with  him  till  Dr.  Timothy's  death.  He
early  introduced  the  practice  of  vaccination  into
Pittsfield  although  meeting  with  much  opposition.
Dr.  Childs  labored  earnestly  in  1822  to  secure  from
the  legislature  a  charter  for  the  Berkshire  medical
institute  at  Pittsfield,  the  establishment  of  which  he
had  advocated  for  years,  and  when  it  was  incor-
porated in  September,  1823,  he  became  professor
of  the  theory  and  practice  of  medicine.  He  gave
himself  zealously  to  the  work  of  obtaining  an  en-
dowment, erecting  buildings,  and  procuring  a  cab-
inet and  library  for  the  institution.  It  was  at
first  connected  with  Williams  college,  and  when  it
was  detached  in  1837  Dr.  Childs  became  its  presi-
dent. On  his  retirement  in  1863  he  was  elected
professor  emeritus,  ^uring  all  this  time  he  had  a
large  medical  practice,  and  for  many  years  was  a
member  of  the  faculty  of  the  medical  colleges  at
Woodstock,  Vt.,  and  Cleveland  and  Columbus,  Ohio,
where  he  annually  gave  courses  of  lectures.  He  was
a  Jelfersonian  democrat  through  life,  and  as  such
represented  Pittsfield  in  the  legislatures  of  1816
and  1827,  Berkshire  county  in  the  constitutional
convention  of  1820,  and  was  elected  lieutenant-
governor  in  1843. — Another  son,  Thomas,  soldier,
b.  in  Pittsfield.  Mass.,  in  1796 ;  d.  in  Fort  Brooke,
Fla.,  8  Oct.,  1853,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1814,  and  was  assigned  at  once  to
the  1st  artillery.  He  was  distinguished  at  Fort
Erie  and  Niagara  in  1814,  and  made  first  lieuten-
ant, 20  April,  1818.  He  became  captain  on  1  Oct.,
1826,  and  planned  the  attack  on  the  Seininoles  at
Fort  Drane,  Fla.,  21  Aug.,  1836.  He  was  bre vetted
major  for  his  conduct  in  this  afl'air,  and  lieutenant-
colonel,  1  Feb.,  1841,  for  his  repeated  successes  in
the  Florida  war  of  1840-2.  In  the  Mexican  war
his  gallant  conduct  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la
Palma  gained  him  the  brevet  of  colonel,  9  May,
1846,  and  he  was  also  engaged  at  Monterey,  where
he  led  the  storming  party,  at  Vera  Cruz,  Cerro
Gordo,  La  Hoya,  and  the  defence  of  Puebla.  He
was  given  his  commission  as  major  of  the  1st  ar-
tillery, 16  Feb.,  1847,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general,  12  Oct.,  1847,  for  his  gallantry  at  Puebla.
He  was  military  governor  of  Jalapa  from  April  till
June,  1847,  and  of  Puebla  from  September  till  Oc-
tober, and  was  in  command  in  east  Florida  from
11  Feb.,  1852,  till  his  death.  Gen.  Scott  spoke  of
him  as  the  "  often  distinguished  Col.  Childs."

CHILOMACON,  Charles,  chief  of  the  Piscata-
way  Indians.  The  principal  town  in  his  territory
was  Kittamaqundi,  near  the  present  village  of  Pis-
cataway,  fifteen  miles  south  of  Washington,  D.  C.
When  Father  White  arrived  there  in  1639  he  was
cordially  received  by  the  chief,  who  entertained
him  hospitably  and  'consented  to  content  himself
with  one  wife  "at  his  request.  At  a  general  meet-
ing of  his  tribe,  Chilomacon  announced  his  deter-
mination to  become  a  Christian. He  then  went  to


606


CHILSON


CHIPMAN


St.  Mary's  and  solicited  baptism.  The  rite  was
postponed,  and  he  was  advised  to  return  with  his
family  the  next  year ;  but  the  ceremony  took  place
on  5  July,  1640,  in  the  presence  of  the  governor's
secretary  and  the  leading  people  of  the  settlement.
Cliilomacon  received  the  name  of  Charles,  and  his
wife  that  of  Mary,  in  honor  of  the  king  and  queen
of  England.  He"  sent  his  daughter  to  St.  Mary's  to
be  educated.  As  she  is  spoken  of  as  "  queen  of  the
Piscataways"  in  1642,  Chilomacon  probably  died
soon  after  his  baptism.

CHILSON,  (xardner,  inventor,  b.  in  Thompson,
Conn.,  in  1804;  d.  21  Nov.,  1877.  He  received  a
public-school  education,  became  apprentice  to  a
cabinet-maker  in  Stirling,  Conn.,  and  removed  to
Providence,  R.  I.,  on  coming  of  age.  He  went  to
Boston  in  1887,  and  engaged  in  the  manufacture
of  stoves  and  furnaces  at  Mansfield,  Mass.  As  early
as  1844  he  devised  a  furnace  that  received  a  prize
medal  at  the  London  world's  fair  in  1851.  Among
his  numerous  inventions  are  conical  radiators,  ap-
plied to  stoves  and  furnaces  (1854),  a  cooking-range
with  two  ovens  placed  above  the  fire,  and  arranged
so  that  either  or  both  may  be  used  (1858),  and  an
office  stove  surmounted  with  a  broad  disk,  which
radiates  heat  toward  the  floor  (1865).

CHILTON,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Garrard
county,  Ky.,  30  July,  1798  :"d.  in  Montgomery,
Texas,  15  Aug.,  1854.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Kentucky  legislature  for  several  sessions,  and  for
four  terms  a  member  of  congress  from  Kentucky,
1829-37.  While  practising  law  with  success,  he
became  a  Baptist  preacher,  removed  to  Alabama,
and  was  elected  president  of  the  Alabama  Baptist
state  convention,  and  soon  abandoned  the  law.  In
1842  he  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  in
Montgomery. He  afterward  removed  to  Texas.

CHILTON,  William  P.,  Jurist,  b.  in  Kentucky ;
d.  in  Alabama,  20  Jan.,  1871.  He  was,  at  different
times,  a  member  of  each  house  of  the  Alabama
legislature.  In  1848  he  was  elected  to  the  supreme
court  of  Alabama,  serving  (a  part  of  the  time  as
chief  justice)  for  a  term  of  ten  years.  During  the
existence  of  the  Confederate  government,  18Jl-'5,
he  was  a  member, of  its  congress.

CHIMALPAIN  QUAUTLEHUANITZIN,  the
Indian  name  of  Domingo  or  Juan  Bautista  Anton
Muiion,  who  was  a  descendant  of  the  caciques  of
Ameca  Ameca,  and  flourished  in  the  latter  part  of
the  16th  century.  He  was  of  pure  Indian  descent,
received  a  good  education,  taught  at  the  Francis-
can college  of  Santiago  Tlatelolco  of  Mexico,  de-
voted himself  to  the  study  of  the  old  Mexican  and
other  neighboring  nations,  and  wrote  several  his-
torical works  in  the  Nahuatl  and  Spanish  lan-
guages. His  principal  works  are  "  Ilistoria  meji-
cana  antigua,  que  comprende  los  sucesos  ysucesion
de  reyes  hasta  el  afio  1526  " ;  "  Cronica  de  Mejico
dcsde  el  ano  106S  hasta  el  de  1597  de  la  era  vul-
gar"; '•  Apuntamientos  de  sucesos  desde  1064  has-
ta 1521";  "Relaciones  originales  de  los  reinos  de
Aculhuacan,  Mejico  y  otras  provincias  desde  muy
remotos  tiempos  " ;  and  "  Relacion  de  la  conquista
de  Mejico  por  los  espaiioles."

CHIMALPOPOCA  (che-mal-po-po'-ca),  third
Mexican  or  Aztec  king  (fifth  king,  according  to
some  accounts),  d.  in  1423.  He  was  elected  by  the
senate  to  succeed  Huitzilihuitl  on  the  same  day
that  the  latter  king  died,  2  Feb.,  1414.  He  ad-
vised Tayauh  or  Tayatzinto  kill  his  eldest  brother,
Maxtla  or  Maxlaton,  who  had  been  recognized  heir
to  their  father  Tezozomoc,  tyrant  of  Azcapotzalco,
but  the  plot  was  discovered.  Then  Maxtla  ordered
a  feast  to  be  prepared  in  honor  of  his  brother
and Chimalpopoca,  in  order  to  have them mur-


dered together ;  but  the  latter  could  not  go,
and  Tayauh  was  the  only  one  killed  at  the  ban-
quet. Maxtla  sent  a  strong  detachment  to  Mexico
to  imprison  Chimalpopoca,  who  had  attempted  to
commit  suicide,  and  had  him  taken  to  Azcapotzal-
co, confined  in  a  wooden  cage  under  close  surveil-
lance, and  almost  starved  to  death,  when  the  pris-
oner succeeded  in  taking  his  own  life  by  hanging
from  a  beam  of  his  cage.

CHIMALPOPOCA,  tenth  king  of  Culhuacan,
flourished  early  in  the  15th  century.  He  succeed-
ed Acamapictli  II.  as  ruler  of  the  Culhuas,  and  oc-
cupied the  throne  in  1402.  He  was  the  last  king
of  their  nation,  which  afterward  became  tributary
of  Texcoco.— Chimalpopoca,  Tecpanec  king  of
Tlacopan,  flourislied  in  the  latter  part  of  the  15th
century.  He  was  the  second  king  of  Tlacopan,  hav-
ing succeeded^  Totoquiyauhtzin  I.  in  1469.

CHINCHON,  Countess  of,  Spanish  lady,  wife  of
the  viceroy  of  Peru.  While  residing  in  that  coun-
try she  became  acquainted  with  the  virtues  of  Pe-
ruvian bark,  and  when  she  returned  to  Spain,  in
1632,  took  with  her  a  quantity  of  the  medicinal
plant  and  introduced  its  use  into  Europe,  first  em-
ploying it  for  the  cure  of  malarial  fevers  about
1640.  In  honor  of  her,  Linmeus  gave  the  name
cinchona  to  the  genus  of  plants  yielding  the  bark.

CHIPMAN,  Daniel,  lawyer,  b.  in  Salisburv,
Conn.,  22  Oct.,  1765;  d.  in  Ripton,  Vt.,  23  Apnl,
1850.  In  1775  his  father  removed  to  Tinmouth,
and  Daniel  labored  on  a  farm  until  1783,  and  was
graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1788.  After  studying
law  with  his  brother  Nathaniel,  at  Rutland,  Vt.,
he  began  practice  there,  but  in  1794  removed  to
Middlebury.  He  became  distinguished  in  his  pro-
fession, and  also  in  literature;  was  made  a  member
of  the  American  academy  in  1812 ;  professor  of  law
at  Middlebury  from  1806  till  1816.  He  represented
Rutland  in  the  state  constitutional  convention  of
1793,  and  was  often  a  member  of  the  legislature
between  1794  and  1808,  when  he  was  elected  a
member  of  the  council,  and  from  1809  till  1815,
and  again  in  1818  and  1821;  speaker  in  1813-4;
member  of  congress  in  1815-7;  member  of  the
constitutional  conventions  of  1816  and  1850.  He
was  the  first  reporter  of  the  supreme  court  of
Vermont,  and  published  a  treatise  on  the  "  Law
of  Contracts"  (Middlebury,  1822);  a  volume  of
"Reports  of  the  Supreme  Court"  (1835);  biogra-
phies of  his  brother,  Nathaniel  Chipman,  with
selections  from  his  papers  (Boston,  1846) :  Seth
Warner  and  Gen.  Thomas  Chittenden  (1H49).—
His  brother,  Nathaniel,  jurist,  b.  in  Salisbury,
Conn.,  15  Nov.,  1752;  d.  in  Tinmouth,  Vt.,  15
Feb.,  1843,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1777.^  Dur-
ing his  senior  year  he  obtained  a  lieutenant's  com-
mission in  the  American  armv,  was  on  duty  at
Valley  Forge  in  the  winter  of  1777-8,  and  was
present  at  the  battles  of  Monmouth  and  White
Plains.  Resigning  his  commission  in  October,
1778,  he  removed  to  Litchfield,  Conn.,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  March,  1779.  He  then  re-
moved to  Tinmouth,  Vt.,  was  a  member  of  the
Vermont  legislature  in  1784-'5,  a  Judge  of  the
state  supreme  court  in  1786,  and  chief  justice  in
1789.  In  that  year  he  was  one  of  the  commis-
sioners on  behalf  of  Vermont  to  adjust  differences
with  New  York,  and  in  1791  to  negotiate  the  ad-
mission of  Vermont  into  the  Union.  In  l<Jl  he
was  appointed  by  Washington  Judge  of  the  U.  b.
district  court  of  Vermont,  which  he  resigned  in
1793;  in  October,  1796,  was  again  chosen  chiet
Justice  of  the  supreme  court,  and  at  the  same
time  was  appointed  one  of  a  committee  to  revise
the statutes, the duties  of which  were almost


CHIPMAJT


CHISOLM


607


wholly  performed  by  him.  Tie  was  U.  S.  senator
from  1797  till  1803;"from  1806  till  1811  was  a  rep-
resentative to  the  state  legislature ;  in  1818  he  was
one  of  the  council  of  censors ;  in  1813-5  was  once
more  chief  justice  of  the  supreme  court ;  and  was

Srofessor  of  law  at  Middlebury  from  181G  until  his
eath.  He  published  "  Sketches  of  the  Principles
of  Government"  (1793)  and  a  small  volume  of
"  Reports  and  Dissertations."  In  1826  he  revised
the  laws  of  Vermont.  His  life  was  written  by  his
brother  Daniel  (Boston,  1846).

CHIPMAN,  Henry,  jurist,  b.  in  Vermont  in
1785;  d.  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  27  April,  1867.  He
was  liberally  educated,  studied  law,  and  when
quite  young  removed  to  South  Carolina,  where  he
practised  his  profession  until  1824,  when  he  was
appointed  a  U.  S.  judge  for  the  territory  of  Michi-
gan by  President  Monroe.  From  this  date  until
his  death  he  resided  in  Detroit.

CHIPMAN,  Ward,  loyalist,  b.  in  Massachu-
setts in  1754 ;  d.  in  Frederickton,  New  Brunswick,
in  1824.  He  was  the  son  of  a  member  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts bar,  and  during  the  revolutionary  war
was  deputy  muster-master  general  at  New  York.
At  the  close  of  the  war  he  removed  to  New  Bruns-
wick, and  for  his  loyalty  to  the  British  government
was  rewarded  with  offices  of  trust  and  profit  and  a
pension  of  £96  per  annum.  In  1796  he  was  ap-
pointed agent  before  the  commission  to  determine
the  St.  Croix  treaty  of  1783.  In  1816,  under  the
treaty  of  Ghent,  he  was  agent  for  the  crown  to  lo-
cate the  northwest  angle  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  sub-
sequently became  administrator  of  the  government
of  New  Brunswick,  and  was  acting  in  this  capacity
when  he  died. — His  son.  Ward,  chief  justice  of
New  Brunswick,  b.  in  St.  John,  N.  B.,  10  July,
1787;  d.  in  that  city,  26  Dec,  1851,  was  educated
at  St.  John,  and  at  Harvard,  where  he  was  gnidu-
ated  in  1805,  receiving  therefrom  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  in  1836.  On  his  father's  death,  in  1824,  he
succeeded  to  his  seat  on  the  bench  and  in  the
council,  and  also  to  the  more  lucrative  place  of
agent  for  the  crown  in  determining  the  northwest
angle  of  Nova  Scotia.  In  1825  he  was  appointed
by  the  British  gov^ernment  umpire  to  apportion
the  customs  duties  between  Upper  and  Lower
Canada,  and  again  in  1833  was  assigned  a  similar
service.  In  1829  he  visited  the  Hague  in  connec-
tion with  his  work  of  determining  the  northwest
angle  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  ceased  thereafter  to  act
in  this  capacity,  the  boundary  difficulty  having
been  amicably  settled.  He  held  successively  the
offices  of  advocate-general  and  clerk  of  the  cir-
cuits; recorder  of  St.  John  and  solicitor-general;
became  puisne  judge  of  the  supreme  court  on  18
March,  1825,  and  was  appointed  chief  justice  on  29
Sept.,  1834.  He  was  also  president  of  the  legisla-
tiv^e  council  and  speaker  of  the  assembly,  and  was
noted  for  his  liberal  donations  to  advance  the  in-
terests of  religion  and  education.

CHISHOLM,  William,  inventor,  b.  in  Loch-
gelly,  Fifesliire,  Scotland,  12  Aug.,  1825.  He  was
apprenticed  to  a  dry-goods  merchant  in  Kircaldy
at  the  age  of  twelve,  but  abandoned  that  occupa-
tion three  years  later,  and  was  for  seven  years  a
sailor.  In  1847  he  settled  in  Montreal,  (Canada,
and  became  a  builder  and  contractor.  In  1852  he
removed  to  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  his  brother
Henry  had  settled.  He  removed  to  Pittsburg
and  remained  there  until  1857,  when  he  returned
to  join  his  brother  in  the  Cleveland  rolling-mills.
He  withdrew  from  the  active  management  of  that
corporation  two  or  three  years  later,  engaged  in
the  manufacture  of  spdies,  bolts,  and  horseshoes,
and,  after  demonstrating  by  experiments  the  prac-


ticability of  the  manufacture  of  screws  from  Bes-
semer steel,  organized  the  Union  steel  company  of
Cleveland,  which  began  operations  in  1871.  He
afterward  devised  new  methods  and  machinery
for  manufacturing  steel  shovels,  spades,  and  scoops,
and  established  a  factory  for  the  new  industry  in
1879.  In  1882  he  began  to  make  steam-engines  of
a  new  model,  adapted  for  hoisting  and  pumping,
and  transmitters  for  carrying  coal  and  ore  between
vessels  and  railroad  cars.

CHISOLM,  William  Wallace,  b.  in  Morgan
county,  Oa.,  6  Dec,  1830;  d.  in  De  Kalb,  Miss.,  13
May,  1877.  In  1847  the  fainily  removed  to  Kemper
CO.,  Miss.  In  1851  the  father  died,  leaving  William  as
the  head  of  the  family.  In  1856  he  married  Emily,
daughter  of  John  W.  Mann,  of  Florida,  through
whose  aid  he  made  good  the  deficiencies  of  his
early  education.  In  1858  Mr.  Chisolm  was  elected
justice  of  the  peace,  and  in  1860  probate  judge,  an
office  which  he  filled  by  successive  re-elections  till
1867.  Until  the  secession  of  the  slave  states  be-
came an  accomplished  fact.  Judge  Chisolm  was  a
pronounced  Union  man,  and  only  wavered  for  a
short  time  during  the  height  of  the  contagious  ex-
citement that  prevailed  in  1861.  During  the  civil
war,  although  known  as  a  "  whig  and  a  unionist,"
he  was  continued  in  office  from  term  to  term,  a
sure  evidence  of  popular  trust.  But  he  was  looked
upon  with  suspicion  by  the  Confederate  authorities,
to  whom  his  unionist  sentiments  were  well  known.
The  local  history  of  the  period  immediately  fol-
lowing the  cessation  of  hostilites  embraces  a  series
of  violent  crimes.  The  newly  enfranchised  negroes
naturally  fraternized  with  the  few  white  unionists,
to  form  the  nucleus  of  a  republican,  or,  as  it  was
then  known,  a  "  radical "  party ;  and  by  their  votes
Chisolm  was  elected  sheriif.  His  duties  often
brought  him  into  direct  conflict  with  his  political
opp(ments,  and  his  life  was  constantly  in  danger.
In  November,  1873,  he  was  re-elected  sheritf  for
two  years,  and  the  county,  under  his  leadership,
became  the  stronghold  of  the  republican  p.arty  in
Mississippi.  After  the  expiration  of  his  term  as
sheriff  he  was  nominated  for  congress,  but  was  de-
feated in  1876.  In  the  spring  of  1877,  John  W.
Gully,  a  leading  democrat,  was  shot  and  killed  not
far  from  Judge  Chisolm's  house,  and  warrants
were  issued  for  Chisolm's  arrest,  with  several  of  his
republican  associates,  as  accessory  to  the  crime.
At  this  time  the  Ku-klux  organization  was  at  the
height  of  its  power,  and  all  night  preceding  the
expected  arrest  armed  horsemen  rode  into  the  town
of  De  Kalb.  On  the  morning  of  Sunday,  30  April,
1877,  the  sheriff  served  the  warrants,  and  Judge
Chisolm's  family,  consisting  of  his  wife,  three  sons,
and  a  daughter,  insisted  upon  accompanying  him
to  jail.  In  the  mean  time  Gilmer,  one  of  the  other
arrested  republicans,  had  been  killed  by  the  mob
while  on  the  way  to  the  same  jail  in  charge  of  a
sheriff's  deputy.  A  short  time  afterward  a  staunch
friend  of  Chisolm's,  Angus  McLellan,  who  had  reso-
lutely guarded  the  Chisolm  party  on  their  way  to
jail,  was  in  turn  shot  down  as  he  left  the  prison,  at
the  sheriff's  request,  to  go  to  his  own  house.  By  this
time  the  guards  had  withdrawn,  leaving  the  jail
undefended,  and  the  mob,  excited  by  the  death  of
the  sturdy  Scotsman,  began  to  batter  in  the  doors
to  gain  access  to  the  chief  victim,  Chisolm  armed
himself  with  one  oE  the  guns  left  by  his  faithless
guards.  As  the  door  gave  way,  his  little  son  John,
a  boy  of  thirteen,  threw  himself  into  his  father's
arms,  where  he  was  killed  by  a  shot  from  the  leader
of  the  assailants.  Dropping  his  son's  body,  Chisolm
instantly  shot  and  killed  the  assassin,  and  the  mob
fell  back  panic-stricken  for  the  time,  and  fired  only


608


CHITTENDEN


CHOATE


random  shots.  Outside  the  cry  was  raised,  "  Burn
them  out ! "  and,  believing'  that  the  jail  was  on  fire,
the  Chisolm  party,  descended  the  stairs,  the  mother
and  an  elder  son  bearing  the  body  of  the  boy  be-
tween them,  the  father  following  with  his  daughter
Cornelia,  a  girl  of  eighteen,  who  had  already  been
wounded  by  chance  shots.  As  soon  as  Chisolm
came  within  sight  of  the  mob  he  was  fired  upon,
and  fell  so  severely  wounded  that  he  was  believed
to  be  dead.  The  daughter  received  additional
wounds  at  this  time,  and,  with  blood  streaming
from  her  face  and  arms,  walked  through  the  crowd,
beside  her  father,  who  was  borne  to  his  house,  not
far  distant,  and  died  in  about  two  weeks,  from  the
effect  of  his  wounds.  The  daughter  died  two  days
later,  her  wounds  proving  more  serious  than  was
at  first  supposed.  At  the  September  term  of  the
county  court  the  leaders  of  the  mob  were  indicted,
having  in  the  mean  time  been  at  large,  but  none
of  them  were  ever  punished  for  their  part  in  these
murders.  No  evidence  was  ever  adduced  connect-
ing either  Chisolm  or  his  associates  with  the  assas-
sination of  Gully ;  but  the  local  newspapers  repeat-
edly justified  the  mob.  The  commonly  accepted
explanation  of  the  affair  is,  that  Chisolm  had  so
organized  the  recently  freed  and  enfranchised  ne-
groes that  he  controlled  the  elections  in  favor  of
the  republican  party — a  state  of  things  to  which
the  democrats  of  the  vicinity  refused  to  submit.
In  December,  1877,  Walter  Riley,  a  negro,  con-
fessed the  murder  of  Gully,  and"  was  hanged  for
the  crime,  but  denied  that  Judge  Chisolm  and  his
associates  instigated  the  act.  See  "  The  Chisolm
Massacre,  a  Picture  of  Home  Rule  in  Mississippi,"
by  James  M.  Wells  (Washington,  1878),  giving  the
Republican  view  of  the  case,  and  "  Kemper  County
Vindicated,"  giving  the  Democratic  side.

CHITTENDEN,  Russell  Henry,  chemist,  b.
in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  18  Feb.,  185G.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  of  Yale
in  1875,  and  also  studied  at  the  University  in  Hei-
delberg. In  1876  he  became  instructor  of  chemis-
try in  the  Sheffield  school,  in  1880  received  the  de-
gree of  Ph.  D.  for  his  researches,  and  in  1882  be-
came professor  of  physiological  chemistry.  Prof.
Chittenden  has  made  numerous  investigations  in
the  domain  of  physiological  chemistry,  the  results
of  which  have  appeared  in  the  "  American  Chemi-
cal Journal,"  "Journal  of  Physiology,"  "Zeit-
sehrift  fur  Biologic,"  and  other  periodicals.  He
has  also  edited  the  "  Studies  from  the  Laboratory
of  Physiological  Chemistry  of  the  Sheffield  Scien-
tific School  of  Yale  College "  (New  Haven,  1885
et  seq.),  and  has  been  called  on  to  testify  as  an  ex-
pert in  important  criminal  cases.

CHITTENDEN,  Simeon  Baldwin,  merchant,
b.  in  Guilford,  Conn.,  29  March,  1814 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  14  April,  1889.  He  entered  a  store  at
New  Haven,  Conn.,  removed  to  New  York  in  1843,
and  engaged  in  mercantile  pursuits.  He  was  vice-
president  of  the  New  York  chamber  of  commerce
from  1807  till  1869;  was  one  of  the  directors  in
the  Continental  bank  and  in  the  Continental  fire
insurance  company;  a  director  in  the  Delaware,
Lackawanna  and  Western,  and  other  railroads;
and  president  of  the  New  Haven  and  New  London
shore  line  railroad  of  Connecticut.  Pie  was  elected
a  member  of  congress  from  Brooklyn  to  fill  a  va-
cancy, taking  his  seat  7  Dec.  1874,  and  was  twice
re-elected  as  an  independent  republican.  Mr.  Chit-
tenden gave  liberally  to  the  Long  Island  historical
society  and  other  institutions.  In  1887  he  gave
|125,()00  to  Yale  for  a  library  building.

CHITTENDEN,  Thomas,  first  governor  of
Vermont,  b.  in  East  Guilford,  Conn.,  6  Jan.,  1730;


d.  in  Williston,  Vt.,  24  Aug.,  1797.  He  removed
to  Salisbury  at  the  age  of  twenty,  and  was  many
years  representative,  and  justice  of  the  peace,  but
in  May,  1774,  emigrated  to  the  New  Hampshire
grants,  as  Vermont  was  then  called,  and  settled  at
Williston,  on  Onion  river.  During  the  controversy
with  New  York,  and  the  war  of  the  revolution,  he
was  assiduously  engaged  in  the  councils  of  his
state,  to  which  he  rendered  great  service.  He  was
a  member  of  the  convention  which,  16  Jan.,  1777,
declared  Vermont  an  independent  state ;  and  was
appointed  one  of  the  committee  to  communicate
to  congress  the  proceedings  of  the  inhabitants,  and
to  solicit  admission  into  the  Union.  He  was  a
member  of  the  convention  at  Windsor,  2  July,
1777,  which  framed  the  first  constitution  of  Ver-
mont ;  and  president  of  the  council  of  safety,
which  was  vested  with  all  the  powers  of  govern-
ment. Under  the  constitution  established  in  1778,
he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state,  and,  with  the
exception  of  one  year,  filled  that  office  until  his
death.  In  the  difficult  position  in  which  Gov.
Chittenden  was  placed,  contending  for  independ-
ence on  the  one  hand,  and  unacknowledged  by  con-
gress as  a  state,  in  consequence  of  the  claims  of
New  York  upon  the  other,  a  profound  policy  was
requisite.  To  prevent  invasion,  hopes  were  held
out  to  the  British  of  a  return  to  its  allegiance  to
the  king,  while  the  possibility  of  her  deserting
the  American  cause  operated,  in  congress,  to  pre-
vent her  being  required  to  submit  to  the  claims  of
New  York.  A  memoir  of  him,  with  a  history  of
the  constitution  of  Vermont  during  his  adminis-
tration, was  published  by  Daniel  Chipman  (1849).
— His  son,  Martin,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in
Salisbury,  Conn.,  12  March,  1769;  d.  in  Williston,
Vt.,  5  Sept.,  1841,  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in
1789.  In  May,  1776,  the  family  removed  to  Willis-
ton, Vt.,  but  during  the  same  year  took  up  their
abode  in  the  southern  part  of  the  state,  where  they
remained  until  the  close  of  the  war.  Owing  to
feeble  health,  he  devoted  himself  to  agriculture,  of
which  he  was  exceedingly  fond,  at  Jericho,  in
Chittenden  co.  He  was  a  member  of  the  conven-
tion that  adopted  the  U.  S.  constitution ;  was  in
1790  elected  county  clerk  and  representative,  to
which  station  he  was  re-elected  for  six  successive
years,  and  also  at  occasional  subsequent  intervals.
He  was  judge  of  the  county  court  in  1793-'5;
chief  judge  in  1796-1803;  and  was  a  member  of
congress  from  1803  till  1813,  and  judge  of  probate
in  1821-2.  At  the  age  of  thirty-three  he  had  at-
tained the  rank  of  major-general  of  militia.  He
was  governor  of  Vermont  in  1813  and  1814,  and
during  the  war  with  England  refused  to  comply
with  the  requisition  of  Gen.  Macomb  for  the  state
militia.  This  act  was  severely  commented  upon,
and  prevented  his  re-election.

CHOATE,  Rufns,  lawyer,  b.  in  Essex,  Mass.,  1
Oct.,  1799;  d.  in  Halifax.  Nova  Scotia,  13  July,
1859.  His  earliest  ancestor  in  this  country  was
John  Choate,  who  became  a  citizen  of  Massachu-
setts in  1667.  The  grandson  of  this  first  ancestor,
also  named  John,  was  a  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature  from  1741  till  1761,  and  for  the
next  five  years  a  member  of  the  council.  His  son,
David,  was  a  man  of  strong  character  and  unusual
intellectual  endowments.  Though  not  trained  to
the  law,  on  one  occasion,  when  he  had  a  suit  pend-
ing in  court  and  his  counsel  happened  to  be  ab-
sent, he  took  up  the  case  himself,  exammed  his
witnesses,  tore  to  shreds  the  testimony  of  the  other
side,  made  a  sound  and  eloquent  argument,  and
won  the  case.  David  married  Miriam  Foster,  a  |
woman  of  strong  sense  and  ready  wit,  and  had


CIIOATE


CHOATE


several  children,  of  whom  Rufus  Choate  was  one.
The  father  died  in  1808,  when  Rufus  was  but  nine
years  old :  the  mother  lived  to  witness  the  noble
career  of  her  son,  and  died  in  1853.  As  a  boy,
Rufus  was  strong,  active,  and  precocious.  Before
he  was  six  years  old  he  had  become  so  familiar
with  ''  Pilgrim's  Progress  "  as  to  repeat  from  mem-
ory large  portions  of  it ;  and  before  he  was  ten  he
had  devoured  most  of  the  volumes  in  the  little  vil-
lage library.  He  was  extremely  fond  of  reading
the  Bible. '  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  with
the  valedictory  in  1819.  For  scholarship  and  for
command  of  language  he  was  already  remarkable.
In  comparison  with  his  translations  from  Latin
and  Greek,  said  Ira  Perley,  who  was  one  of
his  classmates,  all  other  construing  done  in  the
class  "seemed  the  roughest  of  unlicked  babble."
In  1818  Mr,  Choate  was  greatly  affected  by  the
magnificent  speech  of  Daniel  Webster  in  the  Dart-
mouth college
case,  and  was
confirmed  in  his
inclination  to-
ward the  study
of  law.  After
graduation  he
spent  one  year  as
tutor  at  Dart-
mouth, and  then
entered  the  law-
school  at  Cam-
bridge. In  1821
he  removed  to
the  office  of  Will,
iam  Wirt,  then
attorney  -  gener-
al of  the  United
States,  at  Wash-
ington. There
he  saw  Marshall
on  the  bench  of
the  supreme  court,  and  heard  William  Pinkney  in
the  senate.  In  the  autumn  of  1822  he  returned
to  Massachusetts  and  pursued  his  studies  at  Ips-
wich, and  then  for  a  while  at  Salem.  In  1823  he
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  opened  an  office  in
Danvers,  where  he  remained  five  years.  In  1825
he  married  Miss  Helen  Olcott,  of  Hanover,  N.  H.
In  1828  he  removed  to  Salem,  and  in  1830  was
elected  member  of  congress,  where  he  distinguished
himself  the  next  year  by  a  speech  on  the  tariff.
He  was  re-elected  in  1832*  but  resigned  at  the  end
of  the  winter  session  of  1834,  and  removed  to  Bos-
ton, where  he  soon  took  a  foremost  place  as  an
■advocate.  At  the  same  time  he  paid  much  atten-
tion to  literary  studies,  and  occasionally  delivered
lectures  on  literary  and  historical  subjects.  In
1841  Daniel  Webster  accepted  the  office  of  secre-
tary of  state  under  President  Harrison,  and  Mr.
Choate  was  elected  to  his  place  in  the  U.  S.  senate.
Among  his  most  brilliant  speeches  as  senator  were
those  on  the  Oregon  boundary,  the  tariff,  the  fiscal
bank  bill,  the  Smithsonian  institution,  and  the
annexation  of  Texas,  which  he  opposed.  In  1845,
Mr.  Webster  having  been  re-elected  to  the  senate,
Mr.  Choate  returned  to  Boston  and  resumed  the
practice  of  his  profession.  In  the  summer  of  1850
he  travelled  in  Europe,  visiting  England,  Belgium,
I^  ranee,  Switzerland,  and  German v.  He  was  a
delegate  to  the  Whig  national  convention  at  Balti-
more in  June,  1852,  and  urged  the  nomination  of
Webster  for  the  presidency.  In  the  following
year  he  took  an  important  part  in  the  Massachu-
setts convention  for  revising  the  constitution  of
the  state.  In  the  presidential  canvass  of  185G  he
VOL.  I.— 39


/  L^  C/^wY^^A.^-^


supported  Mr,  Buchanan.  During  the  two  troubled
years  that  followed.  Mr.  Choate  took  a  warm  inter-
est in  national  politics,  and  made  a  few  speeches.
His  health,  which  had  been  for  some  time  failing,
gave  way  early  in  1859,  and,  by  the  advice  of  his
physicians,  he  sailed  for  Europe,  accompanied  by
his  son.  On  reaching  Halifax,  where  the  steamers
then  regularly  stopped,  he  became  convinced  that
it  was  useless  to  try  to  go  farther.  He  took  lodg-
ings in  the  town,  hoping  to  recover  enough  strength
to  get  back  to  Boston,  but  in  a  few  days,  after  a
delusive  appearance  of  improvement,  suddenly
died.  Mr.  Choate's  love  of  literary  pursuits  en-
dured to  the  end.  He  was  extremely  fond  of  poet-
ry, and,  being  endowed  with  an  extraordinary  ver-
bal memory,  could  repeat  hundreds  of  favorite
verses.  He  took  an  especial  interest  in  Greek  lit-
erature, and  at  one  time  even  contemplated  devot-
ing his  leisure  hours  to  writing  a  history  of  Greece ;
but  he  abandoned  this  project  on  seeing  the  early
volumes  of  Grote's  great  work.  In  many  respects
he  was  the  most  scholarly  of  all  American  public
men.  He  was  tall,  dignified,  and  graceful,  with  a
face  at  once  rugged  and  mobile,  and  unusually  ex-
pressive. His  voice  was  sympathetic  and  musical.
He  had  an  almost  unrivalled  power  over  his  audi-
ences. He  rarely  indulged  in  invective,  as  it  was
unsuited  to  his  sweet  and  gentle  nature,  but  ex-
celled in  quaint  humor.  No  one  could  put  things
in  a  more  ridiculous  light ;  but  it  was  done  so  deli-
cately that  the  object  of  his  ridicule  could  not  help
joining  in  the  laugh.  From  light  and  airy  banter
he  could  pass  in  an  instant  into  grand  and  solemn
moods.  His  urbanity  was  exquisite.  "  The  very
manner  in  which  he  would  pronounce  your  name,"
said  a  much  younger  lawyer,  who  had  knowm  him
well,  "  was  in  itself  the  most  delicate  of  compli-
ments," This  personal  magnetism  combined  with
his  wealth  of  learning  and  his  strong  sense  place
him  among  the  greatest  forensic  advocates  that
America  has  produced.  He  may  fairly  be  ranked
as  the  equal  of  Lord  Erskine,  His  writings  were
edited,  with  a  memoir,  by  S.  G..  Brown  (2  vols.,
Boston.  1862).  See  also  "  Recollections  of  Eminent
Men,"  by  Edwin  P.  Whipple  (Boston,  1886).— His
brother,  David,  jurist,  b.  in  1796;  d.  in  Essex,
Mass.,  15  Dec,  1872,  served  in  both  branches  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature.  He  held  the  office  of
trial  justice  for  many  years  in  Essex,  and  was  an  ac-
tive supporter  of  benevolent  institutions. — Rufus,
son  of  Rufus  Choate,  soldier,  b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in
1834 :  d.  15  Jan.,  1866,  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1855.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Boston  in
1858,  and  in  1861  entered  the  National  service  as
second  lieutenant.  He  took  part  in  the  battles  of
Winchester,  Cedar  Mountain,  and  Antietam,  but,
after  being  promoted  to  a  captaincy,  was  forced
to  resign  in  1862,  from  failing  health.

CHOATE,  Joseph  Hodgres,  lawyer,  b.  in  Sa-
lem, Mass.,  24  Jan.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1852,  and  at  the  Dane  law-school  in
1854.  In  the  year  following  he  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  Massachusetts,  and  in  1856  in  New
York,  since  which  time  he  has  practised  in  New
York  city.  Mr.  Choate  was  counsel  for  Gen.  Fitz
John  Porter  in  the  protracted  investigation  in
West  Point,  before  the  board  of  officers  appointed
by  President  Hayes,  which  resulted  in  the  reversal  .
of  the  judgment  of  the  original  court-martial.  He
also  defended  the  celebrated  Cesnola  case  (see  Ces-
nola).  Mr.  Choate  for  many  years  was  president
of  the  Union  league  club,  and  of  the  New  England
society,  in  New  York,  and  was  a  member  of  the
"  committee  of  seventy,"  and  took  part  in  the
municipal  canvass  of  1871,  which  resulted  in  the


610


CHOISI


CHRISTIAN


overthrow  of  the  ring  that  had  phindered  the  city
treasury.  He  has  delivered  addresses  on  social,
charitable,  and  other  occasions.  —  His  brother,
William  Gardiner,  b.  in  Massachusetts  about
1830,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1852,  and  at
the  Dane  law-school  in  1854.  For  some  time  he
was  U.  S.  judge  of  the  southern  district  of  New
York,  an  office  which  he  resigned  to  resume  the
practice  of  his  profession  in  New  York  city.

CHOISI,  Claude  Gabriel  de,  French  soldier,
d.  about  1795.  He  entered  the  army  as  a  common
soldier,  16  June,  1741.  and  became  an  officer  by
merit.  He  followed  Baron  Viomenil  to  Poland,
where  he  greatly  distinguished  himself  by' his  de-
fence of  the  castle  of  Cracow,  early  in  1772.  He
accompanied  Rochambeau  and  Viomenil  to  this
country  in  1780,  where  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown,
in  October,  1781,  he  commanded  a  brigade  with
which  he  invested  Gloucester,  Va.,  and  on  3  Oct.,
with  Lauzun's  cavalry,  attacked  and  defeated  Tar-
leton's  legion.  For  his  attachment  to  the  king,  he
was  imprisoned  during  the  reign  of  terror,  and
probably  died  soon  afterward.  See  •'  Lettres  par-
ticulieres  du  Baron  de  Viomenil "  (Paris,  1808).

CHOULES,  John  Overton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Bristol,  England,  5  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  5  Jan.,  1850.  His  parents  were  Wesleyans,
but  he  became  a  member  of  the  Baptist  church  in
1819.  After  graduation  at  the  Baptist  divinity
school  in  Bristol,  he  came  to  the  United  States  in
1824.  He  supplied  various  churches  in  the  vicin-
ity of  New  York  city,  and  became  in  the  spring  of
1825  principal  of  an  academy  at  Red  Hook,  on  the
Hudson.  He  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  2d
Baptist  church,  Newport,  R.  I.,  in  September,  1827,
took  charge  of  the  1st  church  in  New  Bedford,
Mass.,  in  1833,  and  of  the  Washington  street
church,  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1837.  He  was  settled
over  the  Sixth  street  church.  New  York  city,  in
1841,  at  Jamaica  Plain,  near  Boston,  in  1843,  and
in  1847  became  pastor  for  the  second  time  of  his
old  church  in  Newport.  Dr.  Choules  was  a  per-
sonal friend  of  Daniel  Webster,  and  delivered  a
sermon  in  his  memory  at  Newport,  21  Nov.,  1852.
He  had  mingled  with  various  English  celebrities
in  his  youth,  and  was  intimate  with  the  most  culti-
vated public  men  of  his  day.  He  was  very  success-
ful as  a  teacher,  and  had  a  few  pupils  under  his
charge  at  his  home  during  most  of  his  life.  One
of  his  specialties  was  old  Puritan  literature,  of
which  he  had  a  fine  collection  in  his  library.  He
published  "  Young  Americans  Abroad,"  a  descrip-
tion of  a  vacation  tour  with  his  pupils,  and  "  The
Cruise  of  the  Steam  Yacht  North  Star,"  a  narra-
tive of  a  pleasure  excursion  to  Europe  with  Corne-
lius Vanderbilt  (Boston,  1853).  He  also  completed
Smith's  "  History  of  Missions  "  (2  vols.,  New  York,
1832),  continued  Hinton's  "  History  of  the  United
States  "  to  1850,  and  edited  various  works.

CHOUTEAU,  Aiiguste,  pioneer,  b.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  in  1739;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  24
Feb.,  1829.  He  and  his  younger  brother  Pierre
were  the  founders  of  the  city  of  St.  Louis,  and
their  lives  were  closely  connected. — His  brother,
Pierre,  b.  in  New  Orleans  in  1749 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
9  July,  1849.  The  brothers  joined  the  expedition
of  Pierre  Ligueste  Laclede,  who  had  been  commis-
sioned by  the  director-general  of  Louisiana  to  es-
tablish the  fur  trade  in  the  region  west  of  the  Mis-
sissippi. Auguste,  the  elder,  was  given  command
of  the  boat  by  Laclede.  They  left  New  Orleans  in
August,  1763.  and  three  months  later  reached  the
settlement  of  St.  Genevieve.  In  the  winter  they
ascended  the  river  sixty-one  miles  farther,  and  se-
lected a  spot  on  the  western  bank  for  their  princi-


pal trading-station,  naming  it  St.  Louis.  A  party
under  the^charge  of  Auguste  Chouteau  began  op-
erations here,  15  Feb.,  1764.  Speaking  of  the
brothers  in  his  "  Sketch  of  the  Early  History  of  St.
Louis,"  Nicollet  observes :  "  These  two  young  men]
who  never  afterward  quitted  the  country  of  their
adoption,  became  in  time  the  heads  of  numerous
families,  enjoying  the  highest  respectability,  the
comforts  of  an  honorably  acquired  affluence,  the
fruit  of  their  own  industry,  and  possessed  of  a
name  which  to  this  day  (1842),  after  a  lapse  of  sev-
enty years,  is  still  a  passport  that  commands  safety
and  hospitality  among  all  the  Indian  nations  of
the  United  States,  north  and  west." — Pierre  Chou-
teau's son,  Pierre,  merchant,  b.  in  St.  Louis,  19
Jan.,  1789 ;  d.  there,  8  Sept.,  1865,  became  clerk
for  his  father  and  uncle  when  fifteen  years  of  age,
and  also  began  business  on  his  own  account  early
in  life.  Following  the  Indians  from  point  to  point
as  they  receded,  he  at  different  times  occupied  the
places  where  now  are  St.  Joseph,  Kansas  City,
Belleview,  Council  Bluffs,  Fort  Pierre,  Fort  Ber-
thold,  Fort  Union,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Yellowstone,
and  Fort  Benton,  at  the  head  of  navigation  of  the
Missouri.  He  also  established  trading-posts  along
the  Osage  river,  and  on  the  Mississippi,  from
Keokuk  to  St.  Paul.  About  1806  he  visited  Du-
buque in  canoes,  to  trade  with  the  Sac  and  Fox
Indians,  who  then  inhabited  that  country.  He
was  associated  with  several  other  heavy  dealers  in
furs,  among  whom  was  John  Jacob  Astor.  In  1834
he  and  his  associates  purchased  Mr.  Astor's  in-
terest in  the  American  fur  company,  and  in  1889
formed  the  company  that,  under  the  firm-name  of
P.  Chouteau,  Jr.,  &  Co.,  extended  its  trade  as  far
south  as  the  Cross  Timbers  of  Texas,  as  far  north-
west as  the  Blackfeet  country,  and,  at  one  time,  as
far  north  as  the  falls  of  St.  Anthony.  The  trade
with  Santa  Fe  was  also  in  its  hands.  As  a  neces-
sity, Mr.  Chouteau  was  drawn  into  extended  opera-
tions, not  only  with  eastern  cities,  but  in  England
and  on  the  continent,  and  he  lived  for  many  years
in  New  York  city.  He  represented  his  county  in
the  convention  that  adopted  the  first  constitution
of  Missouri ;  with  this  exception,  he  invariably  re-
fused to  take  any  part  in  politics. — Auguste,  an-
other son,  also  an  Indian  trader,  acquired  great  in-
fluence among  the  tribes  of  the  northwest,  and  was
distinguished  for  probity  and  integrity.  He  nego-
tiated numerous  Indian  treaties.  His  wife  was  a
daughter  of  Lieut.-Gov.  Menard,  of  Kaskaskia.

CHRISTIAN,  Joseph,  jurist,  b.  in  Middlesex
county,  Va.,  10  J  uly,  1828.  He  was  graduated  at  Co-
lumbian college,  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1847.  Before
and  during  the  war  he  was  a  member  of  the  senate  of
Virginia,  and  at  its  close  he  was  made  a  district
judge,  and  soon  advanced  to  the  supreme  court  of
appeals.  His  name  has  been  prominent  as  a  candi-
date for  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  also  for  the  supreme
court  of  the  United  States.  In  1872  Columbian
conferred  on  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.

CHRISTIAN,  William,  soldier,  b.  in  Berkeley
county,  Va.,  in  1732 ;  d.  in  June,  1782.  He  removed
with  "his  parents  to  Pennsylvania,  served  against
Pontiac,  was  a  captain  in  Forbes's  expedition
against  Fort  Duquesne  in  1758,  served  with  Dun-
more  against  the  Seiotos,  and  settled  at  BraddocK  s
Ford,  on  the  Youghiogheny  river,  in  1768.  He  was
intimate  with  Washington,  and  raised  and  com-
manded a  regiment  during  the  Revolutionary  war.
After  the  ravages  committed  in  1776  on  the  west-
ern border  districts  by  the  Cherokees,  Creeks,
Chickamaguas,  Choctaws,  Delawares,  Mingoes,  ana
Shawnees,  incited  by  Capt.  Stuart,  the  British  In-
dian agent,  he  was  ordered  by  Patrick  Henry,  gov-


CIIRISTIANCY


CHRISTOPHE


611


emor  of  Virginia,  to  assemble  the  border-men  and
descend  upon  Oconostota,  the  Cherokee  chief,  who
was  encamped  on  the  Tellico.  He  was  accompa-
nied by  John  Sevier  with  a  band  of  scouts.  The
Indians  dispersed  without  fighting,  but  their  towns
and  crops  were  destroyed,  and  all  the  males  in  one
village  were  killed  by  the  scouts.  In  1782  he  re-
luctantly accepted  the  command  of  an  expedition
to  lavage  the  Wyandotte  and  Moravian  Indian  set-
tlements on  the  Muskingum,  and  was  taken  pris-
oner and  put  to  death  by  torture.

CHRISTIANCY,  Isaac  Peckham,  senator,  b.
in  Johnstown  (now  lileecker),  N.  Y.,  12  JMarch,  1812 ;
d.  in  Lansing,  Mich.,  8  Sept.,  1890.  He  received
a  limited  education,  and  when  thirteen  years  old
became  the  main  support  of  his  father's  family.
After  teaching  school  he  studied  law  with  John
Maynard  till  1886,  when  he  removed  to  Monroe,
Mich.,  and,  on  the  completion  of  his  law  studies,
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  He  was  prosecuting
attorney  for  Monroe  county  from  1841  till  1840,
and  in  1848  was  a  delegate  to  the  Buffalo  free-soil
convention,  having  left  the  democratic  party  on
the  question  of  slavery.  He  was  a  member  of  the
state  senate  from  1850  till  1852,  and  in  the  latter
year  was  the  free-soil  candidate  for  governor.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  republican  party  in
Michigan,  and  was  a  delegate  to  its  first  national
convention  in  Philadelphia  in  1856.  He  purchased
the  Monroe  "  Commercial "  in  1857,  and  became  its
editor,  and  in  the  same  year  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  U.  S.  senator.  He  was  elected  a
judge  of  the  State  supreme  court  in  1857,  re-
elected in  1865  and  1873,  both  times  without  oppo-
sition, and  became  chief  justice  in  January,  1872.
He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1875,  and,  resigning
in  February,  1879,  on  account  of  ill  health,  was
sent  as  minister  to  Peru,  where  he  remained  for
two  years.  During  the  civil  war  Judge  Christiancy
was  for  a  time  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Custer  and  that
of  Gen.  A.  A.  Humphreys.  His  judicial  opinions,
which  are  to  be  found  in  the  "  Michigan  Reports  "
from  volumes  5  to  31,  inclusive,  contain  the  best
work  of  his  life.

CHRISTIE,  David,  statesman,  b.  in  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  in  October,  1818.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Edinburgh  high  school,  and  removed  to
Canada  in  1833.  He  was  sworn  of  the  privy
council,  7  Nov.,  1873,  and  was  secretary  of  state
from  that  date  until  9  Jan.,  1874,  when  he  was  ap-
pointed speaker  of  the  senate,  which  office  he  held
until  October,  1878.  During  the  illness  of  Lieut.-
Gov.  Crawford  in  1875  he  was  appointed  adminis-
trator of  the  government  of  Ontario  for  a  short
period,  but  was  not  sworn  in  in  consequence  of
the  death  of  the  lieutenant-governor.  In  May,
1867,  he  was  called  to  the  senate.  Mr.  Christie
has  been  president  of  the  Agricultural  association
of  Upper  Canada,  of  the  new  Agricultural  and
arts  association  of  Ontario,  of  the  Dominion  coun-
cil of  agriculture,  and  of  the  American  short-horn
breeders'  association.  He  sat  for  many  years  in
the  senate  of  Toronto  university.

CHRISTIE,  Gabriel,  British  soldier,  d.  in
Montreal,  Canada,  in  November,  1798.  He  became
captain  in  the  48th  foot,  13  Nov..  1754,  and  com-
manded at  Albany  in  the  summer  of  1757.  He
served  at  the  siege  of  Louisburg  in  1758,  became
major,  7  April,  1759,  deputy  quartermaster-gen-
eral in  America  on  14  Aug.,  and  entered  Canada
with  the  British  army  in  1760.  He  was  made
brevet  lieutenant-colonel.  27  Jan.,  1762,  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  60th  royal  Americans,  24  Dec,  1768,
^Ji^^^  transferred  to  the  1st  battery,  18  Sept.,
1775. He  was  appointed  quartermaster-general  in


Canada,  2  April,  1776,  made  brevet  colonel,  29
April,  1777,  colonel  of  the  2d  battery,  14  May,
1778,  lieutenant-general,  12  Oct.,  1793,  and  gen-
eral, 1  Jan.,  1798.  Gen.  Christie  was  proprietor  of
Isle  Aux  Noix  in  Richelieu  river,  north  of  Lake
Champlain,  and  of  several  seigniories  in  the  vicin-
ity. He  afterward  sold  the  island  to  the  crown.

CHRISTIE,  John,  soldier,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1786;  d.  in  Fort  George,  Canada,  22  July,  1813.
He  was  graduated  at  Columbia  in  1806,  and
studied  law,  but  entered  the  army,  3  May,  1808,  as
first  lieutenant  of  the  6th  infantry,  lie  became
captain  in  February,  1809,  and  resigned  on  15
Nov.,  1811,  but  re-entered  the  service,  and  on  12
March,  1812,  became  lieutenant  of  the  13th  in-
fantry. He  was  wounded  in  the  assault  on  Queens-
town  heights,  13  Oct.,  1812,  where  he  commanded
the  regular  troops,  and  displayed  great  courage
and  skill,  but  was  compelled,  after  a  heroic  strug-
gle, to  surrender  to  an  overwhelming  force.  He
was  made  colonel  of  the  23d  infantry,  12  March,
1813,  and  inspector-general,  with  the  rank  of
colonel,  18  March,  1813.

CHRISTIE,  Robert,  Canadian  author,  b.  in
Nova  Scotia  in  1788 ;  d.  in  Quebec,  13  Oct.,  1856.
He  was  a  member  of  the  provincial  legislature,  and
author  of  a  "  History  of  Lower  Canada  "  (6  vols.,
Montreal,  1866).  He  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  Quebec  "■  Gazette  "  and  "  Mercury."

CHRISTOPHE,  Henri  (cris-toaf),  king  of
Hayti,  b.  6  Oct.,  1767 ;  d.  16  Oct.,  1820.  Accord-
ing to  the  best  accounts,  he  was  born  in  the  island
of  Grenada,  British  West  Indies ;  others  say  in  St.
Christopher,  St.  Croix,  or  Santo  Domingo.  He
was  the  son  of  a  free  mulatto  and  a  slave  negress,
and  his  master  took  him  to  Santo  Domingo  and
sold  him  to  an  innkeeper  at  Cape  Haytien  in  1791.
He  worked  at  the  inn  as  a  waiter  or  cook,  and,  by
saving  whatever  money  was  given  to  him,  bought  his
freedom  and  opened  a  butcher-shop.  Other  au-
thorities say  that,  after  serving  in  the  American
war,  and,  receiving  a  wound  at  the  siege  of  Savan-
nah, he  went  to  Santo  Domingo  and  was  employed
on  the  plantation  of  Limonade,  displaying  as  an
overseer  his  characteristic  severity.  When  the  up-
rising of  the  blacks  occurred  in  Hayti,  he  took  a
decided  part  in  favor  of  independence,  and  in  1794
was  chief  of  a  band  of  insurgents,  signalizing  him-
self by  activity  and  boldness.  Toussaint  I'Ouver-
ture  confirmed  the  appointment  of  Christophe  as
brigadier  -  general,  which  he  first  had  obtained
when  sent  to  quell  an  insurrection  in  the  northern
province  of  the  island,  and,  being  successful  in  this,
he  was  also  appointed  governor  of  that  part  of  the
country.  He  held  that  command  when  a  French
army  under  Leclerc  arrived  in  1802,  subjugated
the  negroes,  and  declared  Christophe  and  Dessa-
lines  outlaws.  The  revolution  for  independence
was  renewed  in  1803,  and  at  the  close  of  1805  no
French  force  remained  in  the  island.  Christophe
was  general-in-chief  during  the  short  administra-
tion of  Dessalines,  and  after  his  death  was  ap-
pointed president  for  life  by  an  assembly  convened
at  Cape  Haytien.  But  the  "southern  portion  of  the
island  had  organized  another  republic,  under  Pe-
tion,  and  a  civil  war  ensued,  which  lasted  eleven
years,  Christophe  heading  the  party  of  the  negroes
against  the  mulattoes.  He  caused  himself  to  be
proclaimed,  28  March,  1811,  king  of  Hayti,  and
was  crowned,  2  June,  1812,  as  Henry  I.,  at  Cape
Haytien.  He  organized  a  hereditary  monarchy
and  nobility,  and  governed  the  country,  in  a  des-
potic manner,  for  nine  years.  He  promulgated  a
code  compiled  from  that  of  Napoleon,  but  judi-
ciously adapted  to  the  wants  of  Hayti,  and  called


612


CHRISTY


CHURCH


it  "  Code  Henri."  A  revolution  broke  out  against
Christophe,  whose  stern  rule  was  not  liked  by  the
negroes,  after  the  death  of  Petion  in  1818;  and
even  his  body-guard  was  implicated,  and  on  8
Oct.,  1820,  the  principal  military  chiefs  declared
in  favor  of  the  dethronement  of  Christophe.  Irri-
tated at  this,  and  unwilling  to  surrender  to  the
revolutionists,  but  knowing  that  his  case  was  des-
perate, he  shot  himself,  in  his  fortified  palace  of
Sans  Souci, — His  eldest  son,  Ferdinand,  had  been
sent  as  a  hostage  to  France  by  Gen.  Leclerc,  and
died  there  in  a  hospital. — His  second  son,  Jacques
Victor,  was  murdered  by  the  insurgents  a  few
days  after  his  father's  death. — His  widow  was  pro-
tected by  Boyer,  the  new  ruler,  and  allowed  a  large
sura.  She  went  to  Europe,  and,  after  travelling  in
England  and  Germany,  settled  in  Pisa.

CHKISTY,  Edwin  P.,  minstrel,  b.  in  1815 ;  d.
in  New  York  city,  21  May,  1862.  He  organized  the
original  "  Christy's  Minstrels"  in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in
1842,  and  was  afterward  their  manager.  He  took
the  troupe  to  London,  met  with  great  success  both
here  and  there,  and  retired  with  a  fortune  in
•  1854.  He  jumped  from  a  second-story  window  in
New  York,  when  temporarily  insane,  and  the  in-
juries so  received  caused  his  death. — Georg-e  N.
Christy,  whose  real  name  was  George  Harrington,
b.  in  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  6  Nov.,  1827 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  12  May,  1868,  made  his  first  appearance  in
Buffalo  in  1839,  under  E.  P.  Christy's  manage-
ment. After  the  organization  of  the  Christy  min-
strels he  was  the  star  of  the  troupe,  and  was  the
original  "  Lucy  Long "  and  "  Cachuca."  E.  P.
Christy's  sons/ E.  Byron  (1838-66)  and  William
A.  (1839-62),  were  also  members  of  the  troupe.

CHRISTY,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Georgetown,
Ky.,  6  Dec,  1791.  He  began  practice  in  1811,
served  under  Harrison  in  the  war  of  1812,  and  be-
came a  merchant  in  New  Orleans.  He  resumed
his  law  practice  before  1826,  and  in  the  presiden-
tial campaign  of  1840  was  a  ready  and  frequent
speaker  in  behalf  of  Gen.  Harrison.  He  published
a  "  Digest  of  the  Decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court
of  Louisiana  "  (1826).

CHRYSLER,  Morg^an  Henry,  soldier,  b.  in
Ghent,  Columbia  co.,  N.  Y.,  30  Sept.,  1826.  He
received  a  common-school  education  in  his  native
town,  and  has  been  a  farmer  nearly  all  his  life.
He  enlisted  as  a  private  soldier  in  the  30th  New
Y'ork  volunteers  on  17  April,  1861,  was  promoted
to  captain  on  7  May,  to  major  on  11  March,  1862,
and  to  lieutenant-colonel  on  30  Aug.,  serving  in
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  mustered  out
in  1863,  went  home,  and  in  fifty-five  days  raised,
by  his  own  efforts,  the  2d  New  York  veteran  cav-
alry, 1,176  men,  three  quarters  of  them  being  vet-
erans from  the  old  "  Iron  Brigade."  He  was  com-
missioned its  colonel  on  5  Dec,  1863,  and  till  8
Nov.,  1865,  served  in  the  Army  of  the  Gulf,  com-
manding all  the  troops  in  northern  Alabama,  with
headquarters  at  Talladega,  and  opening  communi-
cation with  Selma  and  Montgomery.  He  was
present  at  the  capture  of  Mobile,  with  its  surround-
ing defences,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,  23
Jan.,  1864,  and  made  brigadier-general  of  volun-
teers and  brevet  major-general  on  13  March,  1865.

CHUBBUCK,  Samuel  W.,  inventor,  b.  in  Ver-
mont in  1800 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  28  June,  1875.
At  an  early  age  he  removed  to  Eaton,  Madison  co.,
N.  Y.,  and  went  to  Utica  about  1845,  where  he  es-
tablished a  shop  for  the  manufacture  of  telegraph
instruments.  He  made,  it  is  said,  the  first  tele-
graphic instrument  ever  manufactured.  One  of
his  inventions  was  that  by  which  the  paper  on  the
reel  could  be  used  forty  times. The  circuit-closer


attachment  to  the  key,  and  the  famous  "pony"
sounder,  were  also  invented  by  him.  He  was  a
collector  of  coins  and  scientific  instruments,  and
at  one  time  had  a  coin  collection  valued  at  $30,000

CHURCH,  Albert  E.,  author,  b.  in  Salisbury!
Conn.,  in  1807 ;  d.  in  West  Point,  N.  Y.,  30  March,
1878.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military
academy  in  1828,  and  was  commissioned  second
lieutenant  in  the  3d  regiment  of  artillery.  He
served  as  assistant  professor  of  mathematics  at  the
military  academy  from  31  Aug.,  1828,  till  28  Aug.,
1831,  was  in  garrison  at  Fort  Wolcott,  R.  I.,  1832,
and  at  Fort  Independence,  Mass.,  in  1832-3.  He
was  appointed  assistant  professor  of  mathematics
at  West  Point,  24  Nov.,  1833,  and  served  in  this
capacity  until  1  June,  1837,  when  he  became  act-
ing professor  of  mathematics,  and  in  March,  1838,
professor,  retaining  the  chair  till  his  death.  The
degree  of  LL.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him  by  Y'ale
in  1852.  His  works  are  "  Elements  of  Differential
and  Integral  Calculus "  (1842 ;  new  ed.,  contain-
ing the  "  Elements  of  the  Calculus  of  Variations,"
1851);  "  Elements  of  Analytical  Geometry"  (1851);
"Elements  of  Analytical  Trigonometry"  (1857);
and  "  Elements  of  Descriptive  Geometry  (1865).

CHURCH,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  in  Duxbury,
Mass.,  in  1639 ;  d.  in  1718,  He  took  an  active  part
in  King  Philip's  war,  was  engaged  in  the  great
swamp  fight  with  the  Narragansetts,  19  Dec,  1675,
and  hunted  Philip  to  death  12  Aug.,  1676.  He
published  "  Entertaining  Passages  relating  to
Philip's  War"  (1716).

CHURCH,  Benjamin,  political  writer  and  ora-
tor. He  rose  to  eminence  as  a  physician  in  Boston,
and  became  a  friend  of  Samuel  Adams.  In  1768-'9
he  wrote  for  the  "  Times,"  a  newspaper  devoted  to
the  whig  cause  and  denounced  as  seditious  by  Gov.
Bernard.  Dr.  Church  was  held  in  high  esteem  by
the  patriot  leaders,  but  was  secretly  a  waverer.
From  a  letter  of  Gov.  Hutchinson,  dated  29  Jan.,
1772,  we  learn  that  Church  was  then  anonymously
employing  his  venal  pen  in  the  service  of  the  gov-
ernment. This  was  not  suspected  by  the  patriots,
and  Church  was  chosen  to  deliver  the  oration  in  the
Old  South  meeting-house  on  5  March,  1 773.  He  was
one  of  the  leaders  in  the  Boston  tea-party.  At  the
beginning  of  war  he  was  appointed  by  the  provincial
congress  surgeon-general  and  director  of  hospitals.
In  November,  1775,  some  cipher  letters  of  his  were
intercepted  and  interpreted  by  Elbridge  Gerry,  and
it  was  found  that  he  had  been  for  some  time  m
treasonable  correspondence  with  the  enemy.  He
was  examined  before  the  Massachusetts  legislature,
found  guilty  of  treason,  and  sentenced  to  imprison-
ment for  life.  As  he  fell  sick  in  prison  his  sentence
was  mitigated,  and  he  was  allowed  to  leave  the  coun-
try. He  embarked  for  the  West  Indies,  and  the
ship  in  which  he  sailed  was  never  heard  from  agam.

CHURCH,  Frederic  Edwin,  painter,  b.  m
Hartford,  Conn.,  4  May,  1826.  When  quite  youi^
he  became  a  pupil  of  Thomas  Cole  at  Catskill,  iS.
Y.,  where  his  first  pictures  were  painted.  He  early
established  himself  in  New  York,  and  in  1849  was
elected  a  member  of  the  National  academy,  in
1853  and  1857  he  visited  South  America,  and  made
many  sketches  of  tropical  and  Andean  scenery,
which  he  afterward  developed  into  large  pictures^
Several  years  later  an  expedition  to  the  coast  ot
Labrador  gave  him  material  for  his  great  picture
entitled  "  Icebergs,"  which  attracted  much  atten-
tion on  its  exhibition  in  London  m  1863.  In  i»oo
he  visited  the  West  Indies,  and  two  years  later  J^u-
rope  and  the  Holv  Land,  which  resulted  in  impoi-
tant  works.  His  best-known  work  is  the  brreai
Fall  at  Niagara,"  painted  from  the  Canada  siae


CHURCH


CHURCH


613


1857,  which  was  sold  at  the  John  Taylor  Johnston
sale  in  New  York,  1876,  for  |12,500,  to  the  Corcoran
gallery,  Washington.  It  was  exhibited  through-
out the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  was  awarded
a  medal  of  the  second  class  at  the  Exposition  uni-
verselle,  Paris,  in  1807.  Mr.  Church  has  studios  in
New  York  and  in  Hudson,  but  generally  spends
his  winters  in  Mexico.  Plis  principal  works  are
"Andes  of  Ecuador"  (1855);  "Niagara"  (1857);
«  Heart  of  the  Andes  "  (1859) ;  "  Icebergs  "  (1861) ;
"Cotopaxi"  (1862):  "Chimborazo"  (1864);  "St.
Thomas  in  the  Vale,  Jamaica " ;  "  Niagara,  from
the  American  Side  "  (1866) ;  "  Damascus  "  (1869) ;
"Rainy  Season  in  the  Tropics";  "Jerusalem"
(1870);  "The  Parthenon"  (1871);  "El  Khasna
Petra"  (1872);  "Tropical  Moonlight"  (1874);
"  JGgean  Sea  " ;  "  Valley  of  Santa  Ysabel "  (1875) ;
"El  Ayn"  (1876);  "Morning  in  the  Tropics"
(1877) ;  "  The  Monastery  "  (1878) ;  and  "  Valley  of

Santa  Marta"(l«''9)-

CHURCH,  Frederick  S.,  painter,  b.  in  Grand
Rapids,  Mich.,  in  1842.  Pie  received  his  art-edu-
cation in  the  National  academy.  New  York,  and
the  Chicago  academy.  He  paints  in  oil  and  water-
color,  and  draws  in  black  and  white,  and  has  fur-
nished many  illustrations  for  books  and  periodi-
cals. He  is  a  member  of  the  National  academy
(1885),  and  of  the  Society  of  American  artists.  His
studio  is  in  New  York.  His  principal  works  are
"  Sea  Princess  " ;  "  Back  from  the  Beach  "  (1879) ;
"  Muskrat's  Nest "  (1880) ;  "  Foggy  Day  "  (1881) :
"  A  Willing  Captive  "  (1883) ;  "  Retaliation  "  (1884) ;
"  Peacocks  in  the  Snow  "  (1885) ;  "  The  Sorceress  " ;
and  "  Pegasus  Captured  "  (1886).

CHURCH,  Levi  Ru^^les,  Canadian  statesman,
b.  in  Aylmer,  26  May,  1836.  He  is  a  grandson  of
Jonathan  Mills  Church,  who,  at  the  beginning  of
the  Revolutionary  war,  espoused  the  royalist  side,
and  was  taken  prisoner  in  1777.  Subsequently  he
effected  his  escape  to  Canada,  and  ultimately  set-
tled at  Brockville.  Levi  Ruggles  Church  was  edu-
cated at  Victoria  university,  Cobourg,  graduated
in  medicine  at  Albany  medical  college,  and  at
McGill  university,  where  he  took  primary,  final,
and  thesis  prizes.  He  afterward  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  of  Lower  Canada,  and  was  ap-
pointed queen's  counsel  in  1874.  On  22  Sept.,  1874,
he  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  executive  coun-
cil of  Lower  Canada,  and  was  attorney-general
from  that  date  until  transferred  to  the  treasurer-
ship  on  27  Jan.,  1876.  He  held  the  latter  office
until  the  ministry  was  dismissed  by  the  lieutenant-
governor,  Luc  Letellier  de  St.  Just,  in  1878.  Dur-
ing the  summer  of  1876  he  visited  England  on
financial  business,  and  successfully  negotiated  a
large  provincial  loan.  He  is  a  member  of  the  law
firm  of  Fleming,  Church  &  Kenney,  Aylmer,  and
is  a  conservative  in  politics.

CHURCH,  Pharcelliis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Sene-
ca, near  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  11  Aug.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Tarry-
town,  N.  Y.,  5  June,  1886.  He  was  graduated  at
Madison  university  in  1824,  where,  in  1847,  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  After  studying  the-
ology, he  was  ordained  and  held  pastorates"in  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  New  Orleans,  La.,  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
Boston,  Mass.,  and  elsewhere.  He  edited  the  "  New
York  Chronicle"  from  1854  till  1865,  and  con-
tinued to  the  end  of  his  life  one  of  the  proprietors
of  the  "  Examiner,"  with  which  that  paper  was
consolidated.  He  went  to  Europe  in  1846  as  a
egate  to  the  Evangelical  alliance,  and  resided
abroad  for  several  years.  After  his  retirement  as
editor,  he  engaged  in  linguistic  and  other  studies.
While  at  Rochester  he  originated  the  movement
that  resulted  in  the establishment  of Rochester


university,  and  otherwise  was  a  conspicuous  figure
in  western  New  York.  In  Boston  he  was  an  asso-
ciate editor  of  the  "Watchman  and  Reflector."
Until  his  death  he  was  busy  with  literary  work,
his  efforts  being  directed  more  especially  to  the
promotion  of  Christian  union.  Dr.  Churcli's  pub-
lished works,  besides  many  sermons  and  addresses,
were  "Philosophy  of  Benevolence"  (New  York,
1836) ;  a  prize  essay  on  "  Religious  Dissensions :
their  Cause  and  Cure"  (1838);  "Antioch;  or  In-
crease of  Moral  Power  in  the  -Church  "  (Boston,
1843) ;  "  Life  of  Theodosia  Dean  "  (1851) :  "  Maple-
ton  ;  or  More  Work  for  the  Maine  Law"  (1852);
and  "  Seed  Truths ;  or  Bible  Views  of  Mind,  INlorals,
and  Religion  "  (New  York  and  Edinburgh,  1871). —
His  son,  WiUiam  Conant,  ptiblisher,  b.  in  Roch-
ester, N.  Y.,  11  Aug.,  1836,  removed  to  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1848,  and  completed  his  education  at  the
Boston  Latin-school  in  1851.  In  1853  he  removed
to  New  York  and  engaged  with  his  father  in  edit-
ing and  publishing  the  "  New  York  Chronicle,"
afterward  merged  with  the  "  Examiner,"  in  which
he  retained  a  proprietary  interest.  He  became  the
publisher  of  the  New  York  "  Sun "  in  1860,  and
served  as  war  correspondent  of  the  New  York
"  Times "  during  1861-'2,  until  his  appointment,
on  4  Oct.,  1862,  as  captain  of  U.  S.  volunteers.  He
received  the  brevets  of  major  and  lieutenant-colonel
on  11  March,  1865.  In  1882  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  commissioners  to  inspect  the  Northern  Pa-
cific railroad.  In  1863,  with  his  brother  Francis,
he  established  the  "  Array  and  Navy  Journal,"  of
which  he  is  at  present  editor  and  proprietor,  and
in  1866  the  "  Galaxy  "  magazine.  He  has  contrib-
uted to  the  "  Century "  and  other  magazines.- —
Another  son,  Francis  Pharcelliis,  editor,  b.  in
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  22  Feb.,  1839,  was  graduated  at
Columbia  in  1859,  and,  after  studying  law,  became
one  of  the  editors  and  publishers  of  the  "Army
and  Navy  Journal,"  and  later,  with  his  brother,
founded  and  edited  the  "  Galaxy  "  magazine.  He
is  also  a  leading  editorial  writer  for  New  York
daily  Journals, — Another  son,  John  Adams,  min-
ing engineer,  b.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y,,  5  April,  1843,
was  graduated  at  the  Columbia  school  of  mines  in
1867.  The  years  1868-'70  were  spent  in  study  in
Europe,  and  on  his  return  he  served  as  professor
of  mineralogy  and  metallurgy  pro  tern,  in  the  School
of  mines,  and  as  editor  of  the  "  Engineering  and
Mining  Journal "  during  1872-'4.  In  1878,  while
attached  to  the  U.  S.  geographical  and  geological
survey  west  of  the  100th  meridian,  he  examined  the
Comstock  silver  lode  in  Nevada  (his  result  being
printed  privately),  and  was  elected  professor  of
mining  and  metallurgy  in  the  State  university  of
Ohio,  at  Columbus.  He  became  superintendent
for  the  Tombstone  mill  and  mining  company  at
Tombstone,  Arizona,  in  1881,  and  has  since  been
engaged  as  a  mining  engineer.  He  has  published
"The  Mining  Schools  of  the  United  States"  (a
pamphlet.  New  York,  1871) ;  "  Notes  on  a  Metal-
lurgical Journal  in  Europe"  (1873);  "The  Com-
stock Lode  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Report  upon  the  Strik-
ing of  Artesian  Water,  Sulphur  Spring  Valley,
Arizona  "  (published  by  the  territory,  1883).

CHURCH,  Sanford  Elias,  jurist,  b.  in  Milford,
Otsego  CO.,  N.  Y.,  18  April,  1815 ;  d.  in  Albion,  N.
Y.,  14  May,  1880.  He  received  an  academic  edu-
cation, studied  law,  and  settled  in  Albion.  In
1842  he  was  a  member  of  the  state  assembly  from
Orleans  co.,  and  from  that  time  he  was  active  in
the  support  of  the  democratic  party.  He  was  dis-
trict attorney  for  his  county  in  1846-7,  lieutenant-
governor  in  1851-5,  comptroller  of  the  state,
1858-'9,  and  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional


614


CHURCHILL


CHURRUCA  Y  ELORZA


convention  of  1867,  serving  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  finance.  He  was  an  unsuccessful
candidate  for  congress  in  1862,  and  for  comptroller
in  1863.  The  State  constitutional  convention  of
1867  reorganized  the  old  court  of  appeals  by  creat-
ing a  new  court  composed  of  a  chief  judge  and  six

,  associate  judges,
each  to  hold  of-
fice for  fourteen
years  from  1  Jan.
after  his  election.
Tlie  first  judges
were  chosen  at  a
special  election
held  in  May,  1870,
and  Mr.  Church
was  elected  chief
judgeofthecourt.
In  this  capacity
he  served  for  ten
years,  until  his
death.  As  a
politician.  Judge
Church  belonged
to  the  school  of
William  L.  Marcy
and  Silas  Wright.
His  honesty  and  conservatism  were  proverbial,  and
they  nearly  won  for  him  the  nomination  for  the
presidency  of  the  United  States.  His  political
power  throughout  western  New  York  was  remark-
able. As  a  jurist  his  opinions  were  distinguished
by  solidity  rather  than  brilliancy.  He  was  never
an  advocate,  and  he  shrank  from  publicity.  On
the  bench  he  was  as  courteous  to  the  humble  attor-
ney as  to  the  most  eminent,  and  no  one  ever  charged
that  his  earlier  political  activity  warped  in  the
slightest  degree  his  decisions.

CHURCHILL,  Sylvester,  soldier,  b.  in  Wood-
stock, Vt.,  2  Aug.,  1783 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,
7  Dec,  1862.  He  was  educated  in  the  schools  of
his  native  place,  became  a  journalist,  and  published
in  Windsor,  in  1808,  a  weekly  democratic  newspa-
per, "The  Vermont  Republican."  He  served  in
the  war  of  1812-5,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  of
artillery  in  March,  1812;  in  August,  1813,  was
made  captain  of  a  company  raised  by  himself.  He
rendered  effective  service  on  Burlington  heights
in  protecting  Macdonough's  fleet  when  it  was
attacked  while  undergoing  repairs,  became  assist-
ant inspector-general,  29  Aug.,  1813,  and  was
ordnance  officer  under  Gen.  Wade  Hampton,  serv-
ing as  such  till  the  end  of  the  war.  He  was  in  the
attack  on  La  Colle  Mill,  was  subsequently  on  the
staff  of  Gen.  Izard,  and  acting  adjutant-general
to  Gen.  Macomb  at  Plattsburg.  He  became  major
of  the  3d  artillery,  6  April,  1835,  served  during
the  war  with  the  Creek  Indians,  acted  as  inspector-
general  of  the  Creeks  and  in  Florida  from  July,
1836,  till  1841,  and  was  appointed  inspector-gen-
eral, 25  June,  1841.  He  accompanied  Gen.  Wool
in  the  Mexican  war,  and  was  promoted  brevet
brigadier-general,  23  Feb.,  1847,  in  recognition  of
his  services  at  the  battle  of  Buena  Vista.  He  was
retired  from  active  service,  25  Sept.,  1861. — His
eldest  son,  Capt.  William,  b.  about  1820,  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1840,
and  died  at  Point  Isabel  in  1847.

CHURCHMAN,  Johu,  preacher,  b.  in  Notting-
ham, Pa.,  4  June,  1705;  d.  there,  24  July,  1775.
He  began  his  career  as  a  preacher  of  the  Society  of
Friends  in  1733,  preached  throughout  New  Eng-
land in  1742,  in  New  York  in  1743,  and  again  in
1774.  He  travelled  and  preached  through  Eng-
land,  Scotland,  Wales, Ireland, and Holland  in


1750-'4,  and  in  1775  visited  the  eastern  shore  of
Maryland.  He  was  distinguished  for  his  piety  and
ability  as  a  preacher.  A  narrative  of  his  life  and
labors  was  published  in  London  in  1780.

CHURCHMAN,  John,  author,  b.  in  Maryland;
d.  at  sea,  24  July,  1805.  He  belonged  to  the  Society
of  Friends,  and  was  noted  for  his  investigations
into  the  causes  of  the  variations  of  the  magnetic
needle.  In  addition  to  several  philosophical  trea-
tises, he  also  published  a  variation-chart  of  the
globe,  magnetic  atlas,  and  explanation  (Philadel-
phia, 1790 ;  London,  1794).  He  was  a  member  of
the  Imperial  academy,  Russia,  and  was  presented
with  a  set  of  its  transactions.  He  died  on  the
passage  home  from  Europe.

CHURCHMAN,  William  H.,  educator,  b.  in
Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1818.  He  became  a  pupil  of
the  Pennsylvania  institution  for  the  blind  in  1836,
and  progressed  so  rapidly  in  his  studies  that  he
soon  acquired  a  good  knowledge  of  mathematics,
and  became  proficient  in  music.  In  1839  he  began
teaching  music  in  Pennsylvania,  and  in  1840  was
appointed  an  assistant  teacher  of  music  and  other
branches  in  the  institution  for  the  blind  at  Cohim-
bus,  Ohio.  In  1844  he  became  principal  of  the  re-
cently established  Tennessee  institution  for  the
blind,  but  resigned  after  two  years,  in  consequence
of  failing  health.  He  was  chosen  superintendent
of  the  Indiana  institution  for  the  blind  at  Indian-
apolis in  1847,  and  resigned  in  1853,  having  greatly
distinguished  himself  for  the  ability  displayed  in
the  discharge  of  his  duties.  In  1854  he  established
a  young  ladies'  seminary  at  La  Porte,  Ind.,  but,
after  it  had  been  in  successful  operation  a  little
over  a  year,  the  buildings  were  burned.  Shortly
afterward  he  was  appointed  superintendent  of  the
Wisconsin  institute  for  the  blind  at  Janesville.

CHURRUCA  Y  ELORZA,  Cosme  Damidn
de  (chu-ru'-kah),  Spanish  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mo-
trico,  province  of  Guipuzcoa,  27  Sept.,  1761 ;  d.  in
Trafalgar,  21  Oct.,  1805.  He  distinguished  him-
self at  the  siege  of  Gibraltar  in  rescuing  survivors
from  the  floating  batteries  after  it  had  been  de-
stroyed by  the  English.  He  accompanied  a  Span-
ish surveying  ex-
pedition to  the
strait  of  Magellan,
and  wrote  a  diary
of  his  exploration
of  Tierra  del  Fue-
go  (Madrid,  1793).
In  1791,  being  then
in  command  of  a
frigate,  he  was
placed  at  the  head
of  an  expedition  to
survey  the  coasts
of  the  gulf  of  Mex-
ico. The  war  be-
tween Spain  and
France  interrupt-
ed this  work ;  but
he  had  completed
twenty-four  charts
of  the  coasts  of
Cuba,  Hayti,  Porto
Rico,  etc.,  some  of
which  have  been
published.  He  was  r>  f  k

afterward  sent  as  an  envoy  to  Brest.  In  OctoDer,
1805,  he  was  in  command  of  the  ship  "San  Juan
Nepomuceno  "  at  Cadiz,  and  shortly  before  the  bat-
tle of  Trafalgar  wrote  to  a  friend:  "If  J;OU  hear
that  my  ship  is  taken,  know  for  certain  that  l  am
dead." In  that  battle,  his  leg  having  been  stiot


CHUTE


CILLEY


615


away  by  a  cannon-ball,  he  put  the  mutilated  limb
in  a' barrel  full  of  flour  to  check  the  hemorrhage,
and  in  that  condition  continued  at  his  post  for
three  hours,  when  he  died.  His  flag  was  nailed  to
the  mast.  The  British  have  carefully  preserved  the
hull  of  the  "  San  Juan,"  with  the  name  of  Chur-
ruca  inscribed  in  golden  letters  upon  the  entrance
to  the  cabin,  and  all  visitors  are  required  to  un-
cover their  heads  on  entering.  Churruca  was  dis-
tinguished for  his  knowledge  of  natural  philoso-
phy, mathematics,  and  astronomy,  and  left  many
important  works,  among  which  are  "Treinta  y
cuatro  Cartas  esfericas  y  Mapas  geometricos " ;
"  Carta  esferica  de  las  Antillas  " ;  "  Carta  particu-
lar geometrica  de  Puerto  liico  "  ;  "  Carta  esferica
de  las  Islas  Caribes  de  Sotavento " ;  "  Metodo
geometrico  para  determinar  todas  las  inflexiones
de  la  quilla  de  un  buque  quebrantado  " ;  and  "  In-
struccion  sobre  punterias."

CHUTE,  Horatio  Nelson,  physicist,  b.  in
Grovesend,  Ontario,  Canada,  26  Dec,  1847.  He
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Michigan  in
1872.  From  1867  till  1869  he  was  principal  of
public  schools  in  Aylmer,  Ontario,  and  from  then
until  1870  instructor  in  Latin  and  English  in
Woodstock  college.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  in-
structor in  mathematics  and  the  physical  sciences
in  the  high  school  at  Ann  Arbor,  Mich.  He  has
published  "Complete  School  Register"  (Detroit,
1878);  "Complete  Class  Register"  (1878);  "Sys-
tem of  School  Reports  "  (1878) ;  "  Complete  Record
Book  "  (1879) ;  "  Arithmetical  Cabinet  "  (1879) ;  and
a  "  Manual  of  Practical  Physics  "^(1886).

CIEZA,  or  CIE^A  DE  LE6n,  Pedro  (the-
ay'-thah  day  lay-on'),  Spanish  historian,  b.  in  Seville
about  1520.  He  accompanied  Pizarro  to  Peru,  and
resided  seventeen  years  in  that  country.  He  wrote
a  book  entitled  "  Cronica  del  Peru,"  which  is  full
of  interesting  information  relative  to  the  geography
and  history  of  that  region.

CIFUEiVTES,  Fray  Bernardino  (the-foo-en  -
tes),  Spanish  friar,  b.  in  Segovia,  Spain,  24  July,
1725 ;  d.  in  California  about  1780.  He  was  a  son
of  the  Count  de  Cifuentes,  and  his  real  name  was
Carlos  de  Cifuentes,  that  of  Fray  Bernardino  being
assumed  when  he  entered  his  religious  order  after
leading  a  romantic  life.  Young  Cifuentes  was
educated  at  the  University  of  Salamanca,  but  fled
from  that  place  in  consequence  of  a  bloody  en-
counter with  a  fellow-student  and  enlisted  for  mili-
tary service  in  Africa.  In  1752  he  was  promoted
to  the  rank  of  captain,  and  lost  an  arm  and  a  leg
in  battle.  Five  years  afterward  the  king  of  Spain
gave  him  the  command  of  the  garrison  of  Toledo,
and  there  he  remained  until  1760,  when  he  myste-
riously disappeared.  From  the  records  of  the  Fran-
ciscan order  in  California,  it  appears  that  in  1766
Carlos  de  Cifuentes  entered  that  order  in  Spain,
taking  the  conventual  name  of  Fray  Bernardino,
and  came  to  America.  In  June,  1770,  a  party  of
Spanish  missionaries  traversed  the  deserts  of  Ari-
zona, entered  the  territory  of  California,  and  planted
a  staff  from  which  hung  a  white  cloth  with  this  in-
scription, "Mission  de  Fray  Bernardino."  Eight
years  afterward  that  mission  had  become  a  settle-
ment with  200  inhabitants,  and  when  the  United
States  took  possession  of  California  it  was  an  im-
portant town.  The  new  organization  of  the  state
being  effected,  the  name  of  San  Bernardino  was
given  to  the  town  and  county,  which  soon  became
one  of  the  most  prosperous  sections  of  California.

CILLEY,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Nottingham,  N.
H.,  in  1735 ;  d.  there,  25  Aug.,  1799.  His  father,
tapt.  Joseph  Cilley,  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of
Nottingham  in  1727. The  opportunities  for  edu-


cation were  very  slight,  and  he  was  self-taught,  but
acquired  suificient  knowledge  of  the  law  to  prac-
tise. He  was  one  of  the  party  that  in  December,
1774,  dismantled  the  fort  at  Portsmouth.  Imme-
diately after  the  battle  of  Lexington  he  raised  a
company  of  volunteers  and  led  them  into  Boston.
In  May,  1775,  he  was  appointed  major  in  Poor's
regiment,  and  in  April,  1777,  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  1st  New  Hampshire  regiment,  suc-
ceeding Gen.  Stark,  and  served  as  such  until  the
close  of  the  Revolutionary  war.  He  commanded
his  regiment  at  Ticonderoga  in  July,  1777,  was
present  at  the  engagement  at  Bemis  Heights  in
September,  1777,  at  the  battle  of  Monmouth  in
June,  1778,  with  Anthony  Wayne  at  the  storming
of  Stony  Point,  July,  1779,  and  in  Gen.  Sullivan's
expedition  against  the  Indians  in  western  New
York.  After  the  war  he  was  appointed  the  first
major-general  of  the  militia  in  1786,  and  later
served  his  state  in  various  capacities.  He  was  suc-
cessively treasurer,  vice-president,  and  president  of
the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati  in  New  Hampshire.
In  politics  he  was  a  decided  republican  and  a  sup-
porter of  the  administration  of  Thomas  Jefferson.
— His  grandson,  Joseph,  U.  S.  senator,  b.  in  Not-
tingham, N.  H.,  4  Jan.,  1791 :  d.  there,  16  Sept.,
1887,  was  educated  at  the  Atkinson  academy,  and
commissioned  ensign  in  the  18th  New  Hampshire
regiment.  A  year  later,  12  March,  1812,  he  was
appointed  an  ensign  in  the  11th  U.  S.  infantry,  and
in  1814  was  promoted  to  lieutenant  in  the  21st  in-
fantry. He  participated  in  the  battles  of  Chip-
pewa, Lundy's  Lane,  and  Chrysler's  Field.  At
Lundy's  Lane  his  company  led  in  the  famous  charge
of  Col.  Miller's  regiment  on  the  British  battery,
where  nearly  half  of  his  men  were  either  killed,
wounded,  or  missing.  Lieut.  Cilley  was  wounded,
and  every  officer  in  his  company  was  either  killed
or  wounded.  He  received  the  brevet  of  captain
for  gallantry  on  the  field,  and  was  retained  in  the
army  when  it  was  placed  on  a  peace  footing,  but
resigned  in  July,  1816.  Subsequently  he  held  ap-
pointments in  the  New  Hampshire  militia,  and  was
quartermaster  in  1817,  division  inspector  in  1821,
and  aide  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Benjamin  Pierce  in
1827.  He  was  elected  as  a  democrat  to  fill  the  va-
cancy in  the  U.  S.  senate  caused  by  the  resignation
of  Levi  Woodbury,  and  served  from  22  June,  1846,
until  3  March,  1847.  At  the  close  of  his  term  he
retired  to  his  farm  in  Nottingham,  where  he  still
resides  (1886),  the  oldest  living  ex-senator. — An-
other grandson,  Jonathan,  lawyer,  b.  in  Notting-
ham. N.  H.,  2  July,  1802 ;  d.  in  Bladensburg,  Md.,
24  Feb.,  1838,  was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1825,
numbering  among  his  classmates  Hawthorne  and
Longfellow.  Subsequently  he  studied  law  with
John  Ruggles,  U.  S.  senator  from  Maine,  in  Thom-
aston.  Almost  immediately  after  his  being  admit-
ted to  the  bar  he  entered  political  life,  and  from
1829  till  1831  edited  the  "  Thomaston  Register."
In  1832  he  was  a  presidential  elector,  and  was
elected  as  a  democrat  to  the  state  legislature,  and
re-elected  till  1837,  becoming  speaker  in  1836  and
the  acknowledged  leader  of  his  party  in  the  legis-
lature. In  1837  he  was  elected  as  a  Van  Buren
democrat  to  congress,  serving  from  4  Sept.,  1837,
till  his. death.  The  death  of  Mr.  Cilley  was  the
result  of  a  duel  with  William  J.  Graves,  a  con-
gressman from  Kentucky.  The  affair  originated
in  a  speech  delivered  by  Mr.  Cilley  in  the  house  of
representatives,  in  which  he  criticised  a  charge  of
corruption  brought  against  some  unmarried  con-
gressman in  a  letter  published  in  the  New  York
"  Courier  and  Enquirer  "  over  the  signature  of  "A
Spy  in  Washington,"  and  approved  in  the  editorial


616


CINQUE


CINQUE


columns  of  that  paper.  The  editor,  Gen.  James
Watson  Webb,  at  once  went  to  Washington  and
sent  a  challenge  to  Mr.  Cilley  by  Mr.  Graves  ;  but
the  former  declined  to  receive  any  hostile  commu-
nication from  Mr.  Graves,  on  the  ground  that  he
had  made  no  reflections  on  the  personal  character
of  Gen.  Webb,  Mr.  Graves  himself  then  chal-
lenged Mr.  Cilley,  and  the  challenge  was  accepted.
Rifles  were  the  weapons  used,  and  on  the  third  fire
Mr.  Cilley  fell,  shot  through  the  body,  and  died  in-
stantly. Mr.  Graves  was  never  re-elected  to  con-
gress. A  committee  of  seven  members  of  the
house  was  appointed  to  investigate  the  causes
that  led  to  Mr.  Cilley's  death  and  the  circum-
stances connected  therewith.  The  report  was  elab-
orate and  comprehensive,  and  declared  that  Mr.
Graves  deserved  "  the  decided  censure  of  the  house,
ajid  that  he  should  be  censured  accordingly."  See
an  article  on  Mr.  Cilley  in  Nathaniel  Hawthorne's
works. — Grreeiileaf,  son  of  Jonathan,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Thomaston,  Me.,  27  Oct.,  1829,  was  appointed
midshipman  in  the  navy  and  attached  to  the  frig-
ate "  Cumberland,"  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron,
in  1843-'o.  In  August,  1847,  he  was  promoted  to
passed  midshipman,  and  spent  some  time  at  the  U.
S.  naval  academy,  after  which  he  served  on  the
frigate  "Raritan"  in  1849-50,  on  the  coast  survey
in  1851-2,  and  on  various  vessels  of  the  Pacific
squadron  in  1852-5.  He  was  commissioned  as
lieutenant  in  September,  1855,  and  connected  with
the  sloop  "  Saratoga  "  in  1856-"'8,  and  subsequently
served  on  various  other  vessels.  In  July,  1862,  he
was  made  lieutenant-commander,  and  during  the
civil  war  was  in  command  of  the  "  Unadilla,"  and
later  of  the  monitor  "Catskill."  At  the  close  of
the  war  he  was  retired  and  commissioned  as  com-
mander. He  now  (1886)  resides  in  Buenos  Ayres. —
Another  son  of  Jonathan,  Jonathan  Prince,  sol-
dier, b.  in  Thomaston,  Me.,  29  Dec,  1835,  was  grad-
uated at  Bowdoin  in  1858,  studied  law  with  A.  P.
Gould  in  Thomaston,  and,  after  admission  to  the
bar,  settled  in  his  native  town.  At  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  150  men  for  a  light
field-battery ;  but,  that  arm  of  the  service  not  be-
ing required,  he  enlisted  in  the  1st  Maine  cavalry,
and  was  commissioned  captain.  During  the  re-
treat of  Gen.  Banks  from  the  Shenandoah  valley
he  was  wounded  and  made  prisoner  at  Middletown
on  24  May,  1862.  Subsequently  he  was  promoted
to  be  major,  and  assigned  to  duty  as  Judge-advo-
cate and  examining  oflieer  at  the  central  guard-
house in  Washington,  D.  C.  In  1863  he  rejoined
his  regiment  with  his  wound  still  unhealed,  and
during  1864  was  made  lieutenant-colonel.  He
was  placed  in  command  of  the  regiment,  and  con-
tinued in  this  capacity  until  mustered  out  in  1865,
when  he  received  the  brevet  of  brigadier-general
for  distinguished  services  at  Five  Forks,  Farm-
ville,  and  Appomattox  Court-House.  In  his  regi-
ment, which  was  authorized  to  bear  the  names
of  three  more  battles  upon  its  standards  than  any
other  regiment  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  Gen.
Cilley  was  "the  first  man  that  enlisted,  the  first
man  wounded,  and  nearly  the  last  mustered  out."
After  the  war  he  resumed  his  profession  in  Rock-
land, Me.,  and  since  has  been  a  member  of  the
state  legislature,  deputy  collector  of  customs,  ad-
jutant-general of  the  state,  and  commissioner  of
the  U.  S.  circuit  court.  He  is  a  member  of  the
Maine  historical  society,  and,  besides  addresses  and
memorial  orations,  has  published  a  genealogy  of  the
"  Cilley  Familv."

CINQUE,  chief  of  the  Mendi  Africans,  b.  in  Caw-
Mendi,  Africa,  about  1800.  In  the  spring  of  1839
he  was captured by slave-traders,  with a large


company  of  his  countrymen  and  women,  and  taken
to  Havana,  Cuba.  Fifty-two  of  them  were  pur-
chased by  Montes  and  Ruiz,  two  Cuban  planters
and  shipped  for  a  port  on  the  southern  coast  of
Cuba,  on  the  schooner  "  Amistad."  Cinque  organ-
ized a  plan  for  regaining  the  freedom  of  the  cap-
tives, and,  when  four  days  out  from  Havana,  gave
the  prearranged  signal  for  revolt.  The  captain  of
the  schooner  was  killed  with  one  of  his  crew,  and
two  others  were  wounded  in  the  fight  that  fol-
lowed, while  the  rest  surrendered.  The  passengers
and  crew  were  treated  kindly  and  sent  ashore ;  but
Montes  and  Ruiz,  the  nominal  owners,  were  re-
tained on  board  and  given  to  understand  that  they
must  navigate  the  vessel  to  Africa.  The  Spaniards
managed  to  steer  northward  by  night  and  during
foggy  weather,  and  after  a  few  days  sighted  Mon-
tauk  Point,  L.  I.,  where  they  anchored,  and  were
presently  taken  in  charge  by  the  U.  S.  coast  survey
schooner  "  Washington,"  whose  commander,  Lieut.
Gedney,  claimed  salvage  for  vessel  and  cargo,
Montes  and  Ruiz,  through  the  Spanish  minister,
claimed  the  Africans  as  their  property.  The  whole
company  was  sent  to  Farmington,  Conn.,  where
quarters  were  provided  for  them  pending  the  de-
cision of  the
courts.  The
philanthropists
of  New  Eng-
land took  an
active  interest
in  the  case,  en-
gaged Roger
Sherman  Bald-
win and  other
eminent  law-
yers as  counsel,
and  began  en-
ergetically to
educate  and
convert  the
heathen  thus
brought  to
their  doors.  It
is  noteworthy
that  the  resi-
dents of the

little  village  where  this  strange  colony  was  planted
soon  outgrew  their  dread  of  the  Africans,  and  dur-
ing the  months  of  their  stay  learned  to  regard
them  without  apprehension.  Cinque  exercised  a
stern  rule  over  them,  and  would  permit  no  trans-
gression. Many  of  them,  including  their  chief,
learned  to  read  and  write  a  little,  and  acquired
some  ideas  of  civilization.  In  the  mean  time  the
case  came  up  before  the  U.  S.  district  court  for
the  state  of  Connecticut,  the  U.  S.  district  attor-
ney appearing  on  behalf  of  Montes  and  Ruiz  as
well  as  of  the  Spanish  minister.  Never  before  had
the  country  been  so  sharply  divided  on  a  question
touching  slavery.  All  trials  for  violation  of  the
law  prohibiting  the  slave-trade  had  until  this  time
been  held  before  southern  courts,  and  no  one  had
been  convicted.  The  pro-slavery  party  regarded
with  natural  apprehension  the  result  of  such  a
trial  on  the  soil  of  a  free  state.  Mr.  John  Qumcy
Adams,  who  was  the  anti-slavery  leader  in  the
house  of  representatives  at  the  time,  introduced
resolutions  calling  on  the  president  to  communi-
cate to  congress  the  process  or  authority  by  which
these  Africans,  charged  with  no  crime,  were  kept
in  custody.  Further  than  this,  it  was  held  by  the
advanced  anti-slaverv  leaders  that  slavery  ami
slave-dealing  constitute  a  perpetual  war  between
the  enslaver  and  the  enslaved. They  alleged  tne


^-^  i^PXj^L^t^


CIQUARD


CIST


617


right  of  persons  held  as  were  the  " '  Amistad '  cap-
tives," not  only  to  overpower  their  guards  when-
ever they  could  do  so,  but  to  hold  them  as  prison-
ers and  the  ship  and  cargo  as  their  lawful  prize.
They  held  that  the  IT,  S.  government  had  no  right
to  interfere  between  the  Africans  and  the  Cuban
planters,  and  that  the  former  had  a  valid  claim  to
the  ship  and  her  cargo.  After  a  protracted  inves-
tigation the  Connecticut  court  decided  against  the
libellants,  who  promptly  appealed  to  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court.  Tlie  venerable  Jolm  Quincy  Adams
appeared  with  Mr.  Baldwin  as  counsel.  The  prog-
ress of  the  trial  was  watched  with  intense  interest
by  the  pro-slavery  and  anti-slavery  factions  through-
out the  country.  The  court  eventually  declared
in  substance  that  these  Africans  were  born  free,
that  they  had  never  been  legally  held  as  slaves,
and  that  they  were  amenable  to  no  punishment  for
anything  they  had  done.  They  were  sent  back  to
their  native  land  at  the  public  expense,  and  a
Mendi  mission  was  established  and  is  still  main-
tained for  their  benefit  by  the  American  missionary
association  not  far  from  Sierra  Leone.

CIQUARD,  Francois,  b.  in  Clermont,  France,
about  1700 ;  d.  in  Canada.  He  joined  the  Sulpi-
tian  order  and  was  director  of  the  Seminary  of
Bourges.  He  had  a  narrow  escape  during  the
reign  of  terror,  and  embarked  for  the  United
States,  coming  to  Baltimore  in  1792.  His  inten-
tion was  to  join  his  brother  Sulpitians  of  Mon-
treal, but  he  was  not  permitted  by  the  English
government  to  enter  Canada.  Being  sent  by  Bish-
op Carroll  to  labor  among  the  Penobscot  and  Pas-
samaquoddy  Indians  of  Maine,  he  went  to  Old
Town,  on  the  Penobscot,  restored  .the  mission,
which  had  been  founded  by  Father  Thury,  and  es-
tablished wise  regulations  for  the  government  of
the  Indians,  but  found  much  difficulty  in  bringing
them  to  habits  of  order.  He  afterward  obtained
the  consent  of  the  Canadian  authorities  to  enter
Canada,  and  took  charge  of  the  Indians  on  the  St.
John  river,  among  whom  he  died.

CIST,  Charles,  printer,  b.  in  St.  Petersburg,
Russia,  15  Aug.,  1788;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  2
Dec,  1805.  He  was  graduated  at  Halle,  and  came
to  this  country  in  1773.  He  settled  in  Philadel-
phia, and,  with  Melchior  Steiner,  established  a
printing  and  publishing  business.  During  the  war
they  published  many  documents  relating  to  cur-
rent events,  including  Paine's  ''  American  Crisis."
In  1781  the  firm  was  dissolved,  and  the  business
continued  by  Mr.  Cist  alone.  He  began  the  pub-
lication of  "  The  American  Herald  "  in  1784,  and
of  the  "  Columbian  Magazine  "  in  1786.  Mr.  Cist
aided  the  Colonial  government  during  the  revolu-
tion by  endorsing  large  amounts  of  continental
currency,  which  later  he  was  compelled  to  redeem.
He  deserves  special  remembrance  as  the  first  per-
son to  introduce  anthracite  coal  into  general  use  in
the  United  States.  In  1792  he  was  a  member  of
the  Lehigh  coal  company,  and  brought  several
wagons  full  to  Philadelphia,  where  he  offered  to
give  it  away,  but  could  not  dispose  of  it,  and  was
threatened  with  mob  violence  for  trying  to  impose
on  the  people  with  a  lot  of  black  stones  for  coal.
In  1793  he  was  secretary  of  the  Fame  fire  associa-
tion, and  announced  that  the  society  had  procured
a  fire-escape  apparatus  to  save  persons  from  burn-
ing houses  by  means  of  a  bucket  drawn  up  to  the
top  of  the  building.  Subsequently,  during  the  ad-
ministration of  John  Adams,  he  became  public
printer,  and  established  in  Washington,  at  great
expense,  an  extensive  printing-office  and  book-
bmdery  for  the  purpose  of  publishing  public  docu-
ments.—His  son,  Cliarles,  editor,  b.  in  Philadel-


phia, Pa.,  24  April,  1793 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  8
Sept.,  1868,  was  educated  in  Philadelphia,  and
during  the  war  of  1812  was  engaged  in  garrison
duty  in  the  eastern  forts.  After  the  war  he  set-
tled in  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  and  a  few  years  later  re-
moved to  Harmony,  Pa.,  where  he  opened  a  store,
and  was  for  a  time  postmaster.  During  tlie  win-
ter of  1827-8  he  removed  to  Cincinnati,  where  he
opened  and  superintended  the  first  Sunday-school
in  Cincinnati,  and  continued  it  until  it  grew  be-
yond his  control,  when  it  was  divided  among  the
churches.  Mr.  Cist  was  also  one  of  the  most  ear-
nest workers  for  the  success  of  the  free-school
system.  In  1843  he  established  "The  Western
Weekly  Advertiser,"  a  family  journal  devoted  to
the  early  Indian  history  of  the  west,  and  to  statis-
tics relating  to  Cincinnati  and  the  state  of  Ohio.
A  few  years  later  the  name  became  "  Cist's  Week-
ly Advertiser,"  and  it  was  continued  until  1853.
He  prepared  and  published  "  Cincinnati  in  1841,"
" Cincinnati  in  1851,"  and  "Cincinnati  in  1859";
and  "  The  Cincinnati  Miscellany,"  composed  large-
ly of  incidents  in  the  early  settlements,  with  many
of  his  own  writings  (2  vols.,  1846). — Lewis  Jacob,
son  of  the  second  Charles,  poet,  b.  in  Harmon v,
Pa.,  20  Nov.,  1818 ;  d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  30
March,  1885.  He  removed  to  Cincinnati  with  his
parents,  and  after  studying  in  Hanover  college  en-
tered the  Commercial  bank  of  Cincinnati,  and  later
was  made  teller  in  the  Ohio  life  and  trust  com-
pany. From  1850  till  1870  he  resided  in  St.  Louis,
engaged  in  the  banking  business.  He  returned  to
Cincinnati  and  was  occupied  with  the  Zoological
society,  and  in  the  government  service.  Mr.  Cist
became  widely  known  as  an  enthusiastic  collector
of  autographs  and  old  portraits,  and  his  collection,
numbering  more  than  11,000  specimens,  was  one
of  the  largest  and  most  famous  in  the  United
States.  It  was  sold  in  New  York  in  1886  and  1887.
Before  he  attained  his  majority  he  wrote  both
verses  and  music,  and  afterward  contributed  to  the
"  Western  Monthly  Magazine,"  "  Hesperian,"  and
"Cist's  Weekly  Advertiser."  He  delivered  the
poems  at  the  opening  of  the  Spring  Grove  ceme-
tery, and  also  at  the  unveiling  of  the  Tyler-David-
son fountain.  He  published  the  "  Souvenir,"  the
first  annual  of  the  west  for  several  years,  and  "  Tri-
fles in  Verse  "  (1845).— Another  son,  Henry  Mar-
tyii,  lawyer,  b.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  20  Feb.,  1839,
was  graduated  at  Farmer's  (now  Belmont)  college
in  1858,  and  studied  law.  In  April,  1861,  he  en-
listed as  a  private  in  the  6th  Ohio  infantry.  He
was  promoted  to  second  lieutenant  in  the  52d  Ohio
infantry,  and  then  to  adjutant  of  the  74th  Ohio,
and  was  post-adjutant  of  Camp  Chase  during  the
confinement  of  the  prisoners  captured  at  Fort
Donelson.  In  1862  he  was  in  the  field  with  his
regiment,  serving  in  middle  Tennessee,  in  Septem-
ber promoted  to  acting  assistant  adjutant-general
of  Miller's  brigade,  during  the  Tullahoma  cam-
paign appointed  acting  assistant  adjutant-general
of  the  department  of  the  Cumberland,  and  served
on  the  department  staff  under  Gens,  Rosecrans
and  Thomas  until  his  resignation  in  January,  1866,
Meanwhile  he  had  attained  the  rank  of  major  and
assistant  adjutant-general  with  the  brevet  of  briga-
dier-general, having  served  in  the  Chickamauga
and  the  Eastport  campaigns.  Gen.  Cist  remained
in  the  service  after  the  close  of  hostilities,  at  Gen.
Thomas's  request,  to  give  the  necessary  orders  and
to  arrange  the  details  providing  for  the  mustering
out  and  disbanding  of  over  100,000  troops.  Subse-
quent to  the  war  he  returned  to  Cincinnati  and  re-
sumed the  practice  of  law,  and  in  1869  he  was
elected  corresponding  secretary  of  the  Society  of


618


CIUDAD  REAL


CLAGGETT


the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  to  which  office  he
has  been  re-elected  every  year  since.  Gen.  Cist
has  contributed  to  periodicals  many  articles  on  the
civil  war,  among  which  are  "  Cincinnati  with  the
War  Fever  "  and  "  The  Romance  of  Shiloh."  He
edited  all  but  vols.  ii.  and  iii.  of  "  Reports  of  the
Society  of  the  Army  of  the  Cumberland  "  (Cincin-
nati, 17  vols.,  1868-'85),  and  is  the  author  of  "  The
Army  of  the  Cumberland '"  (New  York,  1882).

CIUDAD  REAL,  Antonio,  missionary,  b.  in
Ciudad  Real,  Spain,  in  1551 ;  d.  in  Yucatan,  Mexi-
co, 5  July,  1617.  He  entered  the  Franciscan  order
at  the  convent  of  San  Juan  de  los  Reyes  (Toledo),
and  accompanied  Bishop  Diego  Landa  to  Yucatan
in  1573.  Afterward  he  was  a  missionary  in  Yuca-
tan and  became  noted  for  his  skill  in  the  Indian
dialects  of  that  country,  and  later  was  appointed
provincial  of  his  order  there.  He  published  several
vocabularies,  one  of  which,  "  Vocabularium  Calepi-
num  "  (of  the  Maya  language),  still  extant,  is  said
to  have  cost  him  forty  years'  work  (G  vols.).  He
also  published  "  Sermones  de  Sanctis,"  in  the  Maya
language,  and  "  Tratado  curioso  de  las  grandezas
de  la  Neuva  Bspana."

CLAFLIN,  Horace  Brigliam,  merchant,  b.  in
Milford,  Mass.,  18  Dec,  1811 ;  d.  in  Fordham,  N.  Y.,
14  Nov.,  1885.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Clatlin,  a
general  country  storekeeper,  farmer,  and  justice  of
the  peace,  and  received  his  education  at  the  com-
mon school  and  Milford  academy.  His  first  busi-
ness experience  was  as  a  clerk  in  his  father's  em-
ploy, and  in  1831,  with  his  brother  Aaron  and  his
brother-in-law,  Samuel  Daniels,  he  succeeded  to
his  father's  busi-
ness. In  1832  they
opened  a  dry-goods
store  in  Worces-
ter, in  connection
with  their  establish-
ment in  Milford.
This  venture  proved
successful,  and  in
1833  Aaron  took
the  Milford  store,
leaving  the  other
partners  in  exclu-
sive possession  of
the  Worcester  busi-
ness. In  1843  Hor-
ace removed  to  New
York,  and,  with
William  F.Bulkley,
organized  the  house
of  Bulkley  &  Claf-
lin  and  began  a
wholesale  dry-goods
business  at  No,  46
Cedar  street.  In  1850  the  firm  built  a  store  at  No.
57  Broadway,  which  they  occupied  from  January,
1851,  until  1853.  Mr.  Bulkley  retired  from  the
partnership  in  July,  1851,  when,  with  William  H.
Mellen  and  several  of  his  principal  clerks,  he
continued  his  business  as  Claflin,  Mellen  &  Co.
Meanwhile  their  trade  increased  very  rapidly,  and
larger  accommodation  became  necessary.  Mr.
Claflin,  with  others,  then  erected  the  Trinity  build-
ing, at  No.  Ill  Broadway,  whither  the  business
was  transferred.  In  1861  another  change  was
necessary,  and  the  enormous  warehouse  on  Worth
street,  extending  from  Church  street  to  West
Broadway,  was  secured.  The  beginning  of  the
civil  war,  coming  suddenly  at  this  time,  found  the
firm's  assets  largely  locked  up  and  rendered  almost
worthless,  and  they  were  compelled  to  ask  from
their  creditors  an  extension  of  time  in  which  to


j  settle  their  accounts.  These  liabilities  were  sub-
I  sequently  paid  with  interest  long  before  maturity,
'  and  the  house  entered  upon  a  career  of  unparal-
leled prosperity.  At  the  beginning  of  1864  Mr.
Mellen  retired  from  the  firm,  which  then  adopted
the  style  of  H.  B.  Claflin  &  Co.  The  panic  of  1873
again  caused  the  firm  to  ask  their  creditors  for  an
extension  of  five  months,  with  interest  added  in
settlement  of  their  open  accounts.  Notwithstand-
ing the  enormous  amounts  that  they  were  unable
to  collect  at  that  time,  no  paper  with  their  name
on  it  went  to  protest,  and  their  notes  were  all  paid
in  three  months,  sixty  days  before  maturity.  Dur-
ing a  single  year  the  sales  of  this  house  have
amounted  to  $72,000,000 ;  and  the  ability  of  Mr.
Claflin  may  be  judged  by  the  magnitude  of  the
business,  which  from  1865  to  the  time  of  his  death
far  exceeded  that  of  any  other  commercial  house
in  the  world.  He  was  a  man  of  domestic  habits
and  of  exemplary  life,  fond  of  books  and  of  horses.
Almost  daily,  no  matter  what  the  weather  might
be,  he  drove  from  ten  to  twenty  miles.  He  was
prominently  associated  with  Mr.  Beecher's  church
in  Brooklyn,  where  he  resided  during  the  winter.
His  acts  of  charity  were  frequent  and  unostenta-
tious, and  to  many  of  the  benevolent  institutions  of
Brooklyn  he  was  a  liberal  donor.  It  was  a  great
satisfaction  to  him  to  assist  young  men,  and  prob-
ably no  other  person  in  the  United  States  aided  so
numy  beginners  with  money  and  credit  until  they
were  able  to  sustain  themselves.  In  polities  he
was  a  strong  republican  until  the  canvass  of  1884,
when  he  supported  the  democratic  candidate  for
the  presidency.  Mr.  Claflin  was  a  man  of  very
strong  convictions,  and  in  1850,  when  it  cost  some-
thing to  be  known  as  an  opponent  of  slavery,  he
was  an  uncompromising  friend  of  freedom.  See
"Tribute  of  the  Chamber  of  Commerce  to  the
Memory  of  Horace  B.  Claflin  "  (New  York,  1880).

CLAFLIN,  Lee,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Hopkin-
ton,  Mass.,  19  Nov.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23
Feb.,  1871.  He  early  established  a  shoe-factory  in
Boston,  and  by  his  enterprise  and  industry  accumu-
lated a  large  fortune.  Mr.  Claflin  became  identified
with  education  in  consequence  of  his  munificent
gifts  to  various  institutions  of  learning.  Among
those  endowed  by  him  were  Wesleyan  university,
Wilbraham  academy,  and  Boston  theological  semi-
nary. From  1853  till  1871  he  was  a  trustee  of
Wesleyan  university.  His  death  was  the  result
of  an  accident. — His  son,  William,  governor  of
Massachusetts,  b.  in  Milford,  Mass.,  6  March.  1818.
He  was  educated  in  public  schools  and  in  Brown
university.  For  many  years  he  was  engaged  in
the  wholesale  boot  and  shoe  business  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  and  afterward,  in  Boston,  Mass,,  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  legislature  in  1849-53,  state  sena-
tor in  1860-'l,  and  presiding  officer  during  his  last
term,  lieutenant-governor  in  1866-'9,  and  governor
in  1869-'71.  He  became  a  member  of  the  repub-
lican national  executive  committee  in  1864,  and
was  its  chairman  from  1868  till  1872.  He  was
elected  as  a  republican  to  congress,  and  served
twice,  from  15  Oct.,  1877,  till  4  JVIarch,  1881.  In
1868  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Wes-
levan  university.

CLAOGETT,  Thomas  John,  P.  E.  bishop,  o.
in  Prince  George  county,  Md.,  2  Oct.,  1742;  d.  m
Croom,  Md.,  2  Aug.,  1816.  He  was  graduated  at
Princeton  in  1762,  and  studied  theology,  but,  as
there  were  no  bishops  in  America,  was  compelled  to
go  to  England  for  orders.  He  was  ordained  deacon
20  Sept.,  1767,  priest  11  Oct.,  1767,  aiui,  on  vetum-
ing  home,  was  appointed  to  the  rectorship  of  All
Saints'  church,  Calvert  county,  Md. Here  he  con-


CLAIBORXE


CLAIBORNE


619


tinued  until  the  beginning  of  the  revolution,  when
he  retired  to  his  own  estate  in  Prince  George  coun-
ty. In  1779  he  began  services  in  St.  Paul's  parish,
and  the  next  year  was  chosen  rector.  Being  a  man
of  excellent  fitness  for  the  office,  as  well  as  pos-
sessed of  large  private  means,  he  was  elected  the
first  bishop  of  Maryland,  and  was  consecrated  in
New  York,  17  Sept.,  1792,  Bishop  Seabury  joining
in  the  consecration.  This  is  notable  as  being  the
first  occasion  on  which  a  bishop  was  consecrated
in  the  United  States.  In  1800  Bishop  Claggett  was
chaplain  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  this  being  the  first  ses-
sion of  congress  held  in  Washington  city.  In  1808
he  became  rector  of  Trinity  church.  Upper  Marl-
borough, and  held  that  place  during  the  rest  of  his
Ufe.  An  assistant  bishop  was  appointed  in  1814.
He  published  a  few  sermons,  pastoral  letters,  and
addresses  to  his  convention.

CLAIBORNE,  Ferdinand  Leigh,  soldier,  b.
in  Sussex  county,  Va.,  in  1772 ;  d.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,
in  1815.  He  entered  the  military  service  of  the
United  States  as  ensign  of  infantry  in  1793,  be-
coming lieutenant  in  1794  and  captain  in  1799.
This  office  he  resigned  in  1802,  and  became  briga-
dier-general of  the  militia  in  Mississippi,  5  Feb.,
1811,  and  later  commanded  a  regiment  of  volun-
teers from  that  territory.  In  1813  he  was  made
brigadier-general  of  U.  S.  volunteers,  and  com-
manded in  the  engagement  with  the  Creek  Indians
at  the  Holy  Ground  in  December,  1813.  He  then
settled  in  Mississippi,  and  on  4  Feb.,  1815,  became
legislative  councillor,  later  presiding  over  the  delib-
erations of  the  legislature. — His  brother,  "William
Charles  Cole,  senator,  b.  in  Sussex  county,  Va.,  in

1775:  d.  in  New
Orleans,  La.,  23
Nov.,  1817,  re-
ceived a  liberal
education  and
studied  law.
After  being  ad-
mitted to  the
bar,  he  settled
in  Nashville,
Tenn.,  where
he  followed  his
profession.  He
soon  received
the  appoint-
ment of  territo-
rial judge,  and
assisted  in  fra-
ming the  state
constitution  in
1796.  During
the  following
year  he  was
elected  as  a  democrat  to  congress,  and  served  from
23  March,  1797,  till  3  March,  1801.  In  1802  he  was
appointed  governor  of  Mississippi,  and  in  1803  be-
came a  commissioner,  with  Gen.  James  Wilkinson,
to  take  possession  of  Louisiana  when  it  was  pur-
chased from  France.  After  the  establishment  of
the  new  government,  in  1804,  he  was  made  governor,
and  when  that  province  became  a  state  he  was  elect-
ed by  the  people  to  the  same  office.  He  was  chosen
as  a  democrat  to  be  U.  S.  senator  from  the  new
state,  but  died  before  he  was  able  to  take  his  seat.
—Another  brother,  Nathaniel  Herbert,  politi-
cian, b.  in  Sussex  county,  Va.,  14  Nov.,  1777;  d.  in
Franklin  county,  Va.,  15  Aug.,  1859,  received  a  clas-
sical education,  and  for  many  years  served  variously
in  both  branches  of  the  state  legislature,  where  he
achieved  a  reputation  as  a  reformer  of  extrava-
gance and  abuses  of  the  government. Later  he  '


became  a  member  of  the  executive  council,  and  in
1825  was  sent  to  congress,  where,  with  subsequent
re-elections,  he  served  continuously  from  5  Dec,
1825,  till  3  March,  1837.  He  was  the  author  of
"Notes  on  the  War  in  the  South"  (Richmond,
1819).— John  Francis  Hanitranick,  son  of  Ferdi-
nand Leigh,  lawyer,  b.  in  Natchez,  Miss.,  24  April,
1809 ;  d.  there,  17  May,  1884.  At  the  age  of  four-
teen he  was  sent  to  relations  in  Virginia  to  be  edu-
cated, and  later  entered  the  law-office  of  Benjamin
Watkins  Leigh,  but  failing  health  compelled  his
return  to  Natchez,  where  he  continued  his  law
studies.  Subsequently  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  Virginia,  and.  as  he  was  about  to  begin  practice
in  Natchez,  he  was  induced  to  assume  editorial
control  of  a  journal  then  published  by  Col.  Andrew
Marschalk.  This  step  led  him  into  politics,  and
before  he  had  attained  his  majority  he  was  chosen
a  member  of  the  state  legislature,'  and  was  twice
re-elected.  Mr.  Claiborne  then  settled  in  Madison
county,  and  was  nominated  for  congress  by  accla-
mation in  the  first  State  democratic  convention
ever  held  in  Mississippi.  A  hotly  contested  can-
vass ensued,  after  which  Claiborne  was  elected,  and
served  from  7  Dec,  1835,  till  31  Jan.,  1838.  Dur-
ing his  second  term  his  election  was  contested,  a
new  election  was  called  for,  and  his  opponent  was
successful.  This  was  due  to  a  misunderstanding
which  had  arisen  in  consequence  of  his  election  for
a  special  session  being  regarded  by  his  friends  as  for
the  entire  term,  and  hence  not  voting  at  all.  Mr.
Claiborne  then  turned  his  attention  to  journalism,
and  became  editor  of  the  Natchez  "  Fair-Trader."
In  1844  he  removed  to  New  Orleans,  where  he  edit-
ed successively  the  " Jeffersonian,"  the  "•States-
man," and  afterward  the  "  Louisiana  Courier."  On
the  election  of  President  Pierce  he  received  the
appointment  of  U.  S.  timber  agent  for  Louisiana
and  Mississippi.  Later  he  resided  at  his  planta-
tion, "  Dunbarton,"  in  the  vicinity  of  Natchez,
where,  in  possession  of  abundant  fortune,  he  de-
voted his  time  principally  to  literary  pursuits.  He
published,  besides  many  magazine  articles,  "Life
and  Correspondence  of  Gen.  John  A.  Quitman  "  (2
vols..  New  York,  1860) ;  "  Life  and  Times  of  Gen.
Sam.  Dale "  (1860) ;  and  "  Mississippi  as  a  Prov-
ince, a  Territory,  and  a  State  "  (Jackson,  1880).

CLAIBORNE,  John  Herbert,  physician,  b.  in
Brunswick  county,  Va.,  16  March,  1828.  He  was
graduated  at  the  University  of  Virginia  in  1849,  and
at  the  Jefferson  medical  college  in  1850,  after  which
for  a  year  he  was  connected  with  hospitals  in  Phil-
adelphia. In  1851  he  settled  in  Petersburg,  Va.,
and  there  practised  until  1861.  In  1857  he  was  a
member  of  the  Virginia  senate.  During  the  civil
war  he  was  a  surgeon  in  the  Confederate  army,  and
in  1862  organized  the  general  hospital  in  Peters-
burg, of  which  he  became  chief  executive  officer.
He  is  member  of  several  medical  societies,  has  held
the  office  of  vice-president  of  the  Virginia  state
medical  society,  and  of  the  Confederate  states  army
and  navy  medical  association.  Of  late  years  he  has
made  a  specialty  of  diseases  of  women  and  chil-
dren, and  his  published  articles  in  medical  journals
are  principally  on  these  subjects.  He  has  pub-
lished essays  on  "  Diphtheria "  and  "  Dysmenor-
rhea," and  a  volume  of  "Clinical  Reports  from
Private  Practice  "  (1873).

CLAIBORNE,  or  CLAYBORNE,  William,
colonist,  known  as  "  The  Evil  Genius  of  Maryland,"
b.  in  Westmoreland,  England,  about  1589;  d.  in
Virginia  about  1676.  He  was  a  younger  son  of  a
distinguished  Westmoreland  family,  and  in  1621
was  appointed  surveyor  of  the  plantations  of  Vir-
ginia, under  the  London  company. He  arrived  at


620


CLAIBORNE


CLAIBORNE


Jamestown  in  the  ship  "  George,"  with  Sir  Francis
Wyatt  and  other  members  of  the  new  council,  in
October,  1621,  and,  escaping  the  massacre  of  22
March,  settled  at  "James  City."  He  acquired  con-
siderable landed  estates,  amounting,  according  to
the  "  Land  Register  of  Virginia,"  to  45,000  acres.
On  24  March,  1G2.5,  he  was  commissioned  by  Charles
I.  as  member  of  the  council,  and  "  to  lie  our  Secre-
tary of  State  for  the  said  CoUony  and  Plantation
of  Virginia."  On  17  May,  1626,  he  and  Capt.  Sam-
uel Matthews  proposed  to  the  privy  council  in
England  "to  win  the  forrests  of  Virginia  upon
certain  conditions,"  and  on  13  March,  1628,  he  re-
ceived from  Gov.  John  Port  his  first  commission  to
make  discoveries  to  the  southward,  and  to  open
trade  with  the  Indians.  A  similar  commission  was
issued  to  him  by  Gov.  Sir  John  Harvey,  8  March,

1631,  and  this  was
followed  by  a  pat-
ent from  King
Charles  I.,  dated
16  May,  1631,
and  issued  by  Sir
William  Alexan-
der, under  the
Scotch  signet,  au-
thorizing him  to
make  discoveries,
and  grantingtrad-
ingprivilegeswith
the  Indians  "  in
our  colonies  of
New  England  and
New  Scotland."
Having  discov-
ered and  partially
planted  and  set-
tled the  isle  of
Kent  a  year  be-
fore the  first  pat-
ent of  Maryland  was  ever  heard  of,  he,  with  the
aid  of  William  Cloberry,  John  de  la  Barre,  and
other  "adventurers,"  established  a  trading-post
there,  and  acted  as  the  chief  agent  of  his  London
partners,  Cloberry  &  Co.,  until  displaced  by  George
Evelyn  in  December,  1636.  He  purchased  the  in-
terest of  the  natives  in  all  the  lands  that  he  held  in
the  island  of  Kent,  and  collected  settlers  in  such
numbers  there  that,  in  1632,  they  were  represented
by  a  burgess  in  the  general  assembly  of  Virginia.
George  Calvert,  first  baron  of  Baltimore,  having
failed  in  his  colony  of  Avalon  on  Newfoundland
from  the  severity  of  the  Climate,  sailed  southward,
with  his  wife  and  family  and  a  party  of  followers,
to  search  for  a  more  propitious  climate  and  a  more
favorable  soil.  He  arrived  at  Jamestown  in  Oc-
tober, 1629,  where  he  was  met  by  the  authorities,
among  whom  was  Claiborne,  with  the  demand  that
he  should  take  the  oath  of  supremacy  and  abjura-
tion before  taking  up  his  residence  in  the  colony.
Refusing  to  submit  to  these  tests,  he  sailed  north-
ward, examining  the  Chesapeake  and  its  shores.
He  thence  returned  to  England  and  procured  a
charter  for  the  country  north  of  the  Potomac
and  on  both  sides  of  the  great  bay,  which  was
"hactenus  inculta"  (hitherto  uncultivated).  The
territory  granted  to  Baltimore  had  been  within  the
original  grant  to  the  Virginia  company ;  but,  the
charter  of  that  corporation  having  been  revoked,
the  whole  subject  of  the  grant  was  returned  to  the
control  of  the  crown,  and  in  the  subsequent  charter
to  Baltimore  it  was  only  considered  necessary  to
protect  the  rights  of  actual  settlers  under  the
Virginia  charter  by  granting  such  portion  of  the
t;erritory  designated  as  was "hactenus inculta."


^.-^^^


Therefore,  when  Baltimore's  first  colony  arrived  at
St.  Marie's  in  March,  1634,  Claiborne  had  been  seat-
ed on  the  isle  of  Kent  for  more  than  three  years,
and  his  settlement  had  been  recognized  by  the  ad-
mission of  the  burgess  into  the  Virginia  assembly.
The  Virginians,  sustaining  Claiborne,  naturally
claimed  the  right  to  the  isle  of  Kent.  The  Calverts
insisted  that  Claiborne's  right  was  only  a  license  to
trade  under  the  Scotch  signet,  and  that  from  it  no
right  of  property  in  the  soil  could  arise.  Claiborne
claimed  both  property  right  and  political  inde-
pendence of  Calvert.  Calvert  asserted  sovereignty
and  title  paramount  over  the  isle  of  Kent,  and  all
settlers  thereon.  This  issue  influenced  the  history
of  the  two  colonies  for  a  generation.  It  was  at
first  the  issue  between  the  Roman  Catholics  of
Maryland  and  the  churchmen  of  Virginia;  then
between  cavaliers  and  Puritans,  and  was  never
finally  settled  until  Virginia,  in  her  bill  of  rights
in  1776,  finally  released  all  claim  to  the  temtory
of  Maryland  beyond  the  Potomac,  and  executed  a
conveyance  of  all  the  territory  northwest  of  Ohio
river  in  1781  to  the  United  States.  In  fact,  the
mutterings  of  the  old  Claiborne  quarrel  had  hard-
ly died  out  in  the  Virginia-Maryland  boundary
arbitration  of  1775-8,  which  finally  settled  the  dis-
puted Potomac  boundary  of  the  two  states.

As  soon  as  the  new  colony  was  founded  on  St.
Mary's  river,  the  encroachments  on  the  isle  of  Kent
settlement  began  to  be  felt.  Claiborne's  boats  and
traders  plied  in  and  out  of  the  estuaries  of  the  Chesa-
peake, and  the  Indian  allies  of  the  Calverts  at  St.
Mary's  began  to  show  signs  of  restiveness.  The
settlers  first  provided  themselves  with  a  block-
house for  defence,  and  then  investigated  the  cause
of  trouble.  Claiborne,  so  the  Indians  said,  de-
clared that  the  new  settlers  at  St.  Mary's  were
Spaniards,  who  of  necessity  were  papists  and
people  of  despicable  traits,  and  were  to  be  watched
and  guarded  against.  Whereupon  Leonard  Cal-
vert, governor  of  Maryland,  despatched  an  expedi-
tion under  Capt.  Thomas  Cornwaleys  to  settle  the
question  of  prior  settlement  and  sovereignty  with
the  Kent  isle  rebel.  Cornwaleys,  with  his  pin-
naces, the  "  St.  Helen  "  and  the  "  St.  Margaret,"  at-
tacked the  "  Cockatryce,"  Claiborne's  boat,  under
Lieut.  Ratcliffe  Warren,  on  23  April,  1635,  in  Great
Wicomico  river,  and  captured  both  boat  and  men,
after  killing  Warren  and  two  others,  Cornwaleys
losing  one  man  killed  and  several  wounded.  On
10  May  following,  Cornwaleys  captured  another
boat  belonging  to  Claiborne,  the  commander  of
which,  Thomas  Smith,  escaped.  Claiborne's  enter-
prise on  the  isle  of  Kent  had  proved  an  utter  fail-
ure. A  fire  there  destroyed  his  warehouse  of  sup-
plies, and  his  people  were  reduced  to  the  greatest
extremities,  being  obliged,  says  the  chronicler,  "  to
subsist  on  oysters."  His  London  partners  became
satisfied  that  his  affairs  required  examination.
Cloberry  &  Co.  sent  out  George  Evelyn  as  their
representative,  with  full  power  to  act  for  them  and
take  possession  of  their  propertv.  Claiborne,  fail-
ing to  get  a  surety  of  £3,000  from  Evelyn  and
suspecting  his  intrigue  with  Calvert,  surrendered
everything  to  him,  and  sailed  in  1637  for  England,
where  he  was  sued  by  his  partners  for  an  account
of  his  proceedings,  and  was  held  to  answer  before
the  lords  commissioners  of  plantation  on  a  charge
of  mutiny,  preferred  by  Gov.  Harvey,  of  Virginia.
Evelyn  seized  Kecoughtan  and  the  rest  of  Clai-
borne's propertv  in  Virginia,  and  instituted  suits,
in  the  name  of  Cloberry  &  Co.,  in  Baltimore's  courts
in  Maryland  against  parties  on  the  isle  of  Kent.
At  St.  Mary's,  Evelvn  was  shown  copies  of  Cal-
vert's charter,  and  of  Claiborne's  licenses  to  trade,


CLAIBORNE


CLAIBORNE


621


which  satisfied  hira  as  to  the  question  of  right,  so
that  in  behalf  of  his  principals  he  acknowledged
the  authority  of  Baltimore,  and  accepted  from
Leonard  Calvert  the  office  of  commander  of  the
isle  of  Kent.

Thus  ejected  from  the  isle  of  Kent.  Claiborne
purchased  from  the  Indians  Palmer's  island  at  the
head  of  the  bay,  thinking  it  to  be  beyond  Balti-
more's grant.  He  then  petitioned  the  king  that
Baltimore  might  be  restrained  from  interfering
with  him,  but,  despairing  of  success,  offered  the
king  an  annual  rent  of  £100  for  his  lands  in  the
Chesapeake  and  Susquehanna,  and  proposed  that
the  crown  should  grant  liini  a  tract  of  land  twelve
leagues  on  each  side  of  Susquehanna  river,  "  from
the  mouth  of  said  river  down  the  said  bay,  south-
erly to  the  seaward,  and  to  the  head  of  the  river
and  to  the  great  lake  of  Canada,  to  be  held  of  the
crown  at  the  rent  of  twelve  pounds  sterling  per
annum."  The  commissioners  of  plantation,  to
whom  this  application  was  referred,  having  be-
come satisfied  that  Claiborne's  license  to  trade
gave  him  neither  title  to  land  nor  right  to  make  a
settlement,  and  influenced  by  the  queen,  who  fa-
vored Baltimore,  refused  his  petition  for  the  grant,
thus  ignoring  his  discovery  and  purchase  of  the
land,  and  referred  him  to  the  courts  of  law  for
remedy  for  the  wrongs  of  which  he  complained.
Notwithstanding  Claiborne's  departure,  and  Eve-
lyn's submission  to  the  authorities  of  St.  Mary's,
the  isle  of  Kent  continued  in  an  insubordinate  con-
dition. It  was  represented  in  the  general  assembly
of  the  freemen  of  Maryland,  which  was  convened
by  Leonard  Calvert  at  St.  Mary's  in  February.
1637-8,  by  some  of  the  freemen  in  person,  and  by
Evelyn  as  proxy  for  the  great  body  of  them.  On
the  advice  of  Evelyn,  Gov.  Calvert  undertook  an
expedition  in  person  for  the  subjection  of  Kent.
He  made  his  campaign  within  the  time  marked  out,
reduced  the  isle  of  Kent  to  obedience,  captured
Smith,  the  leader  of  the  affray  in  the  Wicomico
some  years  before,  and  took  possession  of  Palmer's
island,  the  only  remaining  post  held  by  Claiborne
within  the  limits  of  the  Maryland  charter.  On  his
return  to  his  capital  city  of  St.  Mary's,  he  reported
his  proceedings  to  the  general  assembly,  which  had
reconvened  according  to  adjournment,  and  de-
livered Smith  in  irons  to  them.  The  sheriff  forth-
with empanelled  the  whole  general  assembly  as  the
grand  inquest  of  the  province,  and  they  at  once
found  a  true  bill  against  the  prisoner  for  piracy
and  murder.  The  same  body  theji  dissolved  itself
into  a  high  court  of  justice,  presided  over  by  Gov.
Calvert,  with  John  Lewger,  the  attorney-general,
prosecuting  for  the  proprietary.  He  was  allowed
his  challenge,  according  to  the  course  of  the  com-
mon law,  and,  on  being  found  guilty,  after  a  formal
trial,  prayed  his  clergy.  The  president  of  the
court  decided  that  his  prayer  had  not  been  made
in  time,  and  pronounced  sentence  of  death.  He
was  then  executed.  Failing  to  get  possession  of
his  island  of  Kent,  Claibone  proposed  on  6  June,
1638,  that  "he  and  his  associates  should  have  a
grant  for  settlement  of  an  island,  by  them  discov-
ered within  the  companv's  patent,  to  be  called
Rich  island,  in  honor  of  Earl  Holland  " ;  but,  this
meeting  with  but  little  favor,  he  was  made  by  the
king  treasurer  of  the  colonv  of  Virginia  for  life,  on
6  April,  1642.  In  all  the  trials  of  Charles  I.,  Vir-
ginia had  remained  true  to  the  cavalier  cause,  while
the  baron  of  Baltimore  was  preserving  a  cautious
neutrality,  so  as  to  prevent  the  seizure  of  his  prov-
mce  by  either  of  the  powers  then  contending  for
supremacy  in  England.  In  1644  Claiborne  re-
appeared on  the  isle  of  Kent,  and,  exhibiting  what


he  claimed  was  a  royal  commission,  endeavored  to
incite  resistance  to  the  Roman  Catholic  authority
at  St.  Mary's.  In  February,  1645,  the  Roman  Catho-
lic government  under  Leonard  Calvert  was  over-
thrown by  Capt.  Richard  Ingle,  of  the  parliament
ship  "  Reformation,'.'  professing  to  act  under  the
authority  of  the  parliament.  All  historians  unite
in  charging  that  Claiborne  was  a  participator  or
co-operator  with  Ingle  in  this  attack;  but  the
archives  of  Maryland  fail  to  prove  any  such  com-
plicity. Ingle  took  possession  of  the  government
in  February,  1645,  and  entered  on  a  career  of  plun-
der. Gov.  Calvert  took  refuge  in  Cavalier  Vir-
ginia, and  in  December,  1646,  returned  with  a  small
force  and  expelled  the  parliamentarians  without  a
struggle.  The  condition  of  affairs  in  England,
the  battle  of  Marston  Moor,  the  incursion  of  Ingle,
and  the  restless  activity  of  Claiborne,  backed  by
royal  favor,  convinced  Cecilius  Calvert  (Lord  Bal-
timore) that  to  preserve  his  province  he  must  at
once  organize  it  in  sympathy  with  the  prevailing
sentiment  in  England.  Accordingly,  in  1648,  he
reorganized  his  government  of  Maryland,  which
to  that  time  had  been  entirely  in  the  hands  of
Roman  Catholics.  His  brother,  Leonard,  had  died
on  9  June,  1647,  and  appointed  Thomas  Green,  an
ardent  cavalier,  his  successor.  The  churchmen  of
Virginia  were  driving  out  the  non-conformists
there,  and  Lord  Baltimore  induced  Capt.  William
Stone,  one  of  them,  to  remove  from  Northampton
county,  Va.,  to  Maryland,  under  a  contract  that
Stone  would  transport  500  of  the  exiles  from  Vir-
ginia, and  receive  grants  of  land  according  to  Bal-
timore's liberal  terms  of  plantation.  When  the
news  arrived  of  the  execution  of  the  king.  Green,
in  the  absence  of  Stone,  immediately  proclaimed
Charles  II.  as  his  successor.  The  general  assembly
of  Virginia  was  equally  prompt  in  avowing  its  loy-
alty, so  that  in  1650  Maryland  and  Virginia  were
the  only  parts  of  the  British  empire  that  acknowl-
edged the  royal  authority.  The  opportunity  thus
aft'orded  was  too  good  to  be  lost  by  Claiborne.  Ex-
asperated by  what  he  thought  the  injustice  of  the
court,  backed  by  the  influence  of  the  queen  and
his  enemy,  Archbishop  Laud,  he  joined  the  par-
liamentary party,  and  on  26  Sept.,  1651,  with
Richard  Bennett  and  two  others,  was  appointed
commissioner  by  parliament  to  reduce  Virginia
and  "  the  plantations  within  the  Chesapeake  bay."
The  English  expedition  sent  with  the  comniis-
sioners  reached  Virginia  in  March,  1652,  and  over-
threw the  cavalier  government,  with  Sir  William
Berkeley  at  its  head,  and  established  a  roundhead
one,  with  Richard  Bennett  for  governor,  and  Clai-
borne as  secretary  of  state.  As  soon  as  Berkeley
was  disposed  of,  Claiborne  went  to  St.  Mary's,
wliere  he  compelled  Gov.  Stone  to  renounce  liis
allegiance  to  Lord  Baltimore,  and  to  issue  all  legal
process  in  the  names  of  "  the  keepers  of  the  liber-
ties of  England,"  in  June,  1652.  When  Crom-
well at  home  dispersed  the  long  parliament.  Stone
naturally  concluded  that  the  "  keepers  "  had  gone
with  their  masters,  and  repudiated  the  arrange-
ment with  Claiborne,  whereupon  that  vigorous  ad-
venturer returned  with  an  armed  force  and  de-
posed Stone,  and  appointed  Capt.  William  Fuller
governor,  with  a  council  of  Puritan  commissioners.
Thus,  after  a  struggle  of  twenty  years,  Maryland
passed  under  the  control  of  Claiborne.  Starting  with
a  claim  under  a  grant  from  the  king,  he  now  held
office  under  commission  of  parliament.  Writs  for
an  assembly  to  be  held  at  Patuxent  were  issued,
and  they  contained  the  first  religious  test  ever
exacted  in  Maryland.  No  Roman  Catholic  could
be  elected  to  the  general  assembly,  or  vote. The


622


CLANCY


CLAP


assembly  thus  obtained  repealed  the  toleration  act
of  1649,  declared  that  all  actual  settlers  should  be
entitled  to  take  up  land,  regardless  of  any  rights
of  the  proprietary.  In  January,  1654,  Cromwell
intervened  for  the  protection  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics and  the  rights  of  Lord  Baltimore,  and  wrote  to
Gov.  Bennett,  of  Virginia,  forbidding  him,  or  those
acting  under  his  authority,  from  disturbing  Lord
Baltimore  or  his  officers  and  people  in  Maryland.
Encouraged  by  this  support,  Baltimore  ordered
Stone  to  overthrow  the  Puritan  government,  and
Stone  mustered  a  force  and  attacked  the  Puritans
on  the  Severn,  at  Annapolis,  on  35  March,  1654,
where  he  was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.  The
Claiborne  regime  was  thereby  firmly  established ;
but  the  progress  of  affairs  in  England  again  inter-
fered with  Claiborne's  fortunes.  Lord  Baltimore
made  his  peace  in  some  way  with  the  common-
wealth in  1656,  and  the  commissioners  of  planta-
tions decided  that  he  ought  not  to  be  molested  in
his  province.  In  1658  an  agreement  was  made  in
London  by  which  it  was  restored  to  him,  and  thus
Claiborne  finally  disappears  from  the  history  of
Maryland.  On  the  restoration  in  1660  he  was
turned  out  of  his  secretaryship  of  Virginia  and
from  the  council,  and  we  hear  no  more  of  him  until
1675,  when,  on  the  death  of  Cecilius  Calvert,  who
was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Charles,  third  baron  of
Baltimore,  Claiborne  presented  a  petition  to  the
king  in  council  praying  for  the  redress  of  his  many
wrongs  at  the  hands  of  the  Calverts.  He  made
loud  protestations  of  his  loyalty;  but  he  had  no
influence  at  court ;  his  friends  were  dead  ;  and  be-
sides this,  the  royal  memory  was  more  tenacious  than
his  own,  and  no  attention  was  paid  to  his  petition.
He  died  shortly  afterward  on  his  estates  in  Vir-
ginia, leaving  three  sons  and  one  daughter,  from
whom  have  descended  numerous  branches  of  the
family  in  Maryland,  Virginia,  Mississippi,  Missouri,
and  Louisiana,  distinguished  for  ability.  He  has
been  unjustly  called  "  Claiborne  the  Rebel,"  from
a  novel  bearing  that  title,  by  W.  H.  Carpenter
(Philadelphia,  1845).

CLANCY,  William,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Cork,
Ireland,  about  1800;  d.  in  Ireland  in  1847.  He
was  a  graduate  of  Carlow  college,  where  he  acted
as  professor  after  his  ordination.  He  was  selected
as  coadjutor  of  Bishop  England  in  the  see  of
Charleston  in  1835.  He  remained  some  months  in
Ireland  after  his  consecration  with  the  view  of  se-
curing priests  to  accompany  him  to  America,  but
in  this  was  unsuccessful.  He  arrived  in  Charles-
ton on  21  Nov.,  1835.  He  attended  the  council  of
Baltimore  in  1837,  and  in  the  same  year  was  trans-
lated to  the  see  of  Demerara,  British  Guiana.  As
his  management  of  this  diocese  was  not  satisfac-
tory, he  resigned  in  1838  and  returned  to  Ireland.

CLAP,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b,  in  Dorchester,
Mass.,  20  Jan.,  1669 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  L,  30  Oct.,
1745.  He  was  a  grandson  of  Deacon  Nathaniel
Clap,  who  settled  in  Dorchester  in  1636,  and  was
graduated  at  Harvard  in  1690.  In  1695  he  began
to  preach  in  Newport,  and  continued  with  his  work
under  many  discouragements  until  a  church  Avas
formed,  of  which  he  was  ordained  pastor  in  1720,
remaining  there  until  his  death.  \Vhitefield  and
Bishop  Berkeley  both  refer  to  his  venerable  appear-
ance, and  the  latter,  who  esteemed  him  highly,
said:  "Before  I  saw  Father  Clap,  I  thought  the
bishop  of  Rome  had  the  gravest  appearance  of  any
man  I  ever  saw ;  but  really  the  minister  of  New-
port has  the  most  venerable  appearance."  He  pub-
lished "Advice  to  Children"  (1691)  and  a  sermon,
on  "  The  Lord's  Voice  Crying  to  the  People  in
some  Extraordinary  Dispensations  "  (1715).


CLAP,  Rog-er,  settler,  b.  in  Salcomb,  Devon-
shire, England,  6  April,  1609 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.
2  Feb.,  1691.  He  came  to  America  in  1630,  in
company  with  Maverick,  Warham,  and  others,  and
settled  in  Dorchester.  Great  hardships  were  ex-
perienced, and  there  was  a  lack  of  the  necessaries
of  life.  He  held  several  military  and  civil  offices,
and  was  the  representative  of  the  town  from  1652
till  1666.  In  August,  1665,  he  was  appointed  cap-
tain of  Castle  William,  and  continued  in  command
until  he  resigned  in  1686,  after  which  he  made
Boston  his  residence.  His  manuscript  memoirs,  a
memorial  of  the  New  England  worthies,  prepared
for  the  benefit  of  his  children,  among  whom  were
sons  named  Preserved,  Hopestill,  and  Desire,  and
a  daughter  Wait,  to  whom  he  gives  excellent  ad-
vice, were  originally  published  by  Rev.  Thomas
Prince  in  1731,  and  have  been  republished  by  the
Dorchester  historical  society.

CLAP,  Thomas,  educator,  b.  in  Scituate,  Mass.,
26  June,  1703 ;  d.  in  New  Haven,  Conn.,  7  Jan.,
1767.  He  was  a  descendant  in  the  third  genera-
tion from  Thomas  Clap  (1597-1684),  who  came  to
New  England  in  1630,  settling  in  Scituate  ten
years  later.  The  young  man  was  fitted  for  college
principally  under  the  Rev.  James  McSparran,  a
missionary  to  Narragansett,  and  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1722.  While  in  college  he  was  in-
duced, from  the  reading  of  a  treatise  on  conversion,
to  unite  with  the  church,  and  then  decided  to
study  for  the  ministry.  In  1725  he  began  to
preach  at  Windham  as  a  candidate,  and  in  August,

1726,  settled  there  as  the  successor  of  the  Rev.
Samuel  Whiting,  whose  daughter  he  married  in

1727.  He  continued  in  Windham  until  1740,  when,
having  been  chosen  rector  of  Yale  college  at  the
commencement  of  1739,  he  was  inducted  into  office
with  appropriate  ceremonies  on  2  April,  1740.  It
was  with  great  reluctance  that  his  congregation
parted  with  him,  and  only  after  the  decision  of  an
ecclesiastical  convention  advising  his  immediate
acceptance  was  he  allowed  to  take  the  new  office.
The  legislature  agreed  to  compensate  the  people
of  Windham  for  the  loss  of  their  pastor,  and  the
amount  to  be  given  was  left  by  the  representatives
of  the  college  and  of  the  parish  to  a  committee  of
the  general  assembly,  who  reported  that  "inas-
much as  Mr.  Clap  had  been  in  the  ministry  at
Windham  for  fourteen  years,  which  was  about  the
half  of  the  time  ministers  in  general  continue  in
their  public  work,  the  people  ought  to  have  half  so
much  as  they  gave  him  for  settlement,  which,  upon
computation,  was  about  fifty-three  pounds  ster-
ling." This  sum  was  paid.  He  went  to  the  college
with  a  high  reputation  for  general  scholarship,  and
especially  a  great  knowledge  of  pure  mathematics
and  astronomy ;  and  in  the  various  departments  of
natural  philosophy  he  had  few  equals.  The  first
orrery  or  planetarium  made  in  America  was  con-
structed by  him.  His  first  great  work  in  connec-
tion with  the  college  was  the  formation  of  a  new
code  of  laws,  which,  after  adoption  by  the  trustees,
was  in  1748  published  in  Latin,  and  was  the  first  book
printed  in  New  Haven.  Later  he  made  important
improvements  in  the  college  library,  and  caused
catalogues  to  be  prepared.  He  drafted  a  new  and
more  liberal  charter,  which  was  granted  by  the
legislature  in  1745,  incorporating  the  institution
under  the  name  of  "  The  President  and  Fellows  of
Yale  College  in  New  Haven."  In  his  capacity  as
president,  he  undoubtedly  accomplished  much  good
for  the  college,  owing  to  his  remarkable  qualifica-
tions for  the  transaction  of  business;  but  his  religious
views  created  ill  feeling.  He  opposed  the  preach  mg
of  Whitefield,  believing  that  his  influence  would  re-


CLAPP


CLARK


623


suit  in  the  injury  of  true  religion.  As  this  view  was
not  supported  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Noyes,  then  pas-
tor in  New  Haven,  to  whose  church  the  officers
and  students  of  tlie  college  belonged,  a  professor-
ship of  divinity  was  instituted,  and  President  Clap
was  requested  by  the  corporation  to  preach  in  the
college  hall.  This  course  was  objected  to,  and
legal  measures  were  taken  to  suppress  the  so-called
"irregular  procedure."  Subsequent  controversies
with  Dr.  B.  Gale,  of  Killingworth,  and  with  Jona-
than Edwards,  of  Northampton,  increased  the
spirit  of  opposition,  and  his  opponents  requested
the  assembly  to  appoint  a  commission  of  visitation
to  inquire  into  the  affairs  of  the  college.  To  this
memorial  President  Clap  made  an  elaborate  writ-
ten reply,  in  which  he  intimated  if  the  project  was
persisted  in,  the  president  and  fellows  would  ap-
peal to  the  king.  In  1765  this  difficulty  culmi-
nated in  the  resignation  of  the  tutors,  and"  in  July
of  that  year  President  Clap  signified  his  determi-
nation to  resign  likewise.  He  continued,  however,
at  the  request  of  the  corporation,  to  preside  until
the  commencement  in  September,  when  he  took
his  leave  of  the  college.  During  his  administra-
tion many  improvements  were  made,  including
the  erection  of  a  new  college  edifice  in  1752  and  a
chapel,  which  was  completed  in  1762.  His  publi-
cations include  "  A  Sermon  at  the  Ordination  of
the  Rev.  Ephraim  Little"  (1782) ;  "  An  Introduc-
tion to  the  Study  of  Philosophy  "  (1748);  "Letter
to  a  Friend  in  Boston"  (1745);  "A  Letter  to  the
j  Rev.  Jonathan  Edwards"  (1745);  " The  Religious
Constitution  of  Colleges,  especially  of  Yale  College  "
(1754) ;  "  History  and  Vindication  of  the  Doctrines
received  and  established  in  the  Churches  of  New
England"  (1755);  "Nature  and  Foundation  of
Moral  Virtue  and  Obligation"  (1765);  "Annals,  or
History  of  Yale  College"  (1766);  and  "Nature
and  Motions  of  Meteors  "  (1781).

CLAPP,  Asa,  merchant,  b.  in  Mansfield,  Mass.,
15  March,  1762 ;  d.  in  Portland,  Me.,  17  April,  1848.
He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  who  likewise  was  the
magistrate  and  commander  of  a  military  company
in  Mansfield.  Young  Clapp  received  a  common-
school  education,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  volun-
teered in  the  expedition  under  Gen.  Sullivan  for
the  expulsion  of  the  British  from  Rhode  Island.
Subsequently  he  enlisted  on  an  American  pi-iva-
teer,  was  soon  promoted  to  be  an  officer,  and  toward
the  end  of  the  war  obtained  command  of  a  ship,
when  he  had  but  just  reached  the  age  of  twenty-
one.  He  was  at  Port  au  Prince  when  the  attack
was  made  on  that  city  by  the  negroes,  and  ren-
dered essential  aid  to  the  white  population,  who
were  exposed  to  great  sufferings  during  the  insur-
rection. After  the  war  he  continued  in  command
of  various  ships  trading  between  the  United  States
and  England,  and  in  1793  was  captured  by  Sir
Sydney  Smith  and  carried  to  England.  After  a
detention  of  six  months,  he  was  released,  and  his
cargo  paid  for  by  the  British  government.  In
1796  he  established  himself  as  a  merchant  in  Port-
land, and  in  time  became  one  of  the  wealthiest  and
most  distinguished  merchants  of  Maine.  He  had
vessels  employed  in  trade  with  Europe,  the  East
and  West  Indies,  and  South  America.  In  1811  he
was  a  member  of  the  council  of  Massachusetts  un-
der Gov.  Elbridge  Gerry.  During  the  war  of  1812
he  was  a  firm  supporter  of  the  administration,
nearly  all  of  his  ships  were  driven  from  the  ocean,
and  he  volunteered  as  a  common  soldier  in  the  de-
fences of  Portland,  when  that  city  was  threatened
by  the  British  fleet.  In  1816  he  was  one  of  the
commission  appointed  to  obtain  subscriptions  to
the  capital  stock  of  the  bank  of  the  United  States,


and  was  the  largest  subscriber  to  that  institution
in  Maine.  He  was  elected  a  delegate  to  the  con-
vention held  in  October,  1819,  for  forming  the
constitution,  and  for  several  years  was  a  repre-
sentative from  Portland  to  the  legislature.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  the  oldest  member  of
the  first  church  established  in  Portland.

CLAPP,  Tlieodore,  clergyman,  b.  in  Easthamp-
ton,  Mass.,  29  March,  1792 ;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,
17  May,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  18i4,
studied  theology  at  Andover  during  1818-9,  and
was  ordained  in  Easthampton,  Mass.,  in  1822,
being  called  in  that  year  to  the  pastorate  of  the
1st  Presbyterian  church  in  New  Orleans,  La.  In
1884  he  adopted  Unitarian  views,  and  organized,  as
the  Church  of  the  Messiah,  a  congregation  largely
made  up  of  his  former  parishioners,  with  whom
he  continued  until  1857.  There  were  twenty  epi-
demics during  his  residence  in  New  Orleans,  in-
cluding yellow  lever  and  cholera,  and  he  was  con-
spicuous for  his  laborious  devotion  to  the  suffer-
ers. For  many  years  the  use  of  a  large  church  in
New  Orleans  was  given  him  by  its  owner,  Judah
Touro,  a  wealthy  Jew,  free  of  expense.  In  1857
he  resigned  his  work,  on  account  of  failing  health,
and  settled  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  where  he  wrote
"  Autobiographical  Sketches  and  Recollections  of
a  Thirty-five  Years'  Residence  in  New  Orleans"
(Boston,  1857),  besides  other  theological  works.

CLARK,  Abraham,  signer  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  b.  in  Elizabethtown,  N.  J.,  15
Feb.,  1726 :  d.  in  Rahway,  15  Sept.,  1794.  He  was
the  only  child  of  Thomas  Clark,  and  was  born  on
his  father's  farm.  He  received  a  good  English
education,  and  showed  special  fondness  for  the
study  of  mathematics  and  of  civil  law.  He  de-
voted himself  to  surveying  and  conveyancing.
His  legal  advice,  given  gratuitously,  procured  for
him  the  title  of
"  poor  man's  coun-
sellor." He  be-
came high  sheriff
of  the  county  of
Essex  and  clerk  of
the  colonial  assem-
bly of  Amboy  un-
der the  royal  do-
main. At  the  be-
ginning of  the  rev-
olution he  distin-
guished himself  as
an  active  member
of  the  cpmmittee  of
public  safety.  On
21  June,  1776,  with
Richard  Stockton,
John  Hart,  Fran-
cis Hopkinson,  and
Dr.  John  Wither-
spoon,  he  was  elect-
ed by  the  provin-
cial congress  as  a
delegate  to  the  Continental  congress,  and  was  in-
structed to  join  with  the  delegates  of  the  other  col-
onies, if  necessary,  in  declaring  the  united  colonies
independent  of  Great  Britain.  Accordingly,  he  af-
fixed his  name  to  the  Declaration  of  Independence.
In  November,  1776,  he  was  elected  to  the  Continen-
tal congress,  and  was  continuously  re-elected  until
1788  with  the  exception  of  one  year,  1779,  and  again
served  in  1787-8.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
Jersey  legislature  from  1782  till  1787,  and  M'hile
holding  that  office  acquired  great  influence,  and  was
held  responsible  by  the  people  for  all  of  the  impor-
tant measures  passed  during  his  term  of  service.  An


^^fe<^


I

J


624


CLARK


CLARK


act  to  regulate  practice  in  the  courts  of  law  in  that
colony  became  known  as  "Clark's  law,"  and  a
strong  spirit  of  enmity  was  manifested  by  the
members  of  the  bar  against  the  supposed  f  ranier  of
it.  Although  opposed  to  the  emission  of  debased
money,  he  was  styled  the  "  Father  of  the  Paper
Currency  "  on  account  of  his  presumed  influence
being  given  toward  the  introduction  of  such  a
measure.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the  convention
that  framed  the  Federal  constitution  in  1787,  and  in
1789  was  appointed  a  commissioner  to  settle  the
accounts  of  New  Jersey  with  the  United  States.
Later  he  became  a  member  of  congress,  serving
from  24  Oct.,  1791,  till  his  death.  During  his  con-
gressional career  he  participated  in  the  debates
concerning  the  relations  of  England  with  the
United  States,  and  moved  a  resolution  to  prohibit
all  intercourse  with  Great  Britain  until  full  com-
pensation was  made  to  our  citizens  for  the  injuries
sustained  by  them  from  British  armed  vessels,  and
until  the  western  posts  should  be  delivered  up.  A
bill  conforming  to  Mr.  Clark's  resolution  was  car-
ried by  a  considerable  majority  in  the  house,  but
was  lost  in  the  senate  by  the  casting  vote  of  John
Adams,  the  vice-president.  His  death  was  the  re-
sult of  a  sunstroke,  which  proved  fatal  in  two  hours.

CLARK,  Alexander,  clergyman,  b.  in  Jefferson
county,  Ohio,  10  March,  1834 ;  d.  in  Greorgia,  6  July,
1879.  In  early  life  he  was  a  teacher  and  an  editor.
In  1861  he  was  ordained  in  the  Methodist  Episco-
pal church,  and  in  1870  became  editor  of  "  The
Methodist  Recorder."  He  was  the  author  of
numerous  works,  including  "  Old  Log  School-
House  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  The  Red  Sea
Freedman"  (1864);  "  School  -  Day  Dialogues"
(1867);  "Cospel  in  the  Trees"  (1868);  "Worka-
day Christianity  "  (1870) ;  "  Rambles  in  Europe  "  ;
and  a  volume  of  poems,  "  Ripples  on  the  River."

CLARK,  Alonzo,  physician,  b,  in  Chester,  Mass.,
1  March,  1807;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13  Sept.,  1887.
He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1828,  and  at  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  New  York,  in
1835.  Afterward  he  settled  in  New  York  city,
where  he  became  an  eminent  practitioner.  He
held  the  chair  of  pathology  and  materia  medica  in
Vermont  medical  college,  oi  physiology  and  pathol-
ogy in  the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in
1848-55,  and  of  pathology  and  practical  medicine
at  the  same  institution  in  1855-'85,  where  he  was
also  dean  and  president  of  the  faculty  in  1875-85.
Dr.  Clark  was  also  visiting  physician  to  Bellevue
hospital,  president  of  the  medical  board,  and  con-
sulting physician  to  St.  Luke's  hospital  and  to  the
Roosevelt  hospital.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
York  academy  of  medicine,  and  of  the  American
medical  association,  and  was  president  of  the  State
medical  association  in  1853.  He  was  a  frequent
contributor  to  tlie  medical  press.

CLARK,  Alonzo  Howard,  naturalist,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  13  April,  1850.  He  was  educated
in  the  public  schools  of  Boston,  Claverack  college.
Centenary  collegiate  institute,  and  at  Wesleyan
university,  leaving  the  latter  at  the  close  of  "^his
sophomore  year  to  become  assistant  in  charge  of
the  U.  S.  fish  commission  station  at  Gloucester,
Mass.,  during  1879-80.  In  1880  he  was  appointed
special  agent  of  the  10th  census,  and  in  1883  on
the  executive  staff  to  represent  the  United  States
at  the  International  fisheries  exhibition,  London,
England.  He  became  in  1884  assistant  in  the  de-
partment of  arts  and  industries  at  the  U.  S.  nation-
al museum,  Washington.  His  writings,  which
have  appeared  principally  as  government  publica-
eions,  include  "Statistics  of  Fisheries  of  New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Connecticut"


(1882);  " Statistics  of  Fisheries  of  Massachusetts"
(1882);  "History  of  the  Mackerel  Fishery,"  in
parts  (1883) ;  "  The  Fisheries  and  Fishery  Indus-
tries of  the  United  States  "  (1884  et  seq.\  a  series
of  quarto  volumes,  in  the  editorship  of  wliich  Mr.
Clark  has  been  associated,  and  to  which  he  has
contributed  special  chapters  on  "  The  Whale  Fish-
ery," "  The  Antarctic  Seal  Fishery,"  "  The  Men-
haden Fishery,"  and  "  The  Preparation  of  Fishery
Products  "  ;  "  Report  of  the  Exhibit  of  the  Fish-
eries and  Fish-Culture  of  the  United  States,  made
at  London,"  and  "  Catalogue  of  Fishery  Products
and  of  Apparatus  used  in  the  Preparation,"  form-
ing together  Bulletin  27  of  the  National  museum
(1884).  He  is  the  associate  author  and  editor  of
"  History  and  Present  Condition  of  the  Fisheries
and  Fish  Industries  of  the  United  States  "  (1886).

CLARK,  Alvan,  optician,  b.  in  Ashfield,  Mass.,
8  March.  1804;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  19  Aug.,
1887.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  and  became,
when  young,  an  engraver  for  calico  print-works  in
Lowell.  This  pursuit  he  followed  at  various  places
from  1827  till  1836,  when  he  settled  in  Boston  and
became  a  successful  portrait-painter.  About  1844
he  was  interested  in  the  manufacture  of  telescopes,
and  associated  his  sons  with  him.  He  was  the  first
person  in  the  United  States  to  make  achromatic
lenses,  and  the  most  important  modern  telescopes
have  been  constructed  at  his  factory  in  Cambridge-
port.  Mr.  Clark  invented  numerous  improve-
ments in  telescopes  and  their  manufacture,  includ-
ing the  double  eye-piece,  an  ingenious  method  of
measuring  small  celestial  arcs.  A  list  of  discov-
eries made  by  him  with  telescopes  of  his  own
manufacture  is  given  in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the
Royal  Astronomical  Society"  (London,  vol.  17,
No.  9). — His  son,  Alvan  Graham,  astronomer,  b.
in  Fall  River,  Mass.,  10  July,  1832.  After  a  gram-
mar-school education  he  became  associated  with
his  father  in  the  firm  of  Alvan  Clark  &  Sons,  and
in  that  capacity  has  successfully  completed  many
famous  lenses,  among  which  are  the  Chicago
refractor,  the  26-inch  lens  in  the  Naval  observa-
tory at  Washington,  and  the  30-inch  refractor  for
the  Imperial  observatory  at  St.  Petersburg,  for
which  the  honorary  medal  of  Russia  was  awarded
— the  only  one  ever  conferred  upon  an  American.
During  1886  the  36-inch  refractor,  the  largest  in
the  world,  was  made  for  the  Lick  observatory  on
Mount  Hamilton,  near  San  Francisco,  Cal.  Mr.
Clark  accompanied  the  total-eclipse  expedition  to
Jerez,  Spain,  in  1870,  and  also  the  similar  expedi-
tion to  Wyoming  in  1878.  As  an  independent  ob-
server he  has  discovered  fourteen  intricate  double
stars,  including  the  companion  to  Sirius,  for  which
the  Lalande  gold  medal  was  awarded  him  by  the
French  academy  of  sciences  in  1862.  He  has  also
made  numerous  inventions  connected  with  the
manufacture  of  refracting  telescopes.

CLARK,  Billy  James,  reformer,  b.  in  North-
ampton, Mass.,  4  Jan.,  1778;  d.  in  Glenn's  Falls,
N.  Y.,  20  March,  1867.  He  was  educated  at  North-
ampton academv,  and  studied  medicine  with  Dr.
Hicker,  of  Easton,  N.  Y.  He  organized  what  is
claimed  to  have  been  the  first  temperance  society
in  the  world,  at  Moreau,  Saratoga  co.,  N.  Y.,  m
1808.  Dr.  Clark  was  a  member  of  the  legislature
from  Saratoga  county  in  1821,  and  was  a  member
of  the  electoral  college  in  1848.

CLARK,  Charles  Cotesworth  Pinckney,  au-
thor, b.  in  Tinmouth,  Yt.,  20  March,  1822.  He
was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1843,  and^  at  the
College  of  phvsicians  and  surgeons.  New  Vork,  in
1847.  After  practising  in  Middlebury,  Vt.,  four
years,  he  removed  to  Oswego,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was


CLARK


CLARK


625


collector  of  customs  from  1869  till  1871.  He  is  the
author  of  numerous  medical  papers,  and  of  "  The
Commonwealth  Reconstructed  "  (New  York.  1878),
proposing  an  ingenious  device  for  the  reform  of
our  political  system.

CLARK,  Daniel,  senator,  b.  in  Stratham,  Rock-
ingham CO.,  N.  PL,  24  (Jet.,  1809.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1834  with  the  highest  hon-
ors of  his  class,  studied  law,  and  began  practice  at
Epping,  N.  H.,  in  1837.  He  removed  to  Manches-
ter, N.  H.,  in  1839,  and  was  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature for  five  years.  Pie  was  elected  U.  S.  sena-
tor in  1857  for  the  unexpired  term  of  James  Bell,
deceased,  and  was  re-elected  in  1861,  serving  till
he  resigned  in  July,  1866.  He  was  president  pro
tern,  of  the  senate  for  some  time  in  1864-5.  On  11
July,  1861,  Senator  Clark  offered  a  resolution,
which  was  adopted,  expelling  from  the  senate  the
southern  senators  who  had  left  their  seats  on  the
secession  of  their  states.  He  took  an  active  part
in  the  debates  of  the  senate,  and  was  a  steadfast
supporter  of  the  government  during  the  civil  war.
On  his  resignation,  he  was  appointed  by  President
Johnson  U.  S.  Judge  for  the  district  of  New  Plamp-
shire.  Pie  was  president  of  the  New  Hampshire
constitutional  convention  of  1876.

CLARK,  Daniel,  Canadian  physician,  b.  in
Granton,  Invernesshire,  Scotland,  29  Aug.,  1835.
In  1841  his  parents  arrived  in  Canada  and  settled
on  a  farm  near  Port  Dover,  Norfolk  co.,  Ontario.
In  1850  Daniel  set  out  for  California,  and,  after
undergoing  great  hardships,  accumulated  a  large
amount  by  placer  mining.  He  returned  to  Canada
in  1851,  attended  the  Simcoe  grammar-school,  and
subsequently  pursued  classical  and  medical  studies
in  Toronto,  finally  being  graduated  M.  D.  at  Vic-
toria college,  Cobourg,  in  1858.  He  then  at-
tended lectures  at  Edinburgh  university,  and
afterward  visited  the  hospitals  of  the  chief  cities
of  Europe.  In  1859  he  returned  to  Canada  and
engaged  in  the  practice  of  his  profession  at  Prince-
ton, Ontario.  In  1864  he  entered  the  service  of  the
United  States,  and  was  attached  to  the  surgeon-
general's  department.  He  was  chosen  a  member
of  the  medical  council  of  Ontario  in  1872,  and  has
been  its  president.  He  has  also  been  examiner  on
various  subjects  for  Toronto  university  and  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  of  Ontario.
Dr.  Clark  is  now  (1886)  superintendent  of  the  Pro-
vincial asylum  for  the  insane,  Toronto.  He  has
published  "  Pen  Photographs  "  (1873),  and  "  John
Garth,"  a  novel  illustrating  scenes  in  the  rebellion
of  1837,  and  has  been  a  frequent  contributor  to
medical,  religious,  and  other  magazines.

CLARK,  Daniel  A.,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rahway,
N.  J.,  1  March,  1779;  d.  in  New  York,  3  March,
1840.  Pie  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1808,
studied  at  Andover  theological  seminary,  and  while
there  was  licensed  by  the  presbytery  of  New  Jer-
sey, and  in  1812  was  ordained  and  installed  pastor
of  the  Congregational  union  church  of  Braintree
and  Weymouth,  Mass.  Thence  he  removed,  in
1815,  to  Hanover.  N.  J.,  and  the  year  following
went  to  Southbury,  Conn.,  where,  in  addition  to
his  pastoral  labors,  he  taught  gratuitously  in  order
to  elevate  the  standard  of  education  in  the  place.
In  1820  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the  West  parish
of  Amherst,  Mass.,  and  became  one  of  the  founders
01  the  college  there.  He  accepted  a  call  to  Ben-
nmgton  in  1826,  and  afterward  preached  for  short
periods  in  various  places.  His  complete  works,
with  a  biographical  sketch  by  George  Shepard,
were  published  in  1846  (5th  ed.,  edited  by  his  son,
James  H.  Clark,  M.  D.,  2  vols.,  New  York,  1855).—
His  son,  James  Henry,  physician,  b.  in  Living-

VOL.  I. — 40


ston,  N.  Y.,  23  June,  1814 ;  d.  in  Montclair,  N.  J.,  6
March,  1869,  was  educated  at  Bennington,  Vt.,  and
at  Amherst.  He  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  James
C.  Bliss,  of  New  York,  and  in  Europe,  and  received
his  diploma  from  the  College  of  physicians  and  sur-
geons. New  York  city,  in  1841.  After  more  studv
abroad  he  settled  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1846,  and
made  diseases  of  the  eye  and  ear  his  specialty.  Dr.
Clark  was  president  of  the  Essex  county  medical
society  in  1867,  and  its  historian  in  1868.  He  was
one  of  the  founders  of  the  Park  Presbyterian  church
in  Newark,  and  was  for  several  years  secretary  of
the  Tract  society  of  that  city.  In  1863  he  removed
to  Montclair,  but  retained  his  office  in  Newark.
Dr.  Clark  published,  besides  his  father's  works,
"  History  of  the  Cholera  as  it  appeared  in  Newark
in  1849"  (Newark,  1850);  "Sight  and  Hearing:
How  Preserved,  How  Lost "  (1856) ;  "  Medical  To-
pography of  Newark  and  its  Vicinity  "  (1861) ;  and
"  The  Medical  Men  of  New  Jersey  in  Essex  Dis-
trict, from  1666  to  1866  "  (Newark,  1868).  He  left
an  unfinished  "Encyclopaedia  of  P)iseases." — An-
other son,  Horace  Francis,  railroad  president,  b.
in  Southbury,  Conn.,  29  Nov.,  1815;  d.  in  New
York  city,  19  June,  1873,  was  graduated  at  Will-
iams in  1833,  studied  law  in  the  office  of  Prescott
Hall,  and  in  1837  was  admitted  to  the  New  York
bar.  During  the  nineteen  years  that  he  was  en-
gaged in  active  practice  he  was  reputed  to  be  the
most  active,  diligent,  and  hard-working  lawyer  in
the  profession  in  New  York.  In  1856  he  was
elected  to  congress  on  the  democratic  ticket,  but,
though  identified  with  the  wing  of  the  democratic
party  then  known  as  Hardshells,  he  dissented  from
the  first  from  the  policy  of  Mr.  Buchanan  in  regard
to  Kansas,  supported  the  views  of  Senator  Douglas,
and  was  one  of  the  five  anti-Lecompton  men  who
finally  effected  the  organization  of  the  house.  At
the  close  of  his  term  he  was  re-elected  as  an  inde-
pendent candidate.  During  his  first  term  he  was
assigned  to  the  judiciary  committee,  and  during
the  second  to  the  committee  on  Indian  affairs.  In
1857  Mr.  Clark  first  became  a  director  in  the  New
York  and  Harlem  railroad,  then  not  a  very  profit-
able enterprise,  from  which  time  dated  his  active
participation  in  railroad  operations.  He  afterward
became  president  of  the  Lake  Shore,  Michigan
Southern,  and  Northern  Indiana  railroad,  and  of
the  Union  Pacific  railroad,  besides  being  director
in  the  New  York  Central  and  Hudson  River  rail-
road ;  the  New  York  and  Harlem ;  the  New  Haven,
Hartford,  and  Springfield ;  the  Shore  Line ;  the  Chi-
cago and  Northwestern,  and  holding  a  valuable  in-
terest in  various  other  lines.  He  was  also  president
of  the  Union  Trust  company  of  New  York,  and  an
active  manager  of  the  Western  Union  Telegraph
company,  and  other  corporations.  He  was  also  an
operator  in  Wall  street,  where  his  influence  was
great.  When  the  combined  attack  was  made  on
the  Tweed  ring  in  1871,  Mr.  Clark  rendered  power-
ful assistance  in  breaking  the  political  power  of
the  ring,  and  driving  Tweed  and  his  friends  out  of
Tammany  hall,  and  from  that  time  he  continued
to  be  an  active  member  of  the  society.  Mr.  Clark
gave  freely  to  charitable  objects.  Williams  college
gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1868.  He  mar-
ried, in  1848,  a  daughter  of  Com.  Vanderbilt.

CLARK,  Davis  Wasgatt,  M.  E.  bishop,  b.  on
the  island  of  Mount  Desert,  Me.,  12  Feb.,  1812;
d.  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  23  May,  1871.  He  united
with  the  Methodist  church  at  the  age  of  seven-
teen, and  three  years  later  he  became  a  student
in  the  Maine  Wesleyan  seminary,  in  Readfield,
where  he  continued  for  three  years,  pursuing  the
preparatory  and,  in  part,  the regular  collegiate


626


CLARK


CLARK


course  of  studies.  In  1834  he  entered  Wesleyan
university  with  an  advanced  standing,  and  was
graduated  in  1836.  Soon  after  this  he  became  a
teacher  in  the  department  of  mathematics  at
Amenia  seminary,  N.  Y.,  where  he  remained
seven  years,  during  most  of  the  time  filling  the
offices  *of  principal  and  professor  of  intellectual
and  moral  philosophy,  and  also  acting  as  preacher
to  the  seminary.  In  1843  he  became  a  member  of
the  New  York  conference,  and  for  the  next  ten
years  was  actively  engaged  in  pastoral  services  in
New  York  city  and  other  places.  In  the  latter
part  of  1853  he  became  editor  of  the  "  Ladies'
Repository,"  a  monthly  religious  and  literary
magazine  published  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  In  May,
1864,  he  was  chosen,  by  the  general  conference  at
Philadelphia,  to  the  office  of  a  bishop.  In  1839
Mr.  Clark  married  Miss  Mary  J.  Redman,  of  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  who,  with  two  sons  and  two  daughters,
survived  him.  In  1851  he  received  from  his  alma
mater  the  degree  of  D.  D.  He  was  chosen  by  the
New  York  conference  as  a  delegate  to  the  general
conference,  for  the  several  sessions  of  that  body,
for  1856-'60,  and  1864.  As  a  preacher  he  was
able  and  instructive,  and  in  some  cases  intensely
earnest  and  eloquent ;  as  a  pastor  he  was  diligent
and  painstaking,  and  in  his  religious  life  at  once
cheerful  and  earnestly  devout.  He  was  always  a
laborious  student.  Though  he  was  recognized  as
among  the  more  conservative  of  anti-slavery  men,
yet  the  passage  of  the  fugitive  slave  law,  and  its
subsequent  enforcement,  aroused  him  to  earnest
and  outspoken  opposition ;  and  when  the  civil  war
began  he  was  among  the  most  active  advocates  of
the  cause  of  the  Union.  After  the  war  he  entered
heartily  into  the  measure  adopted  by  his  church
for  improving  the  condition  of  the  frecdmen.  On
his  elevation  to  the  episcopacy.  Bishop  Clark's  first
assignment  to  service  was  to  visit  and  superintend
the  work  of  the  church  in  California  and  Oregon,
which  occupied  him  during  the  latter  part  of  1864.
In  1866  his  work  was  chiefly  in  the  region  south  of
Ohio  river,  and  during  that  time  he  organized  the
conferences  in  east  and  middle  Tennessee,  and  in
northern  Georgia  and  Alabama.  In  subsequent
years  he  visited,  in  his  episcopal  tours,  nearly  every
state  and  territory  of  the  nation,  presiding  at  the
sessions  of  the  annual  conferences,  and  laboring  in
all  ways  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  church.
Bishop  Clark  was  rather  above  the  average  height,
exceedingly  well  developed,  and  of  rather  full
habit.  His  complexion  was  slightly  florid,  and
his  hair  a  dark  auburn.  His  works  include  "  Ele-
ments of  Algebra,"  prepared  while  teaching  in  that
department  at  Amenia,  and  "Mental  Discipline,"
a  small  treatise,  intended  primarily  for  his  own
pupils ;  also  "  The  Life  and  Times  of  Bishop  Hed-
ding  "  and  "  Man  all  Immortal."

CLARK,  Edson  Lyiuan,  author,  b.  in  East-
hampton,  Mass.,  1  April,  1827.  After  attending
Williston  seminary  in  his  native  town,  he  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1853,  and  at  Union  theologi-
cal seminary,  New  York  city,  in  1858.  He  taught
in  a  classical  school  in  New  York  from  1853  till
1856.  He  was  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Dalton,  Mass.,  from  1859  till  1867,  at  North  Bran-
ford,  Conn.,  to  August,  1877,  and  at  Southampton,
Mass.,  till  May,  1886.  He  has  published  "The
Arabs  and  the  Turks"  (Boston,  1876);  "The  Races
of  European  Turkey  "  (J^ew  York,  1878) ;  and  "  Fun-
damental Questions ;  chiefly  relating  to  the  Book
of  Genesis  and  the  Hebrew  'Language  "  (1882).

CLARK,  Georg'e  Hunt,  poet,  b.  in  North-
ampton, Mass.,  in  1809 ;  d.  in  Hartford.  Conn.,  20
Aug.,  1881. He  became  an  iron  merchant  at  Hart-


ford, and  was  a  frequent  contributor  to  "  Putnam's
Magazine,"  the  "  Knickerbocker,"  and  other  peri-
odicals. He  published  "Now  and  Then"  and
"  The  News,"  poems  of  about  1,000  lines  each,  and
"  Undertow  of  a  Trade-Wind  Surf,"  a  collection  of
sentimental  and  humorous  pieces.

CLARK,  George  Rog-ers,  soldier,  b.  near  Mon-
ticello,  Albemarle  co.,  Va.,  19  Nov.,  1752 ;  d  near
Louisville,  Ky.,  18  Feb.,  1818.  He  spent  his
early  life  in  Caroline  county,  Va.,  and  enjoyed
some  educational  advantages'from  a  noted  Scotch
teacher,  Donald  Robertson,  in  King  and  Queen
county  among
whose  pupils
was  James
Madison.  He
fitted  himself
for  a  surveyor,
and  at  the  age
of  twenty  prac-
tised his  pro-
fession on  the
upper  Ohio,
and  became  a
farmer.  Two
years  later  he
served under

Gov.  Dun  more j ?^4,y -x  jiac

in his cam-  -^/  '^  ''f

paign  against
the  Shawnees
and  their  al-
lies, which
ended  in  the
treaty  of  Camp  Charlotte,  memorable  as  the  occa-
sion of  the  undying  speech  of  Logan,  the  Mingo
chief.  Early  in  1775  Clark  went  to  Kentucky,
and  was  occupied  in  surveying ;  but,  as  the  west-
ern Indians  were  induced  by  the  British  to  take
up  the  tomahawk,  he  became  the  natural  leader
of  the  people  in  the  defence  of  their  infant  settle-
ments, was  made  a  major  of  the  militia  in  1776,
and  chosen  as  a  delegate  to  the  Virginia  conven-
tion, to  urge  upon  the  state  authorities  the  claims
of  the  colony  for  government  and  defence.  He
arrived  at  Williamsburg  just  after  the  convention
had  adjourned,  but  succeeded  in  procuring  the
formation  of  the  new  county  of  Kentucky,  and
a  supply  of  ammunition  for  the  defence  of  the
frontier.  It  is  said  that  Clark,  seeing  that  his  ap-
peal for  powder  was  likely  to  remain  unheeded,
exclaimed:  "A  country  which  is  not  worth  de-
fending is  not  worth  claiming."  The  500  pounds
of  powder  thus  obtained  was  conveyed  by  land  to
the  Monongahela,  and  thence  by  water  to  the
Three  islands,  a  few  miles  above  where  Maysville
now  is,  and  there  secreted,  while  Clark  and  his
escort  went  to  Harrodsburg  for  horses  and  a  guard
for  its  conveyance  to  that  station.  At  length  it
reached  the  place  of  its  destination,  but  not  with-
out the  loss  of  some  of  the  party  who  first  at-
tempted its  acquisition.  Early  in  1777  Clark  re-
pelled the  Indian  attacks  on  Harrodsburg,  sent  out
spies  to  Illinois,  and  on  their  return  hastened  on
foot  to  Virginia  to  lay  before  the  governor  and
council  his  plan  for  the  conquest  of  the  Illinois
countrv  and  the  repression  of  the  murderous  In-
dian forays  from  that  quarter.  His  scheme  was
approved,  and  he  was  made  a  lieutenant-colonel,  au-
thorized to  raise  the  necessary  troops,  and  pushed
on  with  his  little  force  to  a  small  island  oppo-
site the  present  city  of  Louisville,  where  he  erected
block-houses,  drilled  his  men,  and  planted  corn.
Hence  the  name  of  Corn  island.  On  24  June,  1778,
during  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  he  set  sail,  passed


CLARK


CLARK


627


safely  over  the  rapids,  and  soon  landed  at  the  old
deserted  Fort  Massac,  and,  marching  thence  six
days  across  the  country,  a  portion  of  the  time
without  food,  took  Kaskaskia  by  surprise,  4  July.
The  other  French  villages  in  that  quarter  followed
suit  and  surrendered  at  discretion.  The  Illinois
country  was  thus  captured  without  the  firing  of  a
gun  or  the  loss  of  a  man.  Clark  conciliated  the
surrounding  Indian  tribes,  changing  enemies  into
friends.  All  this  tended  to  alarm  the  British.
Gov.  Hamilton  at  Detroit  marched  a  large  force,
mostly  Indians,  and  retook  Vincennes  early  in  De-
cember of  that  year.  This  intelligence  soon  reached
Kaskaskia.  "I  must  take  Hamilton,  or  he  will
take  me,"  said  Clark;  and  with  fewer  than  170
men,  all  told,  he  marched  across  the  country  in
midwinter,  through  the  submerged  lands  of  the
Wabash  and  its  tributaries,  sometimes  breaking
the  ice,  too  thin  to  bear  them,  often  wading  up  to
their  armpits  in  water,  with  scanty  food,  but
buoyed  up  by  patriotic  hopes.  They  at  length
appeared  before  the  astonished  garrison,  plied
successfully  their  unerring  rifles,  and  in  a  few
hours  Col.  Hamilton  yielded  up  the  fort,  sur-
rendering to  Clark  and  his  ragged  followers,  24
Feb.,  1779.  The  weakness  of  "his  force  and  the
poverty  of  Virginia  alone  prevented  his  attempt-
ing the  capture  of  Detroit.  Early  in  1780  Clark
established  Fort  Jefferson,  a  little  below  the  mouth
of  the  Ohio.  Hearing  of  the  approach  of  a  for-
midable British  and  Indian  force  against  Cahokia,
his  upper  garrison,  and  the  Spanish  settlement  of
St.  Louis,  Clark  hastened  with  a  party  to  the  re-
lief of  Cahokia,  reaching  there  just  in  time  to  re-
Eel  the  enemy.  Learning  from  them  that  another
irge  force  was  marching  to  Kentucky,  he  hastened
there  on  foot,  with  but  two  companions,  leaving
his  Illinois  troops  to  follow  the  retreating  enemy
to  their  towns  on  Rock  river,  which  they  found
deserted  and  destroyed.  On  reaching  Kentucky,
Clark  learned  of  Bird's  invasion,  capturing  Mar-
tin's and  Ruddell's  stations,  with  340  prisoners,
when  he  hastily  gathered  a  thousand  men,  invaded
the  Shawnee  country,  defeated  the  Indians,  and  laid
waste  their  villages.  Once  more  Clark's  attention
was  turned  toward  Detroit,  the  headquarters  of
British  power  and  influence  in  the  northwest,
whence  savage  war -parties  were  constantly  sent
forth  to  harass  and  destroy  the  infant  settlements
of  Kentucky.  Going  to  Virginia,  he  concerted
with  Gov.  Jefferson  and  council  a  campaign  against
Detroit,  which  met  the  approval  and  assistance  of
Gen.  Washington.  Before  it  cotild  be  carried  into
eifeet,  Arnold's  invasion  of  Virginia  in  January,

1781,  occurred,  when  Clark  temporarily  headed
240  riflemen  and  ambuscaded  a  party  of  the  ene-
my at  Hood's,  on  James  river;  and  then  hastened
forward,  with  the  commission  of  brigadier-general,
for  the  execution  of  his  scheme  against  Detroit.
But  it  miscarried,  owing  to  the  poverty  of  Vir-
ginia, the  difficulty  of  raising  an  adequate  force
with  inadequate  means,  and  the  powerful  opposi-
tion of  the  enemy,  headed  by  Brant,  the  great  Mo-
hawk chief,  McKee,  Girty,  and  other  border  lead-
ers, who  attacked  Clark's  detachment  and  invaded
the  Bear-grass  settlements  around  Lotiisville. In

1782,  after  the  British  and  Indian  attack  on  Bry-
an's station,  and  the  disastrous  defeat  of  the  Ken-
tuckians  at  the  Blue  Licks,  Clark  led  forth  1,000
men,  driving  back  the  savages  on  Big  Miami,  and
destroying  their  villages  and  means  of  sustenance.
This  was  Clark's  last  important  service,  as  his  ex-
pedition up  the  Wabash  in  1786,  and  his  efforts
in  behalf  of  France  in  1793-4,  against  the  Span-
iards on  the  Mississippi,  proved  abortive. The


freedom  of  Clark's  early  life  had  unfitted  him  for
domestic  happiness,  and  he  never  married.  A  tra-
dition is  preserved  in  the  family  that  he  was  fasci-
nated with  the  beauty  of  the  daughter  of  the  Span-
ish governor  of  St.  Louis  when  he  relieved  that
post  from  an  Indian  attack.  Observing  a  want  of
courage  in  the  governor,  he  broke  off  his  addresses
to  the  girl,  saying  to  his  friends  :  "  I  will  not  be  the
father  of  a  race  of  cowards."  His  last  years  were
spent  alone  and  in  poverty,  in  a  rude  dwelling  on
Corn  island,  until  his  sister  took  him  to  her  home
at  Locust  Grove,  near  Louisville.  He  felt  keenly
what  he  considered  the  ingratitude  of  the  republic
in  leaving  him  in  poverty  and  obscurity,  and  when
the  state  of  Virginia  sent  him  a  sword,  he  received
the  compliments  of  the  committee  in  gloomy  si-
lence. Then  he  exclaimed :  "  When  Virginia  need-
ed a  sword,  I  gave  her  one.  She  sends  me  now  a
toy.  I  want  bread ! "  He  thrust  the  sword  into
the  ground  and  broke  it  with  his  crutch.  Clark
was  tall  and  commanding,  brave  and  full  of  re-
sources, possessing  the  aftection  and  confidence  of
his  men.  All  that  rich  domain  northwest  of  the
Ohio  was  secured  to  the  republic,  at  the  peace  of
1783,  in  consequence  of  his  prowess.  His  grave  is
in  Cave  Hill  cemetery  at  Louisville,  marked  by  a
little  headstone  bearing  the  letters  G.  R,  C.  It  is
said  that  not  half  a  dozen  people  in  the  United
States  can  point  it  out, — His  brother,  William,
soldier,  b.  in  Virginia,  1  Aug.,  1770 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  1  Sept.,  1838.  He  was  the  youngest  of  six
brothers,  four  of  whom  were  distinguished  in  the
revolution.  He  removed  with  his  family  in  1784
to  the  falls  of  the  Ohio,  in  Kentucky,  the  site  of
the  present  city  of  Louisville,  where  his  brother
George  Rogers  had  built  a  fort.  That  part  of  the
country  was  then  known  as  "  the  dark  and  bloody
ground,"  on  account  of  the  frequent  Indian  raids,
and  young  Clark  became  early  acquainted  with
the  methods  of  Indian  warfare.  He  was  appoint-
ed ensign  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  on  7  March,.
1792,  became  a  lieutenant  of  infantry.  He  was
assigned  to  the  4th  sub-legion  in  December  of  that
year,  was  made  adjutant  and  quartermaster  in
September,  1793,  and  resigned  in  July,  1796,  on
account  of  ill  health.  Soon  afterward  he  removed
to  St.  Louis,  and  in  March,  1804,  was  appointed
by  President  Jefferson  a  second  lieutenant  of  ar-
tillery, with  orders  to  join  Capt.  Merriwether
Lewis's  exploring  expedition  from  St.  Louis  across
the  Rocky  mountains  to  the  mouth  of  Columbia
river.  Ciark  w^as  really  the  principal  military  di-
rector of  the  expedition,  materially  assisted  Capt.
Lewis  in  the  scientific  arrangements,  and  kept  a
journal,  which  was  afterward  published.  His  inti-
mate knowledge  of  Indian  habits  and  character
had  much  to  do  with  the  success  of  the  explora-
tion. He  was  promoted  to  first  lieutenant  in  Jan-
uary, 1806,  and  was  nominated  to  be  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  2d  infantry,  but  was  not  confirmed
by  the  senate.  He  resigned  from  the  army,  27
Feb.,  1807,  and  officiated  as  Indian  agent  till  he
was  appointed  by  congress  brigadier-general  for
the  territory  of  Upper  Louisiana.  During  the
war  of  1812  he  declined  the  appointment  of  briga-
dier-general in  the  army,  and  also  the  command
then  held  by  Gen.  Hull.  President  Madison  ap-
pointed him  governor  of  Missouri  territory  in  1813,
and  he  held  the  office  till  the  organization  of
the  state  in  1821,  when  he  was,  against  his  will,  a
candidate  for  election  to  the  same  office,  and  was
defeated.  He  remained  in  private  life  till  May,
1822,  when  President  Monroe  made  him  superin-
tendent of  Indian  affairs  at  St.  Louis,  and  he  held
this  office  till  his  death.


628


CLARK


CLARK


CLARK,  George  Whitfield,  clergyman,  b.  in
South  Orange,  N.  J.,  15  Feb.,  1881.  His  ancestor,
Richard  Clark,  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  of
Elizabeth,  N.  J.  He  was  graduated  at  Amherst
in  1853,  studied  theology  at  the  Rochester  semi-
nary, and,  after  ordination  on  31  Oct.,  1855,  be-
came pastor  of  the  Baptist  church  at  New  Market,
K  J.  He  took  charge  of  the  1st  Baptist  church
at  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  in  1859,  has  been  a  pastor  at
various  places,  and  since  1880  agent  and  mission-
ary of  the  American  Baptist  publication  society.
He  has  spent  several  years  in  special  exegetical
study,  and  Rochester  university  gave  him  the  de-
gree of  D.  D.  in  1872.  He  has  published  "  History
of  the  First  Baptist  Church,  Elizabeth "  (1863);
"  New  Harmony  of  the  Four  Gospels  in  English  "
(New  York,  1870);  "Notes  on  Matthew"  (1870);
"  Notes  on  Mark  "  (1872) ;  "  Notes  on  Luke  "  (1876) ;
"  Notes  on  John  "  (1879) :  "  Harmonic  Arrangement
of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  (1884) ;  "  Brief  Notes
on  the  New  Testament— the  Gospels  "  (1884),  and
numerous  articles  in  periodicals.  He  has  ready
for  publication  (1886)  brief  treatises  on  Luke  and
John,  and  in  preparation  "  Notes  on  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles."

CLARK,  Henry  James,  naturalist,  b.in  Easton,
Mass.,  22  June,  1826 ;  d.  in  Amherst,  Mass.,  1  July,
1873.  He  was  graduated  at  the  University  of  New
York  in  1848,  after  which  he  taught  for  some  time
in  White  Plains,  N.  Y.  Here  he  developed  a  taste
for  botany,  and  entered  into  a  correspondence  with
Prof.  Asa  Gray,  which  presently  led  to  his  becoming
a  student-at  the  Botanic  garden,  Cambridge,  in  1850,
while  at  the  same  time  he  supported  himself  by
teaching  in  the  academy  in  Westfield,  Mass.  Soon
afterward  he  became  a  student  under  Louis  Agas-
siz,  and  was  graduated  at  Lawrence  scientific
school  of  Harvaid  in  1854.  He  then  became  pri-
vate assistant  to  Agassiz,  who  pronounced  him
"the  most  skillful  microscopist  in  the  country,"
and  was  associated  with  him  from  1856  till  1863
in  the  preparation  of  the  anatomical  and  em-
bryological  portions  of  the  "  Contributions  to  the
Natural  History  of  the  United  States."  In  June,
1860,  he  was  appointed  adjunct  professor  of  zool-
ogy in  Lawrence  scientific  school,  and  in  1861
gave  a  course  of  lectures  on  histology  at  the  Mu-
seum of  comparative  zoology.  An  unfortunate
disagreement  with  Prof.  Agassiz  led  to  his  sev-
ering his  relations  with  the  museum  in  1863,  and
during  the  following  year  he  delivered  twelve  lec-
tures at  the  Lowell  institute  with  the  title  of
"  Mind  in  Nature."  In  1866  he  was  appointed  pro-
fessor of  botany,  zoology,  and  geology  in  the  Agri-
cultural college  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he  remained
until  1869.  He  then  became  professor  of  natural
history  at  the  University  of  Kentucky,  Lexington,
and  in  1872  was  elected  professor  of  veterinary
science  in  Massachusetts  agricultural  college  at
Amherst.  Prof.  Clark  was  a  member  of  most  of
the  learned  societies  in  this  country,  and  had  been
elected  to  the  National  academy  of  sciences.  Be-
sides valuable  contributions  on  scientific  subjects
to  "  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Sci-
ences and  Arts,"  of  the  "  Boston  Society  of  Natu-
ral History,"  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  and
"  Smithsonian  Contributions,"  he  was  the  author
of  "  A  Claim  for  Scientific  Property  "  (Cambridge,
1863),  and  "  Mind  in  Nature,  or  the  Origin  of  Life,
and  the  Mode  of  Development  of  Animals  "  (New
York,  1865).  For  a  full  list  of  his  scientific  papers
and  works,  see  Prof.  Asa  S.  Packard,  Jr.'s  "  Me-
moir of  Henry  James  Clark  "  in  the  "  Biographi-
cal Memoirs  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences"
(Washington,  1877).


CLARK,  Isaac,  soldier,  b.  in  1749;  d.  in  Castle-
ton,  Vt.,  31  Jan.,  1822.  He  was  a  soldier  of  the
revolution,  a  member  of  the  constitutional  conven-
tion, and  for  many  years  chief  judge  of  the  Ver-
mont county  court.  He  becarne  colonel  of  the
11th  U.  S.  infantry  on  12  March.  1812,  and  on  12
Oct.,  1813,  commanded  a  successful  expedition
against  Massequoi,  Canada.  He  was  transferred
and  mustered  out  of  service  on  15  June.

CLARK,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  July,  1730;  d.  in
Lebanon,  Conn.,  29  Dec,  1826.  His  ancestor,  Dan-
iel, was  an  early  settler  of  Windsor,  Conn.  James
was  a  captain  in  Putnam's  regiment,  and  was  pres-
ent at  Bunker  Hill.  He  was  made  lieutenant-
colonel  of  Huntington's  regiment,  4  Nov.,  1775,
and  took  part  in  the  battles  at  Harlem  Heights
and  White  Plains,  16  Sept.  and  18  Oct.,  1776.

CLARK,  James,  governor  of  Kentucky,  b.  in
Bedford  county,  Va.,  in  1779 ;  d.  in  Frankfort.  Ky.,
27  Aug.,  1839.  "He  removed  with  his  father  to  Clarke
county,  Ky.,  was  educated  by  a  private  tutor,  and,
after  studying  law  in  Virginia,  was  admitted  to  the
bar,  and  began  practice  in  Winchester,  Ky.,  in  1797.
He  was  several  times  a  member  of  the  legislature,
became  judge  of  the  court  of  appeals  in  1810.  and
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Clay  democrat,  serving
from  24  May,  1813,  till  1816,  when  he  resigned.  He
was  judge  of  the  circuit  court  from  1817  till  1824,
and  was  then  elected  again  to  congress  as  a  whig,
serving  from  5  Dec,  1825,  till  3  March,  1831.  He
was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in  1832,  becoming
its  speaker,  and  in  1836  was  chosen  governor  of  the
state,  and  served  till  his  death.

CLARK,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Petty,  near  In-
verness, Scotland,  29  Nov.,  1758;  d.  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  11  Oct..  1833.  He  received  a  common-school
education,  worked  for  a  few  years  as  a  copyist  in
public  offices  in  Inverness,  and  in  1778  shipped  as
a  sailor  on  board  a  transport.  He  then  served  one
year  on  a  privateer,  sailed  as  second  mate  to  the
West  Indies,  and  was  impressed  into  the  British
navy  at  Barbadoes.  He  deserted  and  shipped  on
board  a  merchantman,  which  was  captured  by  the
Spanish,  and  Clark  was  for  nineteen  months  a
prisoner  at  Havana.  Soon  after  he  was  released
he  was  again  impressed,  but  escaped  by  swimming
two  miles  to  shore,  when  the  vessel  was  off  Charles-
ton. S.  C.  After  various  adventures,  he  taught  a
backwoods  school  in  South  Carolina,  and  then  in
Georgia,  where  he  was  also  appointed  a  class-leader
among  the  Methodists.  After  a  visit  to  his  home,
which  he  reached  by  working  his  way  before  the
mast,  he  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1789  and
became  an  itinerant  Methodist  preacher  in  Georgia.
He  had  scruples  on  the  subject  of  slavery,  and  once
refused  his  yearly  salary  of  $60  because  it  was  the
proceeds  of  slave  labor.  He  withdrew  from  the
Methodist  church  in  1796  on  account  of  doctrinal
differences,  and  went  to  Illinois,  where  he  taught,
preached,  and  finallv  joined  the  anti-slavery  Bap-
tists calling  themselves  "The  Baptized  Church
of  Christ:  Friends  of  Humanity."  When  not
teaching,  "  Father  Clark,"  as  he  was  called,  made
long  preaching  tours.  One  of  these,  in  1807,  was
to  the  "  Florida  Parishes  "  in  Louisiana,  a  journey
of  1,200  miles,  which  was  performed  alone,  m  a
frail  canoe.  He  returned  to  Illinois  on  foot,  and
revisited  Louisiana  in  1811.  Father  Clark  pre-
ferred to  travel  on  foot,  and  on  one  occasion,  when
he  was  seventy  years  old,  walked  all  night  to  tuini
an  appointment,  going  sixtv-six  miles  over  a  muddy
road.  Unlike  many  western  pioneer  preachers,  ne
was  neat  in  his  dress  and  quiet  in  his  manner,  a
sketch  of  him  has  been  published  by  an  old  pio-
neer (New  York,  1855).


CLARK


CLARK


629


CLARK,  John  Alonzo,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pitts-
field,  Mass.,  6  May,  1801 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
27  Nov.,  1843.  Ho  was  graduated  at  Union  in
1823,  studied  for  the  ministry,  and  was  admitted
to  orders  in  the  Episcopal  church,  12  April,  1826.
iVfter  serving  for  three  years  in  missionary  work
in  western  New  York,  he  became  assistant  rector
of  Christ  church,  New  York  city,  and  gained  high
reputation  as  a  preacher.  In  the  autumn  of  1832
he  accepted  a  call  to  Grace  church.  Providence.
R.  I.,  and  in  1835  went  to  Philadelphia  as  rector
of  St.  Andrew's  church  in  that  city.  His  health
having  failed,  he  made  a  visit  to  Europe  in  1837-'8,
and  returned  without  material  improvement.  In
the  spring  of  1843,  completely  broken  in  health,  he
resigned  his  rectorship.  Dr.  Clark,  representing  the
evangelical  section  of  the  Episcopal  clergy,  wrote
numerous  volumes,  including  "  The  Pastor's  Testi-
mony" (1835);  "Gathered  Fragments"  (1830);  "A
Walk  about  Zion"  (1836);  and  "Glimpses  of  the
Old  World"  (1838;  with  memoir  by  Stephen  H.
Tyng,  London,  1847).

CLARK,  John  Bullock,  lawyer,  b.  in  Madison
county,  Ky.,  17  April,  1802;  d.  in  Fayette,  Mo.,  29
Oct.,  1885.  He  removed  to  Missouri  with  his  father
in  1818,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1824,  and  be-
gan practice  at  Fayette,  Mo.  He  was  clerk  of  the
Howard  county  courts  from  1824  till  1834,  com-
manded a  regiment  of  Missouri  volunteer  cavalry
in  the  Black  Hawk  war  of  1832,  where  he  was
twice  wounded,  and  in  1848  was  commissioned
major-general  of  militia.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislature  in  1850  and  1851,  and  was  at  the  head
of  the  force  sent  out  to  expel  the  Mormons  from
Missouri.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  demo-
crat in  1857,  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  served  till  1861,
when  he  withdrew  and  joined  the  Confederates.
He  was  formally  expelled  on  13  July,  1861.  At
the  beginning  of  the  war  he  was  appointed  briga-
dier-general by  Gov.  Jackson,  and  commanded
the  Missouri  troops  till  disabled  at  the  battle  of
Springheld  in  August,  1861.  Before  his  recovery
he  was  elected  to  the  first  Confederate  congress,
and  was  afterward  senator  from  Missouri  till  the
close  of  the  war.  He  then  resumed  his  law  prac-
tice at  Fayette.— His  son,  John  Bullock,  lawyer,
b.  in  Fayette,  Mo.,  14  Jan.,  1831,  spent  two  years  in
Missouri  university,  and  then  entered  Harvard  law-
school,  where  he  was  graduated  in  1854.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  entered  the  Confed-
erate army  as  a  lieutenant,  and  rose  through  the
grades  of  captain,  major,  and  colonel,  to  that  of
brigadier-general.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a
democrat,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1873,  till  1883,  and
on  4  Dec,  1883,  was  chosen  clerk  of  the  house  of
representatives.

CLARK,  Jonas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newton,  Mass.,
25  Dec,  1730;  d.  in  Lexington,  Mass.,  15  Nov..
1805.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1752,  and
ordained  as  Rev.  Mr.  Hancock's  successor  at  Lex-
ington, Mass.,  5  Nov.,  1755,  remaining  there  till  his
death.  As  was  common  in  those  days,  he  was
farmer  as  well  as  clergyman,  and  cultivated  about
sixty  acres  of  land.  'He  was  an  ardent  patriot.
Edward  Everett  says :  "  Mr.  Clark  was  of  a  class  of
citizens  who  rendered  services  second  to  no  others
in  enlightening  and  animating  the  popular  mind  on
the  great  question  at  issue."  He  well  understood
the  state  of  the  question  between  the  colonies  and
the  mother  country,  and  from  1762  till  1776  drew
up  an  able  series  of  papers,  giving  instructions  to
the  representatives  sent  by  the  town  to  the  general
court.  These  papers  are  still  among  the  Lexington
town  records,  and  are  conceived  in  a  manly,  yet
calm  and  respectful  spirit. Mr.  Clark  was  noted


for  his  hospitality,  and  was  entertaining  John  Han-
cock and  Samuel  Adams  at  his  house  on  the  night
of  18  April,  1775,  when  Paul  Revere  warned  him  of
the  approach  of  the  expedition  sent  out  by  Gage,  one
of  whose  objects  was  to  surprise  and  capture  these
two  patriots.  When  asked  by  his  guests  whether
the  people  would  fight,  Mr.  Clark  replied  that  he
had  "trained  them  for  this  very  hour;  they  would
fight,  and,  if  need  be,  die,  too,  under  the  shadow
of  the  house  of  God."  It  was  but  a  few  rods  from
Mr.  Clark's  house  that  the  first  blood  of  the  revolu-
tion was  shed  on  the  following  day,  19  April,  1775,
and  the  men  that  fell  were  his  parishioners.  "  From
this  day,"  said  he,  when  he  saw  their  dead  bodies,
"  will  be  dated  the  liberty  of  the  world."  Mr.
Clark  published  several  sermons,  among  them  one
to  commemorate  the  battle  of  Lexington  (1776).

CLARK,  Laban,  clergyman,  b.  in  Haverhill,  N.
H.,  19  July,  1778;  d.  in  Middletown,  Conn.,  28
Nov.,  1868.  In  his  childhood  his  parents  removed
to  Bradford,  Vt..  where  he  obtained  a  fair  academi-
cal education.  In  1798  he  united  with  a  Meth-
odist church,  and  soon  became  active  as  a  class-
leader  and  exhorter.  He  began  preaching  in  1800,
and  in  1801,  joining  the  New  York  conference,  en-
tered upon  itinerant  work,  in  which  he  continued
with  great  success  for  fifty  years,  in  New  England,
New  York,  and  Canada.  In  1819  he  offered  the
first  resolution  in  favor  of  forming  the  Missionary
society  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church,  and,  in
conjunction  with  Nathan  Bangs  and  Freeborn  Gar-
retson,  prepared  its  constitution.  In  1829  Mr.
Clark,  then  presiding  elder  of  the  New  Haven  dis-
trict, heard  that  the  buildings  formerly  occupied
by  Capt.  Partridge's  military  academy  in  Middle-
town  were  for  sale,  and  at  once  offered'  to  be  one  of
ten  to  purchase  them,  with  the  idea  of  founding  a
Methodist  college.  Soon  afterward  the  trustees  of
the  buildings  offered  to  give  them  to  the  New  York
and  New  England  conferences,  on  condition  that  a
college  should  be  established  and  provided  with  an
endowment  fund  of  $40,000.  Mr.  Clark  was  active
in  the  matter,  and  the  result  was  the  establishment
of  W^esleyan  university  in  1831.  Mr.  Clark  became
the  president  of  the  board  of  trustees,  and  held  the
office  till  his  death,  withdrawing  from  active  labor
in  1851,  and  settling  at  Middletown.

CLARK,  Lewis  Gaylord,  author,  b.  in  Otisco,
Onondaga  co.,  N.  Y.,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Piermont,  N.
Y.,  3  Nov.,  1873.  He  and  his  twin  brother,  Willis
Gaylord,  were  educated  chiefly  by  their  father,  who
was  a  soldier  of  the  revolution,  and  a  man  of  fine
attainments.  In  1834  Lewis  became  editor  of  the
"  Knickerbocker  Magazine,"  which  had  been  es-
tablished in  1832  by  Charles  Fenno  Hoffman.  It
had  been  unsuccessful,  but  Mr.  Clark  soon  retrieved
its  fortunes,  and  it  became  the  foremost  literary
publication  of  the  day,  numbering  among  its  con-
tributors Irving,  Bryant,  Longfellow,  Halleck,
Willis,  and  many  others  whose  names  are  familiar.
Mr.  Clark  retained  the  editorship  until  1859,  when
it  died  from  financial  mismanagement.  During
this  time  he  wrote  the  "Editor's  Table"  and  the
"  Gossip  with  Readei-s  and  Correspondents,"  which
were  special  features  of  the  magazine,  and  had
much  to  do  with  its  popularity.  These  consisted
of  humorous  or  pleasant  stories  floating  about  town,
the  jests  of  the  day,  and  bits  from  the  editor's
desultory  reading,  strung  together  with  a  running
comment.  For  several  years  they  also  included  a
burlesque  of  a  country  newspaper,  entitled  the
"Bunkum  Flagstaff."  This  kind  of  writing,  so
common  at  the  present  day,  was  then  comparatively
new,  and  Mr.  Clark  may  be  said  to  have  perfected
it. It  had  much  to  do  with  creating  a  kindly  feel-


630


CLARK


CLARK


^


;^r^<^,i^^v^g:^e^^


ing  among  literary  men,  and  attracted  many  young
writers.  Although  Mr.  Clark's  good  nature  often  al-
lowed platitudes  to  pass  muster  in  its  pages,  the  mag-
azine was  the  parent  of  much  that  is  best  in  quality

in  our  later  pe-
riodicals. Its  in-
fluence on  Amer-
ican literature
was  wholesonfe
and  inspiring,
and  it  led  the  way
to  a  higher  stand-
ard of  magazine
writing.  In  1855
some  of  the  con-
tributors to  the
magazine  made
up  lor  Mr.  Clark's
benefit  a  volume
of  their  contribu-
tions, illustrated
by  their  portraits,
and  entitled

"  The  Knicker-
bocker Gallery,"
which  was  edited
by  Dr.  John  W.
/^  Francis,  Dr.  Ru-

fus  W.  Griswold,
Richard  B.  Kimball,  George  P.  Morris,  and  Rev.
Frederick  W.  Shelton.  With  the  proceeds  of  this
book,  supplemented  by  other  aid,  a  residence  was
bought  for  Mr.  Clark  at  Piermont-on-the-Hudson,
where  he  afterward  lived.  After  the  "  Knicker-
bocker "  was  given  up.  Mr.  Clark  held  for  some  years
a  place  in  the  New  York  custom-house.  He  con-
tinued to  contribute  to  periodical  literature  till  a
few  weeks  before  his  death.  Among  Mr.  Clark's
literary  friends  was  Charles  Dickens.  Tiie  ac-
quaintance began  in  a  letter  written  to  Dickens
by  Mr.  Clark  in  commendation  of  the  *'  Pickwick
Papers,"  and  the  two  men  carried  on  for  many
years  a  correspondence  in  which  appeared  the
first  suggestions  that  Dickens  should  visit  the
United  States,  Mr.  Clark's  only  publications  in
book-form  were  the  "  Knickerbocker  Sketch-Book,"
containing  a  few  of  his  own  articles  (1850),  and
"  Knick-Knacks  from  an  Editor's  Table,"  con-
sisting of  selections  from  that  department  of  his
magazine  (New  York,  1852).  See  a  sketch  of  Mr.
Clark,  by  Thomas  B.  Thorpe,  in  "  Harper's  Maga-
zine" for  March,  1874. — His  twin  brother,  Willis
Gaylord,  d.  in  Philadelphia,  12  June,  1841,  was
educated  with  him  at  home,  and  showed  poetic
talent  in  his  youth.  He  began  in  1830  to  edit  in
Philadelphia  a  weekly  paper,  on  the  plan  of  the  New
York  "  Mirror,"  but  it  was  soon  discontinued.  He
then  became  associate  editor  of  the  "  Columbian
Star,"  a  religious  and  literary  paper,  from  which  he
retired  to  take  charge  of  the  Philadelphia  "  Ga-
zette," the  oldest  daily  in  the  city.  At  the  time  of
his  death  Mr.  Clark  was  its  proprietor.  In  1883  he
recited  his  longest  poem,  "  The  Spirit  of  Life,"  be-
fore the  Franklin  society  of  Brown  university.
His  other  poems  are  brief  fugitive  pieces.  A  small
collection  of  them  was  published  during  his  life-
time, and  a  complete  edition,  edited  by  his  brother,
appeared  after  his  death  (New  York,  1847),  A  vol-
ume entitled  "  Literary  Remains,"  with  a  memoir,
was  also  issued  by  his  brother  (1844),  Half  of  this
was  occupied  by  "  Ollapodiana,"  a  series  of  fanciful
papers,  which  had  run  for  several  years  in  the
"  Knickerbocker."  The  prose  of  Willis  G.  Clark  is
rollicking  and  humorous,  while  his  poetry  is  sub-
dued, with  an  undercurrent  of  religious  feeling.


CLARK,  Myron  Holley,  governor  of  New  York,
b.  in  Naples,  Ontario  co.,  N.  Y..  28  Oct.,  1806.  His
grandfather.  Col,  William  Clark,  removed  from
Berkshire  county,  Mass.,  to  Ontario  county,  N.  Y.,
in  1790.  Myron  was  educated  in  a  district  school
at  Naples,  attending  from  three  to  four  months  an-
nually, when  between  six  and  seventeen  years  old.
After  filling  several  offices  in  his  native  town,  and
becoming  lieutenant-colonel  of  state  militia,  he  was
sheriff  of  Ontario  county  for  two  years,  and,  having
removed  to  Canandaigua,  was  president  of  that  vil-
lage in  1850  and  1851,  and  state  senator  from  1852
till  1854.  During  Mr.  Clark's  first  term  as  senator
in  1852-'3,  the  law  was  passed  consolidating  the
several  railroads  now  forming  the  New  York  cen-
tral, and  it  was  largely  by  his  persistent  firmness
that  the  provision  limiting  passenger  fares  to  two
cents  a  mile  was  adopted.  As  chairman  of  the
committee  on  the  subject,  he  was  influential  in  se-
curing the  passage  of  the  prohibitory  liquor  law
that  was  vetoed  by  Gov.  Seymour.  In  1854  the
anti-slavery  wings  of  both  the  whig  and  demo-
cratic parties,  the  prohibitionists,  and  several  in-
dependent organizations  separately  nominated  Mr.
Clark  for  governor,  and  he  was  elected  by  a  small
majority,  his  supporters  in  some  of  their  state  or-
ganizations taking  the  name  of  "republicans,"
thus  making  him  the  earliest  state  candidate  of
that  party.  During  his  administration  a  new  pro-
hibitory law^  was  passed,  and  signed  by  him.  It
remained  in  force  about  nine  months,  when  it  was
set  aside  by  the  court  of  appeals.

CLARK,  Nathaniel  Oeorg-e,  clergyman,  b.  in
Calais,  Vt,,  18  Jan,,  1825.  He  was  graduated  at
the  L^niversity  of  Vermont  in  1845,  and  was  tutor
there  from  1849  till  1850.  After  studying  theology
at  Andover,  and  Auburn,  where  he  was  graduated
in  1852,  he  became  professor  of  English  literature
in  the  University  of  Vermont,  and  retained  the
chair  till  18G3.  He  was  ordained  on  13  Oct.,  1857,
and  from  that  year  occupied  also  the  chair  of  Latin.
He  was  professor  of  logic,  rhetoric,  and  English
literature  at  Union  from  1863  till  1866,  when  he
became  secretary  of  the  American  board  of  com-
missioners for  foreign  missions.  Mr.  Clark  has
travelled  extensively  through  Europe,  Egypt,  and
Palestine.  Union  college  gave  him  the  degree  of
D.  D.  in  1867,  and  the  Universitv  of  Vermont  that
of  LL.  D.  in  1875.  He  is  a  trustee  of  Holyoke
seminary,  and  of  Wellesley  college.  Besides  essays
on  missionary  work,  he  has  published  "Elements
of  the  English  Language  "  (New  York,  1863),

CLARK,  Sheldon,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Oxford,
Conn.,  81  Jan.,  1785;  d.  there,  10  April,  1840.
Without  going  through  the  college  course,  he
studied  under  President  Dwight.  and  became  a
farmer.  In  1823  he  placed  $5,000  at  the  disposal
of  Yale  college,  to  be  invested  at  compound  inter-
est until  it  should  amount  to  $20,000,  when  it  was
to  be  used  for  founding  a  professorshiji,  and  in
1848  the  "  Clark  professorship  of  moral  philoso-
phv"  was  established  on  this  foundation.  Mr.
Clark  also  gave  a  scholarship  fund  to  the  college,
bought  a  telescope  for  it,  and  bequeathed  it  $15,000.
He  published  several  pamphlets,  and  left  numer-
ous manuscripts  on  finance,  economics,  and  meta-
physics. He  received  manv  letters  from  noted
men  in  relation  to  his  pamphlets,  and  one  from
Thomas  Jefferson  is  giA-en  at  length,  in  a  sketch  of
Mr.  Clark  by  Prof.  Silliman  in  the  "American
Journal  of  Science  "  (xii,,  217),  „

CLARK,  Thomas (?),  mate  of  the  "Mayflower.
His  first  name  is  unknown,  though  it  has  been  con-
jectured that  he  was  identical  with  a  Thomas  ClarK,
who  died  in  Plymouth,  24  March,  1697,  aged  nine-


CLARK


CLARK


631


ty-eight,  according  to  his  gravestone,  but  who  had
made  oath  tliat  he  was  born  in  1605.  If  the  latter
date  is  correct,  the  men  are  probably  not  the  same,
especially  as  Thomas  Clark  shared  in  the  division  of
land  in  1637  as  coming  on  the  "  Ann,"  and  not  on
the  '•  Mayflower."  Clark  was  selected  for  master's
mate  or  pilot  of  the  "  Mayflower,"  because  he  had
made  a  voyage  to  Virginia  in  1619,  and  had  been
twice  on  the  New  England  coast.  Clark's  island,
just  within  the  entrance  of  Plymouth  harbor,  was
named  for  him,  as  he  was  said  to  have  been  the
first  to  step  ashore  there.  Clark  is  also  mentioned
as  having  taken  part  in  the  third  expedition  of
discovery  made  by  the  pilgrims,  on  6  Dec,  1620.

CLARK,  Thomas,  author,  b.  in  Lancaster,  Pa.,
in  1787;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1860.  He  was
educated  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Baltimore  (Roman
Catholic),  but  declined  to  take  orders  and  was  ap-
pointed a  lieutenant  of  the  2d  artillery,  1  April,
1813,  becoming  assistant  topographical  engineer,
with  the  rank  of  captain,  on  the  same  day.  Dur-
ing the  war  of  1812  he  was  engaged  in  construct-
ing the  defences  on  the  Delaware  river.  He  was
mustered  out  of  service  in  Jime,  1815,  and  devoted
himself  to  literature,  becoming  editor  of  Latin  and
Greek  classics  for  the  Association  of  Philadelphia
booksellers.  He  published  a  "  Naval  History  of
the  United  States  from  the  Commencement  of  the
Revolutionary  War,"  highly  commended  by  John
Adams  and  Thomas  Jeflierson  (2  vols.,  Philadelphia,
1813-4),  and  " Sketches  of  the  Naval  Historv  of  the
United  States"  (1813).

CLARK,  Thomas  March,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Newburyport,  Mass.,  4  July,  1812.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1831,  studied  theology  at  Prince-
ton, and  in  1835  was  licensed  to  preach  in  the
Presbyterian  church,  Newburyport,  Mass.  Soon
after,  he  applied  for  orders  in  the  Episcopal  church,
and  was  ordained  deacon  by  Bishop  Griswold,  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  February,  1836,  and  priest  in
November  of  the  same  year.  He  was  chosen  to  be
rector  of  Grace  church,  Boston,  and  held  that  place
for  seven  years.  In  1843  he  accepted  the  rector-
ship of  St.  Andrew's  church,  Philadelphia,  but  a
few  years  later  became  assistant  minister  of  Trinity
church,  Boston.  Thence  he  removed  to  Hartford,
Conn.,  where  he  became  rector  of  Christ  church,
and  continued  in  that  place  until  his  election  to
the  episcopate.  He  was  consecrated  the  second
bishop  of  Rhode  Island,  in  Grace  church.  Provi-
dence, 6  Dec,  1854,  and  for  twelve  years,  in  addi-
tion to  his  episcopal  duties,  served  this  church  as
its  rector.  Besides  numerous  charges,  sermons,  and
addresses.  Bishop  Clark  has  published  "Lectures  to
Young  Men  on  the  Formation  of  Character  "  (1852) ;
"  The  Efficient  Sunday-School  Teacher  " ;  and  "  Pri-
mary Truths  of  Religion  "  (1869).— His  brother,  Rii-
fus  Wheelwright,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  17  Dec,  1813;  d.  in  Nantucket,  Mass.,  9
Aug.,  1886,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1838,  and
studied  theology  at  Andover,  and  at  the  Yale  semi-
nary, where  he  was  graduated  in  1841.  He  was  or-
dained 7  Jan.,  1842,  and  became  pastor  of  the  2d
Presbyterian  church  in  Washington,  D.  C.  After
holding  pastorates  in  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  East  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  and  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  he  took  charge  of
the  1st  Dutch  Reformed  church  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,
where  he  remained  till  his  death.  The  University
of  New  York  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1862.
Dr.  Clark  was  widely  known  as  a  pulpit  orator,
and  was  the  author  of  about  130  books,  pamphlets,
reviews,  and  articles.  His  works  include  "Lec-
tures to  Young  Men  "  (2  vols.,  Washington,  1842) ;
"  Review  of  Moses  Stuiirt's  Pamphlet  on  Slaverv  "
(1850) ;  "  Memoir  of  Rev.  John  E.  Emerson  "  (Bos-


ton, 1851;  abridged  ed.,  1852);  "Heaven  and  its
Scriptural  Emblems  "  (1853) ;  "  Life  Scenes  of  the
Messiah  "  and  "  Romanism  in  America "  (1854) :
"The  African  Slave-Trade"  (1860);  "Heroes  of
Albany"  (Albany,  1867);  "The  Bible  and  the
School  Fund  "  (Boston,  1870) ;  and  twelve  volumes
of  Sunday-school  text-books. — Another  brother,
Georg-e  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Newburyport,
Mass.,  7  Nov.,  1819,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1843,
and  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal church.  He  has  been  rector  of  All  Saints
church,  Worcester,  Mass.,  of  St.  John's,  Savannah,
Ga.,  and  of  Christ  church,  Hartford,  Conn.  In
November,  1860,  he  made  in  Savannah  an  appeal
for  the  preservation  of  the  Union,  which  was  pub-
lished at  the  request  of  southern  gentlemen.  His
connection  with  St.  John's  parish  was  dissolved  in
1861,  and  in  1862  his  property,  including  his  li-
brary, was  sold  by  an  agent  of  the  Confederate
government  as  the  property  of  an  "  alien  enemy."
Trinity  college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1863.  Dr.  Clark  has  published  sermons  and  sketch-
es.— Another  brother,  Samuel  Adams,  clergyman,
b.  in  Newburyport,  Mass.,  27  Jan.,  1822 ;  d.  in  Eliza-
beth, N.  J.,  28  Jan.,  1875,  studied  theology  at  An-
dover, Alexandria,  Va.,  and  Litchfield,  Conn.,  en-
tered the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church,  and,  after  preaching  in  Philadelphia  and
in  Plymouth,  Mass.,  became  in  1848  rector  of  the
Church  of  the  Advent,  Philadelphia,  where  he  con-
tinued till  1856.  He  was  then  called  to  St.  John's
church,  Elizabeth,  N.  J.,  where  he  remained  till  his
death.  Rutgers  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1870.  Dr.  Clark  was  a  devoted  worker,  genial  and
witty,  and  was  very  popular  in  his  parish,  where
he  was  instrumental  in  building  a  new  church,
leaving  it  free  from  debt.  He  was  elected  to  repre-
sent the  diocese  of  New  Jersey  in  two  general  con-
ventions, and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  president
of  the  standing  committee  of  his  diocese.  A  tablet
in  his  memory  has  been  placed  in  St.  John's  church,
Elizabeth,  and  a  monument  has  been  erected  to
him  in  Laurel  Hill  cemetery,  Philadelphia.  He
published  "  Memoir  of  Albert  W.  Day,"  prefixed  to
Day's  sermons  (1846),  and  "  History  of  St.  John's
Church,  Elizabethtown.  N.J."  (Philadelphia,  1857).
CLARK,  William  Smith,  educator,  b.  in  Ash-
field,  Mass.,  31  July,  1826 ;  d.  in  Amherst,  9  March,
1886.  He  received  his  early  education  at  Williston
seminary,  and  w^as  graduated  at  Amherst  in  1848.
For  two  years  he  taught  the  natural  sciences  at
Williston  seminary,  after  which  he  spent  tw^o  years
abroad  studying  chemistry  and  botany  at  Gottin-
gen,  where,  in  1852,  he  received  the  degree  of
Ph.  D.  On  his  return  to  the  United  States,  in
1852.  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  analytical  and
applied  chemistry,  and  from  1854  till'  1858  was
professor  of  chem'istry,  botany,  and  zoology.  From
1858  till  1867  he  filled  the  chair  of  chemistry  alone.
He  was  commissioned  major  in  the  21st  Massachu-
setts infantry  in  August,  1861,  became  colonel  in
May,  1862,  and  was  recommended  by  Gen.  Burn-
side  for  a  well-deserved  promotion  as  brigadier-
general.  Col.  Clark  participated  in  the  battles  of
Roanoke  Island,  Newbern,  Camden,  N.  C,  the  second
Bull  Run,  Chantilly,  Antietam,  and  Fredericksburg.
In  1867  he  was  elected  to  the  presidency  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts agricultural  college.  This  office,  with
the  chair  of  botany  and  horticulture,  he  held  until
1879,  except  during  1876-7,  when  he  was  in  Japan,
where  he  had  been  invited  to  establish  and  organ-
ize the  Imperial  college  of  agriculture  at  Sapporo.
During  his  stay  in  Japan  he  examined  the  flora  of
that  country,  and  was  the  means  of  introducing
new  species  of  shade-trees  into  the  United  States.


632


CLARKE


CLARKE


Ele  also  sent  to  Massachusetts  a  large  assortment
of  seeds,  many  of  which  proved  of  special  value  to
his  own  state,  on  account  of  the  high  latitude  from
which  they  were  selected.  He  discovered  a  new
liclien  on  the  side  of  Mt.  Tieni,  at  an  elevation  of
3,200  feet,  which  was  named  Cetraria  Clarkii,  in  his
honor,  by  Prof.  Edward  Tuckerman.  Subsequent
to  his  resignation  from  the  agricultural  college  he
became  interested  in  a  scientific  floating  college,
projected  by  Mr.  Woodruff,  whose  sudden  death
caused  the  abandonment  of  the  scheme.  After
this  Prof.  Clark  resided  in  Amherst  until  his  death,
partly  occupied  with  mining  operations.  From
1859  till  18G1  he  was  a  member  of  the  Massachu-
setts state  board  of  agriculture,  and  a  member  ex
officio  from  1876  till  1879.  He  was  one  of  the  com-
mission of  three,  appointed  by  Gov.  Andrew  in
1863,  to  consider  the  expediency  of  establishing  a
state  military  academy.  He  was  a  presidential
elector  in  1864,  and  a  representative  to  the  Massa-
chusetts legislature  in  1864-'5  and  1867.  He  was  a
fellow  of  the  American  academy  of  arts  and  sci-
ences, and  also  a  member  of  other  scientific  socie-
ties. His  published  papers  include  "  Ueber  Chlor-
magnesium-Ammoniak "  (1851);  "Analyse  des
Steinmarks  aus  dem  Sachsischen  Topasfels  "  (1851) ;
and  "  Analysen  von  Meteoreisen  "  (1852),  which  ap-
peared in  "  Liebig's  Annalen  " ;  and  also  the  fol-
lowing papers  contributed  to  the  annual  reports  of
the  Massachusetts  state  board  of  agriculture :  "  Re-
port on  Horses  "  (1859-'60) ;  "  Professional  Educa-
tion the  Present  Want  of  Agriculture,"  "The  Work
and  the  Wants  of  the  Agricultural  College  "  (1868) ;
"  The  Cultivation  of  the  Cereals  "  (1868) ;  "  Nature's
Mode  of  Distributing  Plants  "  (1870) ;  "  The  Rela-
tions of  Botany  to  Agriculture  "  (1872) ;  "  The  Cir-
culation of  Sap  in  Plants  "  (1873) :  "  Observations
on  the  Phenomena  of  Plant-Life"  (1874);  and
"Agriculture  in  Japan "  (1878).  In  1869  he  trans-
lated, for  use  in  the  Agricultural  college,  Scheerer's
"  Blow-pipe  Manual."

CLARKE,  Sir  Alured,  soldier,  b.  in  1745 ;  d.  in
September,  1832.  He  entered  the  British  army  in
1755,  and  was  lieutenant-colonel  and  brevet  colo-
nel of  the  7th  foot  during  the  American  war  for
independence.  He  was  in  command  during  the
British  occupation  of  Savannah,  Ga.,  until  the
withdrawal  of  his  troops,  11  July,  1782,  and  gained
the  good  will  of  the  inhabitants  by  the  strict  disci-
pline that  he  maintained,  and  by  the  uniform
courtesy  with  which  he  treated  the  inhabitants
and  protected  their  property  from  pillage.  He
was  governor  of  Jamaica  in  1792  and  1793,  and
governor-general  of  India  from  1797  till  1808.

CLARKE,  Charles,  Canadian  journalist,  b.  in
Lincoln,  England,  28  Nov.,  1826.  He  was  educated
in  his  native  place  and  at  Waddington,  Lincoln-
shire, and  in  1844  emigrated  to  Canada  and  be-
came a  farmer.  After  contributing  articles  to  the
Hamilton  "Journal  and  Express"  for  some  time,
he  obtained  control  of  the  paper,  and  continued
this  connection  until  1850.  Subsequently  he  wrote
several  political  papers  for  the  "  North  American,"
was  a  contributor  to  various  other  reform  jour-
nals, and  in  1852  established  the  "Backwoods-
man." He  was  elected  to  the  Ontario  legislature
for  Centre  Wellington  in  1871,  re-elected  in  1875
and  1879,  and  again  at  the  last  general  election
for  the  same  constituency.  He  became  speaker  of
the  House  in  1880,  and  was  re-elected  in  1884.

CLARKE,  Dorus,  author,  b.  in  Westhampton,
Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1797;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  8  March,
1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1817,  stud-
ied theology  at  Andoyer  in  1818-'20,  travelled  with
the  Rev.  Asahel  Nettleton  to  observe  his  method  of


preaching,  was  ordained  5  Feb.,  1823,  and  was  pas-
tor of  the  Congregational  church  at  Blandford,
Mass.,  from  1823  till  1835,  and  then  at  Chicopee
until  1841,  when  he  became  associate  editor  and
proprietor  of  the  "  New  England  Puritan,"  a  relig-
ious magazine  published  in  Boston.  He  after-
ward edited  the  "  Christian  Times  "  in  Boston  in
1845-51,  and  the  "Christian  Parlor  Magazine"
in  New  York  city.  He  resided  for  some  time  in
Waltham,  Mass.,  and  in  his  last  years  at  Bos-
ton. He  was  a  student  of  genealogical  and  local
history,  was  historian  of  the  New  England  historic-
genealogical  society,  an  active  member  of  various
religious  and  philanthropic  organizations,  and  a
prolific  writer.  In  1836  he  published  a  series  of
"  Letters  to  Young  People  in  Manufacturing  Vil-
lages " ;  in  1838,  "  Letters  to  Horace  JMann  " ;  in
1864,  after  retiring  from  editorial  life,  "  Fugitives
from  the  Escritoire  of  a  Retired  Editor";  in  1869,
"  Oneness  of  the  Christian  Church  "  (Boston) ;  in
1871,  "  Orthodox  Congregationalism  and  the  Sects,"
followed  by  "  Review  of  the  Oberlin  Council,"  and
in  1873  by  "Revision  of  the  English  Version  of  the
Bible."  In  1876  he  compiled  "  Ancestry  and  Writ-
ings," in  1877  wrote  an  "  Essay  on  the  Tri-Unity  of
God,"  and  in  1879  a  brochure  called  "  Saying  the
Catechism,"  which  passed  through  many  eclitions.

CLARKE,  Edward  Hammond,  physician,  b.  in
Norton,  Bristol  co.,  Mass.,  2  Feb.,  1820;  d.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  30  Nov.,  1877.  He  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1841,  took  his  medical  degree  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1846,  and,  after  trav-
elling extensively  in  Europe,  established  himself  in
Boston,  and  soon  took  a  high  rank  among  physi-
cians there.  He  held  the  professorship  of  materia
medica  in  Harvard  from  1855  till  1872,  when  he  re-
signed. Dr.  Clarke's  publications  include  "  Obser-
vations on  the  Treatment  of  Polypus  of  the  Ear "
(Boston,  1869) ;  "  Physiological  and  Therapeutical
Action  of  Bromide  of  Potassium  and  Bromide  of
Ammonium,"  with  R.  Amory  (1871) ;  "  Sex  in  Edu-
cation," a  book  that  attracted  wide  attention  (1873);
"The  Building  of  a  Brain"  (Boston,  1874);  and
"Visions;  a  Study  of  False  Sight."  The  last-
named  work,  prepared  amid  the  sufferings  of  the
lingering  and  painful  disease  of  which  he  died,  was
published  under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  Oliver  Wen-
dell Holmes,  who  prefixed  a  memorial  sketch  of  the
author  (Boston,  1878).  In  this  work  Dr.  Clarke  oc-
cupies a  middle  ground  between  those  who  regard
all  visions  as  delusions  and  those  who  ascribe  to
them  a  preternatural  origin.  He  delivered  an  ad-
dress on  "  Education  of  Girls  "  before  the  National
educational  association  at  Detroit,  5  Aug.,  1874.

CLARKE,  Elijah,  soldier,  b.  in  North  Carolina;
d.  in  Wilkes  county,  Ga.,  15  Dec,  1799.  He  removed
to  Georgia  in  1774,  became  a  captain  in  1776,  and
distinguished  himself  in  engagements  both  with
Indians  and  British  on  the  frontiers  of  Georgia;
was  appointed  a  colonel  of  militia,  engaged  in  the
battles  of  Musgrove's  Mill  and  Blackstocks,  after-
ward promoted  brigadier-general,  and  contributed
to  the  capture  of  Augusta  in  June,  1781.  At  the
battle  of  Long  Cane  he  was  severely  wounded,  and,
on  his  recovery,  joined  the  command  of  Gen  Pick-
ens. He  afterward  fought  many  battles,  and  made
several  treaties  with  the  Creek  Indians.  He  was
accused  in  1794  of  a  design  to  establish  an  inde-
pendent government  in  the  Creek  nation,  where  he
had  settled  in  violation  of  law,  and  was  suspected
of  accepting  a  commission  and  receiving  emolu-
ments from  the  French  government.— -His  son,
John,  b.  in  1766:  d.  in  west  Florida,  15  Oct.,
1832,  was  appointed  a  lieutenant  in  the  Continental
army  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  fought  under  his  father


CLARKE


CLARKE


633


with  distinction  at  the  siege  of  Augusta,  the  battle
of  Jack's  Creek,  and  other  actions,  and  rose  by
rapid  promotion  to  the  rank  of  major-general  in
the  militia  of  his  state.  At  a  critical  period  in  the
war  of  1812  he  was  placed  in  command  of  the
forces  raised  to  defend  the  sea-coast  of  Georgia.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1816,  and  after-
ward served  as  governor  for  two  terms.  A  few
years  before  his  death  he  removed  to  Florida.

CLARKE,  Frank  Wi^glesworth,  chemist,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass..  19  March,  1847.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  in
1867,  and  became  assistant  in  chemistry  at  Cornell
during  the  first  year  of  its  existence.  In  l873-'4
he  was  professor  of  chemistry  and  physics  at  How-
ard university,  Washington,  D.  C.,  and  in  1874
was  called  to  fill  a  similar  chair  in  the  University
of  Cincinnati,  where  he  remained  until  1883.  Un-
der his  direction  the  laboratory  training  reached  a
high  standard,  and  about  thirty  investigations  were
published  as  "  Laboratory  Notes."  Li  1883  he  be-
came chief  chemist  to  the  U.  S.  geological  survey
at  Washington.  Prof.  Clarke  has  been  active  in
the  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
science,  and  in  1878  was  chairman  of  the  chemi-
cal section,  delivering  an  address  on  "  The  Culti-
vation of  Chemistry."  During  1885  he  was  presi-
dent of  the  Washington  chemical  society,  and  on
retiring  delivered  an  address  on  "  The  Relations
of  the  Government  to  Chemistry."  He  has  con-
tributed frequent  papers  to  the  "American  Jour-
nal of  Science,"  "  American  Chemist,"  "  American
Chemical  Journal,"  and  to  the  "Proceedings  of
the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science."  His  most  important  work  is  the  "  Con-
stants of  Nature "  (Washington,  1873,  1876,  and
1882),  in  five  octavo  pamphlets,  of  which  the  last
bears  the  sub-title  of  "A  Recalculation  of  the
Atomic  Weights,"  the  results  in  which  are  ac-
cepted as  standard.  He  has  published  "  Weights,
Measures,  and  Money  of  all  Nations  "  (New  York,
1875) :  "  Elements  of  Chemistry  "  (1884) ;  and  a
"  Report  on  the  Teaching  of  Chemistry  and  Phvs-
ics  in  the  United  States"  (Washington,  1881).
Prof.  Clarke  has  also  contributed  popular  essays
on  scientific  subjects  to  "  Appletons'  Journal "  and
the  "  Popular  Science  Monthly."

CLARKE,  George,  governor  of  New  York,  b.
in  England  ;  d.  in  Chester.  England,  in  1763.  He
was  sent  out  by  a  friend,  during  the  reign  of  Queen
Anne,  to  mend  his  fortunes  in  New  York.  Dunlap
says  he  "  had  sagacity  enough  to  see  that  the  aristoc-
racy possessed  the  offices  of  profit,  and  were  sup-
porters of  the  authority  derived  from  England."
He  therefore  sided  with  the  governors  in  their  dis-
putes with  the  popular  party,  and  was  rewarded,
until  he  stood  the  oldest  councillor,  with  the  ex-
ception of  Van  Dam.  On  the  death  of  Gov.  Cosby,
Van  Dam  would  have  assumed  the  administration
as  senior  councillor,  but  the  council,  claiming
that  he  had  been  secretly  suspended  by  Cosby
just  before  the  latter's  death,  proclaimed  Clarke
governor  pro  tem.,  and,  in  spite  of  Van  Dam's  op-
position, he  was  supported  by  the  home  govern-
ment, and  commissioned  lieutenant-governor.  He
endeavored  to  hold  the  favor  of  both  parties,  and
is  said  to  have  destroyed  the  popularity  of  many
democratic  leaders  by  inducing  them  to  ask  for
offices  that  he  did  not  intend  to  bestow  on  them.
His  administration,  like  that  of  his  predecessor,
was  disturbed  by  contention  with  the  assembly ;
but  it  was  also  marked  by  the  adoption  of  many
good  measures.  The  militia  system  was  remod-
elled, courts  set  up  for  the  decision  of  petty  suits,
the  Indian  trade  promoted,  and  a  precedent  estab-


lished for  the  annual  provision  by  the  legislature
for  the  provincial  government.

CLARKE,  Henry  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in
Brownsville,  Pa.,  9  ^ov.,  1820 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  10  May,  1887.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1843,  entered  the  artil-
lery, served  in  the  occupation  of  Texas  in  1845-'6,
and  in  the  war  with  Mexico.  He  won  the  brevet
of  captain  at  Chapultepec,  and  was  present  at  the
assault  and  capture  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He
was  assistant  instructor  of  artillery  at  the  mili-
tary academy  in  1848-9,  assistant  professor  of
mathematics  in  1850-1,  was  engaged  with  his
regiment  in  the  Seminole  war  of  1851-'2,  again
assistant  instructor  of  artillery  at  West  Point  in
1855-6,  made  captain,  12  Jan..  1857,  accompanied
the  Utah  expedition  of  1857  as  commissary  of
subsistence,  and  remained  there  as  chief  commis-
sary till  1860,  when  he  was  assigned  to  duty  in  the
office  of  the  commissary-general.  He  ordered  the
expedition  for  the  relief  of  Fort  Pickens,  1  April,
1861,  was  appointed  chief  commissary  of  Gen.
McDowell's  command,  2  July,  1861,  served  in  the
Manassas  campaign,  was  promoted  major,  3  Aug.,
and  served  as  chief  commissary  of  subsistence  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  20  Aug.,  1861,  till
5  Jan.,  1864,  being  present  at  the  siege  of  York-
town,  the  battles  of  South  Mountain,  Antietam,
Fredericksburg,  Chancel lorsville,  and  Gettysburg.
He  was  promoted  lieutenant-colonel,  29  June,
1864,  and  had  charge  of  purchase  of  supplies  in
New  York  city  till  1867 ;  was  brevetted  brigadier-
general  for  gallantry  at  the  battle  of  Gettysburg,
and  major-general  for  faithful  services  in  the  sub-
sistence department  during  the  civil  war.  He
served  as  chief  of  commissariat  of  the  division  of  the
Missouri  in  1868-75,  and  of  the  division  of  the
Atlantic  from  1879  until  he  was  retired,  9  Nov.,
1884,  with  the  rank  of  colonel,  having  been  ad-
vanced to  that  grade  on  20  May,  1882.

CLARKE,  James  Freeman,  clergyman,  b.  in
Planover,  N.  H.,  4  April,  1810 ;  d.  in  Jamaica  Plains,
Mass.,  8  June,  1888.  He  was  a  cousin  of  Com.
Isaac  Hull.  He  studied  at  the  Boston  Latin-school,
and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1829,  and  at
Cambridge  divinity-school  in  1833.  From  1833
till  1840  he  was  pastor  of  the  Unitarian  church  in
Louisville,  Kv..  and  also  edited  the  "Western
Messenger"  (Louisville)  from  1836  till  1839.  He
then  returned  to  Boston,  where  in  1841  he  found-
ed the  Church  of  the  Disciples,  of  which  he  was
pastor  for  forty-five  years.  h\  this  church  the
seats  are  free,  and  the  worship,  a  form  devised  by
Dr.  Clarke,  combines  the  features  of  responses  on
the  part  of  the  congregation  as  in  the  English
church,  the  extempore  prayer  of  the  Congrega-
tionalists,  and  the  silent  prayer  of  the  Friends.
He  was  prominent  in  all  educational  and  reform
movements  in  Boston.  For  many  years  he  was
one  of  the  overseers  of  Harvard  university,  where,
from  1867  till  1871,  he  was  professor  of  natural
religion  and  Christian  doctrine,  and  during  1876-'7
lecturer  on  ethnic  religions.  He  was  also  a  mem-
ber of  the  State  board  of  education,  and  trustee
of  the  Boston  public  library.  In  connection  with
his  friends,  William  H.  Channing  and  Ralph
Waldo  Emerson,  he  prepared  the  "  jMemoirs  of
Margaret  Fuller  I)"Ossoli "  (Boston,  1852).  His
published  works  include  "  Theodore,  or  the  Sceptic's
Conversion,"  translated  from  the  German  of  De
Wette  (Boston,  1841) ;  "  History  of  the  Campaign  of
1812,  and  Defence  of  General  William  Hull  for  the
Surrender  of  Detroit "  (New  York,  1848) ;  "  Eleven
Weeks  in  Europe  "  (Boston,  1852) ;  "  Christian  Doc-
trine of  Forgiveness  of  Sin  "  (1852) ;  "  Christian  Doc-


634


CLARKE


CLARKE


trine  of  Prayer  "  (1854) ;  "  Karl  Hase.  Life  of  Jesus,"
translated  from  the  German  (1860) ;  "Service  Book  "
(1844) ;  "  Disciples'  Hymn  Book  "  (1844) ;  "  Ortho-
doxy :  its  Truths  and  Errors  "  (1866) ;  "  The  Hour
which  Cometh,"  sermons  (1864) ;  "  Steps  of  Be-
lief, or  Rational  Christianity  maintained  against
Atheism,  Free  Religion,  and  Romanism"  (1870);
"  Ten  Great  Religions,"  an  essay  in  comparative
theology  (1871-'83) :  "  Go  up  Higher,  or  Religion
in  Conimon  Life,"  sermons  (1877) ;  "  Common
Sense  in  Religion,"  essays  (1879);  "Exotics:  At-
tempts to  Domesticate  Them,"  translations  in
verse  (1876);  "Essentials  and  Non-Essentials  in
Religion "  (1878) ;  "  How  to  Find  the  Stars,"  an
account  of  the  astronomical  lantern  (invented
and  patented  by  him)  and  its  use  (1878);
"  Memorial  and  Biographial  Sketches "  (1878) ;
"Events  and  Epochs  in  Religious  History  " (1881) ;
"  Legend  of  Thomas  Didymus,  the  Jewish  Sceptic  "
(New  York,  1881) ;  "  Self-Culture  "  (Boston,  1882) ;
"  The  Ideas  of  the  Apostle  Paul  "  (1884) ;  "  Anti-
Slavery  Days"  (New  York,  1884);  "Manual  of
Unitarian  Belief"  (1884);  "Every-Day  Religion"
(Boston,  1880) ;  and  "  Vexed  Questions  "  (1886).

CLARKE,  or  CLERKE,  Jeremy,  president-
regent  of  Rhode  Island,  lived  in  the  17th  century.
He  was  an  elder  of  Pocasset  and  one  of  the  origi-
nal settlers  of  Newport  in  1689,  was  elected  con-
stable of  the  new  plantation  on  12  March,  1640,
became  treasurer  of  the  province  in  May,  1647,
was  continued  in  that  office,  and  chosen  as  one  of
the  president's  assistants  the  following  year.
When  William  Coddington,  the  president-elect,  a
royalist  who  desired  to  separate  the  island  from
the  other  towns  and  unite  it  to  Plymouth,  neglect-
ed to  enter  upon  the  office  and. to  meet  the  charges
brought  against  him  in  the  assembly,  Clarke,  who
was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  dominant  republican
party,  was  selected  by  that  body  to  fill  the  place
provisionally,  with  the  title  of  president-regent,
until  the  following  May,  when  John  Smith,  of
Warwick,  was  regularly  elected.

CLARKE,  John,  physician,  and  one  of  the
founders  of  Rhode  Island,  b.  in  Suffolk,  England,
8  Oct.,  1609 ;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  20  April,  1676.
He  was  well  educated,  but  it  is  not  known  where
and  how  he  obtained  his  intellectual  training.
Deeply  sympathizing  with  the  Puritans  in  their
struggles,  he  emigrated  to  the  New  World,  arriving
at  Boston  in  November,  1637.  Finding  the  gov-
ernment at  Boston  intolerant  and  oppressive,  and
the  community  rent  with  controversies,  he  resolved
to  plant  a  new  colony.  In  company  with  Codding-
ton and  others,  and  with  the  encouragement  of
Roger  Williams,  he  selected  an  island  in  Narra-
gansett  bay,  known  as  Aquidneck,  afterward  called
Rhode  Island,  as  his  retreat  from  intolerance.  The
lands  were  purchased  from  the  Indians,  the  deed
bearing  date  24  March,  1688.  From  the  north  end
of  the  island,  where  the  first  settlement  was  made,
the  government  was  soon  transferred  to  a  place  at
the  south  end,  which  received  the  name  of  New-
port. When  in  1647  Aquidneck  was  united  with
the  other  settlements,  which  afterward  became  the
state  of  Rhode  Island,  a  code  of  laws  was  framed
for  the  confederacy,  closing  with  these  memorable
words :  "  And  otherwise  than  thus  what  is  herein
forbidden,  all  men  may  walk  as  their  consciences
persuade  them,  every  one  in  the  name  of  his  God.
And  let  the  saints  of  the  Most.  High  walk  in  this
colony  without  molestation,  in  the  name  of  Jeho-
vah, their  God,  for  ever  and  ever."  It  is  supposed
that  John  Clarke  was  the  author  of  this  code.  In
1638  a  church  was  gathered,  to  which  he  ministered
as  teacher,  and  the  second  Baptist  church  established


in  America.  While  on  a  visit  to  one  of  the  members
of  his  church,  William  Witter,  who  lived  in  Lynn,
Mr.  Clarke,  with  his  two  companions,  Obadiah
Holmes  and  John  Crandall,  was  arrested  and  sen-
tenced to  pay  a  fine  of  £20,  "  or  else  to  be  well
whipped."  Some  person  unknown  to  him  paid  the
fine,  much  to  his  regret.  Troubles  having  arisen
in  his  infant  colony,  and  its  existence  being  threat-
ened, he  was  induced  in  1651  to  go  to  England,
with  the  hope  of  obtaining  relief  from  the  court.
In  the  next  year,  1652,  his  famous  work  in  defence
of  liberty  of  conscience  was  published  in  London.
It  was  entitled  "  111  News  from  New  England ;  or,
a  Narrative  of  New  England's  Persecution."  Clarke
remained  abroad  for  some  time,  laboring  for  the
welfare  of  his  colony.  In  1663  he  obtained  from
King  Charles  a  charter  whose  piovisions  were  of
unparalleled  liberality,  guaranteeing  that  "no  per-
son within  the  said  colony,  at  any  time  hereafter,
shall  be  in  anywise  molested,  punished,  disquieted,
or  called  in  question  for  any  differences  of  opinion
on  matters  of  religion."  In  one  of  his  addresses
to  the  king  he  said  of  his  colony :  "  It  desires  to  be
permitted  to  hold  forth  in  a  lively  experiment  that
a  flourishing  civil  state  may  stand,  yea,  and  best  be
maintained,  and  that  among  English  spirits,  with
a  full  liberty  of  religious  concernments."  After
an  absence  of  more  than  twelve  years,  Clarke  re-
turned home  in  1664.  He  was  immediately  elected
to  the  general  assembly,  and  continued  to  be  re-
elected until  1669,  when  he  was  made  deputy  gov-
ernor, an  honor  repeated  in  1671.  Besides  other
important  services  for  his  colony,  he  was  appointed
to  "  compose  all  the  laws  into  a  good  method  and
order,  leaving  out  what  may  be  superfluous,  and
adding  what  may  appear  unto  him  necessary."  He
left  most  of  his  property  in  the  hands  of  trustees,
for  religious  and  educational  purposes.  He  has
been  called  the  "  Father  of  Rhode  Island  "  and  the
"Father  of  American  Baptists."  His  doctrinal
views  have  been  pronounced  "  so  clear  and  scriptu-
ral that  they  might  stand  as  the  confession  of  faith
of  Baptists  to-day,  after  more  than  two  centuries
of  experience  and  investigation."  It  is  claimed  for
him  that  he  w^is  the  first  to  show  "  in  an  actual
government  that  the  best  safeguard  of  personal
rights  is  Christian  law."  There  is  no  full  memoir
of  Clarke's  life  and  times.  Besides  general  histo-
ries, see  Isaac  Backus's  "  History  of  New  England,
with  Special  Reference  to  the  Baptists "  (3  vols.,
1777-'96;  new  ed.,  2  vols.,  1871),  and  articles  on
Clarke's  place  in  historv,  in  the  "  Baptist  Quarter-
ly "  for  1876,  by  Prof.  John  C.  C.  Clarke,  under  the
title  of  "  The  Pioneer  Statesman."

CLARKE,  John  Mason,  geologist,  b.  in  Canan-
daigua,  N.  Y.,  15  April,  1857.  He  was  edticated
at  Amherst,  and  at  the  University  of  Gottingen,
Germany.  From  1881  till  1884  he  was  professor
of  geology  and  mineralogy  at  Smith  college,  North-
ampton, Mass.,  after  which  he  filled  a  similar  chair
in  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  college  at  Am-
herst, and  in  1886  became  assistant  paleontolo-
gist of  the  state  of  New  York.  His  published  pa-
pers include  "New  Devonian  Crustacea"  (1882);
"Devonian  Crustacea"  (1883);  "Cirriped  Crusta-
cea from  the  Devonian  "  (1883) :  "  Ueber  Deutsche
Oberdevonische  Crustaceen  "  (1884) ;  "  Die  Fauna
des  Iberger  Kalks  "  (1884) ;  "  On  Devonian  Spores
(1885);  "The  Geological  Succession  in  Ontario
County,  N.  Y."  (1886) :  and  "  On  the  Higher  Devo-
nian Faunas  of  Ontario  County,  N.  Y."  (1886). _

CLARKE,  John  Sleeper,  comedian,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  in  1835.  He  became  a  member  of  an  ama-
teur dramatic  association  in  his  native  city  in  early
life,  and  essayed  tragic  parts,  but  made  his  debut


CLARKE


CLARKE


635


J


as  Frank  Hardy  in  "Paul  Pry,"  at  the  Howard
Athemeiim  in  Boston  in  1851,  and  began  his  first
regular  engagement  at  the  Chestnut  street  thea-
tre, Philadelphia,  in  the  part  of  Soto  in  "She
Would  and  She  Would  Not,"  28  Aug.,  1853.  In
the  following  January  he  was  the  leading  come-
dian at  that  theatre,  and,  after  playing  in  the
Front  street  theatre  during  1854,  became  first
comedian,  and  in  1858  joint  lessee  of  the  Arch
street  theatre.  In  1863  he  was  Joint  lessee  of  Win-
ter Garden,  New  York  city,  in  1865  he  purchased
with  his  brother-in-law,  Edwin  Booth,  the  Walnut
street  theatre,  Philadelphia,  and  in  1866  acquired
an  interest  in  the  Boston  theatre.  In  the  autumn
of  1866  he  appeared  in  Boston,  and  a  year  later,
after  the  burning  of  Winter  Garden  theatre,  in
January,  1867,  appeared  in  London  at  the  St.
James  theatre,  and  at  once  achieved  a  success  as
Wellington  de  Boots,  a  part  that  he  had  played
more  than  a  thousand  nights  in  the  United  States.
He  played  also  Bob  Tyke  in  "  The  School  of  Re-
form," Caleb  Scudderin  "The  Octoroon,"  and,
after  a  tour  in  the  provinces,  revived  old  comedies,
and  was  very  successful  in  the  role  of  Dr.  Pangloss
in  "The  Heir-at-Law."  Pie  again  appeared  in
New  York  on  17  April,  1870,  performed  in  other
cities,  returned  to  London,  appearing  at  the  Strand
theatre,  29  July,  1871,  played  in  the  United  States
the  following  winter,  and  in  March  returned  to  Lon-
don, where  he  was  proprietor  of  the  Charing  Cross
theatre,  and  afterward  managed  the  Haymarket
theatre,  London,  with  E.  A.  Sothern.  He  has  made
several  professional  visits  to  the  United  States.

CLARKE,  John  T.,  jurist,  b.  in  Putnam  coun-
ty, Ga.,  12  Jan.,  1834.  He  was  graduated  at  Mer-
cer university,  Ga.,  in  1853,  and  in  1854  began  to
practise  law,  but  abandoned  it,  and  was  ordained  a
minister  of  the  Baptist  church  in  1858.  Failing
health  forced  him  to  retire  in  1861,  and  in  1863
he  was  appointed  judge  of  the  superior  courts  of
the  Pataula  circuit.  His  administration  was  con-
spicuous for  energy  and  ability.  After  the  war  he
was  removed  from  office  by  Gen.  George  G.  Meade
for  refusing  to  enforce  certain  military  orders.  His
course  in  this  matter  made  him  very  popular  in
his  state,  and  in  1882  he  was  re-elected  to  the
judgeship.  He  was  an  elector  on  the  Seymour  and
Blair  presidential  ticket  in  186«,  and  state  senator
in  1878.  He  has  contributed  to  current  literature
both  in  prose  and  poetry.

CLARKE,  McDonald,  poet,  b.  in  Bath,  Me.,
IS  June,  1708;  d.  in  New  York  city,  5  March,
1842.  Little  is  known  of  his  early  life  beyond
the  fact  that  he  and  the  poet  Brainard  were  play-
mates, till  he  appeared  in  New  York  city  in  1819,
married  an  actress,  and  was  a  familiar  and  strik-
ing figure  on  Broadway,  and  well  known  as  an
eccentric  character.  He  celebrated  in  verses  the
belles  of  the  town  and  the  topics  of  the  day,  and
was  familiarly  known  as  the  "mad  poet."  He
had  no  vices,  but  always  preserved  a  gentility
of  deportment,  and  was  a  regular  attendant  at
the  fashionable  Episcopal  Grace  church  on  Broad-
way. His  oddities,  as  his  faithful  friend  Halleck
stated  to  the  writer,  were  all  amiable.  He  was
celebrated  in  an  amusing  poem  called  "  The  Dis-
carded," written  by  Halleck.  He  met  with  a
tragic  death,  being  drowned  in  a  cell  of  the  city
prison  by  water  from  an  open  faucet.  A  po-
liceman had  found  him  in  a  destitute  and  ap-
parently demented  condition  on  the  street  and
taken  him  to  the  jail  for  safety.  Clarke's  most
celebrated  couplet  is  often  used  as  a  quotation :
"  Now  twilight  lets  her  curtain  down,
And  pins  it  with  a  star."


It  is  also  frequently  quoted  in  the  following  form :
"  Night  dropped  her  sable  curtain  down,  and
pinned  it  with  a  star."
A  fragment  of  autobiography  in  his  own  hand-
writing, penned  two  months  before  his  death,  is
still  preserved.  It  reads:  "Begotten  among  the
orange-groves,  on  the  wild  mountains  of  Jamaica,
West  Indies.  Born  in  Bath,  on  the  Kennebec
River,  State  of  Maine,  18th  June,  1798.  1st  Love,
Mary  H.  of  New  London ;  last  love.  Mary  T.  of
New  York ;  intermediate  sweethearts  without  num-
ber. No  great  compliment  to  the  greatest  Poet  in
America — should  like  the  change  tho' ;  had  to
pawn  my  Diamond  Ring  (the  gift  of  a  lady),  and
go  tick  at  Del-
raonico's  for
Dinner.  So
much  for  be-
ing the  great-
est Poet  in
America.  The
greatest  Poet
of  the  Coun-
try ought  to
have  the  free-
dom of  the
City,  the  girls
of  'the  gentry
gratis,  grab  all
along  shore,
the  magnifi-
cent Mary,  and
snucks  with  all
the  sweet  Sis-
ters of  Song."
Clarke's  po-
ems, humor-
ous, sentimen-
tal, and  satiri-
cal, have  a  vein  of  tenderness  pervading  their  gro-
tesqueness  and  irregularity.  They  are  now  rare,
though  several  times  republished.  Some  of  the
titles  to  the  volumes  are  "  A  Review  of  the  Eve  of
Eternity,  and  other  Poems "  (New  York,  1820) ;
"  The  Elixir  of  Moonshine,  bv  the  Mad  Poet "
(1822);  "The  Gossip"  (1825);  "Poetic  Sketches"
(1826) ;  "  The  Belles  of  Broadway  "  (1833) ;  "  Death
in  Disguise,"  a  temperance  poem  (1833) ;  "  Poems  "
(1836).  His  last  effusion,  "A  Cross  and  a  Coro-
net," was  published  in  1841.

CLARKE,  Mary  Bayard,  author,  b.  in  Ral-
eigh, N.  C,  about  1830.  She  is  the  daughter  of
Thomas  P.  Devereux,  a  lawyer  and  planter,
and  married  Col.  William  J.  Clarke,  who  dis-
tinguished himself  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  com-
manded a  North  Carolina  regiment  during  the
civil  war.  After  marriage  she  went  to  Cuba  for
her  health,  being  afflicted  with  pulmonary  disease,
and  afterward  resided  in  Texas  until  the  begin-
ning of  the  war,  when  she  returned  to  North
Carolina  with  her  husband  and  children.  She
wrote  both  prose  and  poetry,  and  at  the  close  of
the  war  resorted  to  her  pen  as  a  means  of  livelihood.
In  1854  she  published  a  collection  of  North  Caro-
lina verse  under  the  title  "  Wood-Notes."  On  her
return  from  Havana,  in  1855,  she  wrote  "  Remi-
niscences of  Cuba  "  for  the  "  Southern  Literary
Messenger."  While  residing  in  Cuba  and  after-
ward, she  published  in  periodicals  many  graceful
poems,  at  first  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Tenella,"
and  later  under  her  own  name,  some  of  which
Avere  collected  in  a  volume  called  "Mosses  from  a
Rolling  Stone,  or  Idle  Moments  of  a  Busy
Woman,"  which  was  sold  for  the  benefit  of  the
fund  for  a  Stonewall  cemetery  in  Winchester,  Va.


636


CLARKE


CLARKE


During  the  war  she  wrote  the  "  Battle  of  Manas-
sas," "  Battle  of  Hampton  Roads,"  "  Rebel  Sock,"
and  other  war  lyrics.  She  also  published  elegant
and  faithfid  translations  from  Victor  Hugo,
translated  "  Marguerite,  or  Two  Loves,"  and
published  prose  articles  signed  "  Stuart  Leigh."
After  the  peace,  "  General  Sherman  in  Raleigh  "
and  •'  The  South  Expects  Every  Woman  to  do  her
Duty  "  appeared  in  "  The  Old  Guard,"  published
in  New  York ;  novelettes  in  "  Demorest's  Monthly  "
and  "  Peterson's  Magazine "  ;  "  Social  Reminis-
cences of  Noted  North  Carolinians,"  and  other  ar-
ticles in  "  The  Land  We  Love  "  ;  and  numerous
contributions  in  "  Literary  Pastime,"  a  weekly
Journal  printed  in  Richmond,  of  which  she  was
associate  editor.  Mrs.  Clarke  published  a  poem
entitled  "  Clytie  and  Zenobia,  or  the  Lily  and  the
Palm  "  (New  York,  1870).

CLARKE,  Newman  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Connecti-
cut; d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  17  Oct.,  1800.  He
was  appointed  from  Vermont  an  ensign  in  the  11th
mfantry,  12  March,  1812,  became  a  lieutenant  in
March  following,  first  lieutenant,  15  Aug.,  1813,
served  as  adjutant  in  1813,  and  as  brigade-major
to  Gen.  Ripley  in  1814,  was  brevetted  captain  for
gallantry  in  the  battle  of  Niagara,  25  July,  1814,
promoted  to  a  captaincy,  7  Oct.,  1814,  became  a
major,  21  July,  1834,  lieutenant-colonel,  7  July,
1838,  and  colonel,  29  June,  1846.  He  commanded
a  brigade  in  Mexico  in  1847,  and  received  the  bre-
vet of  brigadier-general,  29  March,  1847,  for  gallant
conduct  at  the  siege  of  Vera  Cruz.

CLARKE,  Richard,  merchant,  b.  about  1708;
d.  in  England  in  1795.  He  was  graduated  at  Har-
vard in  1729.  He  became  a  merchant  in  Boston,
and  he  and  his  sons  were  consignees  of  part  of  the
tea  that  was  thrown  overboard  by  the  "  tea-party  "
in  Boston  harbor  in  December,  1773.  Having  been
harshly  used  by  the  whigs,  he  left  Boston  for  Eng-
land, arriving  in  that  country  on  24  Dec,  1775.
He  was  one  of  the  original  members  of  the  Loyal-
ist club,  which  was  organized  in  the  following  year.
He  lived  with  his  son-in-law  Copley,  the  painter,
in  Leicester  square,  London.

CLARKE,  Richard  H.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  3  July,  1827.  He  is  descended  from
one  of  the  founders  of  Maryland,  was  graduated  at
Georgetown  college,  D.  C,  in  1846,  studied  law,
and  practised  in  Washington,  where  he  tried  suc-
cessfully the  case  establishing  the  validity  of  build-
ing associations.  He  removed  in  1864  to  New
York  city,  and  was  associated  with  Charles  O'Conor
in  the  Forrest  divorce  case,  the  Jumel  will  case,
and  the  suit  of  the  L^.  S.  government  against  Jef-
ferson Davis.  Dr.  Clarke  is  an  officer  in  various
Catholic  societies,  and  has  been  an  active  sup-
porter of  civil  service  reform,  free-trade,  the  tem-
perance cause,  freedom  of  worship  in  public  in-
stitutions, and  legal  reform.  He  has  published
biographical  sketches  of  American  Roman  Catho-
lics, controversial  pamphlets,  and  numerous  papers
in  the  "  Catholic  World  "  and  other  journals.  In
1872  appeared  the  first  part  of  "  Lives '  of  the  De-
ceased Bishops  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  in
the  United  States"  (2  vols..  New  York),  the  third
volume  of  which  he  was  engaged  upon  in  1886.

CLARKE,  Robert,  surveyor,  b.  in  London,
England,  early  in  the  17th  century ;  d.  in  Mary-
land. He  was  the  son  of  Walter  Clarke,  London,
and  came  to  Maryland  some  years  before  the  set-
tlement of  St.  Mary's  was  founded.  In  1639  he
sat  as  a  freeman  in  the  Maryland  legislature,  in
1640  was  deputy  surveyor,  and  in  1649  surveyor-
general  of  the  province.  In  his  last  capacity  he
was  exrofficio  a  member  of  the  privy  council,  and


sat  in  the  assembly  of  1649  and  voted  for  the  tol-
eration act.  He  was  also  a  friend  of  the  Indians,
and  as  steward  of  the  manor  of  Calverton,  an  es-
tate of  10,000  acres,  which  was  set  aside  by  the
colony  for  the  habitation  of  the  Indians,  he'  held
the  court-baron  of  the  manor.  In  the  battle  of  the
Severn  he  was  one  of  the  defenders  of  the  govern-
ment against  the  Puritan  revolution  in  Maryland.
He  was  taken  prisoner,  tried  by  a  council  of  war,
and,  although  his  life  was  spared  "  by  the  petitions
of  the  women,"  he  was  heavily  fined.  His  estates
were  confiscated,  and  he  died  poor.  In  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  provincial  court,  October  term,
1655,  is  this  entry :  "  Robert  Clarke,  gentleman,
hath  openly  in  court  confessed  himself  to  be  a  Ro-
man Catholic,  owning  the  pope's  supremacy."  The
date  of  his  death  is  unknown.

CLARKE,  Robert,  publisher,  b.  in  Annan,
Dumfriesshire,  Scotland,  1  May,  1829.  He  removed
with  his  parents  to  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  in  1840,  was
educated  at  Woodward  college,  and  became  a  book-
seller and  publisher  in  that  city.  He  edited  "  Col.
George  Rogers  Clarke's  Campaign  in  the  Illinois
in  1778-9"  (Cinciimati,  1869);  James  McBride's
"  Pioneer  Biographies  "  (1869) ;  "  Captain  James
Smith's  Captivity  with  the  Indians "  (1870) ;  and
is  the  author  of  a  pamphlet  entitled  "The  Pre-
Historic  Remains  which  were  found  on  the  Site  of
the  City  of  Cincinnati,  with  a  Vindication  of  the
Cincinnati  Tablet "  (printed  privately,  1876).

CLARKE,  Samuel,  English  clergyman,  b.  in
Warwickshire  in  1599  ;  d.  in  1682.  He  was  pastor
of  St.  Bennet  Fink,  London,  until  ejected  in  16G2,
and  published,  besides  theological  works  and  a
famous  "General  Martyrology,"  "A  True  and
Faithful  Account  of  the  Four  Chiefest  Plantations
of  the  English  in  America "  (London,  1670),  and
"  New  Description  of  the  World  "  (1689).

CLARKE,  Samuel  Fessenden,  naturalist,  b.
in  Geneva,  111.,  4  June.  1851.  He  was  graduated
at  the  Sheffield  scientific  school  in  1878,  where
during  1874-'6  he  had  been  instructor.  During
1874-'5  he  was  assistant  to  the  U.  S.  fish  commis-
sion, and  from  1879  till  1881  assistant  in  the  bio-
logical laboratory  at  Johns  Hopkins  university,
from  which  in  1879  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.
D.  In  1882  he  became  lecturer  in  biology  at  Smith
college,  and  also  professor  of  natural  sciences  at
Williams  college.  His  published  papers  include
"  New  and  Rare  Species  of  Hydroids  from  the
New  England  Coast"  (1875);  "New  Hydroids  of
the  Pacific  Coast  of  the  United  States  South  of
Vancouver's  Island  "  (1876) ;  "  Hydroids  of  Alas-
ka" (1876);  "Hydroids  of  the  Gulf  Stream  and
Gulf  of  Mexico  "  (1879) ;  "  Development  of  Arably-
stoma  Punctatum  "  (1879) ;  "  The  Early  Develop-
ment of  the  Wolffian  Body  in  Amblystoma  Punc-
tatum "  (1881)  ;  and  "  the  Development  of  a
Double-Headed  Vertebrate"  (1880).  Prof.  Clarke
is  a  member  of  several  scientific  societies.

CLARKE,  Walter,  colonial  governor  of  Rhode
Island,  lived  in  the  17th  century.  He  was  deputy
governor  in  1675,  was  elected  governor  in  May,l676,
again  deputy  from  1679  until  1686,  when  he  became
governor.  When  Sir  Edmund  Andros  in  1686  de-
manded the  charter  of  Rhode  Island,  Clarke  asked
for  delay  until  a  fitter  season;  but,  on  the  coni-
mand  of  the  royal  governor  in  January,  1687,  he
allowed  the  government  to  be  dissolved,  continu-
ing to  act  as  governor  under  the  royal  commis-
sioner, and  accepted  a  place  in  the  general  council
for  New  England.  When  Andros  returned  from
Connecticut  in  November,  Gov.  Clarke  received
him  with  courtesy  and  gaA^e  up  the  seal  of  the
colony  to  be  broken,  but  sent  the  charter  to  his


CLARKSO^


CLAVER


637


brother  to  be  concealed  in  some  place  unknown  to
himself.  He  was  appointed  on  the  governor's  coun-
cil in  1688  under  the  new  commission,  which  in-
cluded New  York  and  New  Jersey  in  New  Eng-
land. When  Andros  was  overthrown  at  the  revo-
lution of  1688,  the  Rhode  Islanders  resumed  their
charter  government ;  but  Clarke  was  too  cautious
to  accept  his  former  post,  and  for  ten  months  al-
lowed the  deputy  governor  to  fill  his  place.  When
Bull  was  elected  governor,  Clarke  refused,  from
politic  motives,  to  deliver  up  the  charter  and  state
records,  but  did  not  thereby  lose  the  confidence  of
the  people,  who  in  1696  again  elected  him  gov-
ernor. In  1698,  because  he  was  required  to  take
the  oath  to  the  king,  which  as  a  Quaker  he  refused
to  do,  and  because  a  court  of  admiralty  had  been
created  contrary  to  his  wishes  and  he  was  threat-
ened with  impeachment  for  withholding  the  com-
mission of  the  judge,  Gov,  Clarke  resigned  in  favor
of  his  nephew,  Samuel  Cranston.
CLARKSON,  Mathew.  See  Supplement.
CLARKSON,  Robert  Harper,  P.  E,  bishop,  b.
in  Gettysburg,  Pa„  19  Nov.,  1826;  d.  in  Omaha,
Neb.,  10  March,  1884.  He  was  graduated  at  Penn-
sylvania college,  Gettysburg,  in  1844,  and  studied
theology  at  St.  James's  college,  Ilagerstown,  Md.
He  was  ordained  dea-
con by  Bishop  Whit-
tingham,  18  June,
1848,  and  priest  by
Bishop  P.  Chase,  5
Jan.,  1851.  He  be-
came rector  of  St.
James's  church,  Chi-
cago, 111.,  in  1849,  and
held  that  place  for
fifteen  years.  He  was
a  deputy  from  the
diocese  of  Illinois  to
the  general  conven-
tion during  all  these
years,  and  was  assist-
ant secretary  of  the
house  of  clerical  and
lay  deputies  when  he
was  elected  bishop.
He  was  consecrated  missionary  bishop  of  Nebraska
and  Dakota,  in  Chicago,  15  Nov.,  1865,  and  three
years  later,  when  Nebraska  was  organized  as  a  dio-
cese and  admitted  into  union  with  the  general  con-
vention, he  was  chosen  to  be  the  bishop  of  the  new
diocese.  He  accepted  the  office  in  the  spring  of
1870,  retaining  the  missionary  jurisdiction  of  Da-
kota until  the  autumn  of  1883,  Bishop  Clarkson's
sunny  disposition  and  humor  won  for  him  troops
of  friends  wherever  he  was  known.  He  published
numerous  sermons  and  memorial  sketches.

CLARY.  Robert  Eiiiinet,  soldier,  b.  in  Ashfield,
Mass.,  21  March,  1805 :  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  19
Jan.,  1890.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  militarv
academy  in  1828,  and  served  on  frontier  duty  till
7  July,  1888,  wiien  he  was  made  assistant  quarter-
master, with  the  rank  of  captain.  He  became  cap-
tain on  3  April,  1839,  served  in  the  Florida  war  of
1840-1,  and  at  various  posts  till  the  civil  war.  He
was  chief  quartermaster  of  the  department  of  West
Virginia  from  November,  1861,  till  July,  1862,  of
the  Army  of  Virginia  to  October,  1862,  and  of  the
department  of  the  northwest  till  20  March,  1863.
He  was  made  colonel  on  the  staff  and  additional
aide-de-camp,  5  Julv,  1862.  and  was  in  charge  of  the
Memphis  military  depot  from  1864  till  1866.  On
13  March,  1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general
for  his  services  during  the  war.  He  was  made  as-
sistant quartermaster-general  on  29  July,  1866,  and


~\A>'


£i^y^^-7/>^<


served  as  depot  quartermaster  at  Boston.  Mass.,
from  1867  till  1869.  On  22  Feb.  of  that  year  he
was  retired,  being  over  sixty-two  years  of  age.

CLASON,  Isaac  Starr,  actor,  b.  in  New  York
in  1789 ;  d.  in  London  in  1834.  He  received  a  good
education,  and  his  father,  a  wealthy  New  York  mer-
chant, left  him  a  fortune ;  but  he  "soon  wasted  it  in
a  course  of  dissipation,  and  was  obliged  to  support
himself  as  a  writer,  teacher  of  elocution,  and  actor.
He  appeared  at  the  Bowery  and  Park  theatres  in
leading  Shakespearian  parts,  but  with  moderate  suc-
cess. Having  finally  gone  to  London  as  a  theatrical
adventurer,  and  being  reduced  to  poverty,  he  sealed
up,  in  company  with  his  mistress,  the  room  in  which
they  lodged,  lighted  a  fire  of  charcoal,  and  died  by
its  fumes.  He  published  "  Don  Juan,  Cantos  XVII.
and  XVIIL,"  supplementary  to  Lord  Byron's  poem,
and  in  a  kindred  vein  (1825).  It  made  his  reputa-
tion, and  is  probably  the  best  of  the  numerous  imi-
tations of  the  original.  The  scandal  of  the  author's
life,  reflected  in  it,  added  to  its  popularity.  This
was  followed  by  "  Horace  in  New  York,"  a  collec-
tion of  poems,  full  of  the  New  York  gossip  of  the
day,  and  celebrating,  among  others,  Madame  Mali-
bran,  then  the  chief  operatic  singer.  It  also  con-
tained some  feeling  lines  on  the  death  of  Thomas
Addis  Emmet.  Clason  wrote  a  poem  founded  on
the  "  Beauchamp  tragedy "  of  Kentucky,  but  it
was  never  published,  and  is  probably  lost.

CLAUSEL,  Bertraiid,  Count,  French  soldier,
b.  in  Mirepoix,  Ariege,  France,  12  Dec,  1773 ;  d.  in
Chateau  Lecurien,  21  April,  1842.  He  entered  the
army  as  a  volunteer  in  1791,  served  under  Lafayette,
distinguished  himself  in  the  war  against  Spain  in
1794-'5,  and  also  in  Italy  and  Austria  in  1799,  hav-
ing the  rank  of  general.  Then  he  accompanied
Leclerc  to  Hayti.  and  with  only  6,000  exhausted  and
sickly  men,  at  Cape  Haytien,  successfuly  resisted
30,000  attacking  that  city.  At  Leclerc's  death  he
took  command  of  the  army,  in  the  absence  of
Rochambeau,  who  had  been  appointed  general-in-
chief,  built  the  Delphin  and  Paise  forts,  again
checked  the  native  negroes  that  were  advancing  in
large  numbers,  and  displayed  so  much  ability  that
at  last  he  won  the  respect  and  love  of  his  former
enemies.  But,  as  his  views  did  not  accord  with
those  of  Rochambeau,  he  returned  to  France,  Avhere
he  was  rewarded  by  the  government.  He  faithfully
and  ably  served  Napoleon  I.  in  his  campaigns  in  the
north  of  Europe,  Italy,  Dalmatia,  Illyria,  and  Spain,
and  made  a  famous  retreat  from  Portugal,  When
Louis  XVIII,  was  proclaimed,  Chausel  was  obliged
to  leave  France,  came  to  the  United  States,  settled
at  Mobile,  and  devoted  himself  to  farming.  In
1820  he  returned  to  France,  and,  after  the  fall  of  the
Bourbons,  the  new  government  gave  him  titles  and
decorations.  Afterward  he  w;is  governor  of  Al-
geria, in  1830  and  1835,  defeated  the  bey  of  Tittery,
occupied  Medeah  and  Blidah,  and  conquered  Mas-
cara, but  was  unsuccessful  at  Constantine,  which
caused  his  second  recall.  He  passed  the  rest  of  his
life  in  retirement.

CLAVER,  Pedro,  apostle  of  the  negroes,  b.  in
Catalonia,  Spain,  in  1572 :  d.  in  Carthagena,  South
America,  in  1654.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  entered
the  Society  of  Jesus,  In  1610  he  was  sent  to  Car-
thagena, South  America,  and  on  his  arrival  was
painfully  affected  by  the  miseiy  of  the  negro  slaves
that  were  brought  to  that  city' for  sale.  Believing
he  had  found  his  mission,  he  visited  every  slave-
ship  on  its  arrival,  accompanied  by  an  interpreter,
who  carried  provisions  for  the  negroes,  which  he
had  begged  from  the  wealthy  inhabitants.  He
then  descended  into  the  crowded  cabins  to  comfort
the  slaves  and  distribute  his  gifts among them.


638


CLAVlfiRE


CLAY


Pie  afterward  instructed  and  baptized  the  negroes,
and  formed  thein  into  congregations.  In  1628  an
epidemic  of  small-pox  of  a  virulent  character  broke
out  among  the  negroes  of  Carthagena,  and  Father
Claver  was  unremitting  in  his  attention  to  the
victims.  His  favorite  resort  was  the  lepers'  hospi-
tal in  Carthagena,  which  was  shunned  even  1  v  the
doctors.  His  constitution  was  enfeebled  by  his
labors,  penances,  and  mortifications,  and  he  never
recovered  from  an  attack  of  the  plague,  while  his
end  was  hastened  by  the  harshness  and  neglect  of
a  young  negro  appointed  to  attend  him.  He  was
declared  venerable  by  Benedict  XIV.  in  1747,  and
beatified  by^Pius  IX.  in  1850.

CLAVIERE,  Etieiine,  Swiss  financier,  b.  in
Geneva,  27  Jan.,  1735 ;  d.  8  Dec,  1793.  He  removed
to  Paris,  where  he  engaged  in  banking  before  the
revolution,  and  became  acquainted  with  Mirabeau,
Brissot,  and  other  popular  leaders.  Mirabeau,  who
had  a  high  opinion  of  his  talents,  used  Claviere's  as-
sistance in  composing  his  speeches  and  essays.  Du-
mont  says  the  Swiss  banker  was  the  author  of  almost
all  of  Mirabeau's  works  on  finance.  He  was  chosen
deputy  to  the  National  assembly  in  1791,  and  was
Girondist  minister  of  finance  from  March  till  June,
1792.  He  was  arrested  on  2  June,  1793,  on  account
of  his  opposition  to  Robespierre's  extreme  meas-
ures, and  killed  himself  to  escape  the  guillotine.
His  wife  poisoned  herself  two  days  afterward.
Claviere  accompanied  Brissot  in  his  tour  in  the
United  States  in  1783,  and  published,  in  conjunction
with  him,  "  De  la  France  et  des^fitats-Unis  "  (Eng-
lish translation,  London,  1788).

CLAVIJERO,  or  CLAVIGERO,  Francisco
Xavier  (clah-vee-hay'-ro),  Mexican  historian,  b.  in
Vera  Cruz,  9  Sept.,  1721 ;  d.  in  Bologna,  Italy,  3
April,  1787.  After  studying  in  the  colleges  of  St.
Jerome  and  St.  Ignatius,  Puebla,  he  entered  the
novitiate  of  the  Jesuits  in  Tepotzotlan  in  1748.  He
devoted  himself  at  first  to  the  study  of  natural
philosophy,  but  the  great  collection  of  documents
and  antiquities  bearing  on  the  history  of  the  Az-
tecs in  the  library  of  the  College  of  St.  Peter  and
St.  Paul  turned  his  attention  to  Mexican  history.
He  taught  rhetoric  in  Mexico,  and  philosophy
in  Valladolid,  in  the  mean  time  publishing  works
and  translations  that  were  the  fruit  of  his  special
studies.  Owing  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Jesuit  so-
ciety, he  was  banished  from  Mexico  in  17G7,  and
retired  to  Ferrara,  and  then  to  Bologna,  Italy.  The
fruit  of  his  researches  was  the  "  Storia  Antica  del
Messico"  (4  vols.,  1780-83;  English  translation  by
C.  Cullen,  2  vols.,  1787).  It  was  also  translated  in-
to German  and  Spanish.  This  work,  compiled  from
the  best  Spanish  histories  and  from  the  ancient
picture-writings  and  manuscripts  of  the  Indians,
is  the  source  from  which  modern  writers  on  Mexico
have  drawn  their  materials.  Its  greatest  merit  is
its  impartiality,  especially  in  relating  the  story  of
the  conquest  by  Cortes.  The  principal  purpose  of
Clavijero  in  writing  the  book  was  to  refute  many
absurd  assertions  made  by  Parr,  the  Prussian  au-
thor, Robertson,  and  Raynal.  It  was  highly  com-
mended by  historians  and  critics  of  that  time,  and
afterward  by  Prescott.  Clavijero  also  published
the  "  Storia  della  California  "  (Venice,  1789).

CLAXTON,  Alexander,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Maryland,  about  1790;  d.  in  Talcahuana,  Chili,  7
March,  1841.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,
20  June,  1806,  served  in  the  sloop-of-war  "  Wasp"
in  her  action  with  the  "  Frolic,"  18  Oct.,  1812,  and
became  lieutenant,  8  Jan..  1813.  He  was  made
commander,  28  March,  1820,  and  captain,  21  Feb,,
1831.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  Pacific  squadron. — His  son,  Thomas,


entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  17  Dec,  1810,  was
mortally  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  10
Sept.,  1813,  and  died  in  October. — Another  son,
F.  S.,  invented  the  mitrailleuse  that  was  introduced
in  the  French  service.

CLAXTON,  Kate,  actress,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1848.  She  is  the  granddaughter  of  Rev.  Spencer
H.  Cone,  noticed  elsewhere,  and  her  father,  Col.
Spencer  W.  Cone,  commanded  the  61st  New  York
regiment  in  the  civil  war.  She  first  appeared  with
Lotta  in  Chicago,  soon  afterward  became  a  mem-
ber of  Daly's  Fifth  Avenue  company,  and  then  o.'
the  Union  Square  company,  but  attracted  no  atten-
tion till  the  production  of  "  Led  Astray  "  in  1873,
in  which  she  won  great  popularity  as  Mathilde.
Soon  afterward  she  made  a  reputation  in  the  char-
acter of  Louise  in  "  The  Two  Orphans,"  with  which
she  has  become  identified.  She  played  it  first  at
the  Union  Square  theatre,  and  was  acting  the  part
at  the  Brooklyn  theatre  when  that  building  was
destroyed  by  fire.  5  Dec,  1876.  She  became  widely
known  by  her  coolness  on  that  occasion,  and  by  her
efforts  to  calm  the  audience  and  prevent  the  rush
for  the  doors,  in  which  so  many  were  killed.  Soon
afterward  Miss  Claxton  was  in  the  Southern  hotel
in  St.  Louis  when  it  was  burned,  and  again  dis-
played great  coolness  and  energy,  saving  her  own
and  her  brother's  life,  and  escaping  by  a  burning
stairway  that  fell  just  after  her  foot  had  left  the
last  step.  After  this,  many  superstitious  people,
regarding  her  as  specially  unlucky,  avoided  the
theatres  where  she  played.  She  has  more  recently
played  in  Charles  Reade's  "  Double  Marriage  "  and
in  the  "  Sea  of  Ice."  Miss  Claxton  married  Isidor
Lyon,  a  New  York  merchant,  but  was  subsequently
divorced,  and  in  1876  married  Charles  Stevenson,
a  member  of  her  company.

CLAY,  Clement  Comer,  statesman,  b.  in  Hali-
fax countv,  Va,.  17  Dec,  1789 ;  d.  in  Huntsville,
Ala.,  9  Sept.,  1866.  His  father,  William  Clay,  was
an  officer  of  the  Revolutionary  army,  who  removed
to  Granger  county.  Tenn.,  after  the  war.  Young
Clay  was  graduated  at  East  Tennessee  university,
Knoxville,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809,  and  in  ISil
removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.  At  the  beginning  d
the  Creek  war,  in  1813,  he  volunteered  as  a  pri-
vate in  a  Madison  county  battalion,  and  was  after-
ward made  adjutant.  He  was  elected  to  the  terri-
torial council  in  1817,  and  in  1819  was  a  delegate
to  the  constitutional  convention,  and  chairman  of
the  committee  to  report  a  plan  of  state  organiza-
tion. He  was  chosen  one  of  the  circuit  judges  by
the  first  state  legislature  in  1820,  and  elected  chief
justice  by  his  colleagues,  holding  the  office  till
1823,  when  he  resigned  and  resumed  his  law-prac-
tice. Pie  was  speaker  of  the  legislature  in  1828,
and  in  the  same  year  elected  to  congress  as  a
democrat,  serving 'from  1829  till  1835.  He  op-
posed the  effort  to  recharter  the  U.  S.  bank,  and
conspicuously  advocated  the  measures  of  Jackson^s
administration.  He  was  elected  governor  in  1835,
and  in  1837,  before  the  expiration  of  his  term,
chosen  to  the  U.  S.  Senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  made
by  the  appointment  of  John  McKinley  to  the  su-
preme bench.  He  took  his  seat  at  the  extra  ses-
sion called  by  President  Van  Buren  in  September,
1837.  and  served,  supporting  the  adnn'nistration,
till  1841,  when  sickness  in  his  familv  caused  hira
to  resign.  In  1842  and  1843  he  codified  the  laws
of  his  state,  and  after  that  devoted  himself  to  his
profession.  During  the  war  he  remained  quietly
at  home.— His  son,  Clement  Claiborne,  b.  in
Huntsville,  Ala.,  in  1819;  d.  there,  3  Jan.,  1882,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Alabama  in
1835. When  the  elder  Clay  was  elected  goveriior,


CLAY


CLAY


639


he  made  his  son  his  private  secretary,  in  which  ca-
pacity the  boy  continued  his  studies,  and  also  con-
tributed editorials  to  Alabama  papers.  When  his
father  went  to  the  senate,  young  Clay  completed
his  law  studies  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  He  served  in
the  Alabama  legislature  in  1842,  1844,  and  1845,
and  in  1846  became  judge  of  the  Madison  county
court.  He  resigned  in  1848,  and  in  1853  was
elected  U.  S.  senator.  In  1857  he  delivered  an  elo-
quent eulogy  on  Senator  Butler,  of  South  Carolina,
and  in  1858  made  a  speech  advocating  the  admis-
sion of  Kansas  to  the  Union  under  the  Lecompton
constitution.  He  also  advocated  a  bill  repealing
the  bounty  on  vessels  engaged  in  the  Newfound-
land fisheries.  As  a  senator,  he  regarded  himself
as  the  envoy  of  a  sovereign  state  to  the  council  of
the  nation,  and  lost  no  opportunity  of  asserting
the  rights  of  that  state  as  defined  by  Mr.  Calhoun
and  other  southern  statesmen.  He  was  re-elected
unanimously  in  1859,  but  withdrew  in  February,
1861,  his  state  having  seceded  from  the  Union.  He
was  formally  expelled  from  the  senate  in  March,
1861,  and  was  chosen  a  senator  in  the  Confederate
congress.  He  went  to  Canada  in  1864  as  a  secret
agent  of  the  Confederate  government,  took  part  in
planning  the  raids  on  the  northern  frontier,  and
made  some  futile  attempts  at  negotiation  with
President  Lincoln.  He  returned  to  the  Confeder-
acy, but  took  refuge  in  Canada  at  the  close  of  the
war.  In  May,  1865,  hearing  that  a  reward  had
been  offered  for  his  arrest,  he  gave  himself  up  to
the  U.  S.  authorities  and  was  for  some  time  a  pris-
oner in  Fort  Monroe  with  Jefferson  Davis.  He
was  released  in  April,  1866.  and  from  that  time
practised  his  profession  at  Huntsville.

CLAY,  Edward  W.,  caricaturist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  31  Dec,
1857.  He  was  a  relative  of  Henry  Clay,  had  a
liberal  education,  and  served  as  a  midshipman  in
the  U.  S.  navy.  He  then  turned  his  attention  to
the  law,  and,  though  very  young,  was  at  once  ap-
pointed prothonotary  of  Philadelphia.  His  artistic
tastes,  however,  led  him  to  Europe,  and  he  studied
the  old  masters  there  for  five  years.  On  his  return
to  Philadelphia  he  sketched  "The  Rats  Leaving
the  Falling  House,"  on  the  dissolution  of  Jack-
son's cabinet.  This  brought  him  into  notice,  and
for  more  than  twenty  years  he  was  a  noted  carica-
turist. After  the  failure  of  his  eyesight  he  became
clerk  of  the  Chancery  court,  and  of  the  Orphan's
court  in  Delaware.

CLAY,  Green,  soldier,  b.  in  Powhatan  county,
Va.,  14  Aug.,  1757;  d.  in  Kentucky,  31  Oct.,  1826.  He
emigrated  to  Kentucky  before  he  was  twenty  years
of  age,  became  a  surveyor,  and  acquired  a  fortune
by  locating  lands.  He  was  a  representative  of  the
Kentucky  district  in  the  Virginia  legislature,  a
member  of  the  convention  that  ratified  the  Federal
constitution,  and  a  leading  member  of  the  Kentucky
constitutional  convention  of  1799.  He  was  long  a
member  of  one  or  the  other  branch  of  the  legisla-
ture, and  at  one  time  speaker  of  the  senate.  In
1813,  when  Gen.  Harrison  was  besieged  by  the
British  in  Fort  Meigs,  he  came  to  his  relief  with
3.000  volunteers  and  forced  the  enemy  to  with-
draw. He  was  left  in  command  at  the  fort,  and
defended  it  with  great  skill  against  an  attack  of
the  British  and  Indians  under  Gen.  Proctor  and
Tecumseh.  After  the  war  he  retired  to  his  planta-
tion, and  devoted  himself  to  agriculture.  He  was
a  cousin  of  Henry  Clay.— His  son,  Cassius  Mar-
cellus,  politician,  b.  in  Madison  county,  Ky,,  19
Oct.,  1810,  studied  at  Transylvania  imiversity,  but
afterward  entered  the  junior  class  at  Yale,  and  was


graduated  there  in  1832.  While  in  New  Haven  he
heard  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  and,  although  his
parents  were  slave-holders,  became  an  earnest  abo-
litionist. He  began  to  practise  law  in  his  native
county,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1835,
but  was  defeated  the  next  year  on  account  of  his
advocacy  of  internal  improvements.  He  was  again
elected  in  1837,  and  in  1839  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  nominated  Gen.  Harrison  for  the
presidency.  He  then  removed  to  Lexington,  and
was  again  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1840,  but
in  1841  was  defeated,  after  an  exciting  canvass,  on
account  of  his  anti-slavery  views.  The  improved
jury  system  and  the  common-school  system  of
Kentucky  are  largely  due  to  his  efforts  while  in  the
legislature.  Mr.  Clay  denounced  the  proposed  an-
nexation of  Texas,  as  intended  to  extend  slavery,
and  in  1844  actively  supported  Henry  Clay  for  the
presidency,  speaking  in  his  behalf  in  the  northern
states.  On  3  June,  1845,  he  issued  in  Lexington
the  first  number  of  an  anti-slavery  paper  entitled
"The  True  American."  Mob  violence  had  been
threatened,  and  the  editor  had  prepared  himself
for  it.  He  says  in  his  memoirs:  "I  selected  for
my  office  a  brick  building,  and  lined  the  outside
doors  with  sheet-iron,  to  prevent  it  being  burned.
I  purchased  two  brass  four-pounder  cannon  at
Cincinnati,  and  placed  them,  loaded  with  shot  and
nails,  on  a  table,  breast  high ;  had  folding-doors
secured  with  a  chain,  which  could  open  upon  the
mob  and  give  play  to  the  cannon.  I  furnished
my  office  with  Mexican  lances,  and  a  limited  num-
ber of  guns.  There  were  six  or  eight  persons  who
stood  ready  to  defend  me.  If  defeated,  they  were
to  escape  by  a  trap-door  in  the  roof ;  and  I  had
placed  a  keg  of  powder  with  a  match,  which  I
could  set  off  and  blow  up  the  office  and  all  my
invaders ;  and  this  I  should  most  certainly  have
done  in  case  of  the  last  extremity."  In  August,
while  the  editor  was  sick,  his  press  was  seized  by
the  mob  and  taken  to  Cincinnati,  and  he  himself
was  threatened  with  assassination;  but,  notwith-
standing all  opposition,  he  continued  to  publish
the  paper,  printing  it  in  Cincinnati  and  circulat-
ing it  through  Kentucky.  This  was  not  his  only
narrow  escape.  He  was  continually  involved  in
quarrels,  had  several  bloody  personal  encounters,
and  habitually  spoke  in  political  meetings,  with  a'
bowie  knife  concealed  about  him.  and  a  brace  of
pistols  in  the  mouth  of  his  grip-sack,  which  he
placed  at  his  feet.  When  war  with  Mexico  was
declared,  Mr.  Clay  entered  the  army  as  captain  of
a  volunteer  infantry  company  that  had  already
distinguished  itself  at  Tippecanoe  in  1811.  He
took  this  course  because  he  thought  a  military  title
necessarv  to  political  advancement  in  a  "  fighting
state  "  like  Kentucky.  On  23  Jan.,  1847,  while  in
the  van,  more  than  100  miles  in  advance  of  the
main  army,  he  was  taken  prisoner,  with  seventy-
one  others,  at  Encarnacion,  and  marched  to  the
city  of  Mexico.  On  one  occasion,  after  the  escape
of  some  of  the  captives,  the  lives  of  the  remainder
were  saved  by  Capt.  Clay's  gallantry  and  presence
of  mind.  After  being  exchanged,  he  returned  to
Kentucky,  and  was  presented  by  his  fellow-citizens
with  a  sw^ord  in  honor  of  his  services.  He  worked
for  Gen.  Taylor's  nomination  in  the  convention  of
1848,  and  carried  Kentucky  for  him.  He  called  a
convention  of  emancipationists  at  Frankfort,  Ky.,
in  1849,  and  in  1850,  separating  from  the  whig
party,  was  an  anti-slavery  candidate  for  governor,
receiving  about  5.000  votes.  He  labored  energeti-
cally for  Fremont's  election  in  1856,  and  for  Lin-
coln's in  1860.  but  took  pains  to  separate  himself
from  the  "  radical  abolitionists,"  holding  that  all


638


CLAVlfiRE


CLAY


He  afterward  instructed  and  baptized  the  negroes,
and  formed  them  into  congregations.  In  1628  an
epidemic  of  small-pox  of  a  virulent  character  broke
out  among  the  negroes  of  Carthagena,  and  Father
Claver  was  unremitting  in  his  attention  to  the
victims.  His  favorite  resort  was  the  lepers'  hospi-
tal in  Carthagena,  which  was  shunned  oven  It  the
doctors.  His  constitution  was  enfeebled  by  his
labors,  penances,  and  mortifications,  and  ho  never
recovered  from  an  attack  of  the  plague,  while  his
end  was  hastened  by  the  harshness  and  neglect  of
a  young  negro  appointed  to  attend  him.  He  was
declared  venerable  by  Benedict  XIV.  in  1747,  and
beatified  by^  Pius  IX.  in  1850.

CLAVIERE,  Etienne,  Swiss  financier,  b.  in
Geneva,  27  Jan.,  1735 ;  d.  8  Dec,  1793.  He  removed
to  Paris,  where  he  engaged  in  banking  before  the
revolution,  and  became  acquainted  with  Mirabeau,
Brissot,  and  other  popular  leaders.  Mirabeau,  who
had  a  high  opinion  of  his  talents,  used  Claviere's  as-
sistance in  composing  his  speeches  and  essays.  Du-
mont  says  the  Swiss  banker  was  the  author  of  almost
all  of  Mirabeau's  works  on  finance.  He  was  chosen
deputy  to  the  National  assembly  in  1791,  and  was
Girondist  minister  of  finance  from  March  till  June,
1792.  He  was  arrested  on  2  June,  1793,  on  account
of  his  opposition  to  Robespierre's  extreme  meas-
ures, and  killed  himself  to  escape  the  guillotine.
His  wife  poisoned  herself  two  days  afterward.
Claviere  accompanied  Brissot  in  his  tour  in  the
United  States  in  1783,  and  published,  in  conjunction
with  him,  "  De  la  France  et  des  l&tats-Unis  "  (Eng-
lish translation,  London,  1788).

CLAYIJERO,  or  CLAVIGERO,  Francisco
Xavier  (clah-vee-hay'-ro),  Mexican  historian,  b.  in
Vera  Cruz,  9  Sept.,  1721 ;  d.  in  Bologna,  Italy,  2
April,  1787.  After  studying  ill  the  colleges  of  St.
Jerome  and  St.  Ignatius,  Piiebla,  he  entered  the
novitiate  of  the  Jesuits  in  Tepotzotlan  in  1748.  He
devoted  himself  at  first  to  the  study  of  natural
philosophy,  but  the  great  collection  of  documents
and  antiquities  bearing  on  the  history  of  the  Az-
tecs in  the  library  of  the  College  of  St.  Peter  and
St.  Paul  turned  his  attention  to  Mexican  history.
He  taught  rhetoric  in  Mexico,  and  philosophy
in  Valladolid,  in  the  mean  time  publishing  works
and  translations  that  were  the  fruit  of  his  special
studies.  Owing  to  the  dissolution  of  the  Jesuit  so-
ciety, he  was  banished  from  Mexico  in  1767,  and
retired  to  Ferrara,  and  then  to  Bologna,  Italy.  The
fruit  of  his  researches  was  the  "  Storia  Antica  del
Messico "  (4  vols.,  1780-83 ;  English  translation  by
C.  CuUen,  2  vols.,  1787).  It  was  also  translated  in-
to German  and  Spanish.  This  work,  compiled  from
the  best  Spanish  histories  and  from  the  ancient
picture-writings  and  manuscripts  of  the  Indians,
is  the  source  from  which  modern  writers  on  Mexico
have  drawn  their  materials.  Its  greatest  merit  is
its  impartiality,  especially  in  relating  the  story  of
the  conquest  by  Cortes.  The  principal  purpose  of
Clavijero  in  writing  the  book  was  to  refute  many
absurd  assertions  made  by  Parr,  the  Prussian  au-
thor, Robertson,  and  Raynal.  It  was  highly  com-
mended by  historians  and  critics  of  that  time,  and
afterward"  by  Prescott.  Clavijero  also  published
the  "Storia  della  California"  (Venice,  1789).

CLAXTON,  Alexander,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Maryland,  about  1790;  d.  in  Talcahuana,  Chili,  7
March,  1841.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,
20  June,  1806,  served  in  the  sloop-of-war  "  Wasp  "
in  her  action  with  the  '•  Frolic,"  18  Oct.,  1812,  and
became  lieutenant,  8  Jan..  1813.  He  was  made
commander,  28  March,  1820,  and  captain,  21  Feb.,
1831.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  in  com-
mand of  the  Pacific  squadron. — His  son,  Thomas,


entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  17  Dec,  1810,  was
mortally  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Lake  Erie,  10
Sept.,  1813,  and  died  in  October. — Another  son,
F.  S.,  invented  the  mitrailleuse  that  was  introduced
in  the  French  service.

CLAXTON,  Kate,  actress,  b.  in  New  York  city
in  1848.  She  is  the  granddaughter  of  Rev.  Spencer
H.  Cone,  noticed  elsewhere,  and  her  father,  CoL
Spencer  W.  Cone,  commanded  the  61st  New  York
regiment  in  the  civil  war.  She  first  appeared  with
Lotta  in  Chicago,  soon  afterward  became  a  mem-
ber of  Daly's  Fifth  Avenue  company,  and  then  oJ
the  Union  Square  company,  but  attracted  no  atten-
tion till  the  production  of  "  Led  Astray  "  in  1873,
in  which  she  won  great  popularity  as  Mathilde.
Soon  afterward  she  made  a  reputation  in  the  char-
acter of  Louise  in  "  The  Two  Orphans,"  with  which
she  has  become  identified.  She  played  it  first  at
the  Union  Square  theatre,  and  was  acting  the  part
at  the  Brooklyn  theatre  when  that  building  was
destroyed  by  fire,  5  Dec,  1876.  She  became  widely
known  by  her  coolness  on  that  occasion,  and  by  her
efforts  to  calm  the  audience  and  prevent  the  rush
for  the  doors,  in  which  so  many  were  killed.  Soon
afterward  Miss  Claxton  was  in  the  Southern  hotel
in  St.  Louis  when  it  was  burned,  and  again  dis-
played great  coolness  and  energy,  saving  her  own
and  her  brother's  life,  and  escaping  by  a  burning
stairway  that  fell  just  after  her  foot  had  left  the
last  step.  After  this,  many  superstitious  people,
regarding  her  as  specially  unlucky,  avoided  the
theatres  where  she  played.  She  has  more  recently
played  in  Charles  Reade's  "  Double  Marriage  "  and
in  the  "  Sea  of  Ice."  Miss  Claxton  married  Isidor
Lyon,  a  New  York  merchant,  but  was  subsequently
divorced,  and  in  1876  married  Charles  Stevenson,
a  member  of  her  company.

CLAY,  Clement  Comer,  statesman,  b.  in  Hali-
fax county,  Va.,  17  Dec,  1789 ;  d.  in  Huntsville,
Ala.,  9  Sept.,  1866.  His  father,  William  Clay,  was
an  officer  of  the  Revolutionary  army,  who  removed
to  Granger  county.  Tenn,,  after  the  war.  Young
Clay  was  graduated  at  East  Tennessee  university,
Knoxville,  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1809,  and  in  1811
removed  to  Huntsville,  Ala.  At  the  beginning  of
the  Creek  war,  in  1813,  he  volunteered  as  a  pri-
vate in  a  Madison  county  battalion,  and  was  after-
ward made  adjutant.  He  was  elected  to  the  terri-
torial council  in  1817,  and  in  1819  was  a  delegate
to  the  constitutional  convention,  and  chairman  of
the  committee  to  report  a  plan  of  state  organiza-
tion. He  was  chosen  one  of  the  circuit  judges  by
the  first  state  legislature  in  1820,  and  elected  chief
justice  by  his  colleagues,  holding  the  office  till
1823,  when  he  resigned  and  resumed  his  law-prac-
tice. He  was  speaker  of  the  legislature  in  1828,
and  in  the  same  year  elected  to  congress  as  a
democrat,  serving  from  1829  till  1835.  He  op-
posed the  effort  to  recharter  the  U.  S.  bank,  and
conspicuously  advocated  the  measures  of  Jackson's
administration.  He  was  elected  governor  in  1835,
and  in  1837,  before  the  expiration  of  his  term,
chosen  to  the  U.  S.  Senate  to  fill  the  vacancy  made
by  the  appointment  of  John  McKinley  to  the  su-
preme bench.  He  took  his  seat  at  the  extra  ses-
sion called  by  President  Van  Buren  in  September,
1837,  and  served,  supporting  the  administration,
till  1841.  when  sickness  in  his  familv  caused  him
to  resign.  In  1842  and  1843  he  codified  the  laws
of  his  state,  and  after  that  devoted  himself  to  his
profession.  During  the  war  he  remained  quietly
at  home.— His  son,  Clement  Claiborne,  b.  in
Huntsville,  Ala.,  in  1819;  d.  there,  3  Jan.,  1883,
was  graduated  at  the  University  of  Alabama  m
1835. When  the  elder  Clay  was  elected  goveriior,


CLAY


CLAY


639


he  made  his  son  his  private  secretary,  in  which  ca-
pacity the  boy  continued  his  studies,  and  also  con-
tributed editorials  to  Alabama  papers.  When  his
father  went  to  the  senate,  young  Clay  completed
his  law  studies  at  the  University  of  Virginia,  and
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1840.  He  served  in
the  Alabama  legislature  in  1842,  1844,  and  1845,
and  in  1846  became  Judge  of  the  Madison  county
court.  He  resigned  in  1848,  and  iti  1853  was
elected  U.  S.  senator.  In  1857  he  delivered  an  elo-
quent eulogy  on  Senator  Butler,  of  South  Carolina,
and  in  1858  made  a  speech  advocating  the  admis-
sion of  Kansas  to  the  Union  under  the  Lecompton
constitution.  He  also  advocated  a  bill  repealing
the  bounty  on  vessels  engaged  in  the  Newfound-
land fisheries.  As  a  senator,  he  regarded  himself
as  the  envoy  of  a  sovereign  state  to  the  council  of
the  nation,  and  lost  no  opportunity  of  asserting
the  rights  of  that  state  as  defined  by  Mr.  Calhoun
and  other  southern  statesmen.  He  was  re-elected
unanimously  in  1859,  but  withdrew  in  February,
1861,  his  state  having  seceded  from  the  Union.  He
was  formally  expelled  from  the  senate  in  March,
1861,  and  was  chosen  a  senator  in  the  Confederate
congress.  He  went  to  Canada  in  1864  as  a  secret
agent  of  the  Confederate  government,  took  part  in
planning  the  raids  on  the  northern  frontier,  and
made  some  futile  attempts  at  negotiation  with
President  Lincoln.  He  returned  to  the  Confeder-
acy, but  took  refuge  in  Canada  at  the  close  of  the
war.  In  May,  1865,  hearing  that  a  reward  had
been  oft'ered  for  his  arrest,  he  gave  himself  up  to
the  U.  S.  authorities  and  was  for  some  time  a  pris-
oner in  Fort  Monroe  with  Jefferson  Davis.  He
was  released  in  April,  1866.  and  from  that  time
practised  his  profession  at  Huntsville.

CLAY,  Edw.ard  W.,  caricaturist,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  31  Dec,
1857.  He  was  a  relative  of  Henry  Clay,  had  a
liberal  education,  and  served  as  a  midshipman  in
the  U.  S.  navy.  He  then  turned  his  attention  to
the  law,  and,  though  very  young,  was  at  once  ap-
pointed prothonotary  of  Philadelphia.  His  artistic
tastes,  however,  led  him  to  Europe,  and  he  studied
the  old  masters  there  for  five  years.  On  his  return
to  Philadelphia  he  sketched  "  The  Rats  Leaving
tlie  Falling  House,"  on  the  dissolution  of  Jack-
son's cabinet.  This  brought  him  into  notice,  and
for  more  than  twenty  years  he  was  a  noted  carica-
turist. After  the  failure  of  his  eyesight  he  became
clerk  of  the  Chancery  court,  and  of  the  Orphan's
court  in  Delaware.

CLAY,  Green,  soldier,  b.  in  Powhatan  county,
Va.,  14  Aug.,  1757;  d.  in  Kentucky,  31  Oct.,  1826.  He
emigrated  to  Kentucky  before  he  was  twenty  years
of  age,  became  a  surveyor,  and  acquired  a  fortune
by  locating  lands. He  was  a  representative  of  the
Kentucky  district  in  the  Virginia  legislature,  a
member  of  the  convention  that  ratified  the  Federal
3onstitution,  and  a  leading  member  of  the  Kentucky
:?onstitutioual  convention  of  1799. He  was  long  a
member  of  one  or  the  other  branch  of  the  legisla-
ture, and  at  one  time  speaker  of  the  senate. In
1818,  when Gen. Harrison was besieged  by  the
British  in  Fort  Meigs,  he  came  to  his  relief  with
!.000  volunteers  and  forced the  enemy  to  with-
jraw. He  was  left  in  command  at  the  fort,  and
lefended  it  with  great  skill  against  an  attack  of
he  British  and  Indians  under  Gen.  Proctor  and
ecumseh. After  the  war  he  retired  to  his  planta-
lon,  and  devoted  himself  to  agriculture. He  was
cousin  of  Plenry  Clay  .—His  son,  Cassius  Mar-
ellus,  politician,  b.  in  Madison  county,  Ky.,  19
'ct.,  1810,  studied  at  Transylvania  university,  but
?terward  entered  the  junior  class  at  Yale,  and  was


graduated  there  in  1832.  While  in  New  Haven  he
heard  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  and,  although  his
parents  were  slave-holders,  became  an  earnest  abo-
litionist. He  began  to  practise  law  in  his  native
county,  and  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in  1835,
but  was  defeated  the  next  year  on  account  of  his
advocacy  of  internal  improvements.  He  was  again
elected  in  1837,  and  in  1839  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  nominated  Gen.  Harrison  for  the
presidency.  He  then  removed  to  Lexington,  and
was  again  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1840,  but
in  1841  was  defeated,  after  an  exciting  canvass,  on
account  of  his  anti-slavery  views.  The  improved
jury  system  and  the  common-school  system  of
Kentucky  are  largely  due  to  his  efforts  while  in  the
legislature.  Mr.  Clay  denounced  the  proposed  an-
nexation of  Texas,  as  intended  to  extend  slavery,
and  in  1844  actively  supported  Henry  Clay  for  the
presidency,  speaking  in  his  behalf  in  the  northern
states.  On  3  June,  1845,  he  issued  in  Lexington
the  first  number  of  an  anti-slavery  paper  entitled
"The  True  American."  Mob  violence  had  been
threatened,  and  the  editor  had  prepared  himself
for  it.  He  says  in  his  memoirs :  "  I  selected  for
my  office  a  brick  building,  and  lined  the  outside
doors  with  sheet-iron,  to  prevent  it  being  burned.
I  purchased  two  brass  four-pounder  cannon  at
Cincinnati,  and  placed  them,  loaded  with  shot  and
nails,  on  a  table,  breast  high ;  had  folding-doors
secured  with  a  chain,  which  could  open  upon  the
mob  and  give  play  to  the  cannon.  I  furnished
my  office  with  Mexican  lances,  and  a  limited  num-
ber of  guns.  There  were  six  or  eight  persons  who
stood  ready  to  defend  me.  If  defeated,  they  were
to  escape  by  a  trap-door  in  the  roof ;  and  I  had
placed  a  keg  of  powder  with  a  match,  which  I
could  set  off  and  blow  up  the  office  and  all  my
invaders ;  and  this  I  should  most  certainly  have
done  in  case  of  the  last  extremity."  In  August,
while  the  editor  was  sick,  his  press  was  seized  by
the  mob  and  taken  to  Cincinnati,  and  he  himself
was  threatened  with  assassination ;  but,  notwith-
standing all  opposition,  he  continued  to  publish
the  paper,  printing  it  in  Cincinnati  and  circulat-
ing it  through  Kentucky.  This  was  not  his  only
narrow  escape.  He  was  continually  involved  in
quarrels,  had  several  bloody  personal  encounters,
and  habitually  spoke  in  political  meetings,  with  a
bowie  knife  concealed  about  him.  and  a  brace  of
pistols  in  the  mouth  of  his  grip-sack,  which  he
placed  at  his  feet.  When  war  with  Mexico  was
declared,  Mr.  Clay  entered  the  army  as  captain  of
a  volunteer  infantry  company  that  had  already
distinguished  itself  "at  Tippecanoe  in  1811.  He
took  this  course  because  he  thought  a  military  title
necessary  to  political  advancement  in  a  "  fighting
state  "  like  Kentucky.  On  23  Jan.,  1847,  while  in
the  van,  more  than  100  miles  in  advance  of  the
main  army,  he  was  taken  prisoner,  with  seventy-
one  others,  at  Encarnacion,  and  marched  to  the
city  of  Mexico,  On  one  occasion,  after  the  escai)e
of  some  of  the  captives,  the  lives  of  the  remainder
were  saved  by  Capt.  Clay's  gallantry  and  presence
of  mind.  After  being  exchanged,  he  returned  to
Kentucky,  and  was  presented  by  his  fellow-citizens
with  a  sword  in  honor  of  his  services.  He  worked
for  Gen.  Taylor's  nomination  in  the  convention  of
1848,  and  carried  Kentucky  for  him.  He  called  a
convention  of  emancipationists  at  Frankfort,  Ky.,
in  1849,  and  in  1850,  separating  from  the  whig
party,  was  an  anti-slavery  candidate  for  governor,
receiving  about  5.000  votes.  He  labored  energeti-
cally for  Fremont's  election  in  1856,  and  for  Lin-
coln's in  1860,  but  took  pains  to  separate  himself
from  the  "  radical  abolitionists,"  holding  that  all


640


CLAY


CLAY


interference  with  slavery  should  be  by  legal  meth-
ods. On  38  March,  1861,  he  was  appointed  minis-
ter to  Russia.  He  returned  to  this  country  in
June,  1862,  having  been  commissioned  major-gen-
eral of  volunteers,  and  shortly  afterward  made  a
speech  in  Washington,  declaring  that  he  would
never  draw  his  sword  while  slavery  was  protected
in  the  seceding  states.  He  resigned  on  11  March,
1863,  and  was  again  sent  as  minister  to  Russia,
where  he  remained  till  25  Sept.,  1869.  In  1870  he
publicly  supported  the  revolutionary  movement  in
Cuba,  and  became  president  of  the  Cuban  aid  so-
ciety. In  1871  he  delivered  an  address  by  invita-
tion at  the  St.  Louis  fair,  urging  speedy  reconcilia-
tion with  the  north,  and  at  the  same  time  attack-
ing President  Grant's  administration.  He  was
identified  with  the  liberal  republican  movement  in
1872,  and  supported  his  old  friend  Horace  Greeley
for  the  presidency.  He  afterward  joined  the  demo-
cratic party,  and  actively  supported  Samuel  J.
Tilden  in  1876,  but  advocated  Blaine's  election
in  1884.  In  1877  Mr.  Clay  shot  and  killed  a  negro.
Perry  White,  whom  he  had  discharged  from  his
service  and  who  had  threatened  his  life.  Mr.  Clay
was  tried,  and  the  jury  gave  a  verdict  of  "  justifiable
homicide."  A  volume  of  his  speeches  was  edited
by  Horace  Greeley  (1848),  and  he  has  published
"The  Life,  Memoirs,  Writings,  and  Speeches  of
Cassius  M.  Clay  "  (2  vols.,  Cincinnati,  1886).

CLAY,  Henry,  statesman,  b.  in  Hanover  coun-
ty, Va.,  in  a  district  known  as  "  The  Slashes,"  12
April,  1777;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  29  June,
1852.  His  father,  a  Baptist  clergyman,  died  when
Henry  was  four  years  old,  leaving  no  fortune.
Henry  received  some  elementary  instruction  in  a
log  school-house,  doing  farm  and  house  work
when  not  at  school.  His  mother  married  again
and  removed  to  Kentucky.  When  fourteen  years
of  age  he  was  placed  in  a  small  retail  store  at
Richmond,  and  in  1792  obtained  a  place  in  the
office  of  Peter  Tinsley,  clerk  of  the  high  court  of
chancery.  There  he  attracted  the  attention  of
Chancellor  Whyte,  who  employed  him  as  an
amanuensis,  and  directed  his  course  of  reading.
In  1796  he  began  to  study  law  with  Robert  Brooke,
attorney-general  of  Virginia,  and  in  1797,  having


obtained  a  license  to  practise  law  from  the  judges
of  the  court  of  appeals,  he  removed  to  Lexington,
Ky.  During  his  residence  in  Richmond  he  had
made  the  acquaintance  of  several  distinguished
men  of  Virginia,  and  became  a  leading  member  of
a  debating  club.  At  Lexington  he  achieved  his
first  distinction  in  a  similar  society.  He  soon  won
a  lucrative  practice  as  an  attorney,  being  especially
successful  in  criminal  cases  and  in  suits  growing
out  of  the  land  laws.  His  captivating  manners
and  his  striking  eloquence  made  him  a  general
favorite.  His  political  career  began  almost  imme-
diately after  his  arrival  at  Lexington. A  conven-


tion was  to  be  elected  to  revise  the  constitution  of
Kentucky,  and  in  the  canvass  preceding  the  elec-
tion Clay  strongly  advocated  a  constitutional  pro-
vision for  the  gradual  emancipation  of  the  slaves
in  the  state ;  but  the  movement  was  not  success-
ful. He  also  participated  vigorously  in  the  agita-
tion against  the  alien  and  sedition  laws,  taking
position  as  a  member  of  the  republican  party.
Several  of  his  speeches,  delivered  in  mass  meetings,
astonished  the  hearers  by  their  beauty  and  force.
In  1799  he  married  Lucretia  Hart,  daughter  of  a
prominent  citizen  of  Kentucky.  In  1803  he  was
elected  to  a  seat  in  the  state  legislature,  where  he
excelled  as  a  debater.  In  1806  Aaron  Burr  passed
through  Kentucky,  where  he  was  arrested  on  a
charge  of  being  engaged  in  an  unlawful  enterprise
dangerous  to  the  peace  of  the  United  States.  He
engaged  Clay's  professional  services,  and  Clay,  de-
ceived by  Burr  as  to  the  nature  of  his  schemes,  ob-
tained his  release.

In  the  winter  of  1806  Clay  was  appointed  to  a
seat  in  the  U.  S.  Senate  to  serve  out  an  unexpired
terra.  He  was  at  once  placed  on  various  commit-
tees, and  took  an  active  part  in  the  debates,  espe-
cially in  favor  of  internal  improvements.  In  the
summer  of  1807  his  county  sent  him  again  to  the
legislature,  where  he  was  elected  speaker  of  the
assembly.  He  opposed  and  defeated  a  bill  pro-
hibiting the  use  of  the  decisions  of  British  courts
and  of  British  works  on  jurisprudence  as  authority
in  the  courts  of  Kentucky.  In  December,  1808,  he
introduced  resolutions  expressing  approval  of  the
embargo  laid  by  the  general  government,  de-
nouncing the  British  orders  in  council,  pledging
the  general  government  the  active  aid  of  Kentucky
in  anything  determined  upon  to  resist  British  ex-
actions, and  declaring  that  President  Jefferson  was
entitled  to  the  thanks  of  the  country.  He  offered
another  resolution,  recommending  that  the  mem-
bers of  the  legislature  should  wear  only  clothes
that  were  the  product  of  domestic  manufacture.
This  was  his  first  demonstration  in  favor  of  the
encouragement  of  home  industry.  About  this
resolution  he  had  a  quarrel  with  Humphrey  Mar-
shall, which  led  to  a  duel,  in  which  both  parties
were  slightly  wounded.  In  the  winter  of  1809
Clay  was  again  sent  to  the  U.  S.  senate  to  fill  an
unexpired  term  of  two  years.  He  made  a  speech
in  favor  of  encouraging  home  industries,  taking
the  ground  that  the  country  should  be  enabled  to
produce  all  it  might  need  in  time  of  war,  and  that,
while  agriculture  would  remain  the  dominant  in-
terest, it  should  be  aided .  by  the  development  of
domestic  manufactures.  He  also  made  a  report  on
a  bill  granting  a  right  of  pre-emption  to  purchasers
of  public  lands  in  certain  cases,  and  introduced  a
bill  to  regulate  trade  and  intercourse  with  the  In-
dian tribes,  and  to  preserve  peace  on  the  frontier,
a  subject  on  which  he  expressed  very  wise  and  hii-
mane  sentiments.  During  the  session  of  1810-1
he  defended  the  administration  of  Mr.  Madison
with  regard  to  the  occupation  of  West  Florida  by
the  United  States  by  a  strong  historical  argument,
at  the  same  time  appealing,  in  glowing  language,
to  the  national  pride  of  the  American  people.  He
opposed  the  renewal  of  the  charter  of  the  U.  fc*.
bank,  notwithstanding  Gallatin's  recommendat:>)n,
on  the  ground  of  the  unconstitutionality  o±  tne
bank,  and  contributed  much  to  its  defeat.

On  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  the  senate.
Clay  was  sent  to  the  national  house  of  representar
fives  by  the  Lexington  district  in  Kentucky,  ana
immediately  upon  taking  his  seat,  4  Nov.,  Ibli,
was  elected  speaker  by  a  large  majority,  ^ot  con-
fining himself  to  his  duties  as  presiding  officer,  ne


^.


7


CLAY


CLAY


641


took  a  loading  part  in  debate  on  almost  all  impor-
tant occasions.  The  dilliculties  caused  by  British
interference  with  neutral  trade  were  then  ap-
proaching a  crisis,  and  Clay  put  himself  at  the
head  of  the  war  jiarty  in  congress,  which  was  led
in  the  second  line  by  such  young  statesmen  as
John  C.  Calhoun,  William  Lowndes,  Felix  Grundy,
and  Langdon  Cheves,  and  supported  by  a  strong
feeling  in  the  south  and  west.  In  a  series  of  fiery
speeches  Clay  advocated  the  calling  out  of  volun-
teers to  serve  on  land,  and  the  construction  of  an
efficient  navy.  He  expected  that  the  war  with
Great  Britain  would  be  decided  by  an  easy  con-
quest of  Canada,  and  a  peace  dictated  at  Quebec.
The  Madison  administration  hesitated,  but  was
finally  swept  along  by  the  war  furor  created  by
the  young  Americans  under  Clay's  lead,  and  war
against  Great  Britain  was  declared  in  June,  1812.
Clay  spoke  at  a  hirge  number  of  popular  meetings
to  fill  volunteer  regiments  and  to  fire  the  national
spirit.  In  congress,  while  the  events  of  the  war
were  unfavorable  to  the  United  States  in  conse-
quence of  an  utter  lack  of  preparation  and  in-
competent leadership.  Clay  vigorously  sustained
the  administration  and  the  war  policy  against  the
attacks  of  the  federalists.  Some  of  his  speeches
were  of  a  high  order  of  eloquence,  and  electrified
the  country.  lie  was  re-elected  speaker  in  1813.
On  19  Jan.,  1814,  he  resigned  the  speakership,  hav-
ing been  appointed  by  President  Madison  a  mem-
ber of  a  commission,  consisting  of  John  Quincy
Adams,  James  A.  Bayard,  Plenry  Clay,  Jonathan
Russell,  and  Albert  Gallatin,  to  negotiate  peace
with  Great  Britain.  The  American  commissioners
infit  the  commissioners  of  Great  Britain  at  Ghent,
in  the  Netherlands,  and,  after  five  months  of  ne-
gotiation, during  which  Mr.  Clay  stoutly  opposed
the  concession  to  the  British  of  the  right  of  navi-
gating the  Mississipju  and  of  meddling  with  the
Indians  on  tei-ritory  of  the  United  States,  a  treaty
of  peace  was  signed,  24  Dec,  1814.  From  Ghent
Clay  went  to  Paris,  and  thence  with  Adams  and
Gallatin  to  London,  to  negotiate  a  treaty  of  com-
merce with  Great  Britain.

After  his  return  to  the  United  States,  Mr.  Clay
declined  the  mission  to  Russia,  offered  by  the  ad-
ministration. Having  been  elected  again  to  the
house of  representatives, he  took his seat on
Bee.  4,  1815,  and  was  again  chosen  speaker. He
favored  the  enactment  of  the  protective  tariff  of
1816,  and  also  advocated  the  establishment  of  a
U.  S.  bank  as  the  fiscal  agent  of  the  government,
thus  reversing  his  position  with  regard  to  that  sub-
ject. He  now  pronounced  the  bank  constitutional
because  it  was  necessary  in  order  to  carry  on  the
fiscal  concerns  of  the  government. During  the
same  session  he  voted  to  raise  the  pay  of  represen-
tatives from  $6  a  day  to  $1,500  a  year,  a  measure
that  proved  unpopular,  and  his  vote  for  it  came  near
costing  him  his  seat. He  was,  however,  re-elected,
but  then  voted  to  make  the  pay  of  representatives
a  I)er  diem  of  |8,  which  it  remained  for  a  long
f)eriod. In the session  of 1816-7  he,  together
^vith  Calhoun,  actively  supported  an  internkl  im-
provement bill,  which  President  Madison  vetoed,
n  December,  1817,  Clay  was  re-elected speaker,
n  opposition  to  the  doctrine  laid  down  by  Monroe
n  his  first  message,  that  congress  did  not  possess,
inder  the  constitution,  the  right  to  construct  in-
enial  improvements,  Clay  strongly  asserted  that
lit  in several  speeches. With great  vigor  he
avocated  the  recognition  of  the  independence  of
lie  Spanish  American  colonies,  then  in  a  state  of
evohition,  and severely  censured  what he  con-
luored  the  procrastinating  policy  of  the  adminis-
VOL.  I. — 41


tration  in  that  respect.  In  the  session  of  1818-9
he  criticised,  in  an  elaborate  speech,  the  conduct
of  Gen.  Jackson  in  the  Florida  campaign,  espe-
cially the  execution  of  Arbuthnot  and  Ambrister
by  Jackson's  orders.  This  was  the  first  collision
between  Clay  and  Jackson,  and  the  ill  feelings  that
it  engendered  in  Jackson's  mind  were  never  extin-
guished. At  the  first  session  of  the  16th  congress,
in  December,  1819,  Clay  was  again  elected  speaker
almost  without  opposition.  In  the  debate  on  the
treaty  with  Spain,  by  which  Florida  was  ceded  to
the  United  States,  he  severely  censured  the  admin-
istration for  having  given  up  Texas,  which  he  held
to  belong  to  the  United  States  as  a  part  of  the
Louisiana  purchase.  He  continued  to  urge  the
recognition  of  the  South  American  colonies  as  in-
dependent republics.

In  1819-'20  he  took  an  important  part  in  the
struggle  in  congress  concerning  the  admission  of
Missouri  as  a  slave  state,  which  created  the  first
great  political  slavery  excitement  throughout  the
country.  He  o[)posed  the  "  restriction  "  clause
making  the  admission  of  Missouri  dependent  upon
the  exclusion  of  slavery  from  the  state,  but  sup-
ported the  compromise  proposed  Vjy  Senator
Thomas,  of  Illinois,  admitting  Missouri  with
slavery,  but  excluding  slavery  from  all  the  terri-
tory north  of  36°  30',  acquired  by  the  Louisiana
purchase.  This  was  the  first  part  of  the  Missouri
compromise,  which  is  often  erroneously  attributed
to  Clay.  When  Missouri  then  })resehted  herself
with  a  state  constitution,  not  only  recognizing
slavery,  but  also  making  it  the  duty  of  the  legis-
lature to  pass  such  laws  as  would  be  necessary  to
prevent  free  negroes  or  mulattoes  from  coming
into  the  state,  the  excitement  broke  out  anew,  and
a  majority  in  the  house  of  representatives  refused
to  admit  Missouri  as  a  state  with  such  a  constitu-
tion. On  Clay's  motion,  the  subject  was  referred
to  a  special  committee,  of  which  he  was  chairman.
This  committee  of  the  house  joined  with  a  senate
committee,  and  the  two  unitedly  reported  in  both
houses  a  resolution  that  Missouri  be  admitted  upon
the  fundamental  condition  that  the  state  should
never  make  any  law  to  prevent  from  settling  within
its  boundaries  any  description  of  persons  who  then
or  thereafter  might  become  citizens  of  any  state
of  the  Union.  This  resolution  was  adopted,  and
the  fundamental  condition  assented  to  by  Mis-
souri. This  was  Clay's  part  of  the  Missouri  com-
promise, and  he  received  general  praise  as  "the
great  pacificator."

After  the  adjournment  of  congress.  Clay  re-
tired to  private  life,  to  devote  himself  to  his  legal
practice,  but  was  elected  to  the  18tli  congress,
which  met  in  December.  1823,  and  was  again  cho-
sen speaker.  He  made  speeches  on  internal  im-
provements, advocating  a  liberal  construction  of
constitutional  powers,  in  favor  of  sending  a  com-
missioner to  Greece,  and  in  favor  of  the  tariff  law,
which  became  known  as  the  tariff  of  1824,  giving  his
policy  of  protection  and  internal  improvements  the
name  of  the  "  American  system."

He  was  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  at  the
election  of  1824.  His  com{)etitors  were  John
Quincy  Adams,  Andrew  Jackson,  and  William  H.
Crawford,  each  of  whom  received  a  larger  number
of  electoral  votes  than  Clay.  But,  as  none  of
them  had  recei^^ed  a  majority  of  the  electoral  vote,
the  election  devolved  upon  the  house  of  represen-
tatives. Clay,  standing  fourth  in  the  number  of
electoral  votes  received,  was  excluded  from  the
choice,  and  he  used  his  influence  in  the  house  for
John  Quincy  Adams,  who  was  elected.  The  friends
of  Jackson  and  Crawford  charged  that  there  was  a


642


CLAY


CLAY


corrupt  understanding  between  Adams  and  Clay,
and  this  accusation  received  color  from  the  fact
that  Adams  promptly  offered  Clay  the  portfolio
of  secretary  of  state,  and  Clay  accepted  it.  This
was  the  origin  of  the  "  bargain  and  corruption "
charge,  which,  constantly  repeated,  pursued  Clay
during  the  best  part  of  his  public  life,  although  it
was  disproved  by  the  well-established  fact  that
Clay,  immediately  after  the  result  of  the  presiden-
tial election  in  1834  became  known,  had  declared
his  determination  to  use  his  influence  in  the  house
for  Adams  and  against  Jackson.  As  secretary  of
state  under  John  Quincy  Adams,  Clay  accepted
an  invitation,  presented  by  the  Mexican  and  Colom-
bian ministers,  to  send  commissioners  of  the  United
States  to  an  international  congress  of  American  re-
publics, which  was  to  meet  on  the  Isthmus  of  Pan-
ama, to  deliberate  upon  subjects  of  common  inter-
est. The  commissioners  were  appointed,  but  the
Panama  congress  adjourned  before  they  could
reach  the  appointed  place  of  meeting.  •  In  the
course  of  one  of  the  debates  on  this  subject,  John
Randolph,  of  Roanoke,  denounced  the  administra-
tion, alluding  to  Adams  and  Clay  as  a  "  combina-
tion of  the  Puritan  and  the  blackleg."  Clay  there-
upon challenged  Randolph  to  a  duel,  which  was
fought  on  8  April,  1826,  without  bloodshed.  He
negotiated  and  concluded  treaties  with  Prussia,  the
Hanseatic  republics,  Denmark,  Colombia,  Central
America,  and  Austria.  His  negotiations  with
Great  Britain  concerning  the  colonial  trade  re-
sulted only  in  keeping  in  force  the  conventions  of
1815  and  1818.  He  made  another  treaty  with
Great  Britain,  extending  the  joint  occupation  of
the  Oregon  country  provided  for  in  the  treaty  of
1818  ;  another  referring  the  differences  concerning
the  northeastern  boundary  to  some  friendly  sov-
ereign or  state  for  arbitration;  and  still  another
concerning  the  indemnity  to  be  paid  by  Great
Britain  for  slaves  carried  off  by  British  forces  in
the  war  of  1812.  As  to  his  commercial  policy.
Clay  followed  the  accepted  ideas  of  the  times,  to
establish  between  the  United  States  and  foreign
countries  fair  reciprocity  as  to  trade  and  naviga-
tion. He  was  made  president  of  the  American
colonization  society,  whose  object  it  was  to  colo-
nize free  negroes  in  Liberia  on  the  coast  of  Africa.
In  1828  Andrew  Jackson  was  elected  president,
and  after  his  inauguration  Clay  retired  to  his  farm
of  Ashland,  near  Lexington,  Ky.  But,  although  in
private  life,  he  was  generally  recognized  as  the  lead-
er of  the  party  opposing  Jackson,  who  called  them-
selves "  national  republicans,"  and  later  "  whigs,"
Clay,  during  the  years  1829-'81,  visited  several
places  in  the  south  as  well  as  in  the  state  of  Ohio,
was  everywhere  received  with  great  honors,  and
made  speeches  attacking  Jackson's  administra-
tion, mainly  on  account  of  the  sweeping  remov-
als from  oflhce  for  personal  and  partisan  reasons,
and  denouncing  the  nullification  movement,  which
in  the  mean  time  had  been  set  on  foot  in  South
Carolina.  Yielding  to  the  urgent  solicitation  of
his  friends  throughout  the  country,  he  consented
in  1881  to  be  a  candidate  for  the  U.  S.  senate,  and
was  elected.  In  December,  1831,  he  was  nominated
as  the  candidate  of  the  national  republicans  for
the  presidency,  with  John  Sergeant,  of  Pennsyl-
vania, for  the  vice-presidency.  As  the  impending
extinguishment  of  the  public  debt  rendered  a  re-
duction of  the  revenue  necessary.  Clay  introduced
in  the  senate  a  tariff  bill  reducing  duties  on  un-
protected articles,  but  keeping  them  on  protected
articles,  so  as  to  preserve  intact  the  "  American  sys-
tem." The  reduction  of  the  revenue  thus  effected
was  inadequate,  and  the  anti-tariff  excitement  in


the  south  grew  more  intense.  The  subject  of  pub-
lic lands  having,  for  the  purpose  of  embarrassing
him  as  a  presidential  candidate,  been  referred  to
the  committee  on  manufactures,  of  which  he  was
the  leading  spirit,  he  reported  against  reducing  the
pi-ice  of  public  lands  and  in  favor  of  distributing
the  proceeds  of  the  lands'  sales,  after  certain  de'-
ductions,  among-  the  several  states  for  a  limited
period.  The  bill  passed  the  senate,  but  failed  to
pass  the  house.  As  President  Jackson,  in  his  sev-
eral messages,  had  attacked  the  U.  S.  bank.  Clay
induced  the  bank,  whose  charter  was  to  expire  in
1886,  to  apply  for  a  renewal  of  the  charter  during
the  session  of  1881-2,  so  as  to  force  the  issue  before
the  presidential  election.  The  bill  renewing  the
charter  passed  both  houses,  but  Jackson  vetoed  it,
denouncing  the  bank  in  his  message  as  a  danger-
ous monopoly.  In  the  presidential  election  Clay
was  disastrously  defeated,  Jackson  receiving  219
electoral  votes,  and  Clay  only  49.

On  19  Nov.,  1882,  a  state  convention  in  South
Carolina  passed  an  ordinance  nullifving  the  tariff  i
laws  of  1828  and  1882.  On  10  Dec,  President  '
Jackson  issued  a  proclamation  against  the  nulli-
fiers,  which  the  governor  of  South  Carolina  an-
swered with  a  counter-proclamation.  On  12  Feb..
1883,  Clay  introduced,  in  behalf  of  union  and
peace,  a  compromise  bill  providhig  for  a  gradual
reduction  of  the  tariff  until  1842,  when  it  should
be  reduced  to  a  horizontal  rate  of  20  per  cent.
This  bill  was  accepted  by  the  nidlifiers,  and  be-
came a  law,  known  as  the  compromise  of  1838.
South  Carolina  rescinded  the  nullification  ordi-
nance, and  Clay  was  again  praised  as  the  "  great
pacificator."  In  the  autumn  of  1888,  President
Jackson,  through  the  secretary  of  tlie  treasury,
ordered  the  removal  of  the  public  deposits  from
the  U.  S.  bank.  Clay,  in  December,  1883,  intro-
duced resolutions  in  the  senate  censuring  the
president  for  having  "assumed  upon  himself
authority  and  power  not  confei-red  by  the  consti-
tution and  laws."  The  resolutions  were  adopted,
and  President  Jackson  sent  to  the  senate  an  ear-
nest protest  against  them,  which  was  severely  de^
nounced  by  Clay.  During  the  session  of  1834-'5
Clay  successfully  opposed  Jackson's  recommenda-
tion that  authority  be  conferred  on  him  for  making
reprisals  upon  French  property  on  account  of  the
non-payment  by  the  French  government  of  an  in-
demnity due  to'  the  United  States.  He  also  advo-
cated the  enactment  of  a  law  enabling  Indians  to
defend  their  rights  to  their  lands  in  the  courts  of
the  United  States ;  also  the  restriction  of  the  presi-
dent's power  to  make  removals  from  office,  and  the
repeal  of  the  four-years  act.  The  slavery  question
having  come  to  the  front  again,  in  consequence  of
the  agitation  carried  on  bv  the  abolitionists,  Clay,
in  the  session  of  1835-6,' pronounced  himself  m
favor  of  the  reception  by  the  senate  of  anti-slavery
petitions,  and  against  the  exclusion  of  anti-slavery
literature  from  the  mails.  He  declared,  however,
his  opposition  to  the  abolition  of  slavery  in  the
District  of  Columbia.  With  regard  to  the  recog-
nition of  Texas  as  an  independent  state,  he  main-
tained a  somewhat  cold  and  reserved  attitude.  In
the  session  of  1836-'7  he  reintroduced  his  land  bill
without  success,  and  advocated  international  copy-
right. His  resolutions  censuring  Jackson  for  the
removal  of  the  deposits,  passed  in  1834,  were,  on
the  motion  of  Thomas  PI.  Benton,  expunged  Irom
the  records  of  the  senate,  against  solemn  protests  ;
from  the  whig  minority  in  that  body. .  . ^qop

Martin  Van  Buren  was  elected  president  m  l»rfo,
and  immediately  after  his  inauguration  the  groat
financial  crisis  of  1837  broke  out. At  an  extra  seb-


CLAY


CLAY


643


sion  of  congress,  in  the  summer  of  1837,  he  recom-
mended the  introduction  of  the  sub-treasury  sys-
tem. This  was  earnestly  opposed  by  Clay,  who
denounced  it  as  a  scheme  to  "  unite  the  power  of
the  purse  with  the  power  of  the  sword."  He  and
his  friends  insisted  upon  the  restoration  of  the  U.
S.  bank.  After  a  struggle  of  three  sessions,  the
sub-treasury  bill  succeeded,  and  the  long  existence
of  the  system  has  amply  proved  the  groundlessness
of  the  fears  expressed  by  those  who  opposed  it.
Clay  strongly  desired  to  be  the  whig  candidate  for
the  presidency  in  1840,  but  failed.  The  whig  na-
tional convention,  in  December,  1839,  nominated
Harrison  and  Tyler.  Clay  was  very  much  incensed
at  his  defeat,  but  supported  Harrison  with  great
energy,  making  many  speeches  in  the  famous  *'  log-
cabin' and  hard-cider  "  campaign.  After  the  tri-
umphant election  of  Harrison  and  Tyler,  Clay  de-
clined the  oflfice  of  secretary  of  state  offered  to  him.
Harrison  died  soon  after  his  inauguration.  At  the
extra  session  of  congress  in  the  summer  of  1841,
Clay  was  the  recognized  leader  of  the  whig  major-
ity. Pie  moved  the  repeal  of  the  sub-treasury
act,  and  drove  it  through  both  houses.  He  then
brought  in  a  bill  providing  for  the  incorporation
of  a  new  bank  of  the  United  States,  which  also
passed,  but  was  vetoed  by  President  Tyler,  16  Aug.,

1841.  Another  bank  bill,  framed  to  meet  what
were  supposed  to  be  the  president's  objections,  was

i  also  vetoed.  Clay  denounced  Tyler  instantly  for
1  what  he  called  his  faithlessness  to  whig  principles,
and  the  whig  party  rallied  under  Clay's  leadership
in  opposition  to  the  president.  At  the  same  ses-
sion Clay  put  through  his  land  bill,  containing  the
distribution  clause,  which,  however,  could  not  go
into  operation  because  the  revenues  of  the  govern-
ment fell  short  of  the  necessary  expenditures.  At
the  next  session  Clay  offered  an  amendment  to  the
constitution  limiting  the  veto  power,  which  during
Jackson's  and  Tyler's  administrations  had  become
very  obnoxious  to  him  ;  and  also  an  amendment  to
the  constitution  providing  that  the  secretary  of  the
treasury  and  the  treasurer  should  be  appointed  by
congress :  and  a  third  forbidding  the  appointment
of  members  of  congress,  while  in  office,  to  executive
positions. None  of  them  passed. On  31  March,

1842,  Clay  took  leave  of  the  senate  and  retired  to
private  life,  as  he  said  in  his  farewell  speech,  never
to  return  to  the  senate.

During  his  retirement  he  visited  different  parts
of  the  country,  and  was  everywhere  received  with
s:reat  enthusiam,  delivering  speeches,  in  some  of
which  he  pronounced  himself  in  favor  not  of  a
'high  tariff,"  but  of  a  revenue  tariff  with  inci-
iental  protection  repeatedly  aifirming  that  the
Drotective  system  had  been  orignally  designed  only
IS  a  temporary  arrangement  to  be  maintained  until
he  infant  industries  should  have  gained  sufficient
itrength  to  sustain  competition  with  foreign  manu-
factures. It  was  generally  looked  upon  as  cer-
ain  that  he  would  be  the  Whig  candidate  for  the
)residency  in  1844.  In  the  mean  time  the  admin-
stration  had  concluded  a  treaty  of  annexation
nth.  Texas.  In  an  elaborate  letter,  dated  17  April,
844,  known  as  the  "  Raleigh  letter,"  Clay  declared
limself  against  annexation,  mainly  because  it  w^ould
I'ing  on  a  war  with  Mexico,  because  it  met  with
jrious  objection  in  a  large  part  of  the  Union,  and
ecause  it  would  compromise  the  national  charac-
f.  Van  Buren,  who  expected  to  be  the  derao-
fatic  candidate  for  the  presidency,  also  wrote  a
tter  unfavorable  to  annexation.  On  1  May,  1844,
le  whig  national  convention  nominated  Clay  by
claraation.  The  democratic  national  convention
ominated  not  Van  Buren,  but  James  K,  Polk  for


the  presidency,  with  George  M.  Dallas  for  the  vice-
presidency,  and  adopted  a  resolution  recommending
the  annexation  of  Texas.  A  convention  of  anti-
slavery  men  was  held  at  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  which  put
forward  as  a  candidate  for  the  presidency  James
G.  Birney.  The  senate  rejected  the  annexation
treaty,  and  the  Texas  question  became  the  main
issue  in  the  presidential  canvass.  As  to  the  tariff
and  the  currency  question,  the  platforms  of  the
democrats  and  whigs  differed  very  little.  Polk,
who  had  the  reputation  of  being"^  a  free-trader,
wrote  p,  letter  apparently  favoring  a  protective
tariff,  to  propitiate  Pennsylvania,  where  the  cry
was  raised,  "Polk,  Dallas,  and  the  tarilf  of  1842.^'
Clay,  yielding  to  the  entreaties  of  southei'n  whigs,
who  feared  that  his  declaration  against  the  an-
nexation of  Texas  might  injure  his  prospects  in
the  south,  wrote  another  letter,  in  which  he  said
that,  far  from  having  any  personal  objection  to  the
annexation  of  Texas,  he  would  be  "  glad  to  see  it
without  dishonor,  without  war,  with  the  common
consent  of  the  Union,  and  upon  fair  terms."  This
turned  against  him  many  anti-slavery  men  in  the
north,  and  greatly  strengthened  the  Birney  move-
ment. It  is  believed  that  it  cost  him  the  vote  of
the  state  of  New  York,  and  with  it  the  election.
It  was  charged,  apparently  upon  strong  grounds,
that  extensive  election  frauds  were  committed  by
the  Democrats  in  the  city  of  New  York  and  in  the
state  of  Louisiana,  the  latter  becoming  famous  as
the  Plaquemines  frauds;  but  had  Clay  kept  the
anti-slavery  element  on  his  side,  as  it  was  at  the
beginning  of  the  canvass,  these  frauds  could  not
have  decided  the  electio^.  His  defeat  cast  the  whig
party  into  the  deepest  gloom,  and  was  lamented  by
his  supporters  like  a  personal  misfortune.

Texas  was  annexed  by  a  joint  resolution  which
passed  the  two  houses  of  congress  in  the  session
of  1844-'5,  and  the  Mexican  war  followed.  In
1846,  Wilmot,  of  Pennsylvania,  moved,  as  an  amend-
ment to  a  bill  appropriating  money  for  purposes
connected  with  the  war,  a  proviso  that  in  all  terri-
tories to  be  acquired  from  Mexico  slavery  should
be  forever  prohibited,  which,  however,  failed  in  the
senate.  This  became  known  as  the  "  Vi^ilmot  pro-
viso," One  of  Clay's  sons  was  killed  in  the  battle
of  Buena  Vista.  In  the  autumn  of  1847,  when  the
Mexican  army  was  completely  defeated,  Clay  made
a  speech  at  Lexington,  Ky.,  warning  the  American
people  of  the  dangers  that  would  follow  if  they
gave  themselves  up  to  the  ambition  of  conquest,
and  declaring  that  there  should  be  a  generous
peace,  requiring  no  dismemberment  of  the  Mexican
republic,  but  "only  a  just  and  proper  fixation  of
the  limits  of  Texas,"  and  that  any  desire  to  acquire
any  foreign  territory  whatever  for  the  purpose  of
propagating  slavery  should  be  "  positively  and  em-
phatically" disclaimed.  In  February  and  March,
1848,  Clay  was  honored  with  great  popular  recep-
tions in  Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  New  York,
and  his  name  was  again  brought  forward  for  the
presidential  nomination.  But  the  whig  national
convention,  which  met  on  7  June,  1848,  preferred
Gen.  Zachary  Taylor  as  a  more  available  man,  with
Millard  Fillmore  for  the  vice-presidency.  His  de-
feat in  the  convention  was  a  bitter  disappointment
to  Clay.  Pie  declined  to  come  forward  to  the  sup-
port of  Taylor,  and  maintained  during  the  canvass
an  attitude  of  neutrality.  The  principal  reason  he
gave  was  that  Taylor  had  refused  to  pledge  him-
self to  the  support  of  whig  principles  and  meas-
ures, and  that  Taylor  had  announced  his  purpose
to  remain  in  the  field  as  a  candidate,  whoever
might  be  nominated  by  the  whig  convention.  He
declined,  on  the  other  "hand,  to  permit  his  name  to


644


CLAY


CLAY


be  used  by  the  dissatisfied  whigs.  Taylor  was
elected,  the  free-soilers,  whose  candidate  was  Mar-
tin Van  Buren,  having  assured  the  defeat  of  the
democratic  candidate,  Gen.  Cass,  in  the  state  of
New  York.  In  the  spring  of  1849  a  convention
was  to  be  elected  in  Kentucky  to  revise  the  state
constitution,  and  Clay  published  a  letter  recom-
mending gradual  emancipation  of  the  slaves.  By
a  unanimous  vote  of  the  legislature  assembled  in
December,  1848,  Clay  was  again  elected  a  U.  S.
senator,  and  he  took  his  seat  in  December.  1849.

By  the  treaty  of  Guadalupe  Hidalgo,  New  Mexi-
co and  California,  including  Utah,  had  been  ac-
quired by  the  United  States.  The  discovery  of
^old  had  attracted  a  large  immigration  to  Cali-
lomia.  Without  waiting  for  an  enabling  act,  the
inhabitants  of  California,  in  convention,  had
framed  a  constitution  by  which  slavery  was  pro-
hibited, and  applied  to  congress  for  admission  as  a
state.  The  question  of  the  admission  of  California
as  a  free  state,  and  the  other  question  whether
slavery  should  be  admitted  into  or  excluded  from
New  Mexico  and  Utah,  created  the  in  tensest  ex-
citement in  congress  and  among  the  people.  Lead-
ing southern  men  threatened  a  dissolution  of  the
Union  unless  slavery  were  admitted  into  the  terri-
tories acquired  from  Mexico.  On  29  Jan.,  1850,
Clay,  who  was  at  heart  in  favor  of  the  Wilmot
proviso,  brought  forward  in  the  senate  a  "  compre-
hensive scheme  of  compromise,"  which  included

(1)  the  speedy  admission  of  California  as  a  state ;

(2)  the  establishment  of  territorial  governments  in
New  Mexico  and  Utah  without  any  restriction  as
to  slavery;  (3)  a  settlement  of  the  boundary-line
between  Texas  and  New  Mexico  substantially  as
it  now  stands;  (4)  an  indemnity  to  be  paid  to
Texas  for  the  relinquishment  of  her  claims  to  a
large  portion  of  New  Mexico ;  (5)  a  declaration
that  slavery  should  not  be  abolished  in  the  Dis-
trict of  Columbia  :  (6)  the  prohibition  of  the  slave-
trade  in  the  district ;  and  (7)  a  more  effective
fugitive-slave  law.  These  propositions  were,  on
18  April,  1850,  referred  to  a  special  committee,  of
which  Clay  was  elected  chairman.  He  reported
three  bills  embodying  these  different  subjects,  one
of  which,  on  account  of  its  comprehensiveness,  was
called  the  "  omnibus  bill."  After  a  long  struggle,
the  omnibus  bill  was  defeated ;  but  then  its  differ-
ent parts  were  taken  up  singly,  and  passed,  cover-
ing substantially  Clay's  original  propositions.
This  was  the  compromise  of  1850.  In  the  debate
Clay  declared  in  the  strongest  terms  his  allegiance
to  the  Union  as  superior  to  his  allegiance  to  his
state,  and  denounced  secession  as  treason.  The
compromise  of  1850  added  greatly  to  his  renown ;
but,  although  it  was  followed  by  a  short  period  of
qiiiet,  it  satisfied  neither  the  south  nor  the  north,
lo the  north  the  fugitive-slave  law  was  especially
distasteful.  In  January,  1851,  forty-four  senators
and  representatives.  Clay's  name  leading,  published
a  manifesto  declaring  that  they  would  not  support
for  any  office  any  man  not  known  to  be  opposed
to  any  disturbance  of  the  matters  settled  by  the
compromise.  In  Febi'uary,  1851,  a  recaptured
fugitive  slave  having  been  liberated  in  Boston,
Clay  pronounced  himself  in  favor  of  conferring
upon  the  president  extraordinary  powers  for  the
enforcement  of  the  fugitive-slave  law,  his  main
object  being  to  satisfy  the  south,  and  thus  to  dis-
arm the  disunion  spirit.

After  the  adjournment  of  congress,  on  4  March,
1851,  his  health  being  much  impaired,  he  went  to
Cuba  for  relief,  and  thence  to  Ashland.  He  per-
emptorily enjoined  his  friends  not  to  bring  forward
his  name  again  as  that of  a  candidate for  the


presidency.  To  a  committee  of  whigs  in  New
York  he  addressed  a  public  letter  containing  an
urgent  and  eloquent  plea  for  the  maintenance  of  the
Union.  He  went  to  Washington  to  take  his  seat
in  the  senate  in  December,  1851,  but,  owing  to
failing  health,  he  appeared  there  only  once  during
the  winter.  His  last  public  utterance  was  a  short
speech  addressed  to  Louis  Kossuth,  who  visited
him  in  his  room,  deprecating  the  entanglement  of
the  United  States  in
the  complications  of
European  affairs.  He
favored  the  nomina-
tion of  Fillmore  for
the  presidency  by  the
whig  national  con-
vention, which  met  on
16  June,  a  few  days
before  his  death.  Clay
was  unquestionably
one  of  the  greatest
orators  that  Ameri-
ca ever  produced ;  a
man  of  incorruptible
personal integrity ;

of  very great natu- t  j-r^,  -t  >. ^ -^y

ral  ability,  but  little
study; of free  and

convivial  habits ;  of  singularly  winning  address  and
manners ;  not  a  cautious  and  safe  political  leader,
but  a  splendid  party  chief,  idolized  by  his  followers.
He  was  actuated  by  a  lofty  national  spirit,  proud
of  his  country,  and  ardently  devoted  to  the  Union.
It  was  mainly  his  anxiety  to  keep  the  Union  in-
tact that  inspired  his  disposition  to  compromise
contested  questions.  He  had  in  his  last  hours  the
satisfaction  of  seeing  his  last  great  work,  the  com-
promise of  1850,  accepted  as  a  final  settlement  of
the  slavery  question  by  the  national  conventions  of
both  political  parties.  But  only  two  years  after
his  death  it  became  evident  that  the  compromise
had  settled  nothing.  The  struggle  about  slavery
broke  out  anew,  and  brought  forth  a  civil  war,  the
calamity  that  Clay  had  been  most  anxious  to  pre-
vent, leading  to  general  emancipation,  which  Clav
would  have  been  glad  to  see  peaceably  accom-
plished. He  was  buried  in  the  cemetery  at  Lex-
ington, Ky.,  and  a  monument  consisting  of  a  tall
column  surmounted  by  a  statue  was  erected  over
his  tomb.  The  accompanying  illustrations  show  his
birthplace  and  tomb.  See  "  Life  of  Henry  Clay,"
bv  George  D.  Prentice  (Hartford,  Conn.,  1831);
"Speeches,"  collected  by  R.  Chambers  (Cincinnati,
1842) ;  "  Life  and  Speeches  of  Henry  Clay,"  by  J.
B.  Swaim  (New  York,  1843) ;  "  Life  of  Henry  Clay,"
by  Epes  Sargent  (1844.  edited  and  completed  by
Horace  Greeley,  1852);  "Life  and  Speeches  of
Henry  Clay,"  by  D.  Mallorv  (1844;  new  ed.,  1857);
"  Life  and  Times  of  Henry  Clay,"  by  Rev.  Calvm
Colton  (6  vols.,  containing  speeches  and  corr^
spondence,  184G-'57;  revised  ed.,  18()4);  and
"Henrv  Clay,"  bv  Carl  Schurz  (2  vols.,  Boston,
1887).-^His  brother.  Porter,  clergyman,  b.  m  Vir-
ginia in  March,  1779;  d.  in  1850.  He  removed
to  Kentucky  in  early  life,  where  he  studied  law,
and  was  for  a  while  auditor  of  public  accounts.  In
1815  he  was  converted  and  gave  himself  to  the
Baptist  ministry,  in  which  he  was  popular  and
useful.— Henry's  son,  Henry,  lawyer,  b.  in  Ash-
land, Ky.,  10  April,  1811 ;  killed  in  action  at  Buena
Vista,  Mexico,  28  Feb.,  1847,  was  graduated  at
Transvlvania  university  in  1828,  and  at  the  U.  b.
military  academy  in  1831.  He  resigned  from  the
army  and  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1833,  and  was  a  member  of  the  Kentucky  legislature


CLAY


CLAYTON


645


in  1835-'7.  He  went  to  the  Mexican  war  in  June,
184G,  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  2d  Kentucky  vol-
unteers, became  extra  aide-de-camp  to  Gen.  Taylor,
5  Oct.,  184G,  and  was  killed  with  a  lance  while  gal-
lantly leading  a  charge  of  his  regiment. — Another
son,  James  Brown,  b.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  9
Nov.,  1817;  d.  in  Montreal,  Canada,  26  Jan.,  1864,
was  educated  at  Transylvania  university,  was  two
years  in  a  counting-house  in  Boston,  1885-'6,  emi-
grated to  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  which  then  contained
only  8,000  inhabitants,  settled  on  a  farm,  then  en-
gaged in  manufacturing  for  two  years  in  Ken-
tucky, and  afterward  studied  law  in  the  Lexing-
ton law-school,  and  practised  in  partnership  with
his  father  till  1849,  when  he  was  appointed  charge
d'affaires  at  Lisbon  by  President  Taylor.  In
1851-3  he  resided  in  Missouri,  but  returned  to
Kentucky  upon  becoming  the  proprietor  of  Ash-
land, after  his  father's  death.  In  1857  he  was
elected  to  represent  his  father's  old  district  in  con-
gress. He  was  a  member  of  the  peace  convention
of  1861,  but  afterward  embraced  the  secessionist
cause,  and  died  in  exile.

CLAY,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  in
1741 ;  d.  there,  16  Jan.,  1805.  He  was  a  member
of  the  revolutionary  committee  of  1774-'5,  a  colo-
nel in  the  army,  and  paymaster-general  of  the
southern  department.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Continental  congress  from  1778  till  1780,  when  he
resigned,  and  was  afterward  a  county  judge. — His
son,  Joseph,  clergyman,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  16
Aug.,  1764;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1811.  He
was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1784  with  the  high-
est honor  in  his  class.  Returning  to  Savannah,  he
studied  law,  and,  having  been  admitted  to  the  bar,
soon  became  eminent  in  his  profession.  In  1796
he  was  appointed  U.  S.  district  Judge  for  Georgia,
holding  that  office  until  1801,  when  he  resigned.
In  1803  he  made  a  profession  of  religion,  uniting
with  the  Baptist  church  in  Savannah.  In  1804  he
was  ordained  to  the  ministry  as  assistant  pastor  of
Dr.  Holcombe,  and  in  1807  was  invited  to  the  pas-
torate of  the  1st  Baptist  churcn  in  Boston,  just
vacated  by  the  death  of  Dr.  Stillman.  His  health
beginning  to  decline,  he  resigned  his  charge  in
1809,  and  died  soon  afterward.  Mr.  Clay  was  a
member  of  the  Georgia  convention  of  1798,  and
was  very  influential  in  framing  the  constitution  of
that  state.  He  was  eminent  as  a  lawyer  and  a
judge,  and  was  also  one  of  the  most  eloquent
preachers  of  his  dav.

CLAYPOLE,  Edward  Waller,  educator,  b.  in
Ross,  Herefordshire,  England,  1  June,  1835.  He
received  his  education  in  England,  taking  his  de-
crees at  the  University  of  London  in  1862  and  1864.
Later  he  came  to  the  United  States,  and  in  1873-'81
was  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Antioch  col-
lege. Yellow  Springs,  Ohio ;  in  1881-'3  paleontolo-
gist with  the  geological  survey  of  Pennsylvania ;
md  in  1883-'6  professor  of  natural  sciences  in
Buchtel  college,  Akron,  Ohio.  Prof.  Claypole  is  a
'ellow  of  the  Geological  society  of  London  and  of
he  American  association  for  the  advancement  of
cience,  and  has  published  numerous  papers  on
geological  subjects  in  technical  journals.

CLAYPOOLE,  James,  pioneer,  b.  in  1634;  d.  in
Uigust,  1686.  He  was  the  fifth  son  of  John  Clay-
•oole,  and  his  wife  Mary,  daughter  of  William
^ngell,  of  London.  His  brother  John  married  the
aughter  of  Oliver  Cromwell.  James  became  a
Quaker,  and  was  an  intimate  friend  of  William
enn.  Pie  was  a  merchant  in  London,  and  wit-
essed  the  signing  of  the  Charter  of  Privileges
ranted  by  Penn  to  the  settlers  in  1682.  .He  was
le  treasurer  of  the  Free  society  of  traders,  which


was  formed  to  assist  in  the  settlement  of  Pennsyl-
vania, and,  after  attending  to  its  affairs  in  England,
he  emigrated  with  his  family,  in  1683,  to  Pennsyl-
vania, where  he  held  imjjortant  offices.

CLAYTON,  Augustine  Smith,  jurist,  b.  in
Fredericksburg,  Va.,  27  Nov.,  1783 ;  d.  in  Athens,
Ga.,  21  June,  1839.  Soon  after  his  birth  his  parents
removed  to  Georgia,  and  he  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Georgia  in  1804.  He  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  was  elected  to  the  state  legislature,  and
in  1810  appointed  to  compile  the  statutes  of  Georgia
from  1800.  In  1819  he  was  elected  judge  of  the
superior  court  of  the  western  circuit,  an  office  which
he  retained  until  1825,  and  again  from  1828  till
1831.  During  his  last  term  those  difficulties  began
between  the  state  of  Georgia  and  the  Cherokee  Indi-
ans which  ultimately  resulted  in  the  expatriation
of  the  latter.  In  1829  the  legislature  brought  the
territory  occupied  by  the  Cherokee  nation  within
the  jurisdiction  of  the  laws  of  Georgia.  This
action  of  the  state  authorities  was  sustained  by
Judge  Clayton,  though  eventually  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court  decided  against  its  legality,  and  ruled
that  the  Cherokee  nation  was  sovereign  and  not
subject  to  the  state  laws  that  had  been  imposed
upon  it.  Judge  Clayton,  however,  was  not  in  per-
fect accord  with  the  legislature  on  the  question  of
Indian  rights,  as  he  held  that  they  were  entitled  to
dig  gold  on  lands  to  which  their  stipulated  title
had  not  been  extinguished ;  and  for  thus  opposing
the  policy  of  the  state  he  was  removed  from  his
judicial  office.  In  1831  he  was  elected  to  congress,
where  he  took  a  leading  part  in  debates  on  the
tariff  and  the  United  States  bank,  both  of  which
he  opposed.  He  served  two  terms  in  congress,  and
after  his  retirement  in  1835  held  no  public  office
excepting  the  trusteeship  of  the  University  of
Georgia.  He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1829.
His  attitude  toward  Christianity  for  many  years
was  one  of  doubt,  but  at  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  a  member  of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church.
He  was  reputed  to  be  the  author  of  the  political
pamphlet  called  "  Crockett's  Life  of  Van  Buren."

CLAYTON,  John,  botanist,  b.  in  Fulham,  Eng-
land, in  1686 ;  d.  in  Virginia,  15  Dec,  1773.  In
1705  he  emigrated  to  Virginia  with  his  father,
who  was  afterward  attorney-general  of  Virginia,
and  resided  twenty  miles  from  the  city  of  Will-
iamsburg. When  quite  young  he  entered  the  of-
fice of  Peter  Beverly,  who  was  clerk  for  Gloucester
CO.,  and,  succeeding  him  in  office,  filled  it  for  fifty-
one  years.  He  was  educated  as  a  physician,  but
became  an  enthusiastic  botanist,  and  passed  a  long
life  in  exploring  and  describing  the  plants  of  the
country.  His  letters  to  the  Royal  society,  giving
an  account  of  several  new  species  of  plants  ob-
served in  Virginia,  was  embodied  in  Force's
"  Tracts  "  (vol.  iii.).  His  essays  on  the  natural  his-
tory of  Virginia  were  published  in  the  "  Philo-
sophical Transactions "  of  the  Royal  society  of
London.  He  also  sent  dried  specimens  of  the
flora  of  Virginia  to  Gronovius,  who  with  Linnanis
published  an  account  of  a  portion  of  them  (2  parts,
Leyden,  1739-43).  After  the  death  of  Gronovius
the  remainder  were  described  in  a  third  part  by  his
son  (1762),  who  named  a  genus  of  herbaceous  plant-
Claytonia  in  his  honor.  He  was  a  member  of  sev-
eral learned  societies  in  Europe.  He  left  two  vol-
umes of  manuscript  almost  ready  for  the  press  and
a  hortus  siccus  of  folio  size,  with  marginal  notes
and  directions  for  the  engraver  in  preparing  the
plates  for  the  proposed  work.  At  the  beginning
of  the  revolutionary  war  this  work,  which  had  been
placed  in  the  hands  of  William  Clayton,  clerk  of
New  Kent,  was  burned  along  with  the  records  of


646


CLAYTON


CLEAVELAND


the  county.  Several  of  his  commiinicfitions,  treat-
ing of  the  culture  and  different  species  of  tobacco,
and  also  one  containing  an  account  of  medicinal
plants  which  he  had  discovered  in  Virginia,  were
published  in  the  "  Philosophical  Transactions."

CLAYTON,  John  Middleton,  jurist,  b.  in  Dags-
borough,  Sussex  CO.,  Del.,  24  July,  1796 ;  d.  in  Do-
ver, Del.,  9  Nov.,  1856.  lie  was  the  eldest  son  of
James  Clayton  (a  descendant  of  Joshua  of  that
name,  who  came  to  America  with  William  Penn)
and  Sarah  Middleton,  of  Virginian  ancestry.  The
pecuniary  disasters  consequent  upon  the  war  of
1812  reduced  his  father  from  affluence  to  com-
parative poverty,  and  it  was  only  by  making  the
greatest  sacrifices  that  he  was  able  to  send  his  son
to  college.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1815,
studied  law  at  the  Litchfield  law-school,  began  to
practise  in  1818,  and  soon  attained  eminence  in
his  profession.  In  1824  he  was  sent  to  the  Dela-
ware legislature,  and  was  subsequently  secretary  of
state.  In  1829  he  was  sent  to  the  "U.  S.  senate,
and  in  1831  appointed  a  member  of  the  convention
to  revise  the  constitution  of  Delaware.  In  1835  he
was  again  returned  to  the  senate  as  a  whig,  but  re-
signecf  in  1837  to  become  chief  justice  of  Dela-
ware, an  office  which  he  held  for  three  years.  From
1845  till  1849  he  was  again  U.  S.  senator,  and  at
the  latter  date  became  secretary  of  state  under
President  Taylor.  He  was  elected  a  senator  for
the  third  time,  and  served  in  that  capacity  from
March,  1851,  until  his  death.  He  early  distin-
guished himself  in  the  senate  by  a  speech  during
the  debate  on  the  Foote  resolution,  which,  though
merely  relating  to  the  survey  of  the  public  lands,
introduced  into  the  discussion  the  whole  question
of  nullification.  His  argument  in  favor  of  paying
the  claims  for  French  spoliations  was  also  a  fine  in-
stance of  senatorial  oratory.  One  of  his  most  noted
speeches  delivered  in  the  senate  was  that  made  in
1855  against  the  message  of  President  Pierce  veto-
ing the  act  ceding  public  lands  for  an  insane  asy-
lum. While  secretary  of  state  he  negotiated  in

1850  the  treaty  with  the  British  government,  known
as  the  Clayton-Bulwer  treaty,  which  guaranteed
the  neutrality  and  encouragement  of  lines  of  in-
teroceanic  travel  across  the  American  isthmus. In

1851  he  zealously  defended  that  treaty  in  the  sen-
ate and  vindicated  President  Taylor's  administra-
tion. From  1844  Mr.  Clayton  cultivated  a  tract
of  land  near  Newcastle,  which  in  a  few  years  he
made  one  of  the  most  fruitful  estates  in  that  fer-
tile region.  Mr.  Clayton  was  always  accessible,
and  was  noted  for  his  genial  disposition  and  brill-
iant conversational  powers.

CLAYTON,  Joshua,  physician,  d.  near  Middle-
town,  Del.,  11  Aug.,  1798.  He  practised  medicine
for  many  years,  and  during  the  revolution  intro-
duced a  substitute  for  Peruvian  bark,  consisting  of
equal  parts  of  poplar  and  dogwood  root  bark  and
half  the  quantity  of  the  inner  bark  of  the  white
oak.  Dr.  Clayton  was  president  of  Delaware  from
1789  till  1793,  then  governor  till  1796,  and  just  be-
fore his  death  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator.

CLAYTON,  Powell,  governor  of  Arkansas,  b.
in  Bethel,  Delaware  co..  Pa.,  7  Aug.,  1833. _  He
was  educated  in  the  common  schools  and  in  an
academy  at  Bristol,  Pa.,  studied  civil  engineering
at  Wilmington,  Del.,  and  in  1859  was  chosen  engi-
neer and  surveyor  of  Leavenworth,  Kansas.  When
the  civil  war  began  he  entered  the  National  army
as  captain  in  the  1st  Kansas  infantry,  29  May,  1861.
He  was  appointed,  27  Feb.,  1862,  lieutenant-colo-
nel of  the  5th  Kansas  cavalry,  and  was  made  colo-
nel on  30  March,  1862.  On  6  May,  1863,  he  com-
manded a  successful  expedition  from  Helena,  Ark.,


to  the  White  river  to  break  up  a  band  of  guerillas
and  destroy  Confederate  stores,  and  later  an  expe-
dition from  Pine  Bluff  in  March,  1864,  which  in-
flicted severe  loss  on  the  enemy.  On  1  Aug.,  1864,
lie  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-general.  He  set-
tled in  Arkansas  as  a  planter  after  the  war,  was
elected  governor,  and  entered  upon  the  office  in
June,  1868.  He  was  U.  S.  senator  from  25  March,
1871,  till  3  March,  1877.  Afterward  he  resided  at
Eureka  Springs,  and  became  president  of  the  Eu-
reka improvement  company.

CLAYTON,  Thomas,  senator,  b.  in  Newcastle,
Del.,  9  March,  1778;  d.  there,  21  Aug.,  1854.  He
received  a  liberal  education,  studied  and  practised
law  at  Newcastle,  was  elected  to  congress,  and
served  from  4  Dec,  1814,  till  3  March,  1817.  He
was  for  several  terms  a  member  of  the  legislature,
and  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  on  the  resignation  of
C.  A.  Rodney,  serving  from  15  Jan.,  1824,  till  3
March,  1827.  Afterward  he  was  chief  justice  of
common  pleas.  He  was  again  elected  senator
when  John  M.  Clavton  resigned,  serving  from  19
Jan.,  1837,  till  3  March,  1847,  and  subsequently
presided  over  the  supreme  court  of  Delaware.

CLEARY,  James  Vincent,  Canadian  R.  C.
bishop,  b.  in  Dungarvan,  co.  Waterford,  Ireland,
18  Sept.,  1828.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  sent
to  Rome  to  be  educated  for  the  priesthood,  but
subsequently  he  was  recalled  by  the  bishop  of  Wa-
terford and  placed  in  the  Royal  college  of  May-
nooth.  After  completing  a  five  years'  course  there,
he  was  ordained  deacon  in  1851,  and  priest  in  Sep-
tember, 1852,  by  the  bishop  of  Waterford.  Imme-
diately after  his  ordination  he  went  to  Spain  and
studied  for  several  years  at  the  University  of  Sala-
manca. In  1854  he  was  summoned  home  by  the
bishop  of  Waterford  to  take  the  chair  of  dogmatic
theology  and  scriptural  exegesis  in  St.  John's  col-
lege, Waterford,  and  in  1873  was  appointed  presi-
dent of  this  college.  On  21  Nov.,  1880,  he  was
consecrated  bishop  of  Kingston,  Ontario.  Bishop
Cleary  is  reputed  to  be  one  of  the  most  learned  of
the  Roman  Catholic  ecclesiastics  of  Canada.

CLEAVELAND,  John,  elergvman,  b.  in  Canter-
bury, Conn.,  22  April,  1722 ;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,
22  April,  1799.  He  was  expelled  from  Yale  col-
lege in  1744  for  attending  a  Separatist  meeting,
but  received  his  degree  twenty  years  after  as  an
act  of  redress.  He  preached  to  a'Separatist  society
in  Boston,  but,  declining  to  settle  there,  became
pastor  of  the  parish  of  Chebacco  in  Ipswich,  now
the  town  of  Essex.  He  was  chaplain  of  Col.  Bag-
ley's  regiment  at  Ticonderoga  in  1758,  and  at
Louisburg  in  1759,  and  served  in  that  capacity
with  the  Revolutionary  army  at  Cambridge  in  1775,
and  in  Connecticut  and  New  York  the  year  fol-
lowing. He  published  a  "  Narrative  of  the  Work
of  God  at  Chebacco  in  1763-'4,"  describing  a  re-
vival of  religion  in  his  congregation ;  an  "  Essay
to  Defend  Christ's  Sacrifice  and^  Atonement
against  the  Aspersions  cast  on  the  Same  by  Dr.
Mayhew"  (1763) ;  a  "  Replv  to  Dr.  Mayhew's  Let-
ter of  Reproof"  (1765) ;  and  a  "  Treatise  on  Infant
Baptism"  (1784).— His  grandson,  Parker,  b.  in
Rowley,  Mass.,  15  Jan.,  1780;  d.  in  Brunswick,
Me..  15  Oct.,  1858  (whose  father  was  a  physician
of  Rowley,  a  regimental  surgeon  in  the  revolution,
and  frequently  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature),  was  graduated  at  Harvard  m  It^if,
taught  school  at  Haverhill,  Mass.,  and  York,  31e.,
and  studied  law.  He  was  appointed  a  tutor  or
mathematics  at  Harvard  in  1803,  and  m  180o  \^a>
called  to  Brunswick  as  the  first  professor  of  mat  he-
matics and  natural  philosophv  in  Bowdoin.  He
applied  himself  especially  to  the  new  sciences  oi


CLEAVELAND


CLEBURNE


647


chemistry  and  mineralogy,  and  in  1816  published
an  elementary  treatise  on  "  Mineralogy  and  Ge-
ology" (Boston;  2d  ed.,  1822;  3d  ed.,  185(5),  based
on  the  system  of  Brongniart  and  Haiiy,  and  contain-
ing minute  descriptions  of  minerals  and  original
information  regarding  their  localities  in  the  White
mountains  and  other  districts  explored  by  him.
He  lectured  on  chemistry  before  popular  axidiences
in  Ilallowell,  Portland,  and  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,
during  his  winter  vacations  in  1818-22.  When
the  medical  school  was  established  in  1820  he  be-
came lecturer  on  chemistry,  dean  of  the  faculty,
and  librarian.  In  1828  his  chair  in  the  college  was
changed  to  chemistry,  mineralogy,  and  natural
philosophy.  He  stood  first  among  the  mineralo-
gists of  the  country,  gathered  a  large  collection  of
specimens  for  the  college,  was  a  lucid  lecturer,  and
continued  to  teach  with  success  to  the  very  day
of  his  death.  But,  since  he  would  not  travel  by
steam  and  took  little  interest  in  recent  geological
discoveries  and  discussions,  his  early  fame  as  a
mineralogist  was  eclipsed  by  the  scientific  services
of  geological  explorers.  Pie  declined  the  professor-
ship of  mineralogy  at  Harvard,  offered  him  after
his  reputation  was  first  established  by  the  publica-
tion of  his  manual,  and  in  1839  refused  the  presi-
dencv  of  Bowdoin. — Another  grandson,  Nelie-
miafi,  b.  in  Topsfield,  Mass.,  in  1796;  d.  in  1877
(a  son  of  Dr.  Nehemiah,  a  physician  of  Topsfield),
was  prepared  for  college  in  the  family  of  his  cousin,
Parker,  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1813,  began  the
study  of  theology  at  Andover,  and  taught  school
at  Gorham,  Me.  He  had  charge  of  Preble  street
school,  Portland,  in  1816-'7,  was  then,  for  three
years,  a  tutor  at  Bowdoin,  from  1821  till  1839  was
preceptor  of  Dummer  academy,  Byfield,  and  after-
ward professor  of  ancient  languages  at  Phillips
Exeter  academy.  He  was  head  of  the  high  school
j  at  Lowell,  Mass.,  and  from  1842  till  1848  principal
I  of  a  school  for  young  ladies  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.
\  He  was  the  author  of  a  descriptive  and  historical
I  account  of  Greenwood  cemetery,  Brooklyn ;  "  The
Flowers  Personified,"  a  translation  from  the
French ;  and  a  "  History  of  Bowdoin  College,
with  Biographical  Sketches  of  its  Graduates,"  left
unfinished  by  him,  but  completed  by  A.  S.  Pack-
ard {Boston,  1882). — Another  grandson,  brother  of
Nehemiah,  Elislia  Lord,  clergyman,  b.  in  Tops-
field,  Mass.,  25  April,  1806;  d.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  16  Feb.,  1866,  was  prepared  for  college  at
Dummer  academy,  Newbury,  then  under  the  care
of  his  brother,  and  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1829.
and  at  Andover  theological  seminary  in  1832,  and
the  same  year  was  licensed  to  preach.  In  July,  1833,
he  was  ordained  pastor  of  the  3d  Congregational
church  of  New  Haven.  Dr.  Cleaveland  opposed
the  new-school  views  of  Drs.  Taylor  and  Fitch.
In  November,  1864,  he  went  to  Europe,  and  during
his  tour  explained  the  sentiments  and  resources  of
the  northern  states  in  an  assembly  of  French  Prot-
estant pastors  in  Paris,  and  before  the  English
Congregational  miion  in  London.

CLEAVELAND,  Moses,  pioneer,  b.  in  Canter-
bury, Windham  co.,  Conn.,  29  Jan.,  1754 ;  d.  there,
16  Nov.,  1806.  He  was  a  nephew  of  John,  the
minister  of  Ipswich,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1777,  and  studied  and  began  the  practice  of  law  in
his  native  town.  He  was  commissioned  captain  of  a
company  of  sappers  and  miners  in  1779,  served  for
several  years,  and  then  resumed  legal  practice.  He
gained  a  high  reputation  for  ability  and  energy,
was  several  times  elected  to  the  legislature,  and  in
1796  was  commissioned  brigadier-general  of  militia.
He  was  a  shareholder  in  the  Connecticut  land  com-
pany, which  had  purchased  for  $1,200,000  from  the


state  government  of  Connecticut  the  land  in  north-
eastern Ohio  reserved  to  Connecticut  by  congress,
known  at  its  first  settlement  as  New  Connecticut,
and  in  later  times  as  the  Western  Reserve.  In
May,  1796,  the  directors  of  the  company  appointed
Gen.  Cleaveland  their  agent  to  superintend  the
survey  of the tract

and the location of

purchases,  and  to  ne-
gotiate with  the  In-
dians living  on  the
land,  and  obtain  their
acquiescence  in  its
settlement  by  white
emigrants.  He  set
out  from  Schenecta-
dy, N.  Y.,  in  June,
1796,  with  a  party  of
fifty,  consisting  of  six
surveyors,  a  physi-
cian, a  chaplain,  a
boatman,  thirty-seven
employes,  a  few  emi-
grants, and  two  wo-
men who  accompa-
nied their  husbands.  Some  journeyed  by  land
with  the  horses  and  cattle,  while  the  main  body
went  in  boats  up  the  Mohawk,  down  the  Oswego,
along  the  shore  of  Lake  Ontario,  and  up  Niagara
river,  carrying  their  boats  over  the  long  portage  of
seven  miles  at  the  falls.  At  Buffalo  a  delegation
of  Mohawk  and  Seneca  Indians  opposed  their  en-
trance into  the  Western  Reserve,  claiming  it  as
their  territory,  but  waived  their  rights  on  the  re-
ceipt of  goods  valued  at  $1,200.  The  expedition
then  coasted  along  the  shore  of  Lake  Erie,  and
landed,  on  4  July,  1796,  at  the  mouth  of  Conneaut
creek,  which  they  named  Port  Independence.  The
Indians  were  propitiated  with  gifts  of  beads  and
whiskey,  and  allowed  the  surveys  to  proceed.  Gen.
Cleaveland,  with  a  surveying  party,  coasted  along
the  shore,  entered  a  stream  that  he  took  to  be  the
Cuyahoga,  and  named  the  Chagrin  on  learning  his
vexatious  mistake,  then  proceeded  westward,  and
on  22  July,  1796,  landed  at  the  mouth  of  the
Cuyahoga.  He  ascended  the  bank,  and,  beholding
a  beautiful  plain  covered  with  a  luxuriant  forest-
growth,  divined  that  the  spot  where  he  stood,  with
the  river  on  the  west  and  Lake  Erie  on  the  north,
was  a  favorable  site  for  a  city.  He  accordingly
had  it  surveyed  into  town  lots,  and  the  employes
named  the  place  Cleaveland,  in  honor  of  their
chief.  There  were  but  four  settlers  the  first  year,
and,  on  account  of  the  insalubrity  of  the  locality,
the  growth  was  at  first  slow,  reaching  150  inhabi-
tants only  in  1820.  In  1830,  when  the  first  news-
paper, the  "  Cleveland  Advertiser,"  was  established,
the  editor  discovered  that  the  head-line  was  too
long  for  the  form,  and  accordingly  left  out  the
letter  "  a "  in  the  first  syllable  of  "  Cleaveland,"
which  spelling  was  at  once  adopted  by  the  public.
CLEBURNE  (clebborn),  Patrick  Roiiayne,
soldier,  b.  in  county  Cork,  Ireland,  17  March,  1828 ;
killed  in  the  battle  of  Franklin,  Tenn.,  30  Nov.,  1864.
He  was  a  descendant  of  William  Cleburne,  and  the
second  son  of  Dr.  Joseph  Cleburne.  His  mother
was  a  daughter  of  Patrick  Ronayne  of  Annebrook,
county  Cork,  descended  from  "that  JMaurice  Ro-
nayne who  obtained  from  King  Henry  IV.  "  a  grant
of  "the  rights  of  Englishmen."  He  was  intended
for  the  profession  of  medicine,  but  becoming  dis-
couraged while  a  student  at  Trinity  college,  he  ran
away  and  enlisted  in  the  41st  regiment  of  foot.
After  three  years'  service  he  came  to  the  United
States,  settled  at  Helena,  Ark.,  where  he  studied


648


CLELAND


CLEMENS


law,  and  was  in  successful  practice  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  civil  war.  He  joined  the  Confederate
army  as  a  private,  planned  the  capture  of  the  U.  S.
arsenal  in  Arkansas  in  March,  18G1,  was  made  cap-
tain, and  soon  afterward  promoted  to  colonel.  In
March,  18G2,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  and
at  Shiloh  commanded  the  2d  brigade  of  the  3d
corps,  and  was  commended  for  valor  and  ability.
He  was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Perryville,  and
was  made  a  major-general  in  December,  1862.  He
commanded  a  division  of  the  right  wing  at  Mur-
freesboro  and  at  Chickamauga,  and  distinguished
himself  in  command  of  the  rear-guard  at  Mission-
ary Ridge,  in  November,  18G3,  and  received  the
thanks  of  the  Confederate  congress  for  his  de-
fence of  Ringgold  Gap.  He  distinguished  himself
in  numerous  engagements.  At  Jonesboro'  he  cov-
ered the  retreat  of  Hood's  defeated  army,  and  com-
manded a  corps  at  Franklin,  where  he  was  killed
after  two  lines  of  the  National  works  had  been  car-
ried by  the  troops  under  his  command.  He  was  a
favorite  with  the  Irish  brigade,  and  was  called  ''  the
Stonewall  of  the  West."  He  instituted  the  Order
of  the  Southern  Cross,  and  was  among  the  first  to
advise  the  use  of  colored  troops  in  the  armies  of
the  Confederacy.

CLELAND,  Thomas,  clergvman,  b.  in  Fairfax
county,  Va.,  22  May,  1778 ;  d^  '31  Jan.,  1858.  He
removed  to  Marion  county,  Ky.,  in  1789.  He  was
an  exhorter  during  the  revival  of  1801,  and,  urged
to  become  a  preacher  by  the  presbytery  of  Tran-
sylvania, was  licensed,  14  April,  1803,  and  became
pastor  of  a  church  in  Washington  county.  In  1813
he  was  settled  over  the  churches  of  New  Providence
and  Cane  Run,  now  Harrodsburg.  He  published
a  hymn-book  for  prayer-meetings  and  revivals,
and  tracts  directed  against  the  Carapbellites  and
New-lights,  entitled  "  Letters  on  Campbellism,"
"The  Socini-Arian  Detected "  (1815),  and  "Uni-
tarianism  Unmasked  "  (1825).

CLEMENS,  Jeremiah,  statesman,  b.  in  Hunts-
ville,  Ala.,  28  Dec,  1814 ;  d.  there,  21  May,  1805.
He  was  educated  at  La  Grange  college  and  the
University  of  Alabama,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1833,  studied  law  at  Transylvania,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1834.  In  1838  he  was  ap-
pointed U.  S.  marshal  for  the  northern  district  of
Alabama,  and  in  1839, 1840,  and  1841  was  elected
to  the  state  legislature.  In  1842  he  went  to  Texas
as  lieutenant-colonel,  having  raised  a  company  of
volunteer  riflemen.  On  his  return,  he  again  served
in  the  legislature  in  1843-4,  and  in  the  latter
year  as  presidential  elector.  He  was  appointed
major  of  the  13th  U.  S.  infantry,  3  March,  1847,
made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  9th  infantry,  16
July,  and  discharged  20  July,  1848,  He  was  then
appointed  chief  of  the  depot  of  purchases  in  Mexi-
co. From  1849  till  1853  he  represented  Alabama
in  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  was  again  a  presidential
elector  in  1856.  He  removed  to  Memphis,  Tenn.,
and  became  editor  of  the  Memphis  "Eagle  and
Enquirer"  in  1859.  He  was  a  member  of  the
secession  convention  in  Alabama,  but  protested
against  its  action ;  yet  he  subsequently  gave  way
to  the  popular  tide,  and  accepted  office  under  the
Confederacy.  In  1864,  however,  he  had  returned  to
his  former  allegiance,  advocated  the  re-election
of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and  defended  his  policy.  Mr.
Clemens  attained  eminence  at  the  bar  while  still
young,  and  in  the  senate  took  high  rank  as  an  able
and  eloquent  debater.  He  was  the  author  of  novels,
which  passed  through  several  editions,  entitled
"  Bernard  Lyle  "  (Philadelphia,  1853) ;  "  Mustang
Gray"  (1857) ;  "  The  Rivals,  a  Tale  of  the  Times  of
Aaron  Burr  and  Alexander  Hannlton  "  (1859) ;  and


"  Tobias  Wilson,  a  Tale  of  the  Great  Rebellion "
(1865).  He  was  engaged  in  the  preparation  of  a
history  of  the  war,  giving  an  insight  into  the  char-
acter, causes,  and  conduct  of  the  war  in  northern
Alabama,  but  it  was  left  unfinished  at  his  death.

CLEMENS,  Samuel  Lang-horne,  author  (bet-
ter known  und6r  his  pen-name,  Mark  Twain),  b.
in  Florida,  Monroe  co..  Mo.,  30  Nov.,  1835.  He
was  educated  only  in  the  village  school  at  Hannibal,
Mo.,  was  apprenticed  to  a  printer  at  the  age  of
thirteen,  and  worked  at  his  trade  in  St.  Louis,  Cin-
cinnati, Philadelphia,  and  New  York.  In  1851  he
became  a  pilot  on  Mississippi  river  steamboats,  and
in  1861  went  to  Nevada  as  private  secretary  to  his
brother,  who  had  been  appointed  secretary  of  the
territory.  Afterward  he  undertook  mining  in  Ne-
vada, and  became  in  1862  city  editor  of  the  Vir-
ginia City  "  Enterprise."  In  reporting  legislative
proceedings  from  Carson  he  signed  his  letters  "  Mark
Twain,"  a  name  suggested  by  the  technical  phrase-
ology of  Mississippi  navigation,  where,  in  sounding
a  depth  of  two  fathoms,  the  leadsman  calls  out  to
"  mark  twain  ! "  In  1865  he  went  to  San  Francisco,
and  was  for  five  months  a  reporter  on  the  "Morn-
ing Call,"  then  tried  gold-mining  in  the  placers
of  Calaveras  county,  and,  having  no  success,  re-
turned to  San  Francisco  and  resumed  newspaper
work.  He  spent  six  months  in  the  Hawaiian  islands
in  1866.  After  his
return  he  delivered
humorous  lectures
in  California  and
Nevada,  and  then
returned  to  the
east  and  published
"  The  Jumping
Frog,  and  other
Sketches"  (New
York,  1867).  The
same  year  he  went
with  a  party  of
tourists  to  the  Med-
iterranean, Egypt,
and  Palestine,  and
on  his  return  pub-
lished an  amusing
journal  of  the  ex-
cursion, entitled
"  The  Innocents
Abroad "  (Hart-
ford, 1869),  of
which  125,000  copies  were  sold
He  next  edited  the Buffalo, N.


m^-^^t^i


u


l4M'n:i^<-^.


three  years.

"  Express."


After  his  marriage  he  settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.
He  delivered  witty  lectures  in  various  cities,  con-
tributed sketches  to  the  "  Galaxy  "  and  other  mag-
azines, and  in  1872  went  to  England  on  a  lectur-
ing trip.  While  he  was  there,  a  London  puh-
lisher  issued  an  unauthorized  collection  of  his
writings  in  four  volumes,  in  which  were  included
papers  attributed  to  him  that  he  never  wrote.  The
same  year  appeared  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  "  Rough-
ing It,"  containing  sketches  of  Nevada,  Utah,
California,  and  the  Sandwich  islands;  and  in  1873.
in  conjunction  with  Charles  Dudlev  Warner,  a
story  entitled  "  The  Gilded  Age,"  which  was  dnxina-
tized  and  produced  in  New  York  in  1874.  This
comedy,  with  John  T.  Raymond  in  the  leadmg
part.  Col.  Mulberry  Sellers,  had  an  extraordinarv
success.  Mr.  Clemens  subsequently  publishca
"  Sketches,  Old  and  New  " ;  "  Adventures  of  Tom
Sawyer,"  a  story  of  boy-life  in  Missouri  (18 <6);
"Punch,  Brothers,  Punch"  (1878);  "A  Tramp
Abroad"  (Hartford,  1880);  "The  Stolen  \yhite
Elephant "  (Boston,  1882) ;  "  The  Prince  and  the


CLEMENT


CLEVELAND


649


Pauper"  (1882);  and  "Life  on  the  Mississippi"
(1888).  In  1884  he  established  in  New  York  the
publishing-house  of  C.  L.  Webster  &  Co.,  which
issued  in  1885  a  new  story  entitled  "  Adventures
of  Huckleberry  Finn,"  a  sequel  to  "  Tom -Sawyer,"
and  brought  out  in  that  and  the  following  year
Gen.  U,  §.  Grant's  "  Memoirs,"  the  share  in  the
profits  accruing  to  Mrs.  Grant  from  which  publi-
cation, under  a  contract  signed  with  Gen.  Grant
before  his  death,  amounted,  in  October,  1886,  to
$350,000,  which  was  paid  to  her  in  two  checks,  of
1200,000  and  $150,000.  Mark  Twain's  works  have
been  republished  in  England,  and  translations  of
the  principal  ones  in  Germany.

CLEMENT,  Clara  Erskiiie,  author,  b.  in  St.
Louis,  Mo.,  28  Aug.,  1834.  She  was  educated
principally  at  home,  has  made  extensive  tours  in
Europe,  visited  Palestine  and  Turkey  in  1808,  and
travelled  round  the  world  in  1883-4.  She  married
for  her  second  husband  Edwin  Forbes  Waters,
and  resides  in  Cambridge,  Mass.  Her  first  work,
the  "Simple  Story  of  the  Orient,"  was  printed
privately  in  1869.  She  has  published  "  Legendary
and  Mythological  Art "  (Boston,  1871) ;  "  Painters,
Sculptors,  Architects,  Engravers,  and  their  Works  "
(1874):  "Artists  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  and
their  Works,"  in  conjunction  with  Laurence  Hut-
ton  (1879) ;  "  Eleanor  Maitland,"  a  novel  (1881) ;
"  History  of  Egypt "  ;  three  "  Hand-Books  of
Painting,  Sculpture,  and  Architecture  "  (1883-'6) ;
"  Christian  Symbols  and  Stories  of  the  Saints  "
(1886) ;  and  "  Stories  of  Art  and  Artists "  (1886).
She  has  also  translated  a  volume  of  Kenan's  lec-
tures and  "  Dosia's  Daughter,"  a  novel  by  Flenri
Greville,  and  edited  a  translation  of  Carl  von
Liitzow's  "  Treasures  of  Italian  Art."

CLEMENT,  Knut  Jim^bohn,  Danish  linguist,
b.  in  the  island  of  Amrom,  Denmark,  4  Dec,  1803 ;
d.  in  Bergen,  N.  J.,  7  Oct.,  1873.  He  was  educated
at  Kiel  and  Heidelberg,  and  became  Ph.  D.  in  1835.
At  the  expense  of  the  Danish  government  he  made
a  three  years'  tour  through  the  British  islands  and
the  continent,  and  on  his  return  to  Denmark  be-
came a  professor  in  the  University  of  Kiel,  and  de-
livered before  large  and  enthiisiastic  classes  lectures
on  history,  politics,  economy,  and  criticism.  He
had  taken  an  active  part  in  the  question  of  the
Sleswiek-Holstein  duchies,  and,  when  they  were
given  up,  he  emigrated  to  the  United  States  in
1866.  Dr.  Clement  published  works  on  historical,
lin^istic,  critical,  and  political  subjects,  among
which  were  one  on  the  "  Origin  of  the  Teutons  "
(Altona,  1836);  "Introduction  to  the  History  of
Denmark  "  (Hamburg,  1839) ;  "  The  North  German
World"  (Copenhagen,  1840);  "The  Salic  Law"
(Mannheim,  1843);  "Travels  in  Ireland"  (Kiel,
1845) ;  "  History  of  Friesland's  Life  and  Sorrows  "
(1845) ;  "  Shakespeare's  '  Tempest '  Historically  Il-
lustrated "  (Leipsic,  1846) ;  "  Journey  through  Hol-
land and  Germany"  (1847);  "The  French  and
their  Language"  (1848);  "The  Best  Means  of
Ameliorating  the  Condition  of  the  Duchies  of
Sleswick  and  Ilolstein"  (Altona,  1848);  "The
True  Condition  of  the  Language  and  Nationality
)f  South  Jutland  "  (Hamburg,  1849).
CLEMMER,  Mary.  See  Ames,  Mary  Clemmer.
CLERC,  Laurent,  educator,  b.  in  La  Balme,
lear  Lyons,  France,  26  Dec,  1785 ;  died  in  Harf-
ord, Conn.,  18  July,  1869.  He  was  a  son  of  the
nayor  of  the  commune  where  he  was  born,  and,
i^hen  about  a  year  old,  fell  into  the  fire,  was  badly
urned,  and  lost  the  sense  of  smell  and  hearing,
le  was  taken  at  the  age  of  twelve  to  the  Abbe
icard,  in  Paris,  successor  of  the  Abbe  de  I'Epee,  and
uder  his  skilful  instructions  attained  rapid  pro-


ficiency, in  1805  was  appointed  tutor,  and  in  1806
a  teacher.  While  on  a  visit  to  England  in  1815,  he
made  the  acquaintance  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Gallaudet,
who  persuaded  him  to  come  to  this  country  to  lay
the  foundation  of  deaf-mute  instruction.  They
arrived  in  New  York  in  August,  1816,  and  opened
the  asylum  at  Hartford,  15  April,  1817.  He  de-
voted his  life  thenceforth  to  the  interests  of  this
institution,  which  was  very  successful,  until  in  1858,
overcome  by  the  infirmities  of  age,  he  retired  with
a  pension.  He  married  at  the  age  of  thirty-four
Miss  Boardman,  a  deaf-mute,  who  bore  him  several
children,  all  of  them  possessed  of  speech  and  hear-
ing. The  oldest  son  became  an  Episcopal  clergy-
man in  St.  Louis.

CLEVELAND,  Aaron,  clergyman,  b.  29  Oct.,
1715 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  17  Aug.,  1757.  He  was
a  son  of  Capt.  Aaron  Cleveland,  one  of  the  wealthi-
est freeholders  of  Medford,  Mass.,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard
in  1735.  He  was
a  man  of  great
personal  comeli-
ness, strength  and
activity,  and  the
best  skater,  swim-
mer, and  wrestler
in  the  college  in
his  day.  In  1739
he  was  made
pastor  of  the
church  in  Had-
dam,  where  his
father  possessed
landed  property.
The  preaching  of
Whitefield  pro-
duced a  great  im-
pression on  his
mind,  and  led  to
subsequent  changes  in  his  religion.  In  1747  he  re-
moved to  Massachusetts,  but  soon  afterward  took
an  active  part  in  the  emigration  from  New  Eng-
land for  the  settlement  of  Nova  Scotia.  He  estab-
lished the  first  Presbyterian  church  in  Canada,  at
Halifax,  in  1750,  and  the  congregation  is  continued
to  this  day ;  but  the  Scottish  Calvinists  became  its
directors,  overriding  the  New  Englanders,  and  in
1755  Mr.  Cleveland  went  to  London,  where  he  re-
ceived holy  orders,  and  returned  to  America  as  a
missionary  of  the  venerable  Society  for  the  propa-
gation of  the  gospel.  While  in  England  he  became
satisfied  that  the  original  spelling  of  the  family
name  was  "  Cleveland,"  as  he  and  his  descendants
have  since  written  it,  while  other  American  branch-
es of  the  family  generally  retain  the  form  "  Cleave-
land."  During  his  voyage  the  vessel  sprung  a
leak,  and  he  lent  his  muscular  aid  to  the  sailors
with  good  results,  but  inflicted  an  injury  upon
his  strong  frame,  from  the  effects  of  which  he
never  recovered.  He  was  rector  of  the  church  in
Newcastle,  Del.,  but  visiting  Philadelphia  for  medi-
cal treatment,  when  he  died  under  the  hospitable
roof  of  his  frieiul.  Dr.  Franklin.  A  beautiful
tribute  to  his  character  appeared  in  Franklin's
newspaper.  Mr.  Cleveland  married  in  1739  Su-
sannah Porter,  a  lady  celebrated  for  her  personal
beauty  and  character.  She  was  a  granddaughter
of  Maj.  Sewall,  of  Salem,  and  connected  by  her
parentage  with  the  best  families  of  the  colony. —
His  son,  Stephen,  naval  officer,  b.  in  East  Had-
dam.  Conn,,  in  1740 ;  d.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1801.
He  went  to  sea  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  was  taken
by  a  British  press-gang  in  Boston  in  1756,  and  kept
in  service  till  1763. Soon  aftei-  the  Declaration  of


650


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


Independence  he  was  commissioned  a  captain  in
the  navy,  and  brought  from  Bordeaux  valuable
munitions  of  war.  His  commission  is  supposed  to
have  been  the  earliest  issued  by  the  American  gov-
ernment. He  was  promised  the  command  of  one
of  the  frigates,  but  was  delayed  so  long  in  France
that  they  were  given  to  others,  in  consequence  of
which  he  resigned. — His  son,  Richard  Jeffry,
who  was  U.  S.  vice-consul  at  Havana,  Cuba,  in
1829-34,  was  the  author  of  an  autobiographical
work  entitled  "  Voyages  and  Commercial  Enter-
prises" (Boston,  1850).  H.  W.  S.  Cleveland  has
published  "  Voyages  of  a  Merchant  Navigator  of
the  Days  that  are  Past,"  compiled  from  the  jour-
nals and  letters  of  R.  J.  Cleveland. — Another  son
of  Aaron,  Aaron,  b.  at  Haddam,  Conn.,  3  Feb.,
1744;  d.  21  Sept.,  1815.  His  father's  early  death
deprived  him  of  the  privilege  of  a  college  educa-
tion ;  but  he  pursued  his  studies  while  apprenticed
to  a  manufacturer  in  Norwich,  Conn.,  and  at  nine-
teen years  of  age  produced  his  fine  poem,  "  The
Philosopher  and  Boy,"  in  which  he  refers  to  his
botanical  pursuits.  In  1779  he  was  a  member  of
the  provincial  legislature  of  Connecticut,  but  he
declined  a  re-election.  Late  in  life  he  became  a
Congregational  pastor  near  Hartford,  Conn.  He
was  twice  married,  and  his  son,  William,  b.  20
Dec,  1770,  was  the  grandfather  of  President  Cleve-
land. He  published  several  sermons  and  a  few
poems. — Richard  Jell'ry's  son,  Henry  Rnssell,
author,  b.  in  1809 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  12  June,
1843,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1827,  and  be-
came one  of  the  band  called  the  "  Five  of  Clubs,"
his  associates  being  Charles  Sumner,  Henry  W.
Longfellow,  Cornelius  C.  Felton,  and  George  S.
Hillard.  He  published  an  edition  of  Sallust's
works,  with  English  notes  (New  York) ;  "  Remarks
on  the '  Classical  Education  of  Boys,  by  a  Teach-
er "  (1834) ;  the  "  Life  of  Henry  Hudson "  in
Sparks's  "  American  Biographies  " ;  and  review  ar-
ticles and  addresses.  A  selection  from  his  writ-
ings, with  a  memoir  by  George  S.  Hillard,  was
printed  privately  (Boston,  1844). — Another  son  of
Richard  Jeffry,  Horace  William  Slialer,  b.  in
Lancaster,  Mass.,  16  Dec,  1814,  established  himself
as  a  landscape-gardener  about  1845,  and  has  de-
signed many  public  parks,  cemeteries,  and  private
grounds  in  all  parts  of  the  United  States  and  Brit-
ish North  America,  notably  the  parks  of  Minne-
apolis, where  he  resides.  South  park  and  Drexel
boulevard  in  Chicago,  and  Roger  Williams  park  in
Providence.  Besides  numerous  papers  relating  to
his  profession,  he  has  published  "  Hints  to  Rifle-
men "  (New  York,  1864) ;  "  Landscape  Architec-
ture" (Chicago,  1873);  and  "Voyages  of  a  Mer-
chant Navigator"  (New  York,  1886).  —  Charles,
clergyman,  son  of  the  second  Aaron,  b.  in  Nor-
wichj  Conn.,  21  June,  1772;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
5  June,  1872.  He  went  to  live  with  an  uncle
at  Salem  at  the  age  of  twelve,  made  a  voyage
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  before  the  mast,  after
his  return  passed  through  a  mercantile  apprentice-
ship, and  was  appointed  deputy  collector  at  the
Salem  custom-house,  which  place  he  retained  until
1802.  He  was  next  a  clerk  in  Charlestown  for  seven
years,  and  then  began  business  for  himself  in  Bos-
ton as  a  broker.  From  1822  till  1829  he  was  senior
member  in  the  dry-goods  firm  of  Cleveland  &  Dane,
and  then  a  broker  again  for  four  or  five  years,
after  which  he  abandoned  business  to  devote  him-
self to  charitable  works.  In  September,  1816,  the
Society  for  the  moral  and  religious  instruction  of
the  poor  was  organized  at  his  house,  and  he  ap-
plied himself  to  the  work  of  collecting  funds  for
a  mission-house,  which  was  dedicated  in  May,  1821.


Nine  years  later  he  entered  upon  the  duties  of  a
missionary  to  the  poor  of  Boston,  being  associated
with  the  Revs.  Ethan  Smith  and  D.  D.  Rossiter
In  1835  he  re-
ceived a  license
to  preach,  and  on
10  July,  1838,
was  ordained  as
an  evangelist.
From  that  time
until  his  final
sickness  he  was
incessantly  em-
ployed in  chari-
table undertak-
ings in  Boston,
where  he  was
known  as  "  Fa-
ther" Cleveland.
He  was  connect-
ed with  benevo-
lent institutions:
but  his  work  was
independent  of
them.  A  number  of  wealthy  citizens  placed  ib
his  hands  certain  fixed  sums  annually.  These  he
called  his  patrons,  and  he  published  a  report  each
year  of  the  way  their  benefactions  had  been  dis-
posed of. — His  son,  Charles  Dexter,  educator,
b.  in  Salem,  Mass.,  3  Dec,  1802;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  18  Aug.,  1869,  was  graduated  at  Dart-
mouth in  1827,  and  entered  a  counting-house,  but
in  1832  became  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in
Dickinson  college,  in  1834  of  Latin  in  the  Univer-
sity of  the  city  of  New  York,  and  from  1834  until
his  health  failed  taught  a  young  ladies'  school  in
Philadelphia.  From  1861  till  1867  he  was  U.  S.
consul  at  Cardiff,  Wales.  He  is  best  known  by  his
compendiums  of  "  English  Literature  "  (Philadel-
phia), "  English  Literature  of  the  19th  Century,"
"  American  Literature  "  (1869),  "  Classical  Litera-
ture," and  "  Grecian  Antiquities,"  but  wrote  a  large
number  of  text-books.  He  published  also  "The
Moral  Characters  of  Theophrastus  "  (1827) ;  "  Epit-
ome of  Grecian  Antiquities"  (1828,  enlarged  in
1831) ;  "  Address  of  the  Liberty  Party  of  Pennsyl-
vania to  the  People  of  the  State  "  (Philadelphia,
1844) ;  "  Hymns  for  Schools  "  (1850) :  an  edition  of
Milton's  poetical  works,  with  a  complete  index
(1853) ;  "  Lyra  Sacra  Americana "  (New  York,
1868).  His  concordance  to  Milton's  works  was  re-
published in  England.

CLEVELAND,  Benjamin,  soldier,  b.  on  BuU
Run,  Prince  William  co.,  Va.,  26  May,  1788 ;  d.  in
October,  1806.  His  education  was  very  limited,
and  he  became  a  hunter  and  led  a  shiftless  life  for
several  years.  About  1769  he  removed  to  the
Upper  Yadkin,  in  North  Carolina,  where  he  ac-
quired a  reputation  for  industry  and  good  habits.
Learning  from  Daniel  Boone  of  the  promising
country  of  Kentucky,  he  formed  a  party  and  depart-
ed to  visit  that  charming  El  Dorado ;  but,  after
passing  Cumberland  Gap,  they  were  robbed  by  a
band  of  Cherokee  hunters,  and  returned  to  the  set-
tlements well  nigh  famished.  Cleveland  was  made
an  ensign  in  1775,  and  promoted  to  a  captaincy  the
following  year,  serving  against  the  tories  in  the
Wake  Forest  region,  and  in  the  autunm  of  that
year  he  led  his  company  in  Rutherford's  campaign
against  the  Cherokees.  In  1777  he  served  at  Car-
ter's Fort  and  the  Long  Island  of  Holston,  m  l^^t
Tennessee.  In  1778  he  was  made  a  justice  of  the
peace  of  the  new  county  of  Wilkes,  and  colonel  oi
the  militia.  In  June,  1780,  he  aided  in  driving  tne
tories,  who  had  assembled  at  Ramsour's  Mills,  from


^:Z^^


^.


r-f


AppiStOTl: &


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


651


the  country ;  and  next  performed  the  great  service
of  his  life  at  the  battle  of  King's  Mountain.  He
was  a  terror  to  the  tories  ;  but  once,  in  1781,  they
crot  the  better  of  him  for  a  brief  period,  capturing
and  conveying  him  to  the  woods.  They  were  soon
overtaken,'  however,  by  Cleveland's  friends,  who
routed  the  marauders' and  rescued  their  leader.
He  subsequently  removed  to  the  Ingals  country,  on
the  western  border  of  South  Carolina,  where  he  be-
came judge  of  the  court.  He  grew  to  enormous
proportions,  reaching  the  weight  of  450  pounds,  and
died  in  his  chair.  On  29  July,  1887,  a  monument
to  his  memory  was  dedicated  at  Fort  Madison,  S.  C.

CLEVELAND,  Chauncey  Fitch,  lawyer  and
statesman,  b.  in  Hampton,  Conn.,  16  Feb.,  1799;
d.  there,  6  June,  1887.  He  received  a  common-
school  education,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1819.  He  was  elected  to  the  legis-
lature in  1826,  and  served  four  terms,  again  elect-
ed in  1832,  and  was  state  attorney  the  same  year ;
again  sat  in  the  legislature  in  183o-'6,  of  which
body  he  was  twice  chosen  speaker.  He  was  elect-
ed governor  of  Connecticut  in  1842,  and  re-elected
in  1843,  He  returned  to  the  legislature  for  the
eleventh  time  in  1847,  and  in  1849  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  democrat,  and  re-elected  in  1851.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  on  the  republican
ticket  in  1860,  and  at  two  or  three  other  elections,
and  was  a  member  of  the  peace  congress  of  1861.
— His  brother.  Mason,  d.  in  1855,  was  state  sena-
tor, comptroller,  and  commissioner  of  the  school
fund  of  Connecticut. — Edward  Spicer,  son  of
Mason,  was  the  unsuccessful  democratic  candidate
for  governor  of  Connecticut  in  1886.

CLEVELAND,  (xi'over,  twenty-second  presi-
dent of  the  United  States,  b.  in  Caldwell,  Essex
CO.,  N.  J.,  18  March,  1837.  On  the  paternal  side
he  is  of  English  origin.  Moses  Cleveland  emi-
grated from  Ipswich,  county  of  Suffolk,  England,
in  1635,  and  settled  at  Woburn,  Mass.,  where  he
died  in  1701.  His  grandson  was  Aaron,  whose  son,
Aaron,  was  great-great-grandfather  of  Grover.  (See
Cleveland,  Aaron.)  The  second  Aaron's  grand-
son, William,  was  a  silversmith  and  watchmaker
at  Norwich,  Conn.  His  son,  Richard  Falley  Cleve-
land, was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1824,  was  ordained
to  the  Presbyterian  ministry  in  1829,  and  in  the
same  year  married  Anne  Neal,  daughter  of  a  Bal-
timore merchant  of  Irish  birth.  These  tM^o  were
the  parents  of  Grover  Cleveland.  The  Presbyte-
rian parsonage  at  Caldwell,  where  Mr.  Cleveland
was  born,  was  iirst  occupied  by  the  Rev.  Stephen
Grover,  in  whose  honor  the  boy  was  named ;  but
the  first  name  was  early  dropped,  and  he  has  been
known  as  Grover  Cleveland.  When  he  was  four
years  old  his  father  accepted  a  call  to  Fayetteville,
near  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  where  the  son  had  aii  academy
schooling,  and  afterward  was  a  clerk  in  a  country
store.  The  removal  of  the  family  to  Clinton,
Oneida  co.,  gave  Grover  additional  educational  ad-
vantages in  the  academy  there.  In  his  seventeenth
year  he  became  a  clerk  and  an  assistant  teacher  in
tlie  New  York  institution  for  the  blind  in  New
York  city,  in  which  his  elder  brother,  William,  an
alumnus  of  Hamilton  college,  now  a  Presbvterian
clergyman  at  Forest  Port,  N.  Y.,  was  then  a
teacher.  In  1855  Grover  left  Holland  Patent,  in
Oneida  co.,  where  his  mother  then  resided,  to  go
to  the  west  in  search  of  employment.  On  his  way
he  stopped  at  Black  Rock,  now  a  part  of  Buffalo,
and  called  on  his  uncle,  Lewis  F.  Allen,  who  in-
duced him  to  remain  and  aid  him  in  the  compila-
tion of  a  volume  of  the  "American  Herd-Book,"
receiving  for  six  weeks'  service  $60.  He  afterward
assisted  in  the  preparation  of  several  other  vol-


umes of  this  work,  and  the  preface  to  the  fifth  vol-
ume (1861)  acknowledges  his  services.  In  August,
1855,  he  secured  a  place  as  clerk  and  copyist  for
the  law  firm  of  Rogers,  Bowen  &  Rogers,  in  Buf-
falo, began  to  read  Blackstone,  and  in  the  autumn
of  that  year  was  receiving  four  dollars  a  week  for
his  work.  He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1859,
but  for  three  years  longer  he  remained  with  the
firm  that  first  employed  him,  acting  as  managing
clerk  at  a  salary  of  $600,  soon  advanced  to  $1,000,
a  part  of  which  he  devoted  to  the  support  of  his
widowed  mother,  who  died  in  1882.  He  was  ap-
pointed assistant  district  attorney  of  Erie  co.,  1
Jan.,  1863,  and  held  the  office  for  three  years.  At
this  time  strenuous  efforts  were  making  to  bring
the  civil  war  to  a  close.  Two  of  Cleveland's
brothers  were  in  the  army,  and  his  mother  and
sisters  were  dependent  largely  upon  him  for  sup-
port. Unable  to  enlist,  he  borrowed  money  to  send
a  substitute,  and  it  was  not  till  long  after'  the  war
that  he  was  able  to  repay  the  loan.  In  1865,  at  the
age  of  twenty-eight,  he  was  the  democratic  candi-
date for  district  attorney,  but  was  defeated  by  the
republican  candidate,  his  intimate  friend,  Lyman
K.  Bass.  He  then  became  a  law  partner  of  Isaac
V.  Vanderpool,  and  in  1869  became  a  member  of
the  firm  of  Lanning,  Cleveland  &  Folsom.  He  con-
tinued a  successful  practice  till  1870,  when  he  was
elected  sheriff  of  Erie  county.  At  the  expiration
of  his  three-years'  term  he  formed  a  law  partner-
ship with  his  personal  friend  and  political  antago-
nist, Lyman  K.  Bass,  the  firm  being  Bass,  Cleve-
land &  Bissell,  and,  after  the  forced  retirement
from  failing  health  of  Mr.  Bass,  Cleveland  &  Bis-
sell. The  firm  was  prosperous,  and  Cleveland  at-
tained high  rank  as  a  lawyer,  noted  for  the  sim-
plicity and  directness  of  his  logic  and  expression
and  thorough  mastery  of  his  cases.

In  the  autumn  of  1881  he  was  nominated  demo-
cratic candidate  for  mayor  of  Buffalo,  and  was
elected  by  a  majority  of  3,530,  the  largest  ever
given  to  a  candidate  in  that  city.  In  the  same
election  the  republican  state  ticket  was  carried  in
Buffalo  by  an  average  majority  of  over  1,600 ;  but
Cleveland  had  a  partial  republican,  independent,
and  "reform"  movement  support.  He  entered
upon  the  office,  1  Jan.,  1882,  and  the  following  ex-
tract from  his  inaugural  address  was  the  key-note
of  his  administration :  "  It  seems  to  me  that  a  suc-
cessful and  faithful  administration  of  the  govern-
ment of  our  city  may  be  accomplished  by  constant-
ly bearing  in  mind  that  we  are  the  trustees  and
agents  of  our  fellow-citizens,  holding  their  funds
in  sacred  trust,  to  be  expended  for  their  benefit ;
that  we  should  at  all  times  be  prepared  to  render
an  honest  account  of  them,  touching  the  manner
of  their  expenditure ;  and  that  the  affairs  of  the
city  should  be  conducted,  as  far  as  possible,  upon
the  same  principles  as  a  good  business  man  man-
ages his  private  concerns."

He  soon  became  known  as  the  "  veto  mayor,"
using  that  prerogative  fearlessly  in  checking  un-
wise, illegal,  or  extravagant  expenditure  of  the
public  money,  and  enforcing  strict  compliance  with
the  requirements  of  the  state  constitution  and  the
city  charter.  By  vetoing  extravagant  appropria-
tions he  saved  the  city  nearly  $1,000,000  in  the
first  six  months  of  his  administration.  He  opposed
giving  $500  of  the  tax-payers'  money  to  the  Fire-
men's benevolent  society,  on  the  ground  that  such
appropriation  was  not  permissible  under  the  terms
of  the  state  constitution  and  the  charter  of  the
city.  He  vetoed  a  resolution  diverting  $500  from
the  fourth-of-July  appropriation  to  the  observance
of  decoration  day  for  the  same  reason,  and  imme-


652


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


diately  subscribed  one  tenth  of  the  snm  wanted  for
the  purpose.  In  brief,  he  vetoed  every  exorbitant
or  illegal  appropriation.  During  his  mayoralty
the  city  celebrated  the  semi-centenary  of  its  cor-
porate existence.  His  admirable,  impartial  admin-
istration during  his  entire  term  of  office  won  trib-
utes to  his  integrity  and  ability  from  the  press  and
the  people  irrespective  of  party.

On  the  second  day  of  the  democratic  state  con-
vention at  Syracuse,  23  Sept.,  1882,  on  the  third
ballot,  by  a  vote  of  211  out  of  382,  Grover  Cleve-
land was  nominated  for  governor,  in  opposition  to
Charles  J.  Folger,  then  secretary  of  the  U.  S.
treasury,  nominated  for  the  same  office  three  days
before  by  the  republican  state  convention  at  Sara-
toga. In  his  letter  of  acceptance  two  weeks  after-
ward Mr.  Cleveland  wrote :  "  Public  officers  are  the
servants  and  agents  of  the  people,  to  execute  the
laws  which  the  people  have  jnade,  and  within
the  limits  of  a  constitution  which  they  have  estab-
lished. .  .  .  We  may,  I  think,  reduce  to  quite  sim-
ple elements  the  duty  which  public  servants  owe,
by  constantly  bearing  in  mind  that  they  are  put  in
place  to  protect  the  rights  of  the  people,  to  answer
their  needs  as  they  arise,  and  to  expend  for  their
benefit  the  money  drawn  from  them  by  taxation."

In  the  canvass  that  followed,  Cleveland  had  the
advantage  of  a  united  democratic  party,  and  in  ad-
dition the  support  of  the  entire  independent  press
of  the  state.  The  election  in  November  was  the
most  remarkable  in  the  political  annals  of  New
York.  Both  gubernatorial  candidates  were  men
of  character  and  of  unimpeachable  public  record.
Judge  Folger  had  honorably  filled  liigh  state  and
federal  offices.  But  there  was  a  wide-spread  disaf-
fection in  the  republican  ranks  largely  due  to  the
belief  that  the  nomination  of  Folger  (nowise  ob-
noxious in  itself)  was  accomplished  by  means  of
improper  and  fraudulent  practices  in  the  nominat-
ing convention  and  by  the  interference  of  the  fed-
eral administration.  What  were  called  the  "  half-
breeds  "  largely  stayed  away  from  the  polls,  and
in  a  total  vote  of  918,894  Cleveland  received  a  plu-
rality of  192,854  over  Folger,  and  a  majority  over
all,  including  greenback,  prohibition,  and  scatter-
ing, of  151,742.

On  the  last  day  of  December  he  went  to  Albany,
and  on  the  day  following,  dispensing  with  the
usual  parade,  he  walked  with  a  friend  through  the
streets  from  the  executive  mansion  to  the  capitol
and  took  the  oath  of  office.  He  entered  upon  his
office,  in  the  words  of  his  inaugural  address,  "fully
appreciating  his  relations  to  the  people,  and  deter-
mined to  serve  them  faithfully  and  well."  The
very  beginning  of  his  administration  was  marked
by  radical  reforms  in  the  executive  chamber.  Per-
sons having  business  with  the  governor  were  im-
mediately and  informally  admitted  without  run-
ning a  gauntlet  of  clerks  and  door-keepers.  Less
rich  than  many  former  governors,  with  private
means  of  not  more  than  $50,000,  Gov.  Cleveland
lived  upon  and  within  his  official  salary,  simply  and
unostentatiously,  keeping  no  carriage,  and  daily
walking  to  and  from  his  duties  at  the  capitol.

Among  the  salient  acts  of  his  administration
were  his  approval  of  a  bill  to  submit  to  the  people
a  proposition  to  abolish  contract  labor  in  the  pris-
ons, and  when  so  submitted  the  system  was  abol-
ished by  an  overwhelming  majority ;  his  veto  of  a
bill  that  permitted  wide  latitude  in  the  invest-
ments into  which  directors  of  savings  banks  might
put  deposits ;  and  the  veto  of  a  similar  bill  allow-
ing like  latitude  in  the  investment  of  securities  of
fire  insurance  companies.  He  vetoed  a  bill  that
was  a  bold  effort  to  establish  a  monopoly  by  limit-


ing the  right  to  construct  certain  street  railways
to  companies  heretofore  organized,  to  the  exclusion
of  such  as  should  hereafter  obtain  the  consent  of
property-owners  and  local  authorities.  His  much-
criticised  veto  of  the  "five-cent-fare"  bill,  which
proposed  to  reduce  the  rates  of  fare  on  the  elevated
roads  in  New  York  city  from  ten  cents  to  five
cents  for  all  hours  in  the  day,  was  simply  and  sole-
ly because  he  considered  the  enactment  illegal  and
a  breach  of  the  plighted  faith  of  the  state.  The
general  railroad  law  of  1850  provides  for  an  exam-
ination by  state  officers  into  the  earnings  of  rail-
roads before  the  rates  of  fare  can  be  reduced,  and,
as  this  imperative  condition  had  not  been  complied
with  previous  to  the  passage  of  the  bill,  he  vetoed
it.  He  vetoed  the  Buffalo  fire  department -bill  be-
cause he  believed  its  provisions  would  prevent  the
"  economical  and  efficient  administration  of  an  im-
portant department  in  a  large  city,"  and  subject  it
to  partisan  and  personal  influences.  In  the  second
year  of  his  administration  he  approved  the  bill  en-
acting important  reforms  in  the  appointment  and
administration  of  certain  local  offices  in  New  York
city.  His  state  administration  was  only  an  expan-
sion of  the  fundamental  principles  that  controlled
his  official  action  while  mayor  of  Buffalo.  In  a
letter  written  to  his  brother  on  the  day  of  his  elec-
tion, he  announced  the  policy  he  intended  to  adopt
and  afterward  carried  out,  "  that  is,  to  make  the
matter  a  business  engagement  between  the  people
of  the  state  and  myself,  in  which  the  obligation  on
my  side  is  to  perform  the  duties  assigned  me  with
an  eye  single  to  the  interest  of  my  employers."

The  democratic  national  convention  met  at
Chicago,  8  July,  1884.  Three  days  were  devoted
to  organization,  platform,  and  speeches  in  favor  of
candidates.  In  the  evening  of  10  July  a  vote  was
taken,  in  which,  out  of  820  votes,  Grover  Cleve-
land received  392.  A  two-third  vote  (557)  was
necessary  to  a  nomination.  On  the  following
morning,  in  the  first  ballot,  Cleveland  received
683  votes,  and,  on  motion  of  Thomas  A.  Hen-
dricks (subsequently  nominated  for  the  vice-
presidency),  the  vote  was  made  unanimous.  He
was  officially  notified  of  his  nomination  by  the
convention  committee  at  Albany,  29  July,  and
made  a  modest  response,  promising  soon  to  sig-
nify in  a  more  formal  manner  his  acceptance  of
the  nomination.  Nearly  three  weeks  later,  while
the  governor  was  taking  a  brief  vacation  at  Upper
Saranac  lake,  he  wrote  and  made  public  the  fol-
lowing letter  addressed  to  Col.  William  F.  Vilas,
chairman,  and  others :

Albany,  N.  Y.,  Avff.  18,  1884.

Gentlemen  :  1  have  received  your  communica-
tion, dated  28  July,  1884,  informing  me  of  my
nomination  to  the  office  of  president  of  the  United
States  by  the  democratic  national  convention
lately  assembled  at  Chicago.

I  accept  the  nomination  with  a  grateful  appre-
ciation of  the  supreme  honor  conferred,  and  a
solemn  sense  of  the  responsibility  which,  in  its  ac-
ceptance, I  assume.

I  have  carefully  considered  the  platform  adopt-
ed by  the  convention,  and  cordially  approve  the
same.  So  plain  a  statement  of  democratic  faith,
and  the  principles  upon  which  that  party  appeal^'
to  the  suffrages  of  the  people,  needs  no  supple-
ment or  explanation.  .

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  office  ot
president  is  essentiallv  executive  in  its  nature.
The  laws  enacted  by  tlie  legislative  branch  ot  the
government  the  chief  executive  is  bound  laitn-
fully  to  enforce.  And  when  the  wisdom  ot  tlie
political  party  which  selects  one  of  its  members  as


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


653


a  nominee  for  that  office  has  outlined  its  policy
and  declared  its  principles,  it  seems  to  me  that
nothing  in  the  character  of  the  office  or  the  neces-
sities of  the  case  requires  more,  from  the  candidate
accepting  such  nomination  than  the  suggestion  of
certain  well-known  truths,  so  absolutely  vital  to
the  safety  and  welfare  of  the  nation  that  they  can
not  be  too  often  recalled  or  too  seriously  enforced.

We  proudly  call  ours  a  government  by  the  peo-
ple. It  is  not  such  when  a  class  is  tolerated  which
arrogates  to  itself  the  management  of  public
affairs,  seeking  to  control  the  people  instead  of
representing  them.

Parties  are  the  necessary  outgrowth  of  our  in-
stitutions, but  a  government  is  not  by  the  people
when  one  party  fastens  its  control  upon  the  coun-
try, and  perpetuates  its  power  by  cajoling  and  be-
traying the  people  instead  of  serving  them.

A  government  is  not  by  the  people  when  a  re-
sult which  should  represent  the  intelligent  will  of
free  and  thinking  men  is  or  can  be  determined  by
the  shameless  corruption  of  their  suffrages.

When  an  election  to  office  shall  be  the  selection
by  the  voters  of  one  of  their  number  to  assume  for
a  time  a  public  trust,  instead  of  his  dedication  to
the  profession  of  politics  ;  when  the  holders  of  the
ballot,  quickened  by  a  sense  of  duty,  shall  avenge
truth  betrayed  and  pledges  broken,  and  when  the
suffrage  shall  be  altogether  free  and  uncorrupted,
the  full  realization  of  a  government  by  the  people
will  be  at  hand.  And  of  the  means  to  this  end,
not  one  would,  in  my  judgment,  be  more  effective
than  an  amendment  to  the  constitution  disqualify-
ing the  president  from  re-election.  When  we
consider  the  patronage  of  this  great  office,  the  al-
lurements of  power,  the  temptation  to  retain  pub-
lic place  once  gained,  and,  more  than  all,  the
availability  a  party  finds  in  an  incumbent  whom  a
horde  of  office-holders,  with  a  zeal  born  of  benefits
received,  and  fostered  by  the  hope  of  favors  yet  to
come,  stand  ready  to  aid  with  money  and  trained
political  service,  we  recognize  in  the  eligibility  of
the  president  for  re-election  a  most  serious  danger
to  that  calm,  deliberate,  and  intelligent  political
action  which  must  characterize  a  government  by
the  people.

A  true  American  sentiment  recognizes  the  dig-
nity of  labor,  and  the  fact  that  honor  lies  in  hon-
est toil.  Contented  labor  is  an  element  of  na-
tional prosperity.  Ability  to  work  constitutes  the
capital  and  the  wage  of  labor,  the  income  of  a  vast
number  of  our  population,  and  this  interest  should
be  jealously  protected.  Our  working-men  are  not
asking  unreasonable  indulgence,  but,  as  intelligent
and  manly  citizens,  they  seek  the  same  considera-
tion which  those  demand  who  have  other  interests
at  stake.  They  should  receive  their  full  share  of
the  care  and  attention  of  those  who  make  and
execute  the  laws,  to  the  end  that  the  wants  and
needs  of  the  employers  and  the  employed  shall
alike  be  subserved,  and  the  prosperity  of  the  coun-
try, the  common  heritage  of  both, "be  advanced.
As  related  to  this  subject,  while  we  should  not  dis-
courage the  immigration  of  those  who  come  to
acknowledge  allegiance  to  our  government,  and
add  to  our  citizen  population,  yet,  as  a  means  of
protection  to  our  working-men,  a  different  rule
should  prevail  concerning  those  who,  if  they  come
or  are  brought  to  our  land,  do  not  intend  to  be-
come Americans,  but  will  injuriously  compete
with  those  justly  entitled  to  our  field  of' labor.

In  a  letter  accepting  the  nomination  to  the  office
of  governor,  nearly  two  vears  ago,  I  made  the  fol-
owing  statement^  to  which  I  have  steadily  ad-


hered :


*'  The  laboring  classes  constitute  the  main  part
of  our  population.  They  should  be  protected  in
their  efforts  peaceably  to  assert  their  rights  when
endangered  by  aggregated  capital,  and  all  statutes
on  this  subject  should  recognize  the  care  of  the
state  for  honest  toil,  and  be  franled  with  a  view
of  improving  the  condition  of  the  working-man."

A  proper  regard  for  the  welfare  of  the  working-
man  being  inseparably  connected  with  the  integ-
rity of  our  institutions,  none  of  our  citizens  are
more  interested  than  they  in  guarding  against
any  corrupting  influences  which  seek  to  pervert  the
beneficent  purposes  of  our  government,  and  none
should  be  more  watchful  of  the  artful  machina-
tions of  those  who  allure  them  to  self-inflicted  in-

In  a  free  country  the  curtailment  of  the  abso-
lute rights  of  the  individual  should  only  be  such
as  is  essential  to  the  peace  and  good  order  of  the
community.  The  limit  between  the  proper  sub-
jects of  governmental  control,  and  those  which  can
be  more  fittingly  left  to  the  moral  sense  and  self-
imposed  restraint  of  the  citizen,  should  be  care-
fully kept  in  view.  Thus,  laws  unnecessarily  in-
terfering with  the  habits  and  customs  of  any  of
our  people  which  are  not  offensive  to  the  moral
sentiments  of  the  civilized  world,  and  which  are
consistent  with  good  citizenship  and  the  public
welfare,  are  unwise  and  vexatious.

The  commerce  of  a  nation  to  a  great  extent  de-
termines its  supremacy.  Cheap  and  easy  trans-
portation should  therefore  be  liberally  fostered.
Within  the  limits  of  the  constitution,  the  general
government  should  so  improve  and  protect  its
natural  water-ways  as  will  enable  the  producers  of
the  country  to  reach  a  profitable  market. .

The  people  pay  the  wages  of  the  public  em-
ployes, and  they  are  entitled  to  the  fair  and  hon-
est work  which  the  money  thus  paid  should  com-
jnand.  It  is  the  duty  of  those  intrusted  with  the
management  of  their  affairs  to  see  that  such  pub-
lic service  is  forthcoming.  The  selection  and  re-
tention of  subordinates  in  government  employ-
ment should  depend  upon  their  ascertained  fitness
and  the  value  of  their  work,  and  they  should  be
neither  expected  nor  allowed  to  do  questionable
party  service.  The  interests  of  the  people  will  be
better  protected ;  the  estimate  of  public  labor  and
duty  will  be  immensely  improved;  public  employ-
ment will  be  open  to  all  who  can  demonstrate  their
fitness  to  enter  it ;  the  unseemly  scramble  for
place  under  the  government,  with  the  consequent
importunity  which  embitters  official  life,  will  cease ;
and  the  pulDlic  departments  will  not  be  filled  with
those  who  conceive  it  to  be  their  first  duty  to  aid
the  party  to  which  they  owe  their  places,  instead
of  rendering  patient  and  honest  return  to  the
people.

I  believe  that  the  public  temper  is  such  that  the
voters  of  the  land  are  prepared  to  support  the
party  which  gives  the  best  promise  of  administer-
ing "the  government  in  the  honest,  simple,  and
plain  manner  which  is  consistent  with  its  charac-
ter and  purposes.  They  have  learned  that  mys-
tery and  concealment  iii  the  management  of  their
affairs  cover  tricks  and  betrayal.  The  statesman-
ship they  require  consists  in  honesty  and  frugality,
a  prompt  response  to  the  needs  of  the  people  as
they  arise,  and  the  vigilant  protection  of  all  their
varied  interests.

If  I  should  be  called  to  the  chief  magistracy  of
the  nation  by  the  suffrages  of  my  fellow-citizens,  I
will  assume' the  duties  of  that  high  office  with  a
solemn  determination  to  dedicate  every  effort  to
the  country's  good,  and  with  a  humble  reliance


654


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


upon  the  favor  and  support  of  the  Supreme  Being,
who  I  believe  will  always  bless  honest  human. en-
deavor in  the  conscientious  discharge  of  public
duty,  Grover  Cleveland.

The  canvass  that  followed  was  more  remarkable
for  the  discussion  of  the  personal  characters  and
qualifications  of  the  candidates  than  for  the  promi-
nent presentation  of  political  issues.  In  the  elec-
tion (4  Nov.)  four  candidates  were  in  the  field,
viz. :  Grover  Cleveland,  of  New  York,  democratic ;
James  G.  Blaine,  of  Maine,  republican  ;  Benja-
min F.  Butler,  of  Massachusetts,  labor  and  green-
back; John  P.  St.  John,  of  Kansas,  prohibition.
Cleveland  carried  the  states  of  Alabama,  Arkansas,
Connecticut,  Delaware,  Florida,  Georgia,  Indiana,
Kentucky,  Louisiana,  Maryland,  Mississippi,  Mis-
souri, New  Jersey,  New  York,  North  Carolina,
South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Texas,  Virginia,  and
West  Virginia ;  Blaine  carried  Califoi-nia,  Colora-
do, Illinois,  Iowa,  Kansas,  Maine,  Massachusetts,
Michigan,  Minnesota,  Nebraska,  Nevada,  New
Hampshire,  Ohio,  Oregon,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode
Island,  Vermont,  and  Wisconsin.  Butler,  none;
St.  John,  none.  In  Iowa,  Michigan,  and  Ne-
braska there  was  a  fusion  on  the  electoral  ticket
between  the  democrats  and  the  greenbackers ;
hence  the  total  vote  counted  for  Cleveland  in  those
states  represents  both  the  democratic  and  the
greenback  parties.  In  Missouri  and  West  Vir-
ginia there  was  a  fusion  on  the  electoral  ticket  be-
tween the  republicans  and  the  greenbackers ;  hence
the  total  vote  counted  for  Blaine  in  those  states
represents  both  the  republican  and  the  greenback
parties.  The  total  popular  vote  in  the  United
States  was  10,067,010,  divided  as  follows:

Cleveland 4.874.986

Blaine 4.851,981

Butler 17.5.370

St.  John 150,369

Blank,  defective,  and  scattering 14,904

Total 10,067,610

The  following  table  gives  the  electoral  vote,
which  gave  Cleveland  a  majority  of  37.


STATES.

1

■1
G

10

7

6
3
4
12

is

13
8

"8
■9

1

22

i.3
9

;;
"e

u

13

7

t

STATES.

1

0

1

pa

Alabama

Missouri.

16

'9
36
11

■9
12
13

i2
6

219

Arkansas

Nebraska

Nevada

New  Hampshire  . . .

New  Jersey

New  York. .

5-

California

Colorado

Connecticut

Delaware

3

4

Florida

North  Carolina....

Ohio

Oregon

Pennsylvania

Rhode  Island

South  Carolina....

Tennessee

Texas

Georgia

Illinois

Indiana

Iowa

Kansas

Kentucky

Louisiana

23
3

.30
4

Maine.. .;

Maryland

Massachusetts

Michigan

Minnesota

Vermont

Virginia

4

West  Virginia

Wisconsin

Totals

ii

182

Late  in  December  the  executive  committee  of
the  Nation  civil-service  reform  league  addressed  a
letter  to  President-elect  Cleveland,  commending
to  his  care  the  interests  of  civil -service  reform.
Mr.  Cleveland's  reply,  dated  25  Dec,  was  as  fol-
lows:

"  That  a  practical  reform  in  the  civil  service  is
demanded  is  absolutely  established  by  the  fact
that  a  statute,  referred  to  in  your  communication,


to  secure  such  a  result  has  been  passed  in  con-
gress, with  the  assent  of  both  political  parties ;  and
by  the  further  fact  that  a  sentiment  is  generally
prevalent  among  piitriotic  people  calling  for  the
fair  and  honest  enforcement  of  the  law  which  has
been  thus  enacted.  I  regard  myself  pledged  to
this  because  my  conception  of  true  democratic
faith  and  public  duty  requires  that  this  and  all
other  statutes  should  be  in  good  faith  and  without
evasion  enforced,  and  because  in  many  utterances
made  prior  to  my  election  as  president,  approved
by  the  party  to  which  I  belong  and  which  I  have
no  disposition  to  disclaim,  I  have  in  effect  prom-
ised the  people  that  this  should  be  done.

•'  I  am  not  unmindful  of  the  fact  to  which  you  re-
fer, that  many  of  our  citizens  fear  that  the' recent
party  change  in  the  national  executive  may  demon-
strate that  the  abuses  which  have  grown  iip  in  tin
civil  service  are  ineradicable.  I  know  that  they
are  deeply  rooted,  and  that  the  spoils  system  has
been  supposed  to  be  intimately  related  to  success
in  the  maintenance  of  party  organization,  and  1
am  not  sure  that  all  those  who  profess  to  be
the  friends  of  this  reform  will  stand  firmly  among
its  advocates  when  they  find  it  obstructing  their
way  to  patronage  and  place.  But,  fully  appreciat-
ing the  trust  committed  to  my  charge,  no  such
consideration  shall  cause  a  relaxation  on  my  pari
of  an  earnest  effort  to  enforce  this  law.

"  There  is  a  class  of  government  positions  which
are  not  within  the  letter  of  the  civil-service  stat-
ute, but  which  are  so  disconnected  with  the  policy
of  an  administration  that  the  removal  therefrom
of  present  incumbents,  in  my  opinion,  should  not
be  made  during  the  terms  for  which  they  were  jip-
pointed,  solely  on  partisan  grounds,  and  for  the
purpose  of  putting  in  their  places  those  who  ai"e  in
political  accord  with  the  appointing  power.  But
many  now  holding  such  positions  have  forfeited
all  just  claim  to  retention,  because  they  have  used
their  places  for  party  purposes  in  disregard  of  their
duty  to  the  people,  and  because,  instead  of  being
decent  public  servants,  they  have  proved  them-
selves offensive  partisans  and  unscrupulous  ma-
nipulators of  local  party  management.  The  les-
sons of  the  past  should  be  unlearned,  and  such
officials,  as  well  as  their  successors,  should  be
taught  that  efficiency,  fitness,  and  devotion  to  pub-
lic duty  are  the  conditions  of  their  continuance  in
public  place,  and  that  the  quiet  and  unobtrusive
exercise  of  individual  political  rights  is  the  reason-
able measure  of  their  party  service.

"  If  I  were  addressing  none  but  party  friends,  1
should  deem  it  entirely  proper  to  remind  them
that,  though  the  coming  administration  is  to  be
democratic,  due  regard  for  the  people's  interest
does  not  permit  faithful  party  work  to  be  always
rewarded  by  appointment  to  office,  and  to  say  to
them  that,  while  democrats  may  expect  all  proper
consideration,  selections  for  office  not  embraced
within  the  civil-service  rules  will  be  based  upon
sufficient  inquiry  as  to  fitness,  instituted  by  those
charged  with  that  duty,  rather  than  upon  persist-
ent importunity  or  self-solicited  recommendations
on  behalf  of  candidates  for  appointment."

"When  the  New  York  legislature  assembled,  6  Jan.,
1885,  Mr.  Cleveland  resigned  the  govei'norship  of
the  state,  but  he  continued  his  residence  in  Al-
bany. The  time  between  his  resignation  as  gov-
ernor and  his  inauguration  as  president  was  occu-
pied in  receiving  visits  from  many  of  the  leading
men  in  his  party.  On  27  Feb.  was  published  a
letter  of  the  president-elect  in  answer  to  one  signed
by  several  members  of  congress,  in  which  he  indi-
cated his  opposition  to  an  increased  coinage  of


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


655


silver,  and  suggested  a  suspension  of  the  purchase
and  coinage  ot  that  metal  as  a  measure  of  safety,
in  order  to  prevent  a  financial  crisis,  and  the  ulti-
mate expulsion  of  gold  by  silver.  His  inaugural
addi'ess  was  written  during  the  ten  days  previous
to  his  setting  out  for  Washington.  On  the  evening
of  Monday,  2  March,  he  took  a  special  train  on  the
New  York  and  West  Shore  railroad,  and,  accom-

Kanied  by  his  brother  and  two  sisters,  and  Daniel
lanning  (subsequently  appointed  secretary  of  the
treasury)  and  Col.  Daniel  S.  Lamont,  his  private
secretaiy,  arrived  in  Washington  at  seven  o'clock
the  next  morning,  before  it  was  generally  known
that  he  had  left  Albany.  On  the  following  day
he  went  to  the  capitol  in  company  with  President
Arthur,  and,  after  the  usual  preliminaries  had  been
completed,  he  delivered  his  inaugural  address  from
the  eastern  steps  of  the  capitol,  in  the  presence  of
a  vast  concourse.  At  its  conclusion  the  oath  of
office  was  administered  by  Chief -Justice  "Waite.  At
its  close  he  entered  the  open  carriage  of  ex-Presi-
dent Arthur,  and  was  driven  with  him  to  the  White
House,  where  from  a  temporary  platform  he  re-
viewed the  inaugural  parade,  a  procession  number-
ing more  than  100,000  men.  In  the  address  he
urged  the  people  of  all  parties  to  lay  aside  political
animosities  in  order  to  sustain  the  government.
He  declared  his  approval  of  the  Monroe  doctrine
as  a  guide  in  foreign  relations,  of  strict  economy


in  the  administration  of  the  finances,  of  the  protec-
tion of  the  Indians,  and  their  elevation  to  citizen-
ship, of  the  security  of  the  freed  men  in  their
rights,  and  of  the  laws  against  Mormon  polygamy,
and  the  importation  of  a  servile  class  of  foreign
laborers.  In  respect  to  appointments  to  office  he
said  that  the  people  demand  the  application  of
business  principles  to  public  affairs,  and  said  that
the  people  have  a  right  to  protection  from  the  in-
competency of  public  employes,  who  hold  their
places  solely  as  a  reward  for  partisan  service,  and
those  who  worthily  seek  public  employment  have  a
right  to  insist  that  merit  and  competency  shall  be
recognized,  instead  of  party  subserviency,  or  the
surrender  of  honest  political  belief.  On  the  fol-
lowing day  he  sent  to  the  senate  the  nominations
for  his  cabinet  officers  as  follows :  Secretary  of
state,  Thomas  F.  Bayard,  of  Delaware;  secretary
of  the  treasury,  Daniel  Manning,  of  New  York;
secretary  of  war,  William  C.  Endicott,  of  Massa-
chusetts ;  secretary  of  the  navy,  William  C.  Whit-
ney, of  New  York;  postmaster-general.  William
F.  Vilas,  of  Wisconsin ;  attorney-general,  Augus-
tus H.  Garland,  of  Arkansas ;  secretary  of  the
interior,  Lucius  Q,  C.  Lamar,  of  Mississippi.  The
nominations  were  promptly  confirmed.  On  12
March,  1885,  President  Cleveland  withdrew  from
the  senate,  which  met  in  extra  session  to  take  ac-
tion on  appointments  and  other  business  connect-
ed with  the  new  administration,  the  Spanish  reci-


procity and  Nicaragua  canal  treaties,  in  order  tliat
they  might  be  considered  by  the  new  executive.
On  13  March  he  issued  a  proclamation  announcing
the  intention  of  the  government  to  remove  from
the  Oklahoma  country,  in  Indian  territory,  the
white  intruders  who  sought  to  settle  there,  which
was  done  shortly  afterward  by  a  detachment  of
soldiers.  The  president  announced  in  regard  to
official  changes  that,  with  the  exception  of  heads  of
departments,  foreign  ministers,  and  other  officers
charged  with  the  execution  of  the  policy  of  the  ad-
ministration, no  removals  would  take  place  except
for  cause.  He  thereby  came  into  conflict  with  many
influential  members  of  his  party,  who  advocated
the  speedy  removal  of  republican  office-holders  and
the  appointment  of  democrats,  in  order  to  strength-
en the  party  as  a  political  organization.  While
that  class  of  politicians  objected  to  the  slowness
with  which  removals  were  made,  and  to'  the  ap-
pointment of  independents,  and  in  a  few  instances
republicans,  the  republicans  and  some  of  the  civil-
service  reformers  complained  of  other  appoint-
ments as  not  being  in  accord  with  the  professions
of  the  president,  "  Offensive  partisanship "  was
declared  by  the  president  to  be  a  ground  for  re-
moval, and  numerous  republican  functionaries  were
displaced  under  that  rule,  while  the  term  became  a
by- word.  After  the  burning  of  Aspinwall  by  revo-
lutionists on  31  March,  1885,  the  president  ordered
a  naval  expedition  for  the  protection  of  Americans
and  their  property,  and  the  town  was  temporarily
occupied  by  American  marines,  who  restored  and
maintained  order  until  the  regular  government
resumed  authority  there.  When  disturbances
threatened  to  break  out  between  the  Cheyennes
and  the  Arapahoes  in  Indian  territory,  Gen,  Sheri-
dan, at  the  request  of  Mr.  Cleveland,  visited  that
country  in  order  to  study  the  cause  of  the  troub-
les. He  reported  that  the  threatened  outbreak
was  the  result  of  the  occupation  of  Indian  lands
by  cattle-owners  who  leased  vast  areas  from  the
Indians  at  a  merely  nominal  rental.  The  legal
officers  of  the  government  decided  that  these  leases
were  contrary  to  law  and  invalid.  The  president
thereupon  issued  a  proclamation  warning  all  cattle
companies  and  ranchmen  to  remove  their  herds
from  Indian  territory  within  forty  days.  The
owners  of  cattle  represented  to  the  president  that
the  execution  of  this  order  would  entail  heavy
losses,  and  that  its  fulfilment  was  physically  im-
possible. He  resisted  their  pleadings,  and  when
they  found  him  unyielding  they  hastily  vacated
the  Indian  lands  without  obliging  the  govern-
ment to  resort  to  forcible  means.  On  10  Aug.
another  proclamation  of  the  president  warned  cat-
tle-graziers to  remove  all  fences  that  they  had
placed  on  public  lands,  which  decree  was  promptly
obeyed.  In  his  message  at  the  opening  of  the  first
session  of  the  49th  congress,  on  8  Dec,  1885,  Presi-
dent Cleveland  recommended  increased  appropria-
tions for  the  consular  and  diplomatic  service,  the
abolition  of  duties  on  works  of  art,  the  reduction
of  the  tariff  on  necessaries  of  life,  the  suspension  of
compulsory  silver  coinage,  the  improvement  of  the
navy,  the  appointment  of  six  general  Indian  com-
missioners, reform  in  the  laws  under  which  titles
to  the  public  lands  are  required  from  the  govern-
ment, more  stringent  laws  for  the  suppression  of
polygamy  in  Utah,  an  act  to  prohibit  the  immigra-
tion of  Mormons,  the  extension  of  the  principle  of
civil-service  reform,  and  an  increase  in  the  salaries
of  the  commissioners,  and  the  passage  of  a  law  to
determine  the  order  of  presidential  succession  in
the  event  of  a  vacancy.  The  senate,  sitting  in  secret
session  for  the  consideration  of  the  president's  ap-


656


CLEVELAND


CLEVELAND


pointments,  called  for  the  papers  on  file  in  the  de-
partments relating  to  the  causes  for  which  certain
officers  had  been  removed.  Upon  the  refusal  of
the  president  to  submit  the  documents  to  their  in-
spection, a  dispute  ensued,  and  threats  were  uttered
by  republican  senators  that  no  appointments  should
be  confirmed  unless  their  right  to  inspect  papers  on
the  official  files  were  respected.  On  1  March,  188G,
Mr.  Cleveland  sent  a  long  message  to  the  senate,  in
which  he  took  the  ground  that  under  the  constitu-
tion the  right  of  removal  or  suspension  from  office
lay  entirely  within  the  competency  and  discretion
of  the  president ;  that  sections  of  the  tenure-of-
office  act  requiring  him  to  report  to  the  senate
reasons  for  suspending  officers  had  been  repealed  ;
and  that  the  papers  that  the  senate  demanded  to
see  were  not  official,  but  were  of  a  personal  and
private  nature.  Eventually  the  appointments  of
the  president  were  ratified,  with  the  exception  of
a  few  cases,  where  the  persons  nominated  were
notoriously  of  unfit  character.  A  democratic  mem-
ber of  congress  who  had  approved  the  application
of  a  candidate  for  an  office  under  the  govern-
ment, and  afterward  had  expressed  disapproval  of
the  man's  appointment,  received  an  open  letter
from  President  Cleveland  complaining  of  the  in-
sincerity of  senators  and  representatives,  on  whose
advice  he  must  rely  when  he  appointed  local  offi-
cers, in  recommending  for  politic  reasons  persons
whom  they  knew  to  be  unfit  for  office.  During
the  first  fiscal  year  of  Mr.  Cleveland's  administration
18  per  cent,  of  the  postmasters  throughout  the
country  were  removed  or  suspended,  which  is  a
somewhat  larger  proportion  than  in  recent  years ;
while  in  the  departments  at  Washington  eight
clerks  out  of  every  hundred  were  removed.

On  2  March,  after  receiving  representations  from
the  Ciiinese  government  with  reference  to  outrages
on  Chinamen  at  Rock  Springs,  in  which  the  ground
was  taken  that  claims  for  compensation  would  hold
as  in  the  case  of  injuries  inflicted  upon  American
citizens  in  China,  Mr.  Cleveland  sent  to  congress  a
message  in  which  he  affirmed  that  the  United  States
were  not  bound,  either  by  treaty  or  international
law,  to  pay  for  the  loss  of  life  or  property  by  China-
men in  the  United  States,  yet  recommended  to  the
benevolent  consideration  of  congress  the  question
of  voting  an  indemnity  to  the  sufferers  at  Rock
Springs  or  their  families.  When  further  anti-
Cninese  disturbances  occurred  at  Portland,  Oregon,
and  other  places,  he  ordered  out  troops,  and  ex-
pressed his  determination  to  protect  the  Chinese  as
far  as  lay  within  the  power  of  the  government.

In  a  message  to  congress,  dated  22  April,  1886,
the  president  recommended  the  creation  of  a  com-
mission of  labor,  to  consist  of  three  members,  who
should  be  permanent  officers  of  the  government,
with  authority,  in  connection  with  other  duties,  to
consider  and  settle  by  arbitration,  when  called  upon
to  do  so  by  the  interested  parties,  all  disputes  be-
tween laborers  and  capitalists  concerning  wages  or
employment.

In  the  presidency,  as  before  in  the  governorship
of  New  York,  Mr.  Cleveland  has  exercised  the
veto  power  beyond  all  precedent.  Of  987  bills
that  passed  both  houses  in  the  session  that  ended
5  Aug.,  1886,  115  were  vetoed.  Of  these,  102  were
private  pension  bills,  and  six  were  bills  for  the
erection  of  public  iDuildings.  Of  the  general
measures  that  failed  to  receive  his  signature,
the  most  important  was  the  Morrison  resolution
requiring  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  to  apply
to  the  redemption  of  bonds  any  surplus  in  the
treasury  exceeding  $100,000,000.  The  river-and-
harbor  bill,  containing  appropriations  that  many


deemed  useless  and  extravagant,  but  which  the
law  does  not  permit  the  president  to  strike  out  in
detail,  and  the  bill  taxing  oleomargarine  two  cents
a  pound,  which  was  criticised  as  an  unjust  dis-
crimination against  one  class  of  producers  for  the
benefit  of  anoth-
er, were  not  ve-
toed. On  sign-
ing the  latter,  the
president  sent  a
message  to  con-
gress, in  which
he  gave  as  his
reason  that  the
stamps  required
by  the  act  would
mark  the  charac-
ter of  the  sub-
stance and  pre-
vent its  being
fraudulently  sold.
President  Cleve-
land married,  in
the  White  House
(see  illustration,
page 655),  on 2

June,  1886,  Frances  Folsora,  daughter  of  his  de-
ceased friend  and  partner,  Oscar  Folsom,  of  the
Buffalo  bar.  Except  the  wife  of  Madison,  Mrs.
Cleveland  is  the  youngest  of  the  many  mistresses
of  the  White  House,  having  been  born  in  Buffalo,
N.  v.,  in  1864. — His  youngest  sister.  Rose  Eliza-
beth, b.  in  Fayetteville,  N.  Y..  in  1846,  removed
in  1853  to  Holland  Patent,  N.  Y.,  where  her  father
was  settled  as  pastor  of  the  Presbyterian  church,
and  where  he  died  the  same  year.  She  was  edu-
cated at  Houghton  seminary,  became  a  teacher  in
that  school,  and  two  years  later  assumed  charge  of
the  (Jollegiate  institute  in  Lafayette,  Ind.  Sh(>
taught  for  a  time  in  a  private  school  in  Pennsyl-
vania, and  then  prepared  a  course  of  historical  lec-
tures, which  she  delivered  before  the  students  of
Houghton  seminary.  Her  services  as  a  lecturer
were  demanded  in  other  schools.  When  not  em-
ployed in  this  manner,  she  devoted  herself  to  her
aged  mother  in  the  homestead  at  Holland  Patent,
N.  Y..  purchased  with  her  own  earnings,  until  her
mother's  death  in  1882.  After  the  inauguration  of
the  president,  she  became  the  mistress  of  the  White
House.  She  has  published  a  A^olume  of  lectiu-es
and  essays  under  the  title  "  George  Eliot's  Poetry,
and  other  Studies "  (New  York,  1885),  and  "  The
Long  Run,"  a  novel  (1886).  After  her  brother's
marriage  in  1886  she  returned  to  Holland  Patent,
and  assumed  the  editorship  of  "Literary  Life."  a
magazine  published  in  Chicago,  but  was  dissatisfied
with  the  conduct  of  the  publisher,  and  resigned.

CLEVELAND,  John  Fitch,  journalist,  b.  in
Clymer,  Chautauqua  co.,  N.  Y.,  4  Feb.,  1819:  d.  in
New  York  city,  9  Oct.,  1876.  His  family  were
neighbors  of  the  parents  of  Horace  Greeley,  and,
after  receiving  a  liberal  education  and  learning  the
printer's  trade,  he  went  to  New  York  and  obtained
a  place  on  the  "  Tribune,"  which  had  been  founded
by  Greeley  three  years  before.  In  1846  he  married
Mr.  Greeley's  sister  Esther.  He  was  at  different
times  Albany  correspondent  of  the  "  Tribune,"
editor  of  the  weekly  and  semi-weekly  editions,  and
news  editor.  He  was  a  stockholder  in  the  paper
from  1848.  In  1862  he  became  an  assessor  of  in-
ternal revenue,  and  in  1869  was  transferred  to  the
district  embracing  the  financial  institutions  of
Wall  street,  but  resigned  in  1871  and  became
financial  editor  of  the  "  Tribune,"  and  subsequently
compiler  of  the  "  Tribune  Almanac."


CLEVENGER


CLIFFORD


657


CLEVENOER,  Shobal  Tail,  sculptor,  b.  near
Middletown,  Butler  co.,  Ohio,  22  Oct.,  1812;  d.  at
sea,  23  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  the  son  of  a  New  Jer-
sey weaver,  went  to  Cincinnati  when  a  boy,  and
found  occupation  as  a  stone-cutter.  Having  de-
veloped artistic  ability,  as  was  shown  by  some  very
creditable  tombstone  work,  he  was  induced  by
David  Gruio  to  carve  busts  in  freestone.  His  first
effort  in  this  direction  was  the  likeness  of  E.  S.
Thomas,  then  editor  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Evening
Post,"  which  was  executed  directly  in  the  stone,
without  the  intervention  of  plaster.  He  subse-
quently devoted  himself  to  art,  and  transferred  his
studio  to  New  York.  Among  his  sitters  were
William  Henry  Harrison,  Henry  Clay,  Martin  Van
Buren,  Daniel  Webster,  Edward  Everett,  and
Washington  Allston.  Specimens  of  his  work  are
now  preserved  in  the  art-galleries  of  the  Boston
athenaeum,  the  New  York  and  Philadelphia  histori-
cal societies,  the  Metropolitan  museum  of  art  in
New  York,  and  the  Academy  of  fine  arts  in  Phila-
delphia. His  bust  of  Daniel  Webster,  recognized
as  the  most  faithful  likeness  of  the  great  statesman,
was  selected  by  the  Post-office  department  as  best
adapted  for  representation  on  the  fifteen  cent
U.  S.  postage-stamp.  In  1840  he  went  to  reside  in
Rome,  where  he  executed  the  "  North  American
Indian,"  which  was  the  first  distinctive  American
piece  of  sculpture  made  in  Rome,  and  attracted  a
large  number  of  Italians  to  his  studio.  While  in
Italy  he  contracted  pulmonary  phthsis  by  inhala-
tion of  stone-dust.  He  died  when  one  day's  sail
from  Gibraltar,  and  his  body  was  consigned"  to  the
ocean.  His  works  are  characterized  by  remarkable
fidelity,  strength,  and  beauty  of  execution.  Henry
T.  Tuckerman  says  of  him  :  "  Brief  as  was  the  life
of  Clevenger,  it  was  for  the  most  part  happy  and
altogether  honorable." — His  son,  Sliobal  Vail,
physician,  b.  in  Florence,  Italy,  24  March,  1843,  re-
ceived his  early  education  in  the  Jesuit  college  of
New  Orleans,  and  later  was  graduated  at  Chicago
medical  college.  In  1860  he  filled  a  clerkship  in  a
St.  Louis  bank,  which  he  resigned  to  visit  New
Mexico,  crossing  the  plains  for  this  purpose,  but
returning  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war.  He  enlisted  in  the  U.  S.  army,  and  served
in  the  engineer  corps,  attaining  the  rank  of  first
lieutenant.  Subsequently  he  was  engaged  in  sur-
veying in  Montana  and  Dakota,  and  filled  the  office
of  U.  S.  deputy  surveyor.  Later  he  built  the  first
telegraph-line  through  Dakota,  and  for  a  time  was
chief  engineer  of  the  Dakota  southern  railroad.  In
1873  he  began  the  study  of  medicine  under  army
surgeons  in  Fort  Sully,  while  holding  the  appoint-
ment of  civilian  meteorologist  in  the  U.  S.  signal
service.  He  settled  in  Chicago  in  1879,  and  after
studying  medicine  became  a  specialist  in  nervous
and  mental  diseases.  For  some  years  fie  was  pa-
thologist to  the  Chicago  county  insane  asylum,  and
he  is  consulting  physician  in  his  specialties  to  the
Michael  Reese  hospital  and  to  the  Alexian  Broth-
ers' hospital.  He  has  also  held  the  professorship
of  anatomy  in  the  Art  institute  of  Chicago.  Dr.
Clevenger  is  a  member  of  many  scientific  organiza-
tions, and  a  frequent  contributor  to  the  scientific
press.  He  has  published  a  "  Treatise  on  Govern-
ment Surveying"  (New  York,  1874);  "Compara-
tive Physiology  and  Psychology  "  (Chicago,  1885) ;
and  "  Lectures  on  Artistic  Anatomy  and  the
Sciences  Useful  to  the  Artist"  (New  York,  1887).

CLIFFORD,  Joiin  Henry,  governor  of  Massa-
chusetts, b.  in  Providence,  R.  L,  16  Jan.,  1809 ;  d.
in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  2  Jan.,  1876.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1827,  studied  law,  and  set-
tled in  New  Bedford,  and  soon  acquired  an  exten-
VOL.  I. — i2


sive  practice.  In  1835  he  became  a  member  of  the
Massachusetts  legislature,  and  in  1862  was  presi-
dent of  the  senate.  From  1849  till  1858  he  was  at-
torney-general of  the  state,  except  during  the  years
1853-*4,  when  he  filled  the  office  of  governor.
Among  the  prominent  cases  in  which  he  acted  for
the  state  was  the  prosecution  of  Prof.  John  W.
Webster,  of  Harvard,  for  the  murder  of  Dr.  George
Parkman  in  1850.  In  1867  he  retired  from  the
legal  profession  and  became  president  of  the  Bos-
ton and  Providence  railroad  company.  He  received
the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Brown  in  1849,  Amherst
in  1853,  and  Harvard  in  1853.  For  several  years  he
was  president  of  the  board  of  overseers  of  Harvard.
CLIFFORD,  Nathan,  jurist,  b.  in  Rumney,  N.
IL,  18  Aug.,  1803;  d.  in  Cornish,  Me,  25  July,
1881.  He  received  his  early  education  at  the  Haver-
hill, N.  H.,  academy,  and  later  supported  himself
while  studying  at  the  Hampton  literary  institution.
After  graduation  he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar,  and  settled  in  York  county.  Me.,  in  1827.
From  1830  till  1834  he  was  a  member  of  the  Maine
legislature,  and  during  the  last  two  years  was
speaker.  He  was  a  member  of  the  democratic
p.'xrty,  and  was  considered  one  of  its  ablest  leaders.
In  i834  he  was  appointed  attorney-general  of
Maine,  an  office  which  he  filled  until  1838,  when
he  was  elected  to  congress  and  served  for  two
terms,  from  2  Dec,  1839',  till  3  March,  1843.  Dur-
ing the  presidential  canvass  of  1840  he  advocated
the  re-election  of  Martin  Van  Buren,  and  met  in
public  discussion  many  of  the  most  distinguished
whig  orators,  gaining  for  himself  the  reputation  of
being  one  of  the  most  eloquent  champions  of  the
democracy.  In  1846  Mr.  Clifford  became  attorney-
general  in  Pres-
ident Polk's
cabinet.  In  ar-
ranging the
terms  of  peace
between  Mexico
and  the  United
States,  he  went
to  Mexico  as  the
U.  S.  commis-
sioner, with  the
powers  of  en-
voy extraordi-
nary and  min-
ister plenipo-
tentiary ;  and
through  him
the  treaty  was
arranged  with
the  Mexican
government,  by

which  California  became  a  part  of  the  United
States.  He  served  from  18  March,  1848,  till  6
Sept.,  1849,  after  which  he  returned  to  Maine  and
resumed  his  law  practice.  In  1858  he  was  nom-
inated as  an  associate  justice  of  the  supreme  court
by  President  Buchanan.  To  the  people  of  Maine
this  appointment  gave  great  satisfaction,  as  he  was
not  only  the  first  cabinet  officer  from  that  state,  but
also  the  only  representative  slie  ever  had  in  the  su-
preme court.  In  1877,  as  the  oldest  associate  judge,
he  became  president  of  the  electoral  commission  con-
vened early  in  that  year.  Although  a  firm  believer
in  Mr.  Tilden's  election  he  conducted  the  proceed-
ings with  perfect  impartiality.  Subsequent  to  the
inauguration  of  President  Hayes  he  refrained  from
visiting  the  executive  mansion.  In  October,  1880,
he  was  attacked  with  a  serious  illness,  a  complica-
tion of  disorders  arose,  and  it  became  necessary  to
amputate  one  of  his  feet  in  consequence  of  gan-


658


CLIFTON


CLINGMAN


grene.  From  this  illness  he  never  recovered.  He
published  "  United  States  Circuit  Court  iieports  "
(2  vols.,  Boston,  1869).

CLIFTON,  William,  poet,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  in  1772;  d.  in  December,  1799.  His  father
was  a  wealthy  Quaker.  Owing  to  his  delicate
health,  all  ideas  of  an  active  life  were  abandoned,
and  he  found  consolation  and  employment  in  litera-
ture, and  became  proficient  in  music  and  drawing.
He  was  fond  of  field  sports,  and  soon  relinquished
the  Quaker  garb.  During  the  excitement  produced
by  Jay's  treaty,  Clifton  used  his  pen  in  support  of
the  administration,  contributing  to  the  newspapers
many  satires  in  prose  and  verse.  The  longest  of
these  productions  was  entitled  "  The  Group,"  in
which  various  mechanics  and  tradesmen  are  repre-
sented as  meeting  for  a  discussion  upon  topics  be-
yond their  depth  respecting  politics  and  the  state.
The  coarse  material  of  Jacobinism,  which  is  not
disguised,  is  occasionally  elevated  by  the  polish  of
the  verse.  "  The  Rhapsody  on  the  Times  "  is  an-
other production  of  the  same  character,  but  written
to  the  measure  of  "  Hudibras."  In  his  poem,  the
"  Chimeriad,"  which  was  left  unfinished,  he  boldly
personifies,  in  the  character  of  the  witch  Chimera,
the  false  philosophy  then  reigning  in  France.  He
also  wrote  an  epistle  to  Gilford,  which  was  pub-
lished anonymously  in  the  first  American  edition
of  Gilford's  poems.  One  of  his  best  papers  is  a  pre-
tended French  manuscript,  in  prose  and  verse,  de-
scribing the  descent  of  Talleyrand  into  hell.  His
poems  were  collected  and  published  after  his  death,
with  "  Introductory  Notes  of  his  Life  and  Charac-
ter "  (New  York,  1800).

CLINCH,  Charles  Powell,  author,  b.  in  New
York  city,  20  Oct.,  1797;  d.  there,  16  Dec,  1880.
He  was  the  son  of  a  wealthy  ship-chandler,  and
was  educated  in  New  York.  In  early  life  he  be-
came the  secretary  of  Henry  Eckford,  an  eminent
ship-builder  of  the  metropolis,  at  whose  country
residence,  a  short  distance  from  the  city,  he  met
Halleck,  Drake,  and  others  of  the  Knickerbocker
school.  For  many  years  Mr.  Clinch  was  an  edi-
torial writer  for  the  press,  and  a  literary  and  dra-
matic critic.  He  also  wrote  numerous  poems,  the-
atrical addresses,
and  plays,  includ-
ing "The  Spy,"
"The  Expelled  Col-
legians," and  "  The
First  of  May,"  the
last  of  which  was
produced  at  the
Broadway  theatre.
In  1835  he  was
elected  a  member
of  the  state  legis-
lature, and  during
the  same  year  the

freat  fire  in  New
ork  swept  away
his  fortune,  which
had  been  invest-
ed principally  in
insurance  stocks.
He  then  obtained
a  place  in  the
w-'^'lii —  New  York  custom-

house, where  his
aptitude  for  the  work  was  such  that  he  was  pro-
moted to  be  deputy,  and  then  assistant  collector,
which  office  he  held  until  1876,  when  he  resigned
after  forty  years  of  service,  at  the  same  time  chang-
ing his  place  of  residence  from  Staten  Island  to  New
York  city. So  sensitive  was  he  of  even  a  suspicion


^:


A


cxj{j^a.x


of  partiality  in  the  performance  of  his  public  duties
that  he  never,  under  any  circumstances,  would  give
decisions  in  cases  connected  with  the  importations
of  his  brother-in-law,  Alexander  T.  Stewart.  Mr.
Clinch  was  one  of  the  five  intrusted  with  the  secret
of  the  authorship  of  "  The  Croakers  "  (see  Halleck,
Fitz-Greene),  which  appeared  in  the  "Evening
Post"  during  April  and  May,  1819.  He  was  a
great  admirer  of  William  CuUen  Bryant,  and  wrote
a  poem  to  his  memory,  which,  with  a  short  bio-
graphical sketch,  appears  in  Gen.  Wilson's  "  Brvant
and  Friends  "  (New  York,  1886).

CLINCH,  Duncan  Lamont,  soldier,  b.  in  Edge-
combe county,  N.  C,  6  April,  1787 ;  d.  in  Macon,
Ga.,  27  Nov.,  1849.  He  was  appointed  first  lieu-
tenant in  the  3d  U.  S.  infantry  on  1  July,  1808,  and
was  gradually  promoted  until  he  became,  on  20
April,  1819,  colonel  of  the  8th  infantry,  and  ten
years  later  brevet  brigadier-general.  When  the
Seminole  war  began  in  Florida  in  1835,  Gen.  Clinch
was  in  command  of  that  district.  He  commanded
at  the  battle  of  Withlacoochee,  31  Dec,  1835,  and
displayed  the  most  intrepid  courage.  In  Septem-
ber, 1836,  he  resigned  his  commission  and  settled
on  a  plantation  near  St.  Mary's,  Ga.  Subsequently
he  was  elected  as  a  whig  to  congress  to  fill  the  va-
cancy caused  by  the  death  of  John  Millen,  and
served  from  15  Feb.,  1844,  till  3  March,  1845.  His
daughter  married  Gen.  Robert  Anderson,

CLINGMAN,  Thomas  Lanier,  senator,  b.  in
Huntsville,  N.  C,  27  July,  1812.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  North  Carolina  in  1832
with  high  honors,  after  which  he  studied  law  and
was  elected  a  member  of  the  legislature.  He  set-
tled in  Asheville,  Buncombe  co.,  N.  C,  in  1836,
and  was  sent  to  the  state  senate  in  1840.  Later  he
was  elected  as  a  whig  to  congress,  and  served  con-
tinuously from  4  Dec,  1843,  till  14  June,  1858,
with  the  exception  of  the  29th  congress.  During
his  long  career  in  the  house,  extending  over  thir-
teen years,  he  participated  in  nearly  all  of  the  im-
portant debates,  and  as  chairman  of  the  committee
on  foreign  affairs  acquitted  himself  with  ability.
His  first  week  in  congress  was  marked  by  an  en-
counter with  Henry  A.  Wise,  of  Virginia,  in  which
he  displayed  great  readiness  and  self-possession.
His  speech  against  the  so-called  "  21st  rule "  was
extensively  published,  and  his  reply  to  Duncan's
"  coon  speech  "  made  a  decided  impression.  Later
his  speech  on  the  causes  of  Henry  Clay's  defeat
led  to  a  duel  between  himself  and  William  L.
Yancey,  of  Alabama.  He  also  made  important
speeches  on  the  slavery  question,  on  Gen.  Scott's
conduct  in  Mexico,  the  tariff,  against  commercial
restrictions,  on  mediation  in  the  eastern  war,  Texas
debts,  British  policy  in  Cuba,  and  especially  against
the  Clayton  and  Bulwer  treaty.  It  is  said  that
while  a  member  of  congress  he  attended  every
day's  session  of  the  house  without  a  single  excep-
tion. He  was  originally  a  whig,  but  subsequently
joined  the  democratic  party.  In  1858,  on  the  ap-
pointment of  Asa  Biggs  as  U.  S.  judge  for  the  dis-
trict of  North  Carolina,  Mr.  Clingman  was  selected
by  the  governor  of  that  state  to  fill  the  vacancy
in  the  senate,  and  subsequently  elected  for  six
years  after  4  March,  1861 ;  but  he  withdrew  with
the  southern  members  on  21  Jan.,  1861.  In  May
of  that  year  he  was  sent  as  a  commissioner  to  the
Confederate  congress,  to  give  assurances  thnt
North  Carolina  would  co-operate  with  the  Confed-
erate states,  and  was  invited  to  participate  in  the
discussions  of  that  body.  In  July  he  was  expelled
from  the  U.  S.  senate  with  those  who  neglected  to
send  in  their  resignations.  He  entered  the  Confed-
erate army  as  colonel,  and  on  17  May,  1862,  was


CLINTON


CLINTON


659


appointed  a  brigadier-general  in  command  of  the
8th,  31st,  olst,  and  61st  North  Carolina  infantry.
He  served  through  the  war,  surrendering  with  Geii.
J.  E.  Johnston  in  April,  1805.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  National  democratic  convention  held  in
18(58.  In  1855  he  measured  and  made  known
through  the  Smithsonian  institution  the  highest
point  of  the  Black  mountain,  since  designated  as
"  Clingman's  peak,"  and  in  1858  he  determined  the
highest  point  of  the  Smoky  mountain,  designated
on  the  maps  of  the  coast  survey  as  "  Clingman's
dome."  He  also  made  known  the  existence  in
North  Carolina  of  the  diamond,  ruby,  platinum,
corundum,  and  many  other  rare  minerals,  and  the
important  mica-mines  in  Mitchell  and  Yancey  coun-
ties were  first  opened  by  him.  Since  the  close  of
the  war  Gen.  Clingman  has  devoted  his  attention
to  mining  and  to  scientific  and  literary  pursuits.
He  has  published  a  volume  of  his  speeches  (1878)
and  minor  works,  including  "  Follies  of  the  Posi-
tive Philosophers  "  (Raleigh.  1878).

CLINTON,  Charles,  ancestor  of  the  Clintons
in  the  United  States,  b.  in  the  county  Longford,
Ireland,  in  1G90;  d.  in  what  is  now  Orange  county,
N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1773.  His  grandfather,  William
Clinton,  was  an  adherent  of  Charles  I.,  and  fled  to
Ireland  for  refuge  after  the  defeat  of  the  royalists.
His  maternal  grandfather  was  a  captain  in  Crom-
well's army.  Charles,  with  a  party  of  relatives  and
friends,  chartered  a  ship  and  sailed  for  Philadel-
phia, 20  May,  1729.  The  captain  formed  a  plan  to
starve  the  passengers,  either  with  a  view  to  obtain-
ing their  property,  or  to  deter  emigration;  and,
after  the  death  of  many,  among  whom  were  a  son
and  daughter  of  Mr.  Clinton,  they  were  finally  al-
lowed to  land  on  Cape  Cod,  on  4  Oct.,  having
paid  a  large  sum  for  their  lives.  A  proposition  to
wrest  the  command  from  the  captain  had  previous-
ly failed,  owing  to  want  of  energy  among  his  vic-
tims. In  the  spring  of  1731  the  party  settled  in
Ulster  county,  six  miles  west  of  the  Hudson  and
sixty  miles  north  of  New  York,  where  Mr.  Clinton
pursued  his  occupation  of  farmer  and  land-sur-
veyor. He  was  afterward  justice  of  the  peace,
county  judge,  and  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  Ulster
county  militia.  He  was  made  a  lieutenant-colonel
in  Oliver  DeLancy's  regiment  on  24  March,  1758,
and  served  imder  Col.  Bradstreet  at  the  siege  and
capture  of  Fort  Frontenac. — His  son,  Alexander,
was  graduated  at  Princjston  in  1750,  and  became  a
physician.— A  second  son,  Charles,  d.  in  April,
1791,  was  a  surgeon  in  the  army  that  took  Havana
in  1762. — A  third  son,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Ulster
county,  N.  Y.,  9  Aug.,  1736;  d.  in  Little  Britain,
Orange  co,,  N.  Y.,  22'  Dec,  1812,  was  provided  by
his  father  with  an  excellent  education,  but  his
ruling  inclination  was  for  military  life.  He  was
appointed  an  ensign  in  the  2d  regiment  of  Ulster
county  militia,  and  became  its  lieutenant-colonel
before  the  beginning  of  the  revolution.  During
the  war  of  1756,  between  the  English  and  French,
he  particularly  distinguished  himself  at  the  cap-
ture of  Fort  Frontenac,  where  he  was  a  captain
imder  Bradstreet,  rendering  essential  service  by
capturing  a  French  sloop-of-war  on  Lake  Ontario.
The  confidence  reposed  in  his  character  may  be  es-
timated by  his  appointment  as  captain-comman-
dant of  four  regiments  levied  for  the  protection  of
the  western  frontiers  of  Ulster  and  Orange  coun-
ties. He  was  appomted  colonel  of  the  3d  New
York  regiment  on  30  June,  1775.  and  in  the  same
year  accompanied  Montgomery  to  Quebec.  He  was
I  made  brigadier-general,  9  Aug.,  1776,  and  com-
manded Fort  Clinton  when  it  was  attacked,  in  Oc-
tober, 1777,  by  Sir  Henry  Clinton. After  a  gallant


defence  by  about  600  militia  against  3,000  British
troops.  Fort  Clinton,  as  well  as  Fort  Montgomery,
of  which  his  brother.  Gen.  George  Clinton,  was
commander-in-chief,  was  carried  by  storm.  Gen.
Clinton  was  the  last  man  to  leave  the  works,  re-
ceiving a  severe  bayonet- wound,  but  escaping  from
the  enemy  by  riding  a  short  distance  and  then
sliding  down  a  precipice  100  feet,  to  the  creek,
whence  he  made  his  way  to  the  mountain.  In  1779
he  joined  with  1,600  men  the  expedition  of  Gen.
Sullivan  against  the  Indians,  proceeding  up  the
Mohawk  to  the  head  of  Otsego  lake,  where  he  suc-
ceeded in  floating  his  bateaux  on  the  shallow  out-
let by  damming  up  the  lake  and  then  letting- out
the  water  suddenly.  After  an  engagement,  in
which  the  Indians  were  defeated  with  great  loss
at  Newtown  (now  Elmira),  all  resistance  upon  their
part  ceased ;  their  settlements  were  destroyed,  and
they  fled  to  the  British  fortress  of  Niagara.  Gen.
Clinton  commanded  at  Albany  during  a  great  part
of  the  war,  but  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown
and  at  the  evacuation  of  New  York  by  the  British.
He  was  a  commissioner  to  adjust  the  boundary-
line  between  New  York  and  Pennsylvania,  and  was
a  member  of  the  legislature  and  of  the  convention
that  adopted  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.
— A  fourth  son,  George,  statesman,  b.  in  Little
Britain,  Ulster  co.,  N.  Y.,  26  July,  1739;  d.  in
Washington,  D.  C,  20  April,  1812.  On  his  return
from  a  priva-
teering cruise  in
1758,  he  accom-
panied his  fa-
ther and  brother
James  in  the  ex-
pedition against
Fort  Frontenac
as  a  lieutenant,
and,  on  the  dis-
banding of  the
colonial  forces,
he  studied  in
the  law-office  of
William  Smith,
and  settled  in
his  birthplace,
receiving  short-
ly afterward  a
clerkship  from
the  colonial  gov-
ernor. Admiral
George  Clinton,
a  connection  of
the  family.  He
was  elected  in
1768  to  the  New  York  assembly,  where  he  so  reso-
lutely maintained  the  cause  of  the  colonies  against
the  crown  that,  on  22  April,  1775,  he  was  elected
by  the  New  York  provincial  convention  one  of  the
delegates  to  the  second  continental  congress,  tak-
ing his  seat  on  15  May.  He  did  not  vote  on  the
question  of  independence,  as  the  members  of  the
New  York  provincial  congress,  which  he  repre-
sented, did  not  consider  themselves  authorized
to  instruct  their  delegates  to  act  on  that  ques-
tion. They  purposely  left  it  to  the  new  provincial
congress,  which  met  at  White  Plains,  8  July,  1776,
and  which,  on  the  next  day,  passed  unanimously  a
resolution  approving  of  the  declaration.  Clinton
was  likewise  prevented  from  signing  the  declara-
tion with  the  New  York  delegation  on  15  July,  by
receiving,  on  the  7th  of  that  month,  an  imperative
call  from  Washington  to  take  post  in  the  High-
lands, with  rank  as  general  of  militia.  In  the
spring  of  1777  he  was  a  deputy  to  the  New  York


660


CLINTON


CLINTON


provincial  congress,  which  framed  the  first  state
constitution,  but  was  again  called  into  the  field  by
congress,  and  appointed,  25  March,  1777,  a  briga-
dier-general in  the  Continental  array.  Assisted  by
his  brother  James,  he  made  a  brilliant,  though  un-
successful, defence,  6  Oct.,  1777,  of  the  Highland
forts,  Clinton  and  Montgomery,  against  Sir  Henry
Clinton.  He  was  chosen  first  governor  of  the  state,
20  April,  1777,  and  in  1780  was  re-elected  to  the
office,  which  he  retained  by  successive  elections
until  1795.  From  the  period  of  his  first  occupa-
tion of  the  gubernatorial  chair  until  its  final  re-
linquishment he  exhibited  great  energy  of  char-
acter, and,  in  the  defence  of  the  state,  rendered
important  services,  both  in  a  civil  and  military
capacity.  In  1780  he  thwarted  an  expedition  led
by  Sir  John  Johnson,  Brant,  and  Cornplanter,  into
the  Mohawk  valley,  and  thus  saved  the  settlers
from  the  horrors  of  the  torch  and  seal  ping-knife.
He  was  active  in  preventing  encroachments  on  the
territory  of  New  York  by  the  settlers  of  the  New
Hampshire  grants,  and  was  largely  instrumental
with  Timothy  Pickering  in  concluding,  after  the
war,  lasting  treaties  of  peace  with  the  western  In-
dians. In  1783  he  accompanied  Washington  and
Hamilton  on  a  tour  of  the  northern  and  western
posts  of  the  state,  on  their  return  visiting,  with
Schuyler  as  a  guide,  the  High -Rock  Spring  at
Saratoga.  While  on  this  trip  he  first  conceived  the
project  of  a  canal  between  the  Mohawk  and  Wood
creek,  which  he  recommended  to  the  legislature  in
his  speech  opening  the  session  of  1791,  an  idea  that
was  subsequently  carried  out  to  its  legitimate  end  in
the  Erie  and  Champlain  canals  by  his  nephew.  Gov.
De  Witt  Clinton.  At  the  time  of  Shays's  rebellion,
1787,  he  marched  in  person,  at  the  head  of  the  mi-
litia, against  the  insurgents,  and  by  this  prompt
action  greatly  aided  the  governor  of  Massachusetts
in  quelling  that  outbreak.  In  1788  he  presided
at  the  state  convention  to  ratify  the  Federal  con-
stitution, the  adoption  of  which  he  opposed,  be-
lieving that  too  much  power  would  thereby  pass  to
the  Federal  congress  and  the  executive.  At  the
first  presidential  election  he  received  three  of  the
electoral  votes  cast  for  the  vice-presidency.  In
1792,  when  Washington  was  re-elected,  Clinton
had  for  the  same  office  fifty  votes,  and  at  the  sixth
presidential  election,  1809-'13,  he  received  six
ballots  from  New  York  for  the  office  of  president.
In  1800  he  was  chosen  to  the  legislature  after  one
of  the  most  hotly  contested  elections  in  the  annals
o£  the  state ;  and  in  1801  he  was  again  governor.
In  1804  he  was  elected  vice-president  of  the  United
States,  which  office  he  filled  until  his  death.  His
last  important  public  act  was  to  negative,  by  his
casting  vote  in  the  senate,  the  renewal  of  the  char-
ter of  the  U.  S.  bank  in  1811.  He  took  great  in-
terest in  education,  and  in  his  message  at  the
opening  session  of  the  legislature  of  1795  he  in-
itiated the  movement  for  the  organization  of  a
common-school  system.  As  a  military  man,  Clin-
ton was  bold  and  courageous,  and  endowed  with  a
will  that  rarely  failed  him  in  sudden  emergencies.
As  a  civil  magistrate  he  was  a  stanch  friend  to
literature  and  social  order.  In  private  life  he  was
affectionate,  winning,  though  dignified  in  his
manner,  strong  in  his  dislikes,  and  warm  in  his
friendships.  The  vast  influence  that  he  wielded
was  due  more  to  sound  judgment,  marvellous
energy,  and  great  moral  force  of  character,  than
to  any  specially  high-sounding  or  brilliant  achieve-
ments.— James's  son,  De  Witt,  statesman,  b.  in
Little  Britain,  New  Windsor,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  2
March,  17G9  ;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  11  Feb.,  1828,  was
graduated  at  Columbia  in  1786,  studied  law  under


Samuel  Jones  in  New  York,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1788,  but  practised  very  little,  preferring
to  take  part  in  politics  as  an  active  republican.
While  the  Federal  constitution  was  still  a  subject
for  discussion,  he  wrote,  under  the  signature  of
"A  Countryman,"  a  series  of  letters  in  reply  to
the  "Federalist,"  and,  when  the  constitution  came
up  before  the  state  convention  for  ratification,  he
reported  for  the  press  the  debates  of  that  body.  In
1790  he  became  private  secretary  to  his  uncle,
George  Clinton,  then  governor  of  New  York,  and
was  a  leading  champion,  through  the  press,  of  his
administration.  He  was  also  made  one  of  the
secretaries  of  the  newly  organized  Board  of  re-
gents of  the  state  university,  and  secretary  of  the
Board  of  commissioners  of  state  fortifications.  He
left  these  offices  when  his  uncle  retired  from  the
governorship  in  1795,  but  continued  to  uphold  the
republican  cause,  opposing  the  administration  of
Gov.  Jay  and  President  John  Adams.  While  as-
sailing the  federalists  for  their  hostility  to  France,
he  nevertheless  raised,  equipped,  and  commanded
a  company  of  artillery  for  service  in  the  event  of
war  with  that  country.  He  also  studied  the  natu-
ral sciences  at  this  time.  lie  was  chosen  to  the
lower  branch  of  the  legislature  in  1797,  and  from
1798  till  1802  was  a  member  of  the  state  senate.  In
1801  he  became  a  member  of  the  governor's  coun-
cil, and  revived  an  old  claim  of  that  body  to  a
right  of  nomination  co-ordinate  with  that  of  the
governor.  Gov.  Jay  adjourned  the  council,  deny-
ing this  right,  but  Clinton  defended  his  position
in  the  legislature,  and  the  matter  was  referred  to
the  people,  who  supported  his  views  by  amending
the  state  constitution.  While  in  the  state  senate,
Clinton  worked  to  secure  the  public  defence,  for
the  passage  of  sanitary  laws,  the  encourage-
ment of  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  the  arts,
the  relief  of  prisoners  for  debt,  and  the  abolition
of  slavery  in  the  state.  He  also  used  his  influence
to  promote  the  use  of  steam  in  navigation.  He
was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1802,  and  while
there  distinguished  himself  by  a  powerful  speech
opposing  war  with  Spain.  He  resigned  in  1802,  to
take  the  office  of  mayor  of  New  York,  to  which  his
uncle,  now  governor  for  the  second  time,  had  ap-
pointed him.  This  office  was  then  very  important,
the  mayor  of  the  city  being  also  president  of  the
council  and  chief  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas.  He  continued  mayor  until  1815,  with  the
exception  of  the  years  from  1807-9  and  1810-1.
During  this  time  he  was  also  state  senator  from
1805  till  1811,  lieutenant-governor  from  1811  till
1813,  and  was  also  a  member  of  the  council  of
appointment.  After  his  uncle,  George  Clinton,
ceased  to  be  prominent,  on  account  of  his  advanced
age,  De  Witt  Clinton  came  to  be  regarded  as  a
promising  republican  candidate  for  the  presidency.
Aaron  Burr's  disgrace  removed  one  of  his  rivals;
but  Clinton  soon  began  to  be  looked  on  with  dis-
trust by  his  party,  on  account  of  his  want  of  sym-
pathy with  some' of  President  Jefferson's  acts  and
with  Madison's  course  previous  to  the  war  of  1812.
He  was  suspected  of  a  leaning  toward  the  federal-
ists, and  was  bitterly  assailed  by  his  enemies,
toward  whom  his  own 'course  had  never  been  mild.
The  republican  caucus  at  Washington  in  1812  re-
nominated Madison;. but  Clinton,  retaining  his
hold  on  the  party  in  his  own  state,  and  relying  on
the  support  of  the  federalists,  secured  a  nomina-
tion from  the  republican  members  of  the  New
York  legislature.  The  result  of  the  election  was
the  choice  of  Madison  by  a  majority  of  thirty-nine
electoral  A'otes.  Clinton,  having  alienated  his  party
by  his  course,  without  gaining  the  full  sympathy


CLINTON


CLINTON


661


of  the  federalists,  was  in  1813  displaced  from  the
office  of  lieutenant-governor.  lie  was  still  mayor
of  New  York,  however,  and  did  all  in  his  power  to
advance  the  intei'ests  of  that  city.  By  aiding  in
the  establishment  of  schools,  the  amelioration  of
criminal  laws,  the  relief  of  suffering,  the  encour-
agement of  agriculture,  and  the  correction  of  vice,
he  showed  himself  one  of  the  foremost  friends  of
the  people,  and  his  popularity  increased  accord-
ingly. His  efforts  in  founding  institutions  of
science,  literature,  and  art,  helped  to  give  the  city
the  metropolitan  character  it  had  hitherto  lacked,
and  his  liberality  in  securing  the  public  defence,
and  in  voting  money  and  men  to  the  government,
served  to  arrest  the  popular  suspicions  of  his  loyalty.
Above  all,  he  was  the  friend  of  internal  improve-
ments. As  early  as  1809  he  had  been  appointed
one  of  seven  commissioners  to  examine  and  sur-
vey a  route  for  a  canal  from  the  Hudson  to  the
lakes.  He  was  sent  by  the  legislature  in  1812  to
urge  the  adoption  of  the  project  by  congress,  but
his  efforts  were  unsuccessful.  In  January,  1815,  a
republican  council  of  appointment  removed  him
from  the  mayoralty,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that
year  he  prepared  an  elaborate  petition  to  the  legis-
lature, asking  for  the  immediate  construction  of
the  Erie  and  Champlain  canals.  This  was  adopted
by  popular  meetings,  and  ably  advocated  by  Clinton
himself  before  the  legislature,  and  in  1817  a  bill
authorizing  the  construction  of  the  Erie  canal
passed  that  body.  Clinton's  memorial  had  brought
him  prominently  forward  as  the  promoter  of  the
enterprise,  and,  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  those
who  denounced  the  scheme  as  visionary,  he  was
elected  governor  of  the  state  in  1817  by  a  non-
partisan vote.  The  canal  was  begun  on  4  July,
1817,  Gov.  Clinton  breaking  the  ground  with  his
own  hand.  But,  notwithstanding  this  happy  be-
ginning of  his  administration,  it  was  filled  with
violent  political  controversies,  and  though  he  was
re-elected  in  1819,  it  was  by  a  reduced  majority.
In  1822,  a  popular  convention  having  adopted  con-
stitutional amendments  that  he  did  not  entirely
approve,  he  refused  to  be  again  a  candidate.  His
opponents  secured  his  removal  from  the  office  of
canal  commissioner  in  1824,  and  popular  indigna-
tion at  the  injustice  of  this  act  resulted  in  his  elec-
tion as  governor  by  a  majority  of  16,000,  larger
than  had  before  been  given  to  any  candidate,  and
he  was  re-elected  in  1826.  In  October,  1825,  the
Erie  canal  was  opened  with  great  ceremony,  and
Gov.  Clinton  was  carried  on  a  barge  in  a  triumphal
progress  from  Lake  Erie  to  New  York.  In  this
same  year  he  declined  the  English  mission  offered
to  him  by  President  John  Quincy  Adams.  Gov.
Clinton's  death,  which  was  sudden,  took  place
while  he  was  still  in  office;  but  he  had  lived  to
inaugurate  several  branches  of  the  Erie  canal,  and
by  his  influence  had  done  much  toward  developing
the  canal  system  in  other  states.  He  was  tall  and
well  formed,  of  majestic  presence  and  dignified
manners.  He  published  "  Discourse  before  the
New  York  Historical  Society"  (1812);  "Memoir
on  the  Antiquities  of  Western  New  York"  (1818) ;
"  Letters  on  the  Natural  History  and  Internal  Re-
sources of  New  York  "  (New  York,  1822) ;  "  Speeches
to  the  Legislature"  (1823),  and  several  literary
and  historical  addresses.  See  Hosack's  "  Memoir
of  De  Witt  Clinton"  (1829);  Renwick's  "Life  of
De  Witt  Clinton"  (1840);  Campbell's  "Life  and
Writings  of  De  Witt  Clinton "  (1840) ;  and  "Na-
tional Portrait  Gallery  of  Distinguished  Ameri-
cans." Some  of  Clinton's  letters  to  his  friend,
Col.  Henry  Post,  of  New  York,  giving  interesting
glimpses  of  his  character,  were  published  by  John


Bigelow  in  "  Harper's  Magazine  "  for  February  and
March,  1875. — James  Clinton's  grandson,  Alex-
ander, b.  in  Little  Britain,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  7
April,  1793 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  16  Feb.,  1878,
was  graduated  at  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons  in  1819,  and,  after  practising  some  years
in  his  native  county,  returned  to  New  York  in
1832,  where  he*eontinued  in  practice  until  ad-
vanced age  obliged  him  to  retire.  During  the  war
of  1812  he  was  an  officer  in  the  army,  and  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  the  oldest  member  of  the
Society  of  the  Cincinnati.

CLINTON,  George,  colonial  governor  of  New
York,  d.  10  July,  1761.  He  was  the  youngest  son
of  Francis,  sixth  Earl  of  Lincoln,  and  appoint-
ed commodore  and  governor  of  Newfoundland  in
1732.  On  21  May,  1741,  he  became  governor
of  New  York,  and  entered  on  the  duties  of  the
office  in  September,  1743.  His  want  of  skill  in
civil  affairs  peculiarly  exposed  him  to  the  tumults
and  commotions  of  colonial  government.  In  his
controversies  with  the  assembly,  instigated  by
Chief-Justice  James  DeLancy,  (Golden,  afterward
lieutenant-governor,  was  his  champion  with  the
pen,  his  chief  opponent  being  Horsmanden.  Clin-
ton was  succeeded,  in  October,  1753,  by  Sir  D.  Os-
borne, and  afterward  became  governor  of  Green-
wich hospital.  He  was  vice-admiral  of  the  red  in
1745.  and  admiral  of  the  fleet  in  1757. — His  son.
Sir  Henry,  British  general,  b.  in  1738;  d.  in  Gib-
raltar, Spain,  23  Dec,  1795,  became  a  captain  of
the  guards  in  1758,
and  served  in  Han-
over during  the
remainder  of  the
seven  years'  war.
In  May,  1775,  hav-
ing attained  the
rank  of  major-gen-
eral, he  was  sent
to  Boston,  along
with  Burgoyne  and
Howe.  In  the  fol-
lowing winter  he
went  on  an  expedi-
tion to  North  (Caro-
lina to  co-operate
with  the  loyalists
there  and  redeem
the  colony  for  the
king.  Sir  Peter
Parker,  with  the
fleet  and  re-en-
forcements from  Ireland,  was  to  join  him  there,
but  was  detained  by  contrary  winds  and  did  not
reach  the  American  coast  till  May.  The  over-
whelming defeat  of  the  tories  at  Moore's  Creek  in
February  made  Clinton  think  it  unsafe  to  land  in
North  Carolina.  He  cruised  up  and  down  the
coast  until  Parker's  arrival,  and  it  was  then  de-
cided to  go  south  and  capture  Charleston.  On  28
June  they  attacked  Fort  Moultrie,  in  Charleston
harbor,  and  were  totally  defeated.  Clinton  then
sailed  for  New  York  and  took  part  in  Gen.  Howe's
campaigns  from  the  battle  of  Long  Island  to  the
capture  of  Philadelphia.  When  Howe  sailed  for
Chesapeake  bay  in  the  summer  of  1777,  Clinton
was  left  in  command  of  New  York.  About  this
time  he  was  made  K.  C.  B.  In  September  he
stormed  Forts  Clinton  and  Montgomery,  on  the
Hudson  river,  and  sent  a  force  to  relieve  Burgoyne
at  Saratoga,  but  too  late  to  be  of  any  aA'ail.  On
Sir  William  Howe's  resignation,  14  April,  1778,
Clinton  was  appointed  commander-in-chief  of  his
majesty's  forces  in  America,  with  the  rank  of  lieu-


662


CLINTON


CLOSSE


tenant-general.  In  June  he  evacuated  Philadel-
phia, and  on  his  retreat  thi-oughNew  Jersey  fought
an  indecisive  battle  with  Washington  at  Monmouth
Court-House.  In  December,  1779,  he  set  sail  for
South  Carolina,  taking  Lord  Cornwallis  with  him,
and  leaving  Gen.  Knyphausen  in  command  of  New
York.  In  the  spring  he  invested  Charleston,  and
on  12  May  succeeded  in  capturing  that  city,  to-
gether with  the  whole  southern  army  of  6,000  men
under  Gen.  Lincoln.  This  was  one  of  the  heaviest
blows  dealt  to  the  Americans  during  the  revolu-
tionary war,  and  it  may  well  have  consoled  Sir
Henry  Clinton  for  his  humiliating  defeat  before
Charleston  in  1776.  Leaving  Cornwallis  in  com-
mand at  the  south.  Sir  Henry  returned  to  New
York,  and  during  the  summer  matured,  in  concert
with  Benedict  Arnold,  the  famous  scheme  for  the
treasonable  surrender  of  West  Point.  He  accom-
plished nothing  more  of  a  military  nature,  as  his
army  in  New  York  was  held  in  virtual  blockade  by
Washington.  In  October,  1781,  Sir  Henry  set  sail
for  Chesapeake  bay  with  a  large  naval  and  mili-
tary force,  to  relieve  Lord  Cornwallis,  but  did  not
arrive  in  the  neighborhood  until  after  the  surren-
der ;  on  hearing  of  which,  without  landing,  he  re-
turned to  New  York.  He  was  soon  afterward
superseded  by  Sir  Guy  Carleton,  and  returned  to
England  in  June,  1782.  He  was  elected  to  parlia-
ment, and  afterward  made  governor  of  Limerick.
In  1793  he  was  appointed  to  the  command  of  Gib-
raltar. He  wrote  "  A  Narrative  of  the  Campaign
in  1781  in  North  America"  (London,  1783;  re-
printed, Philadelphia,  1865) ;  a  rejoinder  to  Lord
Cornwallis's  "  Observations  "  on  the  aforesaid ;  and
"  Observations  on  Stedman's  History  of  the  Ameri-
can War  "  (London,  1794).

CLINTON,  Joseph  Jackson,  A.  M.  E.  Zion
bishop,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  3  Oct.,  1823 ;  d.  in  Atlan-
tic City,  N.  J.,  25  May,  1881.  He  was  of  African
servile  descent,  but  enjoyed  in  his  youth  many  ad-
vantages of  education  that  were  denied  at  that
time  to  most  of  his  race.  He  began  his  ministry  in
1839,  became  local  preacher  in  his  church  in  1840,
and  entered  the  itinerancy  in  1841.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in  1844,  elder  in  1846,  and  was
elected  and  consecrated  bishop  in  May,  1864.  Dur-
ing his  labors  he  travelled  through  nearly  every
state  in  the  union.  He  was  missionary  bishop  in
the  south  during  and  after  the  war,  and  very  suc-
cessful in  the  establishment  there  of  missions  and
annual  conferences.  Bishop  Clinton  was  an  elo-
quent speaker,  and  possessed  rare  executive  ability.
He  occasionally  contributed  to  the  press.

CLITZ,  John  Mellen  Brady,  naval  officer,  b.
in  Sackett's  Harbor,  N.  Y.,  1  Dec,  1821.  His  fa-
ther, Capt.  John  Clitz,  distinguished  himself  at
Fort  Erie,  17  Sept.,  1814,  and  died  in  command  of
Fort  Mackinac,  6  Nov.,  1836.  The  son  entered
the  navy  as  a  midshipman  in  1837,  became  passed
midshipman  in  1843,  and  was  on  the  bomb-brig
"Ilecla"  at  the  capitulation  of  Vera  Cruz  and
the  capture  of  Tuxpan  in  the  Mexican  war.  He
was  made  lieutenant,  6  April,  1851 ;  commander,
16  July,  1863,  and  commanded  at  different  times
the  blockading  steamers  "  Penobscot,"  '•  Juniata,"
and  "  Osceola."  He  was  in  both  attacks  on  Fort
Fisher,  and  was  recommended  for  promotion  in
Admiral  Porter's  commendatory  despatch  of  28
Jan.,  1865.  He  was  commissioned  captain,  25  July,
1866,  did  ordnance  duty  at  the  Brooklyn  navy-
yard  in  1870,  and  was  made  commodore  on  28
Dec,  1872.  He  was  promoted  to  rear-admiral,  13
March,  1880,  commanded  the  Asiatic  station,  and
was  placed  on  the  retired  list  in  1884. — His  brother,
Henry  Boynton,  soldier,  b.  in  Sackett's  Harbor,


N.  Y.,  4  July,  1824;  disappeared,  13  Oct.,  1889,
was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  iu
1845.  He  served  during  the  war  with  Mexico," and
was  brevetted  first  lieutenant  for  gallant  conduct
at  Cerro  Gordo.  From  1848  till  1855  he  was
assistant  instructor  of  infantry  tactics  at  West
Point.  He  then  served  on  various  frontier  posts
until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  having  been
made  captain  in  the  3d  infantry,  6  Dec,  1858.
While  on  leave  in  1859  and  1860  he  travelled  ex-
tensively in  Europe.  He  took  part  in  the  defence
of  Fort  Pickens.  Fla.,  in  1861,  became  major  on  14
May  of  that  year,  and  was  engaged  in  the  peninsu-
lar campaign  at  Yorktown,  where  he  was  wounded,
and  in  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills  he  was  twice
wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  He  was  brevetted
lieutenant-colonel,  27  June,  1862,  for  his  gallantry
at  Gaines's  Mills,  and  after  a  month  in  Libby
prison,  was  exchanged,  and  made  commandant  at
West  Point,  where  he  remained  till  1864,  afterward
doing  garrison  duty  till  the  close  of  the  war.  He
was  made  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  6th  infantry,
4  Nov.,  1863,  and  brevetted  colonel  and  brigadier-
general,  13  March,  1865,  for  his  services  during
the  war.  After  that  time  he  commanded  at  vari-
ous posts.  He  was  made  colonel  of  the  10th  in-
fantry, 22  Feb.,  1869,  and  placed  on  the  retired
list,  1  July,  1885,  at  his  own  request,  having  been
in  the  service  forty  years.

CLOREVIERE,  Father,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brit-
tany in  1768;  d.  in  Baltimore  in  1826.  He  was
educated  with  Chateaubriand,  and  entered  the
army  of  Louis  XVI.  He  took  part  in  the  Vendean
revolt,  and  was  a  general  under  Cadoual.  Being
implicated  in  a  conspiracy  against  the  first  consul,
he  escaped  to  the  United  States.  He  entered  the
seminary  in  Baltimore  in  1808,  was  ordained  in
1812,  and  was  then  sent  to  Charleston  to  arrange
some  differences  between  the  laity  and  the  clergy.
He  returned  in  1820  to  Baltimore,  where  he  founded
the  Convent  of  the  visitation.

CLOSSE,  Raphael  Lambert,  Canadian  soldier,
b.  in  St.  Denis  de  Mogres,  near  Tours,  France,
about  1620;  d.  in  Montreal,  6  Feb.,  1662.  He
came  to  Canada  with  Maisonneuve  in  1642,  and
was  made  sergeant-major  of  the  garrison  of  Mon-
treal, acting  as  notary  in  times  of  peace.  This  set-
tlement was  exposed  to  attack  from  Indians,  and
he  soon  became  noted  for  his  skill  in  fighting  the
hostile  tribes.  He  trained  his  men  as  sharp-shoot-
ers, and  armed  them  with  musket,  pistol,  and
sword.  Each  was  instructed  to  pick  his  man,
shoot  him  with  the  musket,  then  rush  on  and  take
another  with  the  pistol,  using  the  sword  at  close
quarters,  and  gaining  the  cover  of  the  trees  when
possible.  By  such  tactics,  when  once  sent  with
twenty  men  to  rescue  four  who  were  besieged  in  a
redoubt  at  Point  St.  Charles,  he  routed  the  hostile
force,  killing  thirty-two  of  them,  though  he  lost
four  of  his  men  at  the  first  fire.  On  26  July,  1651,
with  sixteen  men,  after  an  engagement  that  lasted
all  day,  he  defeated  a  party  of  Indians  that  had
penetrated  to  the  Hotel  Dieu  in  Montreal.  On  14
Oct.,  1652,  he  contended  with  a  force  of  300  Iro-
quois near  the  fort,  and,  protected  by  an  old  hut,
defeated  them  with  a  loss  of  fifty  killed  and  thirty-
seven  wounded,  his  own  loss  being  but  one  killed
and  one  wounded  out  of  a  force  of  thirty-four.  In
1655  he  was  acting  governor  of  Montreal  during
the  absence  of  Maisonneuve.  On  6  Feb.,  1662,  he
was  sent  with  twelve  soldiers  to  rescue  some  work-
men who  had  been  attacked  by  Iroquois ;  but  he
was  deserted  by  his  servant,  his  pistol  missing  fire,
and  he  was  killed,  together  with  three  of  his  party.
In  1658  the  fief  of  St.  Lambert  was  bestowed  upon


GLOSSY


CLYDE


663


him  as  a  reward  for  his  services,  and  in  1672  an-
other was  bestowed  upon  his  widow.

CLOSSY,  Samuel,  educator,  b.  in  Ireland  about
1715;  d.  there  in  1776.  He  studied  medicine,  and
was  the  author  of  a  work  entitled  "  Observations
on  Some  of  the  Diseases  of  the  Human  Body,
Chiefly  taken  from  the  Dissections  of  Morbid
Bodies  "  (1763).  In  1764  he  emigrated  to  America,
and  the  year  following  was  appointed  professor  of
natural  philosophy  in  King's  (now  Columbia)  col-
lege, and  retained  this  chair  until  1776,  when  he
resigned.  Upon  the  organization  of  a  medical
school  in  connection  with  the  college  in  1767,  he
became  professor  of  anatomy.  Being  a  loyalist,  at
the  beginning  of  the  war  of  independence  he  re-
turned to  his  native  country.

CLOUGH,  Oeorg-e  L.,  painter,  b.  in  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  18  Sept.,  1824.  His  natural  taste  for  draw-
ing was  evinced  at  an  early  age,  and  when  he  was
ten  years  old  he  thought  of  little  else.  At  this
time  a  wagon-painter,  who  had  seen  several  of  his
sketches,  gave  him  some  colors  on  a  bit  of  shingle,
with  brushes  and  a  smooth  piece  of  board,  and
Clough  made  his  first  oil-painting,  which  he  still
retains.  He  entered  the  service  of  the  local  physi-
cian, who,  knowing  his  predilections,  arranged  his
work  in  such  a  way  that  he  could  devote  part  of
his  time  to  painting.  When  he  was  eighteen  years
old  a  portrait-painter  named  Palmer  gave  him
some  lessons  in  return  for  studio  work,  and  after  a
year  he  began  to  paint  pictures  or  anything  else
that  promised  a  support.  About  1844  Charles  L.
Elliot  came  to  Auburn  to  take  Gov.  Seward's  por-
trait, and  from  him  Clough  obtained  his  first  ideas
of  really  good,  artistic  work.  Securing  some
chance  commissions,  he  was  enabled  to  visit  New
York  and  obtain  further  instruction  from  Elliot,
who  always  remained  his  firm  friend.  In  1850  he
went  to  Europe  and  copied  pictures  in  the  princi-
pal galleries  of  the  continent,  and  after  his  return
he  generally  resided  near  New  York,  where  he
found  a  ready  sale  for  his  paintings,

CLOUGH,  John  E.,  missionary,  b.  in  Chau-
tauqua county.  N,  Y.,  16  July,  1836.  He  was
graduated  at  Upper  Iowa  university  in  1862,  ap-
pointed by  the  American  Baptist  missionary  union
a  missionary  to  India,  and  arrived  in  that  country
in  1865,  spending  his  first  year  among  the  Teloo-
goos  at  Nellore.  In  1866  he  removed  to  Ongole,
and  at  the  end  of  1879  he  had  gathered  a  church
of  more  than  13,000  members.  During  the  great
famine  in  India  he  rendered  the  government  the
most  valuable  service  in  distributing  aid  to  the
sufferers  by  the  famine.

CLOVER,  Lewis  P.,  painter,  b.  in  New  York
city,  20  Feb.,  1810.  He  was  educated  in  New  York
and  at  the  College  of  St.  James,  Maryland.  Un-
der the  instruction  of  William  Page  he  studied
painting,  and  afterward  engraving  for  three  years
under  Asher  B.  Durand.  After  this  he  adopted
painting  as  a  profession  and  followed  it  successful-
ly for  several  yea.rs  in  New  York  and  Baltimore.
He  was  elected  an  associate  of  the  National  acade-
my of  design  in  1840.  Through  the  influence  of
Chief-Justice  Taney  he  was  led  to  enter  the  minis-
try of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  was  or-
dained deacon  in  1850,  and  afterward  entered  the
priesthood.  He  has  been  rector  of  churches  in
Lexington,  Va.,  Springfield,  111.,  and  elsewhere.
In  1858  he  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  the
University  of  Kentucky.  The  titles  of  some  of  his
best-known  paintings  are  "  The  Rejected  Picture,"
"The  Idle  Man,"  "Repose  by  Moonlight,"  and
"  The  Phrenologist."  These  were  all  exhibited  in
the  National  academy  of  design. The  American


reprint  of  Burnet's  "  Practical  Hints  on  Composi-
tion in  Painting  "  (Philadelphia,  1853)  was  edited
by  Dr.  Clover,  who  furnished  the  etchings  that
illustrate  the  book.  He  has  published  numerous
sermons  and  addresses,  notably  one  on  the  death  of
Chief-Justice  Taney  (1864),  which  is  largely  quoted
in  Tyler's  memoirs.

CLUSERET,  Gustave  Paul,  soldier,  b.  in
Paris,  France,  13  June,  1823.  He  entered  the  mili-
tary school  of  St.  Cyr  in  1841,  became  lieutenant
in  January,  1848,  and  was  made  a  chevalier  of  the
legion  of  honor  for  bravery  in  suppressing  the  in-
surrection of  June,  1848.  A  few  months  after  the
coup  (Tetat  he  was  retired  for  political  reasons,  and
opened  a  painter's  studio  in  Paris,  but  was  shortly
afterward  replaced  and  served  in  Algeria  and  the
Crimean  war,  being  promoted  to  captain  in  1855.
He  resigned  his  commission  in  1858,  joined  Gari-
baldi in  1860,  and  commanded  the  French  legion
in  his  army,  receiving  the  brevet  of  colonel  in
November  of  that  year  for  gallantry  at  the  siege
of  Capua,  where  he  was  wounded.  He  came  to
the  United  States  in  January,  1862,  entered  the
National  army,  and  was  appointed  aide-de-camp
to  Gen.  McClellan,  with  the  rank  of  colonel.  He
was  soon  afterward  assigned  to  Gen.  Fremont,
who  placed  him  in  command  of  the  advanced
guard.  He  was  in  several  engagements,  and  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  14
Oct.,  1862,  for  gallantry  in  the  battle  of  Cross  Keys.
After  some  further  service  in  the  Shenandoah  val-
ley, he  resigned  on  2  March,  1863,  and  in  1864  ed-
ited in  New  York  city  the  "  New  Nation,"  a  weekly
journal  advocating  Fremont  for  the  presidency,
and  vehemently  opposing  the  renomination  of
Lincoln.  Gen.  Cluseret  returned  to  Europe  in
1867,  took  part  in  the  Fenian  agitation  of  that
year,  and  was  accused  by  the  journals  of  leading,
under  an  assumed  name,  the  attack  on  Chester
castle.  In  the  same  year  Cluseret  wrote  for  the
"  Courrier  Frangais  "  a  series  of  articles  on  "  The
Situation  in  the  United  States."  In  1868  an  ob-
noxious article  in  "  L'Art,"  a  journal  founded  by
him,  caused  his  imprisonment  for  two  months,  and
in  1869,  on  account  of  his  violent  attacks  on  the
organization  of  the  army,  he  was  again  arrested,
but  pleaded  that  he  was  a  naturalized  American
citizen,  and  was  given  up  to  Minister  Washbume,
who  sent  him  out  of  the  country.  He  returned  to
Paris  on  the  fall  of  the  second  empire,  which  he
had  predicted,  and  began  to  assail  the  provisional
government,  but  soon  afterward  engaged  in  at-
tempts at  insurrection  in  Lyons  and  Marseilles.
In  the  following  spring  he  bcame  minister  of  war
under  the  commune,  and  for  a  time  was  at  the
head  of  all  its  military  operations.  He  was  arrested
on  suspicion  of  treachery  on  1  May,  1871,  but  es-
caped to  England,  and  after  a  short  visit  to  this
country  settled  near  Geneva,  Switzerland,  in  1872.
He  was  condemned  to  death  in  his  absence  by  a
council  of  war,  on  30  Aug.  of  that  year.  Cluseret
has  published  a  pamphlet  on  "Mexico  and  the  Soli-
darity of  Nations  "  (1866) ;  "L'Armee  et  la  demo-
cratic "  (1869) ;  and  assisted  to  prepare  the  "Dic-
tionnaire  historique  et  geographique  de  I'Algerie."

CLYDE,  Lord,  Sir  Colin  Campbell,  British
soldier,  b.  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  20  Oct.,  1792;  d.
in  Chatham,  England,  14  Aug.,  1863.  He  entered
the  army  in  1808,  and  served  in  the  peninsular
war.  In  1814-5  he  participated  in  the  war
against  the  United  States,  and  in  1823  aided  in
quelling  an  insurrection  in  Demerara.  Having
been  appointed  lieutenant-governor  of  NoA^a  Sco-
tia, he  arrived  m  Halifax  in  July,  1834,  and  at
once  entered  upon  the  duties  of  his  office. Sir


664


CLYMER


CLYMER


Colin,  however,  was  a  better  soldier  than  states-
man, and,  though  he  secured  the  personal  respect  of
all  during  the  six  years  that  he  represented  royalty
in  the  province,  in  his  administration  of  the  duties
of  the  executive,  he  adhered  too  closely  to  his  in-
structions to  give  satisfaction  to  a  people  who  were
becoming  conscious  of  their  rights,  as  well  as  of
their  wrongs,  and  whose  aspirations  for  increase
of  privileges  and  a  larger  share  in  the  administra-
tion of  the  government  had  infused  a  new  life  into
the  body-politic,  even  before  the  interregnum  that
succeeded  the  recalling  of  Sir  Peregrine  Maitland
in  1832.  In  1840  political  agitation  was  at  fever
heat  in  Nova  Scotia,  and,  as  Sir  Colin  deemed
it  a  point  of  honor  to  support  the  executive  coun-
cil in  its  contest  with  the  house  of  assembly,  the
latter  reluctantly  petitioned  for  his  recall,  the  re-
sult being  that  he  left  the  province  in  the  autumn.
In  1842  he  became  a  colonel,  and  served  in  the  ex-
pedition against  the  Chinese.  He  distinguished
himself  as  a  general  of  brigade  in  India  between
1848  and  1852,  and  with  the  Highland  brigade,
which  he  commanded  in  the  Crimean  war,  con-
tributed to  the  victories  of  the  Alma  and  Bala-
klava,  in  1854.  In  this  year  he  became  major-
general,  and  in  1855  received  the  grand  cross  of
the  Bath.  In  July,  1857,  he  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  army  in  India,  and  after  a
series  of  brilliant  victories  succeeded  in  crushing
the  Sepoy  rebellion  in  1858.  The  same  year  he
was  created  Lord  Clyde,  and  was  made  field-mar-
shal, 9  Nov.,  1862.  Plis  life  has  been  written  by
Lieut.-Gen.  Shadwell  (Edinburgh,  1881).

CLYMER,  George,  signer  of  the  Declaration  of
Independence,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1739;  d.
in  Morrisville,  Bucks  co.,  Pa.,  23  Jan.,  1813.  His
father  emigrated  from  Bristol,  England,  to  Phila-
delphia. Clymer  was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of
seven,  and  was  brought  up  and  educated  by  his
uncle,  William  Coleman,  who  took  the  boy  into
his  counting-room,  and  left  him  most  of  his  for-
tune. But  though  pursuing  a  business  career,  he
was  averse  to  it,  and,  having  early  acquired  habits
of  reading  and  reflection,  made  himself  acquainted
with  law,  history,  and  political  and  agricultural
science.  He  was  one  of  the  first  that  opposed  the
arbitrary  acts  of  Great  Britain,  and,  when  it  was
found  necessary  to  arm  in  defence  of  colonial
rights,  he  became  captain  of  a  volunteer  company.
At  a  meeting  held  in  Philadelphia,  on  16  Oct.,
1773,  to  adopt  measures  to  prevent  the  sale  of
taxed  tea,  he  was  made  chairman  of  a  committee
to  request  those  appointed  to  sell  the  tea  to  resign
their  appointments.  He  was  a  member  of  the
council  of  safety,  and  on  29  July,  1775,  became
one  of  the  first  continental  treasurers,  converting
all  his  specie  into  continental  currency,  and  sub-
scribing liberally  to  the  loan.  On  20  July,  1776,
five  men,  including  Mr.  Clymer,  were  appointed
by  the  legislature  to  succeed  those  members  of  the
Pennsylvania  delegation  who  had  refused  their  as-
sent to  the  Declaration  of  Independence,  and  had
left  their  seats  in  congress.  Although  Mr.  Cly-
mer's  signature  is  affixed  to  the  Declaration,  he
was  not  present  at  its  adoption.  He  was  appoint-
ed, with  Richard  Stockton,  to  inspect  the  north-
ern army  at  Ticonderoga  on  26  Sept.,  1776,  and  in
December  of  the  same  year,  when  the  approach  of
the  British  forced  congress  to  adjourn  to  Balti-
more, he  was  one  of  a  committee  to  execute  all
needful  public  business  in  Philadelphia.  He  was
re-elected  to  congress  on  12  March,  1777,  and  on
9  April  was  one  of  a  committee  to  consider  steps
for  opposing  the  enemy  if  they  should  attack
Philadelphia. On  11  July,  1777,  he  was  appointed


one  of  three  commissioners  to  investigate  com-
plaints against  the  commissary  department  of  the
army.  At  the  meeting  of  the  general  assemblv,
held  on  14  Sept.,  1777,  Mr.  Clymer  was  not  re-
elected to  congress.  In  the  autumn  of  this  year,
just  after  the  battle  of  the  Brandy  wine,  his  house  in
Chester  county  was  sacked  by  the  British,  and  the
hostility  with  which  he  was  regarded  by  them  was
further  shown  by  an  attempt  to  destroy  his  aunt's
house  in  Philadelphia,  which  they  thought  was
his  property.  In  this  same  year  he  was  one  of
three  commissioners  to  investigate  the  causes  and
extent  of  disaffection  near  Fort  Pitt,  and  to  treat
with  the  Indians
there.  The  pow-
ers of  the  com-
mission extended
even  to  the  sus-
pension and  im-
prisonment of
officers  suspected
of  treason,  and
the  appointment
of  others  in  their
stead.  Although
its  labors  were
not  entirely  suc-
cessful, its  report
to  congress  on  27
April,  1778,  in-
duced that  body
to  take  energetic
measures  for  the
conquest  of  De-
troit and  the  car-
rying of  the  war  into  the  enemy's  country.  In  1780
Mr.  Clymer  was  active  in  an  association  of  the  pa-
triotic citizens  of  Philadelphia,  who  formed  a  bank
to  facilitate  the  supply  and  transportation  of  pro-
visions to  the  army,  and  in  November  of  that  year
he  was  again  chosen  to  congress.  He  was  deputed
by  that  body,  with  John  Nixon,  to  organize  the
Bank  of  North  America,  and  in  1782  was  associated
with  Rutledge  on  his  mission  to  the  southern  states.
He  removed  to  Princeton  in  the  last-named  year
that  he  might  educate  his  children  at  the  college
there,  but  was  summoned  from  his  retirement  in
1784,  and  elected  to  the  Pennsylvania  legislature,
where  he  aided  in  modifying  the  criminal  code,
laboring  with  zeal  for  the  abolition  of  capital  pun-
ishment. He  was  a  member  of  the  convention
that  framed  the  Federal  constitution,  and  in  No-
vember, 1788,  was  elected  to  the  first  congress  held
under  its  provisions.  Here  he  opposed  the  be-
stowal of  titles  on  the  president  and  vice-presi-
dent, earnestly  combated  the  notion  that  a  repre-
sentative should  always  vote  in  accordance  with
the  instructions  of  his  constituents,  favored  the
gradual  naturalization  of  foreigners,  and  sup-
ported the  assumption  of  the  state  debts  by  the
nation.  In  1791,  declining  a  re-election  to  con-
gress, he  was  appointed  collector  of  the  duty  on
spirits,  which,  in  Pennsylvania,  led  to  the  whiskey
riots.  After  resigning  this  office  he  was,  with
Messrs.  Pickens  and  Hawkins,  appointed  to  nego-
tiate a  treaty  with  the  Creeks  and  Cherokees.
This  was  consummated  on  29  June,  1796,  and  he
then  withdrew  from  public  life.  Besides  other  in-
stitutions indebted  to  him,  were  the  Pennsylvania
agricultural  society,  of  which  he  was  vice-presi-
dent, the  Academy  of  fine  arts,  and  the  Pennsyl-
vania bank,  of  both  of  which  he  was  president.
Mr.  Clymer  was  scrupulously  punctual  in  the
smallest  engagements,  and  was  noted  for  brev-
ity, both  in  speech  and  in  his  writings. He  was


COALE


COAN


665


the  author  of  various  addresses  and  essays,  politi-
cal, literary,  and  scientific. — His  grandson,  Mere-
dith, physician,  b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  June,
1817,  studied  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
and  "Was  graduated  at  the  medical  department  of
that  institution  in  1837.  Early  in  1839  he  went
to  Europe,  and  studied  in  Paris,  London,  and
Dublin  until  1841,  under  the  most  eminent  physi-
cians. He  began  practice  in  Philadelphia,  but
removed  to  New  York,  where  he  has  made  a  spe-
cialty of  diseases  of  the  nervous  system  and  the
mind.  He  was  attending  physician  to  the  Phila-
delphia institution  for  the  blind  in  1842,  to  the
Philadelphia  hospital  from  1843  till  1847,  and  con-
sulting physician  until  1853.  He  lectured  on  the
institutes  of  medicine  in  1843,  on  the  practice  of
medicine  in  1849  in  the  Medical  institute  of  Phila-
delphia, on  the  practice  of  medicine  in  the  Frank-
lin medical  college,  of  which  he  was  one  of  the
founders  in  1846,  and  professor  of  practice  of  medi-
cine in  the  medical  department  of  Hampden-Sid-
ney  college  during  1848.  In  1851,  after  settling  in
New  York,  he  became  professor  of  the  institutes
and  practice  of  medicine  in  the  University  of  New
York,  and  in  1871  was  professor  of  mental  and
nervous  diseases  in  Albany  medical  college.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  surgeon  of  U.  S.  volun-
teers, president  of  the  examining  board  of  the  U.
S.  army  in  1862-'3,  also  in  charge  of  the  sick  and
wounded  officers  in  Washington,  D.  C,  and  medical
director  of  the  Department  of  the  South  in  18()4-'5.
Dr.  Clymer  has  twice  been  president  of  the  New
York  society  of  neurology,  is  a  fellow  of  the  College
of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  Philadelphia,  and  of
other  medical  and  scientific  societies,  and  one  of
the  five  honorary  members  of  the  Association  of
American  physicians.  His  literary  work  includes
frequent  articles  to  the  medical  journals,  the  edit-
mg  of  the  "  Medical  Examiner  "  from  1838  till  1844 ;
and  the  ''  Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Diseases  "
from  1878  till  1885.  He  has  edited  Carpenter's
''  Human  Physiology  "  (3d  ed.,  Philadelphia,  1843) ;
Carpenter's  "  Elements  of  Physiology  "  (1844)  ;
Williams's  "  Principles  of  Medicine  "  (1844) ;  Ait-
ken's  "  Science  and  Practice  of  Medicine  "  (2  vols.,
3d  ed.,  1866) ;  and  he  is  the  author  of  "  Williams
and  Clymer's '  Diseases  of  the  Respiratory  Organs' "
(1844) ;  "  The  Pathology,  Diagnosis,  and  Treatment
of  Fevers  "  (Philadelphia,  1846) ;  "  Notes  on  Physi-
ology and  Pathology  of  the  Nervous  System,  with
reference  to  Clinical  Medicine  "  (New  York,  1868) ;
"  Lectures  on  Palsies  and  Kindred  Disorders  "
(1870);  ''Ecstasy  and  other  Dramatic  Disorders  of
the  Nervous  System  "  (1870) ;  "  Hereditary  Genius  "
(1870) ;  "  Cerebro-Spinal  Meningitis  "  (Philadelphia,
1872) ;  and  "  The  Legitimate  Influence  of  Epilepsy
on  Criminal  Responsibility"  (New  York,  1874).

COALE,  Robert  Dorsey,  chemist,  b.  in  Balti-
more, Md.,  13  Sept.,  1857.  He  was  graduated  in
1875  at  the  Pennsylvania  military  academy  with
the  degree  of  C.  E.,  after  which  he  became  a  stu-
dent in  Johns  Hopkins  university,  where  from  1880
till  1881  he  was  fellow  in  chemistry,  and  until  1883
assistant  in  that  science.  During  1883-4  he  was
lecturer  on  chemistry,  and  in  1884  became  profes-
sor of  chemistry  and  toxicology  in  the  University
of  Maryland.  Plis  original  scientific  researches
gained  for  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D,,  and  were
published  in  the  "  American  Chemical  Journal."

COAN,  Sherwood,  singer,  b.  in  New  Haven,
Conn.,  about  1830;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  25  Nov.,
1874.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  carriage-maker,
but  went  upon  the  stage  under  the  name  of  Camp-
bell, and,  after  being  for  several  years  a  member  of
various  minstrel  troupes,  appeared  in  concerts,  and


then  in  English  opera,  where  he  was  very  success-
ful. He  sang  with  Clara  Louise  Kellogg,  Parepa-
Rosa,  Zelda  Harrison,  William  Castle,  and  other
well-known  singers,  and  went  with  the  Rosas  to
England,  where  he  attracted  much  attention.  His
voice  was  a  low  baritone,  very  sweet  and  powerful,
and  his  style  was  simple  and  pleasing.

COAN,  Titus,  missionary,  b.  in  Killingworth,
Conn.,  1  Feb.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Hilo,  Hawaii,  1  Dec,
1882.  He  was  descended  from  a  family  that  had
settled  in  Connecticut  and  at  East  Hampton,  L.  I.,
early  in  the  history  of  the  country.  He  studied
under  private  teachers,  and  from  1819  till  1826
taught  school  in  Saybrook,  Killingworth,  and
Guilford.  In  1826  he  went  to  western  New  York,
where  four  of  his  brpthers  were  established,  and
taught  for  two  years.'  He  was  a  cousin  of  Asahel
Nettleton,  the  evangelist,  and  had  been  influenced
by  the  revivals  that  followed  Nettleton's  preaching ;
he  studied  theology  at  Auburn,  and  was  graduated
there  in  1833.  Even  before  his  graduation  Mr.
Coan  was  invited  by  the  Boston  board  of  mis-
sions to  undertake  the  dangerous  task  of  exploring
southern  Patagonia,  with  a  view  to  the  possible  es-
tablishment of  a  mission  there.  He  sailed  from
New  York  for  the  straits  of  Magellan,  16  Aug.,  1833,
with  one  companion,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Arms,  on  the
schooner  "  Mary  Jane,"  Capt.  Clift.  The  perilous
adventures  of  their  trip  are  narrated  in  his  "  Pata-
gonia." Escaping  with  their  lives  from  the  sav-
ages near  Gregory's  bay,  the  young  explorers  were
taken  off  by  a  passing  vessel  and  returned  to  New
London,  where  they  arrived  7  May,  1834.  On  3
Nov.,  1834,  Mr.  Coan  married  Miss  Fidelia  Church,
and  on  the  5th  of  the  following  month  the  young
missionaries  sailed,  with  six  others,  in  the  ship
"  Hellespont,"  from  Boston,  for  the  Hawaiian
islands.  They  arrived  at  Honolulu,  via  Cape
Horn,  6  June,  and  at  Hilo,  which  was  to  be  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Coan's  home  for  life,  21  July,  1835.  For
two  years  Mr.  Coan  devoted  himself  to  the  study
of  the  language,  in  which  he  became  a  powerful
speaker.  His  energetic  and  affectionate  nature,  and
his  charming  personal  presence,  gave  almost  unex-
ampled success  to  his  labors.  The  number  of  con-
versions in  the  years  1838-'40  was  more  than  7,000,
while  he  received  in  all,  up  to  1882,  13,000  persons
mto  the  Hilo  and  Puna  church.  Throughout  this
extensive  district,  100  miles  of  coast-line,  a  region
for  many  years  only  accessible  on  foot.  Dr.  Coan
made  regular  and  frequent  tours  and  organized
schools  and  churches;  and  he  acted  as  its  only
physician  until  1849,  when  the  mission  board  sent
out  a  medical  man  to  assist  him.  Mrs.  Coan  estab-
lished and  for  some  time  conducted  a  seminary  for
young  Hawaiian  girls.  Dr.  Coan  seized  every  op-
portunity to  visit  and  to  study  the  great  volcanoes
of  Hawaii,  of  which  no  history  can  ever  be  written
that  will  not  depend,  in  large  part,  upon  the  data
given  in  his  published  descriptions.  The  largest  vol-
cano in  the  world  was  in  his  parish,  and  for  forty
years  he  was  the  chief  observer  both  of  Kilaueaand
of  Mokuaweoweo,  the  summit  crater.  In  1860,  and
again  in  1867,  he  made  a  tour  of  the  missions  in
the  Marquesas  islands.  In  1870,  after  a  continuous
absence  of  thirty-six  years,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Coan  re-
visited the  United  States.  His  abounding  energy
exercised  itself  in  making  239  addresses  in  twenty
different  states  and  territories  during  the  eleven
months  of  his  stay.  Mrs.  Coan  died,  after  their  re-
turn to  Hilo,  exhausted  by  care  and  labor,  29
Sept.,  1872.  She  was  a  woman  of  fine  mind  and
great  charm  of  character,  and  to  her  wise  aid  and
counsel  much  of  Dr.  Coan's  success  was  due.  Dr.
Coan's published  writings are "  Adventures  in


6QQ


COANACATZIN


COBB


Patagonia  "  (New  York,  1880) :  "  Life  in  Hawaii  "
(1882) ;  and  a  multitude  of  articles  in  the  "  Ameri-
can Journal  of  Science,"  the  "  Missionary  Herald,"
and  other  journals.— His  son,  Titus  Miinson,  phy-
sician, b.  in  Hilo,  tiawaiian  islands,  27  Sept.,  1836,
was  educated  at  home  and  in  the  royal  school
and  the  Funahou  academy  at  Honolulu,  where  he
was  prepared  for  college.  Coming  to  the  United
States  in  1850,  he  spent  a  year  at  Yale,  but  went
subsequently  to  Williams,  Avhere  he  was  graduated
in  1859.  He  studied  medicine  at  the  New  York
college  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  and  took  his
degree  in  1861.  Dr.  Coan  afterward  served  two
years  in  the  city  hospitals,  and  more  than  two
years  in  the  U.  S.  navy,  under  Admiral  Farragut,
as  assistant  surgeon,  1863-'5^;j3eing  present  at  the
battle  of  Mobile  Bay.  Resigning  from  the  naval
service  in  December,*1865,  he  resumed  his  residence
in  New  York,  which  has  been  his  home  ever  since.
Dr.  Coan  first  became  known  as  a  writer  by  his
essays  in  the  "Galaxy"  (1869-77).  He  has  con-
tributed many  literary,  critical,  and  technical  pa-
pers, and  poems,  to  various  periodicals,  and  has
published  in  book-form  "Ounces  of  Prevention"
(New  York,  1885) ;  a  "  Universal  Gazetteer  "  (a  sup-
plement to  "  Webster's  Dictionary,"  1885) ;  and  he
edited  "Topics  of  the  Time"  (6  vols..  New  York,
1883).  Dr.  Coan  has  written  much  on  the  subject
of  mineral  springs,  to  which  he  has  given  special
study  during  repeated  visits  to  Europe.

COANACATZIN  (co-an-a-cat-tseen'),  twelfth
king  of  Texcoco,  Mexico  (thirteenth  king,  according
to  some  authorities),  flourished  in  the  early  part  of
the  16th  century.  He  succeeded  his  brother,  Caca-
matzin,  on  the  throne  in  1521,  but  ruled  only  for
a  short  time,  being  in  dispute  with  his  brother
Ixtlixochitl.  The  latter  was  aided  by  the  con-
queror Cortes,  and  effected  the  deposition  of  Coana-
catzin  in  the  course  of  the  same  year.

COBB,  Carlos,  merchant,  b.  in  Athens,  Vt.,  28
Feb.,  1815 ;  d.  in  Tarrytown,  N.  Y.,  16  Sept.,  1877.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,
where  he  practised  law  for  several  years.  Becom-
ing interested  in  geology,  he  made  a  large  collec-
tion of  fossils,  some  of  which  he  gave  to  Yale  col-
lege, and  others  to  the  Metropolitan  museum.  In
1845-6  he  was  geologist  to  a  party  commissioned
by  the  Canadian  government  to  survey  the  north-
ern shore  of  Lake  Superior,  and  his  report  was
published  in  connection  with  that  of  the  commis-
sion. He  entered  the  produce  commission  business
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1847,  and  in  1859-'60  prepared
a  pro-rata  tax  bill,  which  was  defeated  in  the  legis-
lature. He  removed  to  New  York  in  1862,  when
he  became  a  member  of  the  produce  exchange,  and
was  the  first  chairman  of  its  committee  on  grain.
Many  reforms  were  instituted  in  the  exchange  by
his  efforts.  Mr.  Cobb  was  a  man  of  fine  presence
and  dignified  bearing,  a  genial  and  delightful  com-
panion. Though  a  democrat  in  politics,  he  invest-
ed his  fortune  in  government  bonds  in  the  darkest
days  of  the  war.

COBB,  David,  soldier,  b.  in  Attleborough,
Mass.,  14  Sept.,  1748;  d.  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  17
April,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1766,  studied  medicine  in  Boston,  and  practised  at
Taunton,  Mass..  for  many  years.  He  was  secretary
of  the  Bristol  county  convention  of  1774,  and  in
1775  was  a  delegate  to  the  provincial  congress.
He  served  in  New  Jersey  and  Rhode  Island  in
1777-8  as  lieutenant-colonel  of  Henry  Jackson's
regiment,  was  for  several  years  an  aide-de-camp  of
Washington,  and  at  the  close  of  the  war  was  colo-
nel and  brevet  brigadier-general,  Washington
intrusted to him the duty of entertaining  the


French  officers,  and  of  negotiating  with  Sir  Guy
Carleton  for  the  evacuation  of  New  York,  He
was  also  an  intimate  friend  of  Gen.  Greene  and
Gen.  Knox.  Afterward  he  became  major-general
of  militia,  and  judge  of  the  Bristol  county  court
of  common  pleas.  During  Shays's  rebellion  he
declared  that  he  "would  sit  as  a  judge,  or  die  as
a  general,"  and  by  his  energy  several  times  pro-
tected his  court  when  it  was  menaced  by  armed
insurgents,  and  prevented  bloodshed.  He  was
elected  to  congress  as  a  federalist,  serving  from  2
Dec,  1793,  till  3  March,  1795,  and  in  1796  became
a  land  agent  and  farmer  in  Oldsborough,  Me.
He  was  elected  to  the  Massachusetts  senate  from
the  eastern  district  of  Maine,  in  1802  was  president
of  that  body,  was  elected  to  the  council  in  1808,
and  became  lieutenant-governor  in  1809.  He  was
a  member  of  the  board  of  military  defence  in  1812,
and  chief  justice  of  the  Hancock  county  court  of
common  pleas,  and  returned  to  Taunton  in  1817.

COBB,  (xeorg-e  T.,  congressman,  b.  in  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  in  October,  1813;  d.  6  Aug.,  1870.
He  was  employed  in  the  iron-works  at  Dover,  N.
J.,  and,  subsequently  establishing  himself  in  the
iron  business,  rapidly  made  a  fortune,  from  which
he  gave  generously  to  both  public  and  private  ob-
jects. The  Evergreen  cemetery  in  Morristown
was  one  of  his  gifts  to  his  native  town,  and  he
also  gave  $15,000  for  a  school-house,  and  $75,000
for  a  church.  Mr.  Cobb  was  elected  to  congress
as  a  Democrat  in  1860,  and  first  sat  in  the  extra
session,  called  by  President  Lincoln  in  July,  1861,
to  provide  means  for  suppressing  the  rel3ellion.
Mr.  Cobb  at  once  gave  the  administration  his
hearty  support,  and  his  course  offended  many  of
his  Democratic  friends  at  home.  The  next  nomi-
nating convention  of  his  district  passed  resolutions
condemning  the  war.  Mr.  Cobb  refused  a  renomi-
nation,  and  Andrew  J.  Rogers  succeeded  hirn.
Mr.  Cobb  finally  separated  from  the  Democracy,
and  in  1865  was  elected  by  the  Republicans  of  Mor-
ris county  as  state  senator,  and  was  re-elected  in
1868.  In  1869  he  lost  the  republican  nomination
for  U.  S.  senator  by  three  votes.  He  was  killed  in
an  accident  on  the  Chesapeake  and  Ohio  railroad.

COBB,  Howell,  soldier,  b.  in  Granville,  N.  C,
about  1770;  d.  in  Georgia  in  1820.  He  became  a
planter  m  Georgia,  served  in  the  army  as  ensign
and  captain  from  1793  till  1806,  and  was  in  con-
gress for  three  successive  terms,  serving  from  1807
till  1812,  when  he  resigned  to  accept  a  captain's
commission  in  the  army.  He  served  through  the
war  of  1812,  resigned  on  the  declaration  of  peace,
and  lived  on  his  plantation  till  his  death.

COBB,  Howell,  lawyer,  b.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
in  1795.  After  serving  an  apprenticeship  to  a
printer,  he  engaged  in  teaching  in  Perry,  Houston
county,  till,  in  1827,  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and
also  became  a  preacher  in  the  Methodist  church.
In  1830  he  was  a  state  senator,  and  soon  afterward
he  established  the  "Cherokee  Gazette,"  the  first
paper  printed  in  the  Cherokee  district  after  it  came
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state.  He  was  a  presi-
dential elector  in  1836,  and  cast  his  vote  for  Hugh
L.  White.  At  his  instance  the  Georgia  cotton-
planters  formed  a  corporate  body  for  improving
the  culture  of  that  staple.  He  published  a  work
on  legal  forms  (1845);  "Penal  Code  of  Georgia"
(Macon,  1850) ;  and  a  work  on  the  African  race.

COBB,  Howell,  statesman,  b.  in  Cherry  Hill,
Jefferson  co.,  Ga.,  7  Sept.,  I8l5 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  9  Oct.,  1868.  He  was  graduated  at  Franklm
college,  Athens,  in  1834,  studied  law,  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  1836,  and  chosen  an  elector  on
the Van Buren ticket  the  same  year. He  was


COBB


COBB


667


appointed  by  the  legislature  solicitor-general  of
the  western  circuit  of  Georgia  in  1837,  held  the
office  for  three  years,  and  during  that  period  ob-
tained an  extensive  practice.  He  entered  congress
as  a  democrat  in  1843,  and  served  by  successive  re-
elections  till  1851,  distinguishing  himself  by  his
familiarity  with  the  rules,  his  skill  as  a  debater,
his  vehement  professions  of  love  for  the  Union,
and  his  equally  earnest  advocacy  of  state  rights.
His  imperiousness,  and  his  bold  championship  of
slavery,  made  him  the  leader  of  the  southern  party
in  the  house  in  1847,  and  he  was  elected  speaker
in  1849,  after  a  long  and  close  contest.  He  de-
manded the  extension  of  slavery  into  California
and  New  Mexico  by  Federal  authority,  and  advo-
cated the  compromise  measures  of  1850.  An  issue
being  taken  on  this  latter  question  by  the  south-
ern rights  extremists  of  Georgia,  he  was  nominated
for  governor  by  the  Union  party  in  1851,  and  after

a  violent  con-
test was  elected
by  a  large  ma-
jority. At  the
expiration  of
his  term  of  ser-
vice as  govern-
or, in  1853,  he
resumed  the
practice  of  law,
but  still  took  an
active  part  in
politics.  He
was  again  elect-
ed to  congress
in  1855,  advo-
cated Mr.  Bu-
chanan's elec-
tionthroughout
the  northern
states  in  1856,
and  in  1857  became  his  secretary  of  the  treasury.
He  found  the  treasury  full,  and  the  bonds  repre-
senting the  national  debt  at  a  premium  of  six-
teen to  eighteen  per  cent.  He  used  the  surplus
funds  in  the  treasury  in  purchasing  this  indebted-
ness at  this  high  premium,  but  the  approach  of
the  civil  war  so  affected  the  national  credit  that
he  was  compelled  to  attempt  to  borrow  at  an  exor-
bitant discount  the  money  necessary  to  defray  the
ordinary  expenses  of  the  government.  On  10
Dec,  18G0,  he  resigned,  giving  as  his  reason  that
the  state  of  Georgia  (then  about  to  secede)  required
his  services.  On  his  return  to  Georgia,  he  ad-
dressed the  people  of  the  state,  urging  forward  the
secession  movement.  He  was  one  of  the  delegates
from  Georgia  to  the  provisional  congress  which
prepared  and  adopted  the  constitution  of  the  Con-
federacy, and  presided  over  each  of  its  four  ses-
sions. Of  the  first  Confederate  congress,  that  as-
sembled 18  Feb.,  1862,  Mr.  Cobb  was  not  a  member;
but,  having  done  his  utmost  to  organize  the  oppo-
sition, he  was  withdrawn  from  civil  office,  not
being  a  favorite  with  Jefferson  Davis.  On  the  de-
mand of  the  Georgian  members,  the  Confederate
congress  appointed  him  brigadier-general,  and  sub-
sequently promoted  him  to  a  major-generalship,
but  he  took  little  part  in  military  movements.  At
the  close  of  the  war  he  strongly  opposed  the  re-
construction measures  as  calculated  to  retard  the
restoration  of  the  south  to  the  Union,  keep  back
its  prosperity,  and  destroy  the  negro  race.  See  a
memorial  volume  edited  bv  Samuel  Boykln  (Phila-
delphia, 1869).— His  brother,  Thomas  R.  R.,  law-
yer, b.  in  Cherry  Hill,  Jefferson  co.,  Ga.,  10  Aflril,
1823;  killed  at  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  Va.,


J'tv-tyV-^'CyCL. .-^^^^^^


13  Dec,  1862,  was  graduated  at  the  University  of
Georgia  in  1841,  standing  at  the  head  of  his  class,
was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  was  reporter  of  the
supreme  court  of  Georgia  from  1849  till  1857,  when
he  resigned.  He  was  a  trustee  of  the  university,
was  active  in  the  cause  of  education  in  his  native
state,  and  had  a  high  reputation  and  large  practice
as  a  lawyer.  He  was  an  able  and  eloquent  member
of  the  Confederate  congress,  in  which  he  served  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  military  affairs,  and
afterward  became  a  general  in  the  Confederate
army.  Mr.  Cobb  was  a  Presbyterian,  took  much
interest  in  religious  and  educational  matters,  and
gave  largely  to  the  Lucy  Cobb  Institute.  He  pub-
lished "Digest  of  the  Laws  of  Georgia"  (1851);
"  Inquiry  into  the  Law  of  Negro  Slavery  in  the
United  States"  (Philadelphia,  1858);  "Historical
Sketch  of  Slavery,  from  the  Earliest  Periods"
(Philadelphia,  1859) ;  and  several  essays  in  behalf
of  a  state  system  of  education.

COBB,  Jonathan  Holmes,  manufacturer,  b.  in
Sharon,  Mass.,  8  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  Dedham,  Mass.,
12  March,  1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1817,  and  numbered  among  his  classmates  George
Bancroft,  Caleb  Gushing,  and  Stephen  H.  Tyng.
Mr.  Cobb  was  one  of  the  first  to  interest  himself
in  the  cultivation  and  manufacture  of  silk  in  the
United  States.  In  1825  the  annual  importations
of  this  material  amounted  to  $10,250,000,  in  conse-
quence of  which  congress  adopted  measures  direct-
ing public  attention  to  the  desirability  of  produc-
ing silk  at  home.  Meanwhile  Mr.  Cobb  succeeded
in  raising  the  silk-worm  in  Dedham,  and  in  1829
called  the  attention  of  the  Massachusetts  legisla-
ture to  the  fact.  This  body  directed  that  a  work
be  prepared  on  the  subject,  appropriating  $600  for
the  purpose,  and  Mr.  Cobb  was  asked  to  write  the
book.  Of  his  "  Manual  of  the  Mulberry-Tree  and
the  Culture  of  Silk  "  (Boston,  1831),  numerous  copies
were  distributed  by  the  members  of  the  Massachu-
setts legislature.  In  1833  the  printing  of  2,000
copies  was  ordered  by  congress,  which  were  circu-
lated throughout  the  United  States  by  the  mem-
bers of  that  body.  The  New  England  silk  com-
pany, under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.  Cobb,
began  operations  about  1835,  with  a  capital  of
$5{),000.  It  employed  sixteen  sewing-silk  ma-
chines, and,  under  the  protective  duty  of  forty
per  cent,  on  sewing-silk,  made  arrangements  to
manufacture  200  pounds  a  week.  A  factory  was
erected,  which  at  that  time  was  the  largest  build-
ing in  the  town,  but  it  was  destroyed  by  fire  in
1844.  From  these  efforts  has  come  the  silk  indus-
try of  to-day,  which  produces  in  the  United  States
annually  more  than  $25,000,000  worth  of  silken
fabrics,  of  so  excellent  quality  that  they  are  fre-
quently sold  as  of  foreign  manufacture.  In  1820
Mr.  Cobb  established  the  "  Village  Register,"  and
in  1831  was  instrumental  in  founding  the  Dedham
institution  for  savings,  of  which,  for  many  years,
he  was  secretary.  For  forty-five  years  he  was  regis-
ter of  probate,,  and  for  twenty-eight  town-clerk.

COBB,  Lyman,  author,  b.  in  Massachusetts
about  1800;  d.  in  Colesburg,  Potter  co..  Pa.,  26
Oct.,  1864.  He  was  one  of  the  greatest  educators
of  his  time,  and  was  also  active  in  charitable  enter-
prises, being  a  member  of  numerous  benevolent
societies.  He  was  the  author  of  "  Evil  Tendency
of  Corporal  Punishment "  (New  York,  1847),  and
numerous  text-books,  including  "Just  Standard
for  Pronouncing  the  English  Language"  (New
York,  1825);  " Spelling-Book "  (1826),  with  "In-
troduction" (1831),  and  "  Expositor  "  (1835) ;  sev-
eral readers  (1831-'44) ;  "  Miniature  Lexicon  of  the
English Language  ' (1835-'54) ; "  Arithmetical


COBB


COBB


Rules  and  Tables"  (1835);  a  new  series  of  spell-
ing-books (1843);  and  "  >J  ew  Pronouncing  School
Dictionary  "  (1843).

COBB,  Nathaniel  R.,  merchant,  b.  in  Fal-
mouth, Me.,  3  Nov.,  1798 ;  d.  24  May,  1834.  He
was  a  member  of  the  Charles  street  Baptist  church
in  Boston,  Mass.,  and  when  but  twenty-three  years
of  age  he  drew  up  and  signed  the  following  re-
markable document :  "  By  the  grace  of  God,  I  will
never  be  worth  more  than  $50,000.  By  the  grace
of  God,  I  will  give  one  fourth  of  the  net  profits  of
my  business  to  charitable  and  religious  uses.  If  I
am  ever  worth  $20,000,  I  will  give  one  half  of  my
net  profits ;  and  if  I  am  worth  $30,000,  I  will  give
three  fourths,  and  the  whole  after  $50,000.  So
help  me  God,  or  give  to  a  more  faithful  steward,
and  set  me  aside."  These  resolutions  he  kept  to
the  letter.  As  one  result,  he  gave  to  Newton  theo-
logical seminary  at  diffei:ent  times  about  $15,000.

COBB,  Stephen  Alonzo,  b.  in  Madison,  Me.,
17  June,  1833 ;  d.  in  August,  1878.  He  went  with
his  father  to  Minnesota  in  1850,  where  he  engaged
in  the  lumber  business,  meanwhile  preparing  for
college.  After  two  years  in  Beloit  college  he
went  to  Brown,  where  he  graduated  in  1858,  and
in  1859  removed  to  Wyandotte,  Kansas,  and  began
the  practice  of  law.  In  1862  he  was  a  state  sena-
tor, but  entered  the  army,  served  through  the  war,
and  rose  to  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In
1869  he  again  became  a  member  of  the  state  sen-
ate. In  1871  he  was  elected  to  the  house,  in  1872
was  speaker  of  that  body,  and  mayor  of  Wyan-
dotte in  1862  and  1868.  He  was  elected  to  con-
gress in  1872,  and  served  on  the  committees  on
post-roads  and  the  state  department.  He  was  re-
nominated in  1874,  but  was  defeated.

COBB,  Sylvanus,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norway,
Me.,  in  July,  1799 ;  d.  in  East  Boston,  31  Oct.,  1866.
In  1828  he  was  settled  over  Universalist  churches
at  Maiden  and  Waltham,  Mass.,  and  in  1838  took
charge  of  the  "  Christian  Freeman,"  which  he  edit-
ed for  more  than  twenty  years.  He  was  for  many
years  a  leader  in  the  anti-slavery  and  temperance
movements.  Dr.  Cobb's  published  works  include
"  The  New  Testament,  with  Explanatory  Notes "
(Boston,  1864) ;  "  Compend  of  Divinity  "  and  "  Dis-
cussions."— His  son,  Sylvanus,  author,  b.  in
Waterville,  Me.,  in  1823 ;  d.  in  Hyde  Park,  Mass.,
20  July,  1887,  was  editor  and  publisher  of  a  pa-
per called  "  The  liechabite,"  edited  the  "  New
England  Washingtonian,"  and  was  a  principal
contributor  to  "  Gleason's  Pictorial,"  "  Flag  of
Our  Union,"  and  the  New  York  "Ledger."  He
published  "  The  Autobiography  of  Rev.  Sylvanus
Cobb,"  with  a  memoir  (Boston,  1867),  and  numer-
ous tales,  including  "  The  King's  Talisman  "  (Hart-
ford, 1851);  "The  Patriot  Cruiser"  (New  York,
1859) :  and  "  Ben  Hamed  "  (Boston,  1864).— Another
son,  Cyrus,  artist,  b.  in  Maiden,  Mass.,  6  Aug.,  1834,
was  graduated  at  Lyman  school.  East  Boston,  in
1848,  and  afterward  studied  the  higher  mathe-
matics and  classics.  He  and  his  twin  brother  Da-
rius studied  art  together,  and  refused  opportuni-
ties for  European  study,  wishing  to  have  no  master
but  nature.  While  perfecting  themselves  in  art
the  brothers  retired  together  at  midnight  and  rose
before  sunrise,  and  they  have  since  been  closely
identified  in  their  work.  At  this  time  they  prac-
tised mental  mathematical  calculation,  as  an  exer-
cise to  prepare  the  mind  for  future  work,  and  at-
tained great  proficiency,  for  example,  in  multiplying
large  numbers  mentally.  Cyrus  began  the  study
of  law  in  1869,  to  enable  himself  and  his  brother
to  bring  out  their  large  historical  works.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Boston  university  law-school  in


1873,  and  practised  till  1879,  when  he  resumed  his
art  work.  Among  his  sculptures  are  a  bust  of  B.
P.  Shillaber  (1867),  the  Cambridge  Soldiers'  Monu-
ment (1869),  an  heroic  bas-relief  of  Prosperc  and
Miranda  (1883),  heroic  statue  of  Abbott  Lawrence
(1885-'6),  "  Ancient  Celtic  Bard  contemplating  the
Future  Woes  and  Dawning  Light  of  Ireland  "  (1886),
and  a  bust  of  Theodore  Parker  (1886).  His  paint-
ings include  "Jesus  Condemned,"  containing  about
thirty  figures,  those  in  the  foreground  of  colossal
size  (1879) ;  "  Warren  at  the  Old  South  "  (1880) ;
and  portraits  of  Dr.  A.  P.  Peabody  and  Dr.  J.  Ap-
pleton.  Mr.  Cobb  has  paid  much  attention  to
music,  is  a  member  of  the  Boylston  club,  and  has  a
tenor  voice  of  great  compass.  Both  the  brothers
have  led  orchestras,  and  in  later  years  have  directed
choruses.  Mr.  Cobb  has  written,  besides  other
poems,  thirty  sonnets  on  the  "Masters  of  Art,"
which  appeared  in  the  Boston  "  Transcript,"  and
are  to  be  published  in  book-form.  Both  the  broth-
ers served  in  the  civil  war  in  the  44th  Massachu-
setts regiment.  To  set  forth  the  aim  and  purpose
of  the  Grand  Army  of  the  Republic,  Cyrus  has
written  a  novel,  "Veteran  of  the  Grand  Army"
(Boston,  1870). — Cyrus's  twin  brother,  Darius,  b.
in  Maiden,  Mass.,  6  Aug.,  1834,  studied  with  his
brother  at  the  same  schools,  and  has  painted  por-
traits, landscapes,  and  figure-pieces.  The  latter
include  "  Judas  in  the  Potter's  Field  "  and  "  King
Lear"  (1877);  "Christ  before  Pilate,"  his  chief
work,  which  has  been  highly  praised,  and  which
has  been  engraved  (1878);  "For  Their  Sakes,"  a
temperance  painting  (1879);  and  "Washington  on
Dorchester  Heights"  (1880).  In  conjunction  with
Cyrus  he  has  painted  a  rendering  of  Leonardo  da
Vinci's  "  Last  Supper,"  which  has  been  pronounced
the  best  ever  made.  These  are  all  large  exhibition
pictures,  varying  from  six  to  nine  feet  in  length.
His  portraits  include  that  of  Collector  Simmons,  in
the  Boston  custom-house  (1875),  and  one  of  Rufus
Choate,  purchased  by  the  Suffolk  bar  in  1877.
Those  of  Gov.  Andrew  (1868)  and  Prof.  Agassiz
(1883)  are  owned  by  Harvard.  Among  other  por-
traits by  his  hand"  is  one  of  Charles  Sumner,  a
two-thirds  length  of  Henry  Wilson,  bought  in  1876
by  his  native  town,  and  those  of  Cyrus  and  Sylva-
nus Cobb,  Jr.,  sent  to  the  Centennial  exhibition.
Among  his  landscapes  is  "  Back  Bay  Lands."  Mr.
Cobb  has  assisted  his  brother  Cyrus  in  his  musical
work,  has  lectured  on  art  before  lyceums  and  col-
leges, and  was  art  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Traveller  "
for  several  years.  He  has  written  poems  on  art
and  nature,  and  numerous  essays  in  periodicals,  not
yet  published  in  book-form,  and  also  has  an  art
novel  in  manuscript.

COBB,  Thomas  W.,  senator,  b.  in  Columbia
county,  Ga.,  in  1784;  d.  in  Greensborough,  Ga.,
1  Feb.,  1830.  His  father,  John  Cobb,  emigrated
from  Virginia.  Thomas  studied  law  with  William
H.  Crawford,  settled  in  Lexington,  Ga.,  and  soon
became  distinguished  in  his  profession.  He  served
two  terms  in  congress,  from  1817  till  1821,  took  his
seat  again  in  1823,  and  before  the  expiration  of  his
term.  In  1824,  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  in  place  of
Nicholas  Ware,  deceased.  He  resigned  in  1828,  and
became  a  Judge  of  the  superior  court  of  his  state.
Senator  Cobb  was  an  eloquent  debater,  one  of  his
best  speeches  being  on  Gen.  Jackson's  policy  in  the
Florida  campaign.  Together  with  Mercer,  of  Vir-
ginia, and  Clay,  of  Kentucky,  he  advocated  a  vote
of  censure  on  that  officer.  He  was  also  prominent
in  the  debates  on  the  Missouri  question  in  1819.
He  wrote  several  admirable  political  essays. — His
son,  Joseph  Beckham,  author,  b.  in  Oglethorpe
county,  Ga.,  11  April,  1819 ;  d.  in  Columbus,  Ga.,  15


COBBETT


COBBS


Sept.,  1858,  was  educated  at  Wilmington,  S.  C,  and
at  Franklin  college,  Athens,  Ga.  He  removed  in
1838  to  Noxubee  county.  Miss.,  where  he  devoted
himself  to  literary  pursuits.  He  was  elected  to  the
state  convention  as  a  whig  in  1851,  was  several
times  a  member  of  the  state  senate,  and  in  1853
was  an  American  candidate  for  congress.  He  pub-
lished "  The  Creole,  or  the  Siege  of  New  Orleans,"
a  novel  (Philadelphia,  1850) ;  "  Mississippi  Scenes,
or  Sketches  of  Southern  and  Western  Life  and
Adventure "  (1850) ;  and  "  Leisure  Labors  "  (New
York,  1858).  He  was  a  frequent  contributor  of
political  essays  to  the  "  American  Review."

COBBETT,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  New-
bury, England,  in  1G08;  d.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  5
Nov.,  1685.  He  studied  at  Oxford,  but  left  on  ac-
count of  the  plague,  and  became  a  pupil  of  Dr.
Twiss.  To  avoid  further  persecution  for  his  non-
conformity, he  emigrated  to  Massachusetts  in  1687
with  Davenport,  and  was  a  colleague  to  his  old
friend,  Mr.  Whiting,  of  Lynn,  until,  in  1656,  he
became  pastor  of  the  first  church  in  Ipswich,  where
he  remained  until  his  death.  He  was  remarkable
for  the  frequency  of  his  prayers,  and  his  assurance
of  their  efRcacy.  In  1645  he  published  a  work  on
infant  baptism ;  in  1653,  "  The  Civil  Magistrate's
Power  m  Matters  of  Religion,  modestly  debated,"
etc;  in  1654,  "A  Practical  Discourse  of  Prayer";
in  1656,  "  On  the  Honor  due  from  Children  to  their
Parents " ;  and  a  "  Narrative  of  New  England's
Deliverances"  (in  "New  England  Historical  and
(xenealogical  Register,"  vol.  vii.).

COBBETT,  William,  British  journalist,  b,  in
Farnham,  Surrey,  9  March,  1762;  d.  there,  18  June,
1835.  His  father  was  a  farmer  and  innkeeper,
and  a  man  of  some  intelligence,  who  gave  his  son
such  rudimentary  education  as  he  could.  At  the
age  of  twenty-one,  having  spent  his  boyhood  work-
ing in  the  fields,  (IJobbett  went  to  London  and  got
a  place  as  clerk  in  an  attorney's  office.  But,  unable
to  endure  the  confinement  of  this  place,  which  he
called  a  •'  hell  on  earth,"  he  enlisted  in  the  54th
infantry  regiment  and  was  sent  to  Chatham.  Here
he  devoted  every  spare  moment  to  learning  English
grammar.  He  went  to  Canada  with  his  regiment
and  served  till  1791,  when  he  obtained  an  honora-
ble discharge,  having  reached  the  grade  of  sergeant-
major.  On  5  Feb.,  1792,  he  married,  at  Woolwich,
Aime,  daughter  of  Thomas  Reid,  a  sergeant-major
of  artillery.  She  was  a  woman  of  remarkable  force
of  character.  Cobbett's  object  in  quitting  the
army  was  to  bring  certain  officers  to  justice  for
having  in  various  ways  wronged  both  the  public
and  the  soldiers.  With  this  purpose  he  visited
London  and  laid  his  complaints  before  the  govern-
ment, but  with  little  or  no  success.  He  then  went
to  France  and  remained  there  six  months,  learning
the  language;  but  the  anarchy  of  1792  made  it  so
uncomfortable  there  that  he  crossed  the  ocean  and
settled  in  Philadelphia.  Here  he  advocated  the
cause  of  the  federalist  party,  and  under  the  name  of
"  Peter  Porcupine  "  wrote  a  series  of  powerful  pam-
phlets, in  which  the  French  revolutionists  and  their
sympathizers  were  severely  criticised.  He  also  at-
tacked Dr.  Benjamin  Rush,  who  advocated  the  cure
of  yellow  fever  and  other  dangerous  maladies  by
wholesale  bleeding.  Cobbett  compared  him  very
effectively  to  Dr.  Sangrado  ;  but  the  irascible  Rush
brought  suit  for  libel,  and  obtained  a  verdict  for
$5,000  damages.  As  the  costs  of  suit  amounted  to
13,000  more,  this  was  a  heavy  blow.  In  1800  Cob-
bett returned  to  London,  opened  a  book-shop,  and
published  the  "  Works  of  Peter  Porcupine  "  (12
vols.),  which  had  an  immense  sale.  He  soon
founded  the  "Weekly  Political  Register,"  which


continued  to  be  published  during  his  lifetime.
The  success  of  this  paper  was  so  great  that  Cob-
bett grew  rich  and  was  able  to  buy  a  large  estate
in  the  country.  He  wrote  with  great  asperity,  but
usually  with  much  justice  and  good  sense.  His
command  of  English  was  extraordinary,  and  he
was  an  inveterate  foe  to  humbug  and  tyranny.
Thus  he  made  himself  obnoxious  to  the  govern-
ment, and  was  often  prosecuted  for  libel.  One  of
these  cases  became  celebrated.  In  July,  1810,  for
sharply  denouncing  the  flogging  of  English  militia-
men by  German  officers,  he  was  fined  £1,000  and
sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment  in  Newgate.
His  friends  immediately  raised  the  money  as  a
testimonial  of  their  sympathy,  but  he  was  kept  in
prison  during  the  whole  of  the  two  years.  In  1816
he  established  an  occasional  paper,  called  "  Two-
penny Trash,"  which  had  so  great  a  sale  and  pro-
duced such  effect  upon  workingmen  as  to  rouse  the
hostility  of  the  government,  so  that  Cobbett  felt  it
necessary  to  retreat  for  two  years  to  the  United
States,  where  he  leased  a  farm  on  Long  Island.  In
1819  he  returned  to  England,  and  devoted  himself
to  authorship.  In  1832,  being  then  seventy  years
old,  Mr.  Cobbett  was  elected  to  parliament  "for  the
borough  of  Oldham.  He  had  distinguished  him-
self as  an  advocate  of  Catholic  emancipation  and
parliamentary  reform,  but,  in  spite  of  his  personal
celebrity,  his  influence  in  the  house  of  commons
was  but  slight.  On  25  May,  1835,  in  the  midst  of
a  debate  on  the  malt  tax,  he  was  struck  down  by
heart  disease,  and  died  soon  after  being  removed
to  his  country  house  at  Farnham.  Asa  writer  of
English  prose,  Mr.  Cobbett  ranks  among  the  high-
est. He  was  extremely  industrious  and  temperate
in  his  habits,  and  thus  acquired  a  good  deal  of
learning  and  accomplished  a  great  amount  of  lit-
erary work.  Among  his  published  books  are  a
"  History  of  the  Protestant  Reformation  in  Eng-
land and  Ireland,"  a  "History  of  England,"  "A
Year's  Residence  in  America,"  "  Advice  to  Young
Men  and  Women,"  "Cottage  Economy,"  and  es-
pecially his  English  and  French  grammars,  which
are  of  themselves  very  entertaining.  He  also  com-
piled twenty  volumes  of  parliamentary  debates.  As
a  satirist  he  has  had  few  if  any  superiors,  after
Swift  and  Junius,  and  he  was  so  ready  to  wield  his
stinging  pen  that  Sir  Henry  Bulwer  calls  him,  in
the  title  of  an  essay,  "  The  Contentious  Man,"  Yet
he  was  very  domestic  in  disposition,  and  devotedly
loved  by  his  family  and  friends.  See  "  William
Cobbett ;  a  Biography,"  by  Edward  Smith  (2  vols.,
London,  1878),  and  "  Historical  Characters,"  by
Sir  Henry  L.  Bulwer  (London,  1868).

COBBS,  Nicholas  Hamner,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in
Bedford  county,  Va.,  5  Feb.,  1796;  d.  in  Mont-
gomery, Ala.,  il  Jan.,  1861.  While  studying  for
the  ministry  in  the  Episcopal  church  he  was  en-
gaged in  teaching  for  several  years.  He  was  or-
dained deacon  in  Staunton,  Va.,  in  May,  1824,  by
the  Rt.  Rev.  R.  C.  Moore,  D.  D.,  and  "priest  the
next  year,  in  Richmond,  Va.,  by  the  same  bishop.
He  was  occupied  in  pastoral  work  in  his  native
county  for  fifteen  years.  In  1839  he  became  rector
of  St.  Paul's  church,  Petersburg,  Va.,  and  in  1843
accepted  a  call  to  the  rectorship  of  St.  Paul's
church,  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  In  1844  he  was  elected
bishop  of  Alabama,  being  the  first  to  preside  over
that  diocese,  and  was  consecrated  in  Philadelphia,
20  Oct.,  1844.  Bishop  Cobbs  was  a  faithful  over-
seer of  the  work  committed  to  his  charge,  and  as
evidence  of  esteem  for  his  memory  a  noble  charity
in  Montgomery  bears  the  name  of  "  The  Bishop
Cobbs  Home  for  Orphans."  He  published  nothing
i  save  a  few  sermons  and  addresses.


670


COBOS


COCHRAN


COBOS,  Marcelino,  Mexican  bandit,  b.  in
Manresa,  Spain,  about  1825 ;  d.  in  December,  1860.
He  emigrated  to  Mexico  about  1845,  and  enrolled
himself  in  the  famous  guerillas  commanded  by
Father  Javanta,  with  whom  he  served  during  the
whole  campaign  against  the  Americans  (1847-8).
A  few  years  afterward  he  served  in  the  reactionary
bands  during  the  civil  war,  and  was  noted  for  his
extreme  boldness  and  terrible  cruelties.  At  the
head  of  his  300  guerillas,  all  well  equipped  and
mounted,  he  became  the  terror  of  the  farmers  and
inhabitants  of  small  towns.  His  lieutenants  were
then  Gonzalez  (afterward  made  a  general  and
president  of  Mexico)  and  Buitron,  who  was  shot
by  the  republicans  upon  the  downfall  of  Maximil-
ian's empire.  It  is  said  that  Cobos  ordered  the  as-
sassination of  the  Mexican  general  Santos  Degol-
lado,  and  many  other  monstrous  crimes.  The  bat-
tle of  Calpulalpan,  fought  between  the  troops  of
the  conservative  and  liberal  parties  (21  to  24  Dec,
18G0),  decided  the  contest  in  favor  of  the  latter,
and  the  victors  ruled  the  country  until  the  French
army  invaded  Mexico  in  1863.  Cobos,  who  had
taken  part  in  this  battle,  fled  to  the  mountains
with  a  few  of  his  men,  but  some  rancheros  fol-
lowed, captured  and  beheaded  him,  taking  his  head
in  triumph  to  the  city  of  Mexico.

COB  URN,  Abner,  merchant,  b.  in  Skowhegan,
Me.,  23  March,  1803 ;  d.  there,  4  Jan.,  1885.  His
father,  Eleazar,  a  land-surveyor,  several  times  rep-
resented the  town  of  Canaan  (now  embraced  in
Skowhegan)  in  the  legislatures  of  Massachusetts
and  Maine.  Though  employed  in  early  life  on  his
father's  farm,  Abner  spent  several  terms  at  Bloom-
field  academy,  and  in  1825  became  a  surveyor.  The
knowledge  olatained  in  this  profession  led  him  into
the  lumber  business,  which  he  prosecuted  for  more
than  half  a  century  with  ability  and  success.  He
began  to  take  an  interest  in  railway  enterprises  in
1854,  and  became  director  or  president  of  several
important  lines.  In  1838  he  was  elected  as  a  whig
to  the  Maine  legislature,  and  again  in  1840.  In
1852,  when  Gen.  Scott  was  the  whig  candidate  for
president,  he  was  on  the  electoral  ticket.  In  1855
he  was  a  member  of  Gov.  Morrill's  council,  and  in
1857  held  the  same  office  under  Govs.  Hamlin  and
Williams.  In  1860  he  was  an  elector  on  the  Lincoln
ticket  and  chosen  governor  of  Maine  in  18G2,  fill-
ing the  office  during  most  of  the  year  1863  and
supporting  the  national  government  with  devotion
and  fidelity.  His  last  public  service  was  rendered
in  1884,  when  he  was  one  of  the  Republican  electors
and  was  made  their  chairman.  Gov.  Coburn  was
active  in  philanthropic  movements,  and  evinced  a
practical  interest  in  higher  education.  He  was
president  of  the  managers  of  the  College  of  agri-
culture and  mechanic-arts,  and  vice-president  of
the  board  of  trustees  of  Colby  university.  He  gave
largely  in  his  lifetime  to  aid  schools  and  colleges
and  the  building  of  churches,  especially  in  connec-
tion with  the  Baptist  denomination,  to  which  he
was  warmly  attached.  He  bequeathed  to  various
educational,  religious,  and  charitable  institutions
over  $800,000,  including  $200,000  to  Colby  uni-
versity, $100,000  to  the  Maine  state  college  of  agri-
culture, $200,000  to  the  American  Baptist  home
missionary  society,  and  $100,000  to  the  American
Baptist  missionary  union.

COBURN,  Charles  Rittenhouse,  educator,  b.
in  Bradford  county.  Pa.,  5  June,  1809 ;  d.  in  Har-
risburg.  Pa.,  9  March,  1869.  He  was  almost  wholly
self-taught,  and,  having  acquired  sufficient  knowl-
edge to  instruct,  he  was  engaged  in  1827,  at  a  salary
of  eight  dollars  a  month,  to  take  charge  of  a  small
school  in  Ovvego,  N.  Y. In  1837  he  became  assist-


ant in  the  Owego  academy,  and  remained  there  for
ten  years,  with  occasional  interruptions  from  ill
health  and  a  brief  attendance  at  the  State  normal
school.  In  1848-50  he  was  president  of  the  New
York  teachers'  association,  and  in  1852-'3  one
of  the  editors  of  the  "  New  York  Teacher."  He
has  lectured  frequently  on  educational  topics.  In
1853  he  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.
from  Madison  university.  In  1854  he  took  charge
of  the  normal  and  mathematical  department  of
Susquehanna  collegiate  institute,  Bradford  county.
Pa.,  and  from  1857  till  1868  superintendent  of
schools  for  the  same  county.  He  was  state  super-
intendent of  schools  for  Pennsylvania  from  1803
till  1866,  and  previously  was  president  of  the  State
teachers'  association  for  one  year.  In  1866  he  was
elected  superintendent  of  schools  at  Harrisburg,
an  office  which  he  held  at  the  time  of  his  death.

COCHRAN,  David  Henry,  educator,  b.  in
Springville,  N.  Y.,  5  July,  1828.  He  was  graduated
at  Hamilton  in  1850,  and  received  from  it  the  degree
of  LL.  D.  in  1869.  He  was  professor  of  natural
sciences  at  the  Clinton  liberal  institute  in  1850-'l,
principal  of  Fredonia  academy  from  1852  till  1854,
professor  of  natural  sciences  in  the  State  normal
school  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1854r-'5,  and  its  presi-
dent from  1855  till  1864.  In  the  last-named  year
he  became  president  of  the  Brooklyn  polytechnic
institute,  where  he  entirely  reorganized  the  courses
of  study.  In  1862  Prof.  Cochran  visited  the  prin-
cipal educational  institutions  of  Europe,  under  the
direction  of  the  executive  committee  of  the  normal
school,  and  he  has  travelled  widely  through  the
mining  districts  of  the  United  States  and  British
America.  He  is  a  trustee  of  Hamilton  college,  has
lectured  much  in  New  York  state,  and  published
educational  and  scientific  reports.

COCHRAN,  James,  inventor,  b.  in  Batavia,  N.
Y.,  in  1763;  d.  31  Dec,  1846.  He  was  a  brass-
founder  in  Philadelphia,  and  Franklin  frequently
visited  his  shop.  He  invented  the  art  of  making
cut  nails,  and  also  claimed  to  have  made  the  first
copper  cents  in  this  country.

COCHRAN,  John,  surgeon,  b.  in  Sudsbury,
Chester  co..  Pa.,  1  Sept.,  1730;  d.  in  Palatine,
Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  6  April,  1807.  He  was  the
son  of  James,  an  emigrant  to  Chester  county,  Pa.,
in  the  early  part  of
the  18th  century.
He  was  instructed  at
the  grammar-school
of  Dr.  Francis  Alli-
son, and  acquired  a
knowledge  of  surgery
and  medicine  from
his  preceptor.  Dr.
Thompson,  at  Lan-
caster, Pa.  At  the
beginning  of  the
French  and  Indian
war  in  1755  he  en-
tered the  British  ser-
vice as  a  surgeon's
mate  in  the  hospital
department.  When
Gen.  Bradstreet

marched  against  Fort
Frontenac  in  the
summer  of  1758,  he
joined  him,  together
with  Maj.  (afterward  Gen.)  Philip  Schuyler.  At
the  close  of  the  war  his  reputation  as  a  surgeon
was  fully  established.  He  first  settled  in  Albany,
and  married  Gertrude,  a  sister  of  Gen.  Schuyler,
but  soon  afterward  he  removed  to  New  Bruns-


^•^-^^zJi^^c/t


COCHRAN


COCHRANE


671


wick,  N.  J.,  where  he  practised  his  profession  and
was  president  of  the  Medical  society  of  New  Jer-
sey, and,  late  in  1776,  offered  his  services  as  a  vol-
unteer in  the  hospital  department  of  the  Revolu-
tionary army.  On  the  recommendation  of  Wash-
ington he  was  appointed  physician  and  surgeon-
general  in  the  middle  department,  and  on  17
Jan.,  1781,  congress  appointed  him  director-gen-
eral of  hospitals,  and  his  experience  enabled  him
to  make  great  improvements  in  the  hospital  ser-
vice. Soon  after  peace  had  been  declared  he  re-
moved with  his  family  to  New  York,  and  on  the
adoption  of  the  Federal  constitution  Washington
made  him  commissioner  of  loans  for  that  state.
— His  grandson,  John,  lawyer,  b.  in  Palatine,
Montgomery  co.,  N.  Y.,  27  Aug.,  1813,  studied
first  at  Union,  but  was  graduated  at  Hamilton
college,  Clinton,  N.  Y.,  in  1831.  He  studied  law
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  of  New  York  in
1834.  From  1853  till  1857  he  was  surveyor  of  the
port  of  New  York,  and  from  1857  till  1861  a  rep-
resentative from  that  city  in  congress.  On  4  July,
1858,  he  was  deputed  by  the  common  council  of
the  city  of  New  York  to  convey  to  his  native  state
of  Virginia  the  remains  of  President  James  Mon-
roe, who  had  died  in  New  York  and  been  buried
there.  On  11  June,  1861,  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  1st  U.  S.  chasseurs,  which  he  com-
manded at  Fair  Oaks,  Malvern  Hill,  and  other
battles  of  the  peninsular  campaign.  He  became
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  on  17  July,  1862,
and  was  assigned  a  brigade  in  Couch's  division  of
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  with  the  re-
serve at  the  battle  of  Antietam,  and  afterward
pursued  the  retreating  enemy,  resigning  from  the
army  on  27  Feb.,  1862,  in  consequence  of  serious
physical  disability.  In  1864  he  was  nominated  at
Cleveland,  Ohio,  by  the  convention  of  independent
republicans,  for  vice-president  of  the  United  States
on  the  ticket  with  Gen.  John  C.  Fremont  for  presi-
dent. In  1863-5  he  was  attorney-general  of  the
state  of  New  York,  and  in  1869  tendered  the  mis-
sion to  Paraguay  and  Uraguay,  which  he  declined.
In  1872  he  was  one  of  the  New  York  delegation  to
the  convention  of  the  liberal  republican  party  that
met  at  Cincinnati,  and  was  chiefly  instrumental  in
securing  the  nomination  of  Horace  Oreeley  for  the
presidency.  In  1872  he  was  a  member  of  the  com-
mon council  of  the  city  of  New  York  and  presi-
dent of  the  board,  and  was  acting  mayor  during
the  temporary  retirement  of  Mayor  Hall  in  the
midst  of  the  Tweed  ring  disclosures,  and  again  a
member  of  the  council  in  1883.  Gen.  Cochran  is  a
member  of  the  Society  of  the  Cincinnati.

COCHRAN,  John  Webster,  inventor,  b.  in
Enfield,  N.  H.,  16  May,  1814.  In  1832,  with  a  cash
capital  of  $1.25,  he  walked  110  miles  to  Boston,
and  in  1833  patented  a  steam-heating  apparatus.  In
1834  he  invented  a  revolving,  breech-loading  rifled
cannon,  in  which  the  cylinder  was  automatically
rotated  by  the  cocking  of  the  hammer — the  same
principle  that  afterward  secured  the  success  of  the
revolving  pistol.  He  visited  France  in  1835,
showed  his  model  to  the  Turkish  ambassador,  and
went  to  Constantinople  on  the  invitation  of  Sultan
Mahmoud,  who  rewarded  him  liberally.  He  lived
in  France  in  1839-'47,  and  afterward  in  England,
where  he  invented  machinery  for  the  curvilinear
sawing  of  timber,  which  was  adopted  by  the  Brit-
ish government.  After  his  return  to  this  country
he  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  fire-arms  and
projectiles  and  in  perfecting  various  inventions.

COCHRANE,  Sir  Alexander  Forester  Inglis,
British  naval  officer,  b.  22  April,  1758 ;  d.  in  Paris,
26  Jan.,  1832. He  was  a  son  of  the  Scottish  Earl


of  Dundonald,  and  distinguished  himself  in  wars
with  the  United  States  and  France,  especially  for
an  unequal  combat  with  five  French  vessels  in
Chesapeake  bay.  He  was  made  a  post-captain  in
1782  and  a  rear-admiral  in  1804.  He  was  knighted
for  his  gallant  conduct  and  meritorious  services  in
a  battle  against  the  French  in  1806  near  Hayti,
and  in  1809  was  made  vice-admiral.  He  com-
manded the  British  fleet  on  the  American  station
in  the  war  of  1812-'5,  and  assisted  the  land  forces
in  taking  Washington  in  August,  1814,  and  in  the
attack  on  New  Orleans.  He  was  made  admiral  of
the  blue  in  1819. — His  son.  Sir  Thomas  John,  b.
about  1790 ;  d.  in  1872,  served  as  captain  under
his  father  in  the  war  against  the  United  States  in
1814.  He  was  elected  to  parliament  in  1837,  was
afterward  made  a  rear-admiral,  commanded  in  the
East  Indies  from  1842  till  1846,  and  became  vice-
admiral  about  1850. — Another  son,  John  Dnndas,
traveller,  b.  about  1780;  d.  in  South  America,  12
Aug.,  1825,  entered  the  British  navy  at  the  age  of
ten,  and  attained  the  rank  of  captain.  In  1815  he
began  a  series  of  journeys  on  foot  through  France,
Spain,  and  Portugal.  After  a  plan  for  exploring
the  interior  of  Africa  and  the  course  of  the  Niger,
submitted  by  him  in  1820  to  the  British  admiralty,
had  been  declined,  he  determined  upon  making  a
tour  of  the  world,  as  much  as  possible  on  foot,  in-
tending to  cross  from  Asia  to  America  at  Bering
strait,  and  started  from  London  in  February,
1820,  but  gave  up  the  project  after  reaching  Kamt-
schatka.  Afterward  he  went  to  South  America,
where  he  was  engaged  in  mining  enterprises  at  the
time  of  his  death.  In  1824  he  published  "Narra-
tive of  a  Pedestrian  Journey  through  Russia  and
Siberian  Tartary,  from  the  Frontiers  of  China  to
the  Frozen  Sea  and  Kamtschatka"  (London,  1824).

COCHRANE,  Clark  B.,  lawyer, b.  in  New  Boston.
N.  H.,  in  1817;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  5  March,  1867.
He  was  graduated  at  Union,  and  devoted  himself
to  the  study  of  law.  In  1844  he  was  chosen  a  mem-
ber of  the  assembly,  on  the  democratic  ticket,  from
Montgomery  county.  He  was  one  of  the  primitive
barnburners,  supported  Van  Buren  and  Adams  in
1848,  and  in  1854  vigorously  opposed  the  Kansas-
Nebraska  bill,  after  which  he  acted  with  the  repub-
lican party.  In  1856  he  was  elected  to  congress
from  the  Schenectady  district,  and  in  1858  was  re-
elected. The  following  year,  his  health  becoming
affected  by  the  excitement  of  congressional  life,  he
was  obliged  to  return  home  for  temporary  rest,  and
after  the  expiration  of  his  term  resided  in  Albany,
devoting  himself  to  his  profession.  In  1865  he
accepted  a  nomination  for  the  legislature.  He  was
the  acknowledged  leader  of  the  house,  and  his  tact
in  quieting  angry  debate  gave  him  the  title  of
"  The  Great  Pacificator."

COCHRANE,  Matthew  Henry,  Canadian  sena-
tor, b.  in  Compton,  Quebec,  11  Nov.,  1824.  He  re-
sided with  his  father  on  the  farm  until  he  was
eighteen  years  of  age,  when  he  went  to  Boston  and
engaged  in  the  shoe  business.  He  returned  to*
Canada  in  1854  and  established  the  same  business,
in  which  he  is  still  engaged,  being  head  of  the  firm
of  Cochrane,  Cassils  &  Co.  In  1864  he  became  an
importer  of  fine  breeds  of  cattle  and  horses.  He
is  a  trustee  of  Lenoxville  university,  a  member  of
the  council  of  agriculture  of  Quebec,  and  connect-
ed as  director  or  president  with  various  other  in-
dustrial and  financial  enterprises.  Politically  he
is  a  conservative,  and  he  was  called  to  the  Do-
minion senate,  on  17  Oct.,  1872.

COCHRANE,  William,  Canadian  clergyman,
b.  in  Paisley,  Scotland,  9  Feb.,  1831.  He  attended
the  parish  school  in  his  native  town  until  twelve


672


COCK


COCKE


years  of  age,  when  he  was  employed  in  a  book-
store, in  which  he  remained  for  about  ten  years,
and  then  entered  the  University  of  Glasgow.  He
emigrated  to  the  United  States  in  1854,  and  was
graduated  at  Hanover  college,  Indiana,  in  1857.
He  studied  theology  at  Princeton,  and  in  February,
1859,  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presbytery  of
Madison,  Ind.,  and  on  7  June  became  pastor  of  the
Scotch  Presbyterian  church,  Jersey  City,  N.  J.  On
13  May,  1862,  he  became  pastor  of  Zion  Presbyte-
rian church,  Brantford,  Ontario.  In  1864  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  M.  A.  from  Hanover  college,
and  in  1875  that  of  D,  D.  He  is  a  frequent  con-
tributor to  current  literature,  and  has  published
four  volumes  of  sermons,  "  The  Heavenly  Vision,"
"Christ  and  Christian  Life,"  "Warning' and  Wel-
come," and  "  Future  Punishment."

COCK,  Thomas,  physician,  b.  in  Glen  Cove,  L.
I.,  in  1782 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  14  June,  1869.
He  studied  medicine  in  company  with  Dr.  Valen-
tine Mott,  in  the  office  of  Dr.  Valentine  Seaman,
at  that  time  a  noted  practitioner,  whose  partner
he  afterward  became.  During  the  epidemic  of
yellow  fever,  in  1822,  he  was  untiring  in  his  efforts
to  overcome  the  disease ;  and  again,  during  the
cholera  of  1832,  his  devotion  was  recognized  by
the  city  authorities  in  the  presentation  of  a  ser-
vice of  silver.  In  his  long  career  he  occupied  va-
rious places  of  honor  and  importance  in  the  pro-
fession. He  was  visiting  physician  to  the  New
York  hospital  from  1819  till  1834,  and  consulting
physician  after  that  year ;  became  a  fellow  of  the
College  of  physicians  and  surgeons  in  1820  ;  was  its
vice-president  from  1827  until  1855 ;  its  president
from  1855  till  1858;  and  president  of  the  New
York  academy  of  medicine  in  1852.  He  was  also
professor  of  anatomy  and  physiology  in  Queen's
(now  Rutgers)  college,  N.  J.,  from  1812  till  1826.
Dr.  Cock  was  long  an  active  member,  and  at  his
death  a  vice-president,  of  the  American  Bible  so-
ciety. Infirmity  and  ill  health  compelled  him  to
retire  from  practice  some  years  before  his  death.

COCKBURN,  Alexander  Peter  (ko'-burn),  Ca-
nadian merchant,  b.  in  Finch,  Stormont,  Ontario,
7  April,  1837.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  town,
and  became  a  merchant  and  forwarder.  He  repre-
sented North  Victoria  in  the  Ontario  assembly  from
1867  till  1871,  and  has  represented  Muskoka  in  the
house  of  commons  since  1872.  While  in  parliament
he  labored  successfully  to  promote  a  vigorous  poli-
cy for  the  development  of  the  northern  districts  by
the  construction  of  railways  and  roads,  in  conjunc-
tion with  a  liberal  land  policy  for  actual  settlers.
Since  1865  he  has  written  extensively  on  the  sub-
ject. His  publications  include  "  A  Few  Weeks  in
the  North,"  the  "  Settler's  Guide,"  and  the  "  Tour-
ist's Guide  "  (1868).

COCKBURN,  Sir  George,  British  naval  officer,
b.  in  London,  22  April,  1772 ;  d.  19  Aug.,  1853.  He
entered  the  navy  in  his  ninth  year,  served  on  the
East  India,  home,  and  Mediterranean  stations,  be-
coming post-captain  in  1795,  and  was  thanked  by
the  house  of  commons  in  1809  for  his  services  as
commander  of  the  naval  force  on  shore,  in  the
operations  by  which  Martinique  came  into  the  pos-
session of  Great  Britain.  In  1811  he  was  sent  on
an  unsuccessful  mission  for  the  reconciliation  of
Spain  and  her  American  colonies.  He  became  a
rear-admiral  in  1812,  and  took  a  conspicuous  part
in  the  war  with  the  United  States.  In  April,  1813,
he  took  position  with  his  squadron  in  Ijyim  Haven
bay,  and  sent  off  marauding  expeditions  in  all  di-
rections to  the  coasts  of  Virginia,  Delaware,  and
Maryland.  He  deprived  three  villages  on  the
Chesapeake  of  property  worth  about  $70,000,  laid


many  towns  in  ashes,  burned  farm-houses,  and  car-
ried away  live  stock  and  slaves,  which  were  after-
ward sold  in  the  West  Indies  on  Cockburn's  own
account.  He  took  the  fortified  works  at  Hampton
on  26  June,  and  in  July  captured  two  islands  and
two  small  war-vessels  in  North  Carolina.  In  the
latter  part  of  the  year  he  sailed  as  far  as  the  Georgia
coast,  plundering  as  he  went.  In  August,  .1814,  he
accompanied  the  expedition  against"  the  city  of
Washington,  and,  in  conjunction  with  Gen.  Ross,
defeated  a  small  force  of  Americans  at  Bladens-
burg,  Md.,  four  miles  from  the  capital,  on  the  24th
of  that  month.  Cockburn  and  Ross  then  entered
the  city,  accompanied  by  a  guard  of  200  men,  and
burned  the  public  buildings  and  some  private  prop-
erty. Cockburn  was  concerned  in  the  unsuccessful
attempt  to  capture  Baltimore  in  September,  1814.
In  1815  he  received  the  order  of  the  bath,  and  in
the  autunm  of  that  year  carried  Napoleon  to  St.
Helena.  He  served  repeatedly  as  member  of  par-
liament and  as  lord  of  the  admiralty,  was  made
admiral  of  the  fleet  in  1851,  and  in  1852  inherited
a  baronetcv  from  his  brother.

COCKBURN,  George  Ralph  Richardson,  Ca-
nadian educator,  b.  in  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  15
Feb.,  1834.  He  was  educated  at  Edinburgh  high
school  and  at  the  university,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1857.  Subsequently  he  studied  in  France
and  Germany.  He  arrived"  in  Canada  in  1858,  was
soon  afterward  appointed  to  the  rectorship  of  the
model  grammar-school  of  Upper  Canada,  and  with-
in a  short  time  was  commissioned  to  inspect  the
higher  educational  institutions  of  the  province.
This  investigation  extended  over  a  period  of  two
years,  and  its  results  were  given  to  the  public  in
two  reports,  in  which  the  condition  of  the  schools
and  the  need  of  higher  educational  facilities  were
set  forth.  The  principal  institutions  of  learning
in  the  United  States  were  then  visited  by  Mr.
Cockburn.  In  1861  he  was  appointed  principal  of
Upper  Canada  college  and  a  member  of  the  senate
of  Toronto  university.  Under  his  management
the  college  has  obtained  a  high  reputation  not  only
for  the  thoroughness  of  its  teaching,  but  also  for
its  excellent  moral  influences.  He  is  regarded  as
a  thorough  philologist  and  one  of  the  best  Latin
scholars  that  Scotland  has  produced.

COCKBURN,  James,  Canadian  statesman,  b.
near  Berwick,  on  the  t^ottish  borders,  13  Feb.,
1819 ;  d.  in  Ottawa,  14  Aug.,  1883.  He  was  edu-
cated at  the  Berwick  grammar-school  and  at  Up-
per Canada  college,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted
to  the  Upper  Canada  bar  in  1846,  He  was  ap-
pointed solicitor-general  of  Upper  Canada  and  a
member  of  the  cabinet  in  March,  1864,  and  re-
tained those  offices  until  the  union  in  1867.  In
November  of  that  year  he  was  nnanimously  elected
first  speaker  of  the  Dominion  house  of  commons,
and  in  February,  1872,  was  chosen  speaker  of  the
second  parliament.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Que-
bec confederation  conference  in  1864.  He  was  a
liberal-conservative.

COCKE,  John  Hartwell,  b.  in  Surry  county,
Va.,  19  Sept.,  1780;  d.  in  Fluvanna  county,  Va.,  1
July,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  William  and  Mary
in  1798,  and  was  general  commanding  the  Virginia
troops  at  Camp  Carter  and  Camp  Holly,  on  the
Chickahominy,  in  1812  and  1813,  in  defence  of  the
city  of  Richinond.  He  was  vice-president  of  the
American  temperance  society  and  of  the  Americai:
colonization  society,  and  a  member  of  the  first
board  of  visitors  of  the  University  of  Virginia.

COCKE,  Philip  St.  Georgre,  soldier,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia in  1808;  d.  in  Powhatan  county,  Va.,  26
Dec,  1861. He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military


COCKE


CODDINGTON


673


academy  in  1832,  assigned  to  the  2d  artillery,  and
served  at  Charleston,  S.  C,  during  the  nullification
excitement  in  1832-'8.  He  was  adjutant  from
1833  till  1834,  and  resigned  on  1  April  of  the  lat-
ter year.  He  then  devoted  himself  to  planting  in
Virginia  and  Mississippi,  and  was  president  of  the
Virginia  state  agricultiiral  society  from  1853  till
185(5.  Pie  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  the
Confederate  service  early  in  18G1,  and  commanded
the  5th  brigade  at  the 'first  battle  of  Bull  Run.
After  an  eight  months'  campaign  he  returned
home,  shattered  in  body  and  mind,  and  shot  him-
self in  a  paroxysm  of  insanity.  He  published
"  Plantation  and  Farm  Instruction"  (1852).

COCKE,  William,  senator,  b.  in  Virginia  about
1740.  He  received  an  English  education  and  be-
gan the  practice  of  law.  After  serving  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  Virginia  legislature  and  a  colonel  of
militia  he  went  to  Tennessee,  where  he  became
brigadier-general  of  militia.  When  Tennessee  was
admitted  into  the  Union  in  1796,  Cocke  and  Will-
iam Blount  were  elected  as  its  first  U.  S.  senators.
Cocke  served  from  5  Dec,  1796,  till  1797,  and
again  from  1799  till  3  .March,  1805.  He  was  a
member  of  the  legislature  in  1813,  a  judge  of  the
circuit  court,  and  in  1814  appointed  by  President
Madison  Indian  agent  for  the  Chickasaw  nation.
The  date  of  his  death  is  not  on  record. — His  son,
John,  soldier,  b.  in  Brunswick,  Nottaway  co.,  Va.,
in  1772;  d.  in  Rutledge,  Granger  co.,  Tenn.,  16
Feb.,  1854.  He  went  with  his  father  to  Tennessee
early  in  life,  and,  after  receiving  a  common-school
education,  studied  law  and  was  admitted  to  the
bar.  He  was  a  member  of  the  first  legislature  in
1796,  speaker  of  the  house  for  many  years,  and
afterward  became  a  member  of  the  state  senate.
He  was  made  major-general  of  the  East  Tennessee
six-months'  volunteers  on  25  Sept.,  1813,  com-
manding them  in  the  Creek  war,  was  made  colonel
of  a  regiment  of  Tennessee  volunteers  on  13  Nov.,
1814,  and  served  under  Jackson  at  New  Orleans.
He  was  elected  to  congress  for  four  successive
terras,  serving  from  6  Dec,  1819,  till  3  March,
1827,  after  which  he  devoted  himself  to  planting.

COCKRELL,  Francis  Marion,  senator,  b.  in
Johnson  county.  Mo.,  1  Oct.,  1834.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Chapel  Hill,  Mo.,  in  1853,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  in  Warrens-
burg.  He  entered  the  Confederate  army,  where  he
rose  to  be  a  colonel,  commanding  the  1st  Missouri
brigade  under  Gen.  Bowen,  which  was  routed  at
Baker's  Creek,  and  he  was  afterward  commissioned
a  brigadier-general.  He  never  held  a  public  office
until  elected  as  a  democratic  senator  in  congress
from  Missouri,  to  succeed  Carl  Schurz,  taking  his
seat  on  4  March,  1875.  He  was  re-elected  in  1880
for  the- term  expiring  3  March,  1887.

CODAZZI,  A^ostine  (ko-dat'-see),  Italian  en-
gineer, b.  in  Lugo,  Italy,  in  1792;  d.  in  1859.  He
made  several  campaigns  under  Napoleon,  and  af-
terward distinguished  himself  as  an  engineer  in
South  America.  He  went  to  Santa  Fe  de  Bogota
about  1826,  entered  the  Colombian  service  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  artillery,  and  was  employed  in
making  charts  and  preparing  plans  of  defence.
Gen.  Paez  appointed  him  in  1831  to  prepare  charts
of  the  new  republic  of  Venezuela,  and  he  was  occu-
pied until  1840  with  this  work,  taking  part  twice
during  that  time  in  defensive  military  expeditions.
In  1838  and  1839  he  conducted  an  exploration  to
the  interior  of  Guiana,  penetrating  nearly  to  the
sources  of  the  Orinoco.  He  was  made  a  colonel  in
the  Venezuelan  army,  afterward  established  a  Ger-
man colony  in  the  republic  find  in  1848  was  em-
ployed by  the  government  of  New  Granada  upon
VOL.  I.— 43


a  topographical  survey.  During  his  later  explora-
tions he  visited  the  isthmus  of  Panama  to  ascer-
tain the  possibility  of  cutting  a  canal  through  it.
Col.  Codazzi  published  "  Resiimen  de  la  Geografia
de  Venezuela,"  with  an  extensive  chart  of  the
country  (Paris,  1841),  and  other  works.

COI)DING,  Ichabod,  clergvman,  b.  in  Bristol,
N.  Y.,  in  1811 ;  d.  in  Baraboo,  Wis.,  17  June,  1866.
He  became  a  popular  temperance  lecturer  at  the
age  of  seventeen,  and  during  his  junior  year  at
Middlebury,  where  he  entered  in  1834,  interested
himself  so  much  in  the  anti-slavery  movement  that
he  obtained  leave  to  speak  publicly  in  its  behalf.
His  addresses  raised  such  a  storm  of  opposition  that
his  life  was  several  times  in  danger,  and  the  col-
lege faculty,  fearing  the  popular  fury,  represented
that  his  absence  was  without  permission.  Codding
compelled  them  to  retract  this  statement,  and  then,
leaving  the  college,  served  for  five  years  as  agent
and  lecturer  of  the  Anti-slavery  society,  speaking
continually  in  New  England  and  New  York.  It  is
said  that  he  never  lost  his  self-command,  though
often  assailed  by  mobs.  He  removed  to  the  west
in  1842,  entered  the  Congregational  ministry,  and
held  pastorates  in  Princeton,  Lockport,  Joliet,  and
elsewhere.  He  also  continued  to  lecture  in  the
west,  where  he  was  greatly  admired  and  loved,

CODDINGTON,  William,  founder  of  the  colo-
ny of  Rhode  Island,  b.  in  Lincolnshire,  England,
in  1601 ;  d.  1  Nov.,  1678.  He  was  one  of  the  Mas-
sachusetts magistrates  appointed  by  the  crown,
and  arrived  at  Salem  in  the  ship  "  Arabella,"  in
1630.  While  exercising  his  judicial  functions,  he
traded  as  a  merchant  in  Boston,  and  accumulated
real  estate  at  Braintree.  With  Gov.  Vane,  he
sympathized  with  the  Antinomian  party,  and  at
the  general  election  of  May,  1637,  when  Winthrop
superseded  Vane  as  governor,  Coddington's  name
was  dropped  from  the  roll,  but  on  the  following
day  both  he  and  Vane  were  elected  deputies  to  the
court  from  Boston.  When  Mrs.  Hutchinson  was
tried,  Coddington  undertook  her  defence  against
Winthrop  and  his  party,  and  also  unsuccessfully
opposed  the  banishment  of  Wheelwright  and  other


Antinomians.  Wishing  to  enjoy  peace,  eighteen
of  the  party,  led  by  Coddington  and  John  Clark,
removed  in  1638,  intending  to  settle  on  Long  Isl-
and, or  Delaware  bay,  but,  by  the  advice  of  Roger
Williams,  selected  the  island  of  Aquidneck,  now
Rhode  Island,  for  their  home.  Having  drawn  up
and  signed  an  agreement  to  be  "  judged  and  guided
by  the  absolute  laws  of  Christ,"  Coddington  was
elected  judge  or  chief  magistrate,  with  a  council
of  three  elders,  who  were  enjoined  by  a  vote  of  the
freemen  to  be  guided  by  God's  laws.  At  a  general
election,  held  in  Newport,  12  March,  1640,  the  titles
of  judge  and  elder  were  abolished,  and  Coddington
was  elected  governor,  with  a  deputy  and  four  as-
sistants. He  continued  in  office  until  a  charter


674


CODMAN


COFFIN


was  obtained  and  the  island  incorporated  with  the
Providence  plantations  in  1647,  when  John  Co^ges-
hall  became  president  of  the  colony,  and  Codding-
ton  was  chosen  assistant  from  Newport.  He  was
made  president  in  1648,  but  did  not  enter  on  the
duties  of  the  office.  At  this  time,  owing  to  the
disturbed  state  of  the  colony,  he  formed  the  pro-
ject of  withdrawing  the  island  of  Aquidneck  from
its  rule.  In  September,  with  Capt.  Partridge,  he
presented  a  petition  begging  that  the  island  might
be  received  into  a  league  with  the  united  New
England  colonies,  which  was  refused,  on  the
ground  that  Aquidneck  rightfully  belonged  to
Plymouth.  Failing  in  his  designs,  Coddington
went  to  England  in  1649,  and,  after  a  delay  of  two
years,  obtained  from  the  council  of  state  a  commis-
sion to  govern  the  islands  of  Rhode  Island  and
Conanicut  during  his  life.  In  the  autumn  of  that
year  the  colonists,  including  those  of  Newport  and
Portsmouth,  urged  Roger  Williams  and  John  Clark
to  go  to  England  to  secure  the  revocation  of  Cod-
dington's  commission.  This  they  succeeded  in
doing  in  October,  1652,  and  Coddington's  "  usurpa-
tion "  was  at  an  end.  But  he  refused  to  give  up
the  records,  and  it  was  not  until  1655  that  he
formally  submitted  to  the  colony.  He  united  with
the  Quakers  in  1665,  and  in  1674  was  chosen  gov-
ernor of  the  colony.  He  was  re-elected  in  1675,
and  again  in  1678,  just  before  his  death.  He  pub-
lished "Demonstration  of  True  Love  unto  the
Rulers  of  Massachusetts,  by  one  who  was  in  au-
thority with  them"  (1674).  There  is  an  alleged
portrait  of  Gov.  Coddington  in  the  council-cham-
ber at  Newport.  The  accompanying  illustration  is
a  representation  of  his  house  at  Newport.  See
"William  Coddington  in  Rhode  Island  Colonial
Affairs"  (No.  4  of  "Rhode  Island  Historical
Tracts,"  Providence,  1878).

CODMAN,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  3  Aug.,  1782;  d.  in  Dorchester,  23  Dec,
1847.  His  father.  John,  was  a  "Boston  merchant
and  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  senate.  Young
Codman  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1802,  and
began  the  study  of  law ;  but,  in  accordance  with
his  father's  dying  wish,  he  abandoned  it  for  the-
ology. After  studying  at  Cambridge,  Mfiss.,  he
went  to  Edinburgh,  Scotland,  in  1805,  and  spent
three  years  abroad,  during  the  last  of  which  he
preached  at  the  Scotch  church  in  Swallow  street,
London.  He  returned  to  the  United  States  in
May,  1808,  and  in  December  became  pastor  of  the
recently  organized  second  church  at  Dorchester,
Mass.,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  During
the  early  part  of  his  pastorate  he  caused  dissatis-
faction in  his  congregation  by  refusing  to  exchange
with  clergymen  whose  orthodoxy  was  doubtful,
and  this  finally  led  to  the  organization  of  a  new
church.  The  excitement  produced  by  his  course
was  so  great  that  he  was  on  one  occasion  forcibly
kept  out  of  his  pulpit.  In  1834-'5  Dr.  Codman
was  a  ,  delegate  to  the  Congregational  union  of
England  and  Wales,  and  he  again  visited  Europe
in  1845.  He  inherited  wealth  from  his  father,  and
gave  freely.  Among  his  gifts  were  a  large  sum  of
money  to  Princeton  theological  seminary,  and  his
library  of  several  thousand  volumes  to  Andover.
Dr.  Codman  published  numerous  sermons,  many
of  which  were  afterward  collected  in  a  volume
(1834),  and  "  A  Visit  to  England  "  (1836).  A  memoir
by  Dr.  William  Allen,  with  six  select  sermons,  was
published  after  his  death  (1853). — His  son,  John,  b.
in  Dorchester,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1814,  left  Amherst
in  his  junior  year,  1833,  and  finished  his  education
on  the  sea,  becoming  a  captain  in  the  merchant
marine. He  has  travelled  widely,  and  is  known  as


an  advocate  of  free  ships  and  free-trade.  He  has
contributed  to  periodicals,  and  published  "  Sailors'
Life  and  Sailors'  Yarns"  (New  York,  1846) ;  " Ten
Months  in  Brazil "  (1872);  "  The  Mormon  Country"
(1876) ;  and  "  The  Round  Trip  "  (1881).

CODY,  William  Frederick,  scout,  b.  in  Scott
county,  Iowa,  26  Feb.,  1845.  When  he  was  about
seven  years  old  his  father  removed  to  Kansas,  then
an  unsettled  territory,  where  he  was  killed  in  what
was  known  as  the  "  Border  war."  When  the  pony
express  was  established  across  the  plains  in  the
spring  of  1860,  William  became  one  of  the  most
fearless  and  daring  among  its  riders.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  acted  as  government
scout  and  guide,  being  chiefly  employed  in  Arkan-
sas and  southwestern  Missouri.  In  1863  he  enlist-
ed in  the  7th  Kansas  cavalry,  was  promoted,  and
served  with  distinction  as  scout  until  the  close  of
the  war.  In  1867  he  entered  into  a  contract  with
the  Kansas  Pacific  railway  in  western  Kansas,  at
a  monthly  compensation  of  $500,  to  deliver  all  the
buffalo  meat  that  would  be  required  for  food  for  the
army  of  laborers  employed,  and  in  eighteen  months
he  killed  4,280  buffaloes,  earning  the  title  of  "  Buf-
falo Bill,"  by  which  he  was  afterward  familiarly
known.  Cody  again  entered  the  government  ser-
vice in  1868  as  a  scout  and  guide,  and  after  a  series
of  dangerous  rides  as  bearer  of  important  des-
patches through  a  country  infested  with  hostile
Indians,  was  appointed  by  Oen.  Sheridan  chief
scout  and  guide  for  the  5th  cavalry  against  the
Sioux  and  Cheyennes.  He  then  served  with  the
Canadian  river  expedition  during  1868-'9,  and  until
the  autumn  of  1872  was  with  the  army  on  the
western  border.  In  1872  he  was  elected  a  member
of  the  Nebraska  legislature,  but,  after  serving  a
short  time,  resigned,  and  made  a  successful  appear-
ance on  the  stage  in  Chicago.  At  the  beginning
of  the  Sioux  war  in  1876  he  discharged  his  dra-
matic company,  joined  the  5th  cavalry,  and  was
engaged  in  the  battle  of  Indian  Creek,  where  he
killed  in  a  hand-to-hand  conflict  the  Cheyenne
chief  Yellow-Hand.  At  the  close  of  the  campaign
he  returned  to  the  stage,  and  in  1883  organized
an  exhibition  called  the  "  Wild  West,"  whose  ob-
ject was  to  give  a  realistic  picture  of  life  on  the
frontier.  His  actors  included  actual  Indians,
Mexicans,  and  "  cowboys,"  and  in  1886  he  con-
tracted to  take  his  company  to  Europe  during  1887.

COFFIN,  Charles  Carleton,  author,  b.  in
Boscawen,  N.  H.,  26  July,  1823.  He  worked  on
his  father's  farm  till  he  was  of  age.  His  means  of
education  were  limited,  but  he  was  so  desirous  to
acquire  knowledge  that  he  studied  at  night.  He
worked  as  a  civil  engineer  from  1845  till  1848,  and
then  bought  a  farm,  but  abandoned  it  on  account
of  failing  health.  He  then  gave  his  attention  to
telegraphy,  constructed  the  time  line  between  Har-
vard observatory  and  Boston,  in  1849,  and,  when  in
charge  of  the  Boston  telegraphic  fire-alarm,  sent
out  the  first  signal  over  the  system,  29  April,  1852.
After  writing  for  some  of  the  New  Hampshire  pa-
pers, he  began  contributing  to  the  Boston  press  in
1851,  spending  much  time  upon  his  articles,  some
of  which  he  rewrote  ten  times  before  sending  them
to  the  printer.  From  1855  till  1860  he  held  vari-
ous places  on  the  Boston  "  Journal,"  the  "  Atlas,"
and  the  "  Traveller."  When  the  civil  war  began,
Mr.  Coffin  became  war-correspondent  for  the
"  Journal,"  writing  under  the  pen-name  of  "  Carle-
ton."  He  witnessed  many  important  battles,  and
was  in  almost  every  engagement  from  the  Wilder-
ness to  the  taking  of  Richmond,  often  rendering
important  service  to  the  military  authorities  by  his
knowledge  of  engineering. He  was  also  the  "  Jour-


COFFIN


COFFIN


675


nal's  "  correspondent  during  the  Prusso-Austrian
war  of  1866,  and  at  its  completion  made  the  circuit
of  the  world,  returning  part  of  the  way  from  San
Francisco  by  stage,  the  Pacific  railroad  not  being
completed.  During  his  travels,  which  lasted  two
and  a  half  years,  Mr.  Coffin  wrote  a  weekly  letter
to  the  Boston  "  Journal."  He  has  lectured  before
the  Lowell  institute,  and  was  for  years  a  popular
lyceura  lecturer.  He  has  also  appeared  several
times  before  congressional  committees,  to  present
arguments  on  the  labor  question.  Pie  has  been  for
some  time  a  resident  of  Boston,  and  v/as  a  member
of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  in  1884  and  1885,
serving  on  important  committees.  He  has  pub-
lished "'  The  Great  Commercial  Prize,"  advocating
the  construction  of  a  railway  over  the  Northern
Pacific  route  (18o8) ;  "  Days  and  Nights  on  the  Bat-
tle-Field  "  (Boston,  1864) ;  "  Following  the  Flag  "
and  "  Winning  His  VVav,"  a  story  (1865) ;  "  Four
Years  of  Fighting  "  (1866) ;  "  Our  New  Way  Round
the  World  "  (1869) ;  "  The  Seat  of  Empire  "  (1870) ;
"  Caleb  Krinkle,  a  Story  of  American  Life  "  (1875) ;
"Historv  of  Boscawen"  (1877);  "Boys  of  '76"
(New  York,  1879);  "Story  of  Liberty"  (1878);
"Old  Times  in  the  Colonies"  (1880):  "Life  of
Garfield  "  (Boston,  1880) ;  "  Building  the  Nation  "
(New  York,  1883);  and  "Drum-Beat  of  the  Na-
tion," the  first  volume  of  a  series  (1887).

COFFIN,  John  Huntington  Crane,  mathe-
matician, b.  in  Wiscasset,  Me.,  14  Sept.,  1815.  He
was  graduated  at  Bowdoin  in  1834.  Two  years
later  he  was  appointed  professor  of  mathematics
in  the  U.  S.  navv,  and  in  that  capacity  served  on
the  "  Vandalia  and  the  "  Constellation,"  in  the
West  India  squadron,  at  Norfolk  navy-yard,  and
on  the  Florida  surveys,  until  1843,  when  he  was
placed  in  charge  of  the  mural  circle  in  the  U.  S.
naval  observatory  in  Washington.  After  1853  he  was
intrusted  with  the  department  of  mathematics,  and
subsequently  that  of  astronomy  and  navigation,  at
the  U.  S.  naval  academy.  In  1865  he  was  appoint-
ed to  the  charge  of  the  "  American  Ephemeris  and
Nautical  Almanac."  then  published  in  Cambridge,
Mass.,  but  since  1867  in  Washington,  D.  C.  In
this  capacity  he  remained  until  1877,  when  he  was
placed  on  the  retired  list,  having  been  senior  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  since  1848.  Prof.  Coffin  is
a  member  of  the  American  academy  of  sciences,
Boston,  the  American  philosophical  society,  Phila-
delphia, and  was  one  of  the  original  members  of
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  In  1884  he  re-
ceived the  honorary  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Bow-
doin. Besides  many  smaller  articles,  he  has  pub-
lished "  Observations  with  the  Mural  Circle  at  the
U.  S.  Naval  Observatory,  with  Explanations,  For-
mulas, Tables,  and  Discussions,  1845-9,"  in  the  vol-
umes of  the  observatory  for  those  years ;  "  The
Compass,"  local  deviations  (1863);  "Navigation
and  Nautical  Astronomy  "  (New  York,  1868),  the
last  two  having  been  prepared  for  use  in  the  U.  S.
naval  academv ;  "  The  American  Ephemeris  and
Nautical  Almanac,"  edited  (1868  till  1879);  also
"Personal  Errors  in  Observations  of  the  Declina-
tion of  Stars  "  in  "  Gould's  Astronomical  Journal  "
(1850) ;  and  "  Observations  of  the  Total  Eclipse  of
the  Sun,  August,  1869  "  (Washington,  1884).

COFFIN,  Joshua,  antiquarv,  b.  in  Newbury,
Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1792 ;  d.  there,  24  June.  ia64.  lie
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1817,  and  taught
for  many  years,  numbering  among  his  pupils  the
poet  Whittier,  who  addressed  to  him  a  poem  enti-
tled "  To  My  Old  School-Master."  Mr.  Coffin  was
ardent  in  the  cause  of  emancipation,  and  was  one
of  the  founders  of  the  New  England  anti-slavery
society  in  1832,  being  its  first  recording  secretary.


He  published  "  The  History  of  Ancient  Newbury"
(Boston,  1845),  genealogies*  of  the  Woodman,  Lit-
tle, and  Toppan  families,  and  magazine  articles.

COFFIN,  Levi,  philanthropist,  b.  near  New
Garden,  N.  C,  28  Oct.,  1798;  d.  in  Avondale,  Ohio,
16  Sept.,  1877.  His  ancestors  were  natives  of  Nan-
tucket. He  assisted  on  his  father's  farm  and  had
but  little  schooling,  yet  he  became  a  teacher.  The
cruel  treatment  of  the  negroes,  and  the  Quakers
principles  under  which  he  was  reared,  enlisted  his
sympathies  in  favor  of  the  oppressed  race,  and  at
the  age  of  fifteen  he  began  to  aid  in  the  escape  of
slaves.  Subsequently  he  organized  a  Sunday-school
for  negroes,  and  in  1822  opened  his  first  school.
In  1826  he  settled  in  Wayne  county,  Ind.,  where  he
kept  a  country  store.  Being  prosperous  in  this
undertaking,  he  soon  enlarged  his  business  in  vari-
ous lines,  including  also  the  curing  of  pork.  In
1836  he  built  an  oil-mill  and  began  the  manufac-
ture of  linseed-oil.  Meanwhile  his  interest  in  the
slaves  continued,  and  he  was  active  in  the  "  under-
ground railroad,"  a  secret  organization,  whose  pur-
pose was  the  transportation  of  slaves  from  member
to  member  until  a  place  was  reached  where  the
negro  was  free.  Thousands  of  escaping  slaves
were  aided  on  their  way  to  Canada  by  him,  in-
cluding Eliza  Harris,  who  subsequently  became
known  through  "  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin."  The  ques-
tion of  using  only  "  free-labor  goods  "  had  been  for
some  time  agitated  throughout  the  United  States,
and  in  1846  a  coruvention  was  held  in  Salem,  Ind.,
at  which  Mr.  Coffin  was  chosen  to  open  such  a
store  in  Cincinnati.  Accordingly  he  moved  to  that
city  in  April,  1847.  The  undertaking  proved  suc-
cessful, and  he  continued  to  be  so  occupied  for
many  years.  His  relations  with  the  "  underground
railroad  "  were  also  continued,  and  he  became  its
president.  In  1863  he  was  associated  in  the  estab-
lishment of  the  freedmen's  bureau,  and  during  the
following  year  was  sent  to  Europe  as  agent  for  the
Western  freedmen's  aid  commission.  He  held
meetings  in  all  of  the  prominent  cities  in  Great
Britain,  enlisted  much  sympathy,  and  secured
funds.  Again  in  1867  he  visited  Europe  in  the
same  capacity.  When  the  colored  people  of  Cin-
cinnati celebrated  the  adoption  of  the  fifteenth
amendment  to  the  United  States  constitution,  he
formally  resigned  his  office  of  president  of  the
"underground  railroad,"  which  he  had  held  for
more  than  thirty  years.  The  story  of  his  life  is
told  in  "  Reminiscences  of  Levi  Coffin,  the  Reputed
President  of  the  Underground  Railroad "  (Cin-
cinnati, 1876).

COFFIN,  Robert  Allen,  educator,  b.  in  Will-
iamsburg, Mass.,  23  Aug.,  1801 ;  d.  in  Conway,
Mass.,  4  Sept.,  1878.  He  was  graduated  at  Am-
herst in  1825,  after  which  he  taught  in  North-
ampton, and  became  principal  of  academies  in
New  Ipswich,  N.  H.,  Warren,  R.  I.,  New  Bed-
ford, Mass.,  and  elsewhere.  His  last  years  were
spent  in  Conway,  Mass.,  where  he  was  chiefly  em-
ployed as  an  accountant,  though  giving  instruc-
tion almost  to  the  last.  In  1856-'7  he  represented
Conway  in  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  Mr.
Coffin  was  an  occasional  contributor  to  the  relig-
ious magazines,  and  published  "  Compendium  of
Natural  Philosophy "  (New  York,  1844) ;  "  I'own
Organization :  its  Uses  and  Advantages,"  a  prize
essay  (Boston,  1845);  and  "History  of  Conway"
(Northampton,  1867).— His  brother,  James  Henry,
meteorologist,  b.  in  Williamsburg,  Mass.,  6  Sept.,
1806 ;  d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  6  Feb.,  1873.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Amherst  in  1828,  supporting  himself  by
teaching  in  a  private  school  in  Berkshire  county.
In  1829  he  established  the  Fellenberg  academ3^  in


676


COFFIN


COFFIN


Greenfield,  Mass.,  the  first  and  most  successful
manual-labor  school  in  the  country.  From  1887
till  1840  he  was  principal  of  the  Ogdensburg,  N.
Y.,  academy,  and  while  there  he  began  his  investi-
gations in  meteorology.  In  1840  he  was  elected  a
tutor  in  Williams,  and  erected  an  observatory  upon
the  Grreylock  peak  of  Saddle  mountain,  at  a  height
of  nearly  4,000  feet  above  the  ocean,  where  continu-
ous observations  were  taken  by  a  self-registering
anemometer  which  he  devised.  From  1843  till
184G  he  was  principal  of  the  Norwalk,  Conn.,  acad-
emy, and  then  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  mathe-
matics and  astronomy  in  Lafayette  college,  Fast-
en, Pa.,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.  Prof.
Coffin's  reputation  depends  chiefly  upon  his  work
in  meteorology.  In  1858  he  announced  before  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence his  theory  of  atmospheric  circulation,  includ-
ing the  principle,  quoted  in  Europe  since  1860  as
"  Buys-Ballot's  Law."  Besides  the  numerous  val-
uable papers  published  in  the  transactions  and
proceedings  of  the  societies  of  which  he  was  a
member,  there  appeared  among  the  publications
of  the  Smithsonian  institution  "  Winds  of  the
Northern  Hemisphere  "  (1858) ;  *'  Psychrometrical
Tables"  (1856);  "  The  Orbit  and  Phenomena  of  a
Meteoric  Fire  Ball "  (1869) ;  and  "  The  Winds  of
the  Globe,  or  the  Laws  of  Atmospheric  Circula-
tion over  the  Surface  of  the  Earth  "  (1875).  The
two  large  quarto  volumes  of  the  "  Results  of  Me-
teorological Observations  for  1854-'9 "  were  ed-
ited for  the  Smithsonian  institution  by  him.  He
also  published  "  Exercises  in  Book-keeping  "  and
"Key"  (Greenfield,  1885);  "Elements  of  Conic
Sections  and  Analytical  Geometry"  (New  York,
1849);  "Key"  (18b4);  and  "Solar  and  Lunar
Eclipses"  (1845).  Prof.  Coffin  was  one  of  the
early  members  of  the  National  academy  of  scien-
ces, and  a  sketch  of  his  life  by  Arnold  Guyot
appears  in  the  "  Biographical  Memoirs  of  the  Na-
tional Academy  of  Sciences "  (Washington,  1877).
See  also  "  Life  "  by  John  C.  Clyde  (Easton,  1882).—
His  son,  Seidell  Jennings,  educator,  b.  in  Og-
densburg, N.  Y.,  8  Aug.,  1888,  was  graduated  at
Lafayette  in  1858,  and  at  Princeton  theological
seminary  in  1864.  During  the  same  year  he  be-
came connected  with  Lafayette  college,  where  he
has  held  the  offices  of  tutor  and  adjunct  professor
of  mathematics.  On  the  death  of  his  father  in
1878  he  became  professor  of  mathematics  and
astronomy,  and  in  1874  was  ordained  by  the  pres-
bytery of  Lehigh.  In  1876  he  was  commissioned
by  the  state  of  Pennsylvania  to  secure  the  "col-
lege exhibits  "  for  the  educational  building  at  the
Centennial  exhibition.  Prof.  Coffin  has  served  on
various  committees  of  the  American  association
for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  has  been  a
frequent  contributor  to  the  scientific  journals  of
articles  on  meteorology.  Besides  minor  biographi-
cal pamphlets,  he  has  published  "Record  of  the
Men  of  Lafayette"  (Easton,  1879).  and  revised
"Olmsted's  Astronomy"  (New  York,  1882).  He
has  also  completed  "  The  Winds  of  the  Globe "
(Washington,  1875),  written  by  his  father,  said  to
be  the  largest  collection  of  numerical  tables  ever
published  in  the  United  States.

COFFIN,  Robert  Barry,  author,  b.  in  Hudson,
N.  Y.,  21  July,  1826;  d.  in  Fordham,  New  York
city,  10  June,  1886.  He  was  seventh  in  line  of  de-
scent from  Tristram,  and  his  great-grandfather,
Alexander  Coffin,  was  one  of  the  original  proprie-
tors of  Hudson,  He  became  fond  of  books  at  an
early  age,  spending  his  savings  for  them,  and  at
the  age  of  ten  owned  a  small  library.  He  spent
several  years  at  the  collegiate  institute  in  Pough-


keepsie,  N.  Y.,  and  soon  began  to  contribute  anony-
mously to  various  journals.  In  1845  he  becan'ie
book-keeper  in  an  importing  house  in  New  York
city,  but  left  on  account  of  failing  health  in  1849,
and  in  1852  opened  a  book-store  with  his  brother
in  Elmira,  N.  Y.  He  studied  divinity  in  1854,  in-
tending to  take  orders  in  the  Protestant  Episcojwl
church,  and  at  this  time  was  a  contributor  to  the
"Churchman."  He  went  to  New  York  again  in
1857,  and  in  1858  succeeded  T.  B.  Aid  rich  as  assist-
ant editor  of  the  "  Home  Journal,"  to  which  he
had  contributed  since  1849,  becoming  at  the  same
time  art  critic  for  the  "  Evening  Post."  He  was
appointed  a  clerk  in  the  auditor's  department  of
the  New  York  custom-house  in  April,  1868,  and  re-
tained the  office  till  the  winter  before  his  death,
with  the  exception  of  the  years  from  1869  till  1875.
He  edited  "  The  Table,"  a  monthly  publication  de-
voted to  gastronomy,  in  1878,  and  from  1882  till
1886  contributed  regularly  on  the  same  subject  to
the  "  Caterer,"  a  Philadelphia  magazine.  Mr.  Cof-
fin's humorous  sketches,  published  in  various  pe-
riodicals over  the  signature  of  "  Barry  Gray,"  have
been  widely  read.  In  1881  he  delivered  some
verses  at  the  reunion  of  the  Coffin  family  in  Nan-
tucket. He  published  "  My  Married  Life  at  Hill-
side "  and  "  Matrimonial  Infelicities  "  (New  York,
1865) ;  "  Out  of  Town :  A  Rural  Episode  "  (1866) ;
"  Cakes  and  Ale  at  Woodbine  "  (1868) ;  "  Castles  in
the  Air  and  other  Phantasies  "  (1871) ;  and  "  The
Home  of  Cooper  "  (1872).  He  left  a  completed  book
in  manuscript.

COFFIN,  Robert  Stevenson,  poet,  b.  in  Brans-
wick,  Me.,  14  July,  1797;  d.  in  Rowley,  Mass.,  7
May,  1827.  His  father,  Ebenezer  Coffin,  was  a
minister  in  Brunswick.  Robert  removed  with  his
father  to  Newburyport,  became  a  printer  there,
and  afterward  worked  at  his  trade  in  Boston,  New
York,  and  Philadelphia.  He  served  as  a  sailor  in
the  war  of  1812,  and  was  once  a  prisoner  on  board  a
British  frigate.  He  began  to  write  poetry  early  in
life,  and  printed  it  in  the  papers  on  which  he  was
employed  over  the  signature  of  "  The  Boston  Bard."
Becoming  intemperate,  he  was  found  in  sickness
and  poverty  in  New  York  in  1826,  and  sent  by
some  benevolent  ladies  to  his  family  in  Massachu-
setts, where  he  died.  He  published  an  autobiog-
raphy (1825)  and  "The  Oriental  Harp:  Poems  of
the  Boston  Bard  "  (Providence,  R.  I.,  1826).  Among
the  more  notable  verses  in  this  book  are  "  On  Pre-
senting a  Lady  with  a  Cake  of  Soap,"  "  To  a  Mouse
which  Took  Lodgings  with  the  Author  in  a  Public
House  near  the  Park,  New  York,"  and  "  A  Large
Nose  and  an  Old  Coat."

COFFIN,  Roland  Folder,  sailor,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y,  8  March.  1826;  d.  on  Shelter  island,
N.  Y.,  17  July,  1888.  He  was  educated  in  Nan-
tucket, Mass.,' and  Brooklyn.  Much  of  his  youth
was  passed  in  the  former  place,  and  he  went  to  sea,
as  most  of  his  family  had  done  for  generations.
He  was  captain  of  the  ship  "  Senator  "  from  1850
till  1860,  when  he  became  an  acting  master  in  the
U.  S.  navy,  and  served  as  such,  mostly  in  the
North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron  during  the
civil  war,  until  1868.  In  his  hours  off  duty  at  sea
he  learned  and  practised  short-hand  writing.  He
became  a  reporter  for  the  "  World  "  newspaper  in
New  Yerk  in  1869,  and  soon  began  to  publish  a
series  of  short  sea-stories  entitled  "An  Old  Sailors
Yarns."  These  attracted  attention  and  gave  him
a  name  in  literature.  He  was  also  the  regular  re-
porter of  marine  news  and  of  yachting,  and  in  this
latter  department  was  for  many  years  the  most  ex-
pert writer  connected  with  the  New  York  press.
Two  volumes  of  "An  Old  Sailor's  Yarns"  have


COFFIN


COFFIN


677


been  published  (New  York,  1878-'82),  and  "The
America's  Cup,"  giving  an  account  of  the  interna-
tional yachting  contests  (New  York,  1885).  He
has  also  published  a  "  History  of  American  Yacht-
ing "  in  the  monthly  magazine  "  Outing,"  which
was  issued  in  book-form  (New  York,  1880).

COFFIN,  Timothy  Gardner,  lawyer,  b.  in  Nan-
tucket, Mass.,  1  Nov.,  1788 ;  d.  in  New  Bedford,
Mass.,  19  Sept.,  1854.  He  early  engaged  in  a  sea-
faring life,  but,  receiving  severe  injuries  from  a
fall,  turned  his  attention  to  the  law.  He  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1813,  was  admitted  to  the
Bristol  bar  in  1810,  and  obtained  the  foremost  rank
in  the  profession,  trying  his  intellectual  strength
against  such  opponents  as  Webster  and  Choate.
He  was  judge  advocate  of  Massachusetts  militia
under  Gen.  Lincoln.  As  a  nisi  prius  lawyer  he
had  few  equals.

COFFIN,  Tristram,  colonist,  b.  in  Brixton,
Devonshire,  England,  in  1005;  d.  in  Nantucket.
Mass.,  in  1081.  He  is  considered  the  ancestor  of
all  the  persons  bearing  this  name  in  the  United
States.  In  1642  he  came  to  America  with  his  wife
and  a  number  of  relatives  and  lived  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  and  in  1659  took  up  his  residence  in  Nan-
tucket, of  which  colony  he  was  the  founder  and
the  first  chief  magistrate.  The  character  of  Tris-
tram, his  wisdom  in  civilizing  the  Indians,  and
his  numerous  descendants,  entitle  him  to  mention,
especially  as  Judith,  daughter  of  his  son  Stephen,
v/as  the  grandmother  of  Benjamin  Franklin.  His
life  was  published  by  Allen  Coffin  (Nantucket,
1881).— John,  loyalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  in  1750 ;
d.  in  Kings  county,  N.  B.,  in  1838.  He  was  de-
scended from  Tristram  through  James  and  Will-
iam, who,  born  in  Nantucket,  settled  in  Boston
about  1730.  He  was  educated  at  the  Boston  Latin-
school,  and,  for  his  services  in  the  battle  of  Bunker
Hill,  was  appointed  ensign  on  the  field  by  Gage.
He  raised  400  men  in  New  York,  who  became
known  as  the  Orange  rangers,  and  commanded
thom  at  the  battles  of  Long  Island  and  German-
town.  He  exchanged  into  the  New  York  volun-
teers in  1778,  and  took  part  at  San  Lucie  and  Bry-
ar's  Creek  in  1779,  at  Camden  in  1780,  and  in  1781
at  Hampton,  Hobkirk's  Hill,  and  Eutaw  Springs.
In  all  these  engagements  Coffin's  cavalry  is  men-
tioned with  praise,  and  his  daring,  judgment,  and
estimable  character  as  a  cavalry  officer  are  highly
commended.  Cornwallis  sent  him  a  handsome
sword  in  acknowledgment  of  his  services,  enclos-
ing his  commission  as  major,  thanking  him  for  his
carriage  and  conduct  on  many  occasions,  and  es-
pecially giving  him  acknowledgment  for  distin-
guishing himself  at  Eutaw.  The  promotion  he
had  earned  was  deferred  by  his  feeling  obliged  to
report  the  want  of  firmness  in  battle  of  a  scion  of
the  royal  house.  He  settled  at  his  manor  of  Al-
wington.  New  Brunswick,  and  became  prominent  in
developing  that  province.  When  the  occasion  came
he  resumed  his  military  rank,  and  was  appointed
major-general.  At  his  death  he  was  the  senior
general  in  the  British  army.  All  of  his  branch  of
the  name  were  refugee  loyalists.  Notwithstanding
his  choice  of  sides  in  the  revolution,  he  never  lost
his  interest  in  the  "  old  thirteen,"  and  he  remem-
bered that  he  was  "  Boston-born "  from  first  to
last.  One  of  his  many  sayings  was,  "  I  would  give
more  for  one  pork-barrel  made  in  Massachusetts
than  for  all  that  have  been  made  in  New  Bruns-
wick since  its  settlement." — His  uncle,  John,  con-
structed a  fortress  at  Quebec  in  1775,  and  its  first
volley  killed  Montgomery  and  his  two  aides.  This
event  and  the  sacking  of 'Montreal  are  said  to  have
saved  the  Canadas  to  the  crown. — His  brother,  Sir


Isaac,  Bart.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Boston,  10  May,
1759;  d.  in  Cheltenham,  England,  4  Aug.,  1839.
In  1773  he  was  appointed  midshipman  on  board
the  ''Gaspc."  After  active  and  faithful  service,
at  the  age  of  eighteen  he  was  appointed  lieutenant,
and  at  the  age  of  twenty -two  captain  of  the
'*  Shrewsbury."  He  took  part  in  Rodney's  victory,
12  April,  1782,  and  in  many  other  engagements
along  the  Atlantic  coast  and  in  the  West  Indies,
acquitting  himself  with  credit  both  in  the  war  of
independence  and  in  that  with  France.  He  was
appointed  admiral  in  1802  and  created  a  baronet  in
1804  for  his  long  and  faithful  services.  After  his
retirement  from  active  service  he  married  Eliza-
beth, daughter  of  William  Greenly,  of  Titley  Court,
Gloucestershire.  In  1818  he  was  returned  to  par-
liament for  Ilchester,  Devonshire,  and  took  an  act-
ive part  in  the  debates  on  naval  affairs  and  kindred
subjects.  He  never  forgot  that  he  was  an  Ameri-
can by  birth,  and  was  untiring  in  his  efforts  to  pro-
mote the  interests  of  his  native  land.  Racers  sent
over  by  him  to  improve  our  breed,  fish  to  multiply
in  our  waters,  plants  and  trees  for  our  garden  and
orchards,  maps  and  new  inventions  for  merchant
and  naval  marine,  nautical  schools,  and  the  Coffin
academy  at  Nantucket,  were  but  a  few  of  his  bene-
factions. He  was  a  man  of  the  world,  of  elegant
manners  and  graceful  ways,  and  a  very  pleasant
companion,  and  at  the  same  time  in  his  fondness
for  frolic  and  in  his  happy  temperament  a  brilliant
instance  of  the  traditional  commodores  of  the  Brit-
ish navy.  When  the  reform  bill  was  in  jeopardy
in  1832,  the  king  placed  his  name  at  the  head  of
his  list  of  new  peers  as  Earl  of  Magdalen  to  carry
the  bill  through  the  lords.  It  would  have  been  an
empty  honor,  as  Sir  Isaac  had  no  lineal  heir  to  in-
herit. See  his  life,  by  Thomas  Coffin  Amory  (Boston,
1886). — His  cousin.  Sir  Thomas  Aston,  loyalist,  b.
in  Boston,  Mass.,  31  March,  1754;  d.  in  London,
31  May,  1810,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1772,
and  at  one  period  of  the  revolution  private  secre-
tary to  Sir  Guy  Carleton.  He  was  made  a  baronet,
19  May,  1804,  and  in  the  same  year  secretary  and
comptroller  of  accounts  of  Lower  Canada.  He  was
also  at  one  time  commissary-general  in  the  British
army. — Another  cousin,  Nathaniel,  physician,  b.
in  Portland,  Me.,  3  May,  1744;  d.  there,  18  Oct.,
1826,  Avas  the  son  of  Dr.  Nathaniel  Coffin,  who  went
from  Newburyport  to  Falmouth  (now  Portland)  in
1738.  He  studied  medicine  with  his  father,  and
in  London  at  Guy's  and  St.  Thomas's  hospitals  un-
der Akenside,  Hunter,  and  McKenzie.  On  his  re-
turn he  began  his  profession,  and  within  a  year,  on
the  death  of  his  father,  succeeded  to  his  extensive
business.  In  1775,  when  Capt.  Mowatt  was  about
to  destroy  the  town  (then  called  Falmouth),  Dr.
Coffin  with  two  others  visited  his  ship  and  en-
deavored to  persuade  him,  unsuccessfully,  however,
to  abandon  the  project.  He  became  specially  emi-
nent as  a  surgeon,  and  for  many  years  discharged  the
duties  of  hospital  surgeon  for  marine  patients  in  his
district.  Bowdoin  conferred  on  him  the  honorary
degree  of  M.  D.  in  1821,  and  he  was  the  first  presi-
dent of  the  Maine  medical  society.

COFFIN,  WilHam  Anderson,  painter,  b.  in
Alleghany  City,  Pa.,  31  Jan.,  1855.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Yale  in  1874,  and  remained  in  the  United
States  for  three  years,  preparing  to  become  an  art-
ist. In  October,  1877,  he  went  to  Paris  and  spent
four  months  as  a  student  with  Jacquesson  de  la
Chevraise,  and  three  years  with  Leon  Bonnat.  Re-
turning to  America  in  1880,  he  remained  nearly  a
year  and  then  went  again  to  Paris,  In  October,
1882,  he  opened  a  studio  in  New  York.  He  ex-
hibited two  pictures  in  the  Paris  salon  of  1879,  two


678


COGGESHALL


COGSWELL


m  that  of  1880,  and  one  in  1882.  He  first  exhibit-
ed in  the  National  academy,  New  York,  in  1881.
In  1886  he  was  awarded  the  Hallgarten  prize  of
$200  for  his  picture  in  the  National  academy.  His
most  notable  works  are  "  Une  academic  de  pein-
ture  moderne "  and  "  Un  auberge  en  Bretagne "
(1879) ;  "  Joueur  de  Mandoline "  and  "  Le  Pere
Jean  "  (1880) ;  "  An  Examination  "  (time  of  Louis
XIII.),  and  "  The  Close  of  Day  "  (1881) ;  "  Portrait
of  a  Gentleman  "  (1882) ;  "  Reflections  "  and  "  Five
O'clock  in  the  Morning  "  (1884) ;  "  Lady  in  Black  "
and  "Day-Dreams"  (1885);  "Moonlight  in  Har-
vest "  and  "  The  Hayfield  "  (1886).

COGGESHALL,  George,  sailor,  b.  in  Connecti-
cut in  1784  He  went  to  sea  when  quite  young.
In  the  second  war  with  Great  Britain  he  com-
manded two  privateers.  He  published  "  Voyages
to  Various  Parts  of  the  World  from  1799  till  1844  "
(New  York,  1852) ;  "  History  of  American  Priva-
teers and  Letters  of  Marque  during  our  War  with
England,  1812,  '13,  '14  "  (New  York,  1856 ;  2d  ed.,
1861) ;  "  Historical  Sketch  of  Commerce  and  Navi-
gation from  the  Birth  of  our  Saviour  down  to  the
Present  Date  "  (New  York,  1860) ;  and  "  Religious
and  Miscellaneous  Poetry."

COGGESHALL,  WiUiam  Turner,  journalist,
b.  in  Lewistown,  Pa.,  6  Sept.,  1824 ;  d.  in  Quito,
Ecuador,  2  Aug.,  1867.  He  went  in  1841  to  Ohio,
connected  himself  with  the  Cincinnati  "  Gazette,"
published  "  The  Genius  of  the  West "  in  1854-'6,
and  was  state  librarian  in  1856-62.  At  the  be-
ginning of  the  civil  war  he  volunteered,  and  was
appointed  on  the  staff  of  Gov.  Dennison,  with
the  rank  of  colonel.  He  was  detailed  to  perform
secret  service  in  Virginia  and  other  places,  and
while  on  duty  caught  a  cold  that  led  to  consump-
tion, and  finally  ended  his  life.  He  bought  the
Springfield  "  Republic "  in  1862,  but  sold  it  in
1865,  and  took  charge  of  the  "  Ohio  State  Jour-
nal," published  at  Columbus.  He  was  on  Gov.
Cox's  staff  in  January,  1866,  and  in  June  of  that
year  accepted  the  mission  to  Ecuador,  hoping  that
the  pure  air  of  Quito  might  restore  his  health.
He  published  "Signs  of  the  Times,"  a  book  on
spirit-rappings  (Cincinnati,  1851) ;  "  Easy  Warren
and  his  Contemporaries "  (New  York,  1854) ;
"  Oakshaw,  or  the  Victim  of  Avarice  "  (Cincinnati,
1855) ;  "  Plome  Hits  and  Hints  "  (New  York,  1859) ;
"  Poets  and  Poetry  of  the  West "  (Columbus,  Ohio,
1860) ;  "  Stories  of  Frontier  Adventure  "  (1863) ;
"  The  Journeys  of  A.  Lincoln  as  President-elect
and  as  President  Martyred "  (1865) ;  and  con-
tributed largely  to  periodical  literature. — His
daughter,  Jessie,  b.  in  Wadsworth,  Ohio,  22  Sept.,
1851 ;  d.  in  Guayaquil,  Ecuador,  10  Jan.,  1868,  ac-
companied her  father  to  Ecuador  as  secretary  of
legation,  and  had  entire  charge  of  the  office  for
four  months  after  his  death.

COGSWELL,  Jonatliau,  clergyman,  b.  in  Row-
ley, Mass.,  3  Sept.,  1782 ;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.
J.,  1  Aug.,  1864.  John  Cogswell,  the  founder  of
the  American  branch  of  the  family,  sailed  from
Bristol,  23  May,  1635,  in  his  own  ship  "  The  An-
gel Gabriel."  "Her  cargo  consisted  of  his  prop-
erty, and  comprised  a  large  part  of  his  valuable  es-
tate. The  vessel  arrived  off  the  coast  of  Maine
in  a  fearful  tempest,  and  was  wrecked  at  Pema-
quid  bay,  15  Aug.  The  crew  and  passengers  were
all  saved,  but  a  large  part  of  her  cargo  was  lost.
After  camping  out  for  a  few  days,  Mr.  Cogswell
chartered  a  small  bark,  which  landed  him,  with  his
family,  furniture,  silver  plate,  and  such  books  as
he  had  saved,  at  Ipswich,  Mass.,  where  many  of  his
descendants  still  reside.  Later  in  the  same  year
he  purchased  an  extensive  tract  of  land  and  erected


the  third  house  built  at  Ipswich.  The  reasons  for
leaving  his  English  home  for  a  log  house  in  the
wilderness  of  a  new  world  were  identical  with
those  that  led  to  the  foundation  of  Plymouth  colo-
ny fifteen  years  before.  Among  John  Cogswell's
descendants  was  Nathaniel,  who  studied  medicine
with  Dr.  Perkins,  one  of  the  celebrities  of  Boston,
and  an  intimate  friend  of  the  philosopher  Benja-
min Franklin.  He  was  present  when  Franklin
killed  a  pigeon  with  his  new  electric  battery.  Jona-
than was  Nathaniel's  youngest  son.  In  early  life
he  resolved  to  become  a  minister,  and  persisted  in
his  purpose,  although  his  father  opposed  it  and
withheld  pecuniary  aid,  wishing  him  to  follow  Ins
own  profession.  He  was  graduated  with  honor  at
Harvard  in  1806,  standing  second  in  his  class.
From  1807  till  1809  he  was  a  tutor  at  Bowdoin,
pursuing  his  theological  studies  at  the  same  time,
but  finishing  them  at  Andover  theological  semi-
nary, where  he  was  graduated  with  the  first  class
that  completed  the  course  in  1810,  and  included
his  life-long  friends,  Richard  S.  Storrs  and  Gardner
Spring.  The  same  year  he  was  ordained  as  a  Con-
gregational minister  and  settled  as  pastor  of  the
churcli  in  Saco,  Me.  Here  he  remained  for  eighteen
years,  when  his  health  compelled  him  to  resign.
During  this  period  he  saved  a  sum  of  nearly  $1,000
with  a  view  to  purchasing  a  house;  but  when  the
work  of  foreign  missions  was  established  and  an
eloquent  appeal  was
made  in  his  church
for  aid,  he  gave
every  dollar  of  his
savings  to  the  cause.
From  1829  till  1834
he  was  pastor  of  the
New  Britain  church
in  Berlin,  Conn.  In
1832  he  was  ap-
pointed trustee  of
his  brother  Nathan-
iel Cogswell's  large
estate,  of  which  he
and  his  family  were
the  principal  heirs.
In  May,  1834,  he
accepted  the  chair


i^


^"e^.^ im


acceptea  tne  cnan- ^.^ ^^

of  ecclesiastical  his- J^' y'^:-=>^

tory  in the Theo- ^ V --

logical  institute  of

Connecticut  at  East  Windsor  Hill.  He  not  only
filled  this  position  gratuitously  for  ten  years,  but
contributed  liberally  to  the  institution  not  alone  in
money,  but  by  giving  most  of  his  large  and  valu-
able library.  He  resigned  his  professorship  in
1844  and  'removed  to  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.
There,  in  company  with  Dr.  Jancway  and  John  R.
Ford,  he  erected  a  tasteful  edifice  known  as  the
2d  Presbyterian  church,  contributing  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  cost,  in  addition  to  giving  one
half  of  the  cost  of  the  parsonage  and  a  thousand
dollars  toward  the  support  of  a  minister,  followed
by  frequent  gifts  to  the  pastor  and  people  up  to
the  time  of  his  death.  He  was  one  of  the  early
members  of  the  New  York  historical  society,  a  life
director  of  the  American  Bible  society,  a  life  mem-
ber of  the  American  tract  society,  and  connected
with  numerous  other  organizations,  to  all  of  which
he  contributed  liberally.  He  founded  scholarships
in  the  College  of  New  Jersey  and  in  Rutgers  col-
lege, and  was  a  regular  annual  contributor  to  the
various  boards  of  the  church  with  which  he  was
connected  for  threescore  years.  Christian  benefi-
cence marked  the  whole  course  of  his  long  life.
As  a  preacher  Dr.  Cogswell  was  peculiarly  zealous


COGSWELL


COGSWELL


679


for  sound  doctrine,  and  fearless  in  stating  and  de-
fending it.  His  own  faith  was  unwavering,  and
timidity  in  expressing  what  he  believed  was  un-
known to  him."  In  1886  he  received  the  degree  of
S.  T.  D.  from  the  University  of  New  York.  Dr.
Cogswell  was  twice  married,  first  tq  Elizabeth,
adopted  daughter  of  Samuel  Abbott,  who  gave  to
Andover  theological  seminary  $120,000.  She  died
in  East  Windsor  in  1887;  and  a  year  later  he
married  Jane  Eudora,  daughter  of  Chief-Justice
Kirkpatrick,  of  New  Jersey,  who  died  in  March,
1864.  President  Harrison,  Ralph  Waldo  Emer-
son, Rufus  Choate,  and  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  are
all  connected  with  the  Cogswells  through  female
branches  of  the  family.  Dr.  Cogswell  published
"A  Sermon  delivered,  24  Aug.,  1819,  before  the
York  County  Association"  (Maine);  "Farewell
Discourse  at  Saco,"  Me.,  12  Oct.,  1828 ;  "  Ten  Dis-
courses, intended  as  a  Keepsake  for  the  Family  and
Friends"  (Hartford,  1842);  "A  Treatise  on  the
Necessity  of  Capital  Punishment"  (1843);  "Dis-
courses "  (New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  1845) ;  "  Hebrew
Theocracy"  (1848);  "Calvary  and  Sinai"  (1852);
"  Discourse  delivered  before  the  Theological  Insti-
tute of  Connecticut "  (1856) ;  "  Godliness  a  Great
Mvsterv  "  (1857) ;  and  "  The  Appropriate  Work  of
the  Holy  Spirit"  (1859).  See  "The  Cogswells  in
America,"  by  E.  0.  Jameson  (Boston,  1884).

COGSWELL,  Joseph  Green,  bibliographer,
was  b.  in  Ipswich,  Mass.,  27  Sept.,  1786;  d.  in
Cambridge,  Mass.,  26  Nov.,  1871.  He  was  grad-
uated at  Harvard  in  1806.  After  making  a  voy-
age to  India  as  supercargo  of  the  vessel  in  which
he  sailed.  Dr.  Cogswell  practised  law  for  a  few
years  in  Belfast,  Me.  In  1812  he  married  Mary,
the  daughter  of  Gov.  John  Taylor  Gilman.  She
died  in  1813.  From  1813  till  1815  he  was  a
tutor  at  Harvard.  In  1816  he  went  to  Europe,
and,  in  company  with  George  Ticknor,  spent  two
years  at  the  University  of  Gottingen,  where  they
advanced  together  in  the  special  culture  that  has
associated  their  names  with  what  is  highest  in
American  literature  and  bibliography.  Two  more
years  were  passed  in  Europe,  chiefly  on  the  conti-
nent, in  the  principal  capitals,  and  in  the  study  of
educational  problems  and  bibliography.  During
part  of  this  time  Edward  Everett  was  his  compan-
ion. He  was,  with  his  friend  Ticknor,  the  guest  of
Sir  Walter  Scott,  at  Abbotsford ;  and  conitributed
to  "  Blackwood's  Magazine  "  a  paper  on  American
literature  which  attracted  much  attention.  Re-
turning to  the  United  States  in  1820,  he  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  geology  and  mineralogy,  and
college  librarian  at  Harvard.  In  1823,  having  re-
signed his  chair  in  Harvard,  he,  in  connection  with
George  Bancroft,  the  historian,  established  the
Round  Hill  school,  at  Northampton,  Mass.  The
plan  of  the  institution  was  novel,  and  based  on  an
examination  of  the  best  English  and  German  sys-
tems of  education.  After  Mr.  Bancroft's  retire-
ment in  1830,  Dr.  Cogswell  continued  the  school
for  six  years,  when  he  assumed  the  charge  of  a
similar  institution  in  Raleigh,  N.  C.  Abandoning
this  field  of  labor,  he  accepted  the  editorship  of
the  "  New  York  Review,"  one  of  the  ablest  critical
journals  then  existing  in  the  country,  which  he
conducted  till  its  suspension  in  1842."  Becoming
the  friend  and  companion  of  John  Jacob  Astor,
he,  in  conjunction  with  Washington  Irving  and
Fitz-Greene  Halleck,  arranged  with  him  the  plan
of  the  Astor  library.  With  Halleck,  Irving,  and
others,  Cogswell  was  appointed  a  trustee  of  the
fund  for  its  creation.  Wlicn  Washington  Irving
was  appointed  minister  to  Spain,  he  was  anxious
that  his  friend  Cogswell  should  accompaiiy  him  as


secretary  of  legation,  and  accordingly  wrote  to
Washington,  requesting  his  appointment.  "He
is,"  said  Irving,  "  a  gentleman  with  whom  I  am  on
terms  of  confidential  intimacy,  and  I  know  no  one
who,  by  his  various  acquirements,  his  prompt  sa-
gacity, his  knowledge  of  the  world,  his  habits  of
business,  and  his  obliging  disposition,  is  so  calcu-
lated to  give  me  that  counsel,  aid,  and  companion-
ship, so  important  in  Madridi,  where  a  stranger  is
more  isolated  than  in  any  other  capital  of  Europe."
Cogswell  received  the  appointment,  and  would
probably  have  accepted  it,  but,  Astor  finding  that  he
was  likely  to  lose  his  invaluable  services,  made  him
superintendent  of  the  embryo  library.  After  the
rich  merchant's  death,  he  went  abroad  to  purchase
books ;  and  it  may  safely  be  said  that  no  library  in
the  land  was  founded  with  more  discrimination
and  economy.  The  books  purchased  by  him  would
sell  to-day  for  ten  times  the  amount  that  he  ex-
pended, while  many  of  them  cannot  now  be  bought
at  any  price.  He  gave  the  Astor  library  his  own
valuable  series  of  works  relating  to  bibliography,
as  he  had  before  united  with  a  friend  in  presenting
Harvard  with  a  rare  cabinet  of  minerals  and
numerous  botanical  specimens.  During  Dr.  Cogs-
well's active  superintendency  of  the  Astor  library,
he  prepared  a  valuable  alphabetical  and  analytical
catalogue  of  its  contents,  which  was  published  in
eight  large  volumes,  displaying  his  extraordinary
knowledge  of  the  comparative  value  and  signifi-
cance of  the  books  he  collected.  He  continued
the  duties  of  superintendent,  which  he  had  per-
formed with  singular  industry  and  fidelity,  until
the  pressure  of  advancing  years  induced  him  to
retire.  Two  years  later,  having  chosen  a  residence
at  Cambridge,  he  also  resigned  the  office  of  trus-
tee. In  accepting  his  resignation,  the  board
passed  a  resokition  highly  complimentary  to  his
talents,  great  learning,  and  spotless  character.  All
who  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  Dr.  Cogswell's  ac-
quaintance, and  the  thousands  of  seekers  after  in-
formation who  remember  the  patience  and  urbanity
with  which  he  was  ever  ready  to  aid  them  in  their
researches,  Avill  most  cordially  unite  in  the  richly
merited  tribute  to  his  learning,  amiability,  and  un-
sullied life.  While  his  physical  strength  gradu-
ally failed,  his  intellectual  powers  remained  un-
impaired, and  his  sparkling  table-talk  was  as
interesting  as  in  earlier  years.  He  had,  in  his  fre-
quent visits  to  Europe,  met  many  of  the  most
distinguished  men  of  the  19th  century,  including
Goethe,  Humboldt,  Beranger,  Byron,  Scott,  Jeffrey,
and  the  brilliant  circle  that  thronged  Gore  House
in  Lady  Blessington's  palmy  days.  Dr.  Cogswell
left,  of  his  moderate  fortune,  $4,000  to  a  school  in
his  native  place,  where  he  was  buried  by  the  side
of  his  mother's  grave,  and  where  a  handsome
monument  has  been  erected  by  his  Round  Hill
pupils,  no  one  of  whom  ever  left  the  school  with-
out carrying  aw^ay  with  him  a  strong  affection  for
the  faitiiful  friend  and  teacher.  He  received  the
degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Trinity  in  1842,  and  from  .
Harvard  in  1863.  He  was  a  frequent  contributor
to  the  magazines,  including  "  Blackwood's,"  "  The
North  American  Review,"  "The  Monthly  An-
thology," and  "The  New  York  Review."  See
"  Memorial  Volume,"  by  Anna  E.  Ticknor  (printed
privately,  Boston,  1874).

COGSWELL,  Mason  Fitcli,  physician,  b.  in
Canterbury,  Conn.,  28  Sept.,  1761;  d.  in  Ilartford,
Conn.,  10  Dec,  1830.  His  mother  died  while  he
was  young,  and  he  was  adopted  by  Samuel  Hunt-
ington, president  of  the  Continental  congress  and
governor  of  Connecticut,  who  sent  him  to  Yale,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1780  as  valedictorian


680


COGSWELL


COHEN


of  his  class,  and  its  youngest  member.  He  studied
with  his  brother  James,  a  surgeon  in  the  Revolu-
tionary army,  at  the  soldiers'  hospital  in  New
York,  and  became  one  of  the  most  distinguished
surgeons  in  the  country.  He  married  Mary  Austin
Ledyard,  and  settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.  He  was
the  first  to  introduce  in  the  United  States  the
operation  of  removing  a  cataract  from  the  eye,
and  also  the  first  to  tie  the  carotid  artery  (1803).
His  daughter,  Alice,  became  deaf  and  dumb  from
severe  illness  at  an  early  age,  and  her  father's  at-
tention was  thus  called  to  the  possibility  of  edu-
cating deaf-mutes.  Mainly  through  his  influence
the  first  deaf-and-dumb  asylum  in  the  country,
that  at  Hartford,  was  established  in  1820,  and  Alice
became  its  first  pupil.  He  was  also  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Connecticut  retreat  for  the  insane
at  Hartford.  He  was  for  ten  years  president  of
the  Connecticut  medical  society,  one  of  the  last
survivors  of  the  "old  school,"  and  persisted  in
wearing  knee-breeches  and  silk  stockings,  which
he  held  to  be  the  only  proper  dress  for  a  gentle-
man.— His  son.  Mason  Fitch,  physician,  b.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  10  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  Albany,
N.  Y.,  21  Jan.,  1865,  was  graduated  at  Yale  in
1829,  studied  medicine,  and  became  a  leading  phy-
sician in  Albany.  He  served  as  assistant  surgeon
and  surgeon  in  the  volunteer  army  of  the  United
States  during  the  civil  war.  In  1847  he  married
Lydia,  daughter  of  the  Rev.  John  M.  Bradford,  a
direct  descendant  from  Gov.  Bradford,  of  Plym-
outh colony. She  died  in  1872.

COGSWELL,  Milton,  soldier,  b.  in  Noblesville,
Ind.,  4  Dec,  1825;  d.  in  Washington,  D.  C,  20
Nov.,  1882.  He  was  the  first  child  of  American
parentage  born  in  Noblesville.  After  graduation
at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1849,  he  joined
the  army  and  served  almost  continuously  until  he
was  placed  on  the  retired  list  in  1871.  This  period
covered  the  civil  war,  in  which  he  became  colonel
of  the  42d  New  York  volunteers.  He  was  severely
wounded,  and  held  a  prisoner  for  nearly  a  year.
After  his  retirement  with  the  rank  of  brevet  colo-
nel in  the  regular  army  for  gallant  services,  he  was
.  deputy  governor  of  the  soldier's  home  in  Washing-
ton, and,  with  the  exception  of  a  year's  interval,
held  the  office  until  his  death.

COGSWELL,  Thomas,  soldier,  b.  in  Haverhill,
Mass.,  4  Aug.,  1746 ;  d.  in  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  3
Sept.,  1810.  He  was  one  of  a  family  of  fourteen
sons  and  five  daughters.  Of  the  nine  sons  that
reached  adult  years,  eight  joined  the  Revolutionary
army.  Thomas  was  captain  of  a  company  in  Col.
Gerrish's  regiment  at  Bunker  Hill ;  became  major
of  Vose's  regiment,  21  Feb.,  1777,  and  lieutenant-
colonel  of  the  15th  Massachusetts  regiment,  26
Nov.,  1779.  He  was  afterward  wagon-master-
general,  and  served  till  the  end  of  the  war.  After
national  independence  was  secured,  he  settled  on
a  farm  near  Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  and  became  a
prominent  citizen  of  the  community,  serving  as  a
judge  in  the  court  of  common  pleas  from  1784  till
1810.  He  married  Ruth,  daughter  of  Gen.  Joseph
Badger. — His  son,  Nathaniel,  soldier,  b.  in  Haver-
hill, Mass.,  19  Jan.,  1773  ;  d.  near  the  rapids  of  the
Red  river,  Louisiana,  in  August,  1813,  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1794.  He  studied  law,  and,
after  admission  to  the  bar,  travelled  in  Europe.
He  had  a  strong  desire  for  military  life,  of-
fered his  services  to  the  patriot  army  in  Mexico,
and  died  holding  a  general's  commission.  Two
other  sons,  Thomas  and  Francis,  died  in  the  mili-
tary service  of  the  United  States  in  the  second  war
with  Great  Britain. — William,  a  younger  brother
of Thomas, surgeon, b. in Haverhill,  Mass.,  11


July,  1760 ;  d.  in  Atkinson,  N.  H.,  1  Jan.,  1831,
entered  the  army  when  fifteen  years  old  in  his
brother's  company.  Having  served  his  term  of
enlistment,  he  studied  medicine  and  surgery,  and
in  1778  re-enlisted  for  a  short  time  under  Gen.
Sullivan.  On  19  July,  1781,  he  was  appointed
surgeon's  mate  in  the  military  hospital  at  West
Point,  and  on  5  Jan.,  1784,  promoted  to  surgeon-
in-chief  of  the  hospital  and  chief  medical  officer
of  the  U.  S.  army.  He  resigned  1  Aug.,  1785.  He
was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  New  Hampshire
medical  society  and  of  Atkinson  academy,  giving
the  land  on  which  the  academy  was  built.'

COGSWELL,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  At-
kinson, N.  H.,  5  June,  1787;  d".  in  Gilmanton,
N.  H.,  18  April,  1850.  He  received  his  early  train-
ing in  the  academy  at  Atkinson,  and  was  gradu-
ated at  Dartmouth  in  1811.  While  in  college  he
taught  school,  and  had  Rufus  Choate  among  his
pupils.  After  graduation  he  taught  for  two  years,
pursuing  his  theological  studies  at  the  same'time.
In  1815  he  was  ordained  to  the  ministry  and  in-
stalled pastor  of  the  South  church  in  Dedham,
Mass.  In  1829  he  was  chosen  general  agent  of  the
American  education  society,  and  resigned  his  pas-
toral charge.  In  1832  he  became  secretary  of  the
society,  which  office  he  held  for  ten  yearsi  and  in
1837  was  chosen  a  trustee  of  Andover  theological
seminary.  He  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  national
education  and  history  at  Dartmouth  in  1841,  and
occupied  it  until  1844,  when  he  resigned  to  accept
the  presidency  and  chair  of  Christian  theology  in
Gilmanton,  N.  H.,  theological  seminary.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  A.  M.  from  Harvard  and  from
Brown  in  1816,  and  that  of  D.  D.  from  Williams
in  1833.  Dr.  Cogswell  edited  the  "  New  England
Historical  and  Genealogical  Register,"  the  "New
Hampshire  Repository,"  and  the  "  American  Quar-
terly Register.  Besides  his  sermons,  he  published
"  A  Manual  of  Theology  and  Devotion,"  "Assistant
to  Family  Religion,"  "  Christian  Philanthropist,"
"Theological  Class-Book,"  "Harbinger  of  the
Millennium,"  "Letters  to  Young  Men  preparing
for  the  Ministry,"  "  Reports  of  the  American  Edu-
cation Society,"  and  "  Reports  of  the  Northern
Academv  of  Arts  and  Sciences."

COGSWELL,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bradford,
Mass.,  23  Aug.,  1838.  His  parents  were  Dr.  George
and  Abigail  Parker  Cogswell.  He  studied  in
Phillips  Andover  academy  and  in  Kimball  Union
academy,  at  Meriden,  N.  H.  He  entered  Dartmouth
college,  but  soon  went  to  sea  before  the  mast,  fol-
lowing the  example  of  an  elder  brother.  After  his
return  he  was  graduated  at  Harvard  law-school
in  1860.  In  1861  he  raised  the  first  company  of
volunteers  for  the  national  cause  in  Massachusetts.
He  was  regularly  promoted  until  he  became  colonel
of  the  2d  Massachusetts  infantry,  and  participated
in  many  of  the  battles  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac, for  which  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general,
15  Dec,  1864.  After  the  war  he  became  a  promi-
nent officer  oi  the  Grand  army  of  the  republic  and
in  the  Loyal  legion,  and  he  has  held  several  impor-
tant civil  offices  in  the  state.

COHEN,  Jacob  Da  Silva  Solis,  physician,  b.
in  New  York  city,  28  Feb.,  1838.  He  was  educated
at  the  Philadelphia  central  high  school,  and,  after
attending  medical  lectures,  received  his  diploma
from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1860.  In
1858-9  he  lived  in  Memphis,  Tenn.  He  was  ap-
pointed assistant  surgeon  to  the  26th  Pennsylvania
regiment  in  April,  1861,  and  in  the  same  year  be-
came assistant  surgeon  in  the  navy.  He  accom-
panied Dupont's  expedition  to  Port  Royal,  and  re-
mained in  the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron


COIT


COKE


681


till  January,  1804,  when  he  resigned,  b\it  served
for  several  months  in  army  hospitals  in  Pliila-
delphia.  After  a  year  in  New  York,  lie  returned
to  Philadelphia  in  1866.  Dr.  Cohen  has  made  a
specialty  of  diseases  of  the  throat  and  chest,  and  is
lecturer  on  laryngoscopy  at  Jefferson  medical  col-
lege, Philadelphia.  He  is  consulting  physician  of
several  Philadelphia  hospitals,  and  a  member  of
many  medical  societies.  In  1875  he  was  president
of  the  Philadelphia  northern  medical  association.
Among  his  publications  the  most  important  are
"  Treatise  on  Inhalation  "  (Philadelphia,  1867 ;  2d
ed.,  1876) ;  "  Diseases  of  the  Throat "  (New  York,
1872);  and  "Croup  in  its  Relations  to  Tracheot-
omy "  (Philadelphia,  1874),

COIT,  Henry  Augustus,  educator,  b,  20  Jan.,
1881.  lie  was  educated  at  St.  Paul's  school  in  Col-
lege Point,  Long  Island,  and  at  the  University  of
Pennsylvania,  but  was  not  graduated.  He  entered
the  ministry  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,
and  on  the  foundation  of  St.  Paul's  school,  in
Concord,  N.  II.,  by  Dr.  George  Shattuck,  was  chosen
its  first  rector.  The  school,  opened  in  1856  with
five  or  six  boys,  has  since  grown  to  be  one  of  the
largest  in  the  country,  numbering  about  300  pupils
and  twenty  masters,  and  occupying  twenty  build-
ings. Its  rector  was  made  a  doctor  of  divinity  by
Trinity  college  in  1803,  and  the  success  of  the
school  is  largely  due  to  his  efforts.  In  1808  he
visited  England,  and  studied  the  workings  of  the
large  public  schools  there,  many  features  of  which
he  has  introduced  into  St.  Paul's.  Dr.  Coit  has
been  a  trustee  of  Trinity  college  for  four  years,  a
delegate  to  the  general  convention  of  his  church
for  many  years,  and  is  a  preacher  of  much  power.
lie  has  published  numerous  sermons  and  addresses,
and  has  contributed  to  periodical  literature. — His
brother,  Joseph  Howland,  was  professor  of  mathe-
matics and  natural  science  in  St.  James's  college,
Md.,  until  the  closing  of  that  institution  in  1865,
when  he  became  associated  with  his  brother  in  St.
Paul's  school,  Concord,  of  which  he  is  now  vice-
principal.  He  has  edited  a  "  Life  of  Bishop  Ker-
foot." — Another  brother,  James  Milnor,  chemist,
b.  in  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  31  Jan.,  1845,  was  educated
at  St.  Paul's  school,  Concord,  N.  IL,  and  at  liobart
college,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1865.  In  1881  he  received  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.
from  Dartmouth.  During  1873-'5  he  was  the
general  manager  of  the  Cleveland  tube-works,  but
has  since  given  his  attention  to  the  teaching  of
chemistry  and  the  natural  sciences,  principally
at  St.  Paul's  school.  Dr.  Coit  has  devised  sev-
eral improved  forms  of  chemical  apparatus,  and
has  published  "A  Short  Manual  of  Qualitative
Analysis"  (Concord,  N.  IL,  1883),  and  "A  Chemi-
cal Arithmetic,  with  a  Short  System  of  Qualitative
Analysis  "  (Boston,  1886).

COIT,  Thomas  Wiiithrop,  clergyman,  b.  in
New  London,  Conn.,  28  June,  1803 ;  d.  in  Middle-
town,  Conn.,  21  June,  1885.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1821.  studied  for  the  ministry  in  the  Epis-
copal church,  and  became  rector  of  St.  Peter's
church,  Salem,  Mass.,  in  1827;  of  Christ  church,
Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  1829  :  and  of  Trinity  church,
New  Rochelle,  N.  Y.,  in  1839.  For  brief  periods
he  was  professor  in  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  Conn.,
and  president  of  Transylvania  university,  Lexing-
ton, Ky.  Soon  afterward  he  accepted  the  rector-
ship of  St.  Paul's  church,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  which  place
he  held  for  nearly  twenty-five  years.  In  1854  he
was  appointed  lecturer  on  ecclesiastical  history  in
the  Berkeley  divinity  school,  the  duties  of  which
office  he  discharged  in  connection  with  his  rector-
ship in  Troy. In  1872  he  resigned  his  church,  was


appointed  professor  in  the  Divinity-school,  and  re-
moved to  Middletown,  Conn.  Dr.  Coit  was  one  of
the  best  scholars  and  ablest  writers  in  the  Episco-
pal church.  His  contributions  to  church  litei-ature
were  numerous  and  effective.  He  published  "  Re-
marks on  Norton's  Statement  of  Reasons  "  (1833);
"Paragraph  Bible"  (1834);  "  Townsend's  Bible,
Chronologically  Arranged,  with  Notes "  (2  vols.,
1837-8) ;  "  Puritanism,  or  a  Churchman's  Defence
against  its  Aspersions,  by  an  Appeal  to  its  own
History"  (1845);  a  monograph  in  Bishop  Perry's
"  History  of  the  American  Episcopal  Church,"  en-
titled "  Puritanism  in  New  England  and  the  Epis-
copal Church  "  (1885) ;  together  with  frequent  con-
tributions to  periodical  literature.

COKE,  Richard,  senator,  b.  in  Williamsburg,
Va.,  13  March,  1829.  He  was  educated  at  William
and  Mary  college,  studied  law,  and  after  admission
to  the  bar  removed  to  Waco,  Texas,  and  practised
his  profession.  He  served  as  a  private,  and  after-
ward as  captain,  in  the  Confederate  army.  In
June,  1865,  he  was  appointed  district  judge,  and
in  1860  elected  judge  of  the  supreme  court.  A  year
later  Gen.  Sheridan  removed  him,  on  the  ground
that  he  was  an  impediment  to  reconstruction.  In
1873  he  was  elected  governor  of  Texas,  and  in  1876
was  re-elected.  Having  been  elected  as  a  democrat
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  he  resigned  to  take  his  seat  in
that  body  on  4  March,  1877.  In  1883  he  was  elected
for  another  term,  to  expire  3  March,  1889.

COKE,  Thomas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Brecon,  South
Wales,  9  Sept.,  1747 ;  d.  2  May,  1814.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Oxford,  and  in  1772  became  mayor  of  his
native  town.  Subsequently  he  studied  for  the
church,  and  obtained  a  curacy  at  Petherton.  In
1776  he  became  acquainted  with  John  Wesley,  and,
joining  the  Methodists,  was  appointed  superintend-
ent of  the  London  district  in  1780,  and  president
of  the  Irish  conference  in  1782.  After  being  or-
dained by  Wesley  as  bishop  of  the  church  in  the
United  States,  he  arrived  in  New  York  in  1784,
and  on  27  Dec.  of  that  year  he  ordained  Asbury  a
bishop,  and  joint  superintendent  of  the  church  in
America.  They  proceeded  together  to  visit  the
different  conferences  until  June,  1785,  when  Coke
returned  to  England  and  visited  Wales,  Scotland,
and  Ireland.  The  first  mission  he  established  was
in  the  West  Indies  in  1786,  which  he  again  visited
in  1788-'9,  1790,  and  1792-'3.  His  ninth  and  last
visit  to  the  United  States  was  in  1803.  After  the
death  of  Wesley  he  was  chosen  secretary  of  the
English  conference,  and,  in  conjunction  with  Mr.
Moore  and  Dr.  Whitehead,  published,  in  1792,  a
"  Life  of  Wesley."  In  a  voyage  to  New  York,  in
1797,  the  vessel  he  was  in  was  taken  by  a  priva-
teer, and  he  was  cruelly  treated,  being  plundered
of  everything  but  his  books.  In  1803  he  estab-
lished a  mission  in  Gibraltar,  and  from  this  time
until  1808  was  engaged  in  travelling  in  aid  of  the
missionary  cause.  Through  his  influence  a  mis-
sion was  established  in  1811  at  Sierra  Leone.  De-
termining, in  1813,  to  establish  a  mission  at  Ceylon,
such  was  his  zeal  that,  when  the  conference  hesi-
tated on  account  of  the  expense,  he  furnished  the
money  from  his  own  private  purse.  The  mission-
aries embarked  30  Dec,  and,  after  being  out  four
months,  he  was  found  dead  in  his  cabin.  He  ren-
dered valuable  assistance  to  Wesley  in  procuring
what  was  called  the  deed  of  declaration,  providing
for  the  settlement  of  the  Methodist  chapels  in  the
connection,  and  restricted  the  conference  to  100  of
the  preachers,  and  their  successors,  forever.  He  was
the  author  of  a  "  Commentary  of  the  Bible  "  (1807),
"  A  History  of  the  West  Indies,"  "  History  of  the
Bible,"  "  Six  Letters  in  Defence  of  the  Doctrine  of


682


COLBORNE


COLBURN


Justification  by  Faith,"  •'  Four  Discourses  on  the
Duties  of  a  Minister,"  and  a  "  Preacher's  Manual."

COLBORNE,  Sir  John,  Lord  Seaton,  British
soldier,  b.  in  1779 ;  d.  17  April.  18G3.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Christ's  hospital,  and  Winchester  school,
entered  the  army  in  1799,  and  served  in  Holland,
Egypt,  and  Italy.  He  was  in  the  battle  of  Maida
in  1806,  was  military  secretary  to  Sir  John  Moore,
commanded  a  brigade  in  Wellington's  army  in
Portugal,  France,  and  Spain  in  1810-4,  and  did
good  service  through  the  peninsular  war.  He
originated  and  led  the  decisive  movement  of  the
52d  light  infantry  that  secured  the  victory  at
Waterloo.  He  received  several  orders  of  knight-
hood for  his  services,  and  became  lieutenant-gov-
ernor of  Guernsey,  and  major-general  in  1825.  He
was  made  lieutenant-governor  of  Upper  Canada  in
1829,  and  firmly  repressed  the  strong  reform  party
that  he  found  there.  In  1835  he  obtained  a  recall ;
but,  as  he  was  about  to  embark  for  Europe,  he  was
appointed  commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  in
Canada.  He  returned  to  Quebec,  and  took  efficient
and  prompt  measures  to  check  the  rebellion  then
preparing,  and,  on -its  breaking  out,  took  the  field
in  person,  in  several  engagements,  and  completely
routed  the  insiirgents.  He  was  twice  temporarily
governor-general  of  British  North  America,  ren-
dered great  services  to  that  country,  and  was  made
a  lieutenant-general  in  1838.  He  returned  to  Eng-
land in  1839,  and  on  14  December  of  that  year  was
created  Baron  Seaton.  He  was  also  made  a  privy-
councillor  and  given  a  pension  of  £2,000  per  an-
num. He  was  afterward  lord-high-commissioner
of  the  Ionian  isles,  and  commander  of  the  forces  in
Ireland,  but  resigned  in  1860,  and  was  promoted
to  field-marshal  on  30  March  of  that  year.

COLBURN,  Jeremiah,  numismatist,  h.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  in  1815.  At  the  age  of  fifteen  he  began
to  collect  coins,  and  afterward  turned  his  atten-
tion to  shells,  minerals,  etc.,  and  finally  to  books,
autographs,  manuscripts,  portraits,  and  engravings
relating  to  America,  including  continental  money
and  the  more  recent  issues  of  paper  tokens.  In
1840  he  began  a  collection  of  bank-notes.  In  1857
he  contributed  articles  to  the  "Historical  Maga-
zine "  on  American  coins  and  coinage,  which  were
followed  for  several  years  by  short  articles  on  these
subjects  in  *'  Notes  and  Queries."  He  is  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Boston  numismatic  society,  has
been  its  curator,  vice-president,  and  president,  and
since  1871  has  been  one  of  the  editors  of  the
"American  Journal  of  Numismatics."

COLBURN,  Warren,  educator,  b.  in  Dedham,
Mass.,  1  March,  1793  :  d.  in  Lowell,  Mass.,  13  Sept.,
1833.  His  parents  were  poor,  and  when  a  boy  he
worked  in  factories  in  the  different  villages  to  which
they  moved.  He  learned  the  machinist's  trade,
but  early  manifested  a  taste  for  mathematics,  and
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1820.  He  then
opened  a  select  school  in  Boston,  but  in  April,
1823,  became  superintendent  of  the  Boston  manu-
facturing company  at  Waltham,  Mass.,  and  in
August,  1824,  of  the  Merrimack  manufacturing
company  at  Lowell.  While  here  he  invented  im-
portant improvements  in  machinery,  and  delivered
a  series  of  popular  lectures,  illustrated  with  the
magic  lantern,  on  commerce,  natural  history,  phys-
ics, and  astronomy,  which  was  continued  through
many  years.  He  was  also  superintendent  of  schools
at  Lowell,  was  elected  a  fellow  of  the  American  acad-
emy of  arts  and  sciences  in  1827,  and  was  for  several
years  an  examiner  in  mathematics  at  Harvard.  His
reputation  rests  largely  on  his  "  First  Lessons  in
Intellectual  Arithmetic  "  (Boston,  1821),  the  plan  of
which  he  had  carefully  completed  while  yet  an  un-


dergraduate at  Harvard.  It  had  a  large  circula-
tion, both  here  and  abroad,  and  has  been  trans-
lated, not  only  into  most  of  the  languages  of  J]u-
rope,  but  also  into  several  of  the  eastern  tongues.
He  also  published  a  "  Sequel "  to  his  arithmetic
(1824:  revised  ed.,  1833),  and  an  "Algebra"  (1827).
COLBURN,  Zerah,  mathematical  prodigv,  b!
in  Cabot,  Vt.,  1  Sept.,  1804;  d.  in  Norwich,' Vt.,
2  March,  1840,  When  only  six  years  old  he  began
to  manifest  extraordinary  powers  of  computation.
His  father,  wishing  to  make  money  by  exhibiting
the  boy,  left  Vermont  with  him  in  the  winter  cf
1810-'l.  The  offer  of  Dr.  Wheelock,  president  of
Dartmouth,  to  educate  Zerah  at  his  own  expense
was  rejected,  and  the  lad  was  placed  on  exhibition
in  Boston,  where  he  attracted  much  attention.  He
mentally  solved  problems  involving  the  use  of
numbers  containing  four  or  five  places  of  figures
with  greater  ease  and  rapidity  than  that  to  which
experienced  mathematicians  could  attain.  The
question,  "How  many  days  and  hours  in  1,811
years  f  "  was  answered  correctly  in  twenty  seconds.
At  this  time  he  could  not  explain  his  jprocesses;
but  a  few  years  later  he  was  able  to  do  so,  and  it
then  appeared  that  he  had  no  new  methods,  but
merely  possessed  wonderful  facility  in  using  the
ordinary  ones.  When  he  was  nine  years  old  he
was  able  to  solve  questions  like  the  following:
"What  is  999,9992  X  492  X  25?"  The  result  occu-
pies seventeen  places  of  figures.  He  imraediatelv
gave  the  factors  of  294,967,297,  which  French
mathematicians  had  supposed  to  be  a  prime  num-
ber. His  performances  show  that  his  mental  pro-
cesses were  inconceivably  rapid,  and  his  memory
very  powerful.  After  exhibiting  his  son  in  the
middle  and  southern  states,  Mr.  Colburn  took  hiin
to  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  and  finally
placed  him  in  the  Lycee  Napoleon  at  Paris,  where
he  remained  for  eighteen  months.  In  1816  they
were  reduced  to  poverty  in  England,  and  Zerah  at-
tracted the  attention  of  the  Earl  of  Bristol,  who
placed  him  in  Westminster  school  for  three  years;
but  a  disagreement  between  Mr.  Colburn  and  the
earl  caused  the  boy's  removal  from  the  school  in
1819,  and,  in  accordance  with  his  father's  sugges-
tions, Zerah  began  to  study  for  the  stage.  Aban-
doning this,  he  became  assistant  in  a  school,  and
soon  began  teaching  on  his  own  account,  perform-
ing astronomical  calculations  at  the  same  time  for
Dr.  Thomas  Young,  then  secretary  of  the  board  of
longitude.  After  his  f?i:her's  death  in  1824  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States,  and,  after  teaching  for
a  few  months  in  Fairfield,  N.  Y.,  removed  to  Bur-
lington, Vt.,  where  he  studied  at  the  university,
and  supported  himself  by  teaching  French.  He
united  with  the  Methodist  church  in  1825,  was  for
nine  years  an  itinerant  preacher,  and  in  1835  be-
came professor  of  languages  in  Norwich  univer-
sity, Vermont.  His  remarkable  faculty  for  com-
putation left  him  about  the  time  he  reached  man-
hood. Mr.  Colburn's  manners  were  unassuming,
and  he  gave  no  evidence  cf  great  ability,  aside
from  his  early  talent  for  calculation.  He  published
his  "Memoirs"  (Springfield,  1833).— His  nephew,
Zerah,  engineer,  b.  in  Saratoga.  N.  Y..  in  1832;
d.  in  Massachusetts,  4  May,  1870,  lost  his  father
when  a  child,  and  removed  with  his  mother  to
New  Hampshire,  where  he  worked  on  a  farm.  He
afterward  went  to  Boston,  found  employment  in
the  Lowell  machine-shop  in  1847,  and  then  on
the  Concord  railroad,  where  he  showed  great
talent  for  practical  mechanics.  He  soon  rose  to
be  superintendent  of  Mr.  Souther's  locomotive-
works  in  Boston,  and  afterward  held  a  similar
place  in  the  works  at  Paterson,  N.  J.,  where  he  in-


COLBY


GOLDEN


683


vented  improvements  in  freight  engines.  He
then  connected  himself  with  the  "  Railroad  Jour-
nal," and  in  1854  established  in  New  York  city
the  '•  Railroad  Advocate,"  which  he  sold  in  1856,
and  bought  lands  in  Iowa.  He  visited  England
and  France,  and  gave  an  account  of  the  machine
and  iron  works  there  in  letters  to  the  "  Advocate."
In  1857,  with  Mr.  Holley,  he  again  visited  Europe
at  the  request  of  several  railroad  presidents,  and  in
1858  they  published  a  report  on  European  railway
systems  and  machinery.  They  resumed  their  re-
searches in  1858.  in  which  year  Mr.  Colburn  began
writing  for  the  London  "  Engineer,"  and  soon  be-
came its  editor.  After  several  years  of  hard  work
he  returned  to  the  United  States  and  began  the

Sublication  of  an  American  "  Engineer  "  in  Phila-
elphia.  Only  a  few  numbers  were  issued,  and  he
soon  resumed  the  editorship  of  the  London  paper.
In  1866  he  established  in  London  a  new  journal
called  "  Engineering,"  which  he  continued  to  edit
until  a  few  weeks  before  his  death.  In  1870  over-
work and  irregularity  of  habits  drove  hira  into
partial  insanity.  He  came  back  to  this  country  in
April,  avoided  all  his  old  friends,  strayed  away  to
a  country  town  in  Massachusetts,  and  died  there
by  his  own  hand.  During  his  residence  in  Lon-
don, Mr.  Colburn  was  employed  as  consulting  en-
gineer on  many  important  constructions,  and  pre-
pared numerous  valuable  papers  in  addition  to  his
editorial  labors.  The  more  noted  of  these  were  his
papers  before  the  Institution  of  civil  engineers  (of
which  he  was  a  member)  on  "  Iron  Bridges  "  and  on
"  American  Locomotives  and  Rolling  Stock,"  both
of  which  received  medals.  He  was  considered  a
high  authority  on  all  subjects  connected  with  me-
chanical engineering.  He  published  "  The  Loco-
motive Engine  "  (Boston,  1851),  and  wrote  a  supple-
ment on  "  American  Practice  "  for  a  new  edition  of
Clark's  "  Locomotive  Engine  "  (1859).

COLBY,  Anthony,  governor  of  New  Hamp-
shire, b.  in  New  London,  N.  H.,  13  Nov.,  1792 ;  d.
there,  1^3  July,  1873.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Baptist  church,  and  did  much  toward  consolidat-
ing the  intei-ests  of  the  denomination  in  the  state.
He  was  major-general  of  militia,  president  of  a
railroad,  and  a  large  owner  of  factories.  In  1846-7
he  was  governor  of  the  state.  Dartmouth  gave
him  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1850,  and  he
was  one  of  its  trustees  from  1850  till  1870.  Dur-
ing the  civil  war  he  was  adjutant-general  of  the
state.  Gov.  Colby  was  a  personal  friend  of  Daniel
Webster.  His  last  work  was  the  establishment  of
Colby  academy,  a  Baptist  institution  in  New  Lon-
don. N.  H.,  endowed  by  his  family.

COLBY,  Charles  Galusha,  editor,  b.  in  Roch-
ester, N.  Y.,  in  1830;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30
Oct.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1848,  and  soon
afterward  began  teaching  and  lecturing  on  astron-
omy. In  1850  he  was  engaged  with  Prof.  Bond,  of
Cambridge  observatory,  and  calculated  the  eclipses
lor  July,  1851,  publishing  his  results  in  "  Harper's
Magazine"  of  that  month.  He  also  wrote  an
article  on  telescopes  for  the  New  York  "  Inde-
pendent," which  attracted  the  attention  of  scien-
tific men.  In  the  latter  part  of  1851  he  removed
to  New  Y^'ork,  where  he  was  first  employed  in  the
office  of  the  "  American  Railroad  Journal,"  and
then  aided  Dr.  R.  S.  Fisher  in  the  preparation  of
his  "  Statistical  Gazetteer  of  the  United  States  "
and  "  American  Statistical  Annual "  (New  Y^'ork,
1853).  He  afterward  became  assistant  editor  of
Hunt's  "Merchant's  Magazine,"  and  held  the
place  till,  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Hunt,  the  property
passed  into  other  hands. Mr.  Colby  wrote  the  de-


scriptive and  statistical  letter-press  for  Morse's
"Geography  of  the  World"  (New  York,  1856),
Morse's  '•  Diamond  Atlas,"  and  several  smaller
works.  He  was  also  the  author  of  numerous
cyclopa3dia  articles.  He  removed  to  Boston  in
1861,  where  he  was  engaged  on  the  "  Commercial
Bulletin,"  but  was  compelled  by  failing  health  to
return  to  New  York  in  1864.

COLBY,  Gardner,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Bow-
doinham.  Me.,  3  Sept.,  1810;  d.  in  Newton  Centre,
Mass.,  2  April,  1879.  After  receiving  the  rudi-
ments of  an  English  education,  he  entered  the
dry-goods  business  in  Boston,  and  afterward  en-
gaged in  manufacturing  woollen  goods.  During
the  civil  war  he  was  a  large  contractor  for  the  sup-
ply of  clothing  to  the  national  army,  and  in  1870
iDecame  president  of  the  Wisconsin  central  rail-
road. Mr.  Colby  was  distinguished  for  his  liberal
contributions  to  benevolent  objects.  Newton
theological  seminary,  Brown  university,  and  the
American  Baptist  missionarv  union  received  large
sums  from  him.  A  gift  of  $50,000  to  Waterville
college,  Maine,  caused  the  name  of  that  institution
to  be  changed  to  Colby  university.  He  occupied
many  important  places  of  trust  and  honor  in  the
Baptist  denomination,  and  for  years  was  treasurer
of  Newton  theological  seminary. — His  son,  Cliarles
Lewis,  b.  in  Roxbury,  Mass.,  in  1839,  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1858.  He  removed  to  Milwaukee,
Wis.,  about  1874,  and  became  president  of  the
Wisconsin  central  railroad.  He  was  a  member  of
the  legislature  in  1880.  and  became  a  trustee  of
Brown  university  in  1879. — Another  son,  Henry
Francis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston  Highlands
(Roxbury),  Mass.,  25  Nov.,  1842,  was  graduated  at
Brown  in  1862,  and  at  Newton  theological  semi-
nary in  1867.  He  has  been  pastor  of  the  1st
Baptist  church  in  Dayton,  Ohio,  since  his  ordina-
tion in  1868,  and  in  1883  was  president  of  the
Ohio  Baptist  convention.  He  has  travelled  ex-
tensively in  Europe.  He  has  published  a  class
poem  (1862),  and  sketches  of  Gardner  Colby,  Caleb
Parker,  and  Ebenezer  Thresher.

COLCUR  (coal'-kur),  Araucanian  cacique  of
Angol,  b.  in  that  territory.  Chili,  in  1555;  d.  in
Coya  in  1589.  He  was  the  grandson  of  Caupoli-
can,  and,  after  taking  part  in  almost  every  battle
against  the  Spaniards  from  1583  till  1591,  was
elected  chief  of  the  united  forces  of  the  Arauca-
nians  in  1592.  He  surprised  Sotomayor,  the
governor  of  Chili,  who,  being  defeated,  returned
to  Peru  for  re-enforcements.  From  1593  till  1596
Colour  kept  up  the  war  by  means  of  continuous
skirmishes,  without  accepting  battle  in  open  field,
and  giving  not  a  moment  of  rest  to  Gov.  Loyola,
who  in  1597  fell,  with  sixty  men  of  his  escort,  in
an  ambuscade.  On  the  death  of  the  governor,
the  Spanish  troops  scattered,  when  the  cacique
attacked  and  captured  the  defenceless  cities,  slaugh-
tering every  Spaniard  that  fell  into  the  hands  of
his  Indians'  In  1598  he  besieged  the  city  of  Coya,
stormed  it  several  times  without  success,  and  was
killed  during  the  final  attack,  which  proved  disas-
trous to  the  Araucanians.

COLDEN,  Cadwallader,  physician,  b.  in  Dunse,
Scotland,  17  Feb.,  1688;  d.  on  Long  Island,  28
Sept.,  1776.  His  father,  Rev.  Alexander  Colden,
prepared  him  for  the  University  of  Edinburgh,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1705.  He  then  spent
three  years  in  studying  medicine  and  mathematics,
and  in  1708  came"  to  this  country  and  practised
successfully  as  a  physician  in  Philadelphia  till  1715,
He  tnen  visited  London,  and  met  Halley,  the  as-
tronomer, who  was  so  pleased  with  a  paper  on
"  Animal  Secretions,"  written  by  Colden  some  years


684


GOLDEN


GOLDEN


before,  that  he  read  it  before  the  Royal  society.
Golden  also  became  acquainted  at  this  time  with
other  noted  literary  and  scientific  men.  He  re-
turned to  Philadelphia  in  1716,  but,  at  the  re-
quest of  his  friend,  Gov.  Hunter,  settled  in  New
York  in  1718,  and  in  1719  became  the  first  survey-
or-general of  the  colony,  and  master  in  chancery.
Gov.  Burnet  gave  him  a  seat  in  the  provincial
council  in  1720.  About  1755  he  retired  with  his
family  to  a  tract  of  land,  for  which  he  had  received
a  patent,  about  nine  miles  from  Newburg,  on  the
Hudson.  Here,  in  the  midst  of  a  wilderness,  ex-
posed to  attacks  from  hostile  Indians,  he  gave  his
attention  to  farming  and  to  scientific  pursuits,
without  neglecting  the  duties  of  the  surveyor-
general's  office.  Golden  was  an  earnest  royalist  and
advocate  of  the  taxation  of  the  colonies  by  the  home
government.  He  administered  the  affairs  of  the
province  as  president  of  the  council  in  1760,  and
in  1761  Lord  Halifax,  in  return  for  his  "  zeal  for
the  rights  of  the  crown,"  appointed  him  lieutenant-
governor.  He  held  this  office  till  his  death,  and
was  repeatedly  placed  at  the  head  of  affairs  by  the
absence  or  death  of  the  various  governors.  He
was  acting  governor  when  the  paper  intended  for
distribution  under  the  stamp-act  arrived  in  New
York,  and  it  was  put  under  his  care  in  Fort
George,  which  stood  on  Battery  point.  On  the
evening  of  1  Nov.,  1765,  "a  torch-light  proces-
sion," says  Bancroft,  "  carrying  a  scaffold  and  two
images,  one  of  the  governor,  the  other  of  the
devil,  came  from  the  Fields,  now  the  Park,  down
Broadway,  to  within  eight  or  ten  feet  of  the  fort,
knocked  at  its  gate,  broke  open  the  governor's

coach-house,  took
out  his  chariot,
carried  the  images
upon  it  through
the  town,  and  re-
turned to  burn
them,  with  his
own  carriages  and
sleighs,  before  his
eyes  on  the  Bowl-
ing Gi-een."  He
would  have  fired
on  the  people,  but
was  menaced  with
being  hanged  on
a  sign-post  if  he
did  so.  The  next
day  he  yielded,
and  consented  to
give  the  stamps
into  the  custody
of  the  New  York
common  council.
They  were  taken  to  the  city-hall,  and  the  mu-
nicipal government  then  restored  order.  Golden's
claim  for  indemnification  was  rejected  by  the
assembly  in  1766.  He  continued  to  be  a  firm
friend  of  the  crown,  and  in  1775  advised  the  as-
sembly to  "  supplicate  the  throne,  and  our  most
gracious  sovereign  will  hear  and  relieve  you  with
paternal  tenderness."  Golden's  administration
was  marked  by  the  incorporation  of  several  be-
nevolent societies.  On  the  return  of  Gov.  Tryon
in  1775,  he  retired  to  his  house  on  Long  Island.
Dr.  Golden  corresponded  from  1710  till  his  death
with  the  most  prominent  scientific  men  of  his
time.  He  took  special  interest  in  botany,  and  was
the  first  to  introduce  the  Linnaean  system  into
America.  He  furnished  to  Linmeus  an  account
of  between  300  and  400  American  plants,  about  200
of  which  were  described  in  the  "  Acta  Upsaliensia."


The  celebrated  Swedish  botanist  afterward  gave
the  name  Goldenia  to  a  plant  of  the  tetandrous
class,  in  honor  of  his  correspondent.  One  of  Gol-
den's most  constant  correspondents  was  Benjamin
Franklin.  The  two  philosophers  regularly  com-
municated their  discoveries  to  each  other,  and  in
a  letter  to  Franklin,  dated  October,  1743,  Golden
first  mentions  his  invention  of  the  art  of  stereo-
typing, afterward  practically  carried  out  by  Her-
ban  in  Paris  in  the  beginning  of  this  century.
Though  he  early  gave  up  the  practice  of  medicine,
he  was  always  interested  in  it.  He  was  one  of  the
first  to  recommend  the  cooling  regimen  in  fevers,
and  in  1742  showed,  in  a  tract,  how  an  epidemic
that  had  visited  New  York  was  aggravated  by  the
filth  and  foul  air  in  portions  of  the  city.  For  this
he  was  thanked  by  the  corporation,  who  adopted
many  of  his  suggestions.  Dr.  Golden  took  an  ac-
tive part  in  founding  the  American  philosophical
society.  He  published  a  "History  of  the  Five
Indian  Nations  depending  upon  New  York,"  call-
ing attention  to  the  relation  of  Indian  affairs  to
commerce  (New  York,  1727;  reprinted,  with  in-
troduction and  notes  by  John  G.  Shea,  186G;
enlarged  ed.,  London,  1747),  and  "Gause  of  Gravi-
tation" (New  York,  1745;  enlarged  ed.,  entitled
"  Principles  of  Action  in  Matter,"  with  a  treatise
on  Fluxions,  London,  1752).  He  prepared,  just
before  his  death,  a  new  edition  of  the  last-named
work,  with  copious  additions,  and  placed  the
manuscript  in  the  hands  of  Prof.  Whittle,  of
Edinburgh,  but  it  never  appeared,  and  its  fate  is
unknown.  Among  Dr.  Golden's  medical  papers
are  an  "  Essay  on  the  Virtues  of  the  Bortanice  or
Great  Water-Dock,"  which  led  to  his  acquaintance
with  Linnaius,  and  "  Observations  on  Exidemical
Sore  Throat "  (1753).  Among  his  manuscripts  are
an  inquiry  into  the  operation  of  intellect  in  ani-
mals, an  essay  on  vital  motion,  and  "  Observations
on  Smith's  History  of  New  York,"  complaining  of
the  author's  partiality  and  incorrectness.  These
and  other  papers  are  in  the  possession  of  the
New  York  historical  society,  and  the  historian
Bancroft  derived  from  them  valuable  data  for  his
History  of  the  United  States. — His  grandson,
Cadw.allader  David,  lawyer,  b.  in  Springhill,
near  Flushing,  L.  I.,  4  April,  1769;  d.  in  Jersey
Gity,  N.  J.,  7  Feb.,  1834,  began  his  studies  in  Ja-
maica, L.  I.,  and  continued  them  in  London,  Eng-
land. He  returned  to  the  United  States  in  1785,
studied  law,  and  began  practice  in  l^ew  York  in
1791.  He  removed  to  Poughkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  in
1793,  but  returned  in  1796  to  New  York  city,
where  he  became  district  attorney  in  1810,  and
stood  at  the  head  of  his  profession  as  a  commercial
lawyer.  He  was  colonel  of  a  volunteer  regiment
in  1812,  a  member  of  the  legislature  in  1818,  and
in  the  same  year  succeeded  De  Witt  Glinton  as
mayor  of  New  York.  In  1821  he  successfully  con-
tested the  election  of  Peter  Sharpe  to  congress,
and  served  one  term,  and  from  1824  till  1827  was
a  member  of  the  state  senate.  With  De  Witt
Glinton  he  was  among  the  earliest  promoters  of
the  system  of  internal  improvements,  and  also  gave
much  attention  to  public  education  and  the  refor-
mation of  juvenile  criminals.  He  was  for  many
years  one  of  the  governors  of  the  New  York  hos-
pital. Mr.  Golden  married  a  daughter  of  Samuel
Provoost,  first  Episcopal  bishop  of  the  diocese  of
New  York.  He  published  a  "  Life  of  Robert  Ful-
ton," whose  intimate  friend  he  was  (New  York,
1817);  "Memoir  of  the  Gelebration  of  the  Gom-
pletion  of  the  New  York  Ganals"  (1825):  and
"  Vindication  of  the  Steamboat  Right  granted  by
the  State  of  New  York  "  (1819).


COLE


COLEMAN


685


COLE,  Azel  Dow,  educator,  b.  in  Sterling,
Conn.,  1  Dec,  1818 ;  d.  in  Nashotah,  Wis.,  15  Oct.,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1838,  and
at  the  General  theological  seminary,  in  New
York,  in  1841,  and  was  ordained  by  Bishop  Gris-
wold.  In  November  of  the  same  year  he  became
rector  of  St.  James's  parish  in  Woonsocket.  R.  I.
After  nearly  four  years'  service  in  this  parish,  he
went  in  1845  to  Kalamazoo,  Mich.,  where  also  he
remained  four  years.  In  December,  1849.  he  re-
moved to  Racine,  Wis.,  and  in  May,  1850,  was
elected  president  of  Nashotah  theological  semi-
nary. In  this  place  he  labored  until  his  death,  a
jieriod  of  thirty-five  years,  being  also  rector  of  St;
Sylvanus's  parish,  and  making  regular  visitations
to  the  stations  in  the  neighboring  villages  and
country  districts,  where  services  were  regularly
maintained  by  the  students.  In  several  of  these
places  the  results  of  his  efforts  culminated  in  the
erection  of  substantial  churches.  He  was  nomi-
nated to  the  vacancy  in  the  bishopric  made  by  the
death  of  Bishop  Armitage  in  1878,  and,  although
not  elected,  wielded  an  influence  in  the  affairs  of
the  diocese  unequalled  by  that  of  any  other  church-
man. In  1852  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred
on  him  by  Norwich  university,  Vt.

COLE,  Cornelius,  senator,  b.  in  Lodi.  N.  Y.,
17  Sept.,  1822.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan
university,  Middletown,  Coim.,  in  1847,  and,  after
studying  law  in  the  office  of  William  H.  Seward,
was  admitted  to  the  bar.  In  1849  he  crossed  the
plains  to  California,  and,  after  working  a  year  in
the  gold  mines,  began  the  practice  of  law.  He  was
district  attorney  of  Sacrainento  city  and  county
from  1859  till  1862,  was  a  member  of  the  National
republican  committee  from  1856  till  1860,  and  dur-
ing the  latter  year  edited  a  newspaper.  He  then
removed  to  Santa  Cruz,  and  was  a  representative
from  California  in  the  38th  congress  as  a  union
republican,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1863,  till  3  March,
1865.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  to  succeed
James  A.  McDougall,  democrat,  serving  from  4
March,  1867,  till  3  March,  1873.

COLE,  Joseph  Foxcroft,  artist,  b.  in  Jay,  Me.,
9  Nov.,  1837.  He  studied  art  in  Paris,  where  he
was  a  pupil  of  Lambinet  from  1860  till  1863,  and
of  Charles  Jacque  in  1867.  His  professional  life
has  been  spent  in  Paris  and  Boston.  Among  his
paintings  are  "  The  Ram  and  Ewe,"  "  New  Eng-
land Farm,"  "  The  Shepherdess,"  "  Willow  Brook,"
'•  The  Weakest  goes  to  the  Wall,"  "  Pastoral  Scene
in  Normandy,"  exhibited  in  the  Paris  salon  of
1875;  "Norman  Farm,"  and  "Sheep-washing  in
Normandy,"  sent  to  the  London  Royal  academy
exhibition  of  1877;  and  "  Twilight,  Melrose  High-
lands," "  Cows  Ruminating,"  and  "  Coast  Scene  in
Normandy,"  shown  at  the  Centennial  exhibition  of
1876,  where  he  received  a  medal  and  diploma.  His
landscapes  contain  delicate  gradations  of  color,  and
show  "  quiet,  slumberous  distances,  indicative  of
the  mysterious  tenderness  and  repose  of  nature."

COLE,  Orsanms,  jurist,  b.  in  Cazenovia,  Madi-
son CO.,  N.  Y.,  23  Aug.,  1819.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  in  1843.  studied  law,  and  removed  to
Potosi,  Grant  co..  Wis.,  where  he  practised  his  pro-
fession. He  was  appointed  U.  S.  judge  for  Wis-
consin territory,  was  a  prominent  member  of  the
constitutional  convention  of  1847,  and  elected  to
congress  as  a  Whig  in  1848,  serving  one  term.  He
vigorously  opposed  the  compromise  measures  of
1850,  was  the  Whig  and  Free-soil  candidate  for  at-
torney-general of  Wisconsin  in  1853,  and  in  1855
elected' by  the  Republicans  to  the  supreme  bench
of  the  state.  He  was  re-elected  in  1861,  1867,  and
1873,  and  in  1879  for  a  term  of  ten  years.


COLE,  Thomas,  painter,  b.  in  Bolton-le-Moor,
England,  1  Feb.,  1801;  d.  near  Catskill,  N.  Y.,  11
Feb.,  1848.  His  father  emigrated  to  the  United
States  in  1819,  and  settled  in  Ohio,  where  Thomas
took  lessons  in  art  from  a  mediocre  portrait-painter
named  Stein.  In  1825  he  removM  to  New  York,
became  intimate  with  Durand  and  Trumbull,  and
turned  his  attention  to  depicting  the  autumn
scenery  of  the  Hudson,  with  such  success  that  he
soon  became  known  as  one  of  the  best  of  American
hmdscape-painters.  He  made  several  professional
visits  to  Europe,  and  sketched  and  painted  in  Eng-
land, France,  and  Italy;  but  his  most  attractive
works  were  executed  in"  this  country.  In  1830  he
exhibited  at  the  Royal  academy,  London,  a  "  View
in  New  Hampshire  "  and  "  The  Tomb  of  General
Brock,"  and  in  1831  a  "  View  in  the  United  States."
Among  his  most  popular  works  are  the  "  Voyage
of  Life,"  a  series  of  allegorical  pictures,  familiar
through  engravings,  and  the  "  Course  of  Empii-e,"
a  similar  series,  representing  a  nation's  rise,  prog-
ress, decline,  fall,  and  desolation,  now  owned  by
the  New  York  historical  society.  Among  his  other
works  are  "  Dream  of  Arcadia,"  "  Departure,  Re-
turn," "Garden  of  Eden"  (1828);  "Expulsion
from  Paradise  "  (1828,  Lenox  library.  New  York) ;
"  Titian's  Goblet "  (1833) ;  "  Mount  Etna,"  "  White
Mountains"  (Wadsworth  athenaeum,  Hartford);
"Angel  appearing  to  the  Shepherds"  (Boston
athenaeum) ;  "  Primitive  State  of  Man,"  "  View  on
the  Thames,"  "  Cross  in  the  Wilderness,"  "  L' Alle-
gro," "  II  Penseroso,"  "  Mountain  Ford."  "  Cross
and  the  World,"  "  Vale  of  Segesta,"  "  Chocorua
Peak,"  and  "  Catskill  Creek."  Mr.  Cole  was  a
modest,  sweet-tempered,  thoughtful  man,  whose
love  of  nature  was  as  deep  as  that  of  his  friend
Bryant.  They  found  great  pleasure  in  wandering
among  the  Catskills,  which  is  pleasantly  commem-
orated in  one  of  Durand's  finest  pictures,  in  which
the  poet  and  painter  are  seen  standing  together  on
a  mountain  ledge.  After  the  death  of  Mr.  Cole  a
memorial  address  was  delivered  by  Mr.  Bryant  be-
fore the  New  York  historical  society.

COLEMAN,  Charles  Caryll,  painter,  b.  in
Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1840.  He  went  to  Europe  when
nineteen  years  old  to  study  art,  but  returned  at
the  beginning  of  the  civil  war,  and  served  in  the
national  army  three  years.  Jn  1866  he  returned
to  Europe,  and  has  since  resided  there,  painting
chiefly  in  Paris,  London,  and  Rome,  where  his
studio  was  in  1886.  He  is  a  member  of  the  Lon-
don art  club,  and  has  been  an  associate  member  of
the  National  academy,  New  York,  since  1881.  His
principal  works  are  "  Troubadour,"  "  Nuremberg
Towers"  (1876);  "Bronze  Horses  of  St.  Mark's"
(1877);  "Venice,  Ancient  and  Modern"  (1880);
"  Remote  Quarter  of  Paris  in  1878  "  (1881) ;  "  Capri
Interior."  "  Capri  Grainfleld,"  "  Capri  Reapers,"
and  "  Head  of  Capri  Girl "  (1886).

COLEMAN,  John,  editor,  b.  in  Baltimore,  Md.,
11  Feb.,  1803;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  16  Sept.,  1869.
He  was  a  Methodist  till  1834,  when  he  was  con-
firmed in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church,  was  or-
dained priest  in  Frederick,  Md.,  27  May,  1836,  and
for  twenty  years  was  rector  of  Trinity  church,
Philadelphia.  He  became  editor  of  the  "  Banner
of  the  Cross,"  Philadelphia,  with  Rev.  F.  Ogilby,
and  edited  Faber's  "  Difficulties  of  Romanism,"
with  an  introductory  essay  (Philadelphia,  1840),
and  Dr.  Wilmer's  "  Episcopal  Manual "  (1841).  He
also  contributed  to  various  religious  journals. —
His  son,  Leighton,  P.  E.  bishop,  b.  in  Philadelphia,
3  May,  1837,  was  graduated  at  the  General  theo-
logical seminary,  New  York,  in  1861,  and,  after
holding  pastorates  in  Philadelphia,  Wilmington,


686


COLEMAN


COLEMAN


Del.,  and  Mauch  Chunk,  Pa.,  became  rector  of
Trinity  church,  Toledo.  Ohio,  in  1874.  In  1875  he
was  elected  bishop  of  Fond  du  Lac,  Wis.,  but  de-
clined. He  resided  abroad  for  several  years,  and
on  6  June.  1888,  was  chosen  bishop  of  Delaware.

COLEMAN,  Lewis  Miner,  educator,  b.  in  Han-
over county,  Va.,  3  Feb.,  1827;  d.  in  ]\Iarch,  1863.
He  was  graduated  with  high  honor  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Virginia  in  184G.  In  1859  he  succeeded  the
distinguished  scholar,  Dr.  Harrison,  as  professor  of
Latin  in  that  institution.  At  the  beginning  of  the
war  he  raised  an  artillery  eoinpany  for  the  Con-
federate service,  became  its  captain,  and  in  18G2
was  appointed  major  of  artillery.  At  the  battle  of
Fredericksburg  he  received  a  wound,  from  which,
after  lingering  in  great  agony  for  three  months,  he
died.  Prof.  Coleman  was  distinguished  for  his
Christian  devotion  and  high  scholarship.

COLEMAN,  Lyman,  author,  b.  in  Middlefield,
Mass.,  14  June,  1796;  d.  in  Easton,  Pa.,  16  March,
1882.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1817.  and  for
three  years  was  principal  in  the  Latin  grammar-
school  in  Hartford.  He  was  a  tutor  in  Yale  from
1820  till  1825,  studying  theology  at  the  same  time.
He  was  pastor  of  Belchertown,  Mass.,  Congrega-
tional church  for  seven  years,  for  five  years  princi-
pal of  Burr  seminary  in  Vermont,  and  then  prin-
cipal of  the  English  department  of  Phillips  An-
dover  academy.  He  spent  the  years  1842  and  1843
in  travel  and  study  in  Germany,  where  he  enjoyed
the  intimate  friendship  of  Dr.  August  Neander,  and
on  his  return  taught  German  in  Princeton  college,
and  afterward,  from  1845  till  1846,  at  Amherst.  In
1856  he  travelled  in  Europe,  Egypt,  and  Palestine.
He  was  professor  of  Latin  and  Greek  in  Lafayette
college,  Easton,  Pa.,  from  1861  till  1868,  when  he
was  transferred  to  the  new  chair  of  Latin  language
and  literature,  holding  it  till  his  death.  Princeton
gave  him  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D.  in  1847.  Dr.  Cole-
man published  "  Antiquities  ^  of  the  Christian
Church  "  (translated  from  the  German,  New  York,
1841) ;  "  The  Apostolical  and  Primitive  Church  "
(Boston,  1844) ;  "  Historical  Geography  of  the
Bible"  (Philadelphia,  1850);  "Ancient  Christian-
ity "  (1852) ;  "  Historical  Text-Book  and  Atlas  of
Biblical  Geography "  (1854 ;  revised  ed.,  1859) ;
"  Prelacy  and  Ritualism  "  (1869) ;  and  a  genealogy
of  the  Lyman  family.  See  a  sermon  on  his  life  by
Rev.  Alfred  N.  Kellogg,  D.  D.  (Easton,  Pa.,  1882)."

COLEMAN,  Obed  M.,  inventor,  b.  in  Barnsta-
ble, Mass.,  23  Jan.,  1817 ;  d.  in  Saratoga,  N.  Y.,  5
April,  1845.  He  was  of  German  and  English  par-
entage, showed  talent  for  music  in  infancy,  and
during  a  severe  illness,  in  1833,  manifested  won-
derful inventive  powers.  About  this  time,  when
living  in  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  he  invented  an
"Automaton  Lady  Minstrel  and  Singing-Bird,"
consisting  of  the  figure  of  a  lady  with  a  bird
perched  on  her  shoulder.  The  lady  played  several
airs  on  an  accordeon,  while  the  bird  warbled.
Coleman  sold  this  remarkable  piece  of  mechanism
for  $800,  thus  relieving  himself  from  extreme  pov-
erty. He  removed  to  Saratoga  in  1842,  and  in-
vented improvements  in  the  accordeon.  He  also
began  here  to  construct  his  -(Eolian  attachment  to
the  piano-forte,  which  gave  him  high  rank  among
inventors.  Pie  sold  his  patent  for  $100,000  in
this  country,  and  for  about  $10,000  in  England.

COLEMAN,  William,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1766 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  13  July,
1829.  He  studied  law,  began  practice  in  Green-
field, Mass.,  and  during  Shays's  rebellion  served
against  the  insurgents.  He  removed  to  New  York
city  about  1794,  and  was  for  a  short  time  a  law
partner  of Aaron Burr. He  was  afterward  re-


porter of  the  New  York  supreme  court,  but  lost
the  place  after  the  defeat  of  the  federalists  in  1800.
In  1801  Coleman  was  selected  by  Alexander  Ham-
ilton and  other  prominent  members  of  his  party
to  conduct  a  new  federalist  daily  in  New  York.
The  paper,  under  the  name  of  the  "  Evening  Post,"
appeared  on  16  Nov.,  1801,  and  Coleman  was  its
sole  editor  for  twenty  years,  retaining  his  connec-
tion with  it  till  his  death.  Coleman  never  wavered
in  his  attachment  to  the  principles  of  the  Federal
party,  and  was  its  warm  defender,  even  after  it  lunl
become  extinct.  He  was  able,  honest,  and  fearless,
and  was  brought  into  intimate  relations  with  some
of  the  most  prominent  men  of  his  time.

COLEMAN,  William  T.,  pioneer,  b.  in  Cvthi-
ana,  Ky.,  29  Feb.,  1824.  He  went  to  San  Fran-
cisco in  1849  and  engaged  in  business  as  a  ship-
ping and  commission  merchant.  During  1850  and
the  early  part  of  1851,  lawlessness,  from  which
San  Francisco,  even  at  the  height  of  the  first  gold
excitement  of  1849,  had  been  surprisingly  free,  be-
came frequent  and  aggl-essive.  The  regular  courts,
meanwhile,  proved  to  be  ineffective.  The  result  in
February,  1851,  w-as  an  outburst  of  popular  indig-
nation against  crime.  Robbers  had  assaulted  and
badly  injured  a  well-known  merchant,  Jansen,  in
his  place  of  business ;  and  two  men  were  arrested
on  a  mistaken  suspicion  that  they  were  the  assail-
ants. On  22  Feb.  a  crowd  of  indignant  citizens
undertook  to  get  these  men  out  of  the  hands  of
the  jailer  and  execute  them,  but  the  attempt  was
for  the  moment  thwarted.  Later  in  the  day,  how-
ever, an  agreement  with  the  authorities  was
reached,  in  accordance  with  which  the  prisoners
were  to  be  brought  for  trial  before  an  improvised
popular  tribunal  on  the  next  day.  At  this  trial  M  r.
Coleman  appeared  as  prosecuting  attorney,  reguhir
lawyers  declining  the  responsibility.  He  himself
had  before  used  all  his  personal  influence  with  the
assembled  people  to  secure  an  orderly  trial,  and
when  the  popular  jury  disagreed  on  the  question  of
the  personal  identity  of  one  of  the  accused,  the  whole
undertaking  was  quietly  abandoned,  the  people  re-
stored the  prisoners  to  the  regular  authorities,  and
the  excitement  died  away.  The  possibility  of  or-
derly popular  justice  in  San  Francisco  had,  how-
ever, been  made  plain  by  this  affair,  and  when,  in
May  and  June,  further  signs  of  lawlessness  became
noticeable,  while  the  inefficiency  of  the  courts  re-
mained as  obvious  as  ever,  the  leaders  in  the  move-
ment of  February  joined  with  many  other  citizens
to  organize  a  vigilance  committee,  for  the  sake  of
terrifying,  banishing,  and,  in  very  serious  cases,
hanging  the  dangerous  characters.  In  the  execu-
tive body  of  this  committee  Mr.  Coleman  was
prominent.  The  committee  was  active  during
June,  July,  and  August,  its  sessions  all  being
secret.  In  all  cases  but  one  (where  they  retook
two  of  their  prisoners  whom  the  sheriff  had  res-
cued) open  resistance  of  the  regular  authorities
was  avoided.  Even  in  this  case  they  escaped  an
actual  fight  with  the  authorities  by  means  of
prompt  action  and  an  overwhelming  show  of  force.
They  executed,  in  the  course  of  their  activity,  four
men,  all  notorious  and  desperate  characters,  ban-
ished to  foreign  countries,  under  threats  of  death
upon  return,  many  others,  and  terrified  into  flight
or  concealment  a  vast  number.  When  their  work
was  done  they  abandoned,  not  their  organization,
but  their  active  operations,  and  returned  to  pri-
vate life.  Mr.  Coleman's  services  in  connection
with  the  committee  of  1851  were  not  forgotten,
and  when  in  May,  1856,  after  a  long  period  of  com-
mercial depression,  popular  discontent,  and  too
general  social  corruption,  public  indignation  was


COLES


COLFAX


687


once  more  aroused  to  white  heat  by  the  murrler  of
the  noted  editor  James  King,  of  William,  Mr.  Cole-
man was  one  of  the  first  called  upon  to  lead  a  new
movement,  which  resulted  in  the  greatest  of  all
vigilance  committees.  After  some  urging,  he  ac-
cepted this  call  and  became  leader  of  the  executive
committee  of  the  revived  organization.  The  work
of  the  great  committee  cannot  be  described  fully
here ;  but  Mr.  Coleman's  name  is  connected  with
all  the  prominent  occurrences  for  which  the  com-
mittee is  responsible.  Early  in  the  history  of  the
excitement  he  was  visited  at  the  rooms  of  the  ex-
ecutive committee  by  the  governor  of  California,
Neely  Johnson,  in  company  with  prominent  offi-
cials,' among  whom  was  Gen.  William  T,  Sherman,
then  major-general  of  tne  state  militia.  The  offi-
cials came  to  use  their  personal  influence  with
Coleman  himself,  and,  with  the  other  members  of
the  body,  to  prevent  any  active  interference  in  the
course  of  law.  Of  this  interview  Gen.  Sherman,  in
his  "  Memoirs,"  has  given  an  account  that  differs
much  from  the  memory  of  Mr.  Coleman  himself,
and  of  other  committee  members.  At  all  events,
the  negotiations  entirely  failed,  and  the  committee
took  for  the  time  almost  complete  control  of  the
administration  of  criminal  justice  in  San  Francis-
co. Both  city  and  state  authorities  were  powerless
to  hinder  them  ;  the  committee  were  strong  in  the
consciousness  of  the  approval  of  a  large  majority
of  good  citizens ;  and  the  respectable  but  not  very
skilfully  conducted  efforts  of  the  "  law  and  order ""
party  to  organize  public  sentiment  against  the
whole  movement  proved  unavailing.  Mr.  Coleman
throughout  endeavored,  and  generally  with  suc-
cess, to  keep  the  committee  from  hasty  and  dan-
gerous action,  and  to  avoid  collision  with  U.S.
authorities.  He  had  charge  of  the  trials,  and  di-
rected the  final  executions,  of  the  four  murderers
whom  the  organization  hanged,  the  most  noted  of
whom  was  Casey,  the  murderer  of  King.  The  most
serious  complication  in  the  movement  was  the  ar-
rest and  trial  of  Judge  David  S.  Terry,  of  the  su-
preme court  of  the  state,  for  assault  on  one  of  the
vigilance  police.  Terry  was  finally  released  with-
out punishment.  The  committee  tried  to  avoid
interference  in  matters  of  general  partisan  politics,
so  far  as  related  to  national  and  state  affairs ;  but
after  the  cessation  of  the  activity  of  the  whole
body,  in  August,  1856,  its  members  still  retained
enough  unity  to  control  municipal  politics  for
many  years.  While  Mr.  Coleman's  firm  continued
its  San  Francisco  business,  he  himself  lived  in  New
York  from  1857  till  1864 ;  and  he  was  there  un-
successfully sued  by  persons  who  had  suffered  from
the  vigilance  committee.  In  1864  he  returned  to
San  Francisco.  The  history  of  the  vigilance  com-
mittees, so  far  as  it  is  now  known,  may  be  found  in
the  "Annals  of  San  Francisco"  (Xew  York,  1855);
Tuthill's  "  Historv  of  California  "  (San  Francisco,
1866):  and  Hittell's  "History  of  San  Francisco"
(San  Francisco,  1878).  But  the  complete  inner  his-
tory of  that  strange  episode  will  probably  not  be
written,  or  at  least  not  published,  until  the  actors
have  all  passed  away.

COLES,  Abraham,  author,  b.  in  Scotch  Plains,
N.  J.,  26  Dec.  1813;  d.  in  Monterey,  Cal.,  3  May,
1891.  He  early  began  the  study  of  medicine,  was
graduated  at  Jefferson  medical  college,  Philadel-
phia, in  1835,  and  settled  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1836.
He  visited  Europe  in  1848,  and  again  in  1854.  and
was  in  Paris  during  the  insurrection  of  June.  1848.
of  which  he  wrote  an  account  in  a  series  of  letters
to  the  Newark  "Advertiser."  He  has  published  a
volume  containing  thirteen  original  translations
of  the  celebrated  hymn  "Dies  IrtT."  (New  York,


^


^


m


/2jr^^^li4j


1859) ;  "  Stabat  Mater  Dolorosa  "  (1865) ;  "  Sta-
bat  Mater  Speciosa  "  (1866) ;  "  Old  Gems  in  New
Settings"  (1866);
"The  Alicrocosm,"
a  physiological
poem,  read  before
the  New  Jersey
medical  society
while  he  was  its
president  in  1866
(1866 ;  2d  ed.,
with  other  poems,
1881);  "The  Evan-
gel inverse,"  with
Scripture  text
and  notes  (1874):
"The  Light  of  the
World  "  (1884),
and  various  re-
views and  papers,
on  literary,  medi-
cal, and  scientific
subjects. He  has

been  engaged  on  the  task  of  versifying  the  Psalms.
Princeton  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1871.

COLES,  Edward,  governor  of  Hlinois,  b,  in  Al-
bemarle county,  Va.,  15  Dec,  1786 ;  d.  in  Philadel-
phia, Pa.,  7  July,  1868.  He  was  educated  at  Hamp-
den-Sidney  college,  and  at  William  and  Mary,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1807.  He  was  private
secretary  to  President  Madison  from  1810  till  1816,
and  in  1817  sent  on  a  confidential  diplomatic  mis-
sion to  Russia.  He  returned  in  1818,  and  in  1819
removed  to  Edwardsville,  111.,  and  freed  all  the
slaves  that  had  been  left  him  by  his  father,  giving
to  each  head  of  a  family  160  acres  of  land.  PJe
was  appointed  registrar  of  the  U.  S.  land-office  at
Edwardsville,  and  in  1822  was  nominated  for  gov-
ernor on  account  of  his  v.ell-known  anti-slavery
sentiments.  He  served  from  1823.  till  1826,  and
during  his  term  of  office  prevented  the  pro-slavery
party  from  obtaining  control  of  the  state  after  a
bitter  and  desperate  conflict.  The  history  of  this
remarkable  struggle  has  been  written  by  Elihu  B.
Washburne  (Chicago,  1882).  Gov.  Coles  removed
to  Philadelphia  in  1833,  and  in  1856  read  before
the  Pennsylvania  historical  society  a  "History  of
the  Ordinance  of  1787"  (Philadelphia,  1856).

COLESWORTHY,  Daniel  Clement,  publisher,
b.  in  Portland,  Mc,  14  July,  1810.  He  is  descend-
ed from  an  old  Boston  family,  one  of  whom  was  a
member  of  the  famous  "  tea-party  "  in  Boston  har-
bor. He  became  a  printer,  and  published  and
edited  the  Portland  "  Tribune  "  in  1840-'4,  and
since  1850  has  been  a  bookseller  in  Boston.  Pie
has  published  "Sabbath-School  Hymns"  (1833);
"  Advice  to  an  Apprentice  "  (1836) ;  "  Opening
Buds"  (1838);  "A  Touch  at  the  Times"  (1840);
"  Chronicles  of  Casco  Bay  "  (1850) ;  and  "  A  Group
of  Children,  and  other  Poems  "  (1865).

COLFAX,  Schuyler,  statesman,  b.  in  New
York  city,  23  March,  1823 ;  d.  in  Mankato,  Minn.,
13  Jan.,  1885.  His  grandfather  was  Gen.  William
Colfax,  who  commanded  the  life-guards  of  Wash-
ington throughout  the  Revolutionary  war.  His
father  died  a  short  time  before  the  son's  birth,  and
in  1834  his  mother  married  George  W.  Matthews.
After  attending  the  public  schools  till  he  was  ten
years  of  age,  and  serving  three  years  as  clerk  in  his
step-father's  store,  Schuyler  went  with  the  family
to  Indiana  in  1836,  and  settled  in  New  Carlisle,  St.
Joseph  CO.,  where  Mr.  Matthews  soon  became  post-
master. The  boy  continued  to  serve  as  his  clerk,
and  began  a  journal  to  aid  himself  in  composition,
contributing  at  the  same  time  to  the  county  pa-


COLFAX


COLGATE


per.  His  step-father  retired  from  business  in
1839,  and  Colfax  then  began  to  study  law,  but
afterward  gave  it  up.  In  1841  Mr.  Matthews  was
elected  county  auditor,  and  removed  to  South
Bend,  making  his  step-son  his  deputy,  which  office
Colfax  held  for  eight  years.  In  1842  he  was  active
in  organizing  a  temperance  society  in  South  Bend,
and  continued  a  total  abstainer  throughout  his
life.  At  this  time  he  reported  the  proceedings  of
the  state  senate  for  the  Indianapolis  "Journal  "
for  two  years.  In  1844  he  made  campaign  speeches
for  Henry  Clay.  He  had  acted  as  editor  of  the
South  Bend  "  Free  Press  "  for  about  a  year  when,
in  company  with  A.  W.  West,  he  bought  the  paper
in  September,  1845,  and  changed  its  name  to  the
"  St.  Joseph  Valley  liegister."  Under  his  man-
agement, despite  numerous  mishaps  and  business
losses,  the  "  Register  "  quadrupled  its  subscription
in  a  few  years,  and  became  the  most  influential
journal,  in  support  of  whig  politics,  in  that  part
of  Indiana.  Mr.  Colfax  was  secretary  of  the  Chi-
cago harbor  and  river  convention  oi  July,  1847,
and  also  of  the  Baltimore  whig  convention  of  1848,
which  nominated  Taylor  for  president.  The  next
year  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  convention  to
revise  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  Indiana,  and
in  his  place,  both  by  voice  and  vote,  opposed  the

clause  that  pro-
iiibited  tree  col-
ored men  from
settling  in  that
state.  He  was
also  offered  a
nomination  for
the  state  senate,
but  declined  it.
In  1851  he  was
a  candidate  for
congress,  and
came  near  being
elected  in  a  dis-
trict that  was
strongly  demo-
cratic. He  ac-
cepted his  oppo-
nent's challenge
to  a  joint  can-
vass, travelled  a
thousand  miles,
and  spoke  sev-
enty times.  He  was  again  a  delegate  to  the  whig
national  convention  in  1852,  and,  having  joined
the  newly  formed  republican  party,  was  its  suc-
cessful candidate  for  congress  in  1854,  serving  by
successive  re-elections  till  1869.  In  1856  he  sup-
ported Fremont  for  president,  and  during  the  can-
vass made  a  speech  in  congress  on  the  extension
of  slavery  and  the  aggressions  of  the  slave-power.
This  speech  was  used  as  a  campaign  document,  and
more  than  half  a  million  copies  were  circulated.
He  was  chairman  of  several  important  committees
of  congress,  especially  that  on  post-offices  and  post-
roads,  and  introduced  many  reforms,  including  a
bill  providing  for  a  daily  overland  mail-route  from
St.  Louis  to  San  Francisco,  reaching  mining-camps
where  letters  had  previously  been  delivered  by  ex-
press at  five  dollars  an  ounce.  Mr.  Colfax  favored
Edward  Bates  as  the  republican  candidate  for  the
presidency  in  1860.  His  name  was  widely  men-
tioned for  the  office  of  postmaster  -  general  in
Lincoln's  cabinet,  but  the  president  selected  C.
B.  Smith,  of  Indiana,  on  the  ground,  as  he  after-
ward wrote  Colfax,  that  the  latter  was  "  a  young
man,  running  a  brilliant  career,  and  sure  of  a
bright  future  in  any  event." In  the  latter  part  of


18G1  he  ably  defended  Fremont  in  the  house  against
the  attack  of  Frank  P.  Blair.  In  1862  he  intro-
duced a  bill,  which  became  a  law,  to  punish  fraudu-
lent contractors  as  felons,  and  continued  his  ef-
forts for  reform  in  the  postal  service.  He  was
elected  speaker  of  the  house  on  7  Dec,  1863,  and
on  8  April,  1864,  descended  from  the  chair  to  move
the  expulsion  of  Mr.  Long,  of  Ohio,  who  had  made
a  speech  favoring  the  recognition  of  the  southern
confederacy.  The  resolution  was  afterward  changed
to  one  of  censure,  and  Mr.  Colfax's  action  was
widely  commented  on,  but  generally  sustained  by
Union  men.  On  7  May,  1864,  he  was  presented  by
citizens  of  Indiana  then  in  Washington  with  a
service  of  silver,  largely  on  account  of  his  course  in
this  matter.  He  was  twice  re-elected  as  speaker,
each  time  by  an  increased  majority,  and  gained  the
applause  of  both  friends  and  opponents  by  his  skill
as  a  presiding  officer,  often  shown  under  very  try-
ing circumstances.  In  May,  1868,  the  republican
national  convention  at  Chicago  nominated  him  on
the  first  ballot  for  vice-president,  Gen.  Grant  be-
ing the  nominee  for  president,  and,  the  republican
ticket  having  been  successful,  he  took  his  seat  as
president  of  the  senate  on  4  March,  1869.  On  4
Aug.,  1871,  President  Grant  offered  him  the  place
of  secretary  of  state  for  the  remainder  of  his  term,
but  he  declined.  In  1872  he  was  prominently
mentioned  as  a  presidential  candidate,  especially
by  those  who,  later  in  the  year,  were  leaders  in  the
liberal  republican  movement,  and,  although  he  re-
fused to  join  them,  this  was  sufficient  to  make  ad-
ministration men  oppose  his  renomination  for  the
vice-presidency,  and  he  was  defeated  in  the  Phila-
delphia convention  of  1872.  In  December,  1872,
he  was  offered  the  chief  editorship  of  the  New
York  "Tribune,"  but  declined  it.  In  1873  Mr.
Colfax  was  implicated  in  the  charges  of  corrup-
tion brought  against  members  of  congress  who  had
received  shares  of  stock  in  the  credit  mobilier  of
America.  The  house  judiciary  committee  reported
that  there  was  no  ground  for  his  impeachment,  as
the  alleged  offence,  if  committed  at  all,  had  been
committed  before  he  became  vice-president.  These
charges  cast  a  shadow  over  the  latter  part  of  Mr.
Colfax's  life.  He  denied  their  truth,  and  his
friends  have  always  regarded  his  character  as  irre-
proachable. His  later  years  were  spent  mostly  in
retirement  in  his  home  at  South  Bend,  Ind.,  and
in  delivering  public  lectures,  which  he  did  fre-
quently before  large  audiences.  His  first  success
in  this" field  had  been  in  1865  with  a  lecture  en-
titled "Across  the  Continent,"  written  after  his
return  from  an  excursion  to  California.  The  most
popular  of  his  later  lectures  was  that  on  "  Lincoln
and  Garfield."  Mr.  Colfax  was  twice  married.
After  his  death,  which  was  the  result  of  heart
disease,  public  honors  were  paid  to  his  memory
both  in  congress  and  in  Indiana.  See  "Life  of
Colfax  "  by  O.  J.  Hollister  (New  York,  1886).

COLGATE,  William,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Kent,
England,  25  Jan.,  1783 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  25
March,  1857.  Constrained  by  political  considera-
tions, his  family  emigrated  to  this  country  in  1795,
and  settled  in  Harford  county,  Md.  Young  Col-
gate came  to  New  York  in  1804,  and  became  ap-
prentice to  a  soap-boiler,  whose  business  he  subse-
quently followed  with  an  intelligence  and  industry
that  commanded  the  largest  success.  In  1808  he
united  with  a  Baptist  church,  and  was  soon  recog-
nized as  one  of  the  leading  Christian  men  of  New
York.  In  all  the  missionary  and  educational  en-
terprises of  his  denomination  he  was  distinguished
for  zeal  and  liberality.  He  was  a  member  of  the
board  of  managers  of*  the  American  Bible  society,


COLHOUN


COLLES


689


but  felt  constrained  by  his  religions  convictions  to
withdraw  from  it,  and  to  unite  in  the  formation  of
the  American  and  foreign  Bible  society,  of  which
he  was  made  treasurer.  In  1850  he  joined  twelve
others,  laymen  and  clergymen,  in  the  organization
of  the  American  Bible  union,  and  of  this  society  he
remained  treasurer  until  his  death. — His  son,  James
Boorinan,  banker,  b.  in  New  York  city,  4  March,
1818,  has  for  many  years  been  the  head  of  the  firm
of  James  B.  Colgate  &  Co.  In  association  with  his
partner,  Mr.  Trevor,  he  built  and  presented  to  the
Warburton  avenue  Baptist  church,  of  Yonkers,  its
fine  house  of  worship.  He  has  given  large  sums
to  Colgate  university,  Rochester  university,  Roch-
ester theological  seminary.  New  London,  N.  H.,  to
Peddie  institute,  N.  J.,  and  to  Columbian  univer-
sity, Washington,  D.  C.  In  connection  with  Madi-
son university,  of  whose  board  he  has  been  presi-
dent since  1864,  he  built  and  liberally  endowed
Colgate  academy.  In  the  civil  war  he  was  a  stanch
and  effective  supporter  of  the  government. — An-
other son,  Samuel,  manufacturer,  b.  in  New  York
city,  22  March,  1822,  succeeded  to  his  father's  busi-
ness, the  manufacture  of  soap,  in  which  he  has
been  greatly  prospered!  He  has  been  a  munificent
patron  of  the  benevolent  enterprises  of  his  denomi-
nation. He  is  president  of  the  New  York  Baptist
education  society,  and  of  "  The  society  for  the  sup-
pression of  vice,"  and  a  member  of  the  board  of
the  American  tract  society.

COLHOUN,  Edmund  R.,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Pennsylvania,  6  May,  1821.  He  entered  the  navy
as  midshipman,  1  April,  1839;  became  a  master,  6
Jan.,  1853 :  resigned,  27  June,  1853  ;  re-entered  the
navy  as  acting  lieutenant,  24  Sept.,  1861 ;  was  com-
missioned commander,  17  Nov.,  1862;  captain,  2
March,  1869 ;  commodore,  26  April,  1876,  and  rear-
admiral,  3  Dec,  1882.  when  he  was  retired  from
active  service.  He  served  in  the  Mexican  war  in
the  first  attack  on  Alvarado  under  Com.  Connor,
and  in  the  assault  on  Tobasco  under  Com.  Perry.
In  1861-'2  he  commanded  the  steamer  "  Hunch-
back," of  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,
and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Roanoke  Island,  the
capture  of  Newbern,  and  the  engagements  below
Franklin  on  the  Blackwater  river  in  October,  1862.
In  1863  he  commanded  the  steamer  "Ladona,"  and
•  afterward  the  monitor  "  Weehawken,"  of  the  South
Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in  her  various  en-
gagements with  Forts  Sumter,  Wagner,  and  Beau-
regard, in  the  summer  of  1863.  In  1864-'5  he
commanded  the  monitor  "Saugus,"  attached  to
the  North  Atlantic  squadron,  and  engaged  How-
lett's  battery  on  James  river,  21  June,  and  again  5
Dec,  1864,  and  took  part  in  the  bombardment  of
Fort  Fisher,  25  Dec,  1864,  and  subsequent  days.
He  was  commandant  at  Mare  island  navy-yard,
Cal.,  in  1879-80,  and  inspector  of  vessels  in  Cali-
fornia at  the  time  of  his  retirement.

COLHOUN,  John,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Pennsvl-
vania  in  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  30  Nov.,  1872.
He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  25  Jan.,  1821,
became  a  passed  midshipman,  24  May,  1828,  a  lieu-
tenant, 27  May,  1830  ;  a  commander,  4  Nov.,  1852,
was  retired  in  "October,  1864,  and  subsequently  pro-
moted to  the  rank  of  commodore,  4  April,  1867.
He  served  on  the  store-ship  "Supply,"  at  Vera
Cruz,  during  the  Mexican  war,  commanded  the
sloop  "  Portsmouth "  on  the  coast  of  Africa  in
1859-61,  brought  the  frigate  "St.  Lawrence"
home  from  Key  West  in  1863,  and  after  his  re-
tirement served  as  light-house  inspector  in  1866-'7.

COLLAMER,  Jacob,  senator,  b.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,
8  Jan.,  1791 ;  d.  in  Woodstock,  Vt.,  9  Nov.,  1865.
In  childhood  he  removed  with  his  father  to  Bur-
VOL.  I. — 44


lington,  and,  earning  his  own  support,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  University  of  Vermont  in  1810,  stud-
ied law  at  St.  Albans,  made  the  frontier  campaign
as  a  lieutenant  of  artillery  in  the  militia,  and  was
admitted  to  the  bar  at  St.  Albans  in  1813.  Until
1833  he  practised  law  in  Washington,  Orange,  and
Windsor  counties,  Vt.,  and  in  1821-2  and  1827-8
represented  the
town  of  Royal -
ton  in  the  as-
sembly. In  1833
he  was  elected
an  associate  jus-
tice of  the  su-
preme court  of
Vermont,  and
continued  on
the  bench  until
1842,  when  he
declined  a  re-
election. In
1843  he  was
chosen  as  a
whig  to  repre-
sent the  2d  dis-
trict in  con-
gress, was  re-
elected in  1844
and  1846,  but  in
1848declinedto
be  again  a  can-
didate. In  March,  1849,  he  was  appointed  post-
master-general by  President  Taylor,  but  on  the
death  of  the  president  resigned  with  the  rest  of  the
cabinet.  He  was  soon  afterward  again  elected
judge  of  the  supreme  court  of  Vermont,  holding
that  office  until  1854,  when  he  was  chosen  U.  S.
senator,  which  office  he  held  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  served  as  chairman  of  the  committee
on  post-offices  and  post-roads,  and  was  also  chair-
man of  that  on  the  library.

COLLES,  Christopher,  engineer,  b,  in  Ireland
about  1738;  d.  in  New  York  city  in  1821.  He  was
educated  by  Pococke^  the  oriental  traveller,  after
whose  death,  in  1765,  he  emigrated  to  America,
lectured  in  Philadelphia  on  pneumatics  in  1772,
and  in  1773  delivered  a  series  of  lectures  in  New
York  city  on  inland  lock  navigation.  In  April,
1774,  he  proposed  to  build  a  reservoir  for  New  York
city.  The  Revolutionary  war  having  prevented  the
construction  of  the  reservoir,  he  suggested  a  system
of  pipes  to  supply  the  city  with  water  from  outside,
and  offered  to  carry  out  the  work.  In  1775  he  lec-
tured on  gunnery,  and  was  employed  as  instructor
to  the  artillery  department  of  the  army,  until  the
arrival  of  Baron  Steuben  in  1777.  Colles  was  the
first  to  suggest  canals  and  improvements  to  con-
nect Lake  Ontario  with  the  Hudson,  and  surveyed
the  Mohawk  river  as  far  as  Wood  creek.  In  1784
he  presented  a  memorial  to  the  New  York  legisla-
ture recommending  that  project.  The  results  of
his  labors  were  published  by  Samuel  Loudon  in
1785.  In  1808  Colles  published  a  pamphlet  on  in-
land navigable  communications.  He  made  a  tour
through  Pennsylvania  and  New  York,  and  in  1789
published  a  book  describing  the  roads  of  New  York
state.  In  1796  he  settled  in  New  York  city,  and
engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  band-boxes,  paper-
hangings,  rat-  and  mouse-traps,  Prussian  blue,  and
other  colors,  traded  in  skins  and  Indian  curiosities,
supplied  Blanchard  and  Baron  with  astronomical
calculations  for  their  "Mathematical  Correspond-
ent," made  fireworks,  and  applied  his  science  to
other  practical  purposes;  yet,  in  spite  of  his  knowl-
edge and  ingenuity,  his  honesty,  and  his  estimable


690


COLLETON


COLLIER


character,  he  was  always  in  pecuniary  straits.  After
the  duties  on  spirits  were  established  by  congress,
he  was  appointed  to  test  the  specific  gravity  of  im-
ported liquors.  He  also  made  proof-glasses.
Finally,  through  his  friend,  John  Pintard,  he  re-
ceived the  appointment  of  superintendent  of  the
academy  of  line  arts.  During  the  war  of  1812  he
constructed  and  worked  the  telegraph  on  Castle
Clinton.  He  is  said  to  have  built  the  first  steam-
engine  in  the  United  States.  He  was  the  friend
of  Jefferson  and  Hamilton,  was  respected  by  his
contemporaries,  and  his  memory  was  preserved  as
that  of  the  original  projector  of  the  Erie  canal.

COLLETON,  James,  colonial  governor  of
South  Carolina.  He  was  a  brother  of  one  of  the
proprietaries,  and  was  appointed  governor  with
the  rank  of  landgrave,  and  endowed  with  48,000
acres  of  land,  in  1(580.  He  was  expected  to  assert
the  authority  of  the  proprietaries  and  secure  the
enforcement  of  laws  in  the  constitutions  that  were
disregarded  by  the  colonists.  The  parliament,
which  had  been  elected  before  his  arrival,  refused
to  acknowledge  the  binding  force  of  the  constitu-
tions. Colleton  thereupon  excluded  the  members
of  the  majority  from  the  legislative  halls,  and
these  protested  against  any  acts  that  might  be
passed  by  the  remaining  members.  In  1687  a  new
parliament  was  elected  that  was  even  less  tractable.
Colleton  endeavored  to  collect  quit-rents  on  unim-
proved land  as  well  as  on  cultivated  fields ;  but
the  assembly  imprisoned  the  secretary  of  the  col-
ony, seized  the  records,  and  defied  the  governor
and  proprietaries.  In  1689  Colleton,  under  pretext
of  threatened  danger  from  the  Spaniards  or  In-
dians, called  out  the  militia  and  proclaimed  mar-
tial law.  Shortly  after  the  English  revolution  the
'  colonists  rose  against  his  despotism,  and  the  legis-
lative assembly  impeached  and  disfranchised  Colle-
ton, and  banished  him  from  the  province.

COLLETT,  John,  geologist,  b.  in  Eugene,
Vermilion  co.,  Ind.,  6  Jan.,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated in  1847  at  Wabash  college,  which,  in  1881,
gave  him  the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  Dr.  Collett  was
state  senator  in  1871,  assistant  state  geologist  in
1870-'8,  a  member  of  the  state-house  commission
in  1878^-'9,  chief  of  the  bureau  of  statistics  and
geology  in  1879-'80,  and  geologist  in  1881-'5.
From  1870  till  1879  he  published  annually  his  re-
ports as  assistant  geologist,  and  as  geologist  from
1881  till  1884,  and  for  the  years  1879  and  1880
reports  of  the  bureau  of  statistics  and  geology.

COLLIER,  Sir  George,  British  naval  officer,  d.
6  April,  1795.  He  became  a  commander  in  the
royal  navy  in  1761,  was  promoted  commodore
while  in  North  America  in  1779,  and  became  a
vice-admiral  in  1794.  He  was  appointed  in  1775
to  the  command  of  the  "  Rainbow,"  cruised  on  the
American  coast,  receiving  the  honor  of  knight-
hood for  his  activity,  was  senior  captain  of  the
fleet  in  1777,  and  on  8  July  captured  the  "  Han-
cock," commanded  by  Capt.  Manly,  destroyed  the
magazines  and  stores  at  Machias  and  thirty  ves-
sels on  the  northeast  coast,  was  temporarily  chief
in  command  on  the  American  station,  in  May.  1779,
destroyed  the  principal  towns  on  Chesapeake  bay,
ravaged  the  coast  of  Connecticut  in  July,  visited
New  Haven,  Faii-field,  Norwalk,  and  Green  Farms,
destroyed  many  privateers  and  other  vessels,  and
on  14'  Aug.  captured  Com.  Saltonstall's  fieet  in
Penobscot  river.  His  "Journal  on  the  Rainbow"
was  published  in  New  York  in  1835.

COLLIER,  Henry  Watkins,  jurist,  b.  in  Lun-
enburg county,  Va.,  17  Jan.,  1801 ;  d.  at  Bailey's
Springs,  Lauderdale  co.,  Ala.,  28  Aug.,  1855,  He
was  educated  in  the  Abbeville  district,  S.  C,  whero


his  father  settled  in  1801.  removed  with  the  family
to  Madison  county,  Ala.,  in  1818,  and  studied  law
at  Murfreesboro,  Tenn.,  and  at  Huntsville,  Ala.,
where *he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  and  began  prac-
tice. In  1823  he  settled  in  Tuscaloosa,  where  he
was  elected  district  judge  in  1827.  In  1836  he  was
appointed  associate  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of
Alabama,  in  1837  was  made  chief  justice,  and
held  that  office  till  1849,  when  he  was  elected,
without  opposition,  governor  of  the  state.  His
support  was  sought  both  by  the  southern  rights
and  the  Union  party ;  but  he  favored  neither  side
of  the  question  that  then  agitated  the  southern
states,  and  in  1851  was  re-nominated  and  elected
without  a  regular  nomination.  When  his  second
term  expired  he  retired  to  private  life.

COLLIER,  James,  lawyer,  b.  in  1789;  d.  in
Steubenville,  Ohio,  2  Feb.,  1873.  He  was  a  soldier
in  the  war  of  1812,  and  fought  at  Queenstown,
where  he  assisted  in  forming  the  first  American
line  on  the  Canadian  side.  After  the  war  he  re-
moved to  Steubenville,  where  he  practised  law
with  distinction  and  served  as  paymaster-general
of  the  state.  When  the  question  arose  as  to  the
boundary-line  between  Virginia  and  Ohio,  he,  with
Thomas  Ewing  and  John  Brough,  represented  the
latter  state  in  the  joint  high  commission  that  set-
tled the  dispute.  In  1849  he  was  appointed  col-
lector for  California,  and  went  there  overland,
fighting  his  way  through  hostile  Indians  with  a
small  company  of  dragoons.  When  he  had  reached
his  destination  he  was  the  only  olficer  there,  and
for  some  time  he  acted  as  military  governor.

COLLIER,  John  A.,  jurist,  b.  in  Broome
county,  N.  Y.,  in  1787;  d.  in  Binghamton,  N.  Y.,
24  March,  1873.  He  practised  law  at  Binghamton,
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Clay  democrat,  serving
from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  2  March,  1833,  was  state
comptroller  in  1845-'6,  and  was  commissioner  to
revise  the  code  in  1847.

COLLIER,  Joseph  Avery,  clergyman,  b,  in
Plymouth,  Mass,,  26  Oct,,  1828 ;  d.  in  Kinderhook,
N.  Y.,  13  Aug.,  1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Rut-
gers in  1849,  and,  upon  the  completion  of  his
studies  in  the  theological  seminary  of  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  at  New  Brunswick,  was
ordained  pastor  of  the  churches  of  Bronxville  and
Greenville,  Westchester  co.,  N.  Y.  He  was  pastor
at  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  in  1855-9,  and  afterward  at
Kingston,  N.  Y.  He  was  the  author  of  "  The  Right
Way,  or  the  Gospel  applied  to  the  Intercourse  of
Individuals  and  Nations"  (New  York,  1854);
"  The  Christian  Home  "  (Philadelphia,  1859) ;  "  The
Young  Men  of  the  Bible"  (New  York,  1861);
"  Little  Crowns  and  how  to  Coin  them  "  (1862) ;
" Pleasant  Paths  for  Little  Feet "(1864):  "Dawn
of  Heaven,"  published  posthumously,  with  a  bio-
graphical sketch  of  the  author,  by  his  brother,  the
Rev.  Ezra  W.  Collier  (1865).

COLLIER,  Peter,  chemist,  b.  in  Chittenango,
N.  Y.,  17  Aug.,  1835.  He  studied  at  the  Yates
Polytechnic  institute  in  his  native  place,  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1861,  and  in  1870  received
his  medical  degree  from  the  University  of  Ver-
mont. Subsequent  to  his  graduation  at  Yale  he
spent  several  years  in  the  Sheffield  scientific  school,
studying  chemistry,  and  for  a  time  was  assistant
in  the  laboratory,  receiving  in  1866  the  degree  of
Ph.  I).  In  1867  he  was  called  to  the  chair  of  ana-
lytical chemistry,  mineralogy,  and  metallurgy  m
the  University  of  Vermont,  becoming  at  the  same
time  professor  of  general  chemistry  and  toxicology
in  the  medical  department,  of  which  faculty  he
was  also  dean.  These  offices  he  held  until  1877,
and  from  1872  till  1876  he  was  secretary  of  the


COLLIER


COLLINS


691


State  board  of  aj^riculture,  mining,  and  manufac-
ture, and  prepared  the  annual  reports  of  the  board
during  these  years.  In  1873  he  was  appointed  one
of  the  scientific  commissioners  to  the  world's  ex-
position, held  in  Vienna,  and  contributed  a  report
on  "Commercial  Fertilizers"  to  the  government
series.  From  1877  till  1883  he  was  chemist  to  the
department  of  agriculture  in  Washington.  During
his  administration  the  efficiency  of  the  work  was
greatly  improved,  and  its  scientific  value  received
universal  commendation.  Numerous  investiga-
tions were  undertaken  at  his  suggestion  and  con-
tinued under  his  supervision.  The  most  impor-
taut  of  these  was  concerning  sorghum  sugar.  By
a  long  series  of  carefully  planned  experiments,
Prof.  Collier  succeeded  in  showing  the  possibility
of  producing  sorghum-sugar  economically  in  the
United  States.  The  practical  establishment  of  the
industry,  though  successful  at  several  localities,
has  never  been  fostered  by  the  government,  and
the  depreciation  in  value  of  the  cane-sugar,  owing
to  the  large  production  of  beet-sugar  in  Germany
and  Austria,  still  prevents  capitalists  from  making
it  an  American  product.  The  United  States  im-
ports sugar  at  an  expense  of  $200,000,000  per  an-
num, and  this  sum  could  be.  retained  within  our
country,  provided  the  demonstrations  of  Prof.
Collier  were  accepted.  In  1883  he  invented  and
patented  an  apparatus  for  recovering  sugar  from
begasse,  or  refuse,  of  the  sugar-cane  and  sorghum.
He  has  published  many  reports  and  articles  on
fertilizers  and  on  sorghum,  and  has  lectured  before
scientific  associations  on  these  topics.  Prof.  Col-
lier has  edited  the  "  Reports  of  the  Department  of
Agriculture"  (Washington,  1877-83),  and  pub-
lished •'  Sorghum  :  its  Culture  and  Manufacture
Economically  Considered,  and  as  a  Source  of  Sugar,
Syrup,  and  Fodder"  (Cincinnati,  1883).

COLLIER,  Robert  Laird,  clergyman,  b.  in
Salisbury,  Md..  7  Aug.,  1837;  d.  there.  28  July,
1890.  Originally  a  Methodist  preacher,  he  united
with  the  Unirarian  church,  and  was  pastor  of  large
churches  in  Chicago  and  Boston,  and  at  the  same
time  became  a  popular  lecturer  and  writer  of
magazine  articles.  His  principal  published  works
are  "  Every-Day  Subjects  in  Sunday  Sermons  "  (Bos-
ton, 1869) ;  "  Meditations  on  the  Essence  of  Chris-
tianity" (1876);  and  "English  Home  Life"  (1885).

COLLIER,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Scituate,
Mass.,  11  Oct.,  1771 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  29  March,
1843.  He  learned  the  carpenter's  trade,  but  decided
to  become  a  minister,  entered  Brown  university,
and  was  graduated  in  1797.  He  studied  theology
with  Dr.  Maxcy,  president  of  the  college,  was  li-
censed in  1798,  ordained  in  Boston,  11  July,  1799,
preached  one  year  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  was  pastor
in  New  York  city  in  1800-4,  then  in  Charlestown,
Mass.,  till  1820,  when  his  health  failed  and  he  re-
moved to  Boston  and  became  a  minister-at-large.
He  was  active  in  the  city  mission  and  kindred  en-
terprises, and  was  a  pioneer  in  the  temperance
movement,  beginning  in  1826  the  publication  of
a  weekly  temperance  paper,  called  the  "  National
Philanthropist,"  which  was  continued  for  two  years.
He  also  edited  "  The  Baptist  Preacher,"  a  monthly
publication  containing  sermons  by  living  ministers,
begun  in  1827,  prepared  edition*^s  of  Saurin  and
Andrew  Fuller,  and  compiled  a  hymn-book.

COLLINS,  Charles,  educator," b.  in  North  Yar-
mouth, Me.,  17  April,  1813;  d.  in  Memphis,  Tenn.,
10  July,  1875.  He  was  graduated  at  Wesleyan  uni-
versity, Middletown.  Conn.,  in  1837,  taught  the
high-school  in  Augusta,  Me.,  for  a  year,  was  presi-
dent of  Emory  and  Henry  college,  in  Emory,  Va.,
from  its  establishment  in  1838  till  1852,  when  he


became  president  of  Dickinson  college.  Pa.  From
1860  till  his  deatli  he  was  proprietor  and  president
of  the  State  female  college  near  Memphis,  Tenn.
He  contributed  many  articles  to  Methodist  maga-
zines, and  published  a  discourse  on  "  Methodism
and  Calvinism  Compared  "  (Philadelphia,  1849).

COLLINS,  Edward  K.,  ship-owner,  b.  in  Truro,
Cape  Cod,  Mass.,  5  Aug.,  1802 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  22  Jan.,  1878.  He  began  life  as  a  clerk  in  the
office  of  McCrea  &  Slidell,  shipping-merchants  in
New  York  city,  became  superintendent  of  a  line  of
packets  running  between  New  York  and  Vera  Cruz,
then  of  a  line  running  to  New  Orleans,  and  estab-
lished the  Dramatic  line  of  sailing-packets  to  Liver-
pool in  1836.  The  first  steamer  of  the  Collins  line
between  New  York  and  Liverpool  sailed  from  New
York  on  27  April,  1849.  The  company  had  a  fleet
of  five  steamers.  One  of  them,  the  "  Arctic,"  sank
with  many  passengers  on  board  off  Cape  Race,  New-
foundland, in  1854,  and  another,  the  "  Pacific,"
sailed  from  Liverpool  in  May,  1856,  and  was  never
again  heard  from.  Afterward  the  government
abruptly  terminated  a  mail  contract,  involving  a
subsidy  of  |858,000  a  year,  on  which  the  line  de-
pended largely  for  its  support.  In  consequence
of  these  misfortunes  the  company  ceased  operations
in  January,  1858.  Mr.  Collins  afterward  engaged
in  mining  enterprises,  and  was  at  one  time  largely
interested  in  Ohio  coal  and  iron  mines.

COLLINS,  Elizabeth  Ballinger,  minister  of
the  Society  of  Friends,  b.  in  Upper  Evesham,  N.  J.,
in  1755 ;  d.  in  1831.  Her  father,  Joseph  Ballinger,
died  when  she  was  a  child,  and  in  1773  she  married
John  Mason,  who  died  about  1777,  and  in  1778  she
married  Job  Collins.  When  in  her  twenty-fourth
year,  she  felt  strongly  impressed  with  the  duty  of
becoming  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  and  later  she
was  a  noted  preacher  in  her  denomination,  "  labor-
ing zealously  to  stir  up  the  lukewarm,  and  speak-
ing a  word  in  season  to  those  that  were  weary;
while  the  purity  of  her  life,  and  the  Christian
meekness  that  marked  her  character,  adorned  the
doctrines  she  delivered  to  others."  Her  autobi-
ography was  published  in  Philadelphia  in  1859.

COLLINS,  George  C,  merchant,  b.  in  South
Hadley,  Mass.,  in  1810;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10
Feb.,  1875.  He  removed  when  a  boy  to  Hartford,
Conn.,  and  at  the  age  of  twenty  went  to  Mobile,
Ala.,  as  confidential  secretary  to  Burrett  Ames,  the
largest  cotton-dealer  in  the  south.  After  three  years
he  returned  to  the  north  and  went  into  business  on
his  own  account  as  a  grocer  in  Hartford,  removed
to  New  York  city  in  1841  as  partner  in  the  house
of  McCoon,  Sherman  &  Co.,  and  established  in  1860
the  house  of  Collins  &  Rayner,  which  afterward  be-
came George  C.  Collins  &  Co.  After  the  draft-riots
of  1863  he  was  a  member  of  a  committee  to  prose-
cute the  claims  of  the  families  of  the  murdered  ne-
groes against  the  city,  and  was  one  of  the  largest
contributors  to  the  fund  raised  for  the  relief  of  the
families.  He  was  an  active  promoter  of  various
charitable  and  religious  objects.

COLLINS,  Isaac,  publisher,  b.  in  Delaware,  16
Feb.,  1746;  d.  in  Burlington,  N.  J.,  21  March,
1817.  He  was  the  son  of  an  immigrant  from  Bris-
tol, England,  learned  the  printer's  trade,  went  to
Philadelphia  at  the  age  of  twenty-one,  where  he
worked  as  a  journeyman,  in  1770  was  appointed
public  printer  in  New  Jersey,  and  removed  to  Bur-
lington. In  1771  he  began  the  publication  of  an
almanac,  which  he  issued  annually  for  more  than
twenty  years.  In  1778  he  removed  to  Trenton,  and
there  printed  5,000  copies  of  a  family  Bible  that
was  remarkably  free  from  typographical  errors.
To  secure  accui-acy,  the  proofs  were  read  eleven


692


COLLINS


COLLINSON


times.  In  1796  he  went  to  New  York  city,  but
returned  to  Burlington  in  1808.  His  sons  also
followed  the  business  of  their  father ;  and  the
house  of  Charles  Collins  is  now  the  oldest  pub-
lishing firm  in  the  United  States.

COLLINS,  John,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,  b.
8  June,  1717;  d.  in  Newport,  R.  L,  8  March,  1795.
He  was  a  prominent  patriot  during  the  Revolution,
and  a  commissioner  to  settle  the  accounts  of  Rhode
Island  with  congress  in  1776,  sat  in  the  old  con-
gress from  1778  till  1783,  was  governor  from  1786
till  1789,  and  in  the  latter  year  elected  a  member
of  the  first  congress  under  the  constitution,  but
did  not  take  his  seat.

COLLINS,  Joseph  Edmund,  Canadian  jour-
nalist, b.  in  Placentia,  Newfoundland,  22  Oct.,
1855.  He  was  educated  by  private  tutors,  and  in
1874  removed  to  Frederieton,  New  Brunswick,  and
studied  law  for  a  short  time.  Then  he  established
the  Frederieton  "  Star "  newspaper,  and  subse-
quently the  Chatham  "  Star."  In  1881  he  removed
to  Toronto  and  assumed  the  city  editorship  of  the
"  Globe."  He  has  published  "  Life  and  Times  of
Sir  John  A.  Macdonald,"  "  Canada  under  the  Ad-
ministration of  Lord  Lome,"  "  A  Sketch  of  the
Life  of  Lord  Lansdowne,"  and  other  works,  all
published  in  Toronto,  lie  has  also  been  a  con-
tributor to  popular  periodicals.

COLLINS,  Napoleon,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Penn-
sylvania, 4  May,  1814;  d.  in  Callao,  Peru,  9  Aug.,
1875.  He  entered  the  navy  in  1834  as  midship-
man, became  a  lieutenant  in  1846,  was  attached  to
the  sloop  "  Decatur  "  during  the  Mexican  war,  and
was  present  at  Tuspan  and  Tobasco.  He  com-
manded the  steamer  "  Anacosta  "  in  the  Potomac
squadron  in  1861,  and  took  part  in  the  engage-
ment at  Acquia  Creek  on  31  May  in  that  year.
He  afterward  received  command  of  the  gun-boat
"  Unadilla,"  and  for  nearly  a  year  was  with  the  fleet
stationed  off  the  coast  of  South  Carolina,  Georgia,
and  Florida,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of  Port
Royal  and  in  various  expeditions  along  the  coast.
In  July,  1862,  he  was  made  commander  of  the
steamer  "Octorara"  in  the  West  Indian  squadron.
In  1863  he  was  transferred  to  the  steam  sloop
"  Wachusett "  and  sent  in  pursuit  of  Confederate
privateers.  On  7  Oct.,  1864,  he  bore  down  on  the
Confederate  steamer  "  Florida "  in  the  harbor  of
Bahia,  Brazil,  intending  to  sink  her,  but  demand-
ed her  surrender,  and,  as  the  captain  and  half  his
crew  were  ashore,  the  lieutenant  in  command
deemed  it  best  to  comply.  In  an  instant  the
"  Florida  "  was  boarded,  a  hawser  was  made  fast,
and  the  captor  put  out  to  sea,  making  no  reply  to
a  challenge  from  the  Brazilian  fleet,  and  unharmed
by  three  shots  fired  from  the  fort.  After  the  "  Wa-
chusett" and  her  prize  arrived  in  Hampton  Roads
in  November,  while  negotiations  for  the  return  of
the  "  Florida  "  were  in  progress  she  was  run  into
at  her  anchorage  by  a  steam  transport  and  sunk.
Brazil  having  complained  that  her  neutrality  had
been  violated  in  this  affair,  Sec.  Seward  disavowed
the  act  of  Commander  Collins  and  ordered  him  to
be  tried  by  court-martial.  On  25  July,  1866,  he
was  promoted  captain  and  placed  in  command  of
the  steam  sloop  "  Sacramento."  He  was  made  a
commodore  on  19  Jan.,  1871,  and  on  9  Aug.,  1874,
was  raised  to  the  rank  of  rear-admiral  and  placed
in  command  of  the  South  Pacific  squadron.

COLLINS,  Patrick  A.,  b.  in  Fermoy,  Ireland,
in  1844.  He  came  to  the  United  States  in  1848,
and  settled  in  Chelsea,  Mass.  He  worked  at  the
upholsterer's  trade  for  eight  years,  gave  his  leisure
hours  to  study,  entered  Harvard  law-school  in  1868,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1872. In  1868-9


he  was  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts  house  of
representatives,  and  in  1870-1  a  state  senator.  In
1875  he  was  judge-advocate-general  of  the  state.
He  was  appointed  delegate-at-large  from  Massa-
chusetts to  the  democratic  national  conventions  in
1876,  and  1880,  and  was  nominated  for  attorney-
general.  In  1882  he  was  elected  to  congress,  and
he  has  been  twice  re-elected.  Mr.  Collins  was  one
of  the  secretaries  to  the  Fenian  congress  held  in
Philadelphia  in  1865,  and  has  been  an  active  mem-
ber of  the  land  and  national  leagues  since  their
establishment.  He  was  chosen  president  of  the
Irish  land  league  at  the  convention  that  was  held
in  Buffalo,  N.  Y.,  in  1884.

COLLINS,  Thomas,  governor  of  Delaware,  b.
in  1732:  d.  near  Duck  creek,  Kent  co.,  Del,  29
March,  1789.  He  was  for  some  time  high  sheriff
of  Kent  county,  a  member  of  the  council  for  four
years,  brigadier-general  of  militia  from  1776  till
1783,  member  of  the  assembly,  chief-justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas,  and  governor  of  the  state
from  1786  till  1789.

COLLINS,  Thomas  Wharton,  jurist,  b.  in
New  Orleans,  23  June,  1812;  d.  3  Nov.,  1879.  He
became  a  printer,  then  an  editor,  studied  law,  was
admitted  to  the  bar  in  1833,  was  reporter  and  clerk
of  the  state  senate  in  1834,  then  edited  the  "  True
American,"  was  clerk  of  the  U.  S.  court  in  1836-'8,
district  attorney  for  the  Orleans  district  in  1840-'2,
judge  of  the  city  court  in  l842-'6,  a  member  of
the  constitutional  convention  in  1852,  and  in  1856
was  elected  judge  of  the  first  district  court  of  New
Orleans.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resumed  the
practice  of  law  in  New  Orleans,  and  in  1867  was
made  judge  of  the  seventh  district  court,  which
office  he  held  until  the  court  was  abolished,  when
he  returned  to  legal  practice.  He  was  the  author
of  a  tragedy  called  "  The  Martyr  Patriots,"  which
was  successfully  performed ;  also  of  "  Humanics  "
(1860),  "  The  Eden  of  Labor,"  and  essays  on  soci-
ology, ethics,  and  politics,  published  in  periodicals.

COLLINS,  Zaccheus,  philanthropist,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  26  Aug.,  1764;  d.  there,  12  June,
1831.  He  was  a  member  of  the  society  of  Friends,
a  promoter  of  the  advancement  of  the  natural  sci-
ences, and  an  officer  or  member  of  many  philo-
sophical, humane,  and  religious  societies.

COLLINSON,  Sir  Richard,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Gateshead,  Durham,  England,  7  Nov.,  1811.  He
entered  the  navy  in  1823,  and,  after  three  yeai-s'
service  on  the  Pacific  station,  was  assigned  to  the
"  Chanticleer,"  which  was  employed  in  making  ob-
servations on  the  shores  and  islands  of  the  Atlantic
ocean.  Being  promoted  a  lieutenant  in  1835,  he
joined  the  "Sulphur,"  and  was  employed  in  the
examination  of  the  coasts  of  Central  America  and
Mexico,  visiting  California,  Vancouver's  island,
Sitka,  and  fixing  the  position  of  Mount  St.  Elias.
Subsequently  he  took  part  in  the  Chinese  war,  and
was  promoted  captain  and  C.  B.  in  1842.  In  1850
Capt.  CoUinson  took  command  of  an  expedition  to
Bering  strait,  to  continue  the  search  for  Sir  John
Franklin.  After  passing  three  winters  in  the  ice,
and  ascertaining  the  fact  that  the  northern  coast
of  North  America  was  navigable  by  a  sailing  ves-
sel from  Bering  strait  to  King  William's  land,  he
returned  to  England,  and  received  the  medal  of
the  Geographical  society.  After  service  on  the
Defence  commission  and  the  lakes  in  Canada,  he
was  promoted  to  flag-officer  in  1862,  and  made  a
K.  C.  B.  in  1875.  He'is  the  author  of  "  Nine  Weeks
in  Canada"  (Cambridge,  1862),  and  "The  Three
Voyages  of  Martin  Frobisher  in  Search  of  a  Pas-
sage to  Cathaia  and  India  by  the  Northwest,  A.  D.
1576-'8  "  (London,  1867).


COLLIPULLE


COLOCOLO


693


COLLIPULLE  (call-yc-piiU'-ye),  Arancanian
cacique,  b.  early  in  the  16th  century;  d.  in  1576.
When  still  very  young  he  was  appointed  generalis-
simo of  the  Indian  army  of  Chili,  in  1564,  after  the
death  of  its  leader,  the  cacique  Antigueun.  In
August  of  the  same  year  he  fought  as  a  chief  at
the  battle  of  Mariguena,  and  assisted  in  the  defeat
of  the  Spanish  army  commanded  by  a  son  of  Vil-
lagran.  From  1565  till  1568  he  had  many  encoun-
ters with  the  Spaniards,  in  1569  besieged  unsuc-
cessfully the  city  of  Valdivia,  and  in  1576  planned
and  fought  three  important  battles  at  Cafiete,  Vil-
larrica,  and  the  banks  of  the  Biobio,  where  he  was
killed.  Collipulle  was  seven  feet  in  height,  and
famous  for  his  extraordinary  strength.

COLLOT,  Victor,  French  explorer,  b.  in  Cha-
lons-sur-Marne  about  1751 ;  d.  in  Paris  in  July,
1805.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  army,  rose  to  be  a
general  of  brigade,  and  was  at  one  time  governor
of  Guadeloupe.  He  published  a  map  of  Detroit  in
1796,  also  "  Voyage  dans  le  nord  d'Amerique  en
1796,"  and  a  "  Memoire  sur  les  inoyens  de  sou-
mettre  les  rebels  de  St.  Dominique."

COLLYER,  Robert,  clergyman,  b.  in  Keighly,
Yorkshire,  England,  8  Dec,  1823.  He  educated
himself,  having  left  school  at  the  age  of  eight  years
to  earn  his  living  in  a  factory.  The  only  instruc-
tion he  received  after  that  was  in  a  night-school
that  he  attended  two  winters.  When  fourteen
years  old  he  was  apprenticed  to  a  blacksmith.  In
1849  he  became  a  local  Methodist  preacher,  and
the  year  following  came  to  the  United  States,  and,
while  still  working  as  a  hammer-maker  in  Shoe-
makertown.  Pa.,  preached  on  Sundays.  His  views
gradually  changed  in  the  direction  of  Unitarian-
ism,  and  he  was  arraigned  before  the  conference
for  heresy,  and  his  license  to  preach  revoked.
The  change  in  his  views  of  the  atonement  was
partly  brought  about  by  conversations  with  Lucre-
tia  Mott.  The  circumstance  that  the  Methodist
clergy  at  that  time  were  restrained  from  freely  de-
nouncing slavery  had  much  influence  in  convert-
ing him  to  Unitarianism.  While  still  working  at
his  craft,  he  became  known  as  an  eloquent  public
speaker.  In  1859  he  united  with  the  Unitarian
church,  and,  going  to  Chicago,  111,,  became  a  mis-
sionary of  the  Unitarian  church  in  that  city,  and
in  1860  organized  the  Unity  church,  which  began
with  only  seven  members,  but  rapidly  increased  in
numbers  under  his  spirited  and  earnest  preaching.
In  1861  he  was  a  cainp-inspector  for  the  Sanitary
commission.  His  reputation  as  a  preacher  and  lec-
turer soon  extended  over  the  country.  In  Septem-
ber, 1879,  he  became  pastor  of  the  Church  of  the
Messiah  in  New  York  city.  He  has  re-visited  Eng-
land five  times  since  1865,  and  travelled  in  other
parts  of  Europe.  He  is  the  author  of  "  Nature  and
Life  "  (Boston,  1866) ;  "  A  Man  in  Earnest :  Life  of
A.  H.  Conant"  (1868);  "The  Life  that  Now  Is"
(1871) ;  "  The  Simple  Truth,  a  Home  Book  "  (1877) ;
"  A  History  of  the  Town  and  Parish  of  Ilkley "
(Otley,  England,  1886),  written  in  collaboration
with  Horsefall  Turner;  "  Lectures  to  Young  Men
and  Women"  (1886).

COLMAN,  Benjamin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  19  Oct.,  1673;  d.  there,  29  Aug.,  1747.  He
was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1692,  began  preach-
ing soon  afterward,  embarked  for  England  in  July,
1695,  was  captured  by  a  French  privateer,  and
reached  England  after  a  brief  imprisonment.  He
there  became  acquainted  with  eminent  noncon-
formist divines,  and  preached  in  Bath  and  other
places.  In  1699  he  returned  to  take  charge  of  the
Brattle  street  church,  receiving  ordination  in  Lon-
don, because  the  society,  just  organized  in  opposi-


tion to  the  Cambridge  platform,  differed  with  the
other  churches  in  New  England  in  regard  to  the
forms  of  service,  desiring  to  abolish  the  public  re-
lation of  experiences,  and  to  introduce  reading  of
the  Scriptures  and  recital  of  the  Lord's  prayer.
He  remained  with  the  society,  with  which  the  other
Boston  churches  long  refused  to  hold  communion,
till  his  death,  ranking  among  the  first  of  New  Eng-
land clergymen,  and  exerting  a  powerful  influence
in  civil  affairs  that  sometimes  drew  censure  upon
him.  He  procured  benefactions  for  Harvard  and
Yale  colleges,  and  interested  himself  in  the  mission
among  the  Housatonic  Indians  and  other  benevo-
lent enterprises.  In  1724  he  was  offered,  but  re-
fused, the  presidency  of  Harvard.  Many  of  his
sermons,  some  poems,  and  a  tract  in  favor  of  in-
oculation for  small-pox,  were  published.  His  col-
lected sermons  were  printed  in  three  volumes  (Bos-
ton, 1707-'22).  See  "  Life  and  Character  of  Col-
man,"  by  his  son-in-law,  the  Kev.  Ebenezer  Turell
(Boston,  1749),  and  Hopkins's  "History  of  the
Houssatonnoc  Indians."

COLMAN,  Henry,  agricultural  writer,  b.  in
Boston,  12  Sept.,  1785;  d.  in  Islington,  England,
14  Aug.,  1849.  He  was  graduated  at  Dartmouth
in  1805.  From  1807  till  1820  he  was  a  Congrega-
tional minister  at  Hingham,  Mass.,  whei-e  he  also
taught  school.  He  was  a  teacher  in  Boston  in
1820-'5,  and  from  1825  till  1831  had  charge  of  a
Unitarian  church  in  Salem,  when  he  left,  being  in
ill  health.  He  then  engaged  in  farming  at  Deer-
field,  Mass.,  and  was  employed  by  the  state,  from
1836  till  1842,  as  commissioner  to  investigate  its
agricultural  condition  and  resources.  In  1838  and
1839  he  issued  reports  on  the  agriculture  of  Massa-
chusetts, and  in  1840  published  a  "  Report  on  Silk
Culture."  In  1842  he  visited  Europe  in  the  em-
ploy of  the  Massachusetts  agricultural  society,  and
pursued  investigations  of  European  farming  for
six  years.  On  his  return,  in  1848,  he  published  in
Boston  "  European  Agricultural  and  Rural  Econ-
omy," and  a  smaller  work  entitled  "  Agricultural
and  Rural  Economy  of  France,  Belgium,  Holland,
and  Switzerland."  He  was  the  author  also  of  "  Eu-
ropean Life  and  Manners,  in  Familiar  Letters  to
Friends  "  (1849),  and  published  two  volumes  of  ser-
mons. Visiting  England  again  for  his  health  in
1849,  he  died  soon  after  his  arrival.

COLMAN,  Samuel,  painter,  b,  in  Portland,  Me.,
in  1832.  He  began  early  to  sketch  from  nature  in
and  around  New  York,  where  his  father  was  a  pub-
lisher, and  became  a  pupil  of  Asher  B.  Durand.
In  1860-62  he  studied  in  France  and  Spain ;  in
1871  he  again  went  abroad,  and  travelled  in  Swit-
zerland, north  Africa,  Italy,  France,  and  Spain,
returning  in  1876  to  New  York.  He  was  elected
an  associate  member  of  the  National  academy  in
1860,  and  a  full  member  in  1862,  was  a  founder  of
the  American  society  of  painters  in  w^ater-colors,
and  its  first  president  in  1866-71,  and  an  original
member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists  in  1878.
His  studio  is  in  New  York.  His  pictures  include
"  Bay  of  Gibraltar,"  "  Andernach  on  the  Rhine,"
"  Street  Scene  in  Caen,  Normandy,"  "  Market  Day
in  Brittany,"  "  Arab  Caravansary  "  (1879),  "  Arab
Burying-Ground,"  "  Dutch  Boats  off  the  Coast  of
Holland"  (1880),  "Misty  Afternoon  in  Venice"
(1881),  "  Zandam  in  Holland,"  "  Ruins  of  Mosque
in  Algeria"  (1882),  and  "Tower  of  Giralda"  (1884).

COLOCOLO  (col-o-co'-lo),  Molucho  or  Aranca-
nian cacique,  b.  about  1515;  d.  in  October,  1561.
When  Valdivia  undertook  the  conquest  of  Arauco,
Colocolo  with  4,000  men  and  the  cacique  Aillavillu
with  his  army  set  out  to  oppose  the  advance  of  the
Spaniards. A  fierce  battle  ensued,  Colocolo  dis-


694


COLQUITT


COLT


tinguishin":  himself  so  much  that  at  the  death  of
Aillavillu  he  was  given  the  command  of  both
tribes.  From  1551  till  1553  he  directed  many  at-
tacks upon  tlie  invaders  under  Valdivia,  and,  hav-
ing united  his  troops  with  those  of  Caupolican,
fought  the  famous  battle  of  Tucapel,  2  Dec,  1553,
in  which  Valdivia  was  defeated.  The  victory  of
the  Indians  was  due  to  the  plan  of  Colocolo,  who
divided  his  forces  into  thirteen  bodies,  to  make
them  fight  in  turn,  in  order  to  have  always  fresh
troops  during  the  encounter.  On  the  following
day  another  battle  was  fought,  Colocolo  being  at
the  head  of  his  division,  and  the  Spaniards  were
again  routed.  Accompanied  by  Lautor,  he  re-
sisted in  his  intrenchments  the  attack  of  Villa-
gran's  army,  23  April,  1554.  The  Spanish  chief  was
wounded,  and  retreated  to  Concepeion,  a  city  that,
later  in  1554,  was  captured  and  burned  by  Colo-
colo. In  1555  he  was  besieged  in  the  city  of  Val-
divia by  Villagran,  and  evacuated  the  place  after
a  long  resistance.  At  the  end  of  the  same  year  he
fought  a  battle  with  Villagran  at  Biobio,  but  was
again  defeated.  Two  years  later  he  commanded  a
division  of  Caupolican's  army,  had  an  encounter
with  Garcia  de  Mendoza  at  Monte  Pinto,  attacked
with  great  fury  his  intrenchments  three  times,
and  was  repelled  each  time  by  the  Spaniards,  los-
ing 2,000  men.  In  November,  1557,  he  was  de-
feated once  more  at  the  Arauco  valley,  and,  Cau-
polican having  been  taken  prisoner,  he  succeeded
him  as  chief  of  the  Araucanian  army.  He  kept  up
the  war  until  1559,  when,  being  successful  in  sev-
eral battles,  he  asked  for  peace,  and  signed  the
first  treaty  between  the  Spaniards  and  the  Arauca-
nians.  Again,  in  October,  1561,  he  raised  a  large
army  against  the  conquerors,  and  lost  his  life  in
the  terrible  battle  of  Lomaco.  Colocolo  was  not
only  celebrated  for  his  great  courage,  but  also  con-
sidered the  wisest  cacique  of  his  time.

COLQUITT,  Walter  T.,  lawyer,  b.  in  Halifax
county,  Va.,  27  Dec,  1799 ;  d.  in  Macon,  Ga.,  7
May,  1855.  He  removed  with  his  parents  to  Geor-
gia, entered  Princeton  college,  but  was  not  gradu-
ated, studied  law  in  Milledgeville,  Ga.,  and  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1820.  He  began  practice  at
Sparta,  and  afterward  removed  to  Cowpens.  At
the  age  of  twenty-one  he  was  elected  by  the  legis-
lature a  brigadier-general  of  militia.  He  became
prominent  in  1828  by  contesting  the  district  as  the
Troup  candidate  for  congress  against  Lumpkin,
the  Clark  candidate,  who  was  elected  by  thirty-
two  majority.  The  same  year  he  was  elected  judge
of  the  Chattahoochee  circuit,  and  was  re-elected  in
1829.  In  1834  and  1837  he  was  a  state  senator.
In  1838  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  state-
rights  whig,  and  took  his  seat  on  2  Dec,  1839,  but,
having  left  the  party  with  two  colleagues  after  the
nomination  of  Harrison  for  president,  he  resigned
on  21  July,  1840.  He  was  again  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  Van  Buren  democrat,  serving  from  1
Feb.,  1842,  till  3  March,  1843.  He  was  then  elected
to  the  U.  S.  senate,  and  served  from  4  Dec,  1843,
till  he  resigned  in  1848.  He  supported  the  Polk
administration  in  the  controversy  relative  to  Ore-
gon, and  throughout  the  Mexican  war  was  a  promi-
nent opponent  of  the  Wilmot  proviso.  He  was
one  of  the  most  earnest  speakers  in  the  Nashville
convention  in  1850  in  defence  of  the  rights  of  the
south.  He  had  been  licensed  as  a  Methodist
preacher  in  1827,  and,  during  the  turmoil  of  a
most  exciting  political  career,  was  in  the  habit  of
officiating  at  the  Methodist  churches.  He  was  one
of  the  most  successful  lawyers  in  the  state,  and  in
criminal  practice  had  no  rival. — His  son,  Alfred
Holt,  statesman, b.  in  Walton  county,  Ga.,  20


April,  1824,  was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1844,
studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1845,
served  during  the  Mexican  war  as  a  staff  officer,
with  the  rank  of  major,  and  in  1852  was  elected  to
congress  as  a  democrat,  and  served  one  term. In

1859  he  was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  and  in

1860  a  presidential  elector  on  the  Breckinridge
ticket.  He  was  a  member  of  the  secession  conven-
tion of  Georgia,  entered  the  Confederate  army  as
captain,  was  chosen  colonel  of  the  6th  Georgia  in-
fantry, promoted  a  brigadier-general,  and,  after
serving  some  time  in  that  grade,  was  commissioned
a  major-general.  In  1876  he  was  elected  governor
of  Georgia  for  four  years,  and  after  the  expiration
of  his  term  re-elected  for  two  years  under  the  new
constitution.  In  1882  he  was  elected  U.  S.  senator
for  the  term  expiring  3  March,  1889.

COLT,  Le  Baron  Bradford,  jurist,  b.  in  Ded-
ham,  Mass.,  25  June,  1846.  He  was  graduated  at
Yale  in  1868,  and  at  Columbia  law-school  in  1870.
He  travelled  in  Europe  in  1870-'l,  was  a  member
of  the  Khode  Island  house  of  representatives  in
1879-'81,  and  on  6  July,  1884,  appointed  U.  S.  cir-
cuit judge  for  the  first  judicial  circuit.

COLT,  Samuel,  inventor,  b.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,
19  July,  1814;  d.  there,  10  Jan.,  1862.  His  father,
descended  from  an  early  settler  of  Hartford,  was  a
merchant  and  afterward  a  manufacturer.  At  the
age  of  ten  he  en-
tered his  father's
factory,  and  re-
mained there  and
at  school  till  his
fourteenth  year,
when  he  was  sent
to  a  boarding-
school  in  Am-
herst, Mass.,  but
ran  away,  and  in
July,1827,shipped
as  a  boy  before
the  mast  on  an
East  India  voy-
age. After  his
return  he  was
placed  in  his  fa-
ther's factory  at
Ware,  Mass.,  in
the  dyeing  and
bleaching  depart-
ment, under  the  tuition  of  William  T.  Smith,  a
scientific  and  practical  chemist,  and  as  soon  as
he  had  become  a  dexterous  manipulator  he  again
left  home  to  seek  his  fortune,  and  though  but  sev-
enteen or  eighteen  years  of  age,  with  a  meagre  edu-
cation, yet,  under  the  assumed  name  of  Dr.  Coult,
he  traversed  the  Union  and  British  America,  lec-
turing on  chemistry,  and,  owing  to  his  success  as
an  experimenter,  drew  full  houses.  The  profit
from  these  lectures,  which  was  very  considerable,
during  the  two  years  that  followed,  was  devoted  to
the  prosecution  of  the  great  invention  connected
with  his  name.  The  first  model  of  his  pistol  was
made  in  wood  in  1829,  witii  the  imperfect  tools  at
his  command,  while  he  was  a  sailor-boy  on  boaid
ship.  The  money  acquired  by  his  chemical  lectures
enabled  him  to  manufacture  other  models,  and  in
1835,  when  only  twenty-one  years  of  age,  he  took
out  his  first  patent  for  revolving  fire-arms.  Patents
having  been  issued  m  England,  France,  and  the
United  States  for  the  revolver,  he  induced  New
York  capitalists  to  take  an  interest  in  it,  and  a
company  was  formed  at  Paterson,  N.  J.,  in  1885,
with  a  capital  of  |300,000,  under  the  name  of  the
Patent  Arms  Company. For  a  long  time  the  ofli-


COLT


COLTON


695


cers  of  the  government  and  of  the  army  and  navy
objected  to  the  percussion-cap,  to  the  supposed  lia-
bility of  the  arm  to  get  out  of  order,  to  the  tend-
ency of  several  of  the  charges  to  explode  at  the
same  time,  and  to  the  greater  difReulty  of  repair-
ing it  than  the  arms  in  common  use.  These  ob-
jections Mr.  Colt  met  by  careful  explanations,  by
repeated  experiments,  and  by  modifications  in  the
construction  of  the  weapon.  In  1837,  during  the
Florida  war,  the  officers  of  the  army  were  baffled
in  their  attempts  to  drive  the  Indians  from  the
Everglades,  until  a  few  of  the  troops,  under  the
direction  of  Lieut.-Col.  Harney,  were  armed  with
Colt's  revolvers,  and  their  success  was  such  that
more  were  at  once  ordered,  and  the  Indians  were
easily  disheartened  and  defeated  when  they  found
that  their  enemies  could  fire  six  or  eight  times
without  reloading.  In  1842  the  Patent  Arms  Com-
pany were  forced  to  suspend,  the  speedy  conclusion
of  the  Seminole  war  having  put  an  end  to  their  sales,
and  from  that  time  till  1847  none  of  the  repeating
fire-arms  were  manufactured.  Meantime  the  mar-
ket was  drained  of  them  by  the  demand  from  Texas
and  the  Indian  frontier.  In  1847,  the  Mexican
war  having  begun.  Gen.  Taylor  sent  to  Col.  Colt
for  a  supply.  There  were  none  to  be  had,  but  he
contracted  to  make  1,000  for  $28,000.  He  had
parted  with  the  last  one  to  a  Texan  ranger,  and,
after  advertising  in  vain  for  one  to  serve  as  a
model,  he  was  compelled  to  make  a  new  model,
and  in  so  doing  added  improvements.  This  first
thousand  were  made  at  an  armory  temporarily
hired  at  Whitneyville,  near  New  Haven,  Conri.
Other  orders  following  immediately  on  the  comple-
tion of  the  first.  Col.  Colt  procured  more  commodi-
ous workshops  at  Hartford  and  filled  the  orders
with  promptness.  The  emigration  to  California,
and  afterward  to  Australia,  increased  the  demand
for  the  revolvers  and  assured  the  permanence  of
the  business.  Soon  after  the  Mexican  war,  the
suggestions  derived  from  the  use  of  these  arms  by
the  military  forces  led  to  improvements  in  their
construction  and  to  their  adoption  by  the  govern-
ment of  the  United  States  as  a  regular  weapon  for
the  army.  Subsequently  the  Crimean  and  Indian
campaigns  suggested  still  further  improvements
and  simplifications.  Finding  in  1852  that  more
room  and  greater  facilities  for  manufacturing  were
required,  Col.  Colt  purchased  a  tract  of  meadow-
land  lying  within  the  city  limits  of  Hartford,  about
250  acres  in  extent,  protected  it  from  the  annual
freshets  of  the  Connecticut  river  by  means  of  a
dike,  and  there  built  an  armory,  consisting  of  two
parallel  buildings  three  stories  high  and  500  feet
long,  connected  by  a  central  building  250  feet  in
length,  with  other  buildings  for  offices  and  ware-
rooms.  In  1861  a  second  building  of  the  same  size
as  the  first  was  erected.  All  the  balls,  cartridges,
bullet-moulds,  powder-flasks,  and  lubricators  are
manufactured  at  the  armory,  and  most  of  them,
as  well  as  the  greater  part  of  the  machinery  for
manufacturing  the  arms,  were  the  invention  of
Col.  Colt  or  the  development  of  his  suggestions  by
skilful  workmen.  A  part  of  the  estalalishment  is
devoted  to  the  manufacture  of  machinery  for  mak-
ing the  fire-arms  elsewhere,  which  has  already  sup-
plied a  large  portion  of  the  machinery  for  the
armory  of  the  British  government  at  Enfield,  Eng-
land, and  the  whole  of  that  for  the  Russian  gov-
ernment armory  at  Tula.  On  the  land  enclosed
by  the  dike  he  also  erected  dwellings  for  his  em-
ployes, the  entire  expenditure  upon  the  grounds
and  buildings  amounting  to  more  than  $2,500,000.
The  dwellings  erected  for  the  employes  are  unusu-
ally comfortable  and  convenient. Col.  Colt  also  pro-


vided the  workmen  with  a  public  hall,  a  library,
courses  of  lectures,  concerts,  a  set  of  instruments  for
a  band  of  musicians,  and  a  uniform  for  a  military
company  organized  among  them.  He  invented
also  a  submarine  battery  for  the  defence  of  harbors
against  naval  attacks,  and  was  the  first  to  conceive
and  practically  test  the  project  of  a  submarine  tele-
graph-cable, having  laid  and  operated  with  perfect
success  in  1843  such  a  cable  from  Coney  Island
and  Fire  Island  to  the  city  of  New  York,  and  from
the  Merchants'  exchange  to  the  mouth  of  the  har-
bor. This  cable  was  insulated  by  being  covered
with  a  combination  of  cotton  yarn  with  asphaltum
and  beeswax,  and  the  whole  enclosed  in  a  lead  pipe,
gutta  percha  being  then  unknown.  A  beautiful
Episcopal  church  was  erected  to  his  memory  by  his
widow,  who  with  their  only  son  still  continues  the
manufacture  of  arms.

COLTON,  Calvin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Long-
meadow,  Mass.,  in  1789 ;  d,  in  Savannah,  Ga.,  13
March,  1857.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1812,
and  at  Andover  seminary  in  1815,  and  settled  over
the  Presbyterian  church  in  Batavia,  N.  Y.  Subse-
quently he  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church,  but  relinquished  preaching  in
1826  from  failure  of  his  voice.  After  a  long  tour
through  the  United  States,  he  went  to  England  in
1831,  as  correspondent  of  the  New  York  "Ob-
server," and  remained  four  years.  After  his  re-
turn to  the  United  States  he  took  orders  in  the
Episcopal  church,  and  published  "  Thoughts  on
the  Religious  State  of  the  Country,  and  Reasons
for  Preferring  Episcopacy."  But  lie  soon  resumed
the  journalistic  profession,  and  distinguished  him-
self as  a  writer  of  political  tracts  and  articles  ad-
vocating the  principles  of  the  whig  party.  From
1842  till  1844  he  edited  the  "True  Whig"  in
Washington.  In  1852  he  became  professor  of  po-
litical economy  in  Trinity  college,  Hartford,  Conn.
He  published  in  England  "A  Manual  for  Emi-
grants to  America,"  and  "  History  and  Character
of  American  Revivals  of  Religion"  (1832);  also
"  The  Americans,  by  an  American  in  London "
(1833) ;  "  American  Cottager  "  and  "  A  Tour  of  the
Lakes"  (1833):  and  "Church  and  State  in  Amer-
ica, being  a  Reply  to  the  Bishop  of  London."
After  his  return  from  England  he  published  "  Four
Years  in  Great  Britain  "  (New  York,  1835) ;  "  Prot-
estant Jesuitism  "  (1836) ;  "  Abolition  a  Sedition  "
and  "Abolition  and  Colonization  Contrasted"
(1838) ;  "  A  Voice  from  America  to  England "
(1839) :  "  The  Crisis  of  the  Country  " ;  "  American
Jacobinism  " ;  and  "  One  Presidential  Term  "  (1840).
In  1840  appeared  a  series  of  political  tracts  called
the  "  Junius  Papers,"  which  were  widely  circulated,
and  enlarged  and  republished  in  1844.  The  same
year  he  published  "  The  Rights  of  Labor  "  (New
York);  in  1846,  "Life  and  Times  of  Henry  Clay,"
the  materials  for  which  he  obtained  from  Mr.  Clay,
whom  he  visited  for  the  purpose  in  1844 ;  and  in
1848,  "Public  Economy  for  the  United  States,"
containing  an  elaborate  argument  in  favor  of  the
protective  policy.  While  a  professor  at  Trinity
college  he  published  "  The  Genius  ancVMission  of
the  Episcopal  Church  in  the  LTnited  States  "  (New
York,  1853),  prepared  for  the  press  the  "Private
Correspondence  of  Henry  Clay  "  (1855),  wrote  "  The
Last  Seven  Years  of  the  Life  of  Henry  Clay"
(1856),  and  edited  the  "Speeches  of  Henry  Clay."
—His  brother,  Walter,  author,  b.  in  Rutland,  Vt.,
9  May,  1797;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22  Jan.,  1851,
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1822,  and,  after  teach-
ing and  studying  theology  at  Andover,  became  in
1825  professor  of  moral  philosophy  and  belles-let-
tres at  Middletown  academy,  Conn. In  1828-'30


696


COLTON


COLUMBUS


,x^:>o^:^-^^£>-2^ CL^tf-^CyCt^-^^


he  edited  the  "  American  Spectator,"  a  whig
paper  in  Washington,  but,  becoming  a  favorite
with  President  Jackson,  was  appointed  chaplain
in  the  navy.  In  1881  he  sailed  to  the  West  Indies
in  the  "  Vincennes  " ;  in  1832-'5  he  was  attached
to  the  "  Constellation  "  on  the  Mediterranean,  in
1837  assigned  to  the  naval  station  at  Charlestown,
Mass.,  and  edited  the  "  Colonization  Herald,"  and
in  1838  to  the  chaplaincy  of  the  station  at  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  where,  in  1841-2,  he  was  principal
editor  of  the  "  North  American,''  and  published  a
pamphlet  entitled  "The  Bible  in  the  Public
Schools." In  1845  he  was  ordered  to  California,

and  on  28  July,
1840,  was  made
by  Com.  Stock-
ton alcalde  of
Monterey,  Cal.
After  exercising
the  duties  of
this  office  for
two  months  un-
der a  military
commission,  he
was  confirmed
as  alcalde  by
the  vote  of  citi-
zens. He  es-
tablished there
the  first  news-
paper in  Cali-
fornia, which
was  called  the
"  Californian,"  and  after  its  removal  to  San  Fran-
cisco the  "  Alta  California."  He  also  built  the
first  school-house,  and,  in  a  letter  to  the  "  North
American,"  made  the  first  public  announcement  of
the  discovery  of  gold.  He  returned  to  Philadel-
phia in  1849.  He  wrote  many  lively  and  interest-
ing books  of  travel  and  sea  life,  the  chief  of  which
are  "  Ship  and  Shore  in  Madeira,  Lisbon,  and  the
Mediterranean"  (New  York,  1835);  "A  Visit  to
Athens  and  Constantinople"  (1836);  "Three  Years
in  California  "  (1850) :  "  Deck  and  Port :  Incidents
of  a  Cruise  to  California"  (1850).  In  1851  the
Rev.  Henry  T.  Cheever  republished  the  sketches
of  Athens  and  Constantinople  under  the  title
"Land  and  Lee  in  the  Bosphorus  and  -^gean,"
and  edited  "  The  Sea  and  Sailor,  Notes  of  France
and  Italy,  and  other  Literary  Remains,"  with  a
memoir  of  the  author. .

COLTON,  (xardner  Qiiincy,  scientist,  b.  in
Georgia,  Vt.,  7  Feb.,  1814.  rfe  was  the  twelfth
child  of  Walter  Colton,  one  of  the  pioneer  settlers
of  the  state.  Gardner  received  a  common-school
education,  and  at  the  age  of  sixteen  learned  the
trade  of  chair-making,  which  he  followed  in  St.
Albans  until  1835,  when  he  went  to  New  York,
worked  at  his  trade,  and  wrote  for  the  press,  at
the  same  time  improving  every  opportunity  for
culture.  In  1842  he  studied  medicine  in  the  office
of  the  late  Willard  Parker,  M.  D.,  and  at  the  Col-
lege of  physicians  and  surgeons.  In  1844  he  be-
gan the  d(plivery  of  philosophical  and  chemical
lectures,  giving  exhibitions  of  electric  phenomena
and  of  the  effects  of  nitrous-oxide  or  "  laughing-
gas."  An  experiment  at  one  of  these  lectures  led
directly  to  the  first  surgical  operation  ever  per-
formed with  the  aid  of  an  anaesthetic.  On  the
evening  of  10  Dec,  1844,  Dr.  Cclton  was  lecturing
in  Hartford,  Conn.  A  young  man  named  Cooley
inhaled  the  gas,  and  while  under  its  influence  fell
over  a  bench  and  was  bruised  severely.  After  the
effect  of  the  gas  had  passed,  he  told  Dr.  Plorace
Wells,  a  dentist  who  was  present,  that  he  had  been


conscious  of  no  pain.  Dr.  Wells  perceived  the
significance  of  the  fact,  and,  after  consultation  with
Dr.  Colton,  made  an  appointment  for  the  next  day,
inhaled  the  gas,  and  had  a  tooth  extracted  by  a
fellow-dentist.  Dr.  Riggs,  of  Hartford.  The  opera-
tion was  painless,  and  led  by  natural  steps  to  the
general  use  of  anaesthetics.  Prior  to  this  time. the
knowledge  of  anicsthetics  had  not  extended  beyond
theory.  Dr.  Colton  gives  Dr.  Wells  full  credit  for
the  discovery.  In  1847  Dr.  Colton  devised  an  elec-
tric motor,  and  first  exhibited  it  during  his  lectures
at  Pittsburg.  The  machine  was  made  from  his
plans  by  a  mathematical-instrument-maker  named
Lilly,  and  is  believed  to  be  the  first  electric  loco-
motive operated  in  this  country.  It  is  fully  de-
scribed in  Prescott's  "  Dynamo-Electricity "  (New
York,  1884).  In  1849  he  went  to  California,  and
for  several  months  worked  in  the  newly  discovered
gold-fields  and  practised  medicine.  Returning  to
San  Francisco  near  the  close  of  the  year,  he  en-
gaged in  various  enterprises,  and  was  appointed
justice  of  the  peace  by  Gov.  Riley,  the  first  appoint-
ment to  this  office  in  California.  His  energy  and
prudence  soon  gave  him  a  competence,  and  he  re-
turned to  the  east  and  resumed  his  lecturing  tours
until  1860,  when  he  became  interested  in  the  pub-
lication of  a  series  of  war  maps,  which  bore  his
name.  In  1863  he  established  the  "  Colton  Dental
Association"  in  New  York,  and  similar  offices  in
several  of  the  larger  cities  of  the  United  States.
Subsequently  he  introduced  the  anaesthetic  use  of
nitrous-oxide  gas  in  Paris  and  London.  He  is  tiie
author  of  several  tracts  and  pamphlets  relating  to
philosophical  and  theological  subjects.

COLTON,  George  Hooker,  author,  b.  in  West-
ford,  N.  Y.,  27  Oct.,  1818 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  1
Dec,  1847.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1840,  and
became  a  teacher  in  Hartford,  Conn.  He  wrote  a
poem  to  commemorate  the  Indian  wars  in  which
Gen.  Harrison  had  been  engaged,  entitled  "Te-
cumseh,  or  the  West  Thirty  Years  Since,"  and
prepared,  from  the  sources  examined  in  the  prepa-
ration of  the  poem,  a  series  of  lectures  on  the
Indians,  which  he  delivered  in  several  cities  during
1842-'3.  In  1844  he  read  a  poem  before  the  Phi
Beta  Kappa  society  of  Yale.  In  January,  1845,
he  issued  the  first  number  of  a  political  magazine,
called  the  "American  Whig  Review,"  which  he
conducted  with  energy  and  ability  until  his  death.

COLUMBUS,  Christopher,  discoverer,  b.  in
Genoa  about  1436 ;  d.  in  Valladolid,  20  May,  1506.
It  is  a  singular  circumstance  that  we  do  not  know
with  certainty  where  or  when  Columbus  was  born.
His  descendant,  the  Duke  de  Veragua,  believes,  with
the  best  authorities,  that  he  was  a  native  of  Genoa,
and  that  his  birth  occurred  about  the  year  1436—
possibly  as  late  as  1440.  According  to  the  custom
of  the  time,  he  Latinized  his  name  of  Christoforo
Colombo  into  Columbus,  and  when  he  went  to
Spain  adopted  the  Spanish  form  of  it,  Cristobal
Colon.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Domenico  Co-
lombo, a  wool-comber,  and  his  wife,  Susanna  Fon-
tanarossa.  They  had  two-  other  sons,  Bartolomeo
and  Giacomo,  the  latter  called  in  Spain  Diego.
The  early  history  of  Columbus  is  involved  in  ob-
scurity. His  son  and  biographer,  Ferdinand,  un-
willing from  mistaken  pride  to  reveal  the  humble
condition  from  which  his  father  emerged,  has  left
his  biography  very  incomplete.  We  know  that  for
a  time  he  attended  school  and  assisted  his  fath.T
in  the  trade  of  wool-combing  before  going  to  sea
at  the  age  of  fifteen,  also  that  he  saw  some  sea-
fighting  in  the  wars  between  Genoa  and  Venice.
These  unknown  years,  it  would  appear,  were
stormy,  laborious,  and  eventful. "  Wherever  ship


COLUMBUS


COLUMBUS


697


has  sailed,"  Columbus  writes,  "  there  have  1  jour-
neyed." We  know  that  he  was  for  a  time  en-
gaged in  selling  books  in  Genoa,  and  that  at  a
later  date  he  was  wrecked  in  an  engagement  begun
off  Cape  St.  Vincent,  and,  before  his  ship  sank,  es-
caped on  a  plank  and  reached  the  shores  of  Portu-
gal. This  was  about  1470.  He  made  his  way  to
Lisbon,  where  he  supported  himself  by  making
maps  and  charts  and  by  occasional  voyages.  A
few  years  later  he  met  and  married  Donna  Felipa,
daughter  of  an  Italian  named  Parestrello,  who  had
l)een  governor  of  Porto  Santo.  Columbus  resided
for  some  time  on  this  island,  where  his  wife —
would  that  we  knew  somethit^g  of  her — had  in-
herited a  small  property,  and  where  their  son
Diego  was  born.  Here  he  studied  the  papers  and
maps  left  by  his  father-in-law,  a  distinguished
navigator  under  Prince  Henry,  of  Portugal,  and
here  he  was  constantly  brought  into  association
with  persons  interested  in  maritime  discovery.
The  precise  date  when  Columbus  conceived  the
design  of  discovering,  not  a  new  continent,  but  a
western  route  to  Asia,  cannot  be  determined — proba-
bly about  1474.  During  the  ensuing  ten  years  he
made  proposals  of  discovery  to  Genoa,  Portugal,
Venice,  France,  and  England,  which  were  deemed
by  some  of  those  governments  the  extravagant  de-
mands of  a  mere  adventurer.  The  king  of  Portu-
gal, after  having  referred  the  project  to  a  maritime
junto  and  to  his  council,  both  of  whom  regarded
it  as  visionary,  nevertheless  sent  a  caravel,  under
the  pretext  of  taking  provisions  to  the  Cape  de
Verde  islands,  but  with  secret  instructions  to  try  the
route  proposed  by  Columbus.  After  sailing  several
days,  the  pilots,  losing  courage,  returned  with  the
report  that  no  indications  of  land  had  been  seen.
King  John  was  not  yet  inclined  to  give  up  the
scheme,  although  it  had  been  most  unmercifully
ridiculed  by  his  council  and  other  unbelievers.  But
Columbus,  who  had  lost  his  wife  and  property,  as
well  as  all  hope  of  aid  in  that  quarter,  determined
to  abandon  Portugal  and  seek  elsewhere  for  patron-
age. Accordingly  he  left  Lisbon  toward  the  end  of
1484  secretly,  lest  his  departure  should  be  prevented,
and  set  out  for  Spain. Meeting  with  Marchena,

the  Superior  of
La  Rabida,  an
Andalusian  mon-
astery, now  pre-
served by  the  gov-
ernment of  Spain
as  anational  mon-
ument, that  good
man  became  so
deeply  interested
in  his  glorious
project  that  he
detained  him  as  a
guest,  and  sent
for  the  learned
physician  of  Pa-
los,  Garcia  Fer-
nandez, to  discuss
the  scheme.  Now
it  was  for  the
first  time  listened
to  with  admiration.  Marchena,  assuming  charge
of  the  maintenance  and  education  of  the  young
son  of  Columbus,  gave  the  father  a  letter  of  intro-
duction to  the  confessor  of  Isabella,  Fernando  de
Talavera.  After  seven  years  of  weary  attendance
on  the  Spanish  court.  Columbus  was  on  the  point
of  departure  for  France  when  stipulations  were  at
last  signed  by  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  at  the  camp
of  Santa  Fe,  on  17  April,  1492. On  Friday,  3  Aug.,


ocfdHmus


Columbus,  as  admiral  of  the  seas  and  lands  which
he  expected  to  discover,  set  sail  from  the  bar  of
Saltes,  near  Palos,  with  120  men  in  three  small
ships,  as  seen  in  the  illustration— the  *'  Santa  Ma-
ria," a  decked  vessel  of  ninety  feet  keel,  and  two


^^^^x
''\^^


",  t


caravels  or  undecked  boats,  the  "  Pinta  "  and  "  Ni-
na," much  smaller  than  the  "  Santa  Maria."

On  Friday,  12  Oct.,  1492,  the  outposts  of  the
New  World  were  seen.  One  of  the  Bahama  group
is  the  land  first  discovered,  but  as  to  which  par-
ticular island  there  is  great  difference  of  opinion.
Humboldt  thinks  it  was  Cat  island,  called  by  the
natives  Guanahavi  and  by  the  Spaniards  San  Sal-
vador. Some  writers  have  claimed  that  it  was  on
that  beautiful  spot  where  Columbus  wished  to  be
buried  and  where  he  slept  for  centuries — the  island
of  Santo  Domingo.  According  to  the  latest  inves-
tigations, Columbus  certainly  landed  on  Cat,  Sa-
mana,  or  Watlings  islands.  These  investigations,
pursued  chiefly  in  the  explorer's  log-book,  would
seem  to  indicate  that  the  admiral's  landing-place
was  the  last-mentioned  island,  now  (ISuO)  believed
to  be  the  true  San  Salvador.  This  is  perhaps  as
near  as  the  world  will  ever  come  to  a  certain  knowl-
edge of  the  "  landfall"  of  Columbus  on  the  Ameri-
can continent.  In  the  spring  of  the  following  year
news  of  the  startling  event  burst  upon  the  aston-
ished ears  of  Europe.  Columbus  returned  to  Eu-
rope, landing  triumphantly  at  Palos  on  Friday,  15
March,  1493.  and  in  his  journey  through  Spain  to
Barcelona  he  received  princely  honors  all  the  way.
There  his  entrance  with  some  of  the  natives,  and
with  the  arms  and  utensils  of  the  discovered  islands,
was  a  long-delayed  triumph,  as  striking  and  more
glorious  than  that  of  a  Roman  conqueror.

With  seventeen  ships  and  1,700  men  Columbus
sailed  on  his  second  voyage  from  Cadiz,  25  Sept.,
1493,  discovered  the  Windward  islands,  Jamaica,
and  Porto  Rico,  and  founded  a  colony  in  His-
paniola,  of  which  he  left  his  brother  Bartholomew
lieutenant-governor,  reaching  Cadiz  11  June,  1496.
He  succeeded  in  clearing  himself  of  the  charges
preferred  against  him  by  the  adventurers  who  had
accompanied  him,  and  on  30  May,  1498,  sailed  with
six  ships  on  his  third  voyage.  Cohimbus  discov-
ered the  Orinoco  and  then  visited  Hispaniola,  only
to  again  become  the  victim  of  malice  and  misrep-
resentation. A  commissioner  sent  by  the  Spanish
king  to  inquire  into  the  charges  placed  him  and  his
brother  in  chains  and  sent  them  to  Spain.  When
the  captain  of  the  ship  offered  to  free  him  from
his  fetters,  Columbus  proudly  replied :  "  No,  I  will
wear  them  as  a  memento  of  the  gratitude  of
princes."  The  indignation  expressed  throughout
Spain  at  this  outrage  caused  the  king  to  disclaim


698


COLUMBUS


COLUMBUS


having  authorized  it ;  but  the  nobles  were  jealous
of  his  superior  rank,  and  Ferdinand  dissatisfied
with  the  small  profits  received  from  the  expedition
to  the  New  World.  The  only  subsequent  employ-
ment Columbus  received  was  the  command  of  four
caravels  to  search  through  the  sea,  now  the  gulf,  of
Mexico.  He  sailed  from  Cadiz,  9  May,  1502,  coasted
along  the  south  side  of  the  gulf,  and,  after  much
suffering  from  hardship  and  famine,  reached  San
Lucar,  7  Nov.,  1504,  where  he  lay  sick  for  several
months,  and,  on  his  recovery  and  return  to  Spain,
had  his  claim  finally  rejected  by  the  king.  At
length,  infirm  in  body,  but  in  full  possession  of  his
faculties,  having,  in  his  own  words,  "no  place  to
repair  to  but  an  inn,  and  often  with  nothing  to  pay
for  his  sustenance,"  the  discoverer  of  a  new  world
died  at  No.  2  Calle  Ancha  de  la  Magdalena  on  As-
cension day,  in  a  small  apartment  of  a  modest
house,  with  a  few  faithful  friends  and  followers
standing  by  his  bedside.  A  small  tablet  on  the
front  of  the  two-story  stone  building,  some  600
years  old,  briefly  states,  "  Here  died  Columbus."

The  travels  of  the  discoverer  did  not  cease  with
his  death.  His  remains,  after  burial  at  Valladolid,
were  removed  to  Seville.  In  1536  they  were  taken
with  great  pomp  to  Santo  Domingo  and  interred
in  the  cathedral.  In  1798  what  were  supposed  to
be  his  ashes  were  again  removed  to  the  cathedral
of  Havana  and  buried  there  with  imposing  cere-
monials ;  but  it  is  believed  by  many  authorities
that  the  remains  conveyed  to  Cuba  were  not  those
of  Columbus,  but  those  of  his  son  Diego.  On  this
point,  and  in  answer  to  the  recent  assertion  that  he
was  a  native  of  Calvi,  in  Corsica,  the  Duke  of  Vera-
gua  says  in  a  letter  to  the  writer :  "  I  do  not  think
any  of  the  historians  or  writers  have  been  success-
ful in  their  attempts  to  deprive  Genoa  of  the  honor
of  being  the  birthplace  of  Columbus  or  in  taking
from  Havana  the  glory  of  possessing  his  ashes."

The  name  and  fame  ol  Columbus  are  not  local  or
limited ;  they  do  not  belong  to  any  single  country  or
people.  They  are  the  proud  possession  of  the  whole
civilized  world.  In  all  the  transactions  of  history
there  is  no  act  which  for  vastness  and  performance
can  be  compared  to  the  discovery  of  the  continent
of  America,  "  the  like  of  which  was  never  done  by
any  man  in  ancient  or  in  later  times."  After  form-
ing his  great  and  glorious  designs,  Columbus  still
continued,  even  during  his  most  destitute  days,  the
promiser  of  kingdoms,  holding  firmly  in  his  grasp
"the  keys  of  the  ocean  sea,"  claiming  as  it  were
from  heaven  the  Indies  as  his  own,  and  "  dividing
them  as  he  pleased."  He  never  knew  the  extent
or  value  of  his  discovery.  He  died  in  the  convic-
tion that  the  land  he  had  reached  was  the  long-
sought  Indies.  But  it  was  a  country  far  richer
than  the  Indies ;  and  had  he,  in  quitting  Cuba,
struck  into  a  westerly  instead  of  a  southerly  di-
rection, it  would  have  carried  him  into  the  very
depths  of  the  golden  regions  whose  existence  he
had  so  long  and  so  vainly  predicted.  As  it  was,  he
"  only  opened  the  gates,"  to  use  his  own  language,
for  others  more  fortunate  than  himself ;  and  before
he  left  Hispaniola  for  the  last  time  the  young  ad-
venturer arrived  there  who  was  destined,  by  the
conquest  of  Mexico,  to  realize  all  the  magnificent
visions,  which  had  been  derided  only  as  visions,  m
the  lifetime  of  Columbus.

The  accompanying  illustration  is  a  representa-
tion of  a  noble  statue  by  Sunal,  a  Spanish  sculptor,
which  will  be  set  up  in  the  Central  park  on  the  four
hundredth  anniversary  of  the  discovery  of  our  con-
tinent, an  event  which  it  is  believed  will  be  cele-
brated by  the  governments  of  Spain  and  the  United
States,  other  European  and  American  nations  per-


haps participating  in  the  quadricentennial  of  the
momentous  event.  The  late  king  of  Spain,  who  said
to  the  writer,  "  Columbus  should  form  an  enduring
bond  between  Spain  and  the  United  States,"  was
deeply  interested  in  the  proposed  celebration,  ex-
pecting to  visit  the  New  World  with  a  large  Span-
ish fleet,  and  perhaps  to  witness  the  unveiling  of  the
Columbus  statue  in  the  Central  parK.


The  following  remarkable  letter,  not  to  be  found
in  any  of  the  biographies  of  Columbus,  was  written
in  Spanish  by  the  great  admiral  two  days  before
he  sailed  from  Saltes  in  search  of  "  that  famous
land."  It  was  addressed  to  Agostino  Barberigo,
doge  of  Venice,  to  whom  the  discoverer  had  previ-
ously made  proposals  of  exploration,  and  has  lain
perdu  for  three  hundred  and  ninety-two  years
among  the  fifteen  millions  of  Venetian  archives
contained  in  an  ancient  monastery  near  the  grand
canal.  There  is  a  surprising  tone  of  confidence
about  the  letter,  and  the  reference  to  "  the  famous
land  "  is  certainly  remarkable  :

"  Magnificent  Sir  :  Since  your  republic  has^  not
deemed  it  convenient  to  accept  my  ofl'ers,  and  ail
the  spite  of  my  many  enemies  has  been  brought  in
force  to  oppose  my  petition,  I  have  thrown  myself
in  the  arms  of  God,  my  Maker,  and  He,  by  the  in-
tercession of  the  saints,  has  caused  the  most  clem-
ent king  of  Castile  not  to  refuse  to  generously  as-
sist my  project  toward  the  discovery  of  a  new
world.'  And  praising  thereby  the  good  God,  I  ob-
tained the  placing  under  my  command  of  men  and
ships,  and  am  about  to  start  on  a  voyage  to  that
famous  land,  grace  to  which  intent  God  has  been
pleased  to  bestow  upon  me."  Like  Shakespeare,
the  "  Inventor  de  las  Indias"  has  suffered  a  series
of  feeble  and  foolish  attacks  from  those  who  would
fain  rob  him  of  the  glory  of  being  the  most  sue-


COLVER


COLVOCORESSES


699


cessful  of  all  navigatoi-s,  as  they  would  deprive
"the  myriad-minded"  of  the  authorship  of  his
own  writings.  The  latest  of  these  futile  efforts  to
prove  him  to  be  an  "  inglorious  Columbus,"  was
made  in  an  address  before  the  New  York  Histori-
cal Society,  on  the  evening  of  2  Nov.,  1886 — Fer-
n<ando,  son  of  Christopher  Columbus  and  Beatriz
Enriquez,  his  second  wife,  b.  in  Spain  in  1488 ;  d,
in  1589.  His  father  legitimated  him  by  a  codicil
dated  at  Segovia,  25  Aug.,  1505.  At  the  age  of
ten  he  was  a  page  of  Queen  Isabella,  and  then
began  his  studies,  becoming  proficient  in  mathe-
matics, cosmography,  and  naval  subjects-  In
1508-9  he  made  a  voyage  to  Ilispaniola  with  his
eldest  brother.  Admiral  Diego  Columbus,  and  after-
ward he  accompanied  Charles  V.  to  Italy  and  Ger-
many, travelled  in  Africa  and  Asia,  and  retired  in
1530,  when  he  became  a  priest.  He  collected  a  fine
library  of  20,000  volumes,  which  he  bequeathed  to
the  cathedral  of  Seville.  A  large  number  of  the
most  valuable  of  these  were  found  in  October,  1886,
mouldering  in  a  cellar  of  Seville.  He  wrote  "  His-
toria  del  Almirante  Don  Cristobal  Colon,"  which
would  have  been  lost  but  for  a  translation  into  Ital-
ian made  by  Alonso  de  Ulloa  (Venice,  1571),  and  left
another  manuscript,  "  Apuntamientos  sobre  la  De-
marcacion  del  Maluco  y  sus  Islas,"  kept  in  the  ar-
chives of  Simancas.  See  "  Select  Lettei-s  relating  to
the  Four  Voyages  to  the  New  World  of  Columbus,"
translated  and  edited  by  R.  H.  Major  (London,
Hakluyt  society,  1847) ;  "  Life  and  Voyages  of  Co-
lumbus," by  Washington  Irving  (New  York,  1828) ;
"  The  Spanish  Conquest  of  America,"  by  Sir  Arthur
Helps  (London,  1858-60) ;  "Notes  on  Columbus,"
by  Henri  Harrisse  (printed  privately.  New  York,
1865) ;  "  Memorials  and  Footprints  of  Columbus,"
by  Jas.  Grant  Wilson  (New  York,  American  geo-
graphical society,  1885).

COLVER,  Nathaniel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Orwell,
Vt,  10  May,  1794;  d.  in  Chicago,  25  Dec,  1870.
His  father,  a  Baptist  minister,  removed,  while
Nathaniel  was  a  child,  to  Champlain,  in  northern
New  York,  and  thence  to  West  Stockbridge,  Mass.,
where  the  son  was  converted  and  decided  to  enter
the  Baptist  ministry.  Though  he  had  but  slender
opportunities  of  early  education,  he  made  himself
a  respectable  scholar.  After  brief  pastorates  in
various  places  he  was  called  in  1839  to  Boston,
where  he  co-operated  in  organizing  the  church
since  famous  as  Tremont  Temple.  His  ministry
here  was  remarkable  for  its  bold,  uncompromising,
and  effective  warfare  upon  slavery  and  intemper-
ance, as  well  as  for  its  directly  spiritual  results.
On  leaving  Boston  in  1852,  Mr.'  Colver  was  pastor
at  South  Abingdon,  Mass.,  at  Detroit,  at  Cincin-
nati, and  finally,  in  1861,  at  Chicago.  While  in
Cincinnati  he  received  from  Denison  university
the  degree  of  D.  D.  In  Chicago  he  was  invited  to
take  the  professorship  of  doctrinal  theology  in  the
theological  seminary  in  process  of  organization  in
that  city.  In  1867-70  he  was  president  of  the
Freedman's  institute  in  Richmond,  Va,  Dr.  Col-
ver bore  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  anti-masonic,
anti-slavery,  and  temperance  movements  of  his
day.  He  wrote  much  for  the  press,  and  published,
besides  occasional  addresses,  three  lectures  on  Odd-
fellowship  (1844).

COLVILLE,  Alexander,  Lord,  British  naval
officer,  b.  about  1710 ;  d.  21  May,  1770.  He  was
the  eighth  liaron  Colviile  in  the  peerage  of  Scot-
land. He  entered  the  navy,  and  attained  in  1770
the  rank  of  vice-admiral  of  the  white.  He  com-
manded on  the  North  American  station,  and  in
1762  drove  the  French  out  of  St.  John,  Newfound-
land, which  they  had  retaken  a  short  time  before.


COLVIN,  Verplanck,  topographical  engineer,
b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,  1847.  He  was  educated
at  private  schools,  and  then  at  the  Albany  acade-
my, where  he  excelled  in  scientific  branches.  In
1864  he  entered  the  law-office  of  his  father  in  Al-
bany, and  subsequently  was  admitted  to  the  bar,
meanwhile  continuing  his  interest  in  the  sciences,
especially  chemistry.  He  delivered  part  of  a  free
course  of  lectures  given  in  the  geological  hall,  and
was  led  in  1865  to  make  his  first  expedition  into
the  Adirondack  wilderness.  Until  1872  he  con-
tinued to  spend  his  summers  in  exploration,  while
his  winters  were  occupied  in  the  practice  of  his
profession  and  in  study. During  the  summer  of

1869  he  made  the  ascent  of  Mt.  Marcy,  and  in

1870  the  first  ascent  of  Mt.  Seward.  lii  1872  he
applied  to  the  legislature  for  aid,  and  in  conse-
quence the  Adirondack  survey  was  instituted,  with
himself  as  superintendent.  His  work  during  that
year  included  the  discovery  of  Lake  Tear-of-the-
Clouds,  the  most  elevated  lake  spring  and  source  of
the  Hudson  river.  Each  year  during  the  summer
months  he  directs  surveying  parties  engaged  in
field-work  throughout  the  Adirondack  region,  and
determinations  of  the  altitudes  of  most  of  the  im-
portant mountains  have  been  made  under  his
supervision.  He  was  appointed  in  1873  one  of  the
commissioners  of  state  parks  to  report  upon  the
expediency  of  setting  apart  the  whole  Adirondack
region  as  a  state  forest  reserve,  and  subsequently
exerted  his  influence  toward  the  passage  of  a  bill
on  this  subject.  In  1883  he  was  appointed  super-
intendent of  the  New  York  state  land  survey.  Mr.
Colvin  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific  societies,
and  has  been  president  of  the  department  of
physical  science  in  the  Albany  institute.  About
1881  he  delivered  at  Hamilton  college  a  series  of
lectures  of  geodesy,  surveying,  and  topographical
engineering.  Besides  occasional  articles  in  the
magazines,  he  has  written  a  series  of  reports  on
the  surveys,  which  are  published  by  the  state.

COLVOCORESSES,  (iJeorge  Musalas,  naval
officer,  b.  in  the  island  of  Scio,  Grecian  archipelago,
22  Oct.,  1816 :  d.  in  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  3  June,
1872.  He  was  ransomed  from  the  Turks  after  the
massacre  of  the  Greek  population  of  the  island  in
1822,  and  sent  by  his  father  to  the  United  States,
where  he  was  received  into  the  family  of  Capt.
Alden  Partridge  and  educated  at  the  military
academy  founded  by  that  officer  in  Norwich,  Vt.
In  1832  he  was  appointed  a  midshipman,  and  in
1836-'7  attached  to  the  frigate  "  United  States  "  on
the  Mediterranean  squadron.  In  1838  he  was
commissioned  passed  midshipman,  and  accompa-
nied Capt.  Wilkes's  exploring  expedition  to  the
southern  seas,  serving  at  various  times  on  the
"  Porpoise,"  "  Peacock,"  "  Vincennes,"  and  "  Ore-
gon," and  taking  part  in  the  overland  expedition
in  1841  from  Vancouver's  island  to  San  Francisco.
He  was  commissioned  lieutenant  in  1843,  served
on  the  Pacific  squadron  in  1844-'6,  the  Mediter-
ranean squadron  in  1847-'9,  on  the  coast  of  Africa
in  1851-2,  at  New  York  in  1853-5,  on  the  East
India  squadron  in  1855-'8,  during  which  he  par-
ticipated as  executive  officer  of  the  "  Levant  '  in
the  capture  of  the  Barrier  forts  in  Canton  river,
and  at  Portsmouth  navy-yard  in  1858-'60.  He
was  made  commander  in  1861,  and  assigned  to
the  store-ship  "Supply"  on  the  Atlantic  coast  in
1861-'3,  during  which  he  captured  the  blockade-
runner  "  Stephen  Hart,"  laden  with  arms  and  mili-
tary stores;  to  the  sloop-of-war  "Saratoga,"  of
the  South  Atlantic  blockading  squadron,  in  1864;
and  the  sloop-of-war  "  St.  Mary's,"  of  the  Pacific
squadron, in  1865-'6. In 1867  he received  his


700


COLWELL


COMBE


commission  as  captain,  and  was  retired.  He  was
mysteriously  murder«^d  in  Bridgeport.  Capt.  Col-
vocoresses  was  the  author  of  a  worl<  on  Wilkes's
expedition,  entitled  "  Four  Years  in  a  Government
Exploring  Expedition  "  (New  York,  1855), — His
son,  Oeorge  Parlridg'e,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Nor-
wich, Vt.,  8  April,  1847,  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy  in  18G8,  and  had  risen  to  the  rank
of  lieutenant  in  1875.  He  has  served  on  most  of
the  foreign  naval  stations,  and  in  the  hydrographic
office  at  Washington,  and  in  1886  was  assistant  in-
structor in  drawing  at  the  U.  S.  naval  academy.

COLWELL,  Stephen,  author,  b.  in  Brooke  coun-
ty, Va.,  25  March,  1800 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
15  Jan.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  in  1819  at  Jeffer-
son college.  Pa.,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  of  Virginia  in  1821.  Removing  to  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  he  practised  law  for  ten  years,  when  he
became  an  iron  merchant  in  Philadelphia.  He  de-
voted much  of  his  time  to  the  study  of  political
economy,  and  soon  began  to  write  for  the  press.
He  acquired  large  wealth,  which  he  devoted  to
charitable  purposes,  to  the  endowment  of  professor-
ships, to  the  encouragement  of  scientific  investiga-
tion, and  to  the  collection  of  a  large  and  valuable
library,  including  a  very  complete  selection  of
works  on  his  favorite  topics  of  political  and  social
science.  During  the  civil  war  Mr.  Colwell  was
among  the  foremost  supporters  of  the  National
government  in  its  struggle  against  secession.  He
lent  his  name  and  his  money  to  the  cause,  and
strengthened  the  hands  of  the  administration  by
every  means  in  his  power.  He  was  one  of  the
founders  of  the  Union  league  of  Philadelphia,  and
an  associate  member  of  the  U.  S.  sanitary  commis-
sion. After  the  war  he  was  appointed  a  commis-
sioner to  examine  the  whole  internal  revenue  system
of  the  United  States,  with  a  view  to  suggesting
such  modifications  as  would  distribute  and  lighten
the  necessary  burdens  of  taxation — a  problem  of
peculiar  importance  at  that  crisis  of  the  nation's
history.  To  this  work  he  devoted  much  time  and
study,  and  his  advice  had  due  weight  in  determin-
ing the  financial  policy  of  the  government.  He
bequeathed  his  library  to  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania with  an  endowment  for  a  professorship  of
social  science.  His  first  published  work,  under  the
signature  of  "  Mr.  Penn,"  was  entitled  "  Letter  to
Members  of  the  Legislature  of  Pennsylvania  on  the
Removal  of  Deposits  from  the  Bank  of  the  United
States  by  Order  of  the  President"  (1834).  Still
concealing  his  identity  under  the  name  of  ''Jona-
than B.  Wise,"  he  published  •'  The  Relative  Position
in  our  Industry  of  Foi-eign  Commerce,  Domestic
Production,  and  Liternal  Trade "  (Philadelphia,
1850).  He  was  the  author  of  "  New  Themes  for
the  Protestant  Clergy  "  (1851) ;  "  Polities  for  Ameri-
can Christians  "  (1852) ;  "  Hints  to  Laymen,"  and
"  Charity  and  the  Clergy  "  (1853) ;  "  Position  of
Christianity  in  the  United  States,  in  its  Relation
with  our  Political  System  and  Religious  Instruction
in  the  Public  Schools  "  (1855) ;  "  The  South ;  a  Let-
ter from  a  Friend  in  the  North  with  Reference  to
the  Effects  of  Disunion  upon  Slavery  "  (1856).  The
same  year  he  edited,  with  notes,  "  List's  Treatise  on
National  Economy."  His  last  and  most  important
work  is  "The  Ways  and  Means  of  Commercial
Payment  "  (1858).  Besides  these  publications  in
book-form,  he  was  the  author  of  a  noteworthy  arti-
cle in  the  "  Merchant's  Magazine,"  entitled  "  Money
of  Account "  (1852),  and  another  essay  on  the  same
subject  in  the  "  Banker's  Magazine"  (1855).

COLYAR,  Arthur  St.  Clair,  lawyer,  b.  in
Washington  county,  Tenn.,  23  June,  1818.  He  was
self-educated,  and achieved success  as  a  lawyer.


He  opposed  secession  in  1861,  but  became  a  mem-
ber of  the  Confederate  congress,  and  served  till
1865.  After  the  war  he  reorganized  the  Tennessee
coal  and  railroad  company,  becoming  its  president,
and  also  engaged  in  manufacturing.  He  has  done
much  to  develop  the  resources  of  fns  state.

COLYER,  Tineent,  painter,  b,  in  Blooming-
dale,  N.  Y.,  in  1825;  d.  on  Contentment  island.
Conn.,  12  July,  1888.  He  studied  four  years  in
New  York  with  John  R.  Smith,  and  then  was  a
pupil  at  the  National  academy,  of  which  he  be-
came an  associate  member  in  1849.  and  from  that
time  until  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  painted
in  New  York  city.  After  the  war,  during  which
he  had  devoted  all  his  time  to  his  duties  as  a  mem-
ber of  the  Christian  and  the  Indian  commissions,
he  settled  at  Rowayton,  in  the  town  of  Darien,
Conn.  His  works  include  "  Johnson  Straits,  Brit-
ish Columbia":  "Columbia  River"  (1875) ;  "  Pue-
blo"; "Passing  Shower"  (1876);  "Home  of  the
Yackamas,  Oregon";  "Darien  Shore,  Connecti-
cut "  ;  "  Rainy  Day  on  Connecticut  Shore  "  (1881) ;
"Winter  on  Connecticut  Shore  "  (1884) ;  "Spring
Flowers"  (1885);  and  "  French  Waiter"  (1886).

COMAN,  Charlotte  B.,  painter,  b.  in  Water-
ville,  N.  Y.,  about  1845.  She  studied  in  New
York  under  James  R.  Brevoort  and  H.  Thompson,
and  later  in  Paris  under  ]&mile  Vernier.  After
painting  in  France  and  Holland  for  six  years,  she
returned  to  the  United  States,  and  opened  a  studio
in  New  York.  Her  best  works  are  "  French  Vil-
lage "  (1876) ;  "  Sunset  at  the  Seaside,  France "
(1877);  "Peasant  Home  in  Normandy"  (1878);
"  Cottage  in  Picardy  "  (1881) ;  "  Old  Windmills  in
Holland";  "Spring-Time  in  Picardy"  (1882);
"  View  near  Schiedam  "  (1883) ;  "  Farmer's  Cottage
in  Picardy  "  (1884) ;  "  Poppy-Field  in  Normandy  "
(1885) ;  and  1886  "A  French  Village."

COMBE,  George,  phrenologist,  b.  near  Edin-
burgh, Scotland,  21  Oct.,  1788 ;  d.  at  Moor  Park,
Surrey,  England,  14  Aug.,  1858.  He  was  educated
at  the  high  school  and  Edinburgh  university,  and
in  1804  began  the  study  of  law.  In  1812  he  ob-
tained his  commission  as  a  writer  to  the  signet,
and  soon  afterward  that  of  notary  public.  He  was
eminently  successful  as  a  lawyer,  and  his  shrewd-
ness and  conscientiousness  in  dealing  with  his  cli-
ents obtained  him  a  large  practice.  In  1837  he  de-
voted himself  wholly  to  phrenology.  On  the  visit
of  Spurzheim  to  Edinburgh  in  1816,  Combe  be-
came a  convert  to  his  system  of  phrenology,  and
advocated  it  in  his  lectures  and  writings.  In  1819
he  published  "  Essays  on  Phrenology,  or  an  Inquiry
into  the  System  of  Grail  and  Spurzheim,"  which  was
subsequently  developed  into  his  "  System  of  Phre-
nology" (2  Vols.,  8vo,  1824).  His  most  important
work,  "  The  Constitution  of  Man  "  (1828),  was  de-
signed to  show  that  all  the  laws  of  nature  were  in
harmony  with  one  another,  and  that  man  could
best  fulfil  God's  will,  and  attain  the  greatest  hap-
piness, by  discovering  those  laws  and  obeying  them.
In  1823,  assisted  by  a  few  friends,  George  Combe
and  his  brother  Andrew,  a  physician,  established
the  "Edinburgh  Phrenological  Journal,"  and  for
more  than  twenty-three  years  contributed  gratui-
tously to  its  pages.  In  1833  he  married  Cecilia
Siddons,  a  daughter  of  the  famous  actress.  In
1837  he  went  to  Germany ;  and  in  1838,  accompa-
nied by  his  wife,  he  visited  the  United  States,  and
during  the  two  years  he  remained  there  delivere.i
158  lectures  on  phrenology,  and  the  education  and
treatment  of  the  criminal  classes.  On  his  return
to  Great  Britain  in  June,  1840,  he  published  his
"  Moral  Philosophy,"  and  in  the  year  following  his
"  Notes  on  the  United  States  of  North  America.'


COMEGYS


COMONFORT


701


COMEGYS,  Joseph  Parsons,  senator,  h.  in
Cherbourg,  Kent  co.,  Del,,  29  Dec,  1813.  His  an-
cestors, who  were  Hungarians,  came  to  this  country
about  1670.  His  father,  Cornelius  P.  Cornegys,
was  governor  of  Delaware  from  1837  till  1840.
He  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1835,  in  1843  and
1849  was  chosen  to  the  legislature,  and  in  1852
appointed  one  of  a  committee  of  three  to  revise
the  statutes.  He  was  appointed  by  the  governor
to  fill  the  vacancy  in  the  U.  S.  senate  caused  by
the  death  of  John  M.  Clavton,  and  served  from  4
Dec,  1856,  till  3  March,  1857.  He  was  a  delegate
to  the  Philadelphia  national  union  convention  of
1866,  and  on  18  May,  1876,  became  chief  justice  of
Delaware.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave
him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1886. — His  brother,
Cornelius  tteorg-e,  physician,  b.  in  Cherbourg,
Kent  CO.  Del.,  23  July,  1816,  was  educated  at  Dover
academy,  Del.  After  embarking  unsuccessfully  in
business  in  Indiana,  he  began  the  study  of  medicine,
and  received  his  diploma  from  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1848.  He  went  to  Cincinnati  in
1849,  and  in  1851  studied  in  London  and  Paris.
He  became  professor  of  anatomy  in  the  Cincinnati
college  of  medicine  in  1852,  but  resigned  to  accept
the  chair  of  the  institutes  of  medicine  in  the  new
Miami  medical  college.  This  was  united  with
the  Medical  college  of  Ohio  five  years  later,  and
Dr.  Comegys  retained  his  chair  till  1868,  with  the
exception  of  the  years  1860-4.  In  1857  he  be-
came lecturer  on  clinical  medicine  in  the  Cincin-
nati hospital,  where  he  has  introduced  important
improvements.  Dr.  Comegys  delivered  an  address
before  the  alumni  association  of  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  in  1875,  in  which  he  maintained  that
a  healthy  brain  is  necessary  to  a  free  will.  He  is
in  favor  of  reform  in  medical  teaching,  holding
that  bedside  instruction  in  hospital  wards  should
be  given  to  advanced  students,  and  that  instruc-
tion given  to  large  classes  by  means  of  lectures  is
inadequate.  Dr.  Comegys  for  many  years  has  been
a  director  of  the  board  of  education,  was  active  in
developing  the  Cincinnati  public  library,  secured
the  organization  of  the  University  of  Cincinnati  in
1869,  and  was  one  of  the  founders  of  the  Cin-
cinnati academy  of  medicine  and  its  president.  Dr.
Comegys  claims  to  have  been  the  first  to  announce
the  correct  theory  of  counter-irritation.  He  is  a
member  of  various  medical  associations.  Of  his
numerous  medical  papers,  two  have  attracted  much
attention,  that  on  "  The  Pathology  and  Treatment
of  Phthisis "  (1854)  and  that  on  "Cool  Bathing  in
the  Treatment  of  Entero-Colitis"  (1875),  in  which
he  is  said  to  have  introduced  "one  of  the  most
life-saving  improvements  in  modern  therapeutics."
He  has  translated  from  the  French  Renouard's
"History  of  Medicine"  (Cincinnati,  1856).

COMER,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  in
August,  1704;  d.  at  Old  Rehoboth,  Mass.,  23  May,
1734.  He  was  apprenticed  to  a  glover,  but  at
the  age  of  seventeen,  through  the  influence  of  In-
crease Mather,  was  released  by  his  master,  and
soon  afterward  entered  Harvard,  studied  there  for
two  years,  and  removed  to  Yale.  In  1721  he
united  with  the  Congregational  church  at  Cam-
bridge, but  four  years  afterward  became  a  Baptist
and  connected  himself  with  Mr.  Callender's  church
in  Boston.  In  the  same  year  he  began  to  preach,
and  in  1726  was  ordained  co-pastor  at  Newport.
He  was  dismissed  from  this  charge  in  1729,  in
consequence  of  his  attempt  to  introduce  the  prac-
tice of  the  laying  on  of  hands  m  presenting  newly
baptized  members  to  full  fellowship  in  the  church.
In  1732  he  became  pastor  of  Old  Rehoboth,  ten
miles  from  Providence. He  left  a  diary  in  manu-


script, which  contains  interesting  information  of
the  early  history  of  the  Baptists  in  America.

COMiER,  Thomas,  actor,  b.  in  Bath,  England,
19  Dec,  1790;  d.  in  Boston,  27  July,  1862.  He
acted  at  Covent  Garden  and  Drury  Lane  theatres,
and  in  1827  came  to  the  United  States,  and  was
successively  musical  director  at  the  Tremont
theatre,  the  Museum,  and  the  Boston  theatre.  His
forte  was  acting  eccentric  parts  and  Irish  imper-
sonations. He  was  skilled  in  musical  composition.

COMFORT,  George  Fisk,  educator,  b.  in  Berk-
shire, Tompkins  co.,  N.  Y.,  20  Sept.,  1833.  He  was
graduated  at  Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,
(Jonn.,  and  became  a  teacher.  He  studied  in
Europe  in  1860-65.  and  from  1865  till  1868  was
professor  of  languages  at  Alleghany  college,  Mead-
ville.  Pa.  In  1872  he  was  appointed  professor
of  aesthetics  and  modern  languages  at  Syracuse,
N.  Y.,  university.  His  publications  include  a  series
of  text-books  for  the  German  language.  In  1866
he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  Institute  archseo-
logico,  Rome,  Paris,  and  Berlin.

COMLY,  John,  author,  b,  in  Pennsylvania  in
1774;  d.  in  Ryberry,  Pa.,  17  Aug.,  1850.  He  was
a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  is  the
author  of  "  Comly's  Speller,"  of  which  several
millions  have  been  printed.  He  also  published  a
grammar,  a  reader,  and  a  primer.  See  "  Journal
of  the  Life  and  Religious  Labors  of  John  Comly,
of  Ryberry  "  (Philadelphia,  1853).

COMMAGER,  Henry  S.,  soldier,  b.  about  1825  ;
d.  in  Galveston,  Texas,  5  Sept.,  1867.  He  was  a
prominent  Democratic  politician  in  Toledo,  Ohio,
and  in  1864  was  an  unsuccessful  candidate  for  con-
gress. He  was  colonel  of  the  67th  Ohio  regiment
during  the  civil  war,  and  on  27  Feb.,  1865,  was
brevetted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  For  a
short  time  before  his  death  he  Was  in  the  employ
of  the  internal  revenue  service.

COMONFORT,  Ygnacio,  Mexican  soldier,  b.  in
Puebla,  Mexico,  12  March,  1812;  killed  near  San
Luis  Potosi,  13  Nov.,  1863.  He  entered  the  Jesuit
college  in  his  native  city  in  1826,  became  a  captain
of  cavalry  in  1832,  and  soon  after  that  attached
himself  to  the  liberal  party,  of  which,  from  that
time,  he  was  a  leader.  Pie  became  prefect  of  the
district  of  Tlapa  in  1834,  was  elected  in  1842  to  the
congress  that  was  dissolved  by  Santa  Anna,  and  in
1846  to  the  one  that  was  dispersed  by  Gen.  Pare-
des.  The  revolution  of  August,  1846,  followed,
and  Comonfort  took  a  prominent  part  in  it.  He
became  third  alcalde  of  the  capital  and  prefect  of
western  Mexico,  but  left  these  offices  to  engage  in
the  war  with  the  United  States,  and,  after  the  cap-
ture of  Mexico,  organized  guerillas  in  the  west  for
another  campaign.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Queretaro  congress,  which  made  peace  with  the
United  States,  and  was  then  chosen  senator  by  his
native  state,  and  served  till  1851.  He  was  again
elected  to  congress  in  1852,  and  was  a  custom-
house director  till  1853,  when  Santa  Anna,  return-
ing to  power,  dismissed  him,  and  he  joined  Alvarez
in  raising  an  insurrection.  After  a  visit  to  New
York,  where  he  obtained  financial  aid,  Comonfort
was  instrumental  in  forcing  Santa  Anna  to  abdi-
cate in  1855.  Alvarez  assumed  the  government,
but  retired  on  11  Dec,  and  made  Comonfort  pro-
visional president.  The  new  president  was  vigor-
ously opposed  by  the  clergy,  the  army,  and  the
conservatives,  and  on  19  Dec.  the  junta  of  Za-
capoastla  declared  against  him.  In  February,
1856,  the  conservatives  assembled  at  Puebla  a  force
variously  estimated  at  from  5,000  to  15,000  men ;
but  Comonfort  marched  on  the  town,  forced  the
rebels  to  surrender  on  20  March,  and  on  31  March


702


COMPOSTELA


COMSTOCK


issued  a  decree  confiscating  church  property,  fol-
lowing it,  on  28  June,  by  another,  forbidding  the
clergy  to  hold  landed  estate.  These  measures
caused  several  revolts,  and,  though  they  were
promptly  quelled,  the  country  remained  in  an  un-
settled state.  On  11  March,  1857,  congress  pro-
mulgated a  new  constitution,  vesting  in  itself  all
control  over  religious  and  military  affairs.  Comon-
fort  was  proclaimed  constitutional  president,  with
extraordinary  powers ;  but  the  opposition  of  the
clergy  and  the  army  rendered  his  position  critical.
Zuloaga's  brigade,  the  last  to  remain  faithful,  de-
clared against  him  on  11  Jan.,  1858,  and,  after  a
bloody  struggle  of  several  days,  the  rebels  gained
possession  of  the  capital  on  21  Jan.  Juarez,  who
had  been  appointed  provisional  president  by
Comonfort,  while  the  latter  took  the  field  in  per-
son, convened  a  congress  at  Guanajuato  in  his
friend's  interest ;  but  Comonfort,  finding  all  efforts
in  vain,  fled  to  the  United  States  in  February,  and
then  to  France.  Soon  after  the  success  of  Juarez
over  the  church  party,  in  1859,  and  on  the  first
movement  of  the  French  for  the  invasion  of
Mexico,  Comonfort  returned,  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  troops,  and  showed  great
skill  and  bravery.  On  his  way  from  Mexico  to  San
Luis  Potosi  he  was  murdered  by  banditti.

COMPOSTELA,  Die^o  Evelino  de  (kom-pos-
tay'-lah),  bishop  of  Cuba  and  Florida,  b.  in  Santi-
ago, Spain,  in  JG58;  d.  in  Havana  in  1704.  He
was  appointed  bishop  of  Cuba  and  Florida  in  1685,
but  did  not  take  possession  of  his  oflice  until  No
vember,  1687.  He  was  a  man  of  exemplary  con-
duct and  morals.  He  established  in  Havana  a
foundling  asylum,  the  first  college  for  girls  in
Cuba,  a  seminary  for  boys,  several  public  schools,
hospitals,  charitable  institutions,  and  many
churches  in  the  interior  of  the  island,  which  were
the  beginning  of  new  towns  and  cities.  As  bishop
of  Florida,  he  established  many  missions  there.

COMSTOCK,  Andrew,  elocutionist,  b.  in  New
York  in  1795.  He  was  a  professor  of  elocution,  a
lecturer  on  oratory,  and  author  of  a  "  New  System
of  Phonetics,"  "  Phonetic  Speaker,"  "  Phonetic  Tes-
tament," "Reader,"  "Historia Sacra,"  and  "Elocu-
tion "(16th  ed.,  1854).

COMSTOCK,  Cyrus  Ballon,  soldier,  b.  in  West
Wrentham,  Mass.,  3  Feb.,  1831.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1855,  stand-
ing first  in  his  class,  and  became  second  lieuten-
ant in  the  corps  of  engineers.  From  that  time
until  1859  he  was  engaged  in  the  construction  of
Fort  Taylor,  Fla.,  and  Fort  Carroll,  Md.,  after
which  he  was  assistant  professor  of  natural  and
experimental  philosophy  at  West  Point.  During
the  civil  war  he  served  in  the  defences  of  Wash-
ington, D.  C,  becoming  in  August,  1861,  assistant
to  the  chief  of  engineers  in  the  Army  of  the  Poto-
mac. He  continued  with  this  army  through  the
peninsular  campaign  of  1862,  and  the  Maryland
campaign,  and  was  made  chief  engineer  in  No-
vember, 1862.  After  Fredericksburg  and  Chan-
cellorsville  he  was  transferred  to  the  Army  of
the  Tennessee,  and  was  its  chief  engineer,  being
present  at  the  siege  of  Vicksburg.  Later  he
became  assistant  inspector  of  the  military  divis-
ion of  the  Mississippi,  and  from  March,  1864,  till
the  close  of  the  war  was  senior  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  U.  S.  Grant,  serving  in  the  Richmond  cam-
paign of  1864-'5,  at  Fort  Fisher,  and  in  Gen.  Canby's
Mobile  campaign.  From  1866  till  1870  he  served
as  aide  to  the  general-in-chief  at  Washington,
and  since  that  time  has  been  occupied  as  superin-
tendent of  geodetic  survey  of  the  northern  and
northwestern  lakes,  and  on  other  important  sur-


veys, including  the  improvements  of  the  mouth  of
the  Mississippi.  In  1881  he  became  lieutenant-
colonel  in  the  engineer  corps,  and  he  holds  the
brevet  ranks  of  brigadier-general  in  the  regular
army  and  major-general  of  volunteers.  He  was
appointed  in  1882  a  member  of  the  board  of  en-
gineers for  fortifications  and  river  and  harbor  im-
provements. Gen.  Comstock  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  of  sciences  in  1884.
He  has  published  "  Notes  on  European  Surveys  "
(Washington,  1876) ;  "  Survey  of  the  Northwestern
Lakes  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Primarv  Triangulation,  U.  8.
Lake  Survey  "  (1882).

COMSTOCK,  John  Henry,  naturalist,  b.  in
Janesville,  Wis.,  24  Feb.,  1849.  He  was  graduated
at  Cornell  in  1874.  where,  from  1873  till  1877,  he
was  instructor.  In  1877  he  was  made  assistant
professor  of  entomology  at  Cornell,  and  also  de-
livered a  course  of  lectures  at  Vassar  college.  Hav-
ing obtained  leave  of  absence  from  the  university,
he  was,  during  1879-81,  U.  S.  entomologist  at
Washington,  and  in  1882  became  professor  of  en-
tomology and  general  invertebrate  zoology  at  Cor-
nell. Besides  numerous  articles  contributed  to
various  entomological  and  agricultural  journals,
he  has  published  "  Notes  on  Entomology  "  (Ithaca,
1875) ;  "  Annual  Reports  of  Entomologist "  (Wash-
ington, 1879-81);  "Report  on  Cotton  Insects"
(1879);  "Second  Annual  Report  of  the  Depart-
ment of  Entomology  of  Cornell  University,"  in-
cluding a  monograph  on  "  DiaspinaB "  (Ithaca.
1883),  and  the  article  on  "  Hvmenoptera "  in  the
"Standard  Natural  History"  (Boston,  1884).

COMSTOCK,  John  Lee,  author,  b.  in  Lyme,
Conn.,  in  1789;  d.  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  21  Nov.,
1858.  After  receiving  a  common-school  education
he  studied  medicine,  and,  a  few  months  after  re-
ceiving his  diploma,  became  assistant  surgeon  in
the  2oth  infantry.  He  served  at  Fort  Trumbull,
New  London,  Conn.,  during  part  of  the  war  of
1812,  and  then  on  the  northern  frontier,  where  he
had  charge  of  three  hospitals.  At  the  close  of  the
war  he  settled  in  Hartford,  Conn.,  and  about  1880
began  compiling  school-books.  He  possessed  much
mechanical  ingenuity,  was  a  skilful  draughtsman,
and  made  the  drawings  for  most  of  the  illustra-
tions of  his  works.  His  books  include  text-books
on  natural  philosophy,  chemistry,  mineralogy,
botany,  geology,  physiology,  natural  history,  and
physical  geography,  a  "  History  of  the  Greek  Revo-
lution "  (New  York,  1828),  and  a  "  History  of  the
Precious  Metals"  (Hartford,  1849).  His  "Intro-
duction to  Mineralogy  "  (1832)  was  used  at  West
Point,  and  his  "System  of  Natural  Philosophy"
(1831)  had  a  sale  of  nearly  900,000  copies,  was
translated  into  several  foreign  languages,  and  re-
published in  London  and  Edinburgh.

COMSTOCK,  Theodore  Bryant,  geologist,  b.
in  Cuyahoga  Falls,  Ohio,  27  July,  1849.  He  was
graduated  at  the  Pennsylvania  state  college  in
1868,  and  at  Cornell  in  1870,  where,  in  1886,  he  re-
ceived the  degree  of  Ph.  D.  In  1870  he  accom-
panied Hartt's  expedition  to  Brazil  as  photog-
rapher and  assistant  geologist,  and  in  1873  was
geologist  to  Capt.  W.  A.  Jones's  Wyoming  expedi-
tion. He  was  director  of  the  Kirtland  summer
school  of  natural  historv  in  Cleveland,  Ohio,  in
1875,  and  from  tliat  date  till  1879  was  professor  of
general  and  economic  geology  in  Cornell.  From
1879  till  1884  he  was  general  manager  of  the  Ni-
agara consolidated  mining  company  in  Silverton,
Col,,  for  which  he  built  and  operated  ore-sampling
and  concentrating  works,  after  which  he  was  elect-
ed to  the  chair  of  mining  engineering  .ind  physics
in  niinois  university  at  Champaign. He  has  been


CONANT


CONANT


703


prominent  in  the  American  association  for  the  ad-
vancement of  science,  and  in  1877  was  chairman  of
the  committee  on  Yellowstone  park.  In  1880  he
was  elected  secretary  of  the  section  of  geology  and
geography  in  this  association.  Dr.  Comstock  has
made  several  important  gjeological  discoveries
while  on  the  various  expeditions  with  which  he
has  been  connected,  accounts  of  which  have  ap-
peared in  the  "  American  Journal  of  Science,"  the
"American  Naturalist,"  the  "Engineering  and
Mining  Journal,"  and  other  journals  to  which  he
is  a  contributor.  While  in  the  west  he  edited  the
"San  Juan  Expositor"  in  Eureka,  Col.,  during
1879-'80,  and  was  mining  editor  of  the  "  Silverton
Democrat  "  in  1882-3.  He  has  also  published  the
geological  portion  of  the  "  Report  upon  the  Recon-
noissance  of  Northwestern  Wyoming,  including
the  Yellowstone  National  Park "  (Washington,
1875) ;  "  Outline  of  General  Geology "  (Ithaca,
1878);  "Classification  of  Rocks"  (1877);  "Notes
on  the  Geology  of  San  Juan  Country"  (1882);  and
"  Geology  and  Vein-Structure  of  Southwestern  Col-
orado "  (1886),  the  two  last  from  "  'J'ransactions  of
the  American  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers."

CONANT,  Alban  Jasper,  artist,  b.  in  Vermont,
24  Sept.,  1821.  After  residing  for  some  years  in
Troy,  he  removed  to  St.  Louis  in  1857.  Here  he  was
instrumental  in  the  establishment  of  an  art-gallery.
He  visited  Washington  and  painted  portraits  of
President  Lincoln,  Attorney-General  Bates,  and  Sec.
Stanton.  He  was  for  eight  years  a  curator  of  the
University  of  Missouri,  and  is  a  correspondent  of  the
Institution  ethnographique,  and  author  of  "  Foot-
prints of  Vanished  Races  in  the  Mississippi  Valley."

CONANT,  John,  manufacturer,  b.  in  Ashburn-
ham,  Mass. ;  d.  in  Brandon,  Vt.,  in  1856.  He  rep-
resented the  town  of  Brandon  in  the  legislature
for  many  years,  was  a  member  of  the  convention
for  revising  the  constitution  of  the  state,  and  a
presidential  elector  in  1840.  He  erected  in  Bran-
don a  large  Baptist  seminary. — His  son,  Thomas
Jefferson,  biblical  schohir,  b.  in  Brandon,  Vt.,  13
Dec;  1802 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  30  April,  1891.
lie  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1823.  having
studied  Hebrew  and  German  in  addition  to  the
usual  curriculum,  and  continued  for  two  years
as  a  resident  graduate,  to  read  privately  the  He-
brew scriptures  and  the  Greek  classic  writers  with
the  professor  of  languages.  He  was  tutor  in  Co-
lumbian college,  Washington,  D.  C,  in  1825-'7,
and  in  1827  became  professor  of  Greek,  Latin,  and
German  in  Waterville  college  (now  Colby  univer-
sity), Maine.  He  held  this  chair  till  1833,  when  he
resigned  and  made  his  home  near  Boston,  where
he  could  better  prosecute  his  studies  in  the  orient-
al languages.  He  had  already  become  convinced
of  the  necessity  of  a  new  translation  of  the  script-
ures, a  work  to  which  his  life  has  been  chiefly  de-
voted. He  was  professor  of  languages  and  bibli-
cal literature  in  Hamilton  literary  and  theological
seminary  (now  Colgate  university),  at  Hamilton,
N.  Y.,  from  1835  till  1850,  but  spent  two  years  of
that  time  in  study  abroad,  mainly  at  Halle  and.
Berlin.  In  1851  he  accepted  the  chair  of  Hebrew
and  biblical  exegesis  in  Rocnester  theological  semi-
nary, which  he  resigned  in  1857,  and  lemoved  to
Brooklyn,  N.  Y..  having  accepted  from  the  Ameri-
can Bible  union  the  oflice  of  reviser  of  the  common
English  version  of  the  Bible.  He  continued  in
this  service  till  1875,  and  also  became  a  member  of
the  Old  Testament  company  of  the  American  com-
mittee, co-operating  with  the  committee  of  the
convocation  of  Canterbury,  England,  in  the  revis-
ion of  the  authorized  English  version  of  the  Bible.
He  is  conceded  to  be  one  of  the  first  Hebraists  of


the  time,  and  is  also  a  writer  of  pure  and  nervous
English.  He  has  published  a  translation  of  the
11th  edition  of  the  Hebrew  grammar  of  Gese-
nius,  with  grammatical  exercises  and  a  chrestom-
athy  added  by  the  translator  (Boston,  1839),  and
a  translation  of  Dr.  E.  Rodiger's  17th  edition  of
that  work,  with  the  additions  (New  York,  1877).
This  work  has  become  a  standard  text-book  in
England  and  America.  He  has  also  published
"  The  Book  of  Job"  (New  York,  1856),  "The  Gos-
pel by  Matthew  "  (1860),  and  "  The  Book  of  Prov-
erbs" (1872),  each  book  containing  the  received
original  text,  the  common  version,  and  a  revised
version,  with  critical  introduction,  and  critical  and
philological  notes  for  scholars.  His  other  works
are  revised  versions  in  English,  with  notes,  of
"The  New  Testament"  (1866);  "The  Book  of
Genesis"  (1868);  "The  Book  of  Psalms"  (1872);
"  Prophecies  of  Isaiah,  Chapters  I-XIII  "(1874);  and
the  historical  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  from
Joshua  to  second  Kings  (Philadelphia,  1884) ;  and
"  Bairri^eiv,  its  Meaning  and  Use  philologically  and
historically  investigated  "  (New  York,  1864).  His
wife,  Hannah  O'Brien  Chaplin,  b.  in  Danvers,
Mass.,  in  1809;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  18  Feb.,
1865,  was  a  daughter  of  the  Rev.  Jeremiah  Chap-
lin, and  married  Dr.  Conant  in  1830.  She  was  a
frequent  contributor  to  literary  and  religious  peri-
odicals, and  in  1838  became  editor  of  the  "  Mother's
Monthly  Journal,"  published  in  Utica,  N.  Y.  Mrs.
Conant  had  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  oriental
tongues,  and  gave  her  husband  much  assistance  in
his  life-work,  at  the  same  time  keeping  pace  with
current  literature,  and  controlling  a  large  family.
She  published  "  The  Earnest  Man,"  a  biographical
sketch  of  the  missionarv  Judson  (1855) ;  "  Popular
History  of  English  Bible  Translation"  (1856);
"  The  History  of  the  English  Bible,"  a  work  of
great  research  (1859);  translations  from  the  Ger-
man of  Strauss's  "Lea,  or  The  Baptism  in  the
Jordan  "  (1844) ;  Neander's  Commentaries  on  the
Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Philippians,  the  Epistle  of
James,  and  the  first  Epistle  of  John  (1850-'2) ;  and
Uhden's  "  New  England  Theocracy  "  (1857).— Their
son,  Samuel  Stillman,  author,  b.  in  WaterAdlle,
Me.,  11  Dec,  1831,  studied  at  Madison  university,
Hamilton,  N.  Y.,  and  in  1858  went  abroad  and
spent  two  years  in  study  in  Berlin,  Heidelberg,  and
Munich.  After  being  connected  with  various  jour-
nals, he  was  managing  editor  of  "  Harper's  Week-
ly" from  1869  till  January,  1885,  when  he  myste-
riously disappeared.  He  contributed  largely  to
periodicals,  and  translated  from  the  Russian,
through  the  German,  Lermontoff's  "  Circassian
Boy  "  (Boston,  1875).— His  wife,  Helen  Stevens,
b.  in  Methuen,  Mass.,  9  Oct.,  1839,  has  contributed
to  periodicals,  and  has  published  "  The  Butterfly-
Hunters  "  (Boston,  1868),  and  primers  of  German
and  Spanish  literature  (New  York,  1878-'9).

CONANT,  Roger,  pioneer,  b.  in  Budleigh,  Dev-
onshire, England,  in  April,  1593;  d.  in  Beverly,
Mass.,  19  Nov.,  1679.  He  came  to  Plymouth  in
1623,  removed  to  Nantasket  in  1625,  and  thence,
in  the  autumn,  to  Cape  Ann,  having  been  charged
by  the  adventurers  in  England  with  the  care  of
that  settlement.  Some  of  the  settlers  became  dis-
couraged and  left,  and  the  rest  finally  removed  to
Naumkeag  (now  Salem),  where  Conant  built  the
first  house  in  1626.  In  May,  1632,  he  was  chosen
one  of  a  committee  to  confer  on  the  subject  of
raising  a  general  stock  for  purposes  of  trade,  and
in  1636  was  appointed  to  examine  and  mark  all  the
Salem  canoes,  then  an  important  means  of  trans-
port. He  was  a  representative  at  the  first  court  in
1634,  and  in  1637  was  a  justice  of  the  quarterly


704


CONCANEN


CONDICT


court  in  what  was  afterward  known  as  Essex
county.  He  organized  the  first  Puritan  church  at
Cape  Ann.  In  1040,  his  son  Roger,  "being  the
first-born  child  in  Salem,"  received  from  the  town
a  grant  of  forty  acres  of  land.  In  1671  he  peti-
tioned the  legislature  to  change  the  name  of  Bev-
erly, "because  (wee  being  but  a  smale  place)  it
hath  caused  on  us  a  constant  nickname  of  beggar-
ly, being  in  the  mouths  of  many."

CONCANEN,  Luke,  bishop,  b.  in  Ireland ;  d.  in
Naples,  Italy,  in  1810.  He  was  educated  in  Rome,
where  he  acquired  so  much  influence  that  ecclesi-
astical appointments  in  Ireland  were  usually  de-
termined by  his  advice.  He  was  also  interested  in
the  missions  of  America,  and  to  some  extent  the
founder  of  the  Dominican  convent  of  St.  Rose  in
Kentucky,  which  he  sustained  by  his  contributions
to  the  end  of  his  life.  In  1808  he  was  created  first
bishop  of  New  York,  and  was  also  commissioned
by  the  pope  to  carry  the  pallium  to  Archbishop
Carroll.  As  his  attempt  to  sail  for  the  United
States  from  Leghorn  was  frustrated  by  the  dis-
turbed condition  of  the  country,  he  went  to  Naples,
whence  he  expected  to  sail,  but  was  arrested  by
order  of  Murat,  on  the  pretext  that  he  was  a  Brit-
ish subject.  He  was  imprisoned  in  the  convent  of
St.  Dominic  at  Naples,  and  the  hardships  he  en-
dured caused  his  death.

CONCHA,  Jos6  Griiti^rrez  de  la  (coan'-cha),
marquis  of  Havana,  Spanish  soldier,  b.  in  Cordova,
Argentine  Republic,  in  1809.  He  went  to  Spain
very  young,  entered  the  army,  fought  against  the
revolutionary  troops  in  South  America,  and  after-
ward took  part  in  the  first  Carlist  war.  In  1839
he  was  brevetted  lieutenant-general,  and  afterward
held  the  command  of  the  Spanish  cavalry.  In
1850-2  he  was  governor-general  of  Cuba.  During
this  short  administration  occurred  the  invasion  of
tlie  island  by  an  expedition  that  sailed  from  the
United  States  under  command  of  Gen.  Narciso
Lopez,  who  was  defeated,  captured,  and  executed
in  Havana,  1  Sept.,  1851.  A  few  days  before,  14
Aug.,  fifty  of  his  followers  were  shot.  In  1854
Concha  was  again  appointed  governor-general  of
Cuba,  which  post  he  retained  until  1859,  when  he
returned  to  Spain,  where  he  was  appointed  minis-
ter of  war  in  1863,  and  presiden'  of  the  senate  in
1864.  Queen  Isabella  appointed  him  prime  minis-
ter just  after  the  revolution  broke  out  in  Spain,
29  Sept.,  1868.  A  third  time  he  was  appointed
governor-general  in  1874,  in  the  midst  of  the
Cuban  insurrection ;  but  his  administration  lasted
only  a  few  months.  In  1886  he  was  elected  presi-
dent of  the  Spanish  senate.  Gen.  Concha  has
published  "  Ensayo  sobre  la  Situacion  Politica  en
Cuba  "  (1860) ;  "  Memoria  sobre  la  guerra  de  Cuba  "
(1876) ;  and  memoirs  of  his  first  administration.

CONCHA  TORO,  Melchor  (coan'-chah),  Chili-
an statesman,  b.  in  the  city  of  Santiago,  19  June,
1823.  He  was  wealthy,  and  devoted  his  knowledge
of  law  and  financial  matters  to  the  service  of  Chili.
In  1864  he  became  a  member  of  the  chamber  of
deputies,  and  in  1870  was  elected  to  the  senate,
becoming  its  vice-president.  He  was  also  minister
of  finance  in  1869  under  Perez's  administration,
and  in  1886  he  was  again  chosen  senator.  He  has
written  "  Chile  durante  los  anos  de  1824  a  1828  "
(Santiago,  1864).

CONCILIO,  Oennaro  Lui^i  Viiicenzo  de,  cler-
gyman, b.  in  Naples,  Italy,  5  July,  1835.  He  was
educated  at  the  Archiepiscopal  lyceum  in  Naples,
and  ordained  deacon  in  1857.  During  the  same
year  he  entered  the  missionary  college  in  Genoa,
with  the  intention  of  devoting  his  life  to  foreign
missions. He  was ordained priest  in  1859,  and


sent  to  the  diocese  of  Newark,  N.  J.,  where,  in
April,  1860,  he  became  assistant  rector  of  the
Church  of  Our  Lady  of  Grace,  in  Hoboken.  In
September,  1860,  he  was  appointed  professor  of
dogmatic  theology,  logic,  and  metaphysics  in
Seton  Hall  college.  South  Orange,  N.  J.,  but  failing
health  compelled  him  to  resign  this  chair  at  the  end
of  the  year.  From  1861  till  1867  he  was  assistant
in  St.  Mary's  church,  Jersey  City,  and  in  1867  was
made  rector  of  St.  Michael's  in  the  same  city.  His
relations  with  the  college  have  been  maintained,
and  he  continues  to  be  pro-synodal  examiner  in
theology,  and  on  several  occasions  has  taught
moral  theology  in  the  seminary.  In  February,
1886,  he  was  appointed,  by  Leo  XIII.,  Cameriere
Segreto  to  his  holiness,  a  dignity  that  entitles  the
person  receiving  it  to  be  addressed  as  "  very  rever-
end monsignor.  Monsignor  Concilio  has  made  a
special  study  of  the  summa  of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas,
and  contributed  frequent  articles  to  the  Catholic
journals,  and  has  published  "  Catholicity  and  Pan-
theism "  (1874) ;  "  The  Knowledge  of  Mary  "  (New
York,  1878) ;  and  "  Intellectual  Philosophy  "  (1878).

CONDAMINE,  Charles  Marie  de  la,  French
geographer,  b.  in  Paris,  28  Jan.,  1701 ;  d.  there,  4
Feb.,  1774.  He  was  educated  at  the  University  of
Paris,  entered  the  army  in  1719,  and  was  distin-
guished at  the  siege  of  Rosas,  but  abandoned  mili-
tary life  to  join  an  expedition  whose  object  was  to
explore  the  coasts  of  Asia  and  Africa.  He  visited
the  Troad,  Cyprus,  Jerusalem,  and  Constantinople,
and  in  1735,  with  Bouguer  and  others,  was  sent  to
Peru  by  the  Academy  of  sciences  to  measure  an
arc  of  the  meridian.  While  in  South  America  he
also  made  observations  on  the  use  of  caoutchouc
by  the  natives,  and  to  him  is  ascribed  the  intro-
duction of  the  article  into  Europe ;  and  he  also
tried  to  introduce  into  France  inoculation  for
small-pox.  He  was  the  first  to  discover  that  the
deflection  of  a  plumb-line  by  the  attraction  of  a
mountain  is  a  measurable  quantity.  He  was  made
a  fellow  of  the  Royal  society  of  London  in  1748,
and  a  member  of  the  French  academy  in  the  year
1760.  He  published  treatises  on  geography,  natu-
ral history,  and  physics,  and  had  some  reputation
as  a  writer  of  verses.  His  works  include  "Rela-
tion abregee  d'un  voyage  fait  dans  I'interieur  de
1  Amerique  Meridionale"  (Paris,  1745),  and  "La
figure  de  la  terre  determinee  par  les  observations
de  MM.  de  la  Condamine  et  Bouguer  "  (1749).  See
Condorcet's  "  Eloge  de  la  Condamine."

CONDICT,  Ira,  clergyman,  b.  in  Orange,  N.  J.,
21  Feb.,  1764;  d.  in  New  Brunswick,  N.  J.,  1  June,
1811.  He  was  the  son  of  a  farmer,  was  gradu-
ated at  Princeton  in  1784,  and  afterward  taught
at  Monmouth,  N.  J.,  at  the  same  time  pursuing  a
course  of  theological  study.  He  was  licensed  to
preach  by  the  presbytery  of  New  Brunswick  in
April,  1786,  and  ordained  pastor  of  the  churches  at
Newton,  Hardwick,  and  Shappenack,  in  November,
1787.  In  1794  he  was  installed  pastor  of  the  Re-
formed Dutch  church  in  New  Brunswick,  where  he
remained  until  he  died.  It  was  chiefiy  through  his
efforts  that  Queen's  (now  Rutgers)  college,  which
had  been  closed  for  several  years,  was  reopened  in
1807.  Under  his  leadership  the  trustees  deter-
mined to  raise,  by  the  help  of  the  Reformed
churches,  $12,000  for  the  erection  of  a  spacious
building  and  to  open  the  college  immediately.  Dr.
Condict  assumed  the  duties  of  president  pro  tem-
pore, and  instructed  the  highest  class.  In  1809  he
was  regularly  appointed  professor  of  moral  phi-
losophy and  vice-president,  having  declined  the
presidency ;  but  the  actual  duties  of  the  office  were
performed  by  him  since  Dr.  Livingston,  the  nominal


CONDICT


CONGAR


705


president,  confined  himself  to  his  theological  pro-
fessorship. Dr.  Condict  was  mainly  instrumental
ill  the  removal  of  the  theological  seminary  to  New
Brunswick.  His  exertions  to  obtain  funds  for  the
college,  and  liis  labors  as  professor  and  executive
head  of  the  institution,  in  addition  to  his  duties  as
pastor  of  one  of  the  largest  churches  of  the  denomi-
nation, hastened  his  death.

CONDICT,  John,  senator,  b.  in  1755;  d.  in
Orange,  N.  J.,  4  May,  1834.  He  received  a  public-
school  education,  and  served  in  the  Revolutionary
army  as  a  surgeon.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New
Jersey  legislature,  was  chosen  to  congress  as  a
democrat,  and  served  from  1799  till  1803,  when  he
was  elected  U.  S.  senator,  serving  till  1817.

CONDICT,  Lewis,  congressman,  b.  in  Morris-
town,  N.  J.,  in  March,  1773;  d.  there,  26  May,
1862.  After  receiving  a  liberal  education,  he
studied  medicine,  received  his  diploma  from  the
University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1794,  and  began
practice  at  Morristown.  He  was  high  sheriff  of
Morris  county  before  1800,  and  from  1805  till  1810
was  a  member  of  the  legislature,  serving  the  last
two  years  as  speaker  of  the  house.  He  was  one  of
the  commission  appointed  in  1807  to  settle  the
boundary  between  New  Jersey  and  New  York,  and
was  chosen  to  congress  as  a  whig,  serving  from  4
Nov.,  1811,  till  3  March,  1817,  and  again  from  3
Dec,  1821,  till  2  March,  1833.  He  declined  re-
election, and  was  afterward  a  presidential  elector
on  the  Harrison  ticket  in  1840.

CONDICT,  Silas,  congressman,  b.  in  Newark,
N.  J.,  in  1777 ;  d.  there,  29  Nov.,  1861.  His  father,
Silas,  was  a  delegate  to  congress  under  the  old  con-
federation from  1781  till  1784.  The  younger  Con-
dict was  graduated  at  Princeton  in  1795,  was  a
member  of  the  New  Jersey  legislature  for  several
years,  and  elected  to  congress  as  a  Clay  demo-
crat, serving  from  5  Dec,  1831,  till  2  March,  1833.
He  was  a  candidate  for  re-election,  but  defeated  by
F.  S.  Schenck,  a  Jackson  democrat,  by  502  majority.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention of  1844,  and  a  presidential  elector  on  the
Fillmore  ticket  in  1856.  He  was  for  many  years
president  of  the  Newark  banking  company.

CONDIE,  David  Francis,  phvsician.  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  12  May,  1796 ;  d.  in  Delaware
county.  Pa.,  31  March,  1875.  He  received  his  medi-
cal diploma  from  the  University  of  Pennsylvania
in  1818,  and  became  prominent  in  his  profession.
He  published  an  abridged  edition,  with  notes,  of
Thomas's  "Practice  of  Medicine"  (Philadelphia,
1817) ;  "  Course  of  Examination  for  Medical  Stu-
dents" (2d  ed,,  1824);  "Catechism  of  Health"
(1831);  "Treatise  on  Epidemic  Cholera,"  in  con-
nection with  Dr,  John  Bell  (1832) ;  and  "  Diseases
of  Children  "  (6th  ed..  enlarged,  1868).  Dr.  Condie
also  edited  Churchill's  "  Diseases  of  Women,"  and
contributed  largelv  to  medical  journals.

CONDORCANCJUI,  Jose  Gabriel  (con-dor-
ean'-ke),  also  called  Tupac  Amaru  or  Aymaru,
American  Spaniard,  who,  having  been  ill  treated
by  a  magistrate  of  Lima,  attempted  the  redress  of
his  own  grievances,  and  the  oppressions  of  the
Indians,  by  exciting  an  insurrection  in  1780.  He
was  artful  and  intrepid,  and,  to  conciliate  the
Indians,  assumed  the  name  of  the  Inca  Tupac
Amaru,  professing  a  design  to  restore  the  ancient
dynasty  of  Peru.  Being  a  cacique  of  the  province
of  Tinta,  under  pretext  of  celebrating  Charles
in.'s  birthday  with  a  banquet,  he  invited  the
governor  of  the  province,  Antonio  Arriaga,  who
at  once  was  imprisoned,  and  hanged  on  6  Nov.
Hi<  plan  was  at  first  successful ;  and,  after  a  con-
test of  three  years,  he  was  hailed  Inca  of  Peru.
VOL.  I. — 45


But  he  became  obnoxious  to  the  Spanish  settlers,
and  troops  were  sent  against  him.  Yet  the  re-
bellion gained  ground,  being  assisted  by  nearly
60,000  Indians,  who  murdered  men  and  women  and
committed  revolting  atrocities.  Finally,  the  efforts
of  the  Indians  proving  too  feeble,  Condorcanqui
and  other  leaders  of  the  revolt  were  deserted  by
their  followers,  taken,  and  put  to  death,  with  no
less  cruelty  than  they  had  practised  against  the
Spaniards.  His  two  sons,  his  wife,  another  Indian
woman,  who  was  the  mother  of  his  son  Hipolito,
and  his  uncle,  Francisco  Tupac  Amaru,  were  all
executed  at  Cuzco  on  18  May,  1781.

CONE,  Spencer  Houghton,  clergyman,  b.  in
Princeton,  N.  J.,  30  April,  1785 ;  d.  28  Aug.,  1855.
At  the  age  of  twelve  he  entered  the  freshman  class
at  Princeton,  but  the  sickness  of  his  father  obliged
him  to  relinquish  his  studies  when  only  fourteen.
At  sixteen  he  was  master  in  a  school  at  Burlington.
He  soon  removed  to  Philadelphia,  and  associated
himself  in  teaching  with  Dr.  Abercrombie,  principal
of  an  academy.  Finding  his  salary  insufficient  for
the  family  dependent  on  him,  he  at  first  resolved
to  study  law,  but  after  some  preparation  for  the
bar  abandoned  this  purpose,  and  turned  to  the
stage,  though  this  step  was  contrary  to  his  own
tastes  as  well  as  opposed  to  the  wishes  of  his  devout
mother.  He  appeared  in  July.  1805,  as  Achmet  in
the  tragedy  of  "  Mahomet,"  and  subsequently  acted
with  success  in  Philadelphia,  Baltimore,  and  Alex-
andria. His  profession,  distasteful  to  him  from
the  first,  and  adopted  only  from  necessity,  soon  be-
came disgusting.  In  1812  he  entered  the  office  of
the  Baltimore  "American  "  as  treasurer  and  book-
keeper. Soon  afterward,  in  connection  with  his
brother-in-law,  he  purchased  and  published  the
Baltimore  "  Whig,"  whereupon  he  abandoned  the
stage.  He  was  converted  in  November,  1813,  and
baptized,  4  Feb.,  1814,  into  the  fellowship  of  a
Baptist  church.  Having  obtained  a  clerkship  in
the  treasury  department  at  Washington,  he  re-
moved to  that  city,  where  he  soon  began  preaching
with  remarkable  success.  In  1815-'6  he  was  elected
chaplain  of  the  house  of  representatives.  After
seven  years  spent  with  a  small  church  at  Alex-
andria, he  was  called  to  the  Oliver  street  church,
New  York,  where  he  remained  for  eighteen  years.
He  then  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Baptist  church,
in  which  relation  he  continued  until  his  death.  In
1832  the  degree  of  D.  D.  was  conferred  upon  him
by  Princeton,  and  the  same  year  he  was  chosen
president  of  the  Baptist  triennial  convention,  and
was  re-elected  until  1841.  From  1837  till  1850  he
was  president  of  the  American  and  foreign  Bible
society.  On  the  formation  of  the  American  Bible
union,  he  was  made  its  president,  and  so  continued
until  his  death.  At  the  zenith  of  his  career  he  was
probably  the  most  popular  and  influential  Baptist
minister  in  the  United  States.

CONEY,  Jabez,  manufacturer,  b,  in  1805 ;  d,  in
Boston,  Mass,,  23  Jan.,  1872.  He  began  business
in  Mill  Village,  Dedhara,  Mass.,  in  1826,  his  first
work  being  the  construction  of  a  large  water-
wheel.  He  planned  and  constructed  many  manu-
facturing establishments  previous  to  1837,  when
his  machine-shop  was  burned.  He  then  moved  to
South  Boston  and  entered  upon  a  much  more  ex-
tensive business,  building  machinery  for  boring
and  finishing  cannon,  constructing  the  first  iron
vessel  ever  built  in  New  England,  and  the  first
large  marine  engine,  the  first  gravel  excavator,  and
many  other  great  enterprises.  He  suffered  from  a
paralytic  affection  for  more  than  twenty  years.

CONGAR,  Samuel  Hayes,  antiquarian,  b.  in
Newark,  N.  J.,  10  Dec,  1796;  d.  there  29  July,  1872.


706


CONGDON


CONKLING


At  the  age  of  eleven  years  he  was  placed  in  a  drug-
store, where  he  gained  information  as  best  he  could,
receiving  slight  schooling.  Five  years  later  he  was
apprenticed  to  a  coach-painter,  and  he  continued
to  follow  that  trade  until  his  retirement  from
business  in  1855.  In  early  life  he  held,  for  a  time,
the  office  of  librarian  to  the  Apprentices'  library
of  Newark,  where  he  laid  the  foundation  for  the
knowledge  on  books  for  which  he  subsequently
became  known.  About  1845  he  began  his  re-
searches among  the  genealogies  of  Newark  fami-
lies, and  soon  became  possessed  of  more  antiquarian
and  genealogical  information  concerning  the  north-
ern part  of  New  Jersey,  especially  the  coimty  of
Essex,  than  any  other  person.  He  was  elected  a
member  of  the  New  Jersey  historical  society  in
1848,  and  its  librarian  in  1852.  His  articles,  many
of  which  were  historically  valuable,  appeared  prin-
cipally in  the  "  Newark  Daily  Advertiser."  He
also  prepared  the  genealogical  notices  of  first  set-
tlers in  the  Historical  society's  volume  on  the  bi-
centennial of  Newark.

CONGDON,  Charles  Taber,  journalist,  b.  in
New  Bedford,  Mass.,  7  April,  1821 ;  d.  in  New  York
city,  18  Jan.,  1891.  He  was  never  graduated,  though
he  received  the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1879  from  Brown.
He  was  an  editorial  writer  on  the  New  York  "  Trib-
une "  from  1857  till  1882,  and  was  an  occasional
contributor  of  critical  and  literary  papers  to  peri-
odical literature.  He  published  a  poem,  delivered
at  Dartmouth  college  (New  York.  1861);  "Tribune
Essays  "  (1869) :  and  "  Reminiscences  of  a  Journal-
ist "  (Boston,  1880).

CONGER,  Omar  Dwiglit,  senator,  b.  in  Coop-
erstown,  N.  Y.,  in  1818.  He  removed  with  his
father,  Rev.  E.  Conger,  to  Huron  county,  Ohio,  in
1824,  and  was  graduated  at  Western  Reserve  in
1842.  He  was  engaged  in  the  geological  survey
of  the  Lake  Superior  iron  and  copper  region  from
1845  till  1847,  and  in  1848  became  a  lawyer  in
Port  Huron,  Mich.  He  was  elected  judge  of  the
St.  Clair  county  court  in  1850,  and  was  a  state
senator  from  1855  till  1861,  being  president  pro
tempore  of  the  senate  in  1859.  He  was  a  presiden-
tial elector  on  the  Republican  ticket  in  1864,  a
member  of  the  State  constitutional  convention  in
1866,  and  a  member  of  congress  from  1869  till  1881,
when  he  was  chosen  to  the  U.  S.  senate.

CONKLIN,  WilHam  Aiig-ustiis,  zoologist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  16  March,  1837.  He  was  educated
at  the  public  schools,  and  received  the  degree  of
doctor  of  veterinary  science  from  Columbia  veteri-
nary college  and  that  of  Ph.  D.  from  Manhattan
college.  He  has  been  connected  with  Central  park
since  1858,  and  director  of  the  zo()logical  depart-
ment since  1870.  He  has  travelled  three  times
through  Europe,  visiting  the  various  zoological
gardens,  is  an  honorary  or  corresponding  member
of  many  zoological  societies,  and  is  a  member  of
several  scientific  societies  in  the  United  States.
Dr.  Conklin  possesses  one  of  the  most  complete
libraries  in  the  country  on  the  subjects  of  mam-
malia and  ornithology.  He  is  editor  of  the  "  Jour-
nal of  Comparative  Medicine  and  Surgery "  in
New  York,  and  has  written  articles  on  natural
history  for  various  periodicals.

CONKLIN,  WiHiam  Judkiiis,  physician,  b.
in  Sidney,  Ohio,  1  Dec,  1844.  He  was  graduated
at  Ohio  Wesleyan  university  in  1866,  and  at  Ohio
medical  college,  Cincinnati,  in  1868.  He  was
physician  to  the  Dayton  hospital  for  the  insane
from  1869  till  1871,  and  afterward  became  secre-
tary of  its  board  of  trustees.  He  was  professor  of
physiology  in  Starling  medical  college,  Columbus,
Ohio,  from  1875  till  1878,  and  of  diseases  of  chil-


dren from  1878  till  1884.  He  is  visiting  surgeon
to  St.  Elizabeth's  hospital,  Dayton,  and  a  member
of  various  medical  societies.  He  has  contributed
frequently  to  medical  journals,  and  has  published
several  monographs,  including  "  History  of  the
Discovery  of  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood."

CONKLING,  Alfred,  jurist,  b.  in  Amagansett.
Suffolk  CO.,  N.  Y.,  12  Oct.,  1789;  d.  in  Utica,
N.  Y.,  5  Feb.,  1874.  He  was  graduated  at  Union
in  1810,  studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1812.  He  was  district  attorney  for  Montgomery
county  three  years,  and  was  elected  to  congress
as  an  anti-Jackson  democrat,  serving  from  1821
till  1828.  He  then  removed  to  Albany,  and  in
1825  was  appointed  by  President  John  Quincy
Adams  judge  of  the  U.  S.  district  court  for  the
northern  distiict  of  New  York,  which  office  he
held  till  1852,  when  President  Fillmore  appointed
him  minister  to  Mexico.  On  his  return  from  that
mission,  in  1853,  he  settled  at  Genesee,  N.  Y.,  de-
voting himself  mainly  to  literary  pursuits.  Union
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  in  1847.  He
published  "  Treatise  on  the  Organization  and
Jurisdiction  of  the  Supreme,  Circuit,  and  District
Courts  of  the  United  States  "  (2d  ed.,  1842) ;  "  Ad-
miralty Jurisdiction  "  (2  vols.,  1848) ;  •'  The  Pow-
ers of  the  Executive  Department  of  the  United
States  "  (Albany,  1866) :  and  the  "  Young  Citizen's
Manual."— His  son,  Frederick  Augustus,  b.  in
Canajoharie,  N.  Y.,  22  Aug.,  1816,  received  a  classi-
cal education,  and  became  a  merchant.  He  was
for  three  years  a  member  of  the  New  York  legisla-
ture. In  June,  1861,  he  organized,  at  his  own  ex-
pense, the  84th  New  York  regiment,  serving  as  its
colonel.  During  July,  18()3,  the  regiment  did
duty  as  provost-guard  at  Baltimore,  Md.,  and  in
1864  it  saw  several  months'  service  in  Virginia.
Col.  Conkling  served  one  term  in  congress,  from
1861  till  1863,  and  in  1868  was  the  Republican  can-
didate for  mayor  of  New  York.  He  changed  his
politics,  however,  and  spoke  in  various  parts  of
the  Union  in  favor  of  Mr.  Tilden's  election  to  the
presidency  in  1876,  and  of  Gen.  Hancock's  in  1880.
He  is  a  trustee  of  the  College  of  physicians  and
surgeons,  a  member  of  the  geographical  and  his-
torical societies,  and  the  author  of  various  reports
to  the  New  York  legislature,  and  numerous  politi-
cal, commercial,  and  scientific  pamphlets, — Another
son,  Roscoe,  senator,  b.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  30  Oct.,
1829;  d.in  New  York,
18  April,  1888,  re-
ceived an  academic
education,  and  stud-
ied law  under  his
father.  In  1846  he
entered  the  law-of-
fice of  Francis  Ker-
nan,  afterward  his
colleague  in  the  sen-
ate, and  in  1850  be-
came district  attor-
ney for  Oneida  coun-
ty. He  was  admit-
ted to  the  bar  in  that
year,  and  soon  be-
came prominent  both
in  law  and  in  poli-
tics. He  was  elected
mayor  of  Utica  in
1858,  and  at  the  ex-
piration of  his  first

term  a  tie  vote  between  the  two  candidates  for  the
office  caused  him  to  hold  over  for  another  term.
In  November,  1858,  he  was  chosen  as  a  Republican
to  congress,  and  took  his  seat  in  that  body  at  the


^lUU^


CONKLING


CONNER


70^


beginning  of  its  first  session,  in  December,  1859 —
,1  session  noted  for  its  long  and  bitter  contest  over
the  speakership.  He  was  re-elected  in  1860,  but  in
1863  was  defeated  by  Francis  Kernan.  over  whom,
however,  he  was  elected  in  1864.  His  first  com-
mittee was  that  on  the  District  of  Columbia,  of
Avhich  he  was  afterward  chairman.  He  was  also  a
member  of  the  committee  of  ways  and  means  and
of  the  special  reconstruction  committee  of  fifteen.
Mr.  Conkling's  first  important  speech  was  in  sup-
port of  the  fourteenth  amendment  to  the  constitu-
tion. He  vigorously  attacked  the  generalship  of
McClellan,  opposed  Spaulding's  legal-tender  act,
and  firmly  upheld  the  government  in  the  prosecu-
tion of  the  war.  Mr.  Conkling  wa's  re-elected  in
the  autunm  of  1866,  but  in  January,  1867,  be-
fore he  took  his  seat,  was  chosen  U.  S.  senator  to
succeed  Ira  Harris,  and  re-elected  in  1878  and
1879.  In  the  senate  he  was  from  the  first  a  mem-
ber of  the  judiciary  committee,  and  connected
with  nearly  all  the  leading  committees,  holding
the  chairs  of  those  on  commerce  and  revision  of
the  laws.  Senator  Conkling  was  a  zealous  sup-
porter of  President  Grant's  administration  and
largely  directed  its  general  policy  toward  the
south,  advocating  it  in  public  and  by  his  personal
influence.  He  was  also  instrumental  in  the  pas-
sage of  the  civil-rights  bill,  and  favored  the  re-
sumption of  specie  payments.  He  took  a  promi-
nent part  in  framing  the  electoral-commission  bill
in  1877,  and  supported  it  by  an  able  speech,  argu-
ing that  the  question  of  the  commission's  jurisdic-
tion should  be  left  to  that  body  itself.  Mr.  Conk-
ling received  93  votes  for  the  Republican  noinina-
tion  for  president  in  the  Cincinnati  convention  of
1876.  In  the  Chicago  convention  of  1880  he  advo-
cated the  nomination  of  Gen.  Grant  for  a  third
term.  In  1881  he  became  hostile  to  President
Garfield's  administration  on  a  question  of  patron-
age, claiming,  with  his  colleague,  Thomas  C.  Piatt,
the  right  to  control  federal  appointments  in  his
state.  The  president  having  appointed  a  political
opponent  of  Mr.  Conkling's  to  the  collectorship  of
the  port  of  New  York,  the  latter  opposed  his  con-
firmation, claiming  that  he  should  have  been  con-
sulted in  the  matter,  and  that  the  nomination  was
a  violation  of  the  pledges  given  to  him  by  the
president.  Mr.  Garfield,  as  soon  as  Mr.  Conkling
had  declared  his  opposition,  withdi'ew  all  other
nominations  to  New  York  offices,  leaving  the  ob-
jectionable one  to  be  acted  on  by  itself.  Finding
that  he  could  not  prevent  the  confirmation,  Mr.
Conkling,  on  16  May,  resigned  his  senatorship.  as
did  also  his  colleague,  and  returned  home  to  seek
a  vindication  in  the  form  of  a  re-election.  In
this,  however,  after  an  exciting  canvass,  they
failed ;  two  other  republicans  were  chosen  to  fill
the  vacant  places,  and  Mr.  Conkling  returned  to
his  law  practice  in  New  York  city.  In  1885-'6  he
was  counsel  of  the  State  senate  investigating  com-
mittee, appointed  for  the  purpose  of  disclosing  the
fraud  and  bribery  in  the  grant  of  the  Broadway
horse-railroad  franchise  by  the  board  of  aldermen
in  1884.  After  the  taking  of  testimony,  lasting
about  three  months,  Mr.  Conkling,  together  with
Clarence  A.  Seward,  made  an  argument  which
resulted  in  the  repeal  of  the  Broadway  -railroad
charter.— Alfred's  daughter,  Margaret  Cock  burn
(Mrs.  Steele),  b.  27  Jan.,  1814,  has  published  "Me-
moirs of  the  Mother  and  Wife  of  Washington"
(Auburn,  N.  Y.,  1851-'3);  "Isabel;  or.  Trials  of
the  Heart " ;  a  translation  of  Florian's  "  History  of
the  Moors  of  Spain,"  and  has  contributed  to  current
literature. — Alfred  Conkling's  grandson,  Alfred
Ronald,  b.  m  New  York  city,  28  Sept.,  1850,  was


graduated  at  Yale  in  1870,  pursued  his  studies  at
Harvard  and  in  Berlin,  Germany,  and  on  his  return
to  this  country  was  employed  on  the  LI.  S.  geologi-
cal survey.  He  then  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1879,  and  became  assistant  U.  S.  at-
torney in  1881-'2.  He  was  an  imsuccessful  Repub-
lican candidate  for  congress  in  1884,  and  made
many  addresses  in  favor  of  the  election  of  James
G.  Blaine  during  the  presidential  campaign  of  that
year.  He  is  the  author  of  "Appletons'  Guide  to
Mexico  "  (New  York,  1884).

CONLEY,  John  Dikeman,  scientist,  b.  in
Brockport,  Monroe  co.,  N.  Y.,  14  Sept.,  1843.  He
was  graduated  at  the  State  normal  school,  Albany,
in  1863,  and  at  Hamilton  college  in  1869.  During
the  same  year  he  was  elected  to  the  chair  of  chem-
istry and  natural  sciences  in  Blackburn  university,
Carlinville,  111.  Pie  has  published  a  series  of  geo-
logical charts  of  all  the  ages  and  epochs,  illustrated
with  two  hundred  figures  of  characteristic  fossils.

CONNELLY,  John,  R,  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Droghe-
da,  Ireland,  in  1750;  d.  in  New  York  in  1825.  He
was  educated  in  Belgium,  where  he  became  a
member  of  the  Dominican  order,  and  afterward
went  to  Rome  and  was  elected  prior  of  St.  Clem-
ent's and  appointed  agent  for  the  Irish  bishops.
During  the  French  occupation  of  that  city  he
gained  much  credit  for  his  success  in  securing  the
property  of  the  English  and  Irish  religious  insti-
tutions from  confiscation.  On  the  return  of  Pius
VII.  to  Rome  in  1814,  Father  Connelly  was  chosen
bishop  of  New  York,  and  consecrated  the  same
year.  He  visited  Ireland  with  the  object  of  ob-
taining priests,  but  secured  only  one.  At  this  time
the  diocese  of  New  York  embraced  the  entire  state
and  part  of  New  Jersey,  and  contained  a  Catholic
population  of  17,000.  Bishop  Connelly  found
only  four  priests  to  receive  him  on  his  arrival,  and
had  to  perform  missionary  duties  in  addition  to
his  episcopal  functions.  He  founded  churches  in
Utica  and  Rochester,  and  erected  an  orphan  asy-
lum in  New  York,  which  he  confided  to  the  care
of  the  Sisters  of  Charity.  His  labors  during  the
yellow-fever  epidemics  of  1822  and  1823  greatly
impaired  his  strength.

CONNELLY,  Pierce  Francis,  sculptor,  b.  in  a
southern  city  about  1840.  He  was  taken  to  Eng-
land when  a  child,  received  a  good  education,  and
studied  painting  in  Paris,  and  afterward  in  Rome.
At  the  age  of  twenty  he  determined  to  become  a
sculptor,  established  "himself  at  Florence,  and  exe-
cuted, among  other  works,  "  Thetis,"  in  the  New
York  museum  of  fine  arts ;  "  St.  Martin  and  the
Beggar,"  an  equestrian  group ;  "  Ophelia  " ;  "  Horror
arresting  the  Triumph  of  Death";  "Queen  Philip-
pa  " ;  "  Diana  transforming  ActiPon,"  and  other
pieces  exhibited  at  the  Philadelphia  centennial  ex-
hibition, and  several  portrait  busts.  In  1876  he
visited  the  United  States,  and  went  from  there  to
New  Zealand,  where  he  became  known  as  an  ex-
plorer of  mountains,  made  sketches  of  craters,
glaciers,  and  lakes,  and  painted  pictures  of  the
scenery  of  the  country  that  were  exhibited  in
Auckland  in  1877.

CONNER,  David,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Harris-
burg,  Pa.,  in  1792 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  20  March,
1856.  He  entered  a  counting-house  in  Philadel-
phia in  1806,  became  a  midshipman  in  the  navy,  16
Jan.,  1809,  and,  as  acting  lieutenant,  took  part  in  the
action  between  the  "  Hornet "  and  the  "  Peacock,"
24  Feb.,  1813.  Charged  with  the  duty  of  remov-
ing the  prisoners,  Lieut.  Conner  was  among  the
last  to  leave  the  sinking  vessel.  On  24  July,  1813,
he  became  a  lieutenant,  and  remained  in  the  "  Hor-
net "  under  Capt.  Biddle. In  the  action  with  the


708


CONNER


CONNOR


"  Penguin,"  23  March,  1815,  he  was  dangerously-
wounded,  and  for  his  gallantry  was  presented  with
a  medal  by  congress,  and  the  legislature  of  Penn-
sylvania unanimously  voted  him  a  sword.  He  was
promoted  to  the  rank  of  commander  on  3  March,
1825,  and  to  that  of  captain  on  3  March,  1835.  He
commanded  the  squadron  on  the  West  India  sta-
tion just  before  the  beginning  of  hostilities  with
Mexico,  and  in  May,  1840,  he  sailed  from  Vera
Cruz  to  San  Brazos  de  Santiago,  established  a
blockade  of  the  Mexican  ports  on  the  gulf,  and
commanded  the  American  squadron  on  the  Mexican
coast  for  two  years.  In  August  and  October,  1846,
two  fruitless  attempts  were  made  to  enter  the  port
of  Alvarado,  on  14  Nov.,  1840,  the  port  of  Tam-
pico  was  captured  by  him,  and  on  9  March,  1847,
he  directed  the  landing  of  the  army  of  Gen.  Scott
at  Vera  Cruz,  and  assisted  in  the  reduction  of  the
fortress  of  San  Juan  de  Ulloa,  but  was  soon  after-
ward compelled,  by  the  failure  of  his  health,  to  re-
turn home.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he  was  com-
mandant of  the  Philadelphia  navy-yard.

CONNER,  Henry  W.,  politician,  b.  in  Prince
George  county,  Va.,  in  August,  1793 ;  d.  in  Catawba
county,  N.  C,  15  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  graduated  at
the  University  of  South  Carolina  in  1812,  served  in
Gen.  Joseph  Graham's  expedition  against  the  Creek
Indians  in  1814,  settled  in  Catawba  county,  N.  C,
was  a  candidate  for  congress  in  1818,  and  elected
as  a  democrat  in  the  next  congressional  election,
and  re-elected  nine  successive  times,  serving  from
3  Dec,  1821,  till  3  March,  1841.  He  declined  re-
election, but  in  1848  entered  the  state  senate,  after
which  he  refused  to  be  a  candidate  for  office.

CONNER,  James,  type-founder,  b.  near  Hvde
Park,  Dutchess  co.,  N.  Y.,  22  April,  1798.  In  1814
he  was  apprenticed  to  Samuel  Brower,  and,  after
learning  the  trade,  worked  in  different  prmting-
offices  in  New  York  city,  was  a  skilful  pressman,
and,  after  becoming  expert  in  finishing  stereotype
plates,  took  charge  of  a  stereotype  foundry  in  Bos-
ton. Returning  after  three  years  to  New  York
city,  he  began  business  as  a  printer  and  stereotype-
founder.  He  made  from  old  stereotype  plates,
and  sold  in  large  quantities,  large  type  that  was
wanted  for  posters,  manufactured  the  first  folio
Bible  ever  printed  in  the  United  States,  began  to
cast  type  for  his  own  establishment,  devising  a  style
of  light-faced  type  that  found  a  large  demand,
and  stereotyped  Shakespeare's  works  and  other
books,  and  then  a  polyglot  Bible,  for  which  he
designed  a  new  size  of  type,  which  he  called  agate.
He  next  published  Walter  Scott's  works,  after
which  he  confined  himself  to  type-founding.  He
invented  a  method  of  casting  letters  from  an
electrotyped  matrix  by  chemical  precipitation.

CONNER,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  1  Sept.,  1829 ;  d.  26  June,  1883.  He  was
graduated  at  South  Carolina  college  in  1849,  ad-
mitted to  the  bar  in  1852,  and  in  1856  appointed
U.  S.  district  attorney  for  South  Carolina,  which
office  he  resigned  in  December,  1860.  He  entered
the  Confederate  army  as  captain  in  1861,  served  in
many  campaigns,  rose  to  the  rank  of  brigadier-
general,  and  in  the  latter  part  of  the  war  com-
manded a  division.  He  was  chairman  of  the  South
Carolina  Democratic  state  committee  in  1870,  and
elected  in  that  year  attorney-general  on  the  same
ticket  with  Gov.  Wade  Hampton,  but  resigned  the
office  in  1877.

CONNER,  Samuel  Shepard,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Hampshire,  about  1783 ;  d.  in  Covington,  Ky.,  17
Dec,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1806.
During  the  war  with  Great  Britain  he  entered  the
army  as  major  of  the  21st  infantry,  served  as  aide-


de-camp  to  Gen.  Henry  Dearborn  in  the  beginning
of  1813,  and  was  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  13th  in-
fantry from  March,  1813,  till  14  July,  1814,  when
he  resigned.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  elected  to
congress  from  Massachusetts,  serving  from  4  Dec,
1815,  till  3  March,  1817.  In  1819  he  was  appointed
surveyor-general  of  the  Ohio  land  district.

CO'NNESS,  John,  senator,  b.  in  Ireland,  20
Sept.,  1821.  He  emigrated  to  the  United  States  at
the  age  of  thirteen,  learned  the  trade  of  a  piano-
forte maker,  and  worked  in  New  York  city  until
the  discovery  of  gold  in  California.  He  went  to
that  state  in  1849,  engaged  in  mining,  and  after-
ward became  a  merchant.  He  was  a  member  of
the  California  legislature  in  1853-'4  and  in  1800-'!.
a  candidate  for  lieutenant-governor  in  1859,  and
the  union  democratic  candidate  for  governor  in
1801,  receiving  30,944  votes,  to  32,751  cast  for
the  Breckinridge  democratic  candidate,  and  50.030
for  Leland  Stanford,  the  successful  republican
candidate.  He  was  elected  as  a  union  republican
to  succeed  Milton  S.  Latham,  a  democrat,  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  and  sat  from  4  March,  1803,  till  4
March,  1809,  serving  on  the  committees  on  finance
and  the  Pacific  railroad,  and  as  chairman  of  the
committee  on  mines  and  mining.  He  resided  m
Massachusetts  after  the  conclusion  of  his  term.

CONNOLLY,  John,  physician,  b.  in  Lancaster
county.  Pa.,  about  1750.  He  resided  at  Pittsburg,
where  he  became  acquainted  with  Washington.  At
the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  he  suggested  to
Gov.  Dunmore  the  plan  of  rousing  the  Indian  tribes
against  the  colonists,  and  was  his  chief  agent  in
that  business.  Pie  was  seized  and  imprisoned,
while  at  the  head  of  an  armed  party,  in  1774,  by
the  authorities  of  Pennsylvania,  with'whom  he  had
a  bitter  controversy  respecting  land  at  the  falls  of
the  Ohio,  granted  him  by  Lord  Dunmore.  He  was
appointed  by  Lord  Dunmore  magistrate  of  We^l
Augusta,  and  in  1775  was  authorized  by  him  t<
raise  in  Canada  and  the  west  and  command  a  regi-
ment of  loyalists  and  Indians,  to  be  called  the
Loyal  Foresters.  He  visited  Gen.  Gage  in  the  au-
tumn of  1775,  and  while  on  the  way  from  Williams-
burg, Va..  to  Detroit,  the  rendezvous  of  the  force
he  expected  to  raise  for  the  invasion  of  Virginia,
he  was  captured  at  Plagerstown,  Md.,  with  his  in-
struction^ in  his  possession,  and  held  prisoner  till
near  the  end  of  the  war.  He  and  other  disaf-
fected persons  held  conferences  at  Detroit,  about
1798,  with  prominent  citizens  of  the  west,  with  re-
gard to  the  seizure  of  New  Orleans  and  the  forci-
ble control  of  the  navigation  of  the  Mississippi.
The  attention  of  Washington  was  attracted  to  the
subject,  and  measures  were  taken  to  prevent  the
execution  of  the  plot.

CONNOR,  Edmund  Sheppard,  actor,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  9  Sept.,  1809.  He  joined  an
amateur  company  at  an  early  age,  in  1829  made  his
first  public  appearance  as  young  Norval  in  the
Walnut  street  theatre,  and  thereafter  became  noted
as  a  performer  of  backwoodsman  and  Indian  char-
acters, in  several  plays  written  by  native  drama-
tists. He  was  manager  of  the  Arch  street  theatre,
Philadelphia,  in  1850,  and  for  many  years  past  has
lived  in  retirement  in  New  Jersey. — His  second
wife,  Charlotte  Mary  Sanford  Barnes,  d.  in
New  York  city,  14  April,  1803,  whom  he  married
in  1847,  made  her  debut  at  the  Tremont  theatre,
Boston,  in  1833,  played  Juliette  to  the  Romeo  of
her  mother,  Mrs.  Mary  Barnes,  and  afterward  ap-
peared in  England.

CONNOR,  Patrick  Edward,  soldier,  b.  in  the
south  of  Ireland,  17  March,  1820.  He  came  to  the
United  States  when  a  boy,  was  educated  in  New


CONNOR


CONRAD


709


York  city,  entered  the  regular  army  during  the
Florida  war,  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  engaged  in
mercantile  business  in  New  York  city  after  his  dis-
charge in  1844,  and  in  1846  settled  in  Texas.  Upon
the  breaking  out  of  the  Mexican  war  in  that  year
he  was  mustered  in  as  captain  of  Texas  volunteers,
in  the  regiment  of  Albert  Sidney  Johnston,  fought
at  Palo  Alto,  Resaca  de  la  Palnia,  and  was  severely
wounded  at  Buena  Vista.  Shortly  after  the  close
of  the  war  he  emigrated  to  California,  and  there
engaged  in  business.  In  1861  he  raised  a  regiment
of  volunteers  in  California,  and  was  ordered  to
Utah,  to  prevent  a  revolt  of  the  Mormons  and
rid  the  overland  routes  of  plundering  Indians.  On
29  Jan.,  1863,  his  force,  numbering  200,  after  a
rapid  march  of  140  miles,  made  in  four  nights
through  deep  snow,  in  weather  so  cold  that  the  feet
of  seventy-six  soldiers  were  frozen,  encountered
300  warriors  in  their  fortified  camp  on  Bear  river,
Washington  territory.  The  troops  enfiladed  the
position,  and  after  a  fight  of  four  hours  destroyed
the  entire  band.  Col.  Connor  was  commissioned
brigadier-general,  30  March,  1863,  and  was  long  in
command  of  the  Utah  district,  where  he  effective-
ly established  the  authority  of.  the  government.
He  received  the  brevet  of  major-general  at  the
close  of  the  civil  war,  and  having  been  appointed,
on  the  petition  of  the  legislatures  of  Colorado  and
Nebraska,  to  the  district  of  the  plains,  organized
an  expedition  of  2,000  cavalry  to  chastise  the  Sioux
and  Arapahoes  for  depredations  on  the  Overland
mail  route,  and  in  August,  1865,  defeated  the  latter
at  Tongue  River.  He  was  mustered  out  of  the  ser-
vice on  30  April,  1866,  Gen.  Connor  was  the  leader
in  building  up  a  Gentile  community  in  Utah.  His
volunteer  force  numbered  16,000.  Soon  after  he
established  Camp  Douglas,  near  Salt  Lake  City,  he
founded  there  the  "  Union  Vedette,"  which  was  the
first  daily  newspaper  printed  in  the  territory.  He
located  the  first  silver  mine  in  Utah,  wrote  the  first
mining  law,  introduced  navigation  on  the  Great
Salt  Lake,  built  the  first  silver-lead  smelting-works,
and  founded  the  town  of  Stockton.  After  the  war
he  declined  a  colonelcy  in  the  regular  army  in  order
to  attend  to  his  large  mining  and  commercial  in-
terests in  LTtah.

CONNOR,  Selden,  soldier,  b.  in  Fairfield,  Mp.,
25  Jan.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at  Tufts  college,
Massachusetts,  in  1859,  and  studied  law  in  Wood-
stock, Vt.  When  the  war  began  he  enlisted  for
three  months  in  the  1st  regiment  of  Vermont  vol-
unteers, and  after  being  mustered  out  was  chosen
major,  and  afterward  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  7th
Maine  regiment.  He  commanded  the  regiment  for
some  time,  took  part  in  the  peninsular  campaign,
was  in  temporary  command  of  the  77th  New  York
regiment  after  the  battle  of  Antietam,  participated
in  the  battle  of  Fredericksburg,  receiving  a  slight
wound,  and  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Gettys-
burg. In  January,  1864,  he  was  commissioned
colonel  of  the  19th  Maine  volunteers,  and,  as  rank-
ing officer,  commanded  the  brigade.  In  the  battle
of  the  Wilderness  his  thigh-bone  was  shattered  by
a  bullet,  6  May,  1864.  He  was  commissioned
brigadier-general  in  June,  1864,  but  was  incapaci-
tated for  active  service  after  receiving  his  wound.
In  April,  1866,  his  leg  was  again  fractured  by  a
fall,  confining  him  to  his  house  for  two  years.  He
was  a  member  of  Gov.  Chamberlain's  staff,  and  in
1868  was  appointed  assessor  of  internal  revenue.
In  1874  he  was  appointed  collector  for  the  Augusta
district,  and  held  that  office  till  he  was  nominated
by  the  republicans  for  the  governorship  of  Maine,
in  1875.  He  was  elected  by  3,872  majority  over
Charles  W.  Roberts,  the  democratic  candidate,  and


re-elected  for  the  two  following  terms,  serving
from  Januarv,  1876,  till  January,  1879.  From
1882  till  1886  he  was  U.  S.  pension-agent.

CONNOR,  Skeffliigton,  jurist,  b.  in  Dublin,
Ireland,  in  1810 ;  d.  in  Toronto  in  1863.  He  was
graduated  at  Trinity  college,  Dublin,  in  1830,  and
soon  afterward  he  emigrated  to  Canada,  settling  in
the  township  of  Orillia,  then  a  wilderness,  where  he
lived  for  two  years.  He  then  returned  to  Ireland,
whence,  after  a  short  stay,  he  went  to  the  continent
and  resided  for  a  few  years.  During  his  absence
Mr.  Connor  was  called  to  the  Irish  bar  in  1833,  and,
on  his  return  to  Canada,  was  admitted  to  the  bar
at  Osgood  hall,  Toronto,  in  1842.  He  entered  into
partnership  with  ex-Chancellor  Blake  and  Justice
Morrison,  and  for  many  years  had  a  lucrative  prac-
tice. In  1846  he  again  visited  Ireland,  and  the
degree  of  LL.  D„  was  conferred  upon  him  by  the
University  of  Dublin.  In  1858  he  was  solicitor-
general  for  Upper  Canada.  At  the  general  elec-
tion of  1856  he  was  elected  for  South  Oxford,  a
constituency  that  he  continued  to  represent  until
his  elevation,  on  1  Feb.,  1863,  to  the  Queen's  bench
as  puisne  judge.  During  the  whole  of  his  parlia-
mentary career  he  adhered  to  the  liberal  party.
He  had  been  appointed  chancellor  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Toronto  not  long  before  his  death.

CONOVER,  Simon  BarcLay,  senator,  b.  in
Cranbury,  Middlesex  co.,  N.  J.,  23  Sept.,  1840.  He
was  graduated  M.  D.  in  the  University  of  Nashville,
Tenn.,  in  1864,  appointed  an  assistant  sui'geon  in
the  Army  of  the  Cumberland,  and  stationed  at
Nashville,  Tenn.,  resigned,  but  was  afterward  re-
appointed, and  ordered  to  Lake  City,  Fla.,  in  1866,
He  was  a  member  of  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention in  1868,  and  was  appointed  state  treasurer
by  Gov.  Reed,  resigning  his  commission  in  the
army  to  accept  the  office.  Pie  was  a  member  of  the
Republican  national  convention  at  Chicago  in  1868,
and  became  a  member  of  the  Republican  national
committee.  After  the  expiration  of  his  term  of
office  as  treasurer,  in  1873,  he  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  state  house  of  representatives,  and  chosen
speaker.  He  was  elected  U.  S.  senator  in  1872,  and
served  from  4  March,  1873,  till  3  March,  1879.  He
was  the  Republican  candidate  for  governor  in  1880.
After  the  expiration  of  his  term  in  the  senate  he
resumed  the  practice  of  medicine.

CONOVER,  Thomas  A.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
Jersey  in  1794;  d.  in  South  Amboy,  N.  J.,  25  Sept.,
1864.  He  entered  the  navy  as  midshipman,  1  Jan.,
1812,  his  first  cruise  being  on  the  "  Essex,"  com-
manded by  Capt.  David  Porter,  during  the  war
with  England.  His  next  service  was  under  Com.
McDonough  on  Lake  Champlain.  He  was  pro-
moted to  a  lieutenancy,  5  March,  1817,  and  served
on  board  the  "  Guerriere  "  in  the  Mediterranean,
and  other  vessels  in  various  portions  of  the  world
until  his  promotion  to  commander,  28  Feb.,  1838,
in  which  capacity  he  commanded  the  sloop-of-war
"  John  Adams  "  some  years.  He  was  promoted  to
the  rank  of  captain,  2  Oct.,  1848,  and  in  1857-8
commanded  the  squadron  on  the  coast  of  Africa,
the  "Constitution"  being  his  flag-ship.  On  16
July,  1862,  on  the  creation  of  the  grade  of  commo-
dore in  the  navy,  he  was  promoted  to  that  rank
and  placed  on  the  retired  list,  having  been  in  the
service  fiftv-three  years.

CONRAD,  Charles  M.,  statesman,  b.  in  Win-
chester, Va.,  about  1804 ;  d.  in  New  Orleans,  La.,  11
Feb.,  1878.  He  went  with  his  father  to  Mississippi,
and  thence  to  Louisiana  while  an  infant,  received
a  liberal  education,  studied  law,  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1828,  and  practised  in  New  Orleans.  He
served  several  years  in  the  state  legislature,  was


710


CONRAD


CONRAD


elected  to  the  U.  S.  senate  as  a  whig  in  the  place
of  Alexander  Mouton,  who  had  resigned,  and  served
from  14  April,  1843,  till  3  March,  1843.  In  1844
he  was  a  member  of  the  state  constitutional  con-
vention. He  was  elected  to  congress  in  1848,  and
served  till  August,  1850,  when  he  was  appointed
secretary  of  war  bv  President  Fillmore,  serving
from  13  Aug.,  1850,  till  7  March,  1853.  He  was
one  of  the  leaders  of  the  secession  movement  in
Louisiana  in  December,  18G0.  a  deputy  from  Lou-
isiana in  the  Montgomery  provisional  congress  of
1861,  a  member  of  the  1st  and  2d  Confederate  con-
gresses in  1862-'4,  and  also  served  as  a  brigadier-
general  in  the  Confedei-ate  army.

CONRAD,  F.,  abbot,  b.  in  Auro,  Switzerland,
in  1833.  He  entered  the  order  of  St.  Benedict,
and  was  ordained  in  1856.  Having  received  direc-
tions to  found  a  monastery  of  his  order  in  the
United  States  in  1873,  he  embarked  for  this  country
and  founded  the  Benedictine  monastery  of  New
Engleberg,  at  Conception,  Mo.,  which  was  erected
into  an  abbey  in  1881.  In  1885  Father  Conrad
was  chosen  as  its  first  abbot.

CONRAD,  Joseph,  soldier,  b.  in  Wied-Selters,
Germany,  17  May,  1830.  He  was  graduated  at  the
military  academy  of  Hesse  Darmstadt  in  1848,  and
came  to  this  country,  settling  in  Missouri.  At  the
beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  enlisted  in  the  Na-
tional service,  and  was  made  captain  of  the  3d
Missouri  infantry.  He  became  major  in  Septem-
ber, and  was  engaged  in  the  action  of  Carthage,
the  battle  of  Pea  Ridge,  and  the  siege  of  Corinth.
After  being  mustered  out,  he  re-entered  the  army
as  lieutenant-colonel  of  the  15th  Missouri  infantry,
in  May,  1862,  became  colonel  in  Noveinber,  and
was  engaged  in  the  battles  of  Perryville,  Chicka-
mauga,  and  Missionary  Ridge.  During  the  Atlanta
campaign  he  commanded  a  brigade  in  the  Army  of
the  Cumberland,  and  was  brevetted  brigadier-gen-
eral for  his  services.  He  commanded  the  sub-dis-
trict of  Victoria  in  Texas  until  February,  1866,
when  he  was  mustered  out  of  the  volunteer  service.
In  July,  1866,  he  entered  the  regular  army,  and
was  commissioned  captain  in  the  29th  infantry,
transferred  to  the  11th  infantry  in  April,  1869,
and  served  with  his  regiment  until  October,  1882,
when  he  was  retired  with  the  rank  of  colonel.

CONRAD,  Joseph  Speed,  soldier,  b.  in  Ithaca,
N,  v.,  23  Aug.,  1833.  He  was  graduated  at  the
U.  S.  military  academy  in  1857,  and  assigned  to
the  2d  infantry,  stationed  at  Fort  Columbus.  He
was  sent  to  the  western  frontier  in  1858,  and  dur-
ing the  three  years  succeeding  served  in  Minne-
sota and  Nebraska.  When  the  civil  war  began
he  was  a  first  lieutenant,  and  was  detailed  as
commissary  of  subsistence  to  Gen,  Lyon  in  the
Missouri  campaign  in  the  summer  of  1861.  He
was  wounded  at  the  battle  of  Wilson's  Creek,  10
Aug.,  and  was  on  sick-leave  until  October,  He
was  promoted  captain,  1  Nov,,  1861,  and  placed  at
the  head  of  the  discharge  department  in  Washing-
ton froui  that  time  until  21  Jan.,  1864.  Early  in
the  summer  of  that  year  he  joined  the  regular
brigade  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  campaigns  that  followed,  including
the  battles  of  the  Wilderness,  Spottsylvania,  Pe-
tersburg, and  Reams's  Station.  During  this  period
he  served  at  different  times  as  judge-advocate,  pro-
vost-marshal, and  commissary  of  musters.  He
received  tliree  brevets,  as  major,  lieutenant-colonel,
and  colonel  of  volunteers.  From  1865  till  1871  he
was  occupied  with  garrison  duty,  after  which  he
served  as  instructor  of  infantry  tactics  at  the  U.  S.
military  academy,  and  then  on  special  duty  in
VV^ashington  in  connection  with  the  Centennial  ex-


iuj.  UnM


•5


hibition  at  Philadelphia.  In  1877  he  was  assigned
to  duty  on  the  frontier.  He  was  promoted  to  major
of  the  17th  infantry  on  27  April,  1879,  and  to  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  the  22d  infantry  on  27  June,  1884,
In  1886  he  was  in  command  of  Fort  Lvon,  Colorado,

CONRAD,  Robert  Taylor,  lawver,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, 10  June,  1810;  d.  there,'27  June,  1858.
He  was  the  son  of  a  publisher  of  Philadelphia,
was  educated  for  the  bar,  and  attained  a  high
reputation  as  a  political  speaker,  and  as  an  edi-
tor and  poet.  Before  he  was  twenty-one  years
old  he  wrote  a  tragedy,  "  Conradin,"  and  in"l832
published  the  "  Daily  Commercial  Intelligencer,"
which  was  merged  into  the  "  Philadelphia  Ga-
zette." Abandoning  this  occupation  from  failing
health  in  1834,  he  returned  to  the  law,  became
recorder,  and  in
1838  judge  of
thecriminalses-
sions  for  the
city  and  coun-
ty of  Philadel-
phia. When  the
latter  court  was
dissolved,  he  re-
sumed the  pen,
edited  "  Gra-
ham's Maga-
zine," and  be-
came associate
editor  of  the
"  North  Ameri-
can." On  the
consolidation  of
the  districts
with  the  city  in
1854,  he  was
elected  mayor
by  the  Whig  and  American  parties.  In  1856  he
was  appointed  to  the  bench  of  the  quarter  sessions,
serving  in  that  capacity  till  1857.  In  literature
he  is  best  known  by  the  tragedy  of  "  Aylmere,"
purchased  by  Edwin  Forrest,  in  which  that  actor
played  the  part  of  Jack  Cade.  In  1852  Judge  Con-
rad'published  a  volume  entitled  "Aylmere,  or  the
Bondman  of  Kent,  and  other  Poems,"  the  princi-
pal of  which  latter  are  "  The  Sons  of  the  Wilder-
ness," a  meditative  poem  on  the  wrongs  and  mis-
fortunes of  the  North  American  Indians,  and  a
series  of  sonnets  on  the  Lord's  Prayer.  Another
tragedy  that  he  wrote,  "  The  Heretic,"  was  never
acted,  nor  published.

CONRAD,  Timothy  Ahhott,  naturalist,  b.  in
New  Jersey,  in  August,  1803;  d.  in  Trenton,  N,  J,,
9  Aug.,  1877.  He  was  from  early  life  an  investi-
gator of  American  paleontology  and  natural  his-
tory, devoting  himself  to  the  study  of  the  shells  of
the  tertiary  and  cretaceous  formations,  and  to  ex-
isting species  of  mollusks.  In  1831  he  began  the
issue  of  a  work  on  "  American  Marine  Concholo-
gy,"  and  the  year  following  published  the  first
number  of  his  "  Fossil  Shells  of  the  Tertiary  For-
mation," which  was  never  completed.  A  "  Monog-
raphy  of  the  Family  UnionidaB "  was  issued  be-
tween 1835  and  1847.  The  lithographed  plates  in
his  publications  were  in  part  his  own  work.  He
contributed  many  articles  to  the  "  American  Jour-
nal of  Science"  and  the  "Journal  of  the  Phila-
delphia Academy  of  Science."  As  one  of  the
New  York  state  geologists  he  prepared  the  geo-
logical report  for  1837.  He  was  paleontologist  of
the  New  York  geological  survey  from  1838  till
1841,  and  wrote  the  annual  reports  in  that  depart-
ment. He  also  made  the  reports  of  paleontologi-
cal  discoveries  in  the  Pacific  railroad  survey  and


CONRAD


CONWAY


711


the  Mexican  boundary  survey.  lie  defended  the
theory  of  periodical  refrigeration,  and  suggested
that  the  Mississippi  depression  was  the  conse-
quence of  the  upheaval  of  the  Appalachians  and
the  later  elevation  of  the  Rocky  mountain  area.  A
list  of  his  scientific  papers  is  given  in  the  catalogue
of  the  Royal  society  of  England.

CONRAD,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pennsyl-
vania, 11  Aug.,  1808;  d.  16 'Feb.,  1865.  He  was
educated  at  the  academy  and  theological  seminary
of  the  German  Reformed  church  at  York,  Pa.,
licensed  to  preach  by  the  Westmoreland  classis  in
May,  1835,  and  labored  during  the  rest  of  his  life
in  western  Pennsylvania  as  a  pioneer  preacher.
He  was  one  of  the  founders  of  Westmoreland  col-
lege. Mount  Pleasant,  Pa.,  to  which  he  presented
his  large  collection  of  geological  specimens,  was  a
frequent  contributor  to  religious  journals,  and
published  a  volume  on  "  Baptism  "  (1847).

CONROY,  John  Joseph,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in
Queens  county,  Ireland,  in  1819.  He  studied  un-
der the  Sulpicians  at  Montreal,  completed  his  theo-
logical course  in  Mount  St.  Mary's,  and  was  or-
dained in  1842.  He  became  vice-president  of  St.
John's  college,  Fordham,  in  1843,  and  was  after-
ward appointed  president.  He  was  transferred  to
the  pastorate  of  St.  Joseph's  church,  Albany,  in
1844,  and  founded  St.  Vincent's  orphan  asylum,
built  a  convent  of  the  Sisters  of  Charity,  and  re-
built St.  Joseph's  church.  He  became  vicar-gen-
eral of  the  diocese  of  Albany  in  1857,  and  admin-
istered its  affairs  during  the  absence  of  the  bishop.
He  succeeded  Dr.  McCloskey  on  the  latter's  promo-
tion to  the  see  of  New  York.  During  his  admin-
istration there  was  a  large  increase  of  churches
and  priests.  Among  the  most  noted  institutions
that  he  founded  are  an  industrial  school,  St.  Peter's
hospital,  St.  Agnes's  rural  cemetery,  and  a  house
of  the  Little  Sisters  of  the  Poor.  He  was  present
at  the  first  and  second  councils  of  Baltimore,  and
took  part  in  the  sessions  of  the  Vatican  council.
In  1869  he  convoked  a  synod  of  his  diocese,  and
made  important  regulations  for  its  future  govern-
ment. In  1870  a  coadjutor  was  appointed  at  his
request,  and  in  1874  he  resigned.  He  was  then
created  bishop  of  Curium  m  partibus,  and  has
since  resided-  in  New  York.

CONTEE,  Benjaiiiin,  clergyman,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1755 ;  d.  in  Charles  county,  Md.,  3  Nov.,
1815.  He  was  liberally  educated,  studied  theology,
and  became  a  clergyman  of  the  Protestant  Episco-
pal church.  In  1776  he  was  an  officer  in  the  3d
Maryland  battalion.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Continental  congress  in  1787-'8,  and  was  elected
to  the  1st  congress  under  the  constitution,  in  which
body  he  voted  in  1790  for  establishing  the  seat  of
government  on  the  Potomac.  Subsequently  he
became  the  presiding  judge  of  the  Charles  county,
Md.,  testamentary  court.

CONTREC(EUR,  Captain,  French  soldier,  b.
about  1730.  He  was  a  captain  in  the  French  ma-
rines, and  in  1754  conducted  a  force  of  1,000  men,
mostly  Indians,  with  eighteen  cannon,  down  the
Alleghany  river  in  boats,  for  the  purpose  of  pre-
venting the  British  authorities  or  the  Ohio  com-
pany from  planting  settlements  in  the  Ohio  valley,
which  was  claimed  by  the  French  under  the  treaty
of  Aix.  Ensign  Ward,  of  Capt.  Trent's  company,
had  partly  constructed  a  fort  at  Ohio  Fork,  now
Pittsburg,"  the  spot  recommended  for  the  purpose
in  Washington's  report.  He  surrendered  the  works
to  Contrecoeur,  who  finished  the  stockade,  called
it  Fort  Duquesne,  and  maintained  there  a  garri-
son of  about  250  Frenchmen,  and  sometimes  as
many  as  500  Indians. When  Braddock  advanced


with  more  than  2,000  men,  although  the  garrison
was  demoralized  by  fear,  Capt.  Beaujeu,  who  haid
come  to  relieve  Contrecoeur,  determined  to  attack
the  approaching  army,  and,  while  he  carried  out
the  brilliant  attack  that  resulted  in  the  rout  of
Braddock's  army,  9  July,  1755,  ContreccEur,  to
whom  the  French  official'  reports  erroneously  give
the  credit  of  the  victory,  remained  at  the  fort.
As  Beaujeu  had  been  shot,  the  command  again  de-
volved upon  Contrecoeur,  who  was  responsible  for
the  atrocities  committed  by  the  Indians.

CONVERSE,  Amasa,  journalist,  b.  in  Virginia
in  1795;  d.  in  Louisville,  Ky.,  9  Dec.  1872.  He
was  graduated  at  Dartmouth  in  1822.  After  com-
pleting his  theological  course  he  was  for  some
years  a  pastor  in  the  south,  whence  he  removed
to  Philadelphia,  and  founded  the  "  Christian  Ob-
server," a  Presbytei-ian  weekly  organ  of  old-school
doctrine  and  southern  political  sympathies.  When
the  civil  war  began  he  removed  his  paper  to  Rich-
mond, Va.,  and  after  the  war  to  Louisville,  Ky.,
where  it  continued  to  be  the  organ  and  exponent
of  the  southern  Presbvterian  church.

CONVERSE,  Charles  Crozat,  musical  com-
poser, b.  in  Warren,  Mass.,  in  1834.  He  studied
law  and  music  in  Leipsic,  Germany,  returned
home  in  1857,  and  was  graduated  at  the  Albany
law-school  in  1861.  His  nmsical  compositions  have
appeared  under  the  anagrammatic  pen-names  "  C.
0.  Nevers,"  "Karl  Reden,"  and  "E.  C.  Revons."
He  has  published  a  cantata  (1855) ;  "  New  Method
for  the  Guitar  "  (1855) ;  "  Musical  Bouquet "  (1859) ;
"  The  One  Hundred  and  Twentv-sixth  Psalm "
(1860);  "Sweet  Singer"  (1863);  "Church  Singer"
(1863) ;  " Sayings  of  Sages"  (1863).

CONWAY,  Moneiire  Daniel,  author,  b.  in  Staf-
ford county,  Va.,  17  March,  1832.  His  father  was
a  magistrate  and  a  member  of  the  Virginia  legisla-
ture ;  his  mother  a  daughter  of  Surgeon-General
Daniel.  He  received  his  early  education  at  Fred-
ericksburg academy,  and  was  graduated  at  Dick-
inson college.  Pa.,  in  1849,  where  he  united  with
the  Methodist  church.  He  began  the  study  of  law
at  Warrenton,  Va.,  and  while  there  wrote  for  the
Richmond  "  Examiner,"  of  which  his  cousin,  John
M.  Daniel,  was  editor,  in  support  of  extreme  south-
ern opinions.  He  abandoned  the  law  to  enter  the
Methodist  ministry,  joined  the  Baltimore  confer-
ence in  1850,  was  appointed  to  the  Rockville  cir-
cuit, and  in  1852  to  Frederick  circuit.  He  was  a
contributor  to  the  "  Southern  Literary  Messenger,"
and  published  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Free  Schools
in  Virginia,"  in  which  he  advocated  the  adoption
of  the  New  England  common-school  system.  Hav-
ing undergone  a  change  of  political  and  religious
convictions,  partly  through  the  influence  of  a  set-
tlement of  Quakers  among  whom  he  lived,  he  left
the  Methodist  ministry  and  entered  the  divinity-
school  at  Cambridge,  Mass.,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated in  1854.  He  then  returned  to  Virginia,  in
the  hope  of  preaching  his  humanitarian  ideas  and
transcendental  and  rationalistic  doctrines;  but
upon  reaching  Falmouth,  where  his  parents  re-
sided, was  obliged  by  a  band  of  neighbors  to  leave
the  state  under  threats  because  he  had  befriended
Anthony  Burns,  a  fugitive  slave  from  the  same
district.  The  same  year  he  became  pastor  of  the
Unitarian  church  in  Washington,  D.  C,  where  he
preached  until  he  was  dismissed  on  account  of
some  anti-slavery  discourses,  especially  one  deliv-
ered after  the  assault  on  Senator  Sumner.  In  1857
he  was  settled  over  the  Unitarian  church  in  Cin-
cinnati, Ohio.  There  he  published,  among  other
pamphlets,  "  A  Defence  of  the  Theatre  "  and  "  The
Natural History  of the Devil." The publica-


712


CONWAY


CONWAY


tlon  of  books  on  slavery  and  its  relation  to  the
civil  war  led  to  an  invitation  to  lecture  on  this
subject  in  New  England,  as  he  had  already  lec-
tured gratuitously  throughout  Ohio.  During  the
war  his  father's  slaves  escaped  from  Virginia  and
were  settled  by  him  in  Yellow  Springs,  Ohio.  He
was  for  a  time  editor  of  the  Boston  "  Common-
wealth." In  1863  he  went  to  England  to  enlighten
the  British  public  in  regard  to  the  causes  of  the
war,  and  there  wrote  and  lectured  as  a  representa-
tive of  the  anti-slavery  opinions  of  the  north.  He
also  contributed  to  "  Eraser's  Magazine  "  and  the
"  Fortnightly  Review."  Toward  the  close  of  1863
he  became  the  minister  of  South  Place  religious
society  in  London,  remaining  there  until  he  re-
turned to  the  United  States  in  1884.  He  was  long
the  London  correspondent  of  the  Cincinnati  "  Com-
mercial." "  The  Rejected  Stone,  or  Insurrection
versus  Resurrection  in  America,"  first  appeared
under  the  pen-name  "A  Native  of  Virginia."  and
attracted  much  attention  before  the  authorship  be-
came known.  "  The  Golden  Hour"  was  a  similar
work.  Mr.  Conway  was  a  frequent  contributor  to
the  daily  liberal  press  in  England,  and  has  written
extensively  for  magazines  in  that  country  and  in
the  United  States.  A  series  of  articles  entitled
"  South  Coast  Saunterings  in  England  "  appeared
in  "  Harper's  Magazine  "  in  1868-9.  He  has  pub-
lished in  book  form  "  Tracts  for  To-day  "  (Cincin-
nati, 1858) ;  '^  The  Rejected  Stone  "  (Boston,  1861) ;
"The  Golden  Hour"  (1862);  "Testimonies  con-
cerning Slavery"  (London,  1865);  "The  Earth-
ward Pilgrimage,"  a  moral  and  doctrinal  allegory
(London  and  New  York,  1870) ;  "  Republican  Su-
perstitions," a  theoretical  treatise  on  politics,  in
which  he  objects  to  the  extensive  powers  conferred
on  the  president  of  the  United  States  by  the  Fed-
eral constitution,  and  advocates,  with  Louis  Blanc,
a  single  legislative  chamber  (London,  1872) ;  "  The
Sacred  Anthology,"  a  selection  from  the  sages  and
sacred  books  of  all  ages  (London  and  New  York,
1878) ;  "  Idols  and  Ideals  "  (London  and  New  York,
1877) ;  "  Demonology  and  Devil-Lore  "  (1879) ;  "  A
Necklace  of  Stories  "  (London,  1880) ;  "  The  Wan-
dering Jew  and  the  Pound  of  Flesh  "  (London  and
New  York,  1881) ;  "  Thomas  Carlyle  "  (1881).

CONWAY,  Thomas,  Count  de,  soldier,  b.  in  Ire-
land, 27  Feb.,  1733 ;  d.  about  1800.  He  was  educated
in  France,  entered  the  army,  and  in  1777  had  at-
tained the  rank  of  colonel  and  the  decoration  of  St.
Louis.  On  the  recommendation  of  Silas  Deane  he
came  to  the  United  States  and  offered  his  services  to
congress.  He  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  13  May,
1777,  was  present  at  the  battles  of  Brandywine  and
Germantown.  It  is  chiefly  as  the  leader  of  the
"  Conway  cabal,"  a  conspiracy  to  deprive  Washing-
ton of  the  command  of  the  army,  that  he  is  known
to  history.  This  plot  was  developed  during  the
autumn  of  1777,  and  received  the  open  or  secret
support  of  a  strong  faction  in  congress,  including
some  able  and  patriotic  men,  who  were  dissatisfied
with  what  they  thought  the  supineness  of  Wash-
ington and  the  southern  army,  in  contrast  with
the  victory  that  had  just  been  won  at  Saratoga  by
the  northern  army  under  Gates.  Even  John  Adams
exclaimed :  "  I  am  weary  with  so  much  insipidity,''
while  Dr.  Benjamin  Rush  actively  supported  the
dissidents.  Through  the  influence  of  this  faction
Gates  was  made  president  of  the  board  of  war,  and
a  Canadian  campaign  was  proposed,  which  Lafay-
ette was  to  lead,  with  Conway  to  assist  him.  Em-
bittered by  Washington's  opposition  to  his  promo-
tion, Conway  wrote  anonymous  letters  to  prominent
men,  alleging  Washington's  responsibility  for  re-
cent military  disasters. He  was  thought  to  have


even  forged  Washington's  name  to  papers  designed
to  further  the  plans  of  the  conspirators.  But  Gen.
James  Wilkinson,  under  the  influence  of  wine,  dis-
closed some  passages  that  had  appeared  in  a  letter
from  Conway  to  Gates,  and  Washington  thus  be-
coming apprised  of  the  conspiracy  against  him,  its
power  was  soon  gone.  Lafayette,  also,  refused  to
lead  the  proposed  expedition  unless  Baron  de  Kalb
should  be  made  his  second.  Conway's  promotion
to  major-general  was  conflrmed,  14  Dec,  1777.  in
spite  of  Washington's  disapproval.  But  in  the
following  March,  having  lost  favor  with  congress,
his  resignation,  ofl'ered  conditionally,  in  a  fit  of
petulance,  was  accepted  unconditionally,  and  he
was  obliged,  against  his  will,  to  leave  the  army.
In  July,  1778.  Gen.  John  ('adwallader,  a  stanch
adherent  of  Washington,  challenged  Conway  to
mortal  combat  because  of  his  attacks  upon'  the
commander-in-chief.  The  meeting  took  place,  22
July,  and  Conway  was  badly  wounded  in  the
mouth.  He  fell  on  his  face,  but  raised  himself  and
remarked  to  his  adversary:  "You  fire  with  much
deliberation,  general,  and  certainly  with  a  great
deal  of  effect."  As  soon  as  he  was  able  to  sit  up  he
wrote  a  humble  apology  to  Washington.  He  shortly
afterward  returned  to  France,  where  he  re-entered
the  military  service,  and  was  appointed  governor
of  Pondicherry  and  the  French  settlements  in  Hin-
dustan. He  is  charged  with  having  ruined  the
French  prospects  in  India  by  a  quarrel  with  Tippoo
Saib.  In  1792  he  was  sent  to  take  command  of
the  royalist  army  in  the  south  of  France,  but  dur-
ing the  revolution  was  obliged  to  flee  the  country.

CONWAY,  William,  sailor,  b.  in  Camden,  Me.,
in  1802 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  30  Nov.,  1865.  He
was  a  sailor  in  the  U.  S.  navy  for  forty  years,  and
was  stationed  at  the  Warrington  'or  Pensacola
navy-yard  when  it  was  surrendered  to  the  south-
erners on  12  Jan..  1861,  serving  at  the  time  as
quartermaster.  When  ordered  by  Lieut.  Frederick
B.  Kinshaw  to  lower  the  U.  S.  flag,  he  replied :  "  I
have  served  under  that  flag  for  forty  years,  and  I
won't  do  it."  Shortly  afterward  Mr.  Conway  was
sent  to  the  north,  where  he  remained  until  his  death.

CONWAY,  William  A.,  actor,  b.  in  London;
drowned  himself  off  Charleston  bar  in  1828.  He
was  educated  for  the  bar,  but  appeared  on  the
stage  at  the  Haymarket  theatre,  in  London,  termi-
nated a  three  years'  engagement  in  1816.  starred
till  1821,  and  came  to  the  United  States  in  1823.
He  appeared  as  Hamlet  and  other  tragic  parts  in
New  York  and  Philadelphia,  visited  the  western
and  southern  cities,  took  passage  early  in  1828  for
Savannah,  and  threw  himself  into  the  sea  while  on
the  voyage.  He  won  the  affections  of  Mrs.  Piozzi,
whose  letters  to  him  were  published  in  1843.  As
Coriolanus  he  was  excelled  by  Kerable  alone. — His
son,  Frederick  Bo,  actor,  b.  in  Clifton,  England,
10  Feb.,  1819  ;  d.  in  Manchester,  Mass.,  6  Sept.,
1874.  He  early  developed  a  taste  for  the  stage,
and  had  won  a  fair  position  in  his  profession  in
England,  when  he  came  to  the  United  States  in
August,  1850.  Here  he  formed  an  association  with
Edwin  Forrest,  and  played  lago  to  his  Othello,
De  Mauprat  to  his  Richelieu,  and  other  com-
panion parts.  After  the  death  of  his  first  wife,
Mr.  Conway  married,  ni  May,  1852,  Miss  Crocker,
a  leading  actress,  and  the  two  thenceforward
acted  together.  In  1859  they  opened  Pike's  opera-
house  m  Cincinnati  with  a  first-class  company,
but  the  engagement  was  not  profitable,  and  they
returned  to  the  east.  In  1861  they  visited  Eng-
land, and  filled  a  short  engagement  at  Sadler's
Wells  theatre,  London.  After  their  return  they
became  star -actors,  and  made  an  extensive  and


CON  WELL


COOK


713


profitable  tour.  Though  somewhat  pompous  in
manner,  Mr.  Conway  was  a  good  actor,  with  a
fine  personal  appearance  and  a  commanding  de-
livery.—S.arah  Crocker,  wife  of  Frederick, "b.  in
Ridgefield,  Conn.,  in  1884 :  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in
April,  1875,  was  a  sister  of  Mrs.  D.  P.  Bowers.  (See
Bowers).  She  made  her  debut  in  Baltimore  in
1849,  playing  Parthenia  and  other  leading  parts.
She  possessed  a  tall  and  graceful  figure  and  an  ex-
pressive countenance,  and  was  a  versatile  actress
and  a  popular  manager.  In  1864  she  leased  the
Park  theatre  in  Brooklyn,  and  subsequently  the
new  Brooklyn  theatre,  in  which  for  nine  years  Mr.
Conway  played  leading  parts.

CONWELL,  Henry,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Armagh,
Ireland,  in  1748;  d.  in  Philadelphia  in  1842.  He
was  ordained  in  177G.  When  vicar-general  of  Ar-
magh he  received  notice  of  his  appointment  to  the
see  of  Philadelphia  in  1820,  and  was  consecrated  in
London.  Shortly  after  his  arrival  in  Philadelphia
he  had  difficulty  with  the  trustees  of  the  cathedral
church  of  St.  Mary's,  who  insisted  on  retaining  a
priest  of  doubtful  character,  contrary  to  the  de-
sire of  the  bishop.  The  result  was  a  schism.  Dr.
Conwell  and  the  clergy  of « his  household  were
obliged  to  abandon  the  cathedral,  and  retired  to
the  church  of  St.  Joseph's  in  the  neighborhood.
The  efforts  of  Bishop  England  and  other  prelates,
who  offered  themselves  as  mediators,  were  unavail-
ing, and  in  1828  Dr.  Conwell  went  to  Rome.  The
papal  authorities  endeavored  to  dissuade  him  from
returning  to  the  United  States,  and,  fearing  he
might  be  detained  in  Rome,  he  suddenly  went  to
Paris.  Here  the  papal  nuncio  used  every  effort  to
prevail  on  him  to  resign  his  see,  but  only  with  the
result  of  alarming  the  aged  prelate  still  further,
who  forthwith  sailed  for  New  York.  He  was
present  at  the  council  of  Baltimore  in  1829,  but
took  no  part  in  its  deliberations.  He  was  per-
suaded by  the  assembled  bishops  to  accept  the
Rev.  Francis  P.  Kenrick  as  a  coadjutor,  and  spent
the  remainder  of  his  life  in  retirement.

CONY,  Samuel,  jurist,  b.  in  Augusta,  Me.,  27
Feb.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  5  Oct.,  1870.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Brown  in  1829,  studied  law,  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  1832,  and  engaged  in  practice  at  Old-
town,  Me.  He  was  elected  to  the  legislature  in
1835,  in  1839  was  chosen  a  member  of  Gov.  Fair-
field's executive  council,  and  from  1840  till  1847
was  judge  of  probate  for  Penobscot  county.  Li
1847  he  was  appointed  land-agent,  and  in  1850
elected  state  treasurer,  an  office  which  he  retained
for  five  years.  In  1850  he  removed  to  Augusta.
Up  to  1861  he  acted  with  the  democratic  party,
but,  being  rejected  by  the  section  of  his  party  that
was  opposed  to  the  war,  he  was  in  1862  elected  to
the  legislature  as  a  war  democrat,  and  in  1863
chosen  governor.  His  administration  was  so  ad-
mirable and  efficient  that  he  was  twice  re-elected
by  large  majorities.  He  was  offered  a  renomina-
tion  in  1867,  but  the  impaired  state  of  his  health
forced  him  to  decline.

CONYNGHAM,  John  Butler,  soldier,  b.  in
1827;  d.  in  Wilkesbarre,  Pa.,  27  May,  1871.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1846,  subsequently  stud-
ied law,  and  practised  in  Wilkesbarre  and  St.
Louis.  At  the  first  call  for  troops  in  1861  he  vol-
unteered in  the  three-months'  service,  and  on  his
return  joined  the  52d  Pennsylvania  volunteers,  of
which  he  w^as  appointed  major  on  5  Nov.,  1861.
He  participated  in  the  peninsular  campaign  of  1862,
and  in  the  winter  of  1863  was  sent  with  his  regi-
ment to  Port  Royal,  S.  C,  was  present  at  the  naval
attack  on  Fort  Sumter  in  April,  1863,  and  partici-
pated in  the  subsequent  assault  and  siege  opera-


tions against  Fort  Wagner.  Upon  the  reduction
of  that  fort,  Maj.  Conyngham  was  placed  in  com-
mand of  the  defences"  of  Morris  island.  He  was
detailed  by  Gen.  Terry  to  make  a  night  recon-
noissance  of  Sumter,  and  subsequently  engaged
in  the  night  assault  on  Fort  Johnson,  across
Charleston  harbor.  In  this  assault  he  was  cap-
tured and  detained  as  prisoner  for  several  months.
While  a  prisoner  at  Charleston  he  was  one  of  the
number  selected  as  hostages  to  be  shot  in  ease  of  a
bombardment  of  the  city  by  our  forces.  In  No-
vember, 1863,  he  was  promoted  to  the  lieutenant-
colonelcy,  and  in  March,  1865,  to  the  colonelcy  of
his  regiment.  In  March,  1867,  Col.  Convngliam
was  appointed  captain  in  the  38th  infantry.  U.  S.
army,  and  transferred  to  the  24th  infantry,  Novem-
ber, 1869.  In  1871  he  was  brevetted  major  and
lieutenant-colonel  for  gallant  service  in  tlie  field.
During  his  term  of  service  in  the  regular  army  he
was  mostly  employed  on  the  Indian  frontier.

CONYNGHAM,  Redmond,  antiquarian,  b.  in
Philadelphia,  Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1781;  d.  in  Lancaster
county.  Pa.,  16  June,  1846.  He  inherited  from  his
paternal  grandfather  an  estate  in  the  county  Done-
gal, Ireland,  yielding  £2,000  a  year,  and  subsequent-
ly spent  some  time  in  Ireland.  During  his  stay
abroad  he  became  intimate  with  Curran,  Grattan,
and  other  prominent  Irishmen,  including  his  cous-
in, William  Conyngham  Plunket,  afterward  lord-
chancellor  of  Ireland.  On  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  settled  in  Luzerne  coimty.  Pa.,  and  for
several  years  represented  that  district  in  the  state
legislature.  He  then  removed  to  Lancaster  county,
where  he  resided  until  his  death.  Mr.  Conyngham
devoted  much  of  his  leisure  to  antiquarian  re-
search, and  contributed  valuable  papers  of  historical
interest  to  the  American  philosophical  society  and
to  the  Historical  society  of  Pennsylvania,  of  which
he  was  a  member.  He  made  a  specialty  of  the
early  history  of  Pennsylvania  and  the  aborigines
of  Lancaster  county.

COOK,  Albert  John,  naturalist,  b.  in  Owasso,
Mich.,  30  Aug.,  1842.  He  was  graduated  at  the
Michigan  agricultural  college  in  1862,  and  then
studied  at  Harvard.  In  1867  he  was  appointed
instructor  in  mathematics  at  the  Agricultural  col-
lege, and  in  1869  succeeded  to  the  professorship  of
zoology  and  entomology.  Prof.  Cook  has  been
for  many  years  agricultural  and  entomological
correspondent,  and,  in  some  cases,  editor  of  those
departments,  to  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  Phila-
delphia "  Press,"  "  Rural  New  Yorker,"  "  New
England  Homestead."  "Country  Gentleman,"  and
other  journals.  He  has  published  "  Injurious  In-
sects of  Michigan"  (Lansing,  1873),  and  "Bee-
keeper's Guide  "  (1876 ;  14th  ed.,  1886).

COOK,  Clarence  Chatham,  journalist,  b.  in
Dorchester,  Mass.,  8  Sept.,  1828.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1849,  and,  after  studying  archi-
tecture, was  employed  for  many  years  as  a  teacher.
In  1863  Mr.  Cook  wrote  a  series  of  articles  on
American  art  for  the  New  York  "  Tribune,"  and
continued  such  contributions  until  1869,  when  he
went  as  the  "Tribune"  correspondent  to  Paris.
He  resigned  that  place  at  the  beginning  of  the
Franco-Prussian  war,  and  subsequently  passed
some  time  in  Italy.  On  his  return  to  New  York  he
renewed  his  former  connection  with  the  "  Trib-
une." Mr.  Cook  has  published  "The  Central
Park  "  (New  York,  1868) ;  the  text  to  accompany
a  reproduction,  by  heliotype,  of  Dlirer's  "  Life  of
the  Virgin  "  (Boston,  1874) :  "  The  House  Beauti-
ful "  (New  York,  1878) ;  and  edited,  with  notes,  a
translation  of  the  7th  German  edition  of  Wilhelm
Lubke's  "  Historv  of  Art "  (2  vols.,  1878).


714


COOK


COOK


COOK,  Daniel  Pope,  lawyer,  b,  in  Scott  county,
Ky.,  in  1795:  d.  in  Kentucky,  16  Oct.,  1827.  lie
received  a  classical  education,  studied  law,  was  ad-
mitted to  the  bar,  and  began  practice  in  Kaskaskia,
111.,  in  1815.  He  was  editor  of  the  "Illinois  In-
telligencer," the  only  newspaper  printed  in  the
territory  in  1816,  and  afterward  settled  in  Ed-
wardsville.  He  was  the  first  attorney-general  of
Illinois,  subsequently  judge  of  the  circuit  court  in
the  western  circuit,  and  a  representative  in  con-
gress from  6  Dec,  1819,  till  8  March,  1827.  He
married  a  daughter  of  Gov.  Ninian  Edwards,  and
took  a  prominent  part  in  Illinois  politics,  exerting
a  powerful  influence  to  prevent  the  introduction  of
slavery  during  the  contest  on  that  question  in
1823-'"4.  In  his  canvass  for  congress  at  the  first
election  after  the  admission  of  the  state,  when  he
was  defeated  by  John  McLean — who  like  himself,
was  remarkably  eloquent — the  custom  of  stump-
speaking  was  first  introduced  in  Illinois.  He  won
the  next  election  against  the  same  competitor,  and
was  three  times  re-elected.  In  his  last  term  he
was  acting  chairman  of  the  committee  of  ways
and  means,  though  suffering  from  consumption.
After  a  trip  to  Cuba,  he  returned  to  his  residence
in  Edwardsville,  and  thoTi  went  back  to  his  early
home  in  Kentucky,  where  he  died.  Out  of  respect
for  his  great  ability  and  services  to  the  state,  the
legislature,  four  years  after  his  death,  gave  his
name  to  Cook  county.  See  "  The  Edwards  Pa-
pers," edited  by  Elihu  B.  Washburne  (Chicago,
1884). — His  son  and  only  child,  John,  soldier,  b.
in  Belleville,  111.,  12  June,  1825,  was  left  an  or-
phan and  the  possessor  of  a  fortune  at  an  early
age,  was  educated  by  his  grandfather.  Gov.  Ed-
wards, and  after  his  death  by  a  clergyman,  and
entered  college  at  Jacksonville,  111.,  but  was  not
graduated,  on  account  of  the  failure  of  his  sight.
lie  engaged  in  mercantile  business  in  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  in  1846  entered  the  dry-goods  business  with
his  uncle  in  Springfield,  ill.,  and  afterward  be-
came a  dealer  in  real  estate.  In  1855  he  was
made  mayor  of  Springfield,  the  following  year
sheriff  of  Sangamon  county,  and  later  quarter-
master general  of  the  state.  At  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  in  1861  he  commanded  the  first  regi-
ment raised  in  Illinois.  For  gallantry  at  the  cap-
ture of  Fort  Donelson,  where  he  commanded  a
brigade,  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  on  21
March,  1862.  In  1864  he  commanded  the  district
of  Illinois,  with  headquarters  at  Springfield.  He
was  mustered  out  on  24  Aug.,  1865,  with  the  rank
of  major-general  by  brevet.  In  1868  he  was  elected
to  the  Illinois  legislature.

COOK,  Georg-e  Hammell,  geologist,  b.  in  Han-
over, Morris  co.,  N.  J.,  5  Jan.,  1818 ;  d.  in  New
Brunswick,  N.  J.,  22  Sept.,  1889.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Rensselaer  polvtechnic  institute,  Troy,
N.  Y.,  in  the  class  of  1839,  and  from  1842  till  1846
he  was  senior  professor  in  that  institution.  In
1858  he  became  professor  of  chemistry  and  the
natural  sciences  at  Rutgers.  His  chair  became  in
1867  that  of  chemistry,  natural  history,  and  agri-
culture, and  in  1878  its  title  was  again  changed
to  that  of  analytical  chemistry,  geology,  and  agri-
culture. In  1880  he  became  simply  professor  of
geology  and  agriculture.  Prof.  Cook  was  elected
vice-president  of  the  college  in  1864,  and  during
the  same  year  was  appointed  state  geologist  of
New  Jersey.  In  1880  he  was  appointed  director
of  the  New  Jersey  agricultural  experiment  station,
of  which  he  published  annual  reports.  He  was  a
member  of  several  scientific  societies  and  a  fellow
of  the  American  association  for  the  advancement
of  science. Besides  papers  contributed  to  scien-


tific journals,  he  published  annual  reports  as  state
geologist  from  1868  to  1885,  and  was  the  author  of
"  Geology  of  New  Jersey  "  (Newark,  1868).

COOK,  Henry  F.,  soldier,  killed  in  battle  at
Bristow  Station,  Va.,  14  Oct.,  1868.  He  was  a
native  of  Mississippi,  served  as  first  lieutenant  in
the  Mexican  war,  with  Jefferson  Davis's  regiment
of  Mississippi  vohmteers,  distinguished  himself  in
the  battle  of  Monterey,  where  he  was  wounded,  and
commanded  a  company  in  the  battle  of  Buena
Vista.  At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  joined
the  Confederate  army,  and  rose  by  successive  steps
until  he  was  made  a  brigadier-general  in  1863.

COOK,  Mrs.  Hosea  and  Mrs.  Jesse,  pioneers.
Of  their  early  life  nothing  authentic  is  known.  In
1792  they,  with  their  husbands,  were  occupying
two  log  cabins  in  the  Innis  settlement  near  Frank-
fort, Ky.  In  April  of  that  year  a  band  of  Indi-
ans made  an  attack  on  the  settlement,  and  at
the  first  onslaught  killed  one  and  mortally  wound-
ed the  other  of  the  husbands.  The  wounded  man
crawled  to  the  cabin,  where  he  gave  directions  for
barricading,  and  then  breathed  his  last.  The  wid-
ows, with  three  children  crying  at  their  skirts,  pre-
pared to  defend  themselves  to  the  utmost.  There
was  a  rifle,  but  there  were  no  bullets.  A  musket-
ball  was  finally  discovered,  but  it  was  too  large
for  the  bore.  In  her  fi'enzy  it  was  bitten  in  two
pieces  by  one  of  the  women.  The  Indians  began
with  their  tomahawks  to  cut  through  the  door,
and,  in  English,  demanded  instant  surrender.
Through  a  narrow  aperture  in  the  logs  one  of  the
women  fired  the  rifie,  and  one  of  the  chiefs  fell
dead.  The  infuriated  savages  swarmed  on  the
roof  and  set  fire  in  several  places,  but  from  the
loft  underneath  the  roof  the  flames  were  extin-
guished as  fast  as  they  burned  through,  until  the
water  was  exhausted,  when  the  women  used  some
eggs,  which  were  broken  and  spread  over  the  burn-
ing roof.  They  also  used  the  bloody  clothing  of
the  man  that  lay  dead  below  to  check  the  flames.
As  a  result  of  their  intrepidity,  the  raid  was  unsuc-
cessful, and  the  savages  sullenly  retired.

COOK,  James,  navigator,  b.  in  Marton,  York-
shire, England,  28  Oct.,  1728;  killed  in  the  Sand-
wich islands,  14  Feb.,  1779.  His  father  was  an
agricultural  laborer  and  farm  bailiff,  and,  owing  to
his  poverty,  the  education  of  the  son  was  limited.
In  his  thirteenth  year  the  future  navigator  was
apprenticed  to  a  haberdasher  in  Staiths,  a  lit-
tle fishing  town  near  Whitby.  His  father  dying,
and  the  lad  quarrelling  with  his  master,  his  in-
dentures were  given  up,  when  he  engaged  himself
as  cabin-boy  in  a  coasting  vessel,  and  afterward
became  master  of  a  sloop.  In  1755  he  shipped  in
the  "Eagle,"  of  the  royal  navy,  and  was  speedily
promoted  to  the  quarter-deck.  Having  been
master  successively  of  the  sloops  "Grampus  "and
"  Garland,"  in  1759  he  had  his  master's  rank  con-
firmed by  the  admiralty,  and  was  appointed  to  the
"  Mercury,"  a  frigate  belonging  to  the  squadron
sent  out  to  co-operate  with  Gen.  Wolfe  at  Quebec.
Cook  piloted  the  boats  of  the  squadron  to  the  at-
tack of  Montmorency,  and  conducted  the  debarka-
tion of  the  troops  for  the  assault  on  the  heights  of
Abraham.  He  was  employed  to  take  hydrographic
surveys  of  the  St.  Lawrence  between  Orleans  and
the  north  shore,  as  well  as  the  survey  of  the  most
dangerous  parts  of  the  river  below  Quebec,  and
performed  the  task  in  the  very  face  of  the  French
encampment,  afterward  publishing  a  chart  of  the
river  and  channels  from  Quebec  to  the  sea.  Being
promoted  to  the  flag-ship  "  Northumberland,"  he
made  use  of  his  leisure  to  study  mathematics  and
astronomy. In 1762 he  was  present  at  the  re-


COOK


COOK


715


capture  of  Newfoundland,  after  which  he  returned
to  England.  In  addition  to  the  charts  of  the  St.
Lawrence,  he  published  several  others,  and,  while
on  one  of  the  Burgeo  islands  near  Cape  Ray,  ob-
served an  eclipse  of  the  sun.  The  record  of  his
observations,  published  in  the  "  Philosophical
Transactions,"  showed  an  accuracy  that  gave  him

a  high  reputa-
tion as  an  as-
tronomer. Ear-
ly in  17G8  he  ac-
companied Cap-
tain Greaves  to
survey  the  coast
of  Newfound-
land, and  in  the
following  year
sailed  with  Sir
Hugh  Pallisser
as  marine  sur-
veyor of  that
coast  and  of  La-
brador. When
the  Royal  socie-
ty obtained  the
consent  of  the
king  to  fit  out
an  .  expedition
for  the  purpose
of  observing  the  transit  of  Venus  in  the  south
Pacific.  Cook  was  chosen  to  command  the  expedi-
tion, and  authorized  to  prosecute  geographical  re-
searches in  the  southern  seas.  He  received  a  royal
commission  as  lieutenant,  chose  the  "  Endeavor,"
of  370  tons,  as  the  expedition  ship,  and  sailed,  23
Aug.,  1768,  from  Plymouth.  On  13  April,  1769,
Lieut.  Cook  reached  Otaheite.  where  he  erected  an
observatory,  and  the  necessary  astronomical  obser-
vations were  made.  He  then  sailed  in  quest  of  the
great  continent  at  that  time  supposed  to  exist  near
the  south  pole,  and  reached  New  Zealand,  which
had  remained  unexplored  since  the  time  of  its  first
discovery.  Cook  first  saw  the  narrow  strait  that
divides  the  island.  His  attempts  to  penetrate  to
the  interior  of  either  of  the  islands  were  thwarted
by  the  continued  hostility  of  the  natives,  and  he
contented  himself  with  a  voyage  of  six  months'
duration  around  the  coast.  From  New  Zealand
he  proceeded  to  Australia,  took  possession  of  the
coast  about  Botany  bay  in  the  name  of  the  king  of
Great  Britain,  38  April,  traced  1,300  miles  of  coast-
line, and  proved  the  entire  separation  of  that
island  and  Papua.  After  various  escapes  from
shipwreck  and  native  hostility,  he  sailed  for  New
Guinea,  thence  to  Batavia,  where  his  ship,  shat-
tered and  disabled,  put  in  for  repairs.  Cook  finally
reached  England,  11  June,  1771,  having  circum-
navigated the  globe  and  fulfilled  the  objects  of
the  expedition.  On  29  Aug.,  following  his  ar-
rival, he  was  raised  to  the  rank  of  captain  in  the
navy.  The  great  southern  continent  was  now
supposed  to  lie  nearer  the  pole,  and  to  settle  this
point  it  was  determined  to  send  out  another  expe-
dition. Two  ships,  the  "■  Resolution,"  of  462  tons
and  112  men,  commanded  by  Cook,  and  the  "  Ad-
venture," of  336  tons  and  81  men,  commanded  by
Tobias  Purneaux,  sailed  from  Plymouth,  13  July,
1772,  with  instructions  to  "circumnavigate  the
whole  globe  in  high  southern  latitudes,  making
traverses  from  time  to  time  into  every  part  of  the
Pacific  ocean  which  had  not  undergone  previous
investigation,  and  to  use  his  best  endeavors  to  re-
solve the  much-agitated  question  of  a  southern
continent."  The  expedition  reached  Madeira  on
the  29th,  and,  after  touching  at  the  Cape  of  Good


Hope,  explored  the  specified  latitudes,  but  without
discovering  land.  After  sailing  over  3,660  leagues
reaching  lat.  71°  10'  S.,  in  Ion.  106°  54'  W.,  and
bemg  out  of  sight  of  land  117  days.  Cook  became
satisfied  that  no  land  existed  within  the  limits  of
his  researches,  and  sailed  for  New  Zealand.  After
wintering  among  the  Society  islands,  he  examined
the  waters  eastward  of  his  former  cruise,  between
lat.  60°  and  70° ;  then  explored  the  ocean  between
lat.  43°  and  56°,  from  Easter  island  to  the  New
Hebrides,  discovered  and  named  New  Caledonia,
and  returned  by  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to
England,  arriving  30  July,  1775.  He  was  pro-
moted to  a  post-captaincy  on  9  Aug.,  1775,  ap-
pointed a  captain  of  Greenwich  hospital,  chosen  a
member  of  the  Royal  society,  29  Feb.,  1776,  and
received  the  Copleian  gold  medal  for  the  best  ex-
perimental paper  of  the  year.  In  this  paper  he
embodied  an  account  of  the  successful  method  of
preserving  the  health  of  men  at  sea,  adopted  by
him  as  the  result  of  his  researches  into  the  nature
and  use  of  anti-scorbutic  medicines.  A  reward  of
£20,000  having  been  offered  for  the  discovery  of  a
northwest  passage,  Capt.  Cook  volunteered  to  take
charge  of  an  expedition  to  ascertain  its  practica-
bility by  making  the  attempt  by  way  of  Bering
strait.  He  sailed  from  Plymouth,  12  July,  1776,
with  the  "  Resolution  "  and  "  Discovery,"  the  latter
under  the  command  of  Capt.  Charles  Gierke.  After
going  as  far  north  as  lat.  65°  in  an  endeavor  to
find  a  passage  to  the  Atlantic,  Capt.  Cook  turned
his  attention  to  the  equatorial  Pacific  for  the  win-
ter, discovering  several  small  islands  and  groups,
then  bore  away  to  the  Friendly  islands,  where  he
cruised  for  several  months.  Iii  January,  1778,  he
set  out  again  for  the  north,  and  on  his  way  discov-
ered and  circumnavigated  a  group  which  he  named
the  Sandwich  islands,  in  honor  of  the  Earl  of
Sandwich,  He  reached  the  coast  of  America  in
March,  sailed  up  a  sound  since  known  as  Cook's
inlet,  and,  finding  no  passage  through,  set  out  for
Bering  strait,  which  he  reached  early  in  the  sum-
mer of  1778,  but  was  stopped  by  an  impassable
barrier  of  ice.  Having  carefully  surveyed  the
Aleutian  group,  and  determined  the  most  west-
erly point  of  America  and  its  distance,  he  reached
the  point  still  known  by  the  name  he  gave  it.
Icy  cape,  18  Aug.,  1778,  and  did  not  turn  back
till  the  end  of  the  month,  having  found  it  impos-
sible to  proceed.  Returning  to  the  Sandwich
islands  to  prepare  for  another  attempt  northward
the  next  year,  he  discovered  Hawaii,  the  largest
of  the  group,  and  Maui.  He  cruised  about  Hawaii
several  weeks,  and  found  the  natives  peaceably
disposed  but  addicted  to  stealing.  One  of  the
boats  having  been  stolen  on  the  night  of  13  Feb.,
1779,  Cook  determined  to  seize  the  person  of  the
king  and  hold  him  xmtil  the  boat  should  be  re-
turned or  reparation  made.  With  a  lieutenant  and
nine  men  he  went  on  shore  for  the  purpose  on  14
Feb.  He  succeeded  in  bringing  the  king  nearly  to  the
boats,  when  the  chieftain's  suspicions  were  aroused
and  he  refused  to  embark.  His  wives,  who  were
near  at  hand,  set  up  a  lamentation,  and  a  shot
from  one  of  the  boats,  fired  to  prevent  a  canoe
leaving  the  bay,  accidentally  killed  a  chief.  The
barbarians,  aroused  to  fury,  rushed  upon  Cook  and
his  men.  Four  of  the  marines  attending  him  were
instantly  killed,  the  rest  were  obliged  to  retreat
to  the  boats,  and  Cook,  who  was  the  last  to  retire,
was  overpowered  and  slain.  His  body  and  those
of  the  marines  were  afterward  cut  up  by  the  sav-
ages and  probably  devoured,  only  the  bones  of
the  great  navigator  being  recovered  seven  days
later, and buried in the sea. The account of


716


COOK


COOK


Cook's  first  voyage  was  published  under  the  di-
rection of  Dr.  Uawkesworth  ;  his  second  was
chronicled  by  himself;  while  the  third  was  pre-
pared from  his  journal  by  Lieut.  King.  The  charts
and  plates  illustrating  the  last  were  executed  at
the  expense  of  the  government,  and  half  the
profits  of  the  work  were  given  to  his  family.  A
narrative  of  the  third  voyage  was  also  published  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  by  John  Ledyard,  who  accom-
panied the  expedition.  Distinguished  honors  were
paid  to  his  memory,  and  a  medal  in  commemora-
tion of  him  was  struck  by  order  of  the  Royal
society.  His  widow  received  a  pension  of  £200
per  annum,  and  each  of  his  children  £25.

COOK,  James  Merrill,  financier,  b.  in  Ballston,
N.  Y.,  19  Nov.,  1807;  d.  in  Saratoga,  12  April,
1868.  His  father  was  a  lawyer  and  judge  in  Sara-
toga county,  and  offered  James  a  liberal  education.
But  the  son  preferred  the  counting-room  to  the  col-
lege, and  devoted  some  years  to  a  clerkship  in  New
York  city.  When  he  was  about  thirty-one  years  of
age  he  was  elected  to  a  local  office  in  his  native
town.  His  ardent  support  of  whig  principles
brought  him  followers,  and  he  was  chosen  to  many
town  and  county  offices  during  the  succeeding  ten
years.  He  was  a  member  of  the  constitutional  con-
vention in  1846,  and  a  member  of  the  state  senate
in  1848-'51,  and  again  in  1864-'5.  In  1851  he  re-
ceived a  certificate  as  state  treasurer,  and  dis-
charged the  duties  of  the  office  for  about  a  year,
when  the  claims  of  his  competitor  in  the  election
were  established,  and  he  retired.  During  1854-'5
he  filled  the  office  of  state  comptroller  with  such
marked  ability  that  it  resulted  in  his  being  offered
the  superintendency  of  the  banking  department  of
the  state.  In  order  to  accept  the  office,  it  was
necessary  for  him  to  divest  himself  of  all  interest  in
any  banks  in  the  state,  and  he  was  president  of  the
Ballston  Spa  bank,  having  been  one  of  the  original
corporators,  and  the  owner  of  a  large  amount  of
stock  in  that  and  other  institutions.  At  the  solici-
tation of  capitalists  throughout  the  state,  he  sold
out  his  stock  and  accepted  the  office.  The  salary
had  been  but  $2,500,  but  was  by  act  of  legislature
increased  to  $5,000.  Mr.  Cook  served  from  30
Jan.,  1856,  till  16  April,  1861.  Frauds  were  de-
tected, worthless  banks  wound  up,  laws  improved,
guards  and  securities  multiplied.  To  such  an  ex-
tent was  his  policy  carried  out  that  the  financial
crisis  of  1857  did  not  affect  the  credit  of  the  state.
Though  specie  payments  in  the  United  States  were
generally  suspended,  the  paper  bills  of  New  York
state  banks  continued  to  pass  at  par  throughout
the  country.  His  last  report  as  superintendent  of
the  banking  department  of  New  York  called  out
elaborate  reviews  from  various  European  journals.
In  1858  his  name  was  prominently  before  the  re-
publican convention  as  a  candidate  for  governor,
but  at  his  own  solicitation  was  withdrawn.

COOK,  John,  Canadian  clergyman,  b.  in  San-
quhar, Dumfries-shire,  about  1810.  He  was  edu-
cated at  Edinburgh  university,  and  received  his
tlieological  training  under  Dr.  Chalmers ;  was  or-
dained by  the  presbytery  of  Dumbarton  in  1835,
in  the  year  following  arrived  in  Quebec,  and  shortly
afterward  was  appointed  pastor  of  St.  Andrew's
church  in  that  city.  When  the  disruption  took
place  in  1843,  he  retained  his  connection  with
the  Established  church  of  Scotland,  and  when
the  establishment  of  Queen's  college,  Kingston,
was  determined  upon,  he  exerted  himself  to  se-
cure the  necessary  endowment,  and  has  been  a
trustee  of  the  institution  ever  since.  In  1857  he
assumed  the  presidency  temporarily,  and  during
two  sessions  acted  as  professor  of  divinity. The


founding  of  Morin  college,  Quebec,  was  largly  due
to  his  efforts,  and  after  its  establishment  he  was
the  lecturer  on  divinity.  In  1861  he  proposed  reso-
lutions favoring  a  union  between  the  free  and  the
established  branches  of  the  Presbyterian  church,
and  in  1875  such  a  union  was  effected,  when  Dr.
Cook  was  moderator  of  the  first  general  assembly.
COOK,  Joseph,  author,  b.  in  Ticonderoga,  N.
Y.,  26  Jan.,  1838.  He  is  the  son  of  a  farmer.
When  he  was  nine  years  of  age  he  attended  an
auction  of  a  district-school  library,  and  purchased
every  book  of  merit  in  the  collection.  As  a  reward
for  good  scholarship  he  was  offered  his  choice  be-
tween a  watch  and  a  cyclopedia,  and  chose  the
latter.  He  entered  Yale  in  1858,  but,  his  health
becoming  impaired,  he  left  early  in  1861.  In  1863
he  entered  Harvard  as  a  junior,  and  was  graduated
in  1865,  not  only  receiving  high  honors,  but  carry-
ing off  several  prizes.  Mr.  Cook  then  studied  three
years  at  Andover,  adding  a  fourth  year  for  special
study  of  advanced  religious  and  philosophical
thought.  A  license  was  granted  to  him,  but  he
declined  all  invitations  to  any  settlement  as  pastor.
He  preached  in  Andover  during  1808-'70,  and  was
acting  pastor  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  in  1870-'l.  In  1871
he  went  to  Europe  and  studied  at  Halle,  Leipsic,
Berlin,  and  Heidelberg,  then  travelled  in  Italy,
Egypt,  Greece,  Turkey,  and  northern  Africa.  Ke-
turning  to  the  United  States  near  the  close  of
1873,  he  became  a  lecturer  on  the  relations  of  relig-
ion, science,  and  current  reform.  His  lectures  in
Tremont  temple,  Boston,  soon  became  widely
known  as  the  "  Boston  Monday  Lectures,"  and,  al-
though delivered  at  noonday,  they  drew  audiences
to  the  full  capacity  of  the  hall,  which  seats  3,000,
The  lectures  were  reported  in  many  newspapers,
and  were  afterward  issued  in  book-form.  Philoso-
phy, science,  and  politics  were  discussed,  and  so
great  was  their  popularity  that  a  series  was  pre-
pared for  general  delivery.  The  following  topics
were  selected,  and,  as  occasion  offered,  the  lectures
were  delivered  in  various  cities  of  the  United
States:  1.  "Does  Death  end  All?"  2.  "Seven
Modern  Wonders."  3.  "  Ultimate  America."  4.
"  Certainties  in  Religion."  5.  "  England  and
America  as  Competitors  and  Allies."  6.  "  Politi-
cal Signs  of  the  Times.'*  7.  "  Alcohol  and  the  Hu-
man Brain."  8.  "  Law  and  Labor,  Property  and
Poverty."  9.  "  God  in  Natural  Law."  10.  "  Re-
ligious Signs  of  the  Times."  11.  "  What  saves
Men,  and  Why  ?  "  12.  "  A  Night  on  the  Acropo-
lis." During  the  winter  of  1878-9  Mr.  Cook  eon-
ducted  a  Boston  Monday-noon  lectureship  and  a
New  York  Thursday-evening  lectureship,  besides
filling  a  large  number  of  engagements.  In  1880,
in  answer  to  invitations  from  abroad,  he  decided
to  make  a  lecturing  tour  around  the  world.  He
was  everywhere  received  with  immense  audiences.
He  made  135  public  appearances  in  Great  Britain,
passed  several  months  in  Germany  and  Italy,  and
went  to  India  by  way  of  Greece,  Palestine,  and
Egypt.  From  India  his  tour  extended  to  China,
Japan,  Australia,  New  Zealand,  and  the  Sandwich
islands,  returning  home  by  way  of  San  Francisco.
In  Japan  he  gave  twelve  lectures — six  in  English
and  six  through  an  interpreter — to  audiences  com-
posed chiefly  of  Japanese  students,  teachers,  and
public  men.  Mr.  Cook's  popularity  arises  from
the  fact  that  he  attempts  to  show  that  science
is  in  harmony  with  religion  and  the  Bible.  His
published  works  are  "  Biology  "  (Boston,  1877) ;
"  Transcendentalism  " (1877) ;  "  Orthodoxy" (1877);
"  Conscience  "  (1878) ;  "  Pleredity  "  (1878) ;  "  Mar-
riage" (1878);  "Labor"  (1879);  "Socialism"
(1880) ;  "  Occident  "  (1884) ;  "  Orient  "  (1886).


COOK


COOK


717


COOK,  Lemuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Plymouth,  Litch-
field CO.,  Conn.,  in  17(54;  d.  in  Clarendon,  N.  Y.,
20  May,  18(50.  He  entered  the  army  at  the  age
of  seventeen,  participated  in  the  campaign  against
Cornwallis  in  Virginia,  and  received  an  honorable
discharge  at  the  close  of  the  war.  signed  by  Gen.
Washington,  which  he  retained  until  his  death.
Soon  after  leaving  the  army  he  married  Hannah
Curtis,  of  Cheshire,  Conn.,  by  whom  he  had  eleven
children.  He  married  again  when  he  was  seventy
years  old.  In  his  earlier  married  years  he  was  a
farmer  near  Utica,  N.  Y. ;  during  the  last  thirty
years  of  his  life  he  lived  at  Clarendon.  His  pen-
sion for  many  years  was  $100  a  vear,  increased  in
18(53  to  1200,  and  the  last  year  of  his  life  to  $800.

COOK,  Marc,  author,  b.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  1
March,  1854 ;  d.  in  Utica,  N.  Y.,  4  Oct.,  1882.  He
was  a  son  of  the  Rev.  Theodore  Dwight  Cook,  a
Universalist  clergyman.  His  early  education  was
received  in  the  public  schools  of  Utica ;  but  before
he  had  learned  to  write  he  showed  his  precocity  by
dictating  verses  and  stories  to  the  older  boys.  A
few  years  later  he  established  a  semi-monthly  paper,
entitled  "The  Boy's  Companion,"  which  was  fol-
lowed by  "  The  Enterprise,"  a  monthly  of  more
pretentious  character,  the  joint  production  of  him-
self and  E.  M.  Rewey.  He  entered  Hamilton
college  at  the  age  of  sixteen,  but  did  not  complete
his  course.  While  there  he  wrote  "To  a  Pretty
Schoolma'am,"  and  other  poems,  which  were  wide-
ly copied.  In  1874  he  left  college  and  devoted  him-
self to  journalism.  In  1879  he  made  the  experi-
ment of  a  prolonged  sojourn  in  the  Adirondacks
for  the  cure  of  consumption,  and  as  a  result  of  sev-
enteen months'  experience  published  "  Camp  Lou  "
in  "Harper's  Magazine"  for  May,  1881,  which  at-
tracted wide  attention  and  was  expanded  into
"  The  Wilderness  Cure  "  (New  York,  1881).  Many
of  his  vers  de  societe  had  appeared  uiider  the  pen-
name  of  Vandike  Brown,  and  his  widow  collected  a
sufficient  number  to  fill  a  volume,  and  published  it
under  that  title  (Boston,  1883).— His  brother,  Theo-
dore Pease,  journalist,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  21
Dec,  1844,  entered  the  army  at  the  age  of  eighteen
and  served  through  the  civil  war,  being  finally  on
the  staff  of  Gen.  John  C.  Robinson.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  law-school  in  1867.  but  devoted
himself  to  journalism  in  Utica.  During  the  presi-
dential canvass  of  1870  he  wrote  the  "  Lives  of  Til-
den  and  Plendrieks"  (New  York,  1870).  The  best
known  of  his  poems  are  "  Blue-Beard  "  and  "  An
Ode  for  Decoration-Dav  "  (1872).

COOK,  Martha  Elizabeth  Duncan  Walker,
author,  b.  in  Northumberland,  Pa.,  23  July,  1800 ;
d.  in  Hoboken,  N.  J.,  15  Sept.,  1874.  She  was  a  sis-
ter of  Robert  J.  Walker,  secretary  of  the  treasury,
and  was  educated  by  her  father.  She  married  at
the  age  of  eighteen  Lieut,  (afterward  General)
William  Cook.  Mrs.  Cook  was  for  nearly  two
years,  1863-4,  editor  of  the  " Continental  Month-
ly," published  in  New  York,  and  contributed  many
poems,  sketches,  and  tales  to  that  periodical.  She
was  a  good  linguist,  and  translated  several  works
from  the  German  and  French.  Among  these  were
Liszt's  "  Life  of  Chopin,"  translated  from  the
French  (Philadelphia,  1803) :  "  The  Undivine  Com-
edy, and  Other  Poems,"  by  (iJount  Sigismund  Kra-
sinski,  translated  from  the  Polish  through  the  Ger-
man and  French  (1875) ;  and  "  Life  of  Joan  of
Are,"  from  the  German  of  Guido  Goerres,  pub-
lished as  a  serial  in  the  "  Freeman's  Journal."

COOK,  Philip,  soldier,  b.  in  Twiggs  county,
Ga.,  31  July,  1817.  He  was  educated  at  Oglethorpe
university,  studied  law  at  the  University  of  Vir-
ginia, was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  practised  his


profession  in  Americus,  Ga.  In  1859,  1860,  and
1803  he  served  in  the  state  senate.  He  entered  the
Confederate  service  in  April,  1861,  as  a  private,
and  before  the  end  of  the  war  had  risen  to  a  briga-
dier-generalship. In  1805  he  was  elected  to  con-
gress, but  was  not  allowed  to  take  his  seat,  by  rea-
son of  the  "disability  clause,"  incurred  by  his
taking  up  arms  against  the  Union.  After  the  re-
peal of  the  law  creating  this  clause  he  was  elected
to  congress  three  times,  serving  from  1  Dec,  1873,
till  3  March,  1879.

COOK,  Russell  S.,  secretary  of  the  American
tract  society,  b,  in  New  Marlborough,  Berkshire
CO.,  Mass.,  6  March,  1811 ;  d.  in  Pleasant  Valley,
N.  Y.,  4  Sept.,  1804.  His  early  life  was  devoted  to
study.  On  arriving  at  manhood  he  entered  a  law-
yer's otfice  in  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  but  soon  changed
his  choice  of  a  profession  and  entered  the  theo-
logical seminary  at  Auburn,  and,  after  graduation,
was  ordained  pastor  of  the  Congregational  church
in  Lanesboro',  Mass.,  in  1830.  In  1838,  his  voice
failing,  he  became  connected  with  the  American
tract  society,  and  in  May,  1839,  was  elected  one  of
the  corresponding  secretaries,  filling  the  office  for
eighteen  years.  His  first  efforts  were  directed  to
the  expansion  of  the  volume  circulation,  and  in
three  and  a  half  years  he  succeeded  in  distributing
800,000  volumes.  In  1841,  that  he  might  meet  the
wants  of  remote  neighborhoods,  Mr.  Cook  began
what  was  afterward  developed  into  the  system  of
American  colportage.  With  this  great  work  he
was  wholly  identified,  devoting  to  it  his  untiring
energies:  and  so  successfully  that,  in  1850,  after
fifteen  years,  the  society  had  on  its  list  547  colpor-
teurs, besides  115  students  who  labored  only  during
vacations.  Its  current  receipts  had  increased  from
$131,000  in  1839  to  $415,000  in  1850.  He  estab-
lished in  1843  the  "  American  Messenger,"  a  month-
ly publication,  with  a  German  edition,  the  "  Bot-
schafter."  This  was  soon  followed  by  the  "  Child's
Paper,"  the  first  of  illustrated  papers  for  children.
The  monthly  issue  of  these  periodicals  soon  reached
an  aggregate  of  500,000  copies.  In  1853  and  1856
he  went  to  Europe  and  established  his  system  of
colportage  in  Scotland.  Failing  health  obliged
him  to  give  up  his  labors  as  secretary  in  1857 ;  but,
somewhat  regaining  his  vigor,  he  afterward  became
identified  with  various  religious  undertakings,  and
labored  with  unabated  resolution  to  the  last.

COOK,  Valentine,  clergyman,  b.  in  Pennsylva-
nia in  1765 ;  d.  in  Logan  county,  Ky.,  in  1820.  His
father  removed  to  western  Virginia  when  Valen-
tine was  a  child.  He  became  a  convert  to  Meth-
odism at  an  early  age,  and  immediately  began
preaching.  His  father  sent  him  to  Cokesbury  col-
lege, but  at  the  end  of  a  year  or  two  he  returned
home,  and  in  1788  began  itinerant  labors,  and  in
1794  became  presiding  elder.  About  1796  he  origi-
nated the  custom  of  calling  anxious  sinners  to  the
front  to  be  prayed  for,  which  afterward  became
universal  in  the  "Methodist  denomination.  In  1798
he  moved  to  Kentucky,  and  there  married  a  niece
of  Gov.  Slaughter.  In  1799  he  took  charge  of
Bethel  seminary,  and  was  afterward  for  some  time
principal  of  Harrodsburg  academy,  finally  settling
in  Logan  county.  In  1819  he  made  a  preaching-
tour  to  the  east  on  horseback,  visiting  Lexington,
Cincinnati,  Pittsburg,  New  York,  Philadelphia,
and  Baltimore.  He  possessed  rare  power  as  a
preacher,  and  instituted  revivals  wherever  ho
went,  but  was  erratic  in  his  maimer  and  negligent
in  his  dress.  He  was  well  versed  in  German,  and
on  one  occasion  stayed  with  a  German  family,  who,
ignorant  of  his  knowledge,  indulged  in  many  un-
complimentary remarks  about  him. Before re-


718


COOK


COOKE


tiring  for  the  night  he  asked  permission  to  pray,
began  his  invocation  in  English,  and  then  changed
to  Grennan.  Consternation  seized  the  members  of
the  household  when  they  recalled  their  remarks,
and  tliey  fled,  leaving  him  to  care  for  himself.

COOK,  Zebedee,  insurance  manager,  b.  in  New-
buryport,  Mass.,  11  Jan.,  1786;  d.  in  Framingham,
24  Jan.,  1858.  At  an  early  age  he  went  to  Bos-
ton to  seek  his  fortune.  He  first  entered  on  a
mercantile  career,  but  in  1815  turned  his  attention
to  insurance,  and  was  among  the  first  to  introduce
into  this  country  the  system  known  as  "mutual
insurance."  He  was  made  president  in  1823  of
'the  Eagle  insurance  company,  and  held  the  office
until  1828.  During  the  next  ten  years  he  devel-
oped his  ideas  so  thoroughly  that  in  1838  he  was
invited  to  New  York  to  become  president  of  the
Mutual  safety  insurance  company,  the  first  estab-
lished in  that  city  on  the  system  of  a  division  of
profits  between  the  insurers  and  the  insured.  The
business  transacted  was  entirely  marine.  While
Mr.  Cook  was  a  resident  of  Boston  he  was,  in  ad-
dition to  his  business  requirements,  deeply  inter-
ested in  horticulture  and  rural  improvements.  By
an  article  published  9  Jan.,  1829,  in  the  "  New-
England  Farmer,"  he  gave  the  first  impulse  to  the
formation  of  the  Massachusetts  horticultural  soci-
ety. On  24  Feb.  a  meeting  was  held  in  his  office,
and  the  society  was  incorporated  on  12  June.
Gen.  Dearborn  was  the  first  president,  and  Mr.
Cook  vice-president.  On  the  resignation  of  Gen.
Dearborn  in  1834,  Mr.  Cook  was  elected  to  the
vacancy.  By  his  efforts  the  Isabella  grape  was  in-
troduced into  New  England.  He  procured  the
cuttings  and  began  the  culture.  He  served  in  the
Massachusetts  legislature  from  1835  till  1839.
After  nearly  twenty  years'  residence  and  business
in  New  York,  he  retired,  at  the  age  of  seventy-one,
to  Framingham,  Mass.

COOKE,  Amos  Starr,  missionary,  b.  in  Dan-
bury,  Conn.,  1  Dec,  1810 ;  d.  in  Honolulu,  Sand-
wich islands,  20  March,  1871.  He  was  graduated
at  Yale  in  1834,  entered  the  service  of  the  Ameri-
can board  of  commissioners  for  foreign  missions  in

1836,  and  arrived  at  the  Sandwich  islands  in  April,

1837,  where,  in  June,  1839.  he  took  charge  of  the
education  of  the  royal  family  and  nobility.  He
retained  the  direction  of  the  royal  school  for  ten
years,  educating  the  last  two  Kamehamehas,  and
doing  nmch  toward  shaping  their  characters,

COOKE,  Edward,  educator,  b.  in  Bethlehem,
N.  H.,  19  Jan.,  1812.  He  was  graduated  at  Wes-
leyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1838,  and
taught  natural  science  in  Amenia  seminary,  N.  Y.,
from  1838  till  1840,  when  he  became  principal  of
the  newly  established  seminary  at  Pennington,
N.  J.  From  1847  till  1853  he  was  pastor  of  Meth-
odist churches  in  and  near  Boston,  and  in  1853
became  president  of  Lawrence  university,  Apple-
ton,  Wis.  While  holding  this  office  he  was  one  of
the  first  to  become  interested  in  the  education  of
the  northwestern  Indians.  In  1857- '60  he  was  one
of  the  regents  of  normal  schools  in  Wisconsin.
Harvard  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1855,
and  on  his  return  to  Massachusetts,  ni  1861,  he  be-
ciime  one  of  the  board  of  examiners  of  that  college,
and  pastor  of  the  Cambridge  Methodist  church.
From  1864  till  1874  he  was  principal  of  the  Wes-
leyan  academy  at  Wilbraham,  Mass.,  and  from  that
year  till  1884  president  of  Claflin  university  and
State  agricultural  college  at  Orangeburg,  S.  C.  In
tlie  latter  year  he  resigned  on  account  of  ill  health,
and  has  since  resided  at  Newton  Centre,  Mass.

COOKE,  Edwin  Francis,  soldier,  b.  in  Brook-
lyn, Susquehanna  eo.,  Pa.,  11  Sept.,  1835; d.  in


Santiago,  Chili,  6  Aug.,  1867.  He  was  educated  at
Mount  Retirement  seminary,  Deckertown,  N.  J.
He  entered  the  national  service  at  the  beginning
of  the  civil  war  as  a  captain  in  the  2d  New  York
light  cavalry,  rose  to  the  command  of  his  regiment,
and  finally  became  chief  of  staff"  in  Gen.  Kilpat-
rick's  cavalry  division.  In  1863  he  was  associated
with  Col.  Dahlgren  in  command  of  the  force  that
was  sent  to  enter  Richmond  from  the  south,  and
his  horse  was  killed  under  him  by  the  same  volley
that  terminated  Dahlgren's  life.  Being  taken  pris-
oner, he  was  confined  for  several  months  in  one  of
the  underground  cells  in  Libby  prison,  where  he
lost  his  health.  From  Libby  prison  he  was  sent  to
other  prisons  in  South  Carolina  and  Georgia.  lie
once  succeeded  in  escaping,  but,  after  wandering
two  months  through  South  and  North  Carolina,
was  recaptured.  He  was  finally  exchanged  in
March,  1864,  and  on  13  March,  1865,  was  brevet-
ted  brigadier-general  of  volunteers.  He  accepted
the  office  of  secretary  to  the  Chilian  legation,  in
the  vain  hope  that  the  climate  might  benefit  his
health,  received  his  commission  on  11  Nov.,  1865,
and  remained  in  Santiago  till  disease,  induced  by
his  imprisonment,  terminated  his  life.

COOKE,  Eleutheros,  congressman,  b.  in  Gran-
ville, N.  Y.,  25  Dec,  1787 ;  d.  in  Sandusky,  Ohio,
27  Dec,  1864.  His  name  was  given  him  in  com-
memoration of  the  framing  of  the. Federal  consti-
tution in  1787,  the  year  of  his  birth.  After  receiv-
ing a  liberal  education,  he  studied  law  and  began
practice  in  Granville,  but  removed  in  1817  to
Madison,  Ind.,  in  1819  to  Bloomingville,  Ohio,  and
in  1820  to  Sandusky,  where  he  rose  to  the  front
rank  of  his  profession.  He  was  for  several  years  a
member  of  the  legislature,  and  was  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  whig,  serving  one  term,  from  1831  till
1833.  He  was  a  candidate  for  re-election,  and  re-
ceived a  majority  of  the  votes  cast,  but  was  defeated
on  a  technicality.  While  he  was  in  congress,  Mr.
Stanberry,  of  Ohio,  was  assaulted  on  the  street  by
Gen.  Houston,  in  consequence  of  remarks  made  on
the  floor  of  the  house.  In  bringing  the  matter
before  congress,  Mr.  Cooke  said  that  if  he  and  his
friends  were  denied  protection  by  that  body,  he
would  "  flee  to  the  bosom  of  his  constituents,"  and
this  expression  was  taken  up  by  his  political  oppo-
nents and  remained  a  catch-word  for  some  time.
Mr.  Cooke  was  the  pioneer  of  railroad  enterprise  in
the  west,  having  been  the  projector  of  the  Mad
River  railroad,  now  the  Sandusky,  Dayton  and  Cin-
cinnati railroad. — His  son.  Jay,  banker,  b.  in  San-
dusky, Ohio,  10  Aug.,  1821,  went  in  1838  to  Phila-
delphia, where  he  entered  the  banking-house  of  E.
W.  Clark  &  Co.  as  a  clerk,  and  became  a  partner
in  1842.  He  retired  in  1858,  and  in  1861  estab-
lished a  new  firm  of  which  he  was  the  head.
Through  the  influence  of  Salmon  P.  Chase,  Mi'.
Cooke's  personal  friend,  this  house  became  the
government  agent  for  the  placing  of  the  war  loans,
and  by  his  success  in  negotiating  them  Mr.  Cooke
contributed  materially  to  the  success  of  the  nii-
tional  cause.  After  the  war  the  firm  acted  fis
agents  for  the  Northern  Pacific  railroad,  and  its
suspension  in  1873,  growing  out  of  its  connection
with  that  enterprise,  was  one  of  the  causes  of  the
financial  panic  of  that  year.  Mr.  Cooke  subse-
quently resumed  business  with  success. — Another
son,  Henry  D.,  journalist,  b,  in  Sandusky,  Ohio,
23  Nov.,  1825 ;  d.  in  Georgetown,  D,  C,  29  Feb.,
1881,  was  graduated  at  Transylvania  university,
Kentucky,  in  1844,  and  began  the  study  of  the
law,  but  soon  turned  his  attention  to  writing  for
the  press.  In  1847  he  sailed  for  Valparaiso,  Chili,
as  an  attache,  to  the  American  consul  there,  but


COOKE


COOKE


719


was  siiipwrecked.  Being  detained  at  St.  Thomas
after  the  wreck,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  a  steam-
ship line  from  New  York  to  California  via  the
isthmus  of  Panama,  and  wrote  concerning  it  to  the
Philadelphia  "  United  States  Gazette "  and  the
New  York  "  Courier  and  Enquirer."  The  atten-
tion of  the  state  department  was  called  to  the  cor-
respondence by  Consul  W.  G.  Moorhead,  and  in
about  two  years  the  Pacific  mail  steamship  com-
pany was  organized.  Mr.  Cooke  afterward  lived
in  California,  where  he  was  actively  connected  with
shi{)ping  interests.  He  was  the  first  to  announce
to  the  authorities  at  Washington,  through  a  des-
patch from  the  military  governor  of  California,  the
discovery  of  gold  in  the  Sacramento  valley.  Be-
coming involved  by  suretyship  for  a  reckless  specu-
lator, he  lost  his  fortune,  and  returned  to  Sandusky
in  comparative  poverty.  He  then  engaged  in
journalism,  becoming  one  of  the  owners  of  the
Sandusky  "  Register,"  and  afterward  of  the  Colum-
bus "  State  Journal."  In  1856  he  was  a  presi-
dential elector,  and  in  1861  became  a  partner  in
the  house  of  Jay  Cooke  &  Co.  He  was  appointed
the  first  governor  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  but
resigned  in  1878.  The  last  twenty  years  of  his
life  were  spent  in  Georgetown,  where  he  was  noted
for  his  benefactions.  He  built  a  mission  church
in  that  city,  gave  $20,000  toward  an  Episcopal
church,  and  made  other  gifts  for  public  benefit.

COOKE,  EHsha,  politician,  b.  in  Boston,  Mass.,
16  Sept.,  1687 ;  d.  31  Oct.,  1715.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1057.  After  serving  as  an  as-
sistant under  the  old  government,  he  was  sent  to
England  in  1689  as  the  agent  of  Massachusetts  for
the  restoration  of  the  charter.  Being  unwilling  to
submit  to  any  abridgment  of  the  liberties  of  the
people,  he  opposed  the  new  charter  in  1691.  He
was  elected  councillor  in  1693,  and  rejected  by
Gov.  Phipps,  but  was  re-elected  in  1694,  and  con-
tinued in  the  council  till  1703,  when  Gov.  Dudley
negatived  his  election,  continuing  to  do  so  for
several  years  in  succession.  He  was  a  physician
by  profession,  and  was  highly  esteemed  as  such.
He  served  in  places  of  public  trust  over  forty
years. — His  son,  Elislia,  b.  in  Boston,  20  Dec,
1678;  d.  24  Aug.,  1737,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1697.  He  was  a  representative  to  the  general
court  from  1713  till  1734,  and  in  the  former  year
opposed  a  public  bank.  He  was  elected  to  the
council  in  1717,  took  the  popular  side  against  Gov.
Shute,  and,  on  his  re-election  in  1718,  was  informed
by  that  magistrate  tliat  "  his  attendance  at  the
board  would  be  excused."  In  1720  he  was  elected
speaker  of  the  house  of  representatives,  but  was
rejected  by  the  governor,  who  dissolved  the  assem-
bly when  it  refused  to  admit  his  right  to  control
its  action.  He  was  agent  for  the  province  in  Lon-
don in  1728,  and  was  again  chosen  to  the  council
in  May,  1726,  soon  after  his  return.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  justice  of  the  court  of  common  pleas  in
Suffolk  county  in  1780.  Mr.  Cooke  was  long  the
leader  of  the  popular  party  in  the  province,  and
published  several  political  tracts.

COOKE,  Geor§:e  Frederick,  English  actor,  b.
in  Westminster,  17  April,  1756;  d.  in  New  York,
26  Sept.,  1812.  His  father,  an  Irish  captain  of  dra-
goons, died  soon  after  his  birth,  and  he  removed
with  his  mother  to  Berwick-upon-Tweed,  where  he
was  apprenticed  to  a  printer.  A  strolling  com-
pany interested  him  in  the  theatre,  and,  after  fre-
quently taking  part  in  private  theatricals,  he  left
his  trade  in  1771,  and  in  1776  made  his  first  public
appearance  in  Brentford  in  the  tragedy  of  ''  Jane
Shore."  After  acting  with  various  provincial
companies  he  made his  first  decided  success  at


Manchester  in  1784.  He  joined  the  Dublin  com-
pany in  1794,  became  the  hero  of  the  stage  there
and  in  Cork  and  Manchester,  and  in  1800  played
Richard  III.  with  success  at  Covent  Garden  thea-
tre, London.  For  ten  years  he  was  the  rival  of
John  Kemble,  and  played  both  in  tragedy  and
comedy  in  the  largest  cities  in  Great  Britain,  his
most  popular  char-
acters being  Rich-
ard III.,  Shylock,
lago.  Sir  Giles
Overreach,  Kitely,
and  Sir  Pertinax
Macsycophant.  He
sailed  for  the  United
States  in  1810,  and
appeared,  on  21  Oct.,
as  Richard  III.  be-
fore 2,000  specta-
tors in  the  Park
theatre.  New  York,
Here,  before  the
play  began,  he  re-
quested the  audi-  '  ^  ■'.,.'■
ence  to  stand  while

"  God  Save  the  King  "  should  be  played,  and  finally
carried  his  point,  calmly  taking  snuff  during  the
tumult  that  followed  his  demand.  His  conduct  was
equally  capricious  at  Philadelphia  and  Baltimore  ;
but  his  acting,  which  was  the  finest  that  had  been
seen  in  this  country,  attracted  large  audiences.  His
inveterate  habits  of  intemperance,  which  had  long
vexed  his  managers,  finally  terminated  his  life.  He
is  buried  in  St.  Paul's  churchyard.  New  York  city,
where  a  monument  was  erected  to  his  memory  by
Edmund  Kean  in  1821.  It  was  repaired  by  Charles
Kean  in  1846,  and  again  by  Edward  A.  Sothern  in
1874.  The  inscription,  written  by  the  poet  Hal-
leck,  includes  the  couplet :

"  Three  kingdoms  claim  his  birth,
Both  hemispheres  pronounce  his  worth."
Kean  considered  Cooke  the  greatest  of  modem
actors,  Garrick  alone  excepted.  His  memoirs  were
written  by  William  Dunlap  (2  vols.,  London,  1813),
and  Dunlap's  novel,  "  Thirty  Years  Ago "  (1836),
contains  notes  of  his  conversation  and  many  inci-
dents of  his  life  and  character.

COOkE,  John  P.,  musician,  b,  in  Chester,  Eng-
land, 31  Oct.,  1820 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  4  Nov.,
1865.  His  father  was  a  musician  and  actor.  After
leading  the  orchestra  of  the  Adelphi,  the  Strand,
and  Astley's,  London,  he  came  in  1850  to  New  York
as  leader  at  Burton's  theatre  in  Chambers  street,
and  was  afterward  musical  director  at  several
other  New  York  theatres.  He  composed  and  ar-
ranged music  for  the  "  Winter's  Tale,"  "  Midsum-
mer Night's  Dream,"  and  other  Shakespearian  plays,
and  when  engaged  at  the  Old  Broadway  theatre
wrote  melodies  for  the  "  Sea  of  Ice,"  which  added
much  to  its  success.  He  also  composed  several
pieces  that  have  been  thought  worthy  of  m.ore
pretentious  musicians.

COOKE,  John  Rogers,  lawyer,  b.  in  Bermuda
in  1788;  d.  in  Richmond,  Va.,  10  Dec,  1854.  He
practised  law  in  V^irginia  with  distinction  for
more  than  forty  years,  and  during  that  time  was
concerned  in  nearly  all  the  great  cases  carried  to
the  higher  courts  of  that  state.  He  held  a  com-
mission, in  1807,  in  the  Frederick  troop  that
marched  to  the  seaboard  when  the  "  Chesapeake  "
was  fired  upon,  and  in  1814  he  was  a  member  of
the  legislature.  In  1829  he  was  a  member  of  the
convention  that  framed  the  constitution  of  Vir-
ginia, and  served,  with  Chief-Justice  Marshall,  ex-
President  Madison,  and  John  Randolph,  on  the


720


COOKE


COOKE


committee  of  seven  that  drafted  that  instrument.
He  possessed  a  vigorous  and  penetrating  mind,
and  has  been  called  "  the  model  of  lofty  courtesy,
chivalry,  and  generosity." — His  brother,  PhiHp
St.  George,  soldier,  b.  near  Leesburg,  Va.,  13
June,  1809,  after  studying  at  the  Academy  of
Martinsburg,  Va.,  entei-ed  the  U.  S.  military  acade-
my, where  he  was  graduated  in  1827,  and  was  as-
signed to  the  6th  infantry.  Jle  was  stationed  for
many  years  on  the  frontier,  and  in  the  Black  Hawk
war  was  adjutant  of  his  regiment  at  the  battle  of
Bad  Axe  River.  2  Aug.,  1832.  He  became  first  lieu-
tenant in  the  1st  dragoons  on  4  March,  1833,  and
captain  on  31  May,  1835.  He  escorted  a  party  of
Santa  Fe  traders  to  the  Arkansas  river  in  1843,
and  on  30  June  of  that  year  captured  a  Texan
military  expedition.  During  the  Mexican  war  he
commanded  a  Missouri  volunteer  battalion  in  Cali-
fornia from  1846  till  1847,  and  in  1848  a  regiment
in  the  city  of  Mexico,  having  been  promoted  to
major  on  16  Feb.,  1847,  and  brevetted  lieutenant-
colonel  on  20  Feb.,  for  his  conduct  in  California.
Afterward  he  was  engaged  in  various  Indian  expe-
ditions, commanding  the  cavalry  in  the  action  at
Blue  Water,  3  Sept.,  1855.  He  commanded  in  Kan-
sas during  the  troubles  there  in  1856-'7,  perform-
ing that  delicate  duty  to  the  satisfaction  of  all,
and  was  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  in  the  Utah
expedition  of  1857-8,  becoming  colonel  of  the  2d
dragoons  on  14  June,  1858.  In  1859  he  prepared
a  new  system  of  cavalry  tactics,  which  was  adopt-
ed for  the  service  in  November,  1861  (revised  ed.,
1883).  In  June,  1861,  Col.  Cooke  published  a  let-
ter in  which  he  declared  that  he  owed  allegiance
to  the  general  government  rather  than  to  his  na-
tive state  of  Virginia.  He  was  promoted  to  briga-
dier-general on  12  Nov.,  1861,  and  commanded  all
the  regular  cavalry  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac
during  the  peninsular  campaign,  particularly  in  the
siege  of  Yorktown,  and  the  battles  of  Williamsburg,
Gaines's  Mills,  and  Glendale.  He  sat  on  courts-mar-
tial in  1862-'3,  commanded  the  Baton  Rouge  dis-
trict till  1864,  and  till  1866  was  general  superin-
tendent of  the  recruiting  service.  He  was  at  the
head  of  the  Department  of  the  Platte  in  1866-'7,
of  that  of  the  Cumberland  in  1869-70,  and  of  the
Department  of  the  Lakes  from  1870  till  1873.  On
?9  Oct.,  1873,  he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list,
having  been  in  active  service  more  than  forty-five
years.  Gen.  Cooke  has  published  "  Scenes  and  Ad-
ventures in  the  Army"  (Philadelphia,  1856),  and
"  The  Conquest  of  New  Mexico  and  California  ;  an
Historical  and  Personal  Narrative"  (1878).  His
daughter  married  Gen.  J.  E.  B.  Stuart,  the  Con-
federate cavalry  leader. — John  Rogers's  son,  Philip
Pendleton,  poet,  b.  in  Martinsburg,  Va.,  26  Oct.,
1816 ;  d.  20  Jan.,  1850,  was  graduated  at  Princeton
in  1834,  and  studied  law  with  his  father.  Before
he  was  of  age  he  had  begun  practice.  He  had  little
partiality  for  his  profession,  and  devoted  himself
to  literature  and  to  field  sports,  of  which  he  was
very  fond.  Before  his  death  he  was  famous  as  the
greatest  huntsman  in  the  Shenandoah  valley.  He
published  several  poems  in  the  "Knickerbocker
Magazine  "  at  an  early  period,  and  became  a  con-
tributor to  the  '•  Southern  I^iterary  Messenger  "  on
its  establishment.  Mr.  Cooke  was  stately  and  im-
pressive in  manner,  and  a  brilliant  talker.  His
only  publication  in  book-form  was  "  Froissart  Bal-
lads, and  other  Poems  "  (Philadelphia,  1847).  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  publishing  serially  a
romance  entitled  "  Chevalier  Merlin."  His  short
lyrics,  "  Florence  Vane,"  "  To  My  Daughter  Lily,"
and  "  Rosa  Lee,"  were  very  popular.  The  first
named  has  been  translated  into  many  languages,


and  has  been  set  to  music  by  celebrated  composers.
Among  his  tales  are  "  John  Carpe,"  "  The  Crime  of
Andrew  Blair,"  and  "  The  Gregories  of  Hackwood."
—Another  son,  Jolin  Esten,  author,  b.  in  Winches-
ter, Va.,  3  Nov.,  1830 ;  d.  near  Bovce,  Clarke  co.,
Va.,  27  Sept.,  1886,  left  school  at  sixteen,  studied
law  with  his  father,  and,  after  practising  about
four  years,  devoted  himself  to  literature.  He  en-
tered the  Confederate  army  at  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war,  and  served  first  as  a  private  in  the
artillery  and  afterward  in  the  cavalry,  being  en-
gaged in  nearly  all  the  battles  in  Virginia,  most  of
the  time  as  a  member  of  Gen.  J.  E.  B.  Stuart's
staff.  At  Lee's  surrender  he  was  inspector-geneml
of  the  horse-artillery  of  the  Army  of  Northern  Vir-
ginia. His  writings  relate  almost  entirely  to  Vir-
ginia, and  describe  the  life,  manners,  and  history
of  the  people  of  that  state.  His  war -books  are
records  of  personal  observation  and  opinion.  In
a  letter  written  a  few  months  before  his  death  Mr.
Cooke  says :  "  I  still  write  stories  for  such  periodi-
cals as  are  inclined  to  accept  romance,  but  whether
any  more  of  my  work  in  that  field  will  appear  in
book-form  is  uncertain.  Mr.  Ilowells  and  the  other
realists  have  crowded  me  out  of  popular  regard  as
a  novelist,  and  have  brought  the  kind  of  fiction  I
write  into  gen-
eral disfavor.  I
do  not  complain
of  that,  for  they
are  right.  They
see,  as  I  do,  that
fiction  should
faithfully  re-
flect life,  and
they  obey  the
law,  while  I  can
not.  1  was  born
too  soon,  and  am
now  too  old  to
learn  my  trade
anew.  But  in
literature,  as  in
everything  else,  '

advance  should  _  y^ y

still  has  no  right . —^

to complain if

he  is  left  behind.  Besides,  the  fires  of  ambition
are  burned  out  of  me.  and  I  am  serenely  happy.
My  wheat-fields  are  green  as  I  look  out  from  the
porch  of  the  Briers,  the  corn  rustles  in  the  wind,
and  the  great  trees  give  me  shade  upon  the  lawn.
My  three  children  are  growing  up  in  such  nurture
and  admonition  as  their  race  has  always  deemed
fit,  and  I  am  not  only  content,  but  very  happy,
and  much  too  lazy  to  entertain  any  other  feeling
toward  my  victors  than  one  of  warm  friendship
and  sincere  approval."  His  publications  include
"Leather  Stocking  and  Silk,"  a  story  (New
York,  1854);  "The  Virginia  Comedians ""(2  vols.,
1854);  "The  Youth  of  Jefferson,"  based  on  the
letters  of  that  statesman  (1854) ;  "  Ellie,"  a  novel
(Richmond,  Va.,  1855) ;  "  The  Last  of  the  Forest-
ers "  (New  York,  1856) ;  "  Henry  St.  John,  Gentle-
man; a  Tale  of  1774-'5,"  sequel  to  the  "Come-
dians "  (1859) ;  "  Life  of  Stonewall  Jackson "
(Richmond,  1863 ;  enlarged  ed.,  New  York,  1876) ;
"  Surry  of  Eagle's  Nest,"  a  picture  of  military  in  •
cidents  in  the  Confederate  cavalry,  in  auto-bio-
graphical form,  purporting  to  be  "  from  MS.  of
Col.  Surry  "  (New  York,  1866) ;  "  Wearing  of  the
Gray "  (1867) ;  "  Mohun,  or  the  Last  Days  of  Lee
and  his  Paladins,"  sequel  to  the  foregoing  (1868);


COOKE


COOKE


721


"Fairfax  "  (1868) ;  "  Ililt  to  Ililt,"  a  romantic  story
of  1804  (1809) ;  "  Out  of  the  Foam  "  (1800) ;  "  Ham-
mer and  Rapier,"  war  sketches  (1870) ;  "  The  Heir
of  Graymount "  (1870) ;  "Life  of  Gen.  R.  E.  Lee"
(1871) ;  "  Dr.  Van  Dyke,"  a  story  of  Virginia  in
tlie  last  century  (1872) ;  "  Her  Majesty  the  Queen  "
(Philadelphia,  1873);  "Pretty  Mrs.  Gaston,  and
other  Stories  "  (New  York,  1874) ;  "  Justin  Harley  "
(Philadelphia,  1874) ;  "  Canolles,"  a  story  of  Corn-
wallis's  Virginia  campaign  (Detroit,  1877) ;  "  Pro-
fessor Pressensee,"  a  story  (New  York,  1878):
"  Mr.  Grantley's  Idea,"  "  Virginia  Bohemians,"  and
"  Stories  of  the  Old  Dominion  "  (1879) ;  "  Virginia ;
a  History  of  the  People"  (Boston,  1883);  "My
Lady  Pokahontas  "  (1884) ;  and  "  The  Maurice
Mystery"  (New  York,  1885).  Besides  these,  Mr.
Cooke  wrote  several  novels  not  issued  in  permanent
form,  and  a  mass  of  stories,  sketches,  and  verses
for  periodicals.  The  last  product  of  his  pen  was  an
article  written  for  this  work. — Philip  St.  George's
son,  John  R.,  entered  the  army  in  1855  as  second
lieutenant  of  the  8th  infantry,  became  first  lieu-
tenant, 28  Jan.,  1861,  and,  resigning  on  30  May,
entered  the  Confederate  service,  where  he  rose  to
the  rank  of  brigadier-general.

COOKE,  Josiah  Parsons,  chemist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  12  Oct.,  1827.  He  received  his  early  educa-
tion at  the  Boston  Latin-school,  and  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1848.  During  the  following  year
he  became  tutor  in  mathematics,  subsequently  in-
structor in  chemistry,  and  in  1850  Erving  professor
of  chemistry  and  mineralogy.  Under  his  direction
the  course  in  chemistry  has  been  developed  from  a
very  small  beginning  until  facilities  are  afforded
for  study  and  investigation  not  excelled  elsewhere.
Prof.  Cooke  was  the  first  to  introduce  laboratory
instruction  into  the  undergraduate  course  of  an
American  college ;  and  has  successfully  labored  to
render  the  inductive  methods  of  experimental  sci-
ence a  legitimate  means  of  liberal  culture  not  only
in  the  college  but  also  in  the  preparatory  school.
Prof.  Cooke's  work  has  been  largely  that  of  in-
structing, and,  in  addition  to  his  duties  at  Harvard,
he  has  given  courses  of  popular  lectures  in  Balti-
more, Brooklyn,  Lowell,  Washington,  and  Worces-
ter, besides  five  courses  at  the  Lowell  institute  in
Boston.  As  director  of  the  chemical  laboratory  of
Harvard  college,  he  has  published  numerous  con-
tributions to  chemical  science,  most  of  which  have
been  collected  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Chemical  and
Physical  Researches"
(1881),  which  includes
much  of  his  scien-
tific work.  The  inves-
tigation on  the  atomic
weight  of  antimony
(1880)  was  one  of  the
most  brilliant  and  per-
fect pieces  of  chemi-
cal work  ever  executed
in  this  country.  It  re-
ceived the  commenda-
tion of  chemists  both
in  the  United  States
and  Europe,  and  its
results  have  been  ac-
cepted. His  numerous
mineral  analyses,  with
descriptions  of  new
species,  have  appeared
in  the  "American  Journal  of  Sciences"  and  in  the
"  Proceedings  of  the  American  Academy  of  Sciences
and  Arts,"  with  both  of  which  journals  he  has  been
editorially  connected.  His  "  New  Chemistry  "  was
the  earliest  exposition  of  a  consistent  system  of
VOL.  I. — 46


'^•*^


\


/  -


\I\


'i\


%l2" «!


f-MTi^c*^


chemistry  based  on  the  principles  of  molecular
mechanics.  Its  philosophy  has  been  widely  ac-
cepted both  in  England  and  in  Germany,  and  the
book  has  been  translated  into  most  of  the  lan-
guages of  Europe.  Prof.  Cooke  is  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies.  In  1872  he  was  jelected
to  the  National  academy  of  sciences,  and  he  is  also
an  honorary  fellow  of  the  London  chemical  society,
a  distinction  which,  in  this  country,  is  shared  with
but  one  other.  In  1882  he  received  the  degree  of
LL.  D.  from  the  University  of  Cambridge,  England.
His  published  works  are  of  two  kinds.  The  scien-
tific includes  "  Chemical  Problems  and  Reactions  "
(Cambridge,  1857);  "Elements  of  Chemical  Phys-
ics "  (Boston,  1800) ;  "  First  Principles  of  Chemical
Philosophy  "  (1868 ;  revised  ed.,  1882) ;  and  "  The
New  Chemistry"  (New  York,  1872;  revised  ed.,
1884);  "Fundamental  Principles  of  Chemistry"
(Cambridge,  1880).  The  literary  comprise  "Re-
ligion and  Chemistry  "  (New  York,  1804)  and  "Sci-
entific Culture  and  other  Essays  "  (New  York,
1881 ;  with  additions,  1885).

COOKE,  Josiah  Piatt,  delegate  to  congress,  b.
in  Danbury,  Conn.,  in  1730;  d.  therein  1816.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1750,  and  was  a  delegate
from  his  state  to  congress  under  the  old  confedera-
tion from  1784  till  1788.

COOKE,  Nicholas,  governor  of  Rhode  Island,
b.  in  Providence,  3  Feb.,  1717 ;  d.  14  Sept.,  1782.
In  December,  1774,  he  was  one  of  the  committee
of  inspection  of  the  town  of  Providence,  a  body
invested  with  the  general  powers  of  a  committee
of  safety.  He  was  deputy-governor  from  May  till
October,  1775,  and  chairman  of  public  assemblies
at  Providence  on  numerous  occasions  during  that
exciting  period  of  the  revolution.  He  was  gov-
ernor from  October,  1775,  till  May,  1778.  The  in-
scription on  his  monument  in  Providence  says  he
"  merited  and  won  the  approbation  of  his  fellow-
citizens,  and  was  honored  with  the  friendship
and  confidence  of  Washington." — His  grandson,
Nicholas  Francis,  physician,  b.  in  Providence,
R.  L,  25  Aug.,  1829 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  1  Feb.,  1885,
entered  Brown  university  in  1846,  but  left  before
graduation,  studied  medicine  in  Providence,  and  in
1852  made  a  tour  of  the  world.  On  his  return  he
studied  in  the  medical  department  of  the  Univer-
sity of  Pennsylvania  and  at  Jefferson  medical
college,  but  soon  afterward  became  a  convert  to
homeopathy.  After  entering  into  partnership
with  Dr.  A.  H.  Okie,  of  Providence,  the  first
homoeopathic  graduate  in  the  United  States,  Dr.
Cooke  removed  to  Chicago  in  1855,  and  remained
there  till  his  death.  He  became  professor  of  chem-
istry in  Hahnemann  medical  college,  on  its  organi-
zation in  1859,  and  was  subsequently  transferred
to  the  chair  of  theory  and  practice.  He  resigned
in  1870,  and  in  1872  filled  for  one  session  the  chair
of  special  pathology  and  diagnosis  in  Pulte  medi-
cal college,  Cincinnati.  He  also  declined  profes-
sorships in  several  other  medical  colleges.  Dr.
Cooke  was  a  prominent  member  of  the  Protestant
Episcopal  church  till  about  1875,  when  he  became
a  Roman  Catholic.  He  was  particularly  skilful
in  diagnosis.  He  published  "Satan  in  Society"
(New  York,  1871)  and  "Antiseptic  Medication"
(Chicago.  1882),  besides  contributions  to  medical
periodicals,  including  an  able  article  on  "  Pancreas
Disease  "  in  the  "  Clinique  "  of  15  Nov.,  1884.

COOKE,  Parsons,  clergvman,  b.  in  Hadley,
Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1800 ;  d.  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  12  Feb.,
1864.  He  was  graduated  at  Williams  in  1822,
studied  theology  with  Dr.  Griffin,  at  that  time
president  of  Williams  college,  and  on  20  June,
1820,  was  ordained  pastor  of  a  newly  organized


722


COOKB


COOLEY


Congregational  church  in  Ware,  Mass.  He  re-
moved to  Portsmouth,  N.  H.,  in  1836,  and  a  few
months  afterward  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Con-
gregational church  in  Lynn,  Mass.,  where  he  re-
mained until  his  death.  The  financial  embarrass-
ment of  his  congregation,  occasioned  by  the  build-
ing of  a  new  church,  led  him  to  undertake,  in
1840,  the  editorship  of  the  "  New  England  Puri-
tan," published  in  Boston,  and  he  continued  in
journalism  from  the  conviction  that  he  could  be
useful  in  that  work.  The  "  Puritan  "  was  subse-
quently united  with  the  "  Recorder,"  of  which  Dr.
Cooke  became  senior  editor,  retaining  the  place
until  his  death.  Dr.  Cooke  was  strongly  Calvin-
istic  in  his  views,  constantly  opposed  the  new-
school  or  moderately  Calvinistic  Congregational-
ists,  and  occasionally  became  involved  in  discus-
sions with  other  denominations.  As  a  preacher,
he  was  doctrinal  rather  than  hortatory.  Williams
college  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1849.  His
publications  include  a  sermon  on  "  The  Exclu-
siveness  of  Unitarianism,"  the  cause  of  his  first
controversy  (1829);  a  "History  of  German  Ana-
baptism  " ;  "A  Century  of  Puritanism  and  a
Ceritury  of  its  Opposites  "  (Boston,  1857) ;  and  oc-
casional sermons  and  addresses.

COOKE,  Rose  Terry,  author,  b.  in  West  Hart-
ford, Conn.,  17  Feb.,  1827.  She  was  graduated  at
Hartford  female  seminary  in  1843,  and  married  R.
H.  Cooke,  of  Winsted,  Conn.,  in  1873.  She  has
published  "  Poems  by  Rose  Terry  "  (Boston,  1860) ;
"  Happy  Dodd  "  (1879) ;  "  Somebody's  Neighbors  "
(1881) ;  and  "  Root- Bound  "  and  "  The  Sphinx's
Children"  (1886).  She  has  written  many  short
magazine  stories,  some  of  them  humorous,  mainly
describing  New  England  life.  "The  Two  Vil-
lages "  is  her  best-known  poem.

COOKINS,  James,  artist,  b.  in  Terre  Haute,
Ind.,  about  1835.  After  studying  two  years  in
Munich,  he  opened  a  studio  in  Cincinnati  in  1861.
He  studied  again  in  Munich  from  1865  till  1870,
and  then  settled  in  Chicago,  111.  He  has  much
talent  as  a  landscape-painter,  and  his  illustrations
of  fairy  tales  show  great  power  of  invention.

COOKMAN,  George  Orimston,  clergyman,  b.
in  Hull,  England,  21  Oct.,  1800;  lost  at  sea  in
March,  1841.  He  came  to  the  United  States  on
business  in  1823,  and  while  here  became  convinced
that  it  was  his  duty  to  preach  the  gospel.  One  of
his  objects  in  coming  to  this  country  was  to  bear
some  humble  part  in  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves
of  the  south.  His  father  settled  him  in  business
in  England  and  was  anxious  to  detain  him  at
home ;  but  he  came  again  to  this  country  in  1825,
officiated  for  a  few  months  as  a  local  preacher  in
Philadelphia,  and  at  the  ensuing  session  of  the
Philadelphia  conference  in  1826  was  admitted  into
the  Methodist  ministry.  He  was  transferred  to
Baltimore  in  1833,  and  was  twice  chosen  chaplain
to  congress.  He  preached  every  Sunday  morning
in  the  hall  of  representatives,  and  attracted  great
crowds,  among  whom  were  all  the  prominent  states-
men of  the  day,  including  John  Quincy  Adams,
Daniel  Webster,  and  Henry  Clay.  He  sailed  for
England,  11  March,  1841,  on  the  steamship  "  Presi-
dent," which  was  never  heard  from  again.  His
style  of  pulpit  oratory  was  nervous,  elegant,  and
richly  imaginative..— His  son,  Alfred,  clergyman,
b.  in  1828;  d.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  13  Nov.,  1871,  was
educated  in  the  schools  of  Baltimore  and  Wash-
ington, and  under  his  father's  care,  and  began
preaching  in  Baltimore  when  only  sixteen  years
old.  He  afterward  joined  the  Philadelphia  con-
ference, and  held  pastorates  in  Philadelphia,  Har-
risburg,  Wilmington,  New  York,  and  other  cities.


See  "  Life  of  Alfred  Cookman,"  by  Henry  B.
Ridgaway  (New  York,  1871). — Another  son,  John
Emory,  b.  in  Carlisle,  Pa.,  8  June,  1836,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  Boston  university  theological  school.
He  joined  the  New  York  conference  in  1861,  and
has  spent  his  ministry  mostly  in  the  vicinity  of
New  York,  with  the  "exception  of  three  years  as
pastor  of  Tremont  street  church,  Boston.  He  re-
ceived the  degree  of  D.  D.  from  Hlinois  Wesleyan
university  in  1876,  and  is  now  (1886)  pastor  of  the
Bedford  street  M.  E.  church,  New  York  city.

COOLEY,  Abiel  A.,  inventor,  b.  in  1782 ;  d.  in
Hartford,  Conn.,  18  Aug.,  1858.  He  was  a  phy-
sician, and  invented  improvements  in  friction-
matches,  an  ingenious  shingle-machine,  and  one  of
the  first  power-presses  in  use.  He  was  also  the  first
to  apply  the  cam-movement  to  pumps.

COOLEY,  Le  Roy  Clark,  chemist,  b.  in  Point
Peninsula,  N.  Y.,  7  Oct.,  1833.  He  was  graduated
at  Union  in  1858,  where  he  followed  a  scientific
course.  From  1861  till  1874  he  was  professor  of
natural  sciences  in  the  New  York  state  normal
school,  when  he  became  professor  of  physics  and
chemistry  in  Vassar  college.  He  has  devised  vari-
ous forms  of  apparatus  to  facilitate  laboratory  in-
struction in  physics  and  chemistry,  and  in  18G8
invented  an  electric  register  by  whicli  piano-wires
and  tuning-forks  leave  an  imprint  of  their  vibra-
tions, which  was  the  first  successful  application  of
electricity  to  the  purpose  of  recording  swift  periodic
impulses  in  permanent  characters.  Prof.  Cooley  has
contributed  frequently  to  educational  and  scientific
journals,  and  has  published  "  A  Text-Book  of  Phys-
ics "  (New  York,  1868) ;  "  A  Text- Book  of  Cheniis-
try"(1869);  "  Easy  I]xperiments  in  Physical  Sci-
ence" (1870);  "Natural  Philosophy  'for  High
Schools "  (1871) ;  "  Elements  of  Chemistry  for
High  Schools*'  (1873);  "The  Student's  Guide-
Book  and  Note-Book  "  (Poughkeepsie,  1878) ;  "  The
New  Text-Book  of  Physics"  (New  York,  1880):
"  The  New  Text-Book  of  Chemistry  "  (1881) ;  "The
Beginner's  Guide  to  Chemistry  "  (1886).

COOLEY,  Thomas  Mclntyre,  jurist,  b.  in  At-
tica, N.  Y.,  6  Jan.,  1824.  He  began  the  study  of
law  in  Palmyra,  N.  Y.,  in  1842,  and,  removing  to
Michigan  in  1843,  completed  his  legal  studies  at
Adrian,  where  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  Janu-
ary, 1846.  He  practised  his  profession  for  the  two
foilowing  years  at  Tecumseh,  after  which  he  set-
tled in  Adrian.  For  a  time  he  edited  a  news-
paper, "  The  Watch-Tower,"  and  in  1857  the  state
senate  assigned  to  him  the  work  of  compiling  the
general  statutes  of  Michigan,  which  were  published
in  two  volumes.  In  1858  he  was  appointed  reporter
of  the  supreme  court,  an  office  which  he  retained  for
seven  years,  during  which  time  lie  published  eight
volumes  of  reports.  In  1859  he  was  made  professor
of  law  in  the  University  of  Michigan.  In  1864  he
was  elected  a  justice  of  the  supreme  court  of  the
state  to  fill  a  vacancy,  and  in  1869  was  re-elected
for  the  full  term  of  eight  years.  In  1868-'9  he
was  chief  justice,  and  in  1885  retired  permanently
from  the  bench.  In  1881  a  School  of  political
science  was  established  in  the  University  of  Michi-
gan, and  he  assumed  the  professorship  of  constitu-
tional and  administrative  law.  He  now  (1886)
holds  the  chair  of  American  history  in  the  Univer-
sity of  Michigan,  and  is  lecturer  on  constitutional
law,  and  dean  of  the  School  of  political  science.
He  published  a  "Digest  of  Michigan  Reports"
(1866);  "The  Constitutional  Limitations  which
Rest  upon  the  Legislative  Power  of  the  States  of
the  American  Union "  (Boston,  1^68 ;  enlarged
ed.,  1871);  and  editions,  with  copious  notes,  of
Blackstone's  "  Commentaries  "  (1870)  and  Story's


COOLIDGE


COOMBS


723


"  Commentaries  on  the  Constitution  of  the  United
States,"  with  additional  chapters  on  the  "  New-
Amendments"  (1878);  "The  Law  of  Taxation"
(187G);  "The  Law  of  Torts"  (1879);  "General
Principles  of  Constitutional  Law  in  the  United
States  "  (1880) ;  and  "  Michigan :  A  History  of  Gov-
ernments "  (Boston,  1885).

COOLIDGE,  Carlos,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.
in  Windsor,  Vt.,  in  1792 ;  d.  there,  15  Aug.,  1866.
He  was  graduated  at  Middlebury  in  1811,  and
practised  law  in  his  native  place  for  fifty-tvVo  years.
He  was  attorney  for  the  county  from  1881  till  1886,
and  a  representative  in  the  legislature  from  1884
till  1837,  and  from  1889  till  1842.  He  was  speaker
in  1886,  and  during  his  latter  term  was  governor
of  Vermont,  1848-'50,  and  senator  from  1855  till
1857.  He  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from  Mid-
dlebury in  1849.

COOLIDGE,  Richard  H.,  military  surgeon,  b.
in  the  state  of  New  York  in  1816 ;  d.  in  Raleigh,
N.  C,  28  Jan.,  1866.  He  was  appointed  assistant
surgeon  in  the  U.  S.  army  from  New  York  state  in
August,  1841,  and  served  at  various  posts.  In
June,  1860,  he  was  promoted  surgeon,  and  was
medical  purveyor  and  director,  Department  of  the
Pacific,  from  January,  1861,  till  April,  1862.  He
was  lieutenant-colonel  and  medical  inspector  from
June,  1862,  till  October,  1865,  was  in  the  provost-
marshal's  department,  Washington,  D.  C,  till  April,
1864,  and  on  duty  at  Louisville,  Ky.,  from  May  till
November,  1864.  He  was  made  medical  inspector
of  the  Northern  Department  and  of  the  Department
of  Pennsylvania  in  1865,  and  subsequently  pro-
moted to  a  brevet  lieutenant-colonelcy  for  faithful
and  meritorious  services  during  the  war.  He  was
medical  director  of  the  Department  of  North  Caro-
lina at  the  time  of  his  death.

COOLIDGE,  Sidney,  scientist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1880 ;  d.  near  Chickamauga,  Ga.,  19  Sept.,
1868.  He  studied  abroad  from  1889  till  1850,  first
in  Geneva  and  Vevay,  and  afterward  in  the  Royal
military  college  in  Dresden.  After  his  return' to
this  country  he  assisted  in  the  construction  of  the
Richmond  and  Danville  railroad,  and  in  running
the  boundary-line  of  Minnesota.  After  working  in
the  nautical-aimanac  office  and  in  the  Cambridge
observatory,  he  was  appointed  in  1853  assistant  as-
tronomer to  Com.  Perry's  Japan  exploring  expedi-
tion. In  1854  he  assisted  Prof.  George  P.  Bond
in  his  observations  of  the  planet  Saturn,  and  con-
tributed drawings  and  notes  to  the  published  an-
nals of  the  observatory.  He  took  charge  in  1855  of
the  chronometric  expedition  for  determining  the
difference  of  longitude  between  Cambridge  and
Greenwich,  and  in  1856-'7  studied  the  dialects  and
astronomical  superstitions  of  the  Indians  near
Saguenay  river  and  Lake  Mistassinnie.  Being  in
Mexico  in  1858,  he  took  part  in  the  civil  war  of
that  year,  was  taken  prisoner  and  sentenced  to  be
shot,  but  was  finally  released  and  sent  to  the  city  of
Mexico  on  parole."  He  took  part  in  an  Arizona
land-survey  in  1860,  and  in  May,  1861,  became
niajor  in  the  16th  U.  S.  infantry.  He  was  super-
intendent of  the  regimental  recruiting  service  in
1862,  commanded  regiments  at  different  posts  and
camps,  and  was  engaged  at  the  battles  of  Hoover's
<  rap  and  Chickamauga,  where  he  was  killed.  For
I  lis  services  in  the  latter  fight  he  received  the
brevet  of  lieutenant-colonel.

COOLIDGE,  Susan. See  Woolsey,  Sarah  C.

COOMBE,  Tlioinas,  clergyman,  b.  in  Philadel-
phia, 21  Oct.,  1758 ;  d.  in  London,  15  Aug.,  1822.
He  was  graduated  at  the  College  of  Philadelphia  in
1766,  and  in  1768  went  to  England,  where  he  was
ordained  priest and appointed chaplain to the


Marquis  of  Rockingham.  He  returned  to  PhiKv
delphia  in  1772,  and  was  chosen  an  assistant  min-
ister of  Christ  church  and  St.  Peter's.  On  20  July,
1775,  the  day  appointed  for  a  general  fast  by  the
Continental  congress,  he  delivered  a  sermon,  which
was  published  (Philadelphia,  1775;  3d  ed.,  New-
port, 1776).  Mr.  Coombe  supported  the  cause  of
the  colonies  until  the  passage  of  the  Declaration
of  Independence,  but  felt  that  his  ordination-oath
did  not  permit  him  to  follow  the  same  course  after
that  event.  This  decision  caused  him  to  be  looked
upon  with  suspicion,  and  just  previous  to  the  occu-
pation of  the  city  he  was  ordered  to  be  arrested ;
but  the  order  was  not  executed,  and,  after  the  Brit-
ish left  the  city  in  1778,  he  obtained  permission  to
go  to  New  York,  whence  he  sailed  for  England.
He  was  subsequently  chaplain  to  the  Earl  of  Car-
lisle, and  in  1794  was  appointed  chaplain  in  ordi-
nary to  the  king.  The  degree  of  D.  D.  was  con-
ferred upon  him  in  1781  by  the  University  of  Dub-
lin. He  was  an  eloquent  and  impressive  preacher.
Josiah  Quincy,  Jr.,  speaks  of  one  of  his  extempore
prayers  "  which,  in  point  of  sentiment,  propriety
of  expression,  and  true  sublimity,  excelled  any--
thing  of  the  kind  "  he  had  ever  heard.  Dr.  Coombe
was  the  friend  of  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  Johnson,
and  Goldsmith.  He  published  two  poems :  "  Ed-
win, or  the  Emigrant"  (Philadelphia,  1775),  and
"The  Peasant  of  Auburn"  (London,  1788).

COOMBS,  Leslie,  soldier,  b.  near  Boonesboro,
Clark  CO.,  Ky.,  28  Nov.,  1793;  d.  in  Lexington,
Ky.,  21  Aug.,  1881.  His  father,  who  served  at  the
siege  of  Yorktown,  removed  from  Virginia  in  1782,
and  settled  in  the  wilderness  of  Kentucky.  Leslie,
the  twelfth  child  of  this  pioneer  farmer,  entered
the  army  at  the  age  of  nineteen.  In  the  campaign
that  ended  in  the  disaster  at  the  river  Raisin,  he
was  sent  by  Gen.  Winchester  with  important  des-
patches to  Gen.  Harrison.  To  deliver  these  he  was
obliged  to  traverse  a  wilderness,  occupied  by  sav-
ages and  covered  with  snow,  for  over  a  hundred
miles,  and  suffered  great  privations.  On  2  June,
1813,  he  was  commissioned  captain  of  spies  in  Dud-
ley's regiment  of  Kentucky  volunteers.  He  volun-
teered, with  an  Indian  guide,  to  carry  the  intelli-
gence of  the  approach  of  Gen.  Clay's  forces  to  Gen.
Harrison,  when  the  latter  was  besieged  in  Fort
Meigs,  but  was  overpowered  in  sight  of  the  fort,
and  escaped  to  Fort  Defiance.  He  bore  a  conspicu-
ous part  in  the  defeat  of  Col.  Dudley,  on  5  May,
and  was  wounded  at  Fort  Miami.  After  the  war
he  studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at  the  age
of  twenty-three,  attaining  high  rank  in  the  profes-
sion. In  1886  he  raised,  at  his  own  expense,  a  regi-
ment to  aid  Texas  in  her  struggle  for  independ-
ence, and  was  commissioned  colonel  ii\  August  of
that  year.  He  was  for  several  terms  state  auditor,
and  was  many  times  elected  to  the  legislature.
When  his  old  commander.  Gen.  Harrison,  was  a
candidate  for  president.  Coombs  took  a  prominent
part  in  the  canvass.  As  a  stump  orator  he  was
unsurpassed.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Mexican
war  he  aided  largely  in  raising  volunteers  in  Ken-
tucky. He  was  a  strong  whig,  and  earnestly  de-
voted to  the  Union  from  the  time  when  the  question
of  secession  was  first  advanced.  In  1849  Plenry
Clay,  who  placed  great  trust  in  Gen.  Coombs,  wrote
to  him  suggesting  that  Union  meetings  should  be
held  throughout  Kentucky,  enclosing  resolutions
to  be  adopted.  During  fhe  canvass  of  1844  he
made  many  speeches  in  the  north  and  east  in  sup-
port of  his  friend  Clay  as  a  candidate  for  president
It  was  in  defeating  Gen.  Coombs  for  congress  that
John  C.  Breckinridge  won  his  earliest  success  in
public  life. Gen.  Coombs's  last  public  office  was


724


COOPER


COOPER


that  of  clerk  of  the  Kentucky  court  of  appeals,  to
which  he  was  elected  by  a  large  majority  as  the
Union  candidate  in  1860.  In  opposition  to  the  state
guard,  organized  by  Simon  B.  Buckner,  which  was
only  a  school  of  recruits  for  the  Confederate  army,
he  organized  and  armed,  in  conjunction  with  Gen.
Lovell  H.  Rousseau,  a  body  of  loyal  soldiers,  who
subsequently  rendered  effective  service  in  the  na-
tional cause.  Gen.  Coombs  was  one  of  the  pioneers
of  railroad-building  in  the  west.

COOPER,  Elias  Samuel,  surgeon,  b.  in  Butler
county,  Ohio,  in  1821 ;  d.  in  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
18  Oct.,  1862.  He  received  a  thorough  medical
education  in  Cincinnati  and  St.  Louis,  and  began
practice  in  Peoria,  HI.  In  1855  he  removed  to
San  Francisco,  where  his  eminent  abilities  and  re-
markable skill  as  an  operating  surgeon  soon  placed
him  at  the  head  of  his  profession,  and  gained  for
him  a  high  reputation  among  his  professional
brethren  in  the  eastern  states  and  in  Europe.  Dr.
Cooper  took  an  active  part  in  the  organization  of
the  medical  department  of  the  University  of  the
Pacific,  the  first  medical  school  on  the  Pacific
coast,  and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  professor
of  surgery  and  president  of  the  medical  faculty.
He  established  the  "  San  Francisco  Medical  Press,"
and  was  a  contributor  to  eastern  medical  journals.

COOPER,  EUwood,  horticulturist,  b.  in  Sads-
bury,  Lancaster  co.,  Pa.,  24  May,  1829.  He  was  edu-
cated in  Harmony,  after  which  he  engaged  in  busi-
ness in  Port  au  Prince,  W.  I.,  and  later  in  NewYork.
About  1870  he  removed  to  southern  California  and
settled  in  Santa  Barbara,  where  he  has  devoted  his
attention  principally  to  the  cultivation  of  fruits.
On  his  farm  are  produced  olives,  grapes,  English
walnuts,  and  European  almonds,  in  crops  far  ex-
ceeding those  of  the  older  countries ;  also  oranges,
lemons,  Japanese  persimmons,  and  other  similar
fruits.  Mr.  Cooper  was  the  first  in  the  United
States  to  manufacture  olive-oil  and  put  it  on  the
market.  In  connection  with  this  industry  he  has
invented  various  forms  of  machinery  for  use  in  the
oil-works,  and  also  a  machine  for  hulling  English
walnuts,  grading  them  as  to  size  and  washing
them,  thus  not  only  effecting  a  great  saving  of
labor,  but  making  them  more  satisfactory  for  sale
than  can  be  done  by  hand.  He  has  been  president
of  the  board  of  directors  of  Santa  Barbara  college,
for  three  years  was  principal  of  the  college,  and  is
now  (1880)  president  of  the  California  state  board
of  horticulture.  He  has  published  "  Statistics  of
Trade  with  Hayti"  (New  York,  1868);  "Forest
Culture  and  Eucalyptus  Trees"  (San  Francisco,
1876) ;  and  "  A  Treatise  on  Olive  Culture  "  (1882).

COOPER,  Ezekiel,  clergyman,  b.  in  Caroline
county,  Md.,  22  Feb.,  1763 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
21  Feb.,  1847.  He  was  the  son  of  a  revolutionary
officer,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  was  so  impressed
by  a  sermon  delivered  by  the  Rev.  Freeborn  Gar-
rettson,  that  he  at  once  determined  to  unite  with
the  church.  In  1784  he  was  placed  upon  circuit
under  Bishop  Francis  Asbury,  and  in  1787  ad-
mitted to  membership  in  the  conference.  His  first
appointment  in  1785  was  to  Long  Island,  and  he  had
that  entire  territory  for  his  circuit.  A  year  later
he  was  assigned  to  East  New  Jersey,  and  in  1787  to
Trenton.  In  1788  he  was  appointed  to  Baltimore,
then  to  Annapolis,  and  afterward  to  Alexandria.
During  1792-3  he  was  presiding  elder  of  the  Bos-
ton district,  after  which  he  was  successively  in  New
York,  Brooklyn,  Philadelphia,  and  Wilmington,
In  1798  he  became  chairman  of  the  Book  Concern,
and  from  1799  till  1802  was  stationed  in  Philadel-
phia as  editor  and  general  agent  of  that  establish-
ment. In  this  capacity  he  displayed  rare  ability.


and  during  his  administration  imparted  to  it  such
impulse  and  organization  that  it  has  become  one
of  the  largest  religious  publishing  establishments
in  the  United  States.  Its  capital  stock,  which  was
almost  nothing  when  he  first  became  connected  with
it,  rose  to  nearly  $50,000  during  his  period  of  ofRce.
He  continued  with  the  depository  after  its  removal
to  New  York,  where,  in  1804,  he  was  stationed  as
preacher,  after  which  he  resumed  his  itinerant
labors.  In  1820  he  was  appointed  to  St,  George's
church  in  Philadelphia,  but  was  soon  afterward
placed  on  the  supernumerary  list»  He  was  distin-
guished for  pulpit  eloquence,  logical  ability,  and
varied  knowledge.  At  the  time  of  his  death  he
was  older  in  the  ministry  than  any  in  the  itiner-
ancy of  the  Methodist  church,  either  in  Europe  or
America.  He  published  sermons  on  the  death  of
Bishop  Francis  Asbury  (Philadelphia,  1819)  and  of
the  Rev.  John  Dickinson.

COOPER,  Georg-e  Henry,  naval  officer,  b.  in
Fort  Diamond,  New  York  harbor,  27  July,  1821.
He  was  appointed  a  midshipman  in  the  U.  S.  navy
on  14  Aug.,  1837,  and  during  that  year  was  at-
tached to  the  fleet  on  the  coast  of  Florida,  which
was  co-operating  with  the  army  m  boat  expeditions
against  the  Seminole  Indians. '  From  1838  till  1842
he  was  attached  to  the  frigate  "  Constitution  "  on
the  Pacific,  after  which  he  spent  some  time  in  the
naval  school,  then  in  Philadelfjhia.  He  was  pro-
moted to  passed  midshipman  in  June,  1843,  and
served  on  the  "Flirt"  during  the  Mexican  war.
This  vessel  reported  to  Gen.  Taylor  in  March,  1846,
and  Mr.  Cooper  commanded  a  detachment  of  men
at  Point  Isabel,  Texas,  in  May.  After  the  capture
of  Monterey  he  was  transferred  to  Com,  Connor's
squadron,  and  was  present  at  the  attacks  on  To-
basco,  Alvarado,  and  Tuspan.  From  1847  till  1851
he  served  at  Norfolk,  and  then  for  five  years  was
attached  to  the  "  Susquehanna  "  in  the  East  India
squadron.  He  received  his  commission  as  lieu-
tenant, 8  May,  1851,  and  on  his  return  from  the
East  Indies  again  spent  two  years  at  Norfolk,  after
which  he  served  on  the  frigate  "  Roanoke  "  in  tlie
home  squadron,  and  later  at  the  navy-yard  in
Portsmouth.  In  July,  1862,  he  was  made  com-
mander and  given  the  supply-vessel  "  Massachu-
setts," of  the  Atlantic  squadron,  and  in  1863  was
in  command  of  the  "  Mercedita,"  of  the  South  At-
lantic blockading  squadron.  For  seven  weeks  he
commanded  the  monitor  "  Sangamon  "  inside  of
the  Charleston  roads,  employed  on  picket-duty,
and  acted  in  concert  with  the  army,  constantly
shelling  Fort  Sumter  and  the  batteries  on  Sulli-
van's island.  Later  he  was  stationed  in  Stone  inlet,
S.  C,  as  senior  officer,  co-operating  with  the  army
in  expeditions  against  the  enemy,  and  frequently
engaged  at  short  range.  From  1863  till  1867  he
commanded  successively  the  "  Sonoma,"  the  "  Glaii-
cus,"  and  the  "  Winooski,"  and,  after  receiving  his
commission  as  captain  in  December,  1867,  was  sta-
tioned at  the  Norfolk  navy-yard.  He  then  spent
some  time  at  sea  in  command  of  the  frigate  "  Colo-
rado," and  in  1872-3  was  commandant  of  the  Nor-
folk navy-yard.  In  June,  1874,  he  was  promoted
to  commodore,  after  which  he  had  charge  of  the
Pensacola  navy-yard.  From  1878  till  1880  he  was
president  of  the  board  of  inspection,  and  com-
mandant of  the  Brooklyn  navy-yard  until  1882.
In  November,  1881,  he  was  commissioned  rear-
admiral  and  given  command  of  the  North  Atlantic
station,  with  headquarters  in  New  York.  In  1884
he  was  placed  on  the  retired  list.

COOPER,  Henry,  senator,  b.  in  Columbia,
Tenn.,  22  Aug.,  1827.  He  was  graduated  at  West
Tennessee  university,  Jackson,  in  1847,  and  stud-


<iJ . /e<f^  o


(>^^cr>^-~^


Ca  o/^


0~eyv


COOPER


COOPER


725


ied  law.  In  1849  he  was  admitted  to  the  bar,  and
began  practice  in  Shelbyville.  He  was  elected  to
the  state  legislature  in  1853,  and  again  in  1857.
In  April,  1862,  he  was  appointed  judge  of  the
7th  judicial  circuit  in  Tennessee,  an  office  which
he  retained  until  1866,  when  for  a  year  he  was  pro-
fessor in  the  law-school  at  Lebanon,  Tenn.  Sub-
sequently he  settled  in  Nashville,  and  resumed  his
practice.  He  was  elected  to  the  state  senate  in
1869,  and  in  1870  was  chosen  as  a  Democrat  to  the
U.  S.  senate,  serving  from  4  March,  1871,  till  3
March,  1877.

COOPER,  James,  senator,  b.  in  Frederick  coun-
ty, Md,,  8  May,  1810;  d.  in  Camp  Chase,  near  Co-
lumbus, Ohio,  28  March,  1863.  He  studied  at  St.
Mary's  college,  and  was  graduated  at  Washington
college.  Pa.,  in  1832,  after  which  he  studied  law
with  Thaddeus  Stevens.  In  1834  he  was  admitted
to  the  bar,  and  began  to  practise  in  Gettysburg.
Pa.  He  was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Whig,  and
served  for  two  terms,  from  2  Dec,  1839,  till  3
March,  1843.  He  was  a  member  of  the  state  legis-
lature during  the  years  1843,  1844,  1846,  and  1848,
and  its  speaker  in  1847.  In  1848  he  was  made  at-
torney-general of  Pennsylvania,  and  he  was  elected
to  the  IJ.  S.  senate  as  a  Whig,  holding  office  from
3  Dec,  1849,  till  3  March,  1855.  On  the  expiration
of  his  term  he  settled  in  Philadelphia,  and  later  in
Frederick  City,  Md.  Soon  after  the  beginning  of
the  civil  war  he  took  command  of  all  the  volun-
teers in  Maryland,  and  organized  them  into  regi-
ments. On  17  May,  1861,  he  was  made  brigadier-
general  in  the  volunteer  service,  his  appointment
being  among  the  first  that  were  made  during  the
war.  Later  he  was  placed  in  command  of  Camp
Chase,  where  he  served  until  his  death.

COOPER,  James  B.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Bucks
county.  Pa.,  6  March,  1753 ;  d.  in  Haddonfield,
N.  J.,  5  Feb.,  1854.  He  served  during  the  revo-
lutionary war  as  captain  in  Lee's  legion,  and  was
actively  engaged  in  the  contests  at  Stony  Point,
Paulus  Hook,  Guilford  Court-House,  and  Eutaw
Springs.  In  1812  he  entered  the  navy  as  master,
and  served  in  that  capacity  during  the  war.  He
was  promoted  to  lieutenant  in  April,  1822,  and  be-
came commander  in  September,  1841. — His  son,
Benjamin,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New  Jersey  about
1793 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  L.  I.,  1  June.  1850.  He  was
appointed  to  the  U.  S.  navy  as  midshipman  on  16
Jan.,  1809,  and  served  with  distinction  during  the
war  of  1812.  He  fought  bravely  under  Capt.
James  Lawrence  on  the  "  Hornet,"  in  her  action
with  the  "  Peacock "  in  February,  1813,  and  was
made  lieutenant  in  December,  1814.  Later  he  was
again  promoted,  and  attained  the  grade  of  captain
in  February,  1828.

COOPER,  James  Fenimore,  author,  b.  in
Burlington,  N.  J.,  15  Sept.,  1789 ;  d.  in  Coopers-
town,  N.  Y.,  14  Sept.,  1851.  On  his  father's  side
he  was  descended  from  James  Cooper,  of  Stratford-
on-Avon,  England,  who  emigrated  to  America  in
1679  and  made  extensive  purchases  of  land  from
the  original  proprietaries  in  New  Jersey  and  Penn-
sylvania. He  and  his  immediate  descendants  were
Quakers,  and  for  a  long  time  many  of  them  re-
mained on  the  lands  thus  acquired.  His  mother,
Elizabeth  Fenimore,  was  of  Swedish  descent,  and
this  name  too  is  of  frequent  occurrence  among  the
Society  of  Friends  in  the  old  Quaker  settlements.
Cooper  was  the  eleventh  of  twelve  children,  most
of  whom  died  early.  Soon  after  the  conclusion
of  the  revolutionary  war  William  Cooper  became
the  owner  of  a  tract  of  land,  several  thousand
acres  in  extent,  within  the  borders  of  New  York
state  and  lying  along  the  head- waters  of  the  Sus-


quehanna river.  He  encouraged  the  settlement  of
this  tract  as  early  as  1786,  and  by  1788  had  select-
ed and  laid  out  the  site  of.  Cooperstown,  on  the
shore  of  Otsego  lake.  A  dwelling-house  was  erect-
ed, and  in  the  autumn  of  1790  the  formidable  task
was  undertaken  of  transporting  a  company  of  fif-
teen persons,  including  servants,  from  the  com-
parative civilization  of  New  Jei-sev  to  the  wilder-
ness of  central  New  York.  The  journey  was
accomplished  on  10  Nov.,  and  for  six  years  the
family  lived  in  the  log-house  originally  construct-
ed for  their  domicile.  In  1796  Mr.  Cooper  de-
termined to  make  his  home  permanently  in  the
town  he  had  founded,  which  by  that  time  prom-
ised to  become  a  thriving  settlement.  He  began
the  construction  of  a  mansion,  completed  in  1799,
which  he  named  Otsego  Hall,  and  which  was  for
many  years  the  manor-house  of  his  own  posses-
sions, and  by  far  the  most  spacious  and  stately
private  residence  in  central  New  York.  To  every
reader  that  has  fallen  under  the  spell  of  Cooper's
Indian  romances,  the  surroundings  of  his  boy-
hood days  are  significant.  The  American  fron-
tier prior  to  the  19th  century  was  very  different
from  that  which  exists  at  present.  Then  the  fore-
most pioneers  of  emigration  had  barely  begun  to
push  their  way  westward  through  the  Mohawk
valley,  the  first  available  highway  to  the  west.
Out  of  the  forest  that  bordered  the  shores  of  Otse-
go lake  and  surrounded  the  little  settlement,  In-
dians came  for  barter,  or  possibly  with  hostile  in-
tent, and  until  young  Cooper  was  well  advanced
toward  manhood  the  possibility  of  an  Indian  raid
was  by  no  means  remote.  The  Six  Nations  were
still  strong  enough  to  array  a  powerful  band  of
warriors,  and  from  their  chieftains  Cooper,  no
doubt,  drew  the  portraits  of  the  men  that  live  in  his
pages.  Such  surroundings  could  not  but  stimu-
late a  naturally  active  imagination,  and  the  mys-
terious influence  of  the  wilderness,  augmented
subsequently  by  the  not  dissimilar  influence  of  the
sea,  pervaded  his  entire  life.

The  wilderness  was  his  earliest  and  most  potent
teacher,  after  that  the  village  school,  and  then
private  instruction  in  the  family  of  the  Rev.  J.
Ellison,  the  English  rector  of  St.  Peter's  Episcopal
church  in  Albany.  This  gentleman  was  a  gradu-
ate of  an  English  university,  an  accomplished
scholar,  and  an  irreconcilable  monarchist.  It  is  to
be  feared  that  the  free  air  of  the  western  continent
did  not  altogether  counteract  the  influence  of  his
tutor  during  the  formative  period  of  the  young
American's  mind.  As  an  instructor,  however,
Ellison  was,  undeniably,  well  equipped,  and  such
teachers  were,  in  those  days,  extremely  rare.  His
death,  in  1802,  interrupted  Cooper's  preparatory
studies,  but  he  was  already  fitted  to  join  the  fresh-
man class  at  Yale  in  the 'beginning  of  its  second
term,  January,  1803.  According  to  his  own  ac-
count, he  learned  but  little  at  college.  Indeed,
the  thoroughness  of  his  preparation  in  the  classics
under  Ellison  made  it  so  easy  for  him  to  maintain
a  fair  standing  in  his  class  that  he  was  at  liberty
to  pass  his  time  as  pleased  him  best.  His  love  for
out-of-door  life  led  him  to  explore  the  rugged  hills
northward  of  New  Haven,  and  the  equally  pictur-
esque shores  of  Long  Island  sound  probably  gave
him  his  first  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  ocean.
No  doubt  all  this  was.  to  some  extent,  favorable  to
the  development  of  his  sympathy  with  nature ;  but
it  did  not  improve  his  standing  with  the  college
authorities.  Gradually  he  became  wilder  in  his
defiance  of  the  academic  restraints,  and  was  at  last
expelled,  during  his  third  year.  Perhaps,  if  the
faculty  could  have  foreseen  the  brilliant  career  of


736


COOPER


COOPER


their  unruly  pupil,  they  would  have  exercised  a
little  more  forbearance  in  his  ease.  Be  this  as  it
may,  the  father  accepted  the  son's  version  of  the
affair  and,  after  a  heated  controversy  with  the  col-
lege authorities,  took  him  home.

The  United  States  already  afforded  a  refuge  for
the  political  exiles  of  Europe,  and  was  beginning
also  to  attract  the  attention  of  distinguished  for-
eign visitors;  and  many  of  these  found  their  way
as  guests  to  Otsego  hall.  Talleyrand  was  among
them,  and  almost  every  nationality  of  Europe  was
represented  either  among  the  permanent  settlers
of  the  town  or  among  its  transient  sojourners.
Young  Cooper,  however,  did  not  linger  long  at
home,  and,  as  the  merchant  marine  offered  the
surest  stepping-stone  to  a  commission  in  the  navy
(the  school  at  Annapolis  not  being  yet  established),
a  berth  was  secured  for  him  on  board  the  ship  "  Ster-
ling," of  Wiscasset,  Me.,  John  Johnston  master.
She  sailed  from  New  York  with  a  cargo  of  flour,
bound  for  Cowes  and  a  market,  in  the  autumn  of
180G,  about  the  time  when  Cooper  should  have
been  taking  his  degree  with  the  rest  of  his  class-
mates at  Yale.  He  shipped  as  a  sailor  before  the
mast,  and,  although  his  social  position  was  well
known  to  the  captain,  he  was  never  admitted  to
the  cabin.  A  stormy  voyage  of  forty  days  made  a
sailor  of  him  before  the  "  Sterling  "  reached  Lon-
don. During  her  stay  there,  Cooper  made  good
use  of  his  time,  and  visited  everything  that  was
accessible  to  a  young  man  in  sailor's  dress,  in  and
about  the  city.  The  "Sterling"  sailed  for  the
straits  of  Gibraltar  in  January,  1807,  and,  taking
on  board  a  return  cargo,  went  back  to  London,
where  she  remained  several  weeks.  In  July  she
cleared  for  home,  and  reached  Philadelphia  after
a  voyage  of  fifty-two  days.

According  to  the  requirements  of  the  time.
Cooper  was  now  qualified  to  be  a  midshipman ;  his
commission  was  issued  1  Jan.,  1808,  and  he  report-
ed for  duty  to  the  commandant  at  New  York,  24
Feb.  Apparently  war  with  Great  Britain  was  im-
minent, and  preparations  were  made  in  anticipation
of  immediate  hostilities.  Cooper  served  for  a  while
on  the  "Vesuvius,"  and  in  the  autumn  was  ordered  to
Oswego,  N.  Y.,  with  a  construction-party,  to  build
a  brig  for  service  on  Lake  Ontario.  Early  in  the
spring  of  1809  the  vessel  was  launched,  but  by
that  time  peaceful  counsels  had  prevailed,  and  war
was  postponed  for  three  years.  All  these  experi-
ences tended  to  develop  the  future  novelist.  Many
incidents  of  the  stormy  North  Atlantic  voyages
appear  in  his  sea  novels,  while  the  long  winter  on
the  shore  of  Ontario  gave  him  glimpses  of  border
life  in  a  new  aspect,  and  his  duties  in  the  ship- yard
made  him  familiar  with  every  detail  of  naval  con-
struction. After  a  visit  to  Niagara,  he  was  left  in
charge  of  the  gun-boat  flotilla  on  Lake  Champlain,
where  he  remained  during  the  summer,  and  on  13
Nov.,  1809,  was  ordered  to  the  "Wasp,"  under
command  of  Capt.  James  Lawrence.  Nearly  two
years  passed,  of  which  there  is  but  scant  record ;
but  during  this  period  he  had  become  engaged  to
a  daughter  of  John  Peter  De  Lancey,  of  West-
chester county,  N.  Y.,  and  they  were  married  on  1
Jan.,  1811.  Here  again  fate  placed  him  under  in-
fluences that  shaped  his  future  career.  The  De
Lanceys  were  tories  during  the  revolutionary  war,
and  the  family  traditions  naturally  supplemented
the  teaching  of  the  English  tutor.  Cooper's  own
patriotism  was  staunch,  but  the  associations  of
his  life  were  such  that,  to  a  generation  that  looked
with  suspicion  upon  everything  English,  his  mo-
tives often  seemed  questionable.  The  marriage
was  happy  in  every  respect. In  deference  to  the


wishes  of  his  wife,  he  resigned  his  commission  in
the  navy  on  6  May,  1811.  After  a  temporary  resi-
dence in  Westchester  county,  he  went  to  Coopers-
town  and  began  a  house,  which  w^as  left  unfinished
and  was  burned  in  1823.  Again,  out  of  consid-
eration for  his  wife's  preferences,  he  returned  to
Westchester  county,  where  he  remained  until  after
his  first  literary  success  in  1821-'2.  In  the  mean
time  his  parents  had  died,  his  father  in  1809  and
his  mother  in  1817;  six  children,  five  daughters,
and  a  son  had  been  born  to  him ;  and  his  time
had  been  given  to  the  cultivation  and  improve-
ment of  his  estate  in  Scarsdale,  known  as  the  An-
gevine  farm.  A  second  son,  Paul,  was  born  after
his  removal  to  New  York  city.

He  was  now  thirty  years  old,  and  seemed  no
nearer  to  a  literary  life  than  he  had  been  when  he
first  donned  his  midshipman's  uniform.  One  day
he  was  reading  an  English  novel  to  his  wife,  and
casually  remarked,  as  many  another  has  done  un-
der like  circumstances,  "  I  believe  I  could  write  a
better  story  myself."  Encouraged  by  her,  he
made  the  attempt,  with  what  ultimate  success  the
world  knows.  "  Precaution,"  a  novel  in  two  vol-
umes, was  published  anonymously  in  an  inferior
manner  in  New  York  in  1820.  Of  this  first  novel
it  need  only  be  said  that  it  dealt  with  high  life  in
England,  a  subject  with  which  the  author  was  per-
sonally unfamiliar,  save  through  the  })ages  of  fic-
tion. The  book  was  republished  in  better  editions,
both  in  this  country  and  in  England ;  and  it  is  note-
worthy that  the  English  reviewers  gave  it  a  fairly
favorable  reception  without  suspecting  its  Ameri-
can origin.  This  venture  can  scarcely  be  said  to
have  enabled  him  to  taste  the  sweets  of  authorship,
but  it  had  the  effect  of  stimulating  the  desire  to
write.  Its  modest  success  was  such  that  Charles
Wilkes  and  other  friends  urged  him  to  try  some
familiar  theme.  "  If,"  they  urged,  "  he  could  so
well  dramatize  affairs  of  which  he  was  totally  ig-
norant, why  should  not  the  sea  and  the  frontier
afford  far  more  congenial  themes  1 "  The  story  of
a  spy,  related  by  John  Jay  years  before,  recurred
to  his  memory,  and  the  surroundings  of  his  home
— Westchester  county,  the  debatable  ground  of
both  armies  during  almost  the  whole  revolution-
ary period — furnished  a  convenient  stage.  "  The
Spy"  was  the  result,  and  during  the  winter  of
1821-'2  the  American  public  awoke  to  the  fact
that  it  possessed  a  novelist  of  its  own.  The  suc-
cess of  this  book,  which  was  unprecedented  at  the
time  in  the  meagre  annals  of  American  literature,
determined  Cooper's  career;  but,  leaving  his  sub-
sequent writings  for  consideration  by  themselves,
the  story  of  his  life  is  here  continued,  independent-
ly of  his  authorship.

In  1823  he  was  living  in  New  York.  There,  on
5  Aug.,  his  youngest  child,  Fenimore,  died,  and
Cooper  himself  was  shortly  afterward  seriously  ill.
By  1826  his  popularity  had  reached  its  zenith  with
the  publication  of  the  "  Last  of  the  Mohicans."
Until  this  time  he  had  always  signed  his  name
James  Cooper ;  but,  in  April,  1826,  the  legislature
passed  an  act  changing  the  family  name  to  Feni-
more-Cooper,  in  compliance  with  the  request  of
his  grandmother,  who  wished  thus  to  perpetuate
her  own  family  name.  At  first  Cooper  attempted
to  preserve  the  compound  surname  by  using  the
hyphen,  but  he  soon  abandoned  it  altogether.
With  fame  had  arisen  envy  and  uncharitableness
at  home  and  abroad.  English  reviewers  at  once
claimed  him  as  a  native,  and  stigmatized  him  as  a
renegade.  His  birthplace  was,  with  much  show
of  authority,  fixed  in  the  Isle  of  IMan,  and  for
many  years  the  matter  was  seriously  in  dispute,


COOPER


COOPER


727


notwithstanding  the  positive  proofs  of  his  Ameri-
can nativity.  In  the  decade  following  the  adop-
tion of  his  mother's  surname  the  controversies
gathered  force  that  affected  the  closing  years  of
his  life,  and  even  survived  him.  He  was  one  of
the  first  Americans  that,  from  personal  associa-
tion, reached  a  point  whence  he  could  look  with-
out bias  upon  the  somewhat  crude  social  develop-
ment of  his  native  country.  Naturally  of  a  head-
strong and  combative  disposition,  he  had  not  the
address  to  temper  his  utterances  so  as  to  avoid
giving  offence  in  an  age  when  the  popular  sense
smarted  under  what  Mr.  Lowell,  even  in  our  own
time,  has  termed  "  a  certain  condescension  in  for-
eigners." All  his  patriotic  championship  of  the
young  republic  in  foreign  lands  counted  for
naught  in  the  light  of  the  criticisms  pronounced
at  home.  His  self-assertive  manner  made  him
enemies  among  men  who  could  not  understand
that  he  was  merely  in  earnest,  and  even  Bryant
owned  to  having  been  at  first  somewhat  startled
by  an  "  emphatic  frankness,"  which  he  afterward
learned  to  estimate  at  its  true  value.  A  thorough
democrat  in  his  convictions.  Cooper  was  still  an
aristocrat,  and  he  often  gave  expression  to  views
under  different  conditions  that  seemed  alike  con-
tradictory and  offensive.  His  love  of  country,
however,  was  one  of  the  most  pronounced  traits  of
his  nature,  and  his  faith  in  what  is  known  as  the
"  manifest  destiny  "  of  the  republic  was  among  the
firmest  of  his  convictions.  This  faith  remained
through  the  troublous  days  of  "  nullification,"  and
through  the  early  controversies  concerning  the
abolition  of  slavery.  Abroad  he  was  the  champion
of  free  institutions,  and  had  his  triumphs  ifi  for-
eign capitals.  At  home  he  was  looked  upon  as  an
enemy  of  all  that  the  fathers  of  the  republic  had
fought  for.  An  English  writer  in  Colburn's  "  New
Monthly  Magazine"  (1831)  said  of  his  personal
bearing :  "  Yet  he  seems  to  claim  little  considera-
tion on  the  score  of  intellectual  greatness ;  he  is
evidently  prouder  of  his  birth  than  of  his  genius,
and  looks,  speaks,  and  walks  as  if  he  exulted  more
in  being  recognized  as  an  American  citizen  than
as  the  author  of  '  The  Pilot '  and  '  The  Prairie.' "
This  proud  Americanism  did  not,  however,  after
the  first  years  of  his  celebrity,  injure  his  standing
in  England.  During  his  repeated  and  often  pro-
tracted visits  to  England,  his  society  was  sought
by  the  most  distinguished  men  of  "the  time,  al-
though it  is  said  that  he  never  presented  letters  of
introduction.  He  very  soon  convinced  those  with
whom  he  associated  that,  though  an  American,  he
was  not  an  easy  person  to  patronize.  On  the  con-
tinent he  was  unwillingly  led  into  a  controversy
to  which  he  ascribed  much  of  the  unpopularity
that  he  afterward  incurred  in  the  United  States.
A  debate  had  arisen  in  the  French  chamber  of
deputies  in  which  Lafayette  referred  to  the  gov-
ernment of  the  United  States  as  a  model  of  econo-
my and  efficiency.  Articles  soon  appeared  in  the
papers  disputing  the  accuracy  of  the  figures,  and
arguing  that  the  limited  monarchy  was  the  cheap-
est and  best  form  of  government.  Cooper,  after
holding  aloof  for  a  time  from  the  discussion,  pub-
lished a  pamphlet  prefaced  by  a  letter  from  La-
fayette to  himself,  in  which  he  reviewed  the  whole
subject  of  government  expenditure  in  the  United
States.  This  provoked  answers  and  contradic-
tory statements,  some  of  which  had  a  semi-official
origin  in  the  U.  S.  legation  at  St.  Petersburg.  One
immediate  outcome  of  the  affair  was  a  circular
from  the  department  of  state  calling  for  informa-
tion regarding  local  expenditures.  Against  this
Cooper  protested  in  a  long  letter,  which  was  pub-


lished in  the  "National  Gazette,"  of  Philadelphia.
The  letters  on  the  finance  discussion  aroused  what
now  seems  an  altogether  inexplicable  bitterness
against  their  author.  The  attacks  upon  him  in
the  newspapers  were  excessively  annoying  to  a
proud  and  sensitive  nature,  and  when  he  returned
in  1833  it  was  with  a  determination  to  abandon
literature,  and  a  distrust  of  public  opinion  under
the  American  republic.  He  resolved  to  reopen  his
ancestral  mansion  at  Cooperstown,  now  long  closed
and  falling  into  decay,  and  visited  the  place  in
June,  1834,  after  an  absence  of  nearly  sixteen
years.  Repairs  were  at  once  begun,  and  the  house
was  speedily  put  in  order.  At  first  the  winters
were  spent  in  New  York  and  the  summers  in
Cooperstown  ;  but  eventually  he  made  the  latter
place  his  permanent  abode.  He  was  no  longer  in
sympathy  with  the  restless  spirit  of  progress  that  had
exterminated  the  Indian  and  was  levelling  the  for-
ests of  the  United  States.  The  Mohawk  valley,  once
traversed  only  by  a  rude  bridle-path,  now  afforded
passage  for  an  endless  procession  of  canal-boats
from  the  ocean  to  the  inland  seas ;  railroads  were
building,  and  the  whole  motive  of  existence  was
feverish  anxiety  for  gain.  The  associations  of  his
boyhood  home  soon  revived  the  instinct  for  lit-
erary work,  and  he  resumed  his  pen. But  in  the


mean  time  he  did  not  hesitate  to  express  his  con-
viction that  the  morals  and  manners  of  the  coun-
try were  decidedly  worse  than  they  had  been
twenty  years  before,  and  the  utterances  of  so
famous  a  man  soon  became  public  property.  A
contemporary  journal  said  of  him,  in  1841 :  "  He
has  disparaged  American  lakes,  ridiculed  Ameri-
can scenery,  burlesqued  American  coin,  and  even
satirized  the  American  flag ! "  Cooper  had  appar-
ently believed  that  his  amicably  intended  criticism
of  American  manners  and  customs  would  be  re-
ceived with  some  deference,  if  not  with  a  moderate
degree  of  gratitude,  and  vituperation  of  this  char-
acter astonished  him.  During  the  years  that  fol-
lowed, the  breach  steadily  widened  between  Cooper
and  his  countrymen,  and  even  his  fellow-towns-
men. In  1837  the  local  quarrel  culminated  in
what  was  known  as  "  the  three-mile-point  contro-
versy." This  point  was  a  part  of  the  Cooper  es-
tate, and,  owing  to  the  good  nature  of  the  heirs,
had  been  used  as  a  public  resort  until  the  towns-
people had  come  to  believe  that  it  was  actually
their  own.  When  Cooper  returned  to  his  home  he
endeavored,  in  an  informal  way,  to  uproot  this
idea  of  public  ownership.  Each  repetition  of  his
purpose  was  resented,  and  at  last  a  popular  outcry
was  raised  against  the  arrogant  claims  of  "one
J.  Fenimore  Cooper."  A  mass-meeting  was  called,
and  fiery  resolutions  were  passed ;  but  there  was  not
a  shadow  of  lawful  right  on  the  popular  side,  and,
as  soon  as  measures  were  taken  to  protect  the  prop-
erty against  trespassers,  the  claim  of  the  town  had


728


COOPER


COOPER


to  be  abandoned.  The  affair,  however,  widened  the
breecli  between  the  author  and  the  public,  and  the
newspapers  were  not  slow  to  present  his  actions  to
their  readers  in  the  most  objectionable  light.  The
novel  entitled  "  Home  as  Found  "  was  an  outgrowth
of  this  experience — a  sequel,  nominally,  to  "  Home-
ward Bound,"  but  as  different  as  possible  in  most
of  the  qualities  that  go  to  make  a  successful  novel.
Cooper's  indignation  appears  to  have  dulled  his
literary  discrimination,  and  he  made  the  characters
in  his  novels  express  unpardonably  offensive  ideas
in  the  most  disagreeable  way  imaginable.  Two  of
these  characters  were  identified  as  intended  to  per-
sonate the  author  himself — John  and  Edward  Ef-
fingham in  "  Home  as  Pound  " — and  none  of  the
protests  and  denials  put  forth  by  Mr.  Cooper  had
any  appreciable  effect  in  removing  the  impression.
For  writing  this  book  he  was  never  forgiven  by
his  contemporaries,  and  the  bitterness  of  popular
indignation  was  intensified  by  the  knowledge  that
the  book,  like  his  others,  was  sure  to  be  translated
into  all  the  languages  of  Europe.  On  the  other
hand,  the  brutality  of  the  newspaper  attacks  upon
the  author  was  inexcusable.

During  the  decade  ending  with  1843  Cooper
explored  almost  every  available  avenue  to  un-
popularity, not  only  in  his  own  co'untry,  but  in
England.  Even  such  professedly  exemplary  and
fastidious  publications  as  Blackwood's  and  Fra-
zer's  magazines  invented  epithets  in  worst  taste,  if
possible,  than  those  applied  to  him  in  his  own
country.  Just  at  this  crisis,  when  he  was  de-
nounced in  England  for  obtrusive  republicanism,
and  pursued  at  home  for  aristocratic  sympathies,
he  instituted  libel  suits  against  many  of  the  lead-
ing whig  editors  in  the  state  of  New  York.  Among
these  was  Thurlow  Weed,  of  the  Albany  "Evening
Journal,"  James  Watson  Webb,  of  the  "  Courier
and  Enquirer,"  Horace  Greeley,  of  the  "  Tribune,"
and  William  L.  Stone,  of  the  "  Commercial  Adver-
tiser," the  three  last-named  journals  published  in
New  York  city.  These  suits  at  first  caused  much
merriment  among  the  defendants ;  but  when  jury
after  jury  was  obliged,  in  most  cases,  reluctantly
to  return  a  verdict  for  the  plaintiff,  there  was  a
decided  change  in  the  tone  of  the  press.  The
damages  awarded  were  usually  small,  but  the  ag-
gregate was  considerable,  and  the  restraining  ef-
fect of  verdicts  was  immediately  apparent.  The
suit  against  Mr.  Webb  differed  from  the  rest,
in  that  it  was  a  criminal  proceeding,  under  an  in-
dictment from  the  grand  jury  of  Otsego  county.
Probably  Mr.  Cooper  failed  to  secure  a  verdict  in
this  instance  for  the  reason  that,  while  the  jury
might  probably  have  assessed  damages,  they  could
not  agree  to  send  the  defendant  to  prison.  Possi-
bly, however,  the  reading  aloud  in  open  court  by
plaintiff's  counsel  of  "  Home  as  Found  "  had  an
unfortunate  effect.  In  these  suits  Mr.  Cooper  acted
as  his  own  counsel,  with  regular  professional  assist-
ance, and  proved  himself  an  able  advocate  and  an
excellent  jury-lawyer.  The  most  pertinacious  of
the  accused  journalists  was  Thurlow  Weed,  and
against  him  numerous  distinct  and  successful  suits
were  brought.  Repeated  adverse  verdicts,  with
costs,  at  last  reduced  even  Mr.  Weed  to  submis-
sion, and  in  1843  he  published  a  sweeping  retrac-
tion of  all  that  he  had  ever  printed  derogatory  to
Cooper's  character.  These  successful  prosecutions
did  not  in  the  least  help  the  author's  general  popu-
larity. Indeed,  he  seemed  to  undertake  them  in  a
spirit  of  knight-errantry,  and  follow  them  to  the
end  from  a  lofty  conviction  of  the  righteousness
of  his  own  cause.  The  effect  of  the  controversy
was  to  embitter  the  last  vears  of  a  life  that  should


have  ended  serenely  in  the  assurance  of  a  well-
earned  and  world-wide  literary  fame.  Cooper  died
in  his  home,  Otsego  Hall,  and  was  buried  in  the
Episcopal  church-yard.  A  monument  has  been
erected  there,  surmounted  by  a  statue  of  "  Leather-
stocking,"  and  bearing  as  a  sufiicient  inscription
the  author's  name  in  full,  with  the  dates  of  his
birth  and  death.  Six  months  after  his  death  a
public  meeting  was  held,  in  honor  of  his  memory,
in  the  city  of  New  York.  Daniel  Webster  pre-
sided and  addressed  the  assembly,  as  did  also
William  Cullen  Bryant.  Washington  Irving  was
also  present,  with  a  large  representation  of  the
most  cultivated  people  in  the  city.  A  few  years
after  the  novelist's  death  Otsego  Hall  was  burned,
and  the  surrounding  property  was  sold  by  the
heirs.  In  concluding  a  sketch  of  Cooper's  life,  it
should  be  said  that  when  about  to  die,  and  appar-
ently in  the  full  possession  of  his  faculties,  he  en-
joined his  family  never  to  allow  the  publication  of
an  authorized  account  of  his  life.  This  command
has  been  faithfully  obeyed,  and  none  of  the  several
biographers  have  had  access  to  his  papers.  Mrs.
Cooper  survived  her  husband  only  a  few  months,
and  was  buried  by  his  side  at  Cooperstown.

An  exhaustive  history  of  Cooper's  literary  work
would  include  more  than  seventy  titles  of  books
and  other  publications,  and  a  long  list  of  miscella-
neous articles  published  in  magazines  and  news-
papers. Some  of  these  have  been  casually  referred
to  in  the  preceding  narrative,  when  they  seemed
to  mark  important  passages  in  his  career.  Such
were  "  Precaution,"  his  first  venture,  "  The  Spy,"
his  first  success,  "The  Last  of  the  Mohicans,"
marking  the  high  tide  of  his  popularity,  and
"  Home  as  Found,"  as  the  direct  cause  of  the  un-
happy final  controversies.  The  ten  years  follow-
ing the  publication  of  "  The  Spy  "  saw  perhaps  his
chief  successes.  These  included  the  five  famous
"  Leatherstocking  Tales,"  beginning  with  the
"  Pioneers,"  of  which  3,500  copies  were  sold  before
noon  on  the  day  of  publication.  This  period  also
included  "  The  "Pilot,"  the  production  of  which  was
suggested  by  the  appearance  of  Scott's  "  Pirate,"
which,  in  Cooper's  estimation,  was  unmistakably
a  landsman's  work.  Cooper's  sailor  instincts  told
hirn  that  the  most  had  not  been  made  out  of  the
available  materials,  and  he  was  successful,  in  this
and  his  other  sea-stories,  in  proving  his  theory.
"  Lionel  Lincoln,"  too,  was  the  first  of  a  distinctive
group  intended  to  embrace,  as  the  title-page  to
the  first  edition  indicated,  "  Legends  of  the  Thir-
teen Republics."  After  the  summit  of  fame  had
been  reached,  and  his  books  were  eagerly  awaited
in  two  continents,  came  the  controversial  period,
extending  to  1842,  and  overlapping  by  a  year  or
more  tl^e  last  decade  of  his  literary  activity.  It
was  inevitable  that  the  disturbing  influences  pre-
ceding his  later  work  should  have  their  effect.  An
observer  so  keen  as  he  could  not  fail  to  note  the
position  in  which  he  had  been  placed  by  the  mis-
understandings and  disputes  that  had  fallen  to  his
lot.  The  younger  generation  of  readers  had  al-
most insensibly  imbibed  the  impression  that  he
was  the  justly  disliked  and  distrusted  critic  of
everything  American.  That  he  was  conscious  oi
this  feeling,  and  sensitive  to  it,  is  evident  from  pas-
sages in  the  later  works,  in  which  he  alludes  to  love
of  country  and  popular  injustice,  and  the  like.
This  period  also  saw  the  production  of  his  "  H  is-
tory  of  the  United  States  Navy,"  a  work  for  which
it  is  said  he  had  been  collecting  materials  for  as
many  as  fourteen  years.  For  its  preparation  he
was  peculiarly  qualified,  through  his  personal  ac-
quaintance with  naval  officers  and  his  familiarity


COOPER


COOPER


729


with  all  the  details  of  a  seafaring  life.  When  it
is  read  at  this  late  day  it  is  diflficiilt  to  under-
stand why  it  should  have  excited  the  rancor  that
it  did.  Any  one  of  the  present  generation  who  is
reasonably  fair-minded  must  see  that  it  is  the
work  of  a  judicial  mind,  which  seeks  to  do  exact
justice,  irrespective  of  patriotic  considerations.  It
was  its  fate,  however,  to  stir  up  controversies  as
harsh  and  enduring  as  any  of  those  in  which  its
author  was  previously  engaged,  and  it  was  freely
denounced  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean  as  grossly
imfair  for  diametrically  opposite  reasons.  Cooper's
facts  have  borne  the  test  of  time,  and  the  work
must  always  remain  an  authority  on  the  subject
treated.  It  was  highly  successful  commercially,
and  went  through  three  editions  before  the  author's
death,  which  event  interrupted  a  continuation  of
the  work  intended  to  include  the  Mexican  war.
As  one  of  the  most  successful  of  authors,  Cooper's
fame  is  assured.  The  generation  that  now  reads
the  "  Leatherstocking  Tales,"  "  The  Pilot,"  "  Wing
and  Wing,''  and  the  rest  of  his  stories  of  adven-
ture, know  him  only  as  a  master  of  fine  descriptive
English,  with  a  tendency  now  and  then  to  prolix
genera^zation.  His  libel  suits  and  controversies
are  forgotten,  his  offensive  criticisms  are  rarely
read,  and  he  is  remembered  only  as  the  most  brill-
iant and  successful  of  American  novelists.

The  greater  part  of  Cooper's  title-pages,  in  the
original  editions  at  least,  do  not  bear  his  name.
They  are  "  by  the  author  of,  etc.,  etc."  The  con-
troversial papers  usually  bore  his  name.  In  the
"  Knickerbocker,"  "  Graham's,"  and  the  "  Naval "
magazines  and  elsewhere,  he  published  many  valu-
able contributions,  letters,  and  some  serial  and
short  stories  that  afterward  appeared  in  book-form.
Several  posthumous  publications  appeared  in
"  Putnam's  Magazine."  A  work  on  "  The  Towns
of  Manhattan "  was  in  press  at  the  time  of  his
death,  but  a  fire  destroyed  the  printed  portion,  and
only  a  part  of  the  manuscript  was  recovered.  A
few  books  have  been  erroneously  ascribed  to  him,
but  they  are  not  of  sufficient  importance  to  be
now  mentioned.  The  following  list  embraces  all
his  principal  works :  "  Precaution,"  a  novel  (New
York,  1820;  English  edition,  1821);  "The  Spv,  a
Tale  of  the  Neutral  Ground  "  (1821 ;  English  edi-
tion, 1822) ;  "  The  Pioneers,  or  the  Sources  of  the
Susquehanna ;  a  Descriptive  Tale "  (1823 ;  Eng-
lish ed.,  and  London,  1823) ;  "  The  Pilot,  a  Tale
of  the  Sea "  (1823)  ;  "  Lionel  Lincoln,  or  the
Leaguer  of  Boston  "  (1825) ;  "  The  Last  of  the  Mo-
hicans, a  Narrative  of  1757"  (Philadelphia,  182G);
"  The  Prairie,  a  Tale  "  (1827) ;  "  The  Red  Rover,  a
Tale  "  (1828) ;  "  Notions  of  the  Americans ;  Picked
up  by  a  Travelling  Bachelor  "  (1828) ;  "  The  Wept
of  Wish-ton- Wish,  a  Tale"  (1829);  English  title,
"  The  Borderers,  or  the  Wept  of  Wish-ton-Wish,"
also  published  as  "  The  Heathcotes  " ;  "  The  WV
ter-Witch,  or  the  Skimmer  of  the  Seas ;  a  Tale  "
(1830);  "The  Bravo,  a  Tale"  (1831);  "Letter  of
J.  Fenimore  Cooper  to  Gen.  Lafayette  on  the
Expenditure  of  the  United  States  of  America "
(Paris,  1831) ;  "  The  Heidenmauer,  or  the  Bene-
dictines; a  Legend  of  the  Rhine"  (Philadelphia,
1832);  "The  Headsman,  or  the  Abbaye  des  Vig-
nerons;  a  Tale"  (1833);  "A  Letter  to  his  Coun-
trymen "  (New  York,  1834)  ;  "  The  Monikins "
(Philadelphia,  1835);  "Sketches  of  Switzerland"
(1836);  English  title,  "Excursions  in  Switzer-
land " ;  "A  Residence  in  France,  with  an  Excur-
sion up  the  Rhine,  and  a  Second  Visit  to  Switze-
rland"; "Gleanings  in  Europe"  (1837);  English
title,  "Recollections  of  Europe";  "Gleanings  in
Europe— England  "  (1837); English  title,  "Eng-


land, with  Sketches  of  Societv  in  the  Metropolis";
"Gleanings  in  Europe— Italy "  (1838);  English
title,  "Excursions  in  Italv";  "The  American
Democrat,  or  Hints  on  the  Social  and  Civic  Rela-
tions of  the  United  States  of  America"  (Coopers-
town,  1838);  "The  Chronicles  of  Cooperstown"
(1838) ;  "  Homeward  Bound,  or  the  Chase  ;  a  Tale
of  the  Sea "  (Philadelphia,  1838)  ;  "  Home  as
Found"  (Philadelphia,  1838);  English  title,  "Eve
Effingham,  or  Home";  "History  of  the  Navy  of
the  United  States  of  America"  (1839);  "The  Path-
finder, or  the  Inland  Sea"  (1840):  "Mercedes  of
Castile,  or  the  Voyage  to  Cathay"  (1840) ;  English
title,  "  Mercedes  of  Castile,  a  Romance  of  the  Days
of  Columbus " ;  "  The  Deerslayer,  or  the  First
War  Path;  a  Tale"  (Philadelphia,  1841);  "The
Two  Admirals,  a  Tale  "  (1842) ;  "  The  Wing-and-
Wing,  or  Le  Feu-Follel;  a  Tale"  (1842);  Eng-
lish title,  "  The  Jack  o'  Lantern  (Le  Feu-Follet),
or  the  Privateer  " ;  "  Richard  Dale  " ;  "  The  Battle
of  Lake  Erie,  or  Answers  to  Messrs.  Burges,
Duer,  and  Mackenzie  "  (Cooperstown,  1843) ;  "  Wy-
andotte, or  the  Hutted  Knoll;  a  Tale"  (Phila-
delphia, 1843) ;  "  Ned  Myers,  or  a  Life  before  the
Mast "(1843);  "Afloat  and  Ashore,  or  the  Adven-
tures of  Miles  Wallingford"  (published  by  the
author,  1844;  2d  series.  New  York,  1844;  English
title,  "Lucy  Hardinge");  "Proceedings  of  the
Naval  Court-Martial  in  the  Case  of  Alexander
Slidell  Mackenzie,  a  Commander  in  the  Navy  of
the  United  States,  etc.,  including  the  Charges  and
Specifications  of  Charges  preferred  against  him
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  to  which  is  an-
nexed an  Elaborate  Review  "  (1844) ;  "  Satanstoe,
or  the  Littlepage  Manuscripts  ;  a  Tale  of  the
Colony "  (1845) ;  "The  Chainbearer,  or  the  Little-
page  Manuscripts  "  (1846) ;  "  Lives  of  Distinguished
American  Naval  Officers"  (Philadeljihia  and  Au-
burn, 1846);  "  The  Redskins,  or  Indinn  and  Injin  ;
being  the  Conclusion  of  the  Littlepage  Manuscripts  "
(New  York,  1846) ;  English  title,  '•  Ravensnest,  or
the  Redskins  " ;  "  The  Crater,  or  Vulcan's  Peak ;  a
Tale  of  the  Pacific  "  (New  York,  1847) ;  the  English
title  was  "Mark's  Reef,  or  the  Crater";  "Jack
Tier,  or  the  Florida  Reefs"  (1848);  "The  Oak
Openings,  or  the  Bee  Hunter"  (1848);  English
title,  "The  Bee  Hunter,  or  the  Oak  Openings":
"  The  Sea  Lions,  or  the  Lost  Sealers"  (1849) ;  "  The
Ways  of  the  Hour ;  a  Tale  "  (1850).  See  "  Memo-
rial Discourse  "  by  William  Cullen  Bryant,  with
speeches  by  Daniel  Webster  and  others  (New  York,
1852) ;  "  The  Home  of  Cooper,"  by  R.  B.  Coffin
(Barry  Gray)  (1872);  "James  Fenimore  Cooper,"
by  Thomas'  Rainsford  Lounsbury  (Boston,  1882) ;
and  "Bryant  and  his  Friends"  (New  York,  1886).
—His  daughter,  Sns<an  Fenimore,  autlior,  b.  in
Scarsdale,  N.  Y.,  in  1813,  is  the  second  child  and
the  eldest  of  five  that  reached  maturity.  During
the  latter  years  of  her  father's  life  she  became  his
secretary  and  amanuensis,  and  but  for  her  father's
prohibition  would  naturally  have  become  his  biog-
rapher. In  1873  she  founded  an  orphanage  in
Cooperstown,  and  under  her  superintendence  it
became  in  a  few  years  a  prosperous  charitable  in-
stitution. It  was  begun  in  a  modest  house  in  a
small  way  with  five  pupils ;  now  the  building,  which
was  erected  in  1883,  shelters  ninety  boys  and  girls.
The  orphans  are  taken  when  quite  young,  are  fed.
clothed,  and  educated  in  the  ordinary  English
branches,  and  when  old  enough  positions  are  found
for  them  in  good  Christian  families.  Some  of  tliem
before  leaving  are  taught  to  earn  their  own  living.
In  furtherance  of  the  work  to  which  she  has  con-
secrated her  later  years,  and  which  she  terms  her
"life work,"  during  1886  she established "The


730


COOPER


COOPER


Friendly  Society."  Every  lady  on  becoming  a
member  of  the  society  chooses  one  of  the  girls  in
the  orphanage  and  makes  her  the  object  of  her
special  care  and  solicitude.  Her  home  is  built
mainly  with  bricks  and  materials  from  the  ruins  of
Otsego  Hall,  of  which  a  fine  view  is  given  on  a
previous  page.  Her  published  books  are  "Rural
Hours"  (New  York,  I80O);  "The  Journal  of  a
Naturalist,"  an  English  book,  edited  and  annotated
by  Miss  Cooper  (1852) ;  "  Rhyme  and  Reason  of
Country  Life"  (1885);  and  "Mt.  Vernon  to  the
Children  of  America  "  (1858).

COOPER,  Joseph  Alexander,  soldier,  b.  near
Somerset,  Ky.,  25  Nov.,  1823.  He  served  during
the  Mexican  war  in  the  4th  Tennessee  infantry.
When  the  civil  war  began  he  entered  the  U.  S.  ser-
vice as  captain  in  the  1st  Tennessee  infantry,  be-
coming in  1862  colonel  of  the  Oth  Tennessee.  He
served  in  East  Tennessee  and  Georgia,  and  in  July,

1864,  was  made  a  brigadier-general,  in  which  ca-
pacity he  commanded  on  the  march  through  Geor-
gia, receiving  the  brevet  of  major-general  in  March,

1865.  He  held  the  office  of  collector  of  internal
revenue  in  Tennessee  from  1869  till  1879,  and  later,
again  resumed  his  farming  in  Kansas.

COOPER,  Mark  Antony,  statesman,  b.  in
Hancock  county,  Ga.,  20  April,  1800;  d.  17  March,
1885.  He  was  graduated  at  the  South  Carolina
college  in  1819,  and  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1821,
settling  in  Eatonton.  In  1825,  and  again  in  1836,
he  served  in  the  campaign  against  the  Seminoles
in  Florida.  In  the  second  campaign  he  was  a  ma-
jor. He  served  two  terms  in  congress,  and  in  1843
was  defeated  for  governor  of  Georgia.  He  took
a  leading  part  in  public  enterprises,  founded  the
State  agricultural  society,  and  developed  in  many
ways  the  resources  of  his  state.

COOPER,  Myles,  clergyman,  b.  in  England  in
1735;  d.  in  Edinburgh,  1  May,  1785.  He  was
graduated  at  Oxford  in  1760,  and  became  a  fellow
of  Queens  college.  In  1762,  at  the  instance  of
Thomas  Seeker,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,  he
came  to  America  to  assist  President  Samuel  John-
son, of  Kings  (now  Columbia)  college,  and  was  ap-
pointed professor  of  mental  and  moral  philosophy
in  that  institution.  A  year  later  he  succeeded  to
the  presidency.  Judge  Thomas  Jones  says  that
through  his  means  the  college  was  raised  in  repu-
tation superior  to  all  the  colleges  on  the  continent,
and  that  under  his  tuition  was  produced  a  num-
ber of  young  men  superior  in  learning  and  ability
to  any  that  America  had  ever  before  seen.  The
son  of  Mrs.  Washington  was  one  of  his  pupils,  and
after  Mr.  Custis  left  the  college.  Gen.  Washington
expressed  the  conviction  that  he  had  been  under
the  care  of  "  a  gentleman  capable  of  instructing
him  in  every  branch  of  knowledge."  In  1771  he
visited  England,  and  returned  shortly  before  the
revolutionary  war.  He  was  loyal  to"  the  crown,
and  is  credited  with  the  authorship  of  "  A  Friend-
ly Address  to  all  Reasonable  Americans  on  our
Political  Confusions ;  in  which  the  Necessary  Con-
sequences of  violently  opposing  the  King's  Troops,
and  of  a  General  Non-importation,  are  fairly  stat-
ed "  (New  York,  1774).  This  tract  was  answered
by  Alexander  Hamilton,  then  an  undergraduate
in  the  college,  also  by  (xen.  Charles  Lee  in  a  pam-
phlet which  passed  through  numerous  editions  in
Boston,  New  York,  and  "Philadelphia.  Cooper's
tory  sentiments  were  not  favorably  received  by
the  students,  and  in  August,  1775,  a  party  of  re-
publicans set  off  about  midnight  with  the  design
of  "  seizing  him  in  his  bed,  shaving  his  head,  cut-
ting off  his  ears,  slitting  his  nose,  stripping  him
naked,  and  setting him adrift." The plot was


overheard  at  a  public  house  where  the  party  had
stopped  for  "  a  proper  dose  of  Madeira,"  and  Presi-
dent Cooper  was  informed  just  in  time  to  escape
through  a  back  window.  He  took  refuge  in  the
house  of  a  friend,  where  he  remained  concealed
during  the  night,  and  in  the  morning  was  conveved
on  board  the  English  ship-of-war  "Kingfisher,"
in  which  he  sailed  for  England.  He  had  previous-
ly been  warned  with  others  to  "  fly  for  their  lives,
or  anticipate  their  doom  by  becoming  their  own
executioners,"  in  a  published  letter  signed  "  Three
Millions."  On  his  arrival  in  England,  two  excel-
lent livings  were  given  him,  one  in  Berkshire,  and
the  other  in  Edinburgh,  where  he  generally  resided.
He  published  "  Poems  on  Several  Occasions  "  (Ox-
ford, 1761),  and  a  poem  in  the  "  Gentleman's  Mag-
azine" for  July,  1776,  descriptive  of  his  escape
from  New  York.  On  13  Dec.,  1776,  he  delivered  a
sermon  before  the  University  of  Oxford  "  On  the
Causes  of  the  Present  Rebellion  in  America,"
which  gave  rise  to  much  political  controversy.  He
advocated  the  appointment  of  bishops  for  the  colo-
nies in  an  "  Address  to  the  Episcopalians  of  Vir-
ginia," and  also  published  "  The  American  Que-
rist "  (1774).  The  epitaph  that  he  wrote  for  him-
self is  characteristic :

"  Here  lies  a  priest  of  English  blood ;
Who,  living,  lik'd  whate'er  was  good —
Good  company,  good  wine,  good  name,
Yet  never  huiited  after  fame.
But  as  the  first  he  still  preferr'd.
So  here  he  chose  to  be  interr'd ;
And,  unobscured  from  crowds,  withdrew
To  rest  among  a  chosen  few.
In  humble  hopes  that  sovereign  love
Will  raise  him  to  be  blest  above."
He  was  interred  a  few  miles  from  Edinburgh,  where
Episcopal  ministers  "  who  die  in  that  city  "  are
all  buried,  which  accounts  for  his  expression  "  to
rest  among  a  chosen  few."

COOPER,  Peter,  philanthropist,  b.  in  New
York  city,  12  Feb.,  1791 ;  d.  there,  4  April,  1883.
His  mother  was  the  daughter  of  John  Campbell,  a
successful  potter  in  New  York,  who  became  an
alderman  of  the  city  and  was  deputy  quartermas-
ter during  the  Revolutionary  war.  Mr.  Campbell
contributed  liberally  to  the  cause  of  American  free-
dom, and  received'  in  acknowledgment  a  large
quantity  of  Continental  money.  On  his  father's
side  Mr.  Cooper  was  of  English  descent,  and  both
his  grandfather  and  his  father  served  in  the  Con-
tinental army.  The  latter,  who  became  a  lieu-
tenant during  the  war,  was  a  hatter,  and  at  the
close  of  the  war  resumed  his  business  in  New  York.
Peter  was  born  about  this  period,  and  he  remem-
bered the  time  when,  as  a  boy,  he  was  employed  to
pull  hair  out  of  rabbit-skins,  his  head  being  just
above  the  table.  He  continued  to  assist  his  father
until  he  was  competent  to  make  every  part  of  a
hat.  The  elder  Cooper  determined  to  liv'e  in  the
country,  and  removed  to  Peekskill,  where  he  began
the  brewing  of  ale,  and  the  son  was  employed  in
delivering  the  kegs.  Later,  Catskill  became  the
residence  of  the  family,  and  the  hatter's  business
was  resumed,  to  which  was  added  the  making  of
bricks.  Peter  was  made  useful  in  carrying  and
handling  the  bricks  for  the  drying  process.  These
occupations  proved  unsatisfactory,  and  another
move  was  made,  this  time  to  Brooklyn,  where  the
father  and  son  again  made  hats  for  a  time,  after
which  they  settled  in  Newburg  and  erected  a
brewery.  Peter  meanwhile  acquired  such  knowl-
edge as  he  could,  for  his  schooling  appears  to  have
been  limited  to  half  days  during  a  single  year.  In
1808  he  was  apprenticed  to  John  Woodward,  a  car-


COOPER

riage-maker,  with  whom  he  remained  until  he  be-
came of  age.  During  this  time  he  constructed  a
machine  for  mortising  the  hubs  of  carriages,  which
proved  of  great  value  to  his  employer,  wlio  at  the
expiration  of  his  service  offered  to  establish  him  in
business.  This,  however,  was  declined,  and  Cooper
settled  in  Hempstead,  L.  I.,  where  for  three  years
he  manufactured  machines  for  shearing  cloth,  and
at  the  end  of  this  engagement  he  had  saved  sufFi-
cient  money  to  buy  the  right  of  the  state  of  New
York  for  a  machine  for  shearing  cloth.  He  began
the  manufacture  of  these  machines  on  his  own  ac-
count, and  the  enterprise  was  thoroughly  success-
ful, largely  owing  to  the.  interruption  of  commer-
cial intercourse  between  the  United  States  and
Great  Britain  by  the  war,  and  also  on  account  of
an  improvement  devised  by  himself.  At  this  time
he  married  Sarah  Bedel,  of  Hempstead,  who  proved
a  devoted  wife  during  fifty-six  years  of  married
life.  With  the  cessation  of  hostilities  the  value  of
this  business  depreciated,  and  he  turned  his  shop
into  a  factory  for  making  cabinet-ware.  Later  he
entered  the  grocery  business  in  New  York,  but  soon
afterward  the  profits  acquired  by  the  sale  of  his
machines  and  in  the  grocer's  shop  were  invested
in  a  gl lie-factory,  which  he  purchased  with  all  its
stock  and  buildings  then  on  a  lease  of  twenty-one
years.  These  works  were  situated  on  the  "old
middle  road,"  between  31st  and  34th  streets,  New

York  city, and
^  -^  there  the  busi-

ness of  manu-
facturing glue,
oil,  whiting,  pre-
pared chalk,  and
isinglass  was
continued  until
the  expiration  of
the  lease,  when
he  bought  ten
acres  of  ground
in  Maspeth  ave-
nue, Brooklyn,
where  the  busi-
ness has  since
been  continued.
In  1828  he  pur-
chased 3,000
acres  of  land
within  the  city
limits  of  Balti-
more, and  he
erected  the  Canton  iron-works,  which  was  the
first  of  his  great  enterprises  tending  toward  the
development  of  the  iron  industry  in  the  United
States.  This  purchase  was  made  at  a  time  when
there  was  great  commercial  excitement  in  Balti-
more on  account  of  the  building  of  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad.  It  was  feared  that  the  many
short  turns  in  the  road  would  make  it  useless  for
locomotive  purposes.  The  stockliolders  had  be-
come discouraged,  and  the  project  seemed  about  to
be  abandoned,  when  Peter  Cooper  came  to  the  res-
cue and  built,  in  1830,  from  his  own  designs,  the
first  locomotive  engine  ever  constructed  on  this
continent.  By  its  moans  the  possibility  of  building
railroads  in  a  country  with  little  capital,  and  with
immense  stretches  of  very  rough  surface,  in  order
to  connect  commercial  centres,  without  the  deep
cuts,  tunnelling,  and  levelhng  that  short  curves
might  avoid,  was  demonstrated,  and  the  Baltimore
and  Ohio  railroad  was  saved  from  bankruptcy.  He
determined  to  dispose  of  his  Baltimore  property,
and  a  portion  of  it  was  purchased  by  Horace  Ab-
bott, which  ui  time  became  the  Abbott  iron  com-


COOPER


731


pany. The  remainder  was  sold  to  Boston  capital-
ists, who  formed  the  Canton  iron  company. He
received  part  of  his  payment  in  stock  at  $44  a
share,  which  he  subsequently  sold  at  |230. He
then  returned  to  New  York  and  built  an  iron-fac-
tory, which  he  afterward  turned  into  a  rolling-mill,
where  he  first  successfully  applied  anthracite  coal
to  the  puddling  of  iron,  and  made  iron  wire  for
several  years. In  1845  he  built three  blast-fur-
naces in  Phillipsburg,  near  Easton,  Pa.,  which  were
the  largest  then  known,  and,  to  control  the  manu-
facture completely,  purchased  the  Andover  iron-
mines,  and  built  a  railroad  through  a  rough  coun-
try for  eight  miles,  in  order  to  bring  the  ore  down
to  the  furnaces  at  the  rate  of  40,000  tons  a  year.
Later  the  entire  plant  was  combined  into  a  corpo-
ration known as the Ironton iron-works. At
these  works  the  first  wrought-iron  beams  for  fire-
proof buildings  were made, The  laying  of  the
Atlantic  cable  was  largely  due  to  his  persistent
efforts  in  its  behalf. He  was  the  first  and  only
president  of  the  New  York,  Newfoundland,  and
London  telegraph  company. It  became  necessary
to  expend  large  sums  in  its  construction,  much  of
which  came  directly  from  Mr.  Cooper. The  banks
were  unwilling  to  trust  the  corporation,  and  inva-
riably drew  on  the  president  as  claims  matured.
The  company  was  frequently  in  his  debt  to  the  ex-
tent of  ten  to  twenty  thousand  dollars. The  first
cable  lasted  scarcely  a  month,  and  a  dozen  years
elapsed  before  the  original  investments  were  recov-
ered. In  spite  of  public  ridicule  and  the  refusal
of  capitalists  to  risk  their  money,  Mr.  Cooper  clung
to  the  idea,  until  at  last  a  cable  became  an  assured
success. The  original  stock,  which  had  been  placed
on  the  market  at  |50  a  share,  was  then  disposed  of
to  an  English  company  at  $00. Mr.  Cooper  served
in  both  branches  of  the  New  York  common  coun-
cil, and  strongly  advocated,  when  a  member  of
that  body,  the  construction  of  the  Croton  aque-
duct. He  was  a  trustee  in  the  Public  school  socie-
ty first  founded  to  promote  public  schools  in  New
York,  and  when  that  body  was  merged in  the
board  of  education  he  became  a  school  commis-
sioner. But  he  is  most  widely  known  in  connec-
tion with  his  interest  in  industrial  education. His
own  experience  early  impressed  him  with  the  ne-
cessity of  affording  proper  means  for  the  instruc-
tion of  the  working  classes. With  this  idea  he
secured  the  property  at  the  junction  of  3d  and  4th
avenues,  between  7th  and  8th  streets,  and  from
plans  of  his  own  making  "  The  Cooper  Union  for
the  Advancement  of  Science  and  Art"  was  erect-
ed. In  1854  the  corner-stone  was  laid,  and  five
years  later,  on  its  completion,  a  deed  was  executed
in  fee  simple  transferring  this  property  to six
trustees,  who  were  empowered  to  devote  all  rents
and  income  from  it  "to  the  instruction  and  improve-
ment of  the  inhabitants  of  the  United  States  in
practical  science  and  art." A  scheme  of  education
was  devised  which  should  include  "  instruction  in
branches  of  knowledge  by  which  men  and  women
earn  their  daily  bread  ;  in  laws  of  health  and  im-
provement of  the  sanitary  conditions  of  families
as  well  as  individuals;  in  social  and  political  sci-
ence, whereby  communities  and  nations  advance
in  virtue,  wealth,  and  power;  and  finally  in  mat-
ters which  affect  the  eye,  the  ear,  and  the  imagina-
tion, and  furnish  a  basis  for  recreation  to  the
working  classes." Free  courses  of  lectures  on  so-
cial and  political  science  were  established;  also  a
free  reading-room  ;  and  collections  of  works  of  art
and  science  were  provided,  and  a  school  for  in-
struction of  women  in  the  art  of  design  by  which
they  may  gain an  honorable livelihood. When


732


COOPER


COOPER


sufficient  funds  have  been  collected,  it  is  proposed
to  establish  a  polytechnic  school.  The  building
with  its  improvements  has  cost  thus  far  nearly
$750,000.  It  has  an  endowment  of  $200,000  for
the  support  of  the  free  reading-room  and  library.
The  annual  expense  of  the  schools  varies  from
150,000  to  160,000,  and  is  derived  from  the  rents
of  such  portions  of  the  edifice  as  are  used  for  busi-
ness purposes.  Mr.  Cooper  devoted  much  careful
thought  and  study  to  questions  of  finance  and  good
government.  He  became  active  in  the  greenback
movement,  and  published  several  political  pam-
phlets on  the  subject  of  the  currency.  In  1876  he
was  nominated  by  the  national  independent  party
as  their  candidate  for  president,  and  in  the  elec-
tion that  followed  received  nearly  100,000  votes.
In  all  affairs  concerning  the  advancement  and  wel-
fare of  New  York  city  Mr.  Cooper  was  prominent.
No  public  gathering  seemed  complete  without  his
well-known  presence  on  the  platform.  He  was  a
regular  attendant  of  the  tTnitarian  church,  and
liberal  in  his  donations  to  charitable  institutions,
to  many  of  which  he  held  the  relation  of  trustee.
His  various  addresses  and  speeches  were  collected
in  a  volume  entitled  "  Ideas  for  a  Science  of  Good
Government,  in  Addresses,  Letters,  and  Articles
on  a-Strictly  National  Currency,  Tariff,  and  Civil
Service"  (New  York,  1883).— His  son,  Edward,
merchant,  b.  in  New  York  city,  26  Oct.,  1824.  He
was  educated  in  public  schools  and  then  in  Colum-
bia, but  left  college  without  completing  the  course,
and  received  the  honorary  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1845.
Afterward  he  spent  some  time  in  travel  abroad,
and  on  his  return  to  the  United  States  became,
with  his  college  friend  and  brother-in-law,  Abram
S.  Hewitt,  a  member  of  the  firm  of  Cooper,  Hewitt
&  Co.  Gradually  he  was  associated  with  his
father  in  his  various  enterprises,  and  much  of  the
active  management  of  affairs  fell  to  him.  The
success  of  the  Trenton  iron-works  and  of  the  New
Jersey  iron-  and  steel-works  is  largely  due  to  his
painstaking  and  careful  study  of  the  subject.
Long  experience  as  an  iron-master  has  made  him
a  practical  and  scientific  metallurgical  engineer.
Mr.  Cooper  has  also  been  prominent  as  a  democrat
in  New  York  local  politics,  and  was  mayor  from
1879  till  1881.  He  was  also  an  active  member  of
the  committee  of  seventy,  through  whose  efforts
the  Tweed  ring  was  overthrown.  In  national  poli-
tics he  has  served  as  a  delegate  to  the  Charleston
convention  of  1860,  and  to  the  St.  Louis  conven-
tion of  1876.  He  is  a  trustee  of  the  Cooper  union,
and  is  a  member  of  various  corporations. — Peter
Cooper's  nephew,  James  Campbell,  mineralogist,
b.  in  Harford  county,  near  Baltimore,  Md.,  16
June,  1882,  a  son  of  James  Cooper,  received  a
limited  education  in  the  public  schools  of  Balti-
more, and  for  many  years  has  been  connected
with  the  development  of  western  railways,  hold-
ing various  offices.  Mr.  Cooper  has  taken  great  in-
terest in  the  study  of  geology  and  mineralogy,  and
has  collected,  located,  and  named  fully  50,000  speci-
mens of  minerals,  including  a  collection  of  9,000
specimens  that  he  presented  the  University  of  Kan-
sas. He  has  added  much  to  the  knowledge  of  the
mineral  resources  of  the  United  States,  and  has  con-
tributed extensively  to  newspapers  and  periodical
literature  concerning  his  discoveries.  Mr.  Cooper
is  a  member  of  several  scientific  associations.

COOPER,  Philip  H.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  New
York,  5  Aug.,  1844.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.
naval  academy  in  1868,  when  he  was  promoted  to
ensign  and  attached  to  the  steam  sloop  "Ticon-
deroga  "  in  the  North  Atlantic  blockading  squad-
ron, and was  present at both  attacks  on  Fort


Fisher.  In  1865  he  was  made  master,  and  in  1866
lieutenant,  serving,  meanwhile,  until  1868  on  the
sloop  "  Shenandoah,"  in  the  Asiatic  squadron.  He
received  his  commission  as  lieutenant-commander
in  1868,  and  was  assigned  to  duty  at  the  U.  S.  naval
academy.  Later  he  was  attached  to  the  "  Plym-
outh," on  the  European  station,  and  afterward
was  on  duty  at  the  Naval  academy.  He  was  made
commander  in  1879,  and  for  several  years  employed
at  the  bureau  of  navigation  in  Washington,  after
which  he  commanded  the  "  Swatara  "  in  the  Asiatic
squadron.  In  1886  he  was  made  commandant  of
the  Norfolk  navy-yard.

COOPER,  Samuel,  soldier,  b.  in  Hackensack,
N.  J.,  12  June,  1798;  d.  in  Cameron,  Va.,  3  Dec,
1876.  His  father,  of  the  same  name,  served  during
the  Revolutionary  war,  and  fought  in  the  battles
of  Lexington,  Bunker  Hill,  Monmouth,  and  Ger-
mantown.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  having  attained
the  rank  of  major,  he  settled  in  Dutchess  county,
where  he  married  Miss  Mary  Horton.  He  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1815,
and  promoted  to  second  lieutenant  in  the  artillery.
His  services  were  retained  on  the  reorganization
of  the  army  after  the  war  of  1812,  and  he  served
on  garrison  duty  and  in  Washington  for  several
years,  meanwhile  he  had  been  promoted  to  first
lieutenant.  From  1828  till  1886  he  was  aide-de-
camp to  Gen.  Alexander  Macomb,  becoming  cap-
tain in  June,  1836,  and  until  1841  was  on  staff
duty  at  army  head-quarters  as  assistant  adjutant
general.  During  the  Florida  war  he  was  chief  of
staff  to  Col.  William  J.  Worth.  He  remained  on
special  duty  in  the  war  department  in  Washington
from  1842  till  1852,  was  brevetted  colonel  for  meri-
torious conduct  in  the  prosecution  of  his  duties  in
connection  with  the  Mexican  war,  and  then,  until
1861,  was  adjutant-general  of  the  U.  S.  army,  with
the  rank  of  colonel  of  the  staff,  dating  froni  1852.
For  a  short  time  during  this  period  he  was  secre-
tary of  war  ad  ititerim.  In  March,  1861,  he  re-
signed his  commission  and  offered  his  services  to
the  seceding  states.  He  was  appointed  adjutant
and  inspector-general  of  the  Confederate  army,  of
which  he  was  the  ranking  officer,  standing  first  on
the  list  of  generals.  In  1827  he  married  a  grand-
daughter of  George  Mason,  of  Gunston  Hall,  Cler-
mont, Fairfax  co.,  Va.,  and  subsequent  to  the  civil
war,  lived  in  retirement  at  his  country  seat  near
Alexandria,  Va.  He  was  the  author  of  "  A  Con-
cise System  of  Instructions  and  Regulations  for
the  Militia  and  Volunteers  of  the  United  States "
(Philadelphia,  1836).

COOPER,  Thomas,  scientist,  b.  in  London,
England,  22  Oct.,  1759 ;  d.  in  Columbia,  S.  C,  11
May,  1840.  He  was  educated  at  Oxford,  and  then
studied  law,  devoting  at  the  same  time  consider-
able attention  to  medicine  and  the  natural  sciences.
After  being  admitted  to  the  bar  he  travelled  a  cir-
cuit for  a  few  years,  but  took  an  active  part  in  the
politics  of  the  time,  and  was  sent  with  James  Watt,
the  inventor,  by  the  democratic  clubs  of  England
to  those  of  France,  where  his  sympathies  were
with  the  Girondists  This  course  called  out  severe
censure  from  Edmund  Burke  in  the  house  of  com-
mons, to  which  Cooper  replied  with  a  violent  pam-
phlet. Its  circulation  was  prohibited  among  the
lower  classes  by  the  attorney-general,  although  no
exception  was  made  to  its  appearance  in  expensive
form.  While  in  France  he  studied  chemistry  and
learned  the  process  of  obtaining  chlorine  from  sea-
salt,  and  this  knowledge  he  tried  to  apply  on  his
return  to  England  by  becoming  a  bleacher  and  a
calico-printer,  but  was  unsuccessful.  In  1795  he
followed  his  friend,  Dr.  Joseph  Priestley,  to  the


COOPER


United  States,  and  settled  in  Northumberland,
Pa.,  where  he  practised  law.  lie  became  a  strong
democrat,  and  violently  attacked  the  administra-
tion of  John  Adams  in  the  Reading  "  Advertiser  "
of  20  Oct.,  1799.  This  led  to  his  being  tried  for
libel  under  the  sedition  act,  and  he  was  sentenced
to  six  months'  imprisonment,  with  a  fine  of  $400.
In  1806  he  was  appointed  a  land  commissioner  and
succeeded  in  overcoming  the  difficulties  with  the
Connecticut  claimants  in  Luzerne  county.  Later
he  was  made  judge,  but,  becoming  obnoxious  to
the  members  of  his  own  party,  he  was  removed  in
1811  on  a  charge  of  arbitrary  conduct.  Prom  1811
till  1814  he  held  the  chair  of  chemistry  in  Dick-
inson college,  Carlisle,  and  from  1816  till  1831
filled  a  similar  place  in  the  University  of  Pennsyl-
vania. Li  1819  he  was  called  to  the  College  of
South  Carolina  in  Columbia,  of  which,  from  1820
till  1834,  he  was  president,  and  at  the  same  time
professor  of  chemistry  and  political  economy.  On
his  retirement  in  1840  the  revision  of  the  statutes
of  the  state  was  confided  to  him.  President  Cooper
was  eminent  for  his  versatility  and  the  extent  of
his  knowledge.  Li  philosophy  he  was  a  material-
ist, in  religion  a  free-thinker,  and  in  the  nul-
lification contest  an  idtra  state-rights  man.  He
was  a  vigorous  pamphleteer  in  various  political
contests,  and  a  frequent  contributor  to  newspa-
pers and  magazines.  From  1812  till  1814  he  edit-
ed two  of  the  five  volumes  of  "  The  Emporium  cf
Arts  and  Sciences"  in  Philadelphia,  and  also
Thomas  Thomson's  "System  of  Chemistry"  (4
vols.,  Philadelphia,  1818).  He  published  "  Letters
on  the  Slave-Trade"  (London,  1787);  "Tracts,
Ethical,  Theological,  and  Political"  (1790);  "In-
formation concerning  America  "  (1790) ;  "Account
of  the  Trial  of  Thomas  Cooper,  of  Northumber-
land "  (Philadelphia,  1800) ;  "  The  Bankrupt  Law
of  America  Compared  with  that  of  England"
(1801);  "Introductory  Lecture  at  Carlisle  Col-
lege "  (1812) ;  "  An  English  Version  of  the  Insti-
tutes of  Justinian"  (1812);  "Tracts  on  Medical
Jurisprudence"  (1819);  and  "Elements  of  Politi-
cal Economy  "  (Charleston,  1826).

COOPER,  Thomas  Aptliorpe,  actor,  b.  in
London,  England,  in  1770 ;  d.  in  Bristol,  Pa.,  21
April,  1849.  He  received  a  good  education,  and,
on  the  death  of  his  father,  was  adopted  by  Thomas
Ilolcroft  and  William  Godwin.  His  first  appear-
ance on  the  stage  was  with  Stephen  Kemble's
company  in  Edinburgh,  and  later  he  acted  at
Covent  Garden,  London,  with  great  success  as
Hamlet  and  Macbeth.  In  December,  1796,  he
made  his  first  appearance  in  Philadelphia  as  Mac-
beth at  the  Chestnut  street  theatre,  and  in  August
of  the  following  year  played  in  the  Greenwich
street  theatre,  New  York,  as  Pierre  in  "  Venice
Preserved."  He  returned  to  England  in  1802,  and
for  several  years  held  a  foremost  rank  on  the  Eng-
lish stage.  In  1804  he  returned  to  New  York  and
soon  afterward,  for  a  long  time,  became  lessee  of
the  Park  theatre.  Later  he  again  visited  England,
but  soon  returned  to  the  United  States,  where  he
continued  to  play  until  advanced  in  years.  His
daughter  having  married  the  son  of  President
Tyler,  he  held  various  public  ofiices,  among  which
were  that  of  military  storekeeper  in  Frankford,
Pa.,  during  1841,  and  later  the  office  of  surveyor  to
the  ports  of  New  York  and  Philadelphia.  Cooper
had  great  natural  endowments  of  person  and  voice,
but  did  not  excel  as  a  student.  His  acting  was  of
the  school  of  John  Philip  Kemble,  whom  he  bid
fair  to  rival  in  his  early  days.

COOPER,  William,  clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1694;  d.  there,  13  Dec,  1743. He  was


COOPER


733


graduated  at  Harvard  in  1712,  and  his  leisure  dur-
ing his  college  years  was  given  to  the  study  of  the
Bible. After his  graduation, being then only
eighteen  years  of  age,  he  continued his studies
untd  1715,  when  he  began  to  preach. In  August
of  that year  he  was  invited to  become  the  col-
league of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Benjamin  Colman,  but  his
ordination  was  deferred  until  23  May,  1716. He
continued  with  the  Brattle  street  Congregational
church  until  his  death. In  1737  he  was  chosen  to
the  presidency  of  Harvard,  but  declined  it. He
participated  actively  in  the  great  revival  of  1740,
and  said, toward the  close  of  his  career, that
"since  the year  1740  more  people  had  sometimes
come  to  him  in  concern  about  their  souls  in  one
week  than  in  the  preceding  twenty-four  years  of
his  ministry." In  1742  he  became  involved  with
the  Rev.  Jonathan  Ashley,  of  Decrfield,  in  a  dis-
pute concerning  the  revival,  and  a  long  newspa-
per and pamphlet  controversy  ensued. Besides
numerous  published  sermons,  he  was  the  author  of
"A  Tract  defending  Inoculation for  the  Small-
Pox"  (1720),  and  "  The  Doctrine  of  Predestination
unto Life  indicated  in  Four  Sermons"  (Boston,
1740; London,  1765).— His  son,  William,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  in  1720; d.  there,  28  Nov.,  1809,
was  distinguished  for  his  patriotic  services  during
the  revolutionary  war,  and  for  forty-nine years
was  town  clerk  of  Boston. — Another  son,  Samuel,
clergyman,  b.  in  Boston,  28  March,  1725;  d.  there,
29  Dec,  1783,  studied  at  the  grammar-school  in
Boston,  and  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1743.
He  studied  theology  and  became  his  father's  suc-
cessor and  an  associate  to  the  venerable  Dr.  Col-
man. He  was  elected  to  the  colleague  postorate
on  31  Dec,  1744,  and  ordained  on  21 May,  1746.
His  ministry  with  the  Brattle  street  church  con-
tinued until  his  death. In  1767  he  was  elected  a
member  of the Harvard corporation, in which
office  he  remained  during  his  lifetime,  and  in  1774
was  chosen  president ;  but,  like  his  father,  he  pre-
ferred the  active  duties  of  the  ministry. He  took
a  prominent  part  in  politics,  and  in  1754  published
"  The  Crisis,'  a  pamphlet  in  opposition  to  the  ex-
cise act,  then  in  contemplation. From  the  time  of
the  stamp-act  some  of  the  best  political  articles  in
the  "  Boston  Gazette  "  were  written  by  him. The
letters  of  Gov.  Hutchinson  were  sent  to  him  by
Dr.  Franklin,  with  an  injunction  not  to  allow  their
publication. These  he  placed  in  the  hands  of  a
friend,  whose  disregard  of  the  prohibition,  though
a  breach  of  confidence  involving serious  conse-
quences, was  a  great  public  benefit. In  the  spring
of  1775,  with  other  distinguished  patriots,  he  was
lampooned  by  the  British  officers  in  an  oration  de-
livered on  State  street. Afterward  he  made  him-
self particularly  obnoxious  to  the  authorities,  in
consequence  of  which  he  withdrew  from  Boston
just  before  the  battle  of  Lexington. From  xipril,
1775,  till  March,  1776,  his  church  was  used  as  a
barracks  for  the  British  troops. Dr.  Cooper  was
the  intimate  friend  of  John  Adams  and  Benjamin
Franklin,  who,  during  their  residence  in  France,
recommended  to  his  care  many  of  the  prominent
French  visitors  to  America. He  was  also  an  es-
teemed correspondent  of  distinguished  Europeans,
and  in  1767  was honored by  the University  of
Edinburgh  with  the  degree  of  D.  D. He  was  a
member  of  several  religious  and  scientific  socie-
ties, and  was  the  first  president  of  the  American
academy  of  science  and  arts. Besides  his  political
writings  he  published numerous  sermons. His
"Discourse  on  the  Commencement  of  the  New
Constitution  of  Massachusetts  "  (1780)  is  the  most
finished  of  all  his  literary  productions.


734


COOTE


COPE


COOTE,  Sir  Eyre,  British  soldier,  b.  in  1757;
(1,  10  Dec,  1823.  He  was  a  nephew  of  Sir  Eyre
Coote,  commander-in-chief  in  India,  entered  the
British  army  as  ensign,  15  April,  1774,  and  was
promoted  lieutenant  in  July,  1776.  He  was  pres-
ent at  the  battle  of  Long  Island  and  the  reduction
of  Port  Washington,  took  part  in  the  expeditions
to  Rhode  Island  and  the  Chesapeake,  was  engaged
at  Brandywine,  Germantown,  and  Monmouth,  and
at  the  attack  on  Mud  island.  He  became  a  cap-
tain, 10  Aug.,  1778,  was  engaged  at  the  siege  of
Charleston  and  in  the  Virginia  campaign,  and  was
present  at  the  surrender  of  Yorktown.  He  became
a  major  in  1783,  served  under  Gen.  Greg  in  the
West  Indies  in  17y3-'5,  was  made  a  colonel  in
1796,  severely  wounded  in  the  Ostend  expedition
of  1798,  promoted  major-general  in  that  year,  and
served  in  Abercromby's  Egyptian  expedition  of
1801.  He  was  lieutenant-governor  of  Jamaica
from  1805  till  1808,  and  rose  to  the  rank  of  gen-
eral in  1814,  but  was  afterward  dismissed  from  the
army  for  the  commission  of  a  crime.

COPAHUE  (co-pah-oo'-a),  Chilian  cacique,
flourished  in  the  latter  part  of  the  14th  century.
He  made  war  against  all  other  caciques  of  his
race,  defeated  them,  and  became  supreme  chief  of
the  whole  Araucanian  people,  also  reducing  some
tribes  of  northern  Chili.  According  to  the  native
historian  Pue,  in  1380  the  Promancos  and  Pen-
cones  rose  in  arms  against  Copahue,  gathered  in
large  numbers,  fought  a  battle  in  the  Aconcagua
valley,  and  were  routed,  leaving  many  dead  upon
the  field,  and  many  prisoners,  who  were  horribly
tortured.  Copahue's  cruelties  exasperated  his
enemies  and  caused  them  to  unite  against  him,
with  the  aid  of  some  Araucanian  caciques.  A
battle  was  fought  in  the  Llai-Uai  valley,  in  which
he  perished,  and  subsequently  every  tribe  regained
its  independence.  The  people  of  his  own  tribe
buried  his  remains  on  the  top  of  the  highest
mountain  in  the  region  belonging  to  them,  and
the  mountain  still  bears  his  name.

COPANO  (co-pan'-yo),  Chilian  yoqui  or  cacique,
b.  in  the  Malpocho  valley  in  1511 ;  d.  early  in
1548.  He  was  chief  of  the  Promancos,  belonging
to  the  Malpocho  tribe.  The  caciques  of  neighbor-
ing regions  made  him  their  generalissimo  to  di-
rect the  war  against  the  Spaniards,  who  had  founded
the  city  of  Santiago  in  1541.  During  1541  Copano
many  times  attacked  the  Spanish  settlement,  and
caused  heavy  loss  to  the  colonists.  The  next
year,  while  Valdivia  was  absei^it  from  the  city,  the
Indians,  in  great  numbers,  attacked  it,  burned  the
buildings,  and  forced  the  inhabitants  to  seek
refuge  in  a  fortress,  which  was  also  assaulted,  and
its  defenders,  under  Alonso  de  Monroy,  were  com-
pelled to  go  out  and  fight  in  the  open  field.  The
timely  return  of  Valdivia  prevented  the  destruc-
tion of  the  whole  colony ;  and  afterward  Copano
was  defeated  in  three  battles.  During  1543-'4  he
continued  the  hostilities  against  the  conquerors,
and  then  joined  the  Copiapinos,  a  tribe  of  north-
ern Chili,  and  was  proclaimed  chief  of  all  the
allied  forces.  In  1545  he  again  attacked  Alonso
de  Monroy  at  Copiapo,  and  only  Monroy  and  one
of  his  officers  escaped,  all  his  other  men  per-
ishing at  the  hands  of  the  Indians.  A  treaty  of
peace  made  with  Valdivia  in  1546  did  not  continue
long,  and  Copaiip  destroyed  the  new  city  of  La
Serena  in  1547.  The  celebrated  chief  was  killed
by  some  northern  Indians  that  declined  to  be
commanded  by  a  stranger.

COPE,  Thomas  Pyiu,  merchant,  b.  in  Lancas-
ter county.  Pa.,  26  Aug.,  1768 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,
Pa..  22 Nov., 1854. His  father, Caleb Cope,  a


Quaker  of  Lancaster,  Pa.,  protected  Andre  from  a
mob  in  1775.  The  son  entered  a  counting-house
in  Philadelphia  in  1786,  began  business  for  him-
self in  1790,  importing  his  goods  latterly  in  his
own  vessels,  the  first  of  which  he  buiit  in  1807,
and  established  in  1821  the  first  line  of  packets  be-
tween Philadelphia  and  Liverpool,  which  survived
several  financial  crises,  and  continued  in  existence
down  till  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war.  He  ac-
quired great  wealth,  and  possessed  in  a  high  de-
gree the  respect  of  his  fellow-townsmen.  During
an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever  in  1793  he  remained
in  the  city  to  aid  the  sufferers,  and  took  the  dis-
ease himself,  and,  when  the  small-pox  raged  in
1797,  he  accepted  the  task  of  ministering  to  the
wants  of  the  destitute  as  almoner,  and  carried
food  to  the  houses  of  the  sufferers.  He  was  a
member  of  the  city  council  about  1800,  an  efBcient
member  of  the  committee  for  introducing  water
into  the  city,  served  in  the  legislature  in  1807,  and
in  the  State  constitutional  convention,  was  presi-
dent of  the  Board  of  trade  for  many  years,  and  of
the  Mercantile  library  company  from  its  foundation
until  his  death,  and  was  an  executor  of  Girard's
will,  a  trustee  of  the  bank,  and  a  director  of  the
Girard  college.  He  was  also  actively  interested
in  completing  the  Chesapeake  and  Delaware  canal,
and  in  the  construction  of  the  Pennsylvania  rail-
road. The  estate  of  Lemon  Hill,  the  country-
seat  of  Henry  J.  Pratt,  which  came  into  the  pos-
session of  the  old  U.  S.  bank,  was  through  his
efforts  secured  to  the  city  as  a  public  park,  instead
of  being  utilized  for  factory  purposes.  When  Mr.
Cope  retired  from  mercantile  life  his  sons,  Henry
and  Alfred,  carried  on  the  business,  which  eventu-
ally passed  into  the  hands  of  Francis  and  Thomas
P.,  sons  of  Henry,  who  adopted  the  style  of  Cope
Brothers.— Alfred's  son,  Edward  Drinker,  natu-
ralist, b.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  28  July,  1840.  He
was  educated  at  the  Westtown  academy  and  at  the
University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  then  studied  com-
parative anatomy  in  the  Academy  of  sciences  of
Philadelphia,  in  the  Smithsonian  institution  dur-
ing 1859,  and  in  Europe  from  1863  till  1864.  He
became  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Haverford
college  in  1864,  but  resigned  in  1867  on  account  of
failing  health.  Later  he  became  palaeontologist  to
the  U.  S.  geological  survey,  serving  at  first  on  the
survey  of  the  territories,  and  then  on  the  survey
west  of  the  100th  meridian.  His  work  in  this  con-
nection has  resulted  in  his  discovery  of  nearly  1,000
new  species  of  extinct  and  as  many  recent  verte-
brata.  For  many  years  Prof.  Cope  was  secretary
and  curator  of  the  Academy  of  natural  sciences,
Philadelphia,  and  chief  of  the  department  of  or-
ganic material  of  the  permanent  exhibition  in  that
city.  He  is  a  member  of  numerous  scientific
societies  in  the  United  States  and  Europe,  and  in
1879  received  the  Bigsby  gold  medal  from  the
Royal  geological  society  of  Great  Britain.  In
1872  he  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences,  and  in  1884  was  vice-president
of  the  section  on  biology  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science.  The  titles  of
his  papers,  upward  of  350  in  number,  form  a
systematic  record  of  the  development  of  paleon-
tology in  the  United  States.  They  have  appeared
in  the  official  reports  of  the  government  surveys,
proceedings  of  the  Philadelphia  academy  of  sci-
ences, of  the  American  philosophical  society,  the
American  association  for  the  advancement  of  sci-
ence, and  in  numerous  periodicals.  Among  his
larger  works  are  "  Systematic  Arrangement  of  the
Lacertilia  and  Ophidia"  (1864);  "  Primary  Groups
of  the  Batrachian  Anura"  (1865) ;  "History  of  the


COPELAND

Cetacea  of  the  Eastern  North  American  Coast"
(1866) ;  "  Synopsis  of  the  Extinct  Cetacea  of  the
United  States"  (1867-'8);  -'Systematic  Arrange-
ment of  the  Extinct  Batrachia,  Reptilia,  and  Aves
of  North  America "  (1869-70) ;  " Systematic  Kela-
tions  of  the  Fishes"  (1871);  "Systematic  Rela-
tions of  the  Tailed  Batrachia  "  (1872) ;  "  Extinct
Vertebrata  of  the  Eocene  Formations  of  Wyo-
ming"  (1878);  "Cretaceous  Vertebrata  of  the
West  "  (1877) ;  and  "  Tertiary  Vertebrata  "  (1885).
To  the  theory  of  evolution  he  has  made  impor-
tant contributions,  among  which  are  "  On  the
Origin  of  Genera  "  (1868) ;  "  Hypothesis  of  Evolu-
tion, Physical  and  Metaphysical "  (1870) ;  "  Method
of  Creation  of  Organic  Types  "  (1871) ;  "  Evolution
and  its  Consequences  "  (1872) ;  "  Consciousness  in
Evolution  "  (1875) ;  "  Relation  of  Man  to  Tertiary
Mammalia"  (1875);  "On  the  Theory  of  Evolu-
tion "  (1876) ;  "  The  Origin  of  Will "  (1877) ;  "  The
Relation  of  Animal  Motion  to  Animal  Evolution  "
(1878);  "A  Review  of  the  Modern  Doctrine  of
Evolution"  (1870);  "Origin  of  Man  and  other
Vertebrates  "  (1885);  "  The  Energy  of  Life  Evolu-
tion and  how  it  has  acted  "  (1885) ;  "  The  Origin
of  the  Fittest "  (1886).

COPELAND,  Alfred  Bryant,  painter,  b.  in
Boston,  Mass.,  about  1840.  He  studied  in  the
Royal  academy  at  Antwerp,  lived  in  that  city  for
several  years,  and  brought  to  Boston  a  large  num-
ber of  original  paintings  and  copies.  He  became
art  professor  in  the  University  of  St.  Louis,  but
about  1877  opened  a  studio  in  Paris,  where  he
worked  in  crayon  and  oils.  He  exhibited  church
interiors  in  the  Paris  salon  in  1877-'8,  and  sent  to
Boston  a  collection  of  street  scenes  in  Paris.

COPELAND,  Joseph  T.,  soldier,  b.  in  Michi-
gan about  1830.  He  entered  the  1st  Michigan  cav-
alry, which  was  organized  during  the  summer  of
1861,  and  was  commissioned  lieutenant-colonel  on
22  Aug.  He  fought  through  the  Manassas  cam-
paign, returned  to  Detroit  in  July,  1862,  and  or-
ganized the  5th  cavalry,  of  which  he  became  colo-
nel, 14  Aug.,  and  on  29  Nov.,  1862,  was  appointed
a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers  and  assigned  to
the  command  of  the  Michigan  cavalry  brigade,
formed  at  Washington,  12  Dec.  The  brigade,
forming  part  of  Hooker's  cavalry,  was  in  Mary-
land after  Lee  had  crossed  the  Potomac,  They
were  the  first  Union  troops  to  occupy  Gettysburg ;
but  with  the  other  changes  of  commanders  then
carried  out,  Gen.  Copeland  transferred  his  com-
mand to  Gen.  Custer  just  before  the  battle,  1  July,
1868.  He  subsequently  commanded  a  draft  ren-
dezvous at  Annapolis  Junction,  Md..  and  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  and  then  the  post  and  military  prison  at
Alton,  111.,  until  the  close  of  the  war.

COPLEY,  John  Singleton,  painter,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  8  July,  1787;  d.  in  London,  9  Sept.,
1815.  He  is  commonly  called  self-taught,  but  he
probably  received  some  instruction  from  his  step-
father, Peter  Pelham,  who  died  in  1751.  Boston
was  then  a  small  provincial  town  where  art  was  al-
most unknown  and  good  instruction  unattainable.
Young  Copley  began  at  an  early  age  to  see  visions
of  lovely  forms  and  faces,  which  nature  impelled
him  to  reproduce  with  such  materials  as  he  could
procure  or  make  for  himself.  In  the  uncongenial
atmosphere  of  colonial  Boston  such  talent  was
phenomenal,  and,  as  he  was  really  successful  in  pro-
ducing likenesses,  he  soon  gained  local  celebrity  by
executing  portraits  of  many  members  of  the  lead-
ing families,  as  is  still  attested  by  almost  every
notable  collection  in  the  city.  In  1760  he  sent  to
Benjamin  West,  in  England,  without  name  or  ad-
dress, a  portrait,  which  at  once  gave  him  a  place


COPLEY


735


was


among  artists  of  recognized  merit.  This  painting
is  known  as  "  The  Boy  and  the  Flying  Squirrel,"
and  represents  the  artist's  half-brother,  Henry  Pel
ham.  Through  West's  influence  the  picture  waj
exhibited  at  Somer-
set house.  Its  Ameri-
can origin  was  at
once  suspected,  be-
cause the  wood  of
the  stretching-frame
was  made  of  Ameri-
can pine ;  but  the
authorship  was  not
decided  until,  after
long  delay,  the  let-
ter of  transmittal
reached  England.  In
1767,  on  West's  nom-
ination, Copley  was
elected  a  fellow  of
the  Society  of  artists
of  Great  Britain,  In
1769  he  married  Su-
sannah, daughter  of
Richard  Clarke,  a  lineal  descendant  of  Mary  Chilton,
who  came  from  England  in  the  "  Mayflower."  The
first  years  of  their  married  life  were  passed  in  Bos-
ton, in  a  solitary  house  on  Beacon  Hill,  where  four
children  were  born,  including  the  son  that  became
lord  chancellor  of  England,  During  these  years
correspondence  had  continued  with  English  ad-
mirers, and  in  1774  Copley  sailed  for  England,
and  after  a  short  sojourn  there  visited  Italy,  spend-
ing a  year  in  studying  the  old  masters,  and  then
settled  in  London,  Here  he  was  joined  by  his
wife,  and  he  thenceforward  made  it  his  home.  He
rose  with  almost  unprecedented  rapidity  to  the
height  of  professional  fame.  He  was  patronized
by  the  royal  family  and  the  nobility,  and  met  with
uninterrupted  success.  In  1777  he  was  elected  an
associate  member,  and  in  1779  a  full  member,  of
the  Royal  academy.  When  he  sent  copies  of  the
engraving  of  his  picture,  "  The  Death  of  Chat-
ham," to  Washington  and  John  Adams,  the  former
wrote,  "  It  is  rendered  more  estimable  in  my  eye
wheu  I  remember  that  America  gave  birth  to  the
celebrated  artist  who  produced  it,"  Adams  said,
"  I  shall  preserve  my  copy,  both  as  a  token  of  your
friendship  and  as  an  indubitable  proof  of  Ameri-
can genius."  Although  he  was  essentially  a  por-
trait-painter, Copley  composed  some  large  histori-
cal works,  of  which  the  "  Death  of  Chatham,"  the
"  Death  of  Major  Pierson,"  and  the  "  Siege  of  Gib-
raltar "  are  in  the  National  gallery,  London.  The
first  two  of  these  and  his  "  (Jharles  I.  demanding
in  the  House  of  Commons  the  Five  Impeached
Members  "  were  engraved  and  became  very  popu-
lar. Among  his  other  historical  works  are  "  Offer
of  the  Crown  to  Lady  Jane  Gray  "  (1808) ;  "  King
Charles  signing  Stratford's  Death-Warrant "  ;  "As-
sassination of  Buckingham " ;  "  Battle  of  the
Boyne  "  ;  "  King  Charles  addressing  the  Citizens
of  London";  "The  Five  Impeached  Members
brought  back  in  Triumph  " ;  and  "  The  King's  Es-
cape from  Hampton  Court."  Among  his  best  por-
trait compositions  are  "  The  Daughters  of  Geoi-ge
III."  (Buckingham  Palace);  "The  Family  Pic-
ture "  (Charles  Amory,  Boston) :  "  The  Red  Cross
Knight "  (1788,  S.  G.  Dexter,  Boston) ;  "  Mrs.  Der-
bv  as  St.  Cecilia"  (W.  Appleton,  Boston);  and
"'Mrs.  D.  D.  Rogers  "  (1789,  H.  B.  Rogers,  Boston).
Most  of  Copley's  best  works  were  collected  by  his
son.  Lord  Chancellor  Lyndhurst,  and  were  dis-
persed at  his  sale  in  1864.  See  A.  T.  Perkins's
"Life  of  J,  S,  Copley"  (1878);  "Memorial  His-


736


COPPEE


CORBIN


tory  of  Boston  "  IV.  (1881) ;  and  Mrs.  Martha  B.
Amory's  "  Life  of  J.  S.  Copley  "  (1882).— His  son,
John  Singleton,  Jr.,  afterward  Baron  Lyndhurst,
b.  in  Boston,  21  May,  1772  ;  d.  at  Tunbridge  Wells,
England,  11  Oct.,  1803.  His  father  attempted  to
educate  him  as  an  artist ;  but  he  had  no  taste  for
that  profession,  and  is  credited  with  having  de-
clared in  a  fit  of  childish  iinpatience  that  coming
generations  should  speak  of  "  Copley  the  father  of
the  lord  chancellor,  not  of  Copley  the  son  of  the
painter."  He  was  graduated  with  high  honor  at
Cambridge  in  1795,  and  shortly  afterward  visited
the  United  States  with  a  view  to  regain  his  father's
property  in  Boston,  which  had  been  sold  through
a  mistake.  This  he  failed  to  accomplish,  but  spent
some  time  in  this  country,  visiting  Washington  at
Mount  Vernon,  and  travelling  extensively  through
the  northern  and  middle  Atlantic  states.  Of  his
experiences  he  made  copious  notes  and  wrote  de-
scriptive letters  in  Latin  to  the  vice-chancellor  of
Cambridge  university.  Returning  to  England  in
1798,  he  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1804,  and  entered
parliament  in  1818.  In  1827  he  became  chancellor,
and  was  raised  to  the  peerage  as  Baron  Lyndhurst
of  Lyndhurst,  27  April  the  same  year.  He  was
twice  married,  but,  as  he  had  no  male  issue,  the
title  lapsed  at  his  death.  See  Lord  John  Camp-
bell's "Lives  of  the  Lord  Chancellors"  (7  vols..
London,  184(>-'7);  "Select  Biographical  Sketches,"
by  William  Heath  Bennet ;  "  Life  of  John  Single-
ton Copley "  (supra) ;  and  "  Life  of  Lord  Lynd-
hurst," by, Sir  Theodore  Martin  (London,  1883).

COPPEE,  Henry,  educator,  b.  in  Savannah,
Ga.,  13  Oct.,  1821.  He  spent  two  years  at  Yale  in
the  class  of  1839,  then  studied  civil  engineering,  and
was  employed  in  the  construction  of  the  Georgia
Central  railroad  in  1837-'40,  entered  the  U.  S.
military  academy  in  1841,  and  after  graduation  in
1845  served  as  an  officer  of  artillery  through  the
Mexican  war,  receiving  the  brevet  of  captain  for
gallantry  at  Contreras  and  Churubusco.  He  was
principal  assistant  professor  of  geography,  history,
and  ethics  at  West  Point  from  14  Jan..  1850,  nntil
16  May,  1855,  and  on  30  June,  1855,  resigned  from
the  army  and  became  professor  of  English  litera-
ture in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  where  he
remained  until  1866,  when  he  accepted  the  presi-
dency of  Lehigh  university  at  Bethlehem,  Pa.  In
1875  he  exchanged  the  presidency  for  the  profes-
sorship of  history.  In  1874  Br.  Coppee  was  ap-
pointed one  of  the  regents  of  the  Smithsonian  in-
stitution, and  twice  he  served  on  the  assay  com-
mission of  the  U.  S.  mint.  In  1864-'6  he  edited
the  "  United  States  Service  Magazine."  He  has
published  "Elements  of  Logic"  (Philadelphia,
1857) ;  "  Gallery  of  Famous  Poets  "  (1858) ;  "  Ele-
ments of  Rhetoric"  (1859);  "Gallery  of  Distin-
guished Poetesses"  (I860);  "Select  Academic
Speaker"  (1861);  "Manual  of  Battalion  Drill"
(1862) ;  "  Evolutions  of  the  Line  "  (1862) ;  "  Manu-
al of  Court-Martial "  (1863) ;  "  Songs  of  Praise  in
the  Christian  Centuries"  (1864);  "Life  and  Ser-
vices of  Gen.  U.  S.  Grant "  (New  York,  1866) ;  a
manual  of  "  English  Literature "  (Philadelphia,
1872) ;  "  Lectures  on  English  Literature  "  (1872) ;
and  "  The  Conquest  of  Spain  by  the  Arab-Moors  "
(Boston,  1881).  He  has  also  edited  a  translation
of  Marmont's  "  Esprit  des  institutions  militaires  "
(1862),  and  one  of  "  La  guerre  civile  en  Amerique  "
by  the  Comte  de  Paris.

COPWAY,  George,  Indian  chief  and  author,  b.
in  Michigan  in  August,  1820.  His  name  in  the
Ojibway  language,  in  which  tribe  he  was  born,  is
Kahgegwaoebow.  He  was  for  many  years  con-
nected with  the  press  of  New  York  city,  and  lec-


tured extensively  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.
Among  his  publications  are  a  translation  of  the
"  Acts  of  the  Apostles  "  into  his  native  language
(1838) ;  "  Recollections  of  a  Forest  Life  "  (1847) ;
"  The  Ojibway  Conquest,"  a  poem  (New  York,
1850) ;  "  Traditional  History  and  Characteristic
Sketches  of  the  Ojibway  Nation"  (Boston,  1850);
"Organization  of  a  New  Indian  Territory"  (1850);
"Running  Sketches  of  Men  and  Places  in  Eng-
land, France,  Germany,  Belgium,  and  Scotland "
(New  York,  1851) ;  and  "  Copway's  American
Indian."  See  "Life,  Letters,  and  Speeches  of
Kah-ge-ga-gah-bowb  "  (New  York,  1850).

CORAM,  Thomas,  English  philanthropist,  b.
about  1668;  d.  29  March,  1751.  He  was  a  sailor  in
early  life,  rose  to  be  captain  of  a  merchantman,
lived  several  years  in  Taunton,  Mass.,  where  he
followed  fanning  and  boat-building,  returned  to
England  in  1703,  and  devoted  himself  to  charitable
works,  especially  the  establishment  of  a  foundling
hospital  in  London,  which,  after  seventeen  years
of  exertion,  was  opened  on  17  Oct.,  1740.  He  was
also  a  promoter  of  English  settlements  in  Georgia
and  Nova  Scotia.  Having  expended  his  fortune
in  benevolent  enterprises  in  his  old  age,  he  was  the
recipient  of  an  annuity  obtained  by  subscription.
He  was  instrumental  in  promoting  American  com-
merce by  securing  an  act  of  parliament  granting  a
bounty  on  naval  stores  of  colonial  production.  At
the  time  of  his  death  he  was  engaged  on  a  scheme
for  the  education  of  Indian  girls.

CORAS,  Jose  Zacarias,  sculptor,  b.  in  Mexico
in  1752;  d.  in  Mexico  in  1819.  His  statues  of  the
crucifixion  are  noted  for  the  profound  agony  in
the  face  of  Christ.  The  two  statues  that  crown
the  tower  of  the  Mexican  cathedral  are  his  work.

CORBETT,  Henry  Winslow,  senator,  b.  in
Westboro,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,  1827  He  accompanied,
his  parents  to  Washington  county,  N.  Y.,  received
an  academic  education, entered  a  store  at  Cambridge
in  1840,  removed  to  New  York  city  in  1843,  and
continued  in  mercantile  business  there  for  seven
years.  In  1850  he  shipped  a  quantity  of  goods  to
Portland,  Oregon,  and  the  following  spring  settled
in  that  territory  and  became  a  prominent  mer-
chant, and  in  1867  a  banker,  in  Portland.  He  has
held  various  local  offices,  and  was  active  in  the
organization  of  the  republican  party  in  Oregon.
He  was  a  delegate  to  the  Republican  national  con-
vention of  1860,  and  chairman  of  the  state  central
committee  in  1859-60, and  in  1866  was  elected  U.S.
senator,  serving  from  1867  till  3  March,  1873.

CORBIN,  Margaret,  patriot,  b.  about  1750.
She  was  the  wife  of  a  soldier,  and  was  wounded  by
three  grape-shot  in  the  shoulder  and  utterly  dis-
aoled  at  Fort  Washington,  16  Nov.,  1776,  while  she
heroically  filled  the  post  of  her  husband,  who  was
killed  by  her  side  while  serving  a  piece  of  artillery.
The  council  of  Pennsylvania  in  1779  appealed  to
the  board  of  war  in  her  behalf,  and  in  consequence
she  received  from  congress  a  pension  of  one  half
of  the  monthly  pay  drawn  by  a  soldier  while  in
service.  The  board  of  war,  having  received  further
information  in  1780  that  her  wound  deprived  her
of  the  use  of  one  arm,  recominended  that  she  re-
ceive annually  "one  compleat  suit  of  cloaths  out
of  the  public  stores,  or  the  value  thereof  in  money,"
in  addition  to  the  provision  previously  made.

CORBIN,  Tliomas  G.,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Vir-
ginia, 13  Aug.,  1820;  d.  in  1886.  He  was  ap-
pointed a  midshipman,  15  May,  1838,  served  on
the  coast  survey  and  in  the  Brazilian  and  Pa-
cific squadrons,  was  commissioned  lieutenant,  10
June,  1852,  and  employed  in  the  survey  of  the
river  Plata  during  1853-'5. He  was  attached  to


CORCORAN


CORCORAN


737


the  steamer  "Wabash,"  of  the  South  Atlantic
blockading  squadron,  in  18(Jl-'3,  and  at  the  battle
of  Port  Royal,  7  Nov.,  1861,  taking  part  in  the
capture  of  I  orts  Beauregard  and  Walker.  He  was
commissioned  commander,  16  July,  1863,  and  was
commandant  at  the  naval  academy  in  1863.  In
1864-'5  he  commanded  the  steamer  "Augusta,"
served  as  fleet-captain  of  the  West  India  squad-
ron in  1865-6,  was  commissioned  captain,  25  July,
1866,  made  his  last  cruise  in  command  of  the  flag-
ship "  Guerriere,"  of  the  South  Atlantic  squad-
ron, in  1868,  and  afterward  served  on  ordnance
duty  at  Philadelphia.  He  was  retired  5  Jan.,  1874.
CORCORAN,  James  A.,  clergyman,  b.  in
Charleston,  S.  C,  in  1820.  Pie  was  sent  to  Rome
at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and  studied  at  the  Univer-
sity of  the  propaganda.  He  was  graduated  with
the  reputation  of  the  best  linguist  among  the  stu-
dents of  his  time,  was  ordained  in  1842,  returned
to  Charleston  in  1843  and  organized  the  Diocesan
seminary,  in  which  he  was  appointed  professor  of
theology  in  1844.  He  held  this  place  till  1851,  be-
ing also  pastor  at  the  cathedral  and  chaplain  to
the  Sisters.  He  was  for  fifteen  years  editor  of  the
"  United  States  Catholic  Miscellany."  He  was
chosen  secretary  of  the  Baltimore  provincial  coun-
cils of  1855  and  1858,  and  of  the  plenary  council
of  1866.  As  his  duties  consisted  in  preparing
matter  for  the  sessions  of  these  bodies,  framing  de-
crees, and  reducing  everything  to  order  and  system.
Dr.  Corcoran  has  had  considerable  influence  on  the
legislation  of  the  Catholic  church  in  the  United
States.  He  accompanied  the  four  doctors  sent  by
Gen.  Beauregard  in  1862  to  the  relief  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  Wilmington  who  were  suffering  from
yellow  fever,  and  continued  to  be  their  pastor  till
1868.  He  was  present  at  the  general  council  of
the  Vatican,  being  selected  by  the  American  bish-
ops as  a  representative  doctor  of  the  Catholic
church  of  the  United  States,  and  in  1870  was  ap-
pointed professor  in  the  Seminary  of  St.  Charles
Borromeo,  Philadelphia,  and  founded  the  "  Catho-
lic Quarterly  Review,"  of  which  he  is  editor.

CORCORAN,  Michael, soldier,  b.  in  Carrow-
keel,  county  Sligo,  Ireland,  21 Sept., 1827; d.

near  Fairfax
Court- House,
Va.,  22  Dec,
1863.  He  was
the  son  of  a
captain  in  the
British  army,
received  a
good  educa-
tion, and  was
appointed  in
the  Irish  con-
stabulary at
the  early  age
of  eighteen,
but  resigned
his  commis-
sion from  pa-
triotic mo-
tives in  1849,
emigrated  to
the  United
States,  and
settled  in  New
York  city,
where  he  ob-
tained a  clerk-
ship in  the  post-office,  and  afterward  in  the  office  of
the  city  register.  He  entered  the  69th  regiment  of
New  York  militia  as  a  private,  rose  through  the  suc-
voL.  I. — 47


cessive  grades,  and  in  August,  1859,  was  elected
colonel.  When  the  militia  paraded  in  honor  of  the
Prince  of  Wales  in  1860,  he  refused  to  order  out
his  regiment,  for  which  he  was  subjected  to  a  trial
by  court-martial  that  was  still  pending  when  the
civil  war  began.  Upon  the  first  call  of  the  presi-
dent for  troops.  Col.  Corcoran  led  the  69th  regi-
ment to  the  seat  of  war.  It  was  ordered  into
Virginia,  built  Fort  Corcoran  on  Arlington  heights,
and  fought  with  impetuous  valor  at  the  battle  of
Bull  Run,  21  July,  1861.  The  colonel  was  wounded
and  taken  prisoner,  and  was  first  sent  to  Rich-
mond, and  afterward  taken  to  Charleston,  Colum-
bia, Salisbury,  back  to  Richmond,  and  to  other
places,  being  kept  in  close  confinement  for  nearly
a  year.  With  some  other  national  officers  he  was
reserved  for  execution  in  case  the  U.  S.  government
carried  out  its  threat  of  punishing  the  crews  of
captured  privateers.  He  was  offered  his  liberty
on  condition  of  not  again  taking  up  arms  against
the  south,  but  refused  to  accept  it  on  such  terms.
An  exchange  being  finally  effected,  15  Aug.,  1862,
he  was  released,  and  commissioned  brigadier-gen-
eral, dating  from  21  July,  1861.  He  next  organ-
ized the  Corcoran  legion,  which  took  part  in  the
battles  of  the  Nansemond  river  and  Suffolk,  during
April,  1863,  and  held  the  advance  of  the  enemy
upon  Norfolk  in  check.  In  August,  1863,  the
legion  was  attached  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.
Gen.  Corcoran  was  killed  by  the  falling  of  his
horse  upon  him  while  he  was  riding  in  company
with  Gen.  Thomas  Francis  Meagher.

CORCORAN,  William  Wilson,  banker,  b.  in
Georgetown,  D.  C,  27  Dec,  1798 ;  d.  in  Washing-
ton, D.  C,  24  Feb.,  1888.  His  father,  Thomas,  was
born  in  Limerick,  Ireland,  and,  coming  to  this  coun-
try in  1783,  married  Hannah  Lemmon,  of  Balti-
more county,  Md.,  in  1788,  and  settled  in  George-
town, then  a  busy  commercial  port.  Here  he
prospered  in  business,  and  became  a  magistrate,
member  of  the  levy  court,  postmaster,  and  college
trustee.  The  son,  after  pursuing  classical  and
mathematical  studies  in  private  schools  and  in
Georgetown  college,  entered  upon  business  at  the
age  of  seventeen,  at  first  under  the  direction  of
two  older  brother^,  who  combined  with  the  dry-
goods  trade  a  wholesale  auction  and  commission
business,  ancl  were  very  prosperous  until  1823,
when,  in  a  time  of  general  financial  stringency,
they  were  compelled  to  suspend,  after  sinking  more
than  their  capital  in  a  resolute  effort  to  maintain
their  credit.  As  it  was,  they  paid  in  full  all  con-
fidential debts,  and  compromised  with  their  re-
maining creditors  at  the  rate  of  fifty  per  cent.  In
1828  Mr.  Corcoran  took  charge  of  the  large  real
estate  held  in  the  District  of  Columbia  by  the  U.
S.  bank  and  the  Bank  of  Columbia,  and,  after  his
father's  death  in  1830,  devoted  himself  with  unre-
mitting assiduity  to  this  responsible  trust  until  1836.
In  1835  he  married  Louise  Amory  Morris,  daugh-
ter of  Com.  Charles  Morris.  Mrs.  Corcoran  died  in
1840,  leaving  a  beloved  memory,  which,  with  that
of  the  daughter,  is  shrined  in  "The Louise  Home."
In  1837  Mr.  Coi'coran  began  business  as  a  broker
and  banker  in  Washington,  and  three  years  later
he  called  the  late  George  W.  Riggs  into  partnership
with  him,  and  in  1845  the  firm  established  itself  at
the  seat  of  the  old  U.  S.  bank  in  Washington.
Among  the  first  uses  that  Mr.  Corcoran  made  of
his  accumulations  was  the  disbursement  of  $46,000
in  absolute  discharge  of  the  debts  for  which  a  legal
compromise  had  been  made  in  1823.  He  paid  them
all  to  the  uttermost  farthing,  with  interest)  calcu-
lated to  the  date  of  this  complete  settlement.  The
firm  of  Corcoran  &  Riggs  was  now  strong  enough


738


c6rdova


C6RD0VA


to  take  on  its  own  account  nearly  all  the  loans  of
the  government.  At  one  stage  of  its  operations,
during  the  Mexican  war,  its  transactions  under  this
head  were  so  bold  that  Mr.  Riggs  thought  it  more
prudent  to  retire  from  the  partnership.  Mr.  Cor-
coran now  found  himself  with  twelve  millions  of
the  United  States  six-per-cent.  loan  on  his  hands,  in
a  falling  market,  which  had  already  sunk  one  per
cent,  below  the  price  at  which  he  had  taken  the
whole  loan.  Nothing  daunted,  he  embarked  at
once  for  London,  and  there  succeeded,  through  the
faith  inspired  by  his  business  Judgment  and  honor,
in  enlisting  its  greatest  banking-houses  in  support
of  a  loan  that  seemed  perilous,  but  that  subse-
quently rose  to  a  high  premium  and  proved  a
source  of  great  profit  to  all  interested  in  it,  besides
bringing  a  relief  to  the  exchanges  of  the  United
States.  This  negotiation,  so  creditable  to  his
sagacity,  courage,  and  integrity,  laid  the  basis  of
that  large  wealth  which  subsequently  came  to  be
reckoned  by  the  millions.  He  retired  from  the
banking  business  in  1854,  and  has  since  given  him-
self entirely  to  the  management  of  his  own  affairs.
Plans  of  benevolence  have  taken  the  foremost  place
in  his  solicitudes,  and  in  shapes  so  multiform  that
they  have  left  no  aspect  of  human  life  untouched


by  his  beneficence.  The  beautiful  cemetery  of  Oak
Hill,  crowning  the  slopes  of  Georgetown,  marks
his  tender  respect  for  the  dead :  the  Louise  Home,
his  provident  care  for  impoverished  gentlewomen  ;
the  Corcoran  gallery  of  art  (see  illustration),  with
its  magnificent  endowment,  his  patronage  of  the
fine  arts ;  his  rich  benefactions  to  colleges  and  uni-
versities, his  love  of  learning;  countless  gifts  to
churches,  church  homes,  and  theological  seminaries,
his  reverence  for  religion ;  ceaseless  contributions
to  institutions  of  public  charity,  his  sympathy  for
human  suffering.  It  is  estimated  that  his  charities,
including  private  ones,  exceed  the  aggregate  amount
of  $5,000,000.  Mr.  Corcoran  has  long  made  his
home  in  Washington  the  seat  of  an  elegant  hospi-
tality and  a  centre  of  social  influence,  as  being  the
favorite  meeting-place  of  scholars,  artists,  states-
men, diplomatists,  and  distinguished  strangers.

CORDOVA,  Francisco  de  (cor'-do-vah),  clergy-
man, b.  in  Spain ;  d.  in  Cumana,  Venezuela,  in
1514.  He  was  sent  by  Peter  de  Cordova  with  Juan
Garces  to  convert  the  natives  of  Venezuela  in  1514.
They  arrived  at  Cumana,  where  the  Indians  re-
ceived them  with  kindness,  and  were  making
numerous  conversions  when  a  Spanish  vessel  visited
the  coast  with  the  object  of  carrying  off  and  selling
the  natives.  The  captain  and  crew  were  well
treated  for  the  sake  of  the  missionaries,  and  the
captain  invited  the  cacique  and  principal  Indians
on  board.  As  soon  as  they  were  on  deck  they
were  seized  and  thrown  into  chains,  and  the  vessel
then  sailed  for  Santo  Domingo.  The  Indians
rushed  to  the  house  of  the  two  Dominicans  and


were  about  to  kill  them,  when  the  priests  obtained
a  respite  by  promising  that  if  the  cacique  and  his
companions  were  not  restored  in  four  months  they
would  submit  to  their  fate.  Meanwhile  another
Spanish  ship  arrived,  on  which  Francisco  de  Cor-
dova and  his  companion  could  easily  have  made
their  escape ;  but  they  contented  themselves  with
begging  the  captain  to  return  promptly  to  Santo
Domingo  and  state  the  facts  to  the  admiral  and
Peter  de  Cordova.  The  captain  executed  his  com-
mission, but  was  too  late.  The  cacique  and  his
chiefs  had  been  sold,  and  the  purchasers  refused  to
surrender  them.  The  king  of  Spain  ordered  the
pirates  to  be  tried  and  the  cacique  and  his  com-  /
panions  restored  to  freedom.  The  four  months,
however,  had  elapsed  without  the  Indians  hearing
news  of  their  countrymen,  and  Francisco  de  Cor-
dova and  his  companion  were  slain,  these  being  the
first, Dominican  martyrs  of  the  New  World.

CORDOVA,  Francisco  Fernandez  de,  dis-
coverer of  Mexico ;  d,  in  1518.  On  8  Feb.,  1517,  this
navigator  sailed  from  Cuba  with  Juan  Alaminos,  a
pilot,  who  had  accompanied  Columbus  in  his  fourth
voyage,  steered  for  the  continent,  and  in  March
ranged  the  coast  of  Yucatan,  where  he  lost  many
men  in  his  various  encounters  with  the  natives.  It
appears  certain  that  Cordova  left  two  of  his  com-
panions in  this  region ;  for  in  1518,  when  Grijalva
explored  the  country,  he  was  informed  that  one  of
them  survived,  but  was  unable  to  procure  his  re-
lease. After  exploring  the  coast,  and  remarking
the  grand  monumental  structures  of  Yucatan,  he
was  forced  by  a  tempest  to  abandon  its  shores.  He
visited  Florida  five  years  after  the  expedition  of
Ponce  de  Leon,  and,  on  returning  to  Cuba,  died,  ten
days  after  his  arrival,  of  wounds  received  from  the
natives.  He  was  a  rich  settler  in  Cuba  before  he
undertook  his  expedition.

CORDOVA,  Jose  M.,  Colombian  general,  b.  in
Antoquia,  New  Granada,  in  1797;  killed  at  San-
tuario,  17  Oct.,  1829.  He  was  the  son  of  a  rich
merchant  of  the  Spanish  party,  but  when  fifteen
years  of  age  Joined  the  Independents.  His  con-
duct at  the  battle  of  Boyaca,  8  Aug.,  1819,  gained
him  the  rank  of  colonel,  and  he  was  charged
with  the  expulsion  of  the  royalists  from  Antoquia.
This  duty  he  successfully  performed  ;  and  his  first
care  was  to  levy  on  his  own  father  the  sum  of  $10,-
000.  His  exactions  occasioned  his  recall,  but  he
distinguished  himself  in  many  combats  on  the
banks  of  the  Magdalena.  By  a  skilful  manoeuvre
he  captured  a  Spanish  fleet  of  twenty-seven  vessels
at  anchor  in  the  port  of  Teneriffe,  and,  after  a
bloody  battle,  took  possession  of  the  town.  He
was  made  a  general,  and  was  in  the  Colombian
division  left  by  Bolivar  in  Peru.  On  9  Dec,  1824,
Cordova  participated  in  the  victory  of  Ayacucho,
and  he  was  named  general  of  division  on  the
field.  Covering  his  ambition  with  the  pretext  of
establishing  a  federal  government,  he  conspired
many  times  against  Bolivar,  and  openly  revolted
in  August,  1829,  but  found  few  partisans.  He  was
hunted  at  Santuario,  17  Oct.,  by  the  united  forces
of  Andrada,  Ureta,  and  O'Leary,  and  defended  him-
self with  vigor,  but  fell  covered  with  wounds.

CORDOVA,  Jos6  Maria,  South  American
soldier,  b.  in  Cajamarca,  Peru.  14  Jan.,  178G ;  d.
near  the  same  city,  18  Oct.,  1846.  He  was  the  son
of  wealthy  parents,  who  sent  him  to  Spain  for  his
military  studies,  and,  after  finishing  them,  he
entered  the  Spanish  army  and  fought  against  the
French  when  they  invaded  the  peninsula.  But,  on
hearing  of  the  revolutionary  movement  in  Peru,
he  deserted  his  colors,  although  he  was  a  captain
of  cavalry,  and  fled  to  his  own  country. There  he


CORDOVA


CORLEY


739


took  service  under  the  insurgent  Gen.  Rondeau,
and  was  with  him  in  many  battles  fought  in  upper
Peru  (now  Bolivia).  He  was  promoted  to  the  rank
of  colonel  in  1818,  and  given  command  of  the
guerillas,  with  which,  in  1814,  he  continually  mo-
lested the  Spanish  Gen.  Pezuela,  forcing  him  to
retreat  to  Suipacha ;  but  Pezuela  afterward  routed
both  Rondeau  and  Cordova,  then  commanding  a
division,  at  Viluma,  near  Cuzco,  on  15  Nov.,  1815.
Then  Cordova  offered  his  services  to  Gen.  San
Martin,  who  was  preparing  an  expedition  to  Chili,
and,  having  distinguished  himself  at  tne  battle  of
Chacabuco,  Chili,  was  appointed  colonel  in  the
Chilian  army,  and  as  such  fought  at  Cancha  Ra-
yada  and  Maipo  in  1818.  On  14  Jan.,  1819,  he
embarked  in  one  of  the  Chilian  vessels  commanded
by  Lord  Cochrane,  took  an  important  part  in  several
unsuccessful  attacks  upon  Callao,  returned  to  Chili,
afterward  accompanied  San  Martin  when  he  landed
at  Pisco,  8  Sept.,  1820,  was  awarded  the  rank  of
brigadier-general,  and  finally  entered  Lima  with
San  Martin,  12  July,  1821.  The  constituent  con-
gress of  Peru  appointed  Cordova  general  of  divis-
ion, and  elected  him  a  member  of  the  triumvirate
intrusted  with  the  government  of  the  country,
and  subsequently  was  defeated,  18  June,  1823,  by
Canterac,  the  Spanish  general  that  entered  Lima*;
then  Cordova  joined  Gen.  Sucre,  with  whom  he
entered  Arequipa,  30  Aug.,  and  on  5  Aug.,  1824,
took  part  in  the  defeat  of  the  royalists  at  Junin,
when  he  commanded  the  centre  of  the  army  under
Bolivar.  At  the  battle  of  Ayacucho.  9  Dec,  1824,
Cordova  decided  the  victory  for  the  revolutionary
forces  by  defeating  the  three  portions  of  the  royal-
ist army  in  succession,  and  taking  prisoners  Vice-
roy Laserna  and  Gen.  Moret,  even  after  the  divis-
ion under  Sucre,  the  commander-in-chief  of  the
revolutionary  troops,  had  been  routed  by  the  Span-
iards. That  was  the  end  of  the  Spanish-American
war  of  independence.  In  December,  1827,  the  Pe-
ruvian people  elected  Gen.  Cordova  vice-president
and  he  acted  as  such  for  six  years,  afterward  retir-
ing to  his  farm  at  Cajamarca,  where  he  died.

CORDOVA,  Pedro  de,  clergyman,  b.  in  Spain
in  1460 ;  d.  in  Santo  Domingo  in  1525.  He  entered
the  Dominican  order  and  embarked  with  two  other
Dominicans  for  Santo  Domingo  in  1510.  His  aus-
tere life  commended  the  veneration  of  the  Span-
iards, as  well  as  of  the  Indians.  In  conjunction
with  his  companions,  he  established  schools  in
every  part  of  the  island  for  the  natives  and  the
children  of  the  colonists.  But  when  he  attempted
to  free  the  Indians  from  the  slavery  to  which  the
Spaniards  had  reduced  them,  he  became  the  object
of  bitter  hatred.  The  feeling  was  increased  when
he  refused  to  censure  a  monk  who  had  preached
sermons  against  the  cruelty  of  the  colonists.  He
then  set  out  for  Spain,  and  laid  the  wrongs  of  the
Indians  before  the  great  council  and  the  king.
Some  regulations  were  made  for  bettering  their
condition,  but,  knowing  that  these  would  be  futile
as  long  as  the  natives  were  portioned  out  among
the  colonists,  he  demanded  permission  for  himself
and  his  brethren  to  leave  the  island  and  preach  the
gospel  in  parts  of  America  where  the  Spaniards
had  not  formed  settlements.  This  permission  was
refused  by  the  king,  who,  however,  made  him  a
member  of  the  royal  audience  of  Hispaniola,  capi-
tal of  the  island  of  Santo  Domingo.  He  returned
to  America,  bringing  with  him  fourteen  friars  from
the  convent  of  Salamanca.  In  1512  he  laid  the
foundations  of  the  convent  of  Santa  Cruz,  in  Santo
Domingo,  the  first  convent  of  the  Dominican  order
erected  in  the  New  World.  Between  1514  and
1519  he  despatched  three  bodies  of  missionaries  to


Venezuela,  and  all  of  them  perished  at  the  hands
of  the  natives.  In  the  same  year  Pedro  de  Cor-
dova accompanied  a  body  of  colonists  to  the  island
of  Santa  Marguerita.  The  islanders  received  them
so  favorably,  and  showed  so  much  disposition  to
embrace  Christianity,  that  he  sent  the  vessels  back
to  Santo  Domingo  for  new  colonists.  No  sooner,
however,  were  the  ships  out  of  sight  than  the  na-
tives rose  and  massacred  all  the  Spaniards,  with  the
exception  of  Pedro  de  Cordova  and  another,  who
escaped  to  the  shore,  where  they  found  a  boat.  On
returning,  he  resumed  direction  of  the  convent  of
Santa  Cruz.  The  pope  named  him  grand  inquisi-
tor of  all  the  Indias,  and  at  his  instance  Charles  V.
founded  the  Roval  university  of  Hispaniola.

CORDU.BA  Y  SALINAS,  clergyman,  lived  in
the  17th  century.  He  published  the  "  Vida,  Virtu-
tes  y  Milagros  del  Apostol  del  Piru"(lG30)  and
"  Epitome  de  la  Historia  de  la  Provincia  de  los
doce  Apostoles  en  la  Provincia  del  Piru"(1651);
and  also  wrote  "  Monarchiam  Limensem."

COREAL,  Francisco  (kor-ray'-al),  Spanish
traveller,  b.  in  Cartagena  in  1G48;  d.  in  1708.  He
left  Cartagena  in  1(566,  went  to  the  West  Indies,
and  then  visited  Florida  and  Mexico.  After  trav-
elling in  several  North  American  regions  he  made
explorations  in  Brazil  as  well  as  in  Uruguay,  along
the  river  Plate,  and  in  Peru.  He  passed  the
Panama  isthmus  for  the  third  time  in  1679,  and
returned  to  his  country,  where  he  published  his
"  Viaje  a  las  Indias  Occidentales,"  a  narrative  of
his  travels,  which  was  translated  and  printed  in
French  (3  vols.,  1722).  Some  have  thought  that
Coreal  was  only  the  pseudonym  used  by  an  un-
known author  who  was  not  the  real  traveller.

COREY,  Charles  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  at  New
Canaan,  New  Brunswick,  12  Dec,  1834.  He  was
graduated  at  Acadia  college,  Nova  Scotia,  and  at
Newton  theological  seminary  in  1861.  Not  long
after  his  ordination  to  the  Baptist  ministry  he  re-
signed his  charge,  to  enter  the  service  of  the  U.  S.
Christian  commission,  and  remained  in  that  ser-
vice until  the  end  of  the  war.  In  1867  he  was  ap-
pointed principal  of  the  Augusta  institute,  Au-
gusta, Ga.,  and  in  the  next  year  was  transferred  to
Richmond,  Va.,  as  president  of  an  institution  for
the  training  of  colored  preachers  and  teachers.  In
this  work  he  has  been  eminently  successful.

CORLET,  Elijah,  educator,  "b.  in  London,  Eng-
land, in  1611 ;  d.  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  24  Feb.,
1687.  He  was  graduated  at  Oxford  in  1627,  estab-
lished himself  in  Cambridge  soon  after  the  settle-
ment of  the  town,  and  taught  the  grammar-school
there  for  forty-six  years.  The  Society  for  the
propagation  of  the  gospel  compensated  him  for
preparing  Indian  scholars  for  the  university.  Ne-
hemiah  Walter  published  an  elegy  on  his  death.

CORLEY,  Manuel  Simeon,  patriot,  b.  in  Lex-
ington district,  S.  C,  10  Feb.,  1823.  He  received
an  academic  education,  was  apprenticed  to  a  tailor
in  1834,  and  began  business  for  himself  in  1838.
In  1846  he  began  to  write  for  the  press,  in  advocacy
of  temperance  and  other  reforms.  He  opposed  the
secession  doctrine  in  1851,  for  which  he  was  de-
nounced as  an  abolitionist  and  threatened  with  ex-
pulsion from  the  state.  He  defended  himself  in
articles  openly  avowing  his  principles,  which  were
only  received  by  the  newspapers  at  advertising
rates.  In  1852  he  made  a  tour  through  the  north,
and  wrote  a  series  of  letters  directed  against  sec-
tionalism to  the  "Southern  Patriot."  In  1855-'6
he  edited  the  South  Carolina  "  Temperance  Stand-
ard." A  patent  for  a  new  system  of  cutting  cloth-
ing was  issued  to  him  in  1857,  He  was  one  of  the
few  opponents  of  secession  in  South  Carolina  in


740


CORLISS


CORNBURY


1860,  was  compelled  to  serve  as  a  conscript  in  the
Confederate  army  in  1863,  and  after  his  capture
by  the  national '  troops  at  Petersburg,  2  April,
1865,  joyfully  look  the  oath  of  allegiance  and  re-
turned to  his  home.  He  opposed  the  policy  of  An-
drew Johnson  and  Gov.  Perry,  advocated  recon-
struction in  1866,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
constitutional  convention  of  1867,  in  which  he
introduced  the  resolutions  to  remove  the  provis-
ional government,  opposed  the  repudiation  of  the
slave  debts,  and  advocated  the  present  homestead
law  of  the  state.  He  was  elected  to  congress  in
1868,  and,  after  the  removal  of  his  technical  dis-
abilities, took  his  seat  on  25  July,  1868,  and  served
till  3  March.  1869.  He  introduced  joint  resolu-
tions for  the  better  protection  of  loyal  men  in  the
reconstructed  states  and  the  exclusion  of  secession-
ist text-books  from  the  schools,  and  earnestly  sup-
ported the  15th  amendment.  In  1869  he  was  ap-
pointed a  special  agent  of  the  U.  S.  treasury
department.  He  was  commissioner  of  the  State
board  of  agricultural  statistics  in  1870,  treasurer
of  Lexington  county  in  1874,  and  a  nominee  of  the
independent  party  for  state  comptroller  in  1882.

CORLISS,  George  Henry,  inventor,  b.  in  Eas-
ton.  N.  Y.,  2  June,  1817:  d.  in  Providence,  R.  L,  21
Feb.,  1888.  In  1825  his  father,  a  physician,  moved
to  Greenwich,  N.  Y.,  where  young  Corliss  attend-
ed school.  After  several  years  as  general  clerk  in
a  cotton-factory,  he  spent  three  years  in  Castleton
academy,  Vermont,  and  in  1838  opened  a  country
store  in  Greenwich.  He  first  showed  mechanical
skill  in  temporarily  rebuilding  a  bridge  that  had
been  washed  away  by  a  freshet,  after  it  had  been
decided  that  such  a  structure  was  impracticable.
He  afterward  constructed  a  machine  for  stitching
leather,  before  the  invention  of  the  original  Howe
sewing-machine.  He  moved  to  Providence,  R.  L,
in  1844,  and  in  1846  began  to  develop  improve-
ments in  steam-engines,  for  which  he  received  let-
ters-patent on  10  March,  1849.  By  these  improve-
ments uniformity  of  motion  was  secured  by  the
method  of  connecting  the  governor  with  the  cut-
off. The  governor  had  previously  been  made  to  do
the  work  of  moving  the  throttle-valve,  the  result
being  an  imperfect  response  and  a  great  loss  of
power.  In  the  Corliss  engine  the  governor  does  no
work,  but  simply  indicates  to  the  valves  the  work
to  be  done.  This  arrangement  also  prevents  waste
of  steam,  and  renders  the  working  of  the  engine  so
uniform  that,  if  all  but  one  of  a  hundred  looms  in
a  factory  be  suddenly  stopped,  that  one  will  go  on
working  at  the  same  rate.  It  has  been  said  that
ihese  improvements  have  revolutionized  the  con-
struction of  the  steam-engine.  In  introducing
their  new  engines,  the  inventor  and  manufacturers
adopted  the  novel  plan  of  offering  to  take  as  their
pay  the  saving  of  fuel  for  a  given  time.  In  one
case  the  saving  in  one  year  is  said  to  have  amounted
to  |4,000.  In  1856  the  Corliss  steam-engine  com-
pany was  incorporated,  and  Mr.  Corliss  became  its
president.  Its  works,  covering  many  acres  of
ground,  are  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  and  hundreds  of
its  engines  are  now  in  use.  Mr.  Corliss  received
awards  for  his  inventions  at  the  exhibitions  at  Paris
in  1867,  and  at  Vienna  in  1873,  and  was  given  the
Rumford  medal  by  the  American  academy  of  arts
and  sciences  in  1870.  In  1872  he  was  appointed
Centennial  commissioner  from  Rhode  Island,  and
was  one  of  the  executive  committee  of  seven  to
whom  was  intrusted  the  responsibility  of  the  pre-
liminary work.  In  January,  1875,  he  submitted
plans  for  a  single  engine  of  1,400  horse-power  to
move  all  the  machinery  in  the  exhibition.  Engi-
neers of  high  repute  predicted  that  it  would  be


noisy  and  troublesome,  but  it  was  completely  suc-
cessful, owing  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Corliss,  who  spent
$100,000  upon  it  above  the  appropriation  for  build-
ing it.  Special  contrivances  were  necessary  to  com-
pensate the  expansion  of  the  great  lengths  of  steam-
pipe  and  shafting,  which  would  otherwise  have
been  thrown  out  of  gear  by  a  change  of  tempera-
ture. The  cylinders  were  forty  inches  in  diameter,
with  ten-foot  stroke:  the  gear-wheel  was  thiity
feet  in  diameter:  and  the  whole  engine  weighed
700  tons.  ]M.  Bartholdi,  in  his  report  to  the  French
government,  said  that  it  belonged  to  the  category
of  works  of  art,  by  the  general  beauty  of  its  effect,
and  its  perfect  balance  to  the  eye.  Mr.  Corliss
invented  many  other  ingenious  devices,  among
which  is  a  machine  for  cutting  the  cogs  of  bevel-
wheels,  an  improved  boiler,  with  condensing  ap-
paratus for  marine-engines,  and  pumping-engines
for  water-works.  He  was  a  member  of  the  Rhode
Island  legislature  in  1868-'70,  and  was  a  republi-
can presidential  elector  in  1876.  The  Institute  of
France  gave  him,  in  1878,  the  Montyon  prize  for
that  year,  the  highest  honor  for  mechanical  achieve-
ment, and  in  February,  1886,  the  king  of  Belgium
made  him  an  "  Officer  of  the  Order  of  Leopold."

CORMIER,  Charles,  Canadian  senator,  b,  in
St.  Gregoire  le  Grand,  province  of  Quebec,  22  June,
1818.  He  is  a  grandson  of  Frangois  Cormier,  who
emigrated  from  France  to  Nova  Scotia.  He  is  a
mill-owner,  and  has  been  mayor  of  Plessisville,
president  of  the  commissioner's  court,  and  of  the
school  commissioners.  He  was  a  member  of  the
legislative  council  of  Canada  from  1862  until  the
union  in  1867,  when  he  was  called  to  the  senate.

CORNBURY,  Edward  Hyde,  Lord,  colonial
governor  of  New  York,  d.  in  London,  England,  1
April,  1723.  He  was  the  eldest  son  of  the  second
Earl  of  Clarendon,  and  was  one  of  the  first  officers
of  the  household  troops  to  abandon  the  cause  of
Ids  uncle  by  marriage,  James  LL,  in  1688,  and  join
the  standard  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  and  the
Princess  Anne,  his  cousin ;  in  reward  for  which
service  he  was  appointed  governor  of  New  York
and  New  Jersey.  He  arrived  in  New  York  city,  3
May,  1702.  The  assembly,  which  was  largely  com-
posed of  Orange  partisans,  the  followers  of  Leisler,
welcomed  the  new  governor,  voted  him  £2,000  to
pay  the  expenses  of  his  voyage,  and  provided  a
revenue  for  the  public  service  for  seven  years  in
advance.  Although  Cornbury  had  been  educated
at  Geneva,  he  was  a  foe  to  Presbyterianism,  and
the  colonists  soon  found  that  he  was  an  arrogant
and  bigoted  upholder  of  despotic  power  and  more
dishonest  and  rapacious  than  any  of  the  governor
that  had  preceded  him.  After  £1,500,  voted  in
April,  1703,  for  the  specific  purpose  of  fortifying
the  Narrows,  had  been  misappropriated,  the  assem-
bly in  June  petitioned  for  a  treasurer  of  its  own
nomination.  Lord  Cornbury  declared  that  the  as-
sembly had  no  rights  but  such  as  her  majesty  was
pleased  to  allow  them,  yet  the  queen  in  1704  ac-
knowledged the  right  to  make  specific  appropria-
tions, and  permitted  theappointmentof  a  treasurer
to  take  charge  of  extraordinary  grants.  The  gov-
ernor denied  the  right  of  ministers  or  school-teach-
ers to  practise  their  professions  without  a  special
license  from  him.  He  even  forged  a  standing  in-
struction in  order  to  favor  the  English  church.
In  Januiica,  L.  I.,  he  gave  to  the  Episcopalians  tbs
church  that  had  been  built  by  the  towns-people ;
but  the  colonial  courts  reversed  the  decree.  A
Presbyterian  clergyman,  who  was  tried  for  preach-
ing without  a  license,  was  acquitted  by  an  Episco
palian  jury.  In  New  Jersey  the  assembly  was  as
firm  in  resisting  the  governor's  demands  for  money


CORNELIUS

as  the  legislature  of  New  York.  In  1704  he  ex-
cluded from  the  New  Jersey  assembly  representa-
tives that  had  been  duly  elected.  After  two  as-
semblies had  been  angrily  dissolved,  the  third,  in
April,  1707,  sent  Lewis  Morris,  the  speaker,  with
a  remonstrance  to  the  governor.  In  New  York  the
assembly  was  likewise  twice  dissolved.  The  third
which  was  convened  in  August,  1708,  asserted  with
vigor  the  right  of  self-government  in  respect  to
taxation,  the  judiciary,  and  administration.  One
of  his  imbecile  freaks  was  to  attire  himself  like  a
woman,  and  in  that  disguise  to  patrol  the  fort  in
which  he  lived.  In  compliance  with  the  protests  of
the  colonists.  Lord  Cornbury  was  removed  in  that
year.  He  was  immediately  arrested  by  his  credit-
ors and  thrown  into  prison ;  but  upon  the  death
of  his  father  he  discharged  his  debts  and  returned
to  England  to  take  his  seat  in  the  house  of  lords
as  the  third  Enrl  Clarendon.  He  left  the  reputa-
tion of  being  the  worst  governor  that  New  York
had  ever  had;  but  his  administration  promoted
harmony  among  the  colonists  of  various  races  and
religions,  and  advanced  the  principles  of  liberty.

CORNELIUS,  Elias,  physician  and  patriot,  b.
on  Long  Island  in  1758;  d.  in  Somers,  N.  Y.,  13
June,  1823.  He  studied  medicine,  and  at  the  age
of  nineteen  obtained  the  appointment  of  surgeon's
mate  in  the  2d  Rhode  Island  regiment.  He  was
captured  and  confined  in  the  prison-ship  "Jersey,"
but  escaped  in  March,  1778,  rejoined  the  army,  and
continued  with  it  till  1781.  In  later  years  he  ob-
tained a  large  practice.— His  son,  Elias,  educator,
b.  in  Somers,  N.  Y.,  31  July,  1794 ;  d.  in  Hartford,
Conn.,  12  Feb.,  1832.  He  was  graduated  at  Yale
in  1813,  and  sent  to  the  Cherokee  and  Chickasaw
Indians  as  a  missionary.  He  was  ordained  an
evangelist  in  1817,  and  travelled  through  the  south,
raising  funds  to  found  Indian  missions.  The  cause
was  helped  by  his  "  Little  Osage  Girl,"  widely  read
in  Sunday-schools,  which  was  founded  on  the  story
of  a  child  that  he  rescued  from  the  Cherokees,  who
had  killed  and  scalped  her  mother.  In  1819  he  was
installed  as  the  colleague  of  Dr.  Worcester  in  the
Tabernacle  church  at  Salem,  Mass.  After  Dr.  Wor-
cester's death  in  1821,  Mr.  Cornelius  remained  in
the  pastorate  until  1826,  when  he  accepted  the  sec-
retaryship of  the  American  education  society.  In
1832,  a  month  before  his  death,  he  became  sec-
retary to  the  Board  of  commissioners  for  foreign
missions.  A  "  Memoir  "  of  Dr.  Cornelius  was  pub-
lished by  Bela  B.  Edwards  (New  York,  1833).

CORNELL,  Ezekiel,  soldier,  b.  in  Scituate,  R.
I.  He  was  a  mechanic,  who  educated  himself,  and
established  a  library  in  his  native  town.  In  1775
he  was  appointed  lieutenant-colonel  of  Hitchcock's
regiment,  was  present  at  the  siege  of  Boston,  was
made  deputy  adjutant-general,  1  Oct.,  1776,  and
subsequently  brigadier-general  and  commander  of
the  brigade  of  state  troops,  which  was  in  service
three  years  and  three  months,  and  was  disbanded,
16  March,  1780.  This  force  was  of  great  service
ill  protecting  the  state  during  the  British  occupa-
tion. He  was  a  delegate  from  Rhode  Island  to
the  Continental  congress  in  1780-3,  and  chairman
of  the  military  committee.  At  the  close  of  his
term  he  retired  to  his  farm  at  Scituate.

CORNELL,  Ezra,  philanthropist,  b.  at  West-
chester Landing,  N.  Y.,  11  Jan.,  1807 ;  d.  in  Ithaca,
N.  Y.,  9  Dec,  1874.  His  parents  were  Quakers,
and,  although  his  early  educational  opportunities
were  limited  to  the  common  schools  of  Westchester
and  Madison  counties,  he  Avas  through  life  a  de-
voted student  and  became  distinguished  for  his
practical  and  scientific  attainments.  He  settled
at  Ithaca  in  1828,  and  for  many  years  was  em-


CORNELL


741


ployed  as  manager  of  the  Ithaca  Falls  mills.  The
water-power  tunnel  at  Fall  Creek,  conceived  and
executed  by  him,  is  a  monument  of  his  foresight
and  skill.  Becoming  associated  with  Prof.  Morse
in  the  early  development  of  the  electric  telegraph,
Mr.  Cornell  superintended  the  erection  of  the  first
telegraph-line  in  America,  which  was  opened  be-
tween Washington  and  Baltimore  in  June,  1844.
Thereafter,  devoting  himself  to  the  establishment
ot  telegraph-lines  throughout  the  northern  and
western  states,  he  became  one  of  the  most  active
^"u-  ^"^^erprising  pioneers  in  that  business,  from
which  he  realized  a  large  fortune.  He  was  one  of
the  original  founders  of  the  Western  union  tele-
graph company,  of  which  he  was  a  director  for
twenty  years,  and  for  much  of  that  period  he  was
the  largest  individual  share-holder.  He  gave  much
attention  to  public  affairs,  and  was  especially  in-
terested in  agricultural  development.  lie  attended
the  first  Republican  national  convention  at  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  in  1856  as  a  delegate.  He  was  presi-
dent of  the  New  York  state  agricultural  society  in
1862,  represented  that  society  at  the  international
exposition  in  London,  and  travelled  extensively  in
Europe.  He  was  a  member  of  the  New  York  state
assembly  in  1862-3,  and  a  state  senator  from  1864
till  1868. Mr.  Cornell  was  the  founder  of  Cornell


university  at  Ithaca.  His  original  endowment  of
$500,000,  in  1865,  was  supplemented  by  contribu-
tions of  nearly  $400,000  from  his  private  means,
and  more  than  $3,000,000  realized  as  the  profits  of
his  operation  in  purchasing  and  locating  public
lands  for  the  benefit  of  the  university.  In  his  ad-
dress at  the  inaugural  ceremonies  IMr*.  Cornell  said :
"  I  would  found  an  institution  where  any  person
can  find  instruction  in  any  study."  This  compre-
hensive declaration,  adopted  as  the  official  motto,
and  graven  upon  the  seal  of  the  university,  has
been  the  inspiration  of  the  authorities  in  direct-
ing its  subsequent  development.  Although  young,
Cornell  university  already  ranks  with  the  foremost
institutions  of  learning  in  the  United  States.  The
Cornell  library  in  Ithaca  was  also  established  bv
Mr.  Cornell,  at  an  outlay  of  nearly  $100,000.  The
last  years  of  his  life  were  devoted  to  the  building
of  several  railway-lines,  to  connect  Ithaca  with  the
general  railroad  system  of  the  state,  in  order  to
facilitate  access  to  the  university  town.  These
enterprises  proved  highly  beneficial  to  the  locality,
but  the  capital  invested  in  them  was  almost  a  total
loss. — His  eldest  son,  Aloiizo  B.,  25th  governor  of
New  York,  b.  in  Ithaca,  N.  Y.,  22  Jan.,  1832,  was
educated  at  the  Ithaca  academy,  at  the  age  of
fifteen  was  a  telegraph-operator  at  Troy,  and  in
the  following  year  became  manager  of  the  tele-
graph-office at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  where  he  continued
three  years,  after  which  he  was  for  several  years
manager  of  the  principal  telegraph-office  in  New
York  city. In  1862-'3  he  was  proprietor  of  the


742


CORNELL


CORNING


line  of  steamboats  on  Cayuga  lake,  and  from  1864
till  1869  was  cashier  and  vice-president  of  the
First  national  bank  of  Ithaca.  He  was  a  super-
visor of  the  town  of  Ithaca  in  1864-5.  From  1858
till  1866  he  served  as  chairman  of  the  Tompkins
county  Republican  committee,  and  in  1866-7  was
a  member  of  the  Republican  state  committee.  He
was  one  of  the  first  commissioners  for  the  erection
of  the  new  state  capitol  at  Albany  from  1868  till
1871.  He  has  been  a  director  of  the  Western
union  telegraph  company  continuously  since  1868,
and  was  its  vice-president  from  1870  till  1876.  At
the  Republican  state  convention  in  1868  he  was
nominated  for  lieutenant-governor,  but  was  de-
feated in  the  election.  President  Grant  in  1869
appointed  Mr.  Cornell  surveyor  of  customs  at  New
York,  which  office  he  resigned  to  become  a  member
of  the  New  York  state  assembly  in  1878.  Although
a  new  member,  he  was  nominated  for  speaker  by
acclamation  in  the  Republican  caucus,  and  won
high  repute  as  a  successful  presiding  officer.  In
June,  1870,  he  was  nominated  as  assistant  treasurer
of  the  United  States  at  New  York ;  but  he  declined
the  appointment.  From  1870  till  1878  he  was
chairman  of  the  Republican  state  committee,  and
became  noted  as  a  political  organizer  of  remark-
able tact  and  efficiency.  Mr.  Cornell  was  a  dele-
gate at  large  to  the  Republican  national  convention
at  Cincinnati  in  1876,  and  was  the  leader  of  the  New
York  delegation.  Through  his  influence  nearly
the  entire  delegation  was  finally  recorded  for  Gov.
Hayes,  of  Ohio,  thus  insuring  his  nomination  for
the  presidency.  In  the  canvass  Mr.  Cornell  served
as  chairman  of  the  state  committee,  and  also  as  a
member  of  the  national  executive  committee,  and
devoted  himself  to  the  work  with  great  energy.
In  January  following  he  was  appointed  naval  offi-
cer for  the  port  of  New  York  by  President  Grant.
Soon  after  his  accession.  President  Hayes  directed
the  treasury  department  to  notify  Mr.  Cornell  that
he  must  resign  from  the  state  and  national  com-
mittees as  a  condition  of  remaining  naval  officer.
Regarding  this  as  an  invasion  of  his  civil  and
political  rights,  he  declined  to  obey  the  mandate ;
whereupon  a  successor  was  nominated,  but  was
rejected  by  the  senate.  After  the  adjournment  of
the  senate  in  July,  1878,  the  president  suspended
both  the  collector  (Chester  A.  Arthur)  and  the
naval  officer,  and  their  successors  were  finally  con-
firmed. At  the  subsequent  elections  Mr.  Cornell
was  chosen  governor  of  New  York  and  Gen.  Arthur
became  vice-president  of  the  United  States.  Gov.
Cornell  was  inaugurated,  1  Jan.,  1880,  and  served
three  years.  His  administration  was  noted  for
economy  in  public  expenditures,  and  his  vetoes  of
appropriation  bills  were  beyond  all  precedent,  but
gave  much  satisfaction  to  the  people.  Upon  his
recommendation  a  state  board  of  health  and  the
state  railroad  commission  were  created,  women  were
made  eligible  for  school-officers,  a  reformatory  for
women  established,  and  the  usury  laws  were  modi-
fied. The  resignation  of  the  New  York  senators
from  the  U.  S.  senate  in  1881  provoked  a  bitter  con-
test for  the  succession,  by  which  the  Republican
party  was  divided  into  hostile  factions.  At  the
convention  in  1882,  Gov.  Cornell  was  earnestly  sup-
ported for  renomination,  but  he  was  opposed  by
many  active  politicians,  and  was  finally  defeated.
So  much  dissatisfaction  was  aroused  among  the
Republican  masses  that  the  nominees  of  the  party
were  overwhelmed  at  the  polls  by  a  majority  of
nearly  200,000,  and  this  result  led  to  the  defeat  of
the  Republican  party  in  the  following  presidential
election.  On  his  retirement.  Gov.  Cornell  resumed
his  residence  in  New  York  city.


CORNELL,  John  Henry,  musician,  b.  in  New
York  city,  8  May,  1828.  In  1848  he  was  appointed
organist  of  St.  John's  chapel  (Trinity  parish)  in  his
native  city,  where  he  had  until  that  time  pursued
his  musical  studies,  especially  harmony  and  com-
position. Within  a  year  he  resigned  and  went  to
England,  where  he  visited  the  chief  cathedral  cities.
At  York  he  united  with  the  Roman  Catholic
church,  and,  returning  to  the  United  States,  en-
tered a  religious  order  in*Baltimore.  He  withdrew
from  the  order  and  made  a  tour  of  England,  Hol-
land, and  Germany.  From  1868  till  1877  he  was
organist  of  St,  Paul's  chapel  (Trinity  parish).  New
York  city,  and  subsequently  for  five  years  organ-
ist of  the  Brick  church.  His  chief  works  arc  a
"  Primer  of  Modern  Musical  Tonality,"  "  Practice
of  Sight-Singing,"  "  Theory  and  Practice  of  Musi-
cal Form,"  adapted  from  the  German  of  Ludwig
Bussler,  "Easy  Method  of  Modulation,"  "A  Man-
ual of  Roman  Chant"  (Baltimore),  and  a  "Con-
gregational Tune-Book  "  (New  York,  1872).

CORNELL,  William  Mason,  physician,  b.  in
Berkley,  Mass.,  16  Oct.,  1802.  He  was  graduated
at  Brown  in  1827.  studied  theology,  was  ordained,
19  Jan.,  1830,  and  officiated  as  pastor  of  a  Congre-
gational church  at  Woodstock,  Conn.,  in  1832-'4,
and  then  at  Quincy,  Mass.,  until  1839,  when  he  left
the  ministry  on  account  of  failing  health.  He  then
studied  medicine,  took  his  degree  in  1844  at  the
Berkshire  medical  school,  began  practice  in  Bos-
ton, edited  the  "Journal  of  Health"  in  1846-9,
and  afterward  "  Pastor  and  People "  and  the
"  Guardian  of  Health,"  and  contributed  largely  to
periodicals.  He  also  compiled  a  "  Medical  Dic-
tionary," and  subsequently  filled  the  chair  of  an-
atomy and  physiology  in  the  Western  university.

CORNELL,  William  W.,  manufacturer,  b.  on
Long  Island,  1  Jan.,  1823 ;  d.  at  Fort  Washington,
New  York  city,  17  March,  1870.  He  established
an  extensive  business  as  an  iron-founder  in  New
York  city,  was  a  liberal  giver  to  benevolent  ob-
jects, especially  for  the  erection  of  churches  for
the  Methodist  denominations,  and  founded  Cornell
college  at  Mount  Vernon,  Iowa. — His  brother,  John
Black,  inventor,  b.  about  1825 ;  d.  in  New  York,  26
Oct.,  1887.  In  1847,  after  serving  an  apprenticeship
of  six  years,  he  entered  business  with  his  brother,
W.  W.  Cornell,  at  first  employing  only  one  man
and  a  boy.  On  12  Sept.,  1854,  J.  B.  Cornell  pa-
tented an  improved  method  of  uniting  the  sheet-
metal  slats  of  revolving  shutters  for  store-fronts,
and  in  1856  a  new  plaster-supporting  metallic  sur-
face for  fire-proof  partitions ;  and  these  inventions
gave  a  great  impetus  to  the  use  of  iron  for  build-
ing. The  works  of  the  Messrs.  Cornell  are  now
among  the  largest  in  the  country,  and  they  have
erected  many  iron  fire-proof  buildings,  including
that  of  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange.

CORNING,  Erastus,  merchant,  b.  in  Norwich,
Conn.,  14  Dec,  1794;  d.  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  9  April,
1872.  At  the  age  of  thirteen  he  settled  in  Troy,
where  he  served  as  a  clerk  in  the  hardware  store  of
his  uncle,  Benjamin  Smith.  In  1814  he  removed
to  Albany  and  entered  the  business  house  of  James
Spencer,  becoming  later  a  member  of  the  firm.
After  inheriting  the  greater  portion  of  his  uncle's
property,  he  became  head  of  the  extensive  hard-
ware house  of  Erastus  Corning  &  Co.  He  also  ac-
quired a  large  interest  in  the  Albany  iron-works,
which,  under  his  management,  became  one  of  the
largest  industrial  establishments  in  the  United
States.  His  attention  was  then  directed  to  bank-
ing, a  business  which  he  followed  for  many  years
with  success.  His  greatest  work  was  in  connection
with  the  development  of  the  railroad  system  of


CORNPLANTER


CORNWALLTS


743


New  York  state.  He  was  made  president  of  the
pioneer  Albany  and  Schenectady  line,  and  its  ex-
tension was  largely  the  results  of  his  efforts.  He
was  the  master-spirit  of  the  consolidation  that
made  the  great  New  York  Central  road,  and  was
president  of  that  corporation  for  twelve  years,  con-
tinuing as  a  director  until  his  death.  He  became
prominent  in  Albany  politics,  and  held  the  office
of  mayor.  From  1842  till  1845  he  was  a  member
of  the  state  senate,  and  he  was  elected  as  a  demo-
crat to  congress,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till  3
March,  1859,  and  again  from  4  July,  1861,  till  3
March,  18(53.  He  was  again  re-elected,  but  resigned
on  account  of  failing  health.  He  was  a  member
of  the  peace  congress  held  in  Washington  in  1861.
He  was  elected  a  regent  of  the  University  of  the
State  of  New  York  in  1833,  and  at  the  time  of  his
death  was  vice-chancellor  of  the  board.  Mr.  Corn-
ing acquired  great  wealth,  and  his  estate  at  the
time  of  his  death  was  estimated  at  $8,000,000.

CORNPLANTER,  or  GARYANWAH-GAH,
Seneca  chief,  b.  in  Conewaugus,  on  Genesee  river,
in  1732;  d.  at  the  Seneca  reservation,  Pa.,  17  Feb.,
1836.  He  was  a  half-breed,  the  son  of  John  O'Bail,
an  Indian  trader,  and  first  became  known  as  the
leader  of  a  war-party  of  Senecas,  in  alliance  with
the  French  against  the  English. .  He  was  present
at  Braddock's  defeat,  and  at  the  period  of  the  revo-
lution was  one  of  those  who  spread  destruction
over  the  frontier  settlements  in  New  York  and  the
valley  of  Wyoming.  During  the  war  he  was  an
inveterate  foe  of  the  Americans,  but  at  a  subse-
quent period  he  manifested  toward  them  a  sincere
friendship.  He  and  Red  Jacket  were  for  many
years  the  chief  counsellors  and  protectors  of  their
people.  Pie  made  great  efforts  to  eradicate  intem-
perance from  his  nation,  and  was  the  first  tem-
perance lecturer  in  the  United  States.  In  his  later
years  he  cultivated  a  farm  on  Alleghany  river.

CORNWALEYS,  or  CORMWALEYS,  Thomas,
pioneer,  b.  about  1600  ;  d.  in  Burnham  Thorpe,  Nor-
folk, England,  in  1676.  He  was  the  son  of  Sir  Will-
iam and  grandson  of  Sir  Charles  Cornwaleys,  who
was  ambassador  to  Spain  under  James  II.  In  the
planting  of  the  colony  at  St.  Mary's,  Cornwaleys
took  a  leading  part,  and  for  twenty-five  years  his  in-
fluence was  conspicuous  in  the  councils  and  course
of  the  province.  He  commanded  the  force  against
Claiborne  in  1635,  and  opposed  the  code  sent  out  by
Lord  Baltimore  for  adoption  by  the  general  assem-
bly in  1038,  on  the  ground  that  the  freemen  had
the  right  under  the  charter  to  make  their  own  laws.
He  was  appointed  deputy  governor  in  1638  by
Leonard  Calvert,  who  also  deputized  him  to  act  as
lieutenant-general  during  the  visit  of  the  governor
to  England  in  1041.  On  Calvert's  return,  with  in-
structions from  the  proprietary,  Cornwaleys  re-
fused to  be  sworn  in  as  a  member  of  the  new  coun-
cil, for  some  reason  which  does  not  appear,  but
which  doubtless  had  reference  to  the  political
struggle  then  going  on  in  England  between  the
king  and  parliament.  He  was  appointed  com-
mander-in-chief of  the  expedition  against  the  Indi-
ans in  1642,  and  protested  in  the  general  assembly
against  the  governor  and  his  servants  being  ex-
empted from  military  service.  He  led  the  expedi-
tion against  the  Indians  in  1643,  and  in  1644  re-
sumed his  place  in  the  council.  His  manor  of
Cornwaleys  Cross  was  on  the  head  of  St.  Mary's
river,  in  'Maryland.  It  was  plundered  by  Ingle
and  his  crew,  and  in  1646  he  brought  an  action  of
trespass  against  Ingle  in  the  courts  of  Westminster
Hall,  laying  his  damages  at  £3,000.  The  suit  was
settled  upon  Ingle's  assigning  him  property  and
claims  in  Maryland  and  Virginia  in  satisfaction  of


the  demand.  On  7  March,  1652,  he  received  a  gmnt
of  4,000  acres  beyond  Port  Tobacco  creek.  He  Ixj-
came  a  member  of  the  general  court,  25  Nov.,  1652,
appointed  assistant  governor  to  Gov.  Fendall,  20
Nov.,  1657,  upon  the  restoration  of  the  govern-
ment to  Lord  Baltimore  from  the  Puritan  occupa-
tion under  Claiborne.  He  returned  to  England,
sailing  2  June,  165!).

CORNWALL,  Henry  Bediiiger,  chemist,  b.  in
Southport,  Conn.,  21)  July,  1844.  He  was  gradu-
ated at  Columbia  college  in  1864,  and  at  the  School
of  mines  in  1867  as  a  mining  engineer.  From  1865
till  1873  he  was  assistant  in  the  School  of  mines,
with  the  exception  of  two  years  spent  in  study  at
the  Freiburg,  Saxony,  mining-school.  In  1873  he
was  elected  to  the  chair  of  analytical  chemistry
and  mineralogy  in  the  John  C.  Green  school  of
science  of  the  College  of  New  Jersey.  In  1865  he
was  superintendent  of  the  Continental  zinc  and
lead  company,  of  New  York,  During  1870-'l  he
filled  a  similar  office  in  the  Geral  silver-mining
company,  and  spent  fifteen  months  while  in  their
employ  examining  the  Batopilas  mines,  in  Mexico.
Prof.  Cornwall  has  published  numerous  scientific
papers,  and  has  paid  special  attention  to  water-
analysis.  He  has  translated  "  Plattner's  Blowpipe
Analysis  "  (New  York,  1870),  and  is  the  author  of
a  "  Manual  of  Blowpipe  Analysis  and  Determina-
tive Mineralogy  "  (1872).

CORNWALLIS,  Charles,  Earl  (afterward
Marquis),  British  soldier,  b.  in  Brome,  Suffolk,
England,  31  Dec,  1737 ;  d.  at  Ghazepore,  near  Be-
nares, India,  5  Oct.,  1805.  The  family  had  been
conspicuous  in  London  since  the  reign  of  Edward
III.  In  1599  William  Cornwallis  was  knighted  for
military  ser-
vices in  Ire-
land. In  1627
his  son  Fred-
erick was  cre-
ated a  baro-
net byCharles
I.,  and,  be-
ing distin-
guished for
his  loyalty  to
the  Stuarts,
was  raised  in
1661  to  the
peerage  as
Baron  Corn-  p'~
wall  is  of  Eye,  ;
a  rank  that
was  held  by
his  descend-
ants till  1753,
whenCharles,

the  fifth  baron,  was  created  Earl  Cornwallis  and
Viscount  Brome.  Charles  had  married  in  1722
Elizabeth,  daughter  of  Lord  Townshend,  and
Charles  was  their  sixth  child  and  eldest  son.  He
distinguished  himself  at  Eton,  and  in  1756,  being
then  known  as  Lord  Brome,  obtained  an  ensign's
commission  in  the  army,  and  spent  the  next  two
years  at  the  famous  military  academy  at  Turin.
In  1758  he  was  appointed  aide-de-camp  to  Lord
Granby,  with  the  rank  of  captain,  and  was  pres-
ent at  the  battle  of  Minden  in  1759.  He  was  pro-
moted to  lieutenant-colonel  in  1761,  and  became
noted  for  personal  valor  and  the  skill  with  which
he  handled  his  regiment.  In  July,  1762,  on  the
death  of  his  father,  he  became  Earl  Cornwallis,
and  soon  afterward  took  his  seat  in  the  house  of
lords.  In  politics  he  was  an  extreme  liberal,  be-
longing to  the  party  of  '"  new  whigs "  headed  by


Lrr>/krzX^


744


CORNWALLIS


CORNWALLIS


Pitt  and  Shelburne.  On  the  American  question
his  sympathies  were  strongly  with  the  colonists,
and  in  the  famous  debate  on  the  repeal  of  the
stamp-act  he  was  signalized  as  one  of  the  five  peers
who  voted  in  favor  of  unconditional  repeal,  accom-
panied by  an  explicit  renouncement  of  the  right  of
taxing  America.  In  1766  he  was  promoted  to  the
rank  of  colonel.  In  1770  he  was  made  constable
of  the  tower  of  London  and  vice-treasurer  of  Ire-
land. In  December,  1775,  having  reached  the
grade  of  lieutenant-general,  he  was  ordered  to
America,  and  embarked  in  the  "  Bristol,''  of  fifty
guns,  one  of  the  fleet  commanded  by  Sir  Peter
Parker.  After  a  long  delay  at  Cork  for  re-enforce-
ments and  a  tempestuous  voyage,  the  squadron
reached  the  coast  of  the  Carolinas  in  May,  was  de-
feated before  Fort  Moultrie  in  June,  and  then
sailed  northward  to  take  part  in  the  operations
against  New  York.  Lord  Cornwallis  took  an  act-
ive part  in  the  battle  of  Long  Island  and  the
movements  that  followed  down  to  the  fall  of  Fort
Washington.  He  then  took  possession  of  Fort
Lee,  which  Greene  had  hastily  abandoned,  and  con-
ducted the  pursuit  of  Washington's  army  through
New  Jersey.  In  December,  considering  Washing-
ton as  disposed  of  and  the  war  virtually  at  an  end,
Cornwallis  returned  to  New  York,  intending  to  set
sail  for  England.  He  had  actually  sent  his  lug-
gage on  board  ship  when  the  news  of  Washing-
ton's great  stroke  at  Trenton  upset  his  plans.  He
marched  upon  Trenton,  and  found  the  American
army  drawn  up  behind  Assunpink  creek  in  such  a
position  that  he  hoped  next  day  to  capture  it ;  but
Washington,  by  a  masterly  device,  withdrew  dur-
ing the  night,  marched  around  the  left  wing,  and
early  in  the  morning  routed  his  rear-guard  at
Princeton,  causing  him  to  retreat  upon  New  Bruns-
wick. In  the  brief  campaign  of  June,  1777,  when
the  British  were  compelled  to  abandon  New  Jersey,
the  most  important  part  was  taken  by  Cornwallis.
At  the  battle  of  Brandy  wine,  11  Sept.,  he  con-
ducted a  flanking  march,  which  secured  the  de-
feat of  the  Americans.  On  26  Sept.  he  occupied
Philadelphia  with  the  advance  of  the  British  army,
and  on  4  Oct.  moved  to  the  support  of  Gen.  Howe
at  Germantown.  In  January,  1778,  he  returned  to
England  on  private  business,  but  was  again  in
America  in  May,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Monmouth,  28  June.  In  December  he  was  called
back  to  England  by  the  severe  illness  of  his  wife,
who  died  soon  afterward.  Toward  the  end  of  1779
he  returned  to  America  and  accompanied  Sir  Henry
Clinton  on  his  expedition  to  South  Carolina.  In
June,  1780,  after  the  capture  of  Charleston,  Sir
Henry  returned  to  New  York,  leaving  Cornwallis
in  the  chief  command  at  the  south.  His  first  ad-
versary was  the  incompetent  Gates,  whom  he  de-
feated at  Camden,  16  Aug.,  in  the  most  disastrous
battle  ever  fought  by  an  American  army.  After
this  great  victory  Cornwallis  pro'^eeded  to  invade
Nortli  Carolina;  but  he  had  gone  no  farther  than
Charlotte,  in  Mecklenburg  county,  in  the  midst  of
a  bitterly  hostile  population,  when  he  was  obliged
to  fall  back  on  hearing  news  of  the  overwhelming
defeat  of  his  subordinate  Ferguson  at  King's
Mountain,  7  Oct.,  by  the  highland  militia.  On  his
second  advance  northward  he  had  the  brilliant
Greene  to  contend  with,  and  disasters  thickened
around  him.  First  his  left  wing  under  Tarleton
was  annihilated  by  Morgan  at  the  Cowpens,  17
Jan.,  1781 ;  then  Greene  succeeded,  in  spite  of
him,  in  reuniting  his  main  army  with  that  of  Mor-
gan at  Guilford  Court-House,  near  the  Virginia
border,  and  at  a  great  distance  from  Cornwallis's
base  of  supplies. Thus  forced  to  give  battle  against


superior  numbers  and  in  a  most  disadvantageous
position.  Lord  Cornwallis  fought  with  great  skill
and  as  much  success  as  was  possible  under  the  cir-
cumstances. The  battle  at  Guilford  Court-House,
15  March,  1781,  was,  for  the  numbers  engaged,
one  of  the  most  obstinate  on  record.  After  losing
one  third  of  his  force  in  killed  and  wounded,  Corn-
wallis barely  succeeded  in  keeping  possession  of
the  field,  but  found  it  necessary  next  day  to  re-
treat, leaving  his  wounded  behind.  He  fell  back
to  Wilmington,  on  the  coast,  where  he  might  hope
for  support  from  the  fleet.  Greene  pursued  him
about  fifty  miles,  and  then,  leaving  him  quite  to
himself,  faced  about  and  marched  rapidly  back  to
South  Carolina  to  undertake  the  reconquest  of  that
state.  The  British  army  was  so  badly  crippled
that  Cornwallis  did  not  think  it  prudent  to  follow
him,  nor  was  he  willing  to  acknowledge  his  defeat
by  embarking  on  the  ships  and  returning  to  South
Carolina  by  sea.  At  this  juncture  of  affairs,  hear-
ing that  Gen.  Phillips  had  been  sent  with  a  con-
siderable British  force  to  V^irginia,  he  decided  to
march  northward  and  join  him,  hoping  to  deal  a
blow  in  Virginia,  cut  off  Greene's  connections
with  the  northern  states,  and  return  to  attack  him
with  superior  force.  This  plan  was  too  extensive
and  hazardous  to  be  likely  to  succeed.  Cornwallis
adopted  it  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  on  his  own
responsibility,  and  without  waiting  for  his  superior
officer.  Sir  Henry  Clinton,  to  sanction  it ;  and  in
after-years  it  became  the  occasion  of  a  bitter  con-
troversy between  the  two  generals.  On  25  April
Cornwallis  started  from  Wilmington,  and  on  20
May  he  effected  a  junction  with  Phillips  at  Peters-
burg. His  hope  of  dealing  a  heavy  blow  was
foiled  by  the  youthful  Lafayette,  who  commanded
the  American  troops  in  Virginia  and  adopted  a
Fabian  policy.  Cornwallis  pursued  Lafayette  un-
successfully from  Richmond  to  the  Rapidan,  then,
after  some  fruitless  raids  upon  Charlottesville  and
Albemarle  Court-House,  he  returned  to  Richmond,
and  presently  began  his  retreat  from  the  peninsula,
closely  followed  by  Lafayette,  who  had  been  re-en-
forced by  Steuben  and  Wayne,  until  he  was  now
superior  in  numbers.  The  campaign  was  ended
the  last  week  in  July,  when  Cornwallis  occupied
Yorktown,  while  Lafayette  took  up  a  strong  posi-
tion on  Malvern  Hill  and  awaited  further  develop-
ments. In  retreating  to  Yorktown  the  British
general  hoped  to  secure  re-enforcements  by  sea;
but  in  August  the  Count  de  Grasse  arrived  on  the
coast  of  Virginia  with  a  powerful  French  fleet,
and  for  the  first  time  in  the  war  the  British  lost
control  of  the  water.  Washington  was  not  slow  to
avail  himself  of  this  rare  opportunity,  and  by  one
of  the  most  brilliant  movements  recorded  in  the
history  of  warfare  suddenly  moved  his  army  from
the  Hudson  river  to  the  James  and  invested  York-
town  with  an  overwhelming  force.  Thus  placed
between  a  hostile  fleet  and  an  army  that  outnum-
bered him  more  than  two  to  one,  'Cornwallis  was
obliged  to  surrender,  17  Oct.,  1781.  The  commis-
sioners of  the  two  armies  met  in  the  Moore  House
(see  illustration,  page  745)  to  agree  upon  the  terms
of  capitulation.  Two  months  afterward,  having
been  exchanged  for  Henry  Laurens,  Lord  Corn-
wallis returned  to  England.

In  1786,  having  been  promoted  to  the  rank  of
field-marshal,  Cornwallis  was  appointed  governor-
general  of  India  and  commander-in-chief  of  the
forces  there.  He  was  shortly  afterward  made  a
knight  of  the  garter.  In  1791-'2  he  conducted
in  person  the  great  war  against  Tippoo  Sultan,
captured  Bangalore,  invested  Seringapatam,  and
concluded  a  treaty  with  Tippoo  by  which  the  latter


CORONA


CORPA


745


surrendered  more  than  half  of  his  dominions  to
Great  Britain.  The  reforms  that  he  wrought  in
the  civil  service  of  India,  and  in  its  judicial  and
revenue  systems,  were  wide-reaching  and  salutary.
On  his  return  to  England  in  1794  he  was  created  a
marquis  for  his  services  in  India.  In  the  following
year  he  became  master  of  the  ordnance,  with  a
seat  in  the  cabinet.  In  1798  he  was  appointed  lord-
lieutenant  of  Ireland  and  commander-in-chief  of
the  forces  there.  This  was  just  after  the  suppres-
sion of  the  rebellion,  and  Cornwallis  remained  in
Ireland  until  the  accomplishment  of  the  parlia-
mentary union  between  that  country  and  Great
Britain. Then  in  November,  1801,  he  was  sent  to


France  as  one  of  the  commissioners  for  negotiat-
ing the  treaty  that  was  completed  and  signed  at
Amiens,  29  March,  1802.  Feeling  his  health  to  be
somewhat  precarious,  he  now  retired  to  his  rural
estate  at  Brome  in  the  hope  of  spending  the  re-
mainder of  his  life  in  seclusion.  But  in  1805  the
troubles  in  India  seemed  to  call  for  his  skilful
management,  and  he  was  again  sent  out  as  gov-
ernor-general, but  lived  only  a  few  months  after
his  arrival.  Among  English  public  men  there
have  been  none  more  high-minded,  disinterested,
faithful,  and  pure,  than  Lord  Cornwallis.  As  a
military  commander  he  was  bold  and  vigilant,
though  unable  to  cope  with  the  transcendent  tal-
ents of  Washington  and  Greene.  He  was  by  far
the  ablest  of  the  generals  sent  by  Great  Britain  to
fight  in  America.  He  married,  14  July,  1768,  Miss
Jemima  Jones,  by  whom  he  had  one  son  and  one
daughter.  The  former  succeeded  to  the  marquis-
ate,  which  became  extinct  by  the  failure  of  male
heirs  in  the  next  generation.  See  Gleig's  "  Lives
of  the  Most  Eminent  British  Military  Command-
ers "  (London,  1832) ;  Kaye's  "  Lives  of  Indian  Offi-
cers "  (London,  1867) ;  arid  Johnston's  "  Yorktown
Campaign  "  (New  York,  1881).

CORONA,  Ramon  (co-ro'-nah),  Mexican  soldier,
b.  in  Acaponeta,  Tepic  territory,  about  1825.  He
was  in  business  in  his  native  town,  but  had  to
leave  the  place  on  account  of  persecution  by  Manuel
Losada,  a  bandit,  who  became  a  kind  of  independ-
ent ruler  in  the  Tepic  territory.  Corona  joined
the  liberals,  entered  the  army,  soon  obtained  the
rank  of  general,  and  fought  against  the  army  of
Maximilian,  especially  in  the  western  states,  and
the  French  troops  never  became  masters  of  that
part  of  the  country.  Corona  organized  the  Army
of  the  west,  8,000  strong,  in  1866,  and  crossed  the
country,  defeating  the  French  in  many  encounters.
He  reached  Queretaro,  participated  in  the  siege,
and,  after  the  final  victory  of  the  Mexicans,  Maxi-
milian surrendered  to  him,  15  May,  1867.  The  re-
public having  been  reinstated.  President  Juarez
gave  Gen.  Corona  a  high  military  office,  with  resi-
dence at Guadalajara. At tliat time Losada,


thinking  to  subjugate  the  whole  nation,  organized
an  army  of  16,000  men,  and  issued  a  proclamation
to  his  troops,  telling  them  to  expect  no  compensa-
tion but  what  they  could  get  from  the  vanquished
towns.  On  28  Jan.,  1872,  at  daybreak,  began  a
bloody  battle,  near  ]Mojonera,  between  his  forces
and  about  1,400  men  under  Corona.  Losada  was
routed,  leaving  over  3,000  dead  on  the  field,  while
the  rest  of  his  troops  were  dispersed.  Next  day
Corona  entered  Guadalajara  in  triumph,  after  hav-
ing saved  that  city  from  the  army  of  plunderers,
for  which  he  was  surnamed  the  "  Hero  do  la  Mo-
jonera."  President  Lerdo  de  Tcjada  appointed  him
minister  to  Spain,  where  he  remained  twelve  vears.
He  returned  to  Mexico  in  1884,  and  was  put  in
command  of  the  Federal  army  at  Jalisco.

CORONADO,  Francisco  Ydsquez  de  (cor-o-
nah'-do),  Spanish  explorer,  b.  in  Salamanca,  Spain,
about  1510 ;  d.  in  1542.  On  the  arrival  in  Cuhacan
of  Cabeza  de  Vaca  from  his  journey  from  Florida
in  1536,  when  he  brought  news  of  the  existence  of
half-civilized  tribes  far  to  the  north,  an  expedi-
tion was  sent  out  under  Marco  de  Niza,  in  1539,  to
explore  that  region.  On  its  return,  a  second  expe-
dition was  fitted  out  under  Coronado,  which  de-
parted from  Culiaean,  on  the  Pacific  coast,  in  April,
1540.  He  passed  up  the  entire  length  of  what  is
now  the  state  of  Sonora  to  the  river  Gila.  Cross-
ing this,  he  penetrated  the  country  beyond  to  the
Little  Colorado,  and  visited  the  famed  cities  of
Cibola  mentioned  by  Cabeza  de  Vaca  and  De  Niza.
In  the  kingdom  were  seven  cities.  The  country,
he  says,  was  too  cold  for  cotton,  yet  the  people  all
wore  mantles  of  it,  and  cotton  yarn  was  found  in
their  houses.  He  also  found  maize,  Guinea  cocks,
peas,  and  dressed  skins.  From  Cibola,  Coronado
travelled  eastward,  visiting  several  towns,  similar
to  the  existing  villages  of  the  Pueblo  Indians,  till
he  reached  the  Rio  Grande,  and  from  there  travelled
300  leagues  to  Quivira,  the  ruins  of  which  are  well
known,  being  near  lat.  34°  N.,  about  1'50  miles  from
El  Paso.  There  he  found  a  temperate  climate,
with  good  water  and  an  abundance  of  fruit. The

Keople  were  clothed  in  skins.  On  his  way  back  in
larch,  1542,  Coronado  fell  from  his  horse  at
Tiguex,  near  the  Rio  Grande,  and  is  said  to  have
become  insane.  The  viceroy  Mendoza  wished  a
colony  to  be  founded  in  the  regions  visited ;  but
the  commander  of  the  expedition  did  not  wish  to
leave  any  of  his  party  in  so  poor  a  country  and  at
so  great  a  distance  from  succor.  The  narrative  of
this  expedition  furnishes  the  first  authentic  account
of  the  bufi"alo,  or  American  bison,  and  the  great
prairies  and  plains  of  New  Mexico.  Drawings  of
the  cities  and  houses  built  by  the  Indians  were
sent  to  Spain  with  Coronado's  report.

CORPA,  Peter  de,  missionary,  b.  in  Spain
about  1560 ;  d.  in  Florida  in  1597.  He  came  to
America  in  1592,  and  was  one  of  a  body  of  Francis-
cans who  were  sent  to  Florida  to  mediate  between
the  Indians  and  Spaniards.  At  this  time  the
Spaniards  were  so  hemmed  in  by  the  natives
that  they  could  not  leave  their  forts,  and  were
reduced  "to  great  extremity.  Father  de  Corpa
was  well  received  and  succeeded  in  restoring
friendly  relations.  He  then  began  his  missionary
labors,  at  first  without  much  success,  owing  to  the
difficultv  of  weaning  the  natives  from  polygamy.
He  prevailed  in  the  end,  however,  built  several
chapels,  and  founded  village?  and  schools.  He  in-
troduced an  Indian  translation  of  Pareja's  "  Doc-
trina  Christiana  para  los  Indios."  In  1597  he
found  it  necessary  to  denounce  the  life  of  the  son
of  a  cacique  who  had  relapsed  into  polygamy.
The  young  chief  fled  from  the  village,  collected  a


746


CORREA


CORRIGAN


band  of  braves,  returned,  crept  into  the  chapel
where  the  friar  was  at  his  devotions,  and  toma-
hawked him  before  the  altar.  He  then  cut  off  his
head  and  placed  it  on  a  spear  in  front  of  the  gate.

CORREA,  Antonio,  Porto  Rican  soldier,  b.  in
the  latter  part  of  the  17th  century.  He  entered
the  army  quite  young,  and  when  he  was  captain  of
the  local  militia  was  put  in  command  of  the  small
garrison  in  Arecibo  in  1702.  On  5  Aug.  of  that
year  the  English,  having  resolved  to  undertake
the  conquest  of  the  island  of  Porto  Rico,  attacked
Arecibo  with  a  small  squadron  and  some  land
forces.  Correa  at  once  gathered  his  men,  pre-
tended to  retreat,  went  to  a  wood  where  they  had
their  horses,  and  when  an  English  column  ap-
proached the  place  it  was  suddenly  and  fiercely  at-
tacked and  driven  back  to  the  shore,  where  many
were  killed,  even  after  they  reached  the  boats.
Correa  lost  but  one  man  killed  and  three  wounded.
All  the  survivors  were  rewarded  with  special
honors  by  the  king  of  Spain.  The  British  gave
up  their  attempt  to  seize  the  island.

CORREA,  Juan,  Mexican  painter,  flourished
during  the  early  part  of  the  18th  century.  His
paintings  are  specially  remarkable  for  their  fine,
broad  composition,  expression,  and  life-like  fig-
ures, as  well  as  for  their  good  perspective  and
effective  groupings.  But  he  is  not  a  good  colorist.
They  are  generally  large,  like  those  he  painted
for  the  cathedral  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  Correa
was  an  excellent  teacher  of  his  art,  and  among  his
pupils  are  the  celebrated  Cabrera  and  Ibarra.

CORREA  DA  SERRA,  Joseph  Francisco
(ko-ray'-ah),  Portuguese  botanist,  b.  in  Serpa  in
1750;  d.  in  Caldas,  11  Sept.,  1823.  He  studied  at
Rome  and  Naples,  and,  after  residing  eleven  years
at  Paris,  came  in  1818  to  the  United  States  to
prosecute  researches  in  natural  history.  About
1814  he  supplied  the  place  of  Mr.  Barton  as  pro-
fessor of  botany  in  Philadelphia.  He  published
several  botanical  papers,  one,  on  the  soil  of  Ken-
tucky, in  "  American  Philosophical  Transactions  "
(vol.  i.,  new  series).  When  Correa  returned  to  his
own  country,  the  constitutional  form  of  govern-
ment had  been  established  and  he  was  elected  a  rep-
resentative. Besides  many  scientific  writings,  he
left  an  extensive  work  entitled  "  Collecgion  de  libro
ineditos  da  historia  Portugueza."

CORREA  DE  SA  BENAVIDES,  Salvador
(co-ray'-ah),  Portuguese  admiral,  b.  in  1594 ;  d.  in
Lisbon  in  1688.  After  serving  with  distinction  in
the  Portuguese  navy,  he  was  appointed  governor
of  Brazil.  He  effected  the  expulsion  of  the  Dutch
from  Bahia  in  l()25-'40,  re-established  order  in
some  Brazilian  provinces,  took  from  the  Dutch  their
settlements  on  the  western  coast  of  Africa  in  1648,
and  conquered  the  kingdom  of  Angola.  Then  he
returned  to  Rio  Janeiro  as  governor,  filled  that
office  for  some  lime,  and  finally  went  to  Lisbon.

CORREIA  DE  LACERDA,  Antonio  (cor-ray  -
yah  da  lah-iher'-dah),  Portuguese  physician,  b.  in
Ponte  in  1777;  d.  in  the  province  of  Maranhao,
Brazil,  21  July,  1852.  He  was  graduated  at  the
University  of  Coimbra,  served  as  military  surgeon,
and  in  1818  went  to  Brazil  to  practise  his  profession^
A  few  years  later  he  emigrated  to  the  United
States,  where  he  devoted  himself  to  his  professional
work  with  marked  success.  He  returned  to  Brazil
in  1836  and  settled  at  Maranhao,  giving  much  of
his  time  to  scientific  investigation.  He  published
several  scientific  books,  among  them  "  Flora  pa-
raense-maranhensis,"  "  Phytographia  paraense-ma-
ranhensis,"  "  Nova  genera  plantarum,"  "  Notes  de
botanique,"  "  Chemiologia  vegetal."  "  Zoologia
paranense,"  "  Observagoes  sobre  propiedades  thera-


peuticas  das  plantas,"  "Observances  meteoroJo-
gicas,"  _"  ObservagOes  medico-philosophicas,"  and
"  Materia  medica  das  Para  e  Maranhao."

CORREIA  DE  SOUZA  COSTA,  Antonio  (cor-
ray'-yah  da  so'-thah),  Brazilian  physician,  b.  in  Rio
Janeiro  about  1830.  In  1859  he  won  in  competi-
tion the  post  of  first  officer  in  the  medical  science
department,  and  afterward  the  professorship  of
hygiene  and  history  of  medfcine.  Later  he  served
during  the  war  against  Paraguay  as  first  surgeon,
and  was  made  a  colonel.  He  belongs  to  the  impe-
rial council,  and  is  physician  of  the  court,  presi-
dent of  the  board  of  health,  a  member  of  the
Academy  of  medicine,  and  of  several  other  cor-
porations. Most  of  his  medical  works  have  been
translated  into  French  and  English.  The  princi-
pal ones  are  "  Da  infecgao  purulenta  "  ;  "  Da  dys-
enteria  nos  paizes  inter-tropicales  " ;  "  Considera-
goes  sobre  a  myases  das  fossas  nazaes " ;  and
"  Formulario  pharmaceutico  militar  para  uso  dos
hospitaes  e  enfermarias  militares  do  Brazil."

CORRIOAN,  Michael  Au^nstine,  R.  C.  prel-
ate, b.  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  13  Aug.,  1839. His  early
education  was  received  at  St.  Mary's  college,  Wil-
mington, Del,  and  in  1859  he  was  graduated  at
Mount  St.  Mary's,  Emmettsburg,  Md. It  is  curi-
ous to  note,  in  connection  with  Archbishop  Corri-
gan's  successful  appeal  to  the  U.  S.  government  to
protect  the  property  of  the  American  college  at
Rome from be-
ing  assumed by
the Italian gov-
ernment, that  he
was one of the
twelve students
that  first  entered
that  college.  Car-
dinal Patrizi or-
dained him a
priest at Rome
on  19  Sept.,  1863.
In 1864 he re-
ceived the  degree
of  D.  D.  in  pub-
lic competition.
He  was  appoint-
ed to  the  chair  of
dogmatic  theolo-
gy and sacred
scripture  in  Seton Hall  college. Orange,  N.  J.,
and  in  1868  became  its  president. In  March,  1873,
Pope  Pius  IX.  appointed  Dr.  Corrigan  to  the  see
of  Newark,  he  having  administered  the  affairs  of
that  diocese  during  the  absence  of  Bishop  Bay-
ley  at  the  Vatican  council in 1870. As  bishop,
Dr.  Corrigan showed  a  combination  of  firmness
and  gentleness,  which  commanded  the  admiration
of his  ecclesiastical superiors. Churches,  chari-
table institutions,  and  religious  communities  arose
in  the diocese. His energy, his  grasp  of  the
smallest  details  of  every  plan,  his  power  of  admin-
istration, and  his  liberality  were  notable. During
his  administration the  Jesuits and Dominicans
were introduced  by  him,  a Catholic  protectory
for  boys  founded in Denville, a home  of the
Good  Shepherd  in  Newark,  a  hospital in  charge
of  the  Little  Sisters  of  the  Poor,  and  a  convent
for  the Dominican Nuns  of  the  Perpetual  Ado-
ration. In 1880  the Catholic  schools  of New
Jersey  had  increased  to  150,  with nearly  30,000
pupils,  the  churches  to  150, and the priests  to
172. Bishop  Corrigan  had  been  made  coadjutor,
with  the  right  of  succession,  to  Cardinal  McClos-
key, archbishop of  New  York, under the  title
of  Archbishop  of  Petra,  on  26  Sept.,  1880,  and


^...^o


CORSE


CORSON


747


thereafter  performed  all  of  the  practical  work  of
the  archdiocese.  In  1884  he  was  summoned  to
Rome  to  advise  with  the  pope  as  to  the  work  of
the  proposed  Plenary  council,  and  represented
New  York  in  that  body.  Dr.  Corrigan,  when
early  in  1880  he  received  the  pallium,  was  the
youngest  archbishop,  excepting  Archbishop  Se-
ghers,  in  the  American  episcopate.  On  10  Oct.,
1885,  Cardinal  McCloskey  died,  and  Archbishop
Corrigan  became  metropolitan  of  the  diocese  of
New  York,  lie  was  no  longer  archbishop,  in  title,
of  a  deserted  strip  of  Arabian  soil,  but  the  chief
spiritual  ruler  of  one  of  the  most  important  dio-
ceses in  the  world.  He  was  not  obliged  to  wait,
according  to  the  usual  custom,  for  the  pallium,  in
order  to  exercise  his  functions.  By  a  special  act
of  courtesy  done  to  a  prelate  who  had  so  far  re-
markably distinguished  himself  in  the  apostolic
virtues  befitting  his  state,  Rome  permitted  him
to  perform  the  acts  of  his  office  as  soon  as  he
succeeded  to  the  archbishopric.  Archbishop  Cor-
rigan is  a  scholar,  with  a  keen  interest  in  modern
literature.  He  has,  in  the  pulpit,  the  art  of  con-
vincing and  stimulating  ;  and  the  modulations  of
a  voice,  trained  in  the  best  schools,  give  variety
and  interest  even  to  the  most  abstract  theological
theme.  He  is  not  a  great  pulpit  orator,  in  the
rhetorical  sense  of  the  phrase,  but  a  genial  and
pleasant  talker,  who  never  fails  to  soften  and
charm  his  audiences.  His  administration  of  the
archdiocese  of  New  York  has  already  shown  the
results  to  be  expected  from  his  successful  career  in
Newark.  The  fourth  provincial  council  and
fourth  synod  of  New  York  were  principally  influ-
enced by  him.  He  has  prepared  a  manual  on  the
regulation  of  such  assemblies.

CORSE,  John  Murray,  soldier,  b.  in  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  27  April,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1857,  but  immedi-
ately resigned  and  entered  the  Albany  law-school.
As  soon  as  he  returned  to  his  home  in  Iowa  he
was  nominated  by  the  democrats  for  lieutenant-
governor.  He  entered  the  U.  S.  service  as  major
of  the  6th  Iowa  volunteers  in  August,  1861,  served
under  Gen.  Fremont,  and  then  as  judge-advocate
and  inspector-general  on  the  staff  of  Gen.  Pope ;
but  after  the  victories  of  Island  No.  10  and  Shiloh
preferring  active  service,  joined  his  regiment,  and
became  its  colonel.  He  commanded  a  division  at
Memphis,  and  was  commissioned  a  brigadier-gen-
eral on  11  Aug.,  1863.  He  served  in  the  Chatta-
nooga campaign,  distinguished  himself  at  Chicka-
mauga,  and  was  wounded  at  Missionary  Ridge.  In
Sherman's  march  to  the  sea  he  commanded  a
division  of  the  15th  corps.  When,  after  the  evacu-
ation of  Atlanta,  the  Confederates  crossed  the
Chattahoochee  and  destroyed  the  railroad.  Corse
was  ordered  from  Rome  to  the  relief  of  Allatoona,
where  large  commissary  supplies,  guarded  by  890
men,  under  Col.  Tourtellotte,  were  threatened  by
an  infantry  division  of  the  enemy.  Gen.  Corse  ar-
rived with  1,054  troops  before  the  Confederates ;
but  when  the  latter  came  up,  being  greatly  supe-
rior in  numbers,  they  closely  surrounded  the
position.  To  the  summons  of  the  Confederate
general,  French,  to  surrender  and  avoid  a  needless
effusion  of  blood.  Gen.  Corse  returned  a  defiant
answer.  The  Confederates,  numbering  4,000  or
5,000,  attacked  the  fortifications  furiously,  5  Oct.,
1864,  but  were  repeatedly  driven  back.  Gen.
Sherman,  who  had  despatched  a  corps  to  attack
the  Confederate  rear,  signaled  from  Kenesaw
mountain,  where  he  heard  the  roar  of  battle,  eigh-
teen miles  away,  for  the  commander  to  hold  out,
as  relief  was  approaching;  and  when  he  learned


by  the  sun-telegraph  that  Corse  was  in  command,
he  said:  "He  will  hold  out;  I  know  the  man."
Gen.  Corse's  ear  and  cheek-bone  were  shot  away
during  the  engagement,  but  he  continued  to  direct
his  men.  At  the  approach  of  the  relieving  force,
the  assailants  retired.  Gen.  Sherman  made  the
brave  defence  of  Allatoona  the  subject  of  a  general
order,  emphasizing  the  principle  in  warfare  that
fortified  posts  should  be  defended  to  the  last,
without  regard  to  the  strength  of  the  attacking
force. Corse  received  the  brevet  of  major-general,

5  Oct.,  1864.  After  the  war.  Gen.  Corse  was  for
two  years  (1867-'9)  collector  of  internal  revenue  in
Chicago,  111.  He  then  spent  four  years  in  Europe,
and  on  his  return  engaged  in  railroad  contracting,
and  built  several  hundred  miles  of  road  in  the
neighborhood  of  Chicago.  In  1881  he  removed  to
Massachusetts,  residing  in  Boston  and  in  Win-
chester, where  he  settled  in  1882,  after  marrying
for  his  second  wife  a  niece  of  Franklin  Pierce.
He  was  a  vigorous  opponent  of  Gen.  Butler  in  his
political  campaigns,  and  became  chairman  of  the
executive  committee  in  the  democratic  state  cen-
tral committee.  On  9  Oct.,  1886,  he  was  appointed
postmaster  of  Boston.

CORSE,  Moiitg'omery  Dent,  soldier,  b.  in
Alexandria  (then  in  the  District  of  Columbia),
14  March,  1816.  He  served  as  a  captain  in  the
Mexican  war,  and  lived  in  California  from  April,
1849,  till  December,  1856,  when  he  returned  to
Virginia  and  became  a  banker  in  Alexandria.  He
entered  the  Confederate  service  in  May,  1861,  as
colonel  of  the  17th  Virginia  regiment.  He  was
wounded  in  the  second  battle  of  Bull  Run,  and
engaged  at  Boonsboro  and  Antietam.  He  was
commissioned  a  brigadier-general  in  November,
1862,  commanded  a  brigade  in  Pickett's  division
in  the  expedition  against  Knoxville,  and  was  cap-
tured at  Sailor's  Creek,  Va.,  on  6  April,  1865.
After  the  war  he  resumed  the  business  of  a  banker
and  broker  at  Alexandria  till  1874.

CORSON,  Edward  T.,  surgeon,  b.  in  Mont-
gomery county.  Pa.,  14  Oct.,  1834;  d.  in  Plymouth,
Pa.,  22  June,  1864.  He  entered  the  navy  as  assist-
ant surgeon,  20  May,  1859,  and  was  ordered  to
China  and  Japan  in  the  U.  S.  steamer  "Plartford,"
where  he  remained  tmtil  the  winter  of  1861.  He
was  subsequently,  for  a  short  time,  at  the  naval
asylum,  Philadelphia,  and,  upon  application  for  sea
service,  was  ordered  to  the  "Mohican,"  returning,
after  a  cruise  of  40,000  miles,  •without  the  loss  of  a
man  by  sickness.  He  was  promoted  to  surgeon,
31  July,  1862.

CORSON,  Hiram,  educator,  b.  in  Philadelphia,

6  Nov.,  1828.  After  being  employed  for  some
time  as  a  private  tutor  and  assistant  teacher  in  the
Treemount  seminary  at  Norristown,  Pa.,  he  be-
came connected  with  the  library  of  congress  and
with  that  of  the  Smithsonian  institution  at  Wash-
ington in  1849,  and  continued  there  until  1856,
when  he  resumed  teaching.  In  1859  Mr.  Corson
removed  with  his  family  to  Philadelphia,  and  for
some  years  devoted  himself  to  teaching  and  lectur-
ing on  English  literature.  In  1865  he  was  elected
professor  of  history  and  rhetoric  in  Girard  college,
resigning  this  place  in  1866  to  accept  the  pro-
fessorship of  rhetoric  and  English  literature  in  St.
John's  college,  Annapolis.  In  1870  he  was  elected
to  the  chair  of  English  language  and  literature,
rhetoric,  and  oratory  in  Cornell,  which  office  he
still  holds.  He  has  published  Chaucer's  "  Legende
of  Goode  Women,"  containing  an  introduction  on
the  versification  of  Chaucer,  and  glossarial  and
critical  notes;  "An  Elocutionary  Manual,"  with  an
introductory  essay  on  the  study  of  literature  and


748


CORSON


CORTES


the  relations  of  vocal  culture  to  an  fpsthetic  ap-
preciation of  poetry ;  and  a  "  Hand-Book  of  Anglo-
Saxon  and  Early  English  "  (New  York,  1871).  He
has  also  prepared  a  thesaurus  of  early  English,
containing  a  complete  verbal  and  glossarial  index
of  the  "  Canterbury  Tales,"  "  Piers  Ploughman,"
Govver's  "Confessio  Amantis,"  Wycliffe's  Bible,
Spenser,  and  Chapman's  Homer.

CORSON,  Juliet,  teacher  of  cookery,  b.  in  Bos-
ton, Mass.,  14  Feb.,  1842.  She  was  educated  at
Raymond  and  Brooklyn  institutes,  and  in  1872-'3
was  secretary  of  the  New  York  free  training-school
for  women.  Since  1872  she  has  devoted  herself  to
study  and  experiments  on  healthful  and  economi-
cal cookery,  and  dietetics.  She  founded  the  New
York  school  of  cookery  in  1876,  and  was  its  super-
intendent till  1888,  when  she  was  obliged  to  close
it  on  account  of  failing  health.  Since  that  time
she  has  been  actively  engaged,  in  the  intervals  of
illness,  in  writing  and  in  lecturing  throughout  the
country.  In  Philadelphia,  Montreal,  and  Oakland,
Cal.,  her  efforts  have  led  to  the  teaching  of  cook-
ery in  the  public  schools.  In  1881  the  French  con-
sul-general at  New  York  applied  ofificially  to  ]\Iiss
Corson  for  her  works  and  methods,  for  the  purpose
of  adapting  them  to  the  needs  of  the  French  edu-
cational system.  Her  publications,  besides  many
newspaper  articles  and  pamphlets,  include  "Fifteen-
Cent  Dinners  for  Workingmen's  Families,"  pub-
lished by  the  author  for  free  distribution  to  work-
ing-people earning  $1.50,  or  less,  a  day  (New  York,
1877) ;  "  Cooking  Manual "  (1878) ;  "  Cooking-School
Text-Book  and  Housekeeper's  Guide"  (1878);
"New  Family  Cook-Book"  (1885);  "  Local  Ameri-
can Cookery  "  (1885) ;  "  Practical  American  Cook-
ery" (1886);  "Diet  for  Invalids  and  Children"
(1886) ;  and  "  Family  living  on  ,$500  a  Year"  (1886).

CORTEREAL,  or  CORTERREAL,  Gaspar
(cor-tay-ray-al'),  Portuguese  navigator,  b.  in  Lis-
bon ;  d.  in  1501.  In  1500,  by  appointment  of  the
king  of  Portugal,  he  left  the  mouth  of  the  Tagus
with  two  ships,  well  equipped  at  his  own  cost,  and
went  as  far  as  the  regions  since  known  as  Canada.
He  reached  60°  N.,  and  imposed  upon  many  places
purely  Portuguese  names,  such  as  Labrador.  Se-
bastian Cabot  had  visited  these  coasts  in  1497,  but
did  not  land.  After  his  return  from  this  voyage,
he  again  left  Lisbon  for  the  arctic  regions,  15  May,
1501,  but  never  returned ;  and  an  expedition  sent
by  King  Emanuel  in  1508  found  no  traces  of  him.
In  this  last  voyage  he  carried  off  fifty-seven  na-
tives, most  of  whom  were  lost  in  his  ship.  The
other  ship  reached  Lisbon  in  October,  1501.  His
father,  John  "^'^az  Costa  Cortereal,  a  gentleman  of
the  household  of  Alphonso  V.  of  Portugal,  is  said
to  have  di,scovered  Newfoundland  about  1468.

CORTES,  Herndii,  or  Hernando,  soldier,  b.  in
Medellin,  province  of  Estromadura,  Spain,  in  1485 ;
d.  near  Seville,  2  Dec,  1547.  His  parents,  Martin
Cortes  and  Catalina  Pizarro  Altamirano,  were  both
of  good  family,  but  in  reduced  circumstances.  He
was  a  sickly  child,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  was
sent  to  the  University  of  Salamanca,  but  returned
home  two  years  later  without  leave.  He  then  de-
termined upon  a  life  of  adventure,  and  arranged  to
accompany  Nicolas  de  Ovando,  likewise  a  native  of
Estremadura,  who  was  about  to  sail  for  Santo  Do-
mingo to  supersede  Bobadilla  in  his  command.  An
accident  that  happened  to  him  in  a  love  adventure
detained  him  at  home,  and  the  expedition  sailed
without  him.  He  then  sought  military  service  un-
der the  celebrated  Gonzalo  de  Cordova,  but  on  His
way  to  Italy  was  prostrated  by  sickness  in  Valencia,
where  he  remained  for  a  year,  experiencing  great
hardship  and  poverty. Returning  to  Medellin,  he


was  able  in  1504  to  sail  from  San  Lucar  for  Santo
Domingo.  Ovando  received  him  cordially,  and  he
obtained  employment  under  Diego  Valasquez  in
the  suppression  of  a  revolt,  on  the  termination  of
which  he  was  assigned  the  control  of  a  large  num-
ber of  Indians,  and  appointed  a  notary.  He  was
at  this  time  remarkable  for  a  graceful  physiog-
nomy and  amiable
manner  as  well  as
for  skill  and  ad-
dress in  military
matters,  and  he
held  successively
various  important
offices.  In  1511
he  accompanied
Diego  Velasquez,
who  was  sent  out
by  Diego  Colum-
bus to  subdue  and
colonize  Cuba.
Later  he  held  the
office  of  alcalde
of  Santiago  in
the  new  colony,
and  meanwhile  he
married  Catalina
Juarez,  a  Spanish
lady  who  had
come  over  in  the  suite  of  Maria  de  Toledo,  the  vice-
queen.  After  his  marriage  he  employed  himself  and
his  Indians  in  getting  gold.  "  How  many  of  them
died  in  extracting  this  gold  for  him,  God  will  have
kept  a  better  account  than  I  have,"  says  LasCasas.
Grijalva,  a  lieutenant  of  Velasquez,  had  just  dis-
covered Mexico,  but  had  made  no  attempt  at  its
settlement.  This  displeased  the  governor,  and  Cor-
tes was  given  the  command  of  a  new  expedition
about  to  start  for  the  conquest  of  the  newly  dis-
covered province.  At  the  last  moment,  Velasquez
appears  to  have  regretled  the  appointment,  possi-
bly fearing  that  Cortes  would  carry  off  all  the
glory  as  well  as  the  profit  of  the  enterprise,  and
endeavored  to  recall  the  expedition ;  but  Cortes
hastened  his  preparations,  and  on  18  Nov.,  1518,
left  Santiago  with  10  vessels,  550  Spaniards,  nearly
800  Indians,  a  few  negroes,  10  brass  guns,  a  dozen
horses,  and  some  falconets.  Collecting  stores  on
his  way,  he  arrived  at  Trinidad,  and  later  at  Ha-
vana, at  both  of  which  places  he  found  orders
from  Velasquez  depriving  him  of  his  command,
but  in  neither  place  could  they  be  enforced,  so,
after  writing  a  letter  of  remonstrance  to  the  gov-
ernor, he  sailed,  on  10  Feb.,  1519,  for  the  island  of
Cozumel,  on  the  coast  of  Yucatan.  On  4  March  he
first  landed  on  the  shores  of  Mexico,  in  the  prov-
ince of  Tabasco,  advancing  slowly  along  the  gulf.
Sometimes  taking  measures  to  conciliate  the  na-
tives and  sometimes  spreading  terror  by  arms,  he
finally  reached  and  took  possession  of  the  city  of
Tabasco.  The  noise  of  the  artillery,  the  appear-
ance of  the  floating  fortresses  that  had  transported
the  Spaniards  over  the  ocean,  and  the  horses  on
which  they  fought,  all  new  objects  to  the  natives,
inspired  them  with  astonishment,  terror,  and  ad-
miration. At  San  Juan  de  Ulua,  Cortes  first
learned  that  the  native  ruler  was  called  Monte-
zuma; that  he  reigned  over  an  extensive  empire,
which  had  lasted  for  three  centuries ;  that  thirty
vassals  called  caciques  obeyed  him ;  and  that  his
power  and  riches  were  very  great.  These  facts  in-
duced him  to  undertake  the  conquest  of  the  em-
pire. He  laid  the  foundation  of  the  town  of  Vera
Cruz,  and  caused  himself  to  be  chosen  captain-
general  of  the  new  colony,  then  burning  his  ships


CORTjfiS

so  as  to  make  retreat  impossible,  and  to  augment
his  army  by  the  seamen,  and  taking  the  part  of
several  native  tribes  against  the  tax-collectors  of
Montezuma,  thus  gaining  allies,  he  set  out  for  the
city  of  JVIexico,  the  residence  and  capital  of  Mon-
tezuma. The  republic  of  Tlascala,  a  province  be-
tween the  coast  and  the  capital,  although  hostile
to Montezuma,  opposed Cortes  with its  forces.
After  four  severe  battles,  in  each  of  which  he  de-
feated large  numbers  of  Tlascalans,  he  entered  the
capital  city  of  Tlascala  on  18  Sept.,  1519,  and,  dic-
tating peace  on  moderate  terms,  converted  the  na-
tives into  powerful  allies. He  endeavored  to  per-
suade the  Tlascalans  to  abjure  their  religion,  but  in
vain,  although  he  succeeded  better  in  prevailing
upon  them  to  own  themselves  vassals  of  the  king
of  Spain. After  a  stay  of  twenty  days  in  this  capi-
tal he  pushed  on  toward  Mexico  bv  Cholula,  ac-
companied by  several  thousand  of  his  new  allies.
An  attempt  was  made  to  check  his  advance  by  an
ambuscade  prepared  by  the  Cholulans  at  the  in-
stance of  the  Mexicans ;  but  this  he  escaped,  al-
though not  until  after  he  had  taken  vengeance  on
the  Cholulans. He  then  continued  his  march,  and
reached  the  city  of  Mexico  early  in  November,  at
the  head  of  a  force  consisting  of  6,000  natives  and
a  handful  of  Spaniards. Ambassadors  from  Mon-
tezuma had  met  Cortes  before  he  entered  Tlascala,
and  he  was  now  received  with  great  ceremony  by
the  Mexican  monarch. The  natives,  believing  him
to  be  a  descendant  of  the  sun,  prostrated  them-
selves before  him,  and  he  was  assigned  quarters  in
one  of  the  beautiful  palaces  of  this magnificent
city.  _  This  he  at  once  fortified  so  as  to  prevent
surprise  or  capture, and was considering what
plans  to  pursue  in  order  to  possess  the  wealth  of
the  empire  when  he  was  informed  that  an  attack
had  been  made  on  the  garrison  at  Vera  Cruz. The
importance  of  this  event  was  very  great,  for  hitherto
the  Mexicans  had  believed  the  Spaniards  to  be  im-
mortal, and  they  were  only  undeceived  by  the  re-
ceipt of  the  head  of  one  of  the  soldiers. Cortes
conceived  and  executed  a  most  brilliant  and  daring
project,  which,  being  successf  ul.doubtless  prevented
the  massacre  of  the  entire  Spanish  force. Accom-
panied by  his  ol!icers,  he  went  at  once  to  the  palace
of  Montezuma,  and,  taking  him  prisoner,  threat-
ened him  with  instant  death  if  he  in  any  way  ap-
pealed to  his  people;  then,  having  captured  the
Mexicans  who  had  participated  in  the  attack  on
Vera  Cruz,  he  burned  them  alive  in  front  of  the
imperial palace. Meanwhile  he  placed Monte-
zuma in  irons,  and  compelled  him  to  acknowledge
himself  a  vassal  of  Charles  V. Caminatzin,  the
bravest of Montezuma's nephews,  was  likewise
made  prisoner,  and,  Avith  many  of  the  nobles  of
the  empire,  induced  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance
to  the  king  of  Spain. Soon  after  the  Mexican
ruler  was  restored  to  a  semblance  of  liberty,  but
not  until  he  presented  Cortes  with  600,000  marks
of  pure  gold'  and  a  large  quantity  of  precious
stones. Scarcely  had he accomplished  all this
when  he  received  intelligence  that  an  army  under
Narvaez  had  been  sent  by  Velasquez  to  compel
him  to  renounce  his  command. Leaving  200  men
in  Mexico  under  the  command of  a  lieutenant
whom  he  recommended  to  the  care  of  Montezuma
as  a  vassal  of  Charles  V.,  he  marched  with  70  men,
and,  after  being  joined  by  150  more,  whom  he  had
left  at  Cholula,  captured Narvaez,  who  had  en-
camped near  the  city  of  the  Cempovallans  with  a
force  of  900  men,  80' horses,  and  10  or  12  pieces  of
artillery. The  defeated  troops,  after  the  death  of
their  leader,  readily  joined  the  army  of  Cortes  and
returned  with  him  to  Mexico,  where  he  found  that


CORTfiS


749


the  people  had  risen  against  the  Spaniards.  Mon-
tezuma, still  a  prisoner,  endeavored  to  pacify  his
subjects,  but  was  attacked  by  the  mob  and  so  in-
jured by  stones  that  he  died  in  a  few  days.  A  new
emperor  was  chosen,  under  whose  leadership  they
attacked  the  Spaniards  and  drove  them  out  of  the
city.  Cortes's  rear-guard  was  cut  to  pieces,  and,
after  a  harassing  retreat  of  six  days,  the  ]\Iexicans
offered  battle  on  the  plains  of  Otumba.  With  the
advantages  offered  by  his  artillery  and  fire-arms,
Cortes,  on  7  July,  1520,  gained  a  great  victory,
which  decided  the  fate  of  Mexico.  The  celebrated
noche-triste  (or  "  unhappy  night ")  tree,  shown  in
the  illustration,  is  in  the 'village  of  Popotla,  near
an  old  church  in  the  environs  of  Mexico.  Cortes
is  said  to  have  sat  under  this  tree  lamenting  his
misfortune  after  the  retreat  of  the  Spaniards  during
the  night  of  the  evacuation.  The  tree  is  known
by  the  Indians  as  the  "  ahuehuete,"  and  in  Spanish
is  called  "  sabino."  It  is  a  species  of  cedar  and  is
ten  feet  in  diameter  at  the  base,  about  forty  feet
in  height,  and  surrounded  by  a  substantial  iron
railing.  After  his  success,  Cortes  proceeded  to
Tlascala,  where  he  collected  an  army  of  natives,
and  again  marched  against  the  city  of  Mexico,
which,  after  a
gallant  defence
of  seventy-seven
days,  was  retaken
on  13  Aug.,  1521.
The  extent  of  his
conquest,  due  en-
tirely to  his  ge-
nius, valor,  and
profound  but  un-
scrupulous poli-
cy, caused  his  ir-
regularities to  be
forgiven  by  his
sovereign,  who,
disregarding  the
pretensionsofVe-
lasquez,  appoint-
ed Cortes  govern-
or and  captain-
general  of  Mexi-
co, also  confer-
ring on  him  the
marquisate  of
Oajaca with a

considerable  revenue.  His  course  of  conquest,
however,  was  not  such  as  to  conciliate  the  natives  :
he  was  over-zealous  to  destroy  their  idols,  and
anxious  to  convert  them  to  Christianity,  even
using  force  for  this  purpose.  These  actions  so  em-
bittered the  Mexicans  that,  reduced  to  despair,
they  again  revolted,  but  in  vain.  The  arms,  valor,
and  zeal  of  the  Spaniards  succeeded  everywhere.
Guatimozin,  the  new  emperor,  a  man  of  much
greater  force  than  Montezuma,  was,  with  a  num-
ber of  the  caciques,  accused  of  conspiring  against
the  conquerors,  and  was  publicly  executed  with
circumstances  of  great  cruelty  by  Cortes.  Mean-
while his  successes  produced  jealousies  in  Madrid,
his  ambition  and  great  popularity  with  the  soldiers
caused  him  to  be  feared,  and  commissioners  were
sent  to  watch  his  conduct  and  thwart  his  proceed-
ings. While  he  was  engaged  in  conquest,  his  prop-
erty was  seized  and  his  retainers  imprisoned  and
put  in  irons.  Indignant  at  such  treatment,  Cortes
returned  to  Spain  to  appeal  to  the  justice  of  his
master,  and  presented  himself  with  great  splendor
before  the  court.  He  was  received  by  Charles
with  every  distinction,  and  decorated  with  the  or-
der of  Santiago. Cortes  returned  to  Mexico  with


750


CORTHELL


CORTINA


new  titles  and  honors,  but  with  diminished  power,
a  viceroy  having  been  intrusted  with  the  adminis-
tration of  civil  affairs,  althou|?h  Cortes  still  re-
tained military  authority,  with  permission  to  con-
tinue his  conquests.  This  division  of  power  led  to
continual  dissension,  and  caused  the  failure  of  sev-
eral enterprises  in  which  Cortes  was  engaged ;  but
in  1536  he  discovered  the  peninsula  of  California
and  surveyed  part  of  the  gulf  that  separates  it
from  Mexico.  Subsequently,  however,  tired  of
struggling  with  unworthy  adversaries,  he  returned
to  Europe,  hoping  to  confound  his  enemies.  He
was  coldly  received  by  Charles ;  but,  concealing  his
feelings,  he  served  in  the  disastrous  expedition  to
Algiers  in  1541.  During  this  unfortunate  cam-
paign, which  was  his  last,  he  served  with  great
bravery ;  and,  had  his  advice  been  heeded,  the  Span-
ish arms  would  have  been  saved  from  disgrace,  and
Europe  delivered  nearly  three  centuries  earlier
from  the  scourge  of  organized  piracy.  On  his  re-
turn he  was  utterly  neglected,  and  could  scarcely
obtain  an  audience.  On  one  occasion  he  forced
his  way  through  a  crowd  that  surrounded  the  em-
peror's carriage,  and  mounted  on  the  doorstep.
The  emperor,  astounded  at  such  audacity,  demand-
ed of  him  who  he  was.  "  I  am  a  man,"  replied
Cortes  proudly,  "who  has  given  you  more  prov-
inces than  your  ancestors  left  you  cities."  This
declaration  of  services  could  scarcely  fail  to  offend
the  proud  monarch,  and  Cortes  retired  to  Seville,
where  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  soli-
tude. Five  letters  addressed  to  Charles  V.,  detail-
ing his  conquests,  are  his  only  writings.  See  "  Let-
ters and  Despatches  of  Cortes,"  translated  by
George  Folsom  (New  York,  1843) ;  Prescott's  "  Con-
quest of  Mexico  "  (Boston,  1843) ;  and  Sir  Arthur
Helps's  "  Life  of  Hernando  Cortes  "  (London,  1871).

CORTHELL,  Elmer  Lawrence,  engineer,  b.
30  Sept.,  1840.  He  left  Brown  university  to  en-
list for  three  years  at  the  beginning  of  the  civil
war,  and  was  promoted  to  be  captain  of  artillery.
Returning  to  the  university  after  his  discharge,  he
was  graduated  in  18(37,  then  studied  civil  engineer-
ing with  S.  B.  Cushing,  of  Providence,  and  went
to  Illinois  as  assistant  engineer  in  the  construc-
tion of  the  Hannibal  and  Naples  railroad  in  1868.
He  was  chief  engineer  of  the  Sny  Island  levee  in
1871,  became  chief  assistant  engineer  on  the  Mis-
sissippi jetties  in  1874,  chief  engineer  in  the  con-
struction of  the  New  York,  West  Shore,  and  Buf-
falo railroad  in  1881,  and  in  1883  was  appointed
chief  engineer  of  the  Tehuantepec  ship-railway.
He  has  published  a  "  History  of  the  Jetties  at  the
Mouth  of  the  Mississippi  River  "  (New  York,  1881).

CORTINA,  Jos6  M.  Jiisto  Gomez  de  La  (cor-
tee'-nah).  Count  de  la  Cortina,  Mexican  scholar,  b.
in  the  city  of  Mexico,  9  Aug.,  1799;  d.  there,  6
Jan.,  1860.  He  was  the  son  of  noble  parents,  from
whom  he  inherited  his  title.  At  the  age  of  fifteen
he  was  sent  to  Madrid  to  finish  his  education,  af-
terward studied  at  the  Academy  of  Aleala  de  He-
nares,  won  in  competition  the  professorship  of  mili-
tary geography,  and  became  an  officer  of  engineers.
Still  later  he  entered  the  diplomatic  service.  The
most  distinguished  scholars  of  Spain  met  at  his
house  in  Madrid,  and  he  was  in  correspondence
with  philologists,  historians,  critics,  and  poets  of
France,  Germany,  and  Austria.  Cortina  returned
to  his  country  in  1832,  worked  hard  to  promote
literary  education  in  Mexico,  and  soon  had  great
influence  in  polities ;  but  this  caused  his  expulsion
from  Mexico  in  June,  1833,  and  he  was  absent  un-
til Gen.  Santa  Anna  recalled  him  in  the  following
year.  He  afterward  filled  many  public  offices,  in-
eluding  those  of  minister  of  finance,  president  of


the  board  of  finance,  colonel  of  the  grenadiers
corps,  member  of  the  board  of  notables  that  laid
the  bases  for  the  organization  of  the  republic,  sena-
tor and  chief  officer  of  the  war  department,  and
governor  of  the  district  of  Mexico.  He  established
several  periodicals,  was  a  constant  contributor  to
many  others,  published  more  than  twenty  works,
and  left  fifty-four  manuscripts  on  various  subjects.
Among  his  printed  books  are  "Cartilia  historial";
"  Cartilia  social  "  (1833) ;  "  Diccionario  de  sinoni-
mos  castellanos  "  (1845) ;  "  Leonor,"  a  novel  (1845);
"Euclea  6  la  Griega  de  Trieste,"  a  novel  (1845);
"Diccionario  manual  de  voces  tecnicas  castella-
nas,  en  bellas  artes  "  (1848) ;  "  Los  enviados  diplo-
maticos ;  sus  atribuciones  y  derechos  "  (1854) ;  and
"  Prontuario  diplomatic©  y  consular  "  (1856).  Of
his  manuscripts,  the  "  Diccionario  diplomatico,"
'•  Gramatica  castellana,"  "  Diccionario  de  voces  an-
tiguas,"  "  Uso  de  las  preposiciones  de  la  lengua
castellana,"  "  Nomenclatura  cientifica  de  plantas  y
de  animales  de  la  Republica  mejicana,"  "  Tratado
de  la  nobleza  espaiiola,"  "  Diccionario  militar  an-
tiguo,"  "  Vocabulario  de  voces  poeticas,"  "  Dic-
cionario seismologico,"  and  the  poems  entitled  "  La
Mariposa "  and  "  El  Clasico  y  el  Romantico,"  de-
serve special  mention.  Cortina's  library,  which
included  many  rare  books  and  manuscripts,  was
sold  in  Paris.  He  also  left  a  rich  numismatic  col-
lection, which  he  presented  to  the  National  museum
in  the  city  of  Mexico.

CORTINA,  Juan  Nepomuceno  (cor-tee  -nah),
Mexican  soldier,  b.  in  La  Higuera,  near  Matarao-
ros,  Tamaulipas,  15  June,  1830.  He  began  life  as
a  farm  laborer.  When  the  American  troops  en-
tered Mexico  in  1846  he  organized  a  band  of  cow-
boys for  guerilla  warfare.  This  band  was  after-
ward incorporated  in  the  Mexican  army  and  took
part  in  the  battles  of  Palo  Alto  and  Angostura,
where  Cortina  was  dangerously  wounded.  At  the
close  of  the  war  he  had  the  rank  of  captain,  but
was  not  permitted  to  enter  the  regular  army,  and
became  a  smuggler.  On  one  occasion  he  had
promised  certain  Texan  dealers  to  smuggle  a  large
cargo  of  goods  into  Matamoros,  and,  as  the  Mexi-
can authorities  were  making  preparations  to  pre-
vent it,  he  entered  Matamoros  alone,  took  away
with  him  the  custom-house  collector,  and  forced
him  to  escort  the  cargo  into  Matamoros.  In  1856,
while  assisting  the  liberal  revolutionists,  he  entered
the  town  of  Burgos  and  shot  the  mayor  and  other
officers.  Even  some  members  of  his  own  party
asked  in  congress  that  Cortina  and  others  should
be  sentenced  to  death  in  1857.  He  was  now  a  gen-
eral, and  sided  with  Comonfort,  but  was  attacked
and  defeated  by  Gen.  Plinojosa  near  Cerralbo,  and
took  refuge  in  United  States  territory,  where
he  remained  until  1859.  He  then  served  under
Gen.  Vidaurri,  but  would  not  submit  to  mili-
tary discipline.  He  and  Canales  governed  in  the
frontier,  appointing  and  discharging  military  or
civil  authorities  at  will,  burning  settlements,  and
committing  other  depredations,  until  1863.  Cor-
tina remained  faithful  to  the  republican  party  dur-
ing the  first  year  of  the  French  invasion,  joined
V^idaurri  to  defend  Maximilian  in  1864,  refused  to
go  to  the  city  of  Mexico  when  called  there  in  1865,
and  again  sided  with  the  republicans  in  1867.
President  Juarez  appointed  him  in  1869  federal
chief  of  Tamaulipas ;  but  he  revolted  in  1874  in
favor  of  the  Plan  de  Tuxtepec,  and  gave  shelter  to
Gen.  Diaz,  then  a  fugitive,  to  whom  he  offered
money  and  soldiers.  After  the  revolution  was
ended  in  1876,  Diaz  ordered  Gen.  Canales  to  cap-
ture and  shoot  Cortina;  but  Canales  only  arrested
him  and  took  him  to  the  city  of  Mexico,  early  in


CORUJA

1877,  where  he  has  been  kept  ever  since  in  the
military  prison  of  Santiago  Tlaltelolco,  without
being  tried  or  sentenced.

CORUJA,  Antonio  Alvares  Pereira  (co-roo  -
ha),  Brazilian  scholar,  b.  in  Porto  Alegre,  Rio
Grande  do  Sul,  31  Aug.,  180G.  After  finishing  his
studies,  he  devoted  himself  to  teaching  Portuguese
and  philosophy,  but,  being  elected  a  member  of
the  provincial  deputation  in  1836,  took  part  in  the
political  struggles  of  that  time,  suffered  persecu-
tion, gave  up  politics,  and  established  a  college  in
Rio  Janeiro.  He  was  noted  for  his  educational
work,  and  received  several  decorations.  Most  of
his  works  are  text-books  of  Portuguese  and  Latin
grammar,  arithmetic,  history  of  Brazil,  orthogra-
phy and  provincial  words.  He  has  also  written
largely  for  periodicals.

CORWIN,  Thomas,  statesman,  b.  in  Bourbon
county,  Ky.,  29  July,  1794 ;  d.  in  Washington,  D.
C,  18  Dec,  1865.  In  1798  his  father,  Matthias,  re-
moved to  what  is  now  Lebanon,  Ohio,  and  for
many  years  represented  his  district  in  the  legisla-
ture. The  son  worked  on  the  home  farm  till  he
was  about  twenty  years  old,  and  enjoyed  very
slender  educational' advantages, but  began the

study  of  law  in
1815,  and  was
admitted  to  the
bar  in  May,  1818.
His  ability  and
eloquence  as  an
advocate  soon
gained  him  an
extensive  prac-
tice. He  was
first  chosen  to
the  legislature
of  Ohio  in  1822,
serving  seven
years,  and  was
chosen  to  con-
gress in  1830,
from  the  Miami
district  as  a
whig,  of  which
party  he  was
an  enthusiastic
member.  His
wit  and  eloquence  made  him  a  prominent  member
of  the  house  of  representatives,  to  which  he  was
re-elected  by  the  strong  whig  constituency  that
he  represented  for  each  successive  term  till  1840,
when  he  resigned  to  become  the  whig  candidate
for  governor  of  Ohio,  and  canvassed  the  state
with  Gen.  Harrison,  addressing  large  gatherings
in  most  of  the  counties.  He  was  unsurpassed  as
an  orator  on  the  political  platform  or  before  a  jury.
At  the  election  he  was  chosen  by  16,000  majority,
Gen.  Harrison  receiving  over  23,000  in  the  presi-
dential election  that  soon  followed.  Two  years
later,  Gov.  Corwin  was  defeated  for  governor  by
Wilson  Shannon,  whom  he  had  so  heavily  beaten
in  1840.  In  1844  the  Whigs  again  carried  the
state,  giving  its  electoral  vote  to  Mr.  Clay,  and  send-
ing Mr.  Corwin  to  the  U.  S.  senate,  where  he  made
in  1847  a  notable  speech  against  the  war  in  Mexi-
co. He  served  in  the  senate  until  Mr.  Fillmore's
accession  to  the  presidency  in  July,  1850,  when  he
was  called  to  the  head  of  the  treasury.  After  the
expiration  of  Mr.  Fillmore's  term  he  returned  to
private  life  and  the  practice  of  law  at  Lebanon,
Ohio.  In  1858  he  was  returned  once  more  a  repre-
sentative in  congress  by  an  overwhelming  majority,
and  was  re-elected  with  but  slight  opposition  in
1860. On  Mr.  Lincoln's  accession  to  the  presi-


COSBY


751


dency  he  was  appointed  minister  to  Mexico,  where
he  remained  until  the  arrival  of  Maximilian,  when
he  came  home  on  leave  of  absence,  and  did  not  re-
turn, remaining  in  Washington  and  practising  law,
but  taking  a  warm  interest  in  public  affairs,  and
earnestly  co-operating  in  every  effort  to  restore

Eeace.  His  style  of  oratory  was  captivating,  and
is  genial  and  kindly  nature  made  him  a  univer-
sal favorite.  His  intemoerate  speech  against  the
Mexican  war  hindered  >iis  further  political  ad-
vancement. He  was  a  faithful  public  servant,  led
a  busy  life,  lived  frugally,  and,  although  he  had
been  secretary  of  the  U.  8.  treasury,  failed  to  se-
cure a  competency  for  his  family.  See  the  "  Life
and  Speeches  "  of  Thomas  Corwin,  edited  by  Isaac
Strohn  (Dayton.  1859).— His  brother,  Moses  B.,  b.
m  Bourbon  county,  Ky.,  5  Jan.,  1790 ;  d.  in  UrbanJ^
Ohio,  7  April,  1872,  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, studied  law,  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1812,  and  practised  at  Urbana.  He  was  a  member
of  the  legislature  in  1838-9,  and  was  elected  as  a
whig  to  congress  in  1848,  against  his  son,  John
A.,  who  was  nominated  as  a  Democrat.  He  was
again  elected  in  1854.

CORWINE,  Amos  Breckinridge,  journalist,
b.  in  Maysville,  Ky.,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  New  Rochelle,
Ohio,  22  June,  1880.  His  early  years  were  spent
on  his  father's  plantation  in  Mississippi.  He  pub-
lished the  Yazoo  "Banner"  from  1840  to  1844.
He  served  during  the  Mexican  war,  being  a  lieu-
tenant in  the  Mississippi  regiment  commanded  by
Jefferson  Davis,  and  was  severely  wounded  at
Buena  Vista.  After  that  war,  in  partnership  with
his  brother  Samuel,  he  edited  the  Cincinnati
"  Chronicle."  During  the  administrations  of  Presi-
dents Tyler  and  Fillmore  he  was  U.  S.  consul  at
Panama.  In  1856  he  was  sent  by  President  Pierce
to  investigate  the  Panama  massacres,  and  on  his
report  were  based  the  treaty  and  adjustment  of
damages  between  the  United  States  and  New  Gra-
nada. He  was  re-appointed  consul,  and  remained
in  Panama  until  1861,  when  he  was  removed.

COSA,  Juan  de  la,  Spanish  navigator,  b.  in  the
latter  part  of  the  15th  century;  d.  in  1509.  Ho
accompanied  Columbus,  as  pilot,  in  his  second
voyage.  Having  become  noted  for  his  great  abili-
ty and  vast  knowledge  as  a  navigator,  he  was  in-
trusted with  the  command  of  three  expeditions  to
the  coasts  and  territories  of  Darien,  and  on  re-
turning to  Spain  was  rewarded  for  his  discov-
eries with  special  honors  and  the  title  of  cdguacil
mayor  of  those  regions  explored  by  him.  In  1509
he  accompanied  Ojeda  in  another  expedition  to  the
same  country,  and  the  explorers  landed,  against  his
advice,  at  the  place  where  the  city  of  Cartagena
is  now.  When  Ojeda  had  gone  some  distance  into
the  country,  he  and  his  men  were  attacked  and
surrounded  by  many  thousands  of  Indians.  De  la
Cosa  went  at  once  to  his  aid,  fought  with  astonish-
ing bravery,  resisted  desperately  against  the  con-
tinuous attacks  of  numberless  Indians,  and,  after
three  hundred  of  his  companions  had  perished  in
the  battle,  he  also  fell  under  the  poisoned  arrows
of  the  enemy.  A  few  days  afterward  Ojeda  found
the  body  of  his  heroic  friend  hanging  from  a  tree.
COSBY,  William,  governor  of  New  York,  b.
about  1695;  d.  in  New  York  city,  10  March,  1736.
After  serving  as  a  colonel  in  the  army,  and  being
governor  of  Minorca  and  of  the  Leeward  islands,
he  became  governor  of  New  York  in  1731,  and
held  the  office  till  his  death.  His  administration
was  turbulent  and  unpopular.  He  appointed  James
De  Lancey  his  successor,  held  in  contempt  the  elec-
tive franchise,  and  continued  the  same  assembly
six  years,  without  permitting  its  dissolution.


752


COSGROVE


COTTON


g'


COSGROTE,  Henry,  R.  C.  bishop,  b.  in  Wil-
liamsport,  Pa.,  in  1884.  He  removed  with  his  par-
ents to  Dubuque  when  eleven  years  old.  He  was
ordained  in  1857,  and  appointed  assistant  pastor  of
St.  Mary's,  Davenport.  He  became  pastor  in  1862,
and  shortly  afterward  erected  a  church  and  school.
He  was  appointed  vicar-general  of  the  diocese  in
1882.  On  the  death  of  Bishop  McMullen  he  was
selected  as  administrator;  and  in  1884  was  pro-
posed to  tlie  holy  see  as  his  successor  in  the  bish-
opric of  Davenport.  Dr.  Cosgrove  is  the  first  na-
tive of  the  United  States  that  has  been  appointed
bishop  west  of  the  Mississippi.

COSSETT,  Franceway  Ranna,  clergyman,  b.  in
Claremont,  N.  H.,  24  April,  1790 ;  d.  in  Lebanon,
Tenn.,  3  July,  18(33.  He  was  graduated  at  Middle-
bury  in  1813,  and,  after  teaching  school  for  several
years,  studied  theology,  intending  to  take  orders
in  the  Protestant  Episcopal  church.  Going  to
Tennessee,  he  became  interested  in  the  Cumber-
land Presbyterians,  and  was  ordained  by  Anderson
resbytery  in  1822. He  was  first  president  of

umberland  college,  Princeton,  Ky.,  in  1825-42,
and  of  Cumberland  university,  Lebanon,  Tenn.,  till
1847.  Middlebury  gave  him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in
1839,  Dr,  Cossett  was  the  founder  of  the  Nash-
ville "  Banner  of  Peace,"  and  edited  it  from  1839
till  1850.  He  published  "  Life  and  Times  of  Ew-
ing,"  containing  a  history  of  the  early  years  of  the
Cumberland  Presbyterian  church.

COSTIGAN,  Jolin,  Canadian  statesman,  b.  in
St.  Nicholas,  province  of  Quebec,  1  Feb.,  1835.  He
was  graduated  at  St.  Ann's  college,  went  to  New
Brunswick,  and,  after  engaging  in  various  pursuits,
was  appointed  a  judge  of  the  superior  court  of
common  pleas.  In  1801  he  was  elected  for  Vic-
toria county,  and  sat  in  the  New  Brunswick  assem-
bly till  180(i.  He  was  returned  for  the  same  county
at  the  general  election  that  followed  confederation
in  1867,  and  has  represented  it  ever  since  in  the
Dominion  house  of  commons.  On  23  May,  1882,
he  was  sworn  of  the  privy  council,  and  became  min-
ister of  inland  revenue,  a  portfolio  which  he  still
retains.  To  his  efforts  in  parliament  the  Roman
Catholics  of  New  Brunswick  are  largely  indebted
for  now  possessing  separate  schools,  on  a  similar
basis  to  that  prevailing  in  Ontario  and  Quebec.
In  1882  he  submitted  in  parliament  the  famous
"Costigan  Irish  resolutions,"  praying  the  British
government  to  grant  home  rule  to  Ireland  on  the
colonial  plan  of  self-government.  The  resolution
was  adopted  by  the  Canada  house  of  commons.

COTABANAMA  (co-tah-ban-nah'-mah),  Indian
cacique,  the  last  of  the  five  kings  of  Hayti,  d.  in
1504.  He  ruled  in  the  district  of  Higuey.  Cota-
banama  made  war  against  the  Spaniards,  who  had
taken  possession  of  the  island,  but  at  last  was  de-
feated by  Juan  de  Esquibel,  Ovando's  lieutenant,
and  taken  to  Santo  Domingo  to  be  executed.  His
death  was  followed  by  the  surrender  and  submis-
sion of  the  people  that  had  been  under  his  rule.

COTTINEAU,  Denis  Nicholas,  naval  officer,
b.  in  Nantes,  Prance,  in  1746 ;  d.  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
29  Nov.,  1808.  He  was  formerly  a  lieutenant  in
the  French  navy.  He  commanded  the  "  Pallas  "
in  the  battle  of  Paul  Jones  with  the  British  squad-
ron under  Sir  Richard  Pearson.  James  Fenimore
Cooper,  in  his  "  History  of  the  Navy  of  the  United
States,"  says  that  Jones  appears  to  have  had  much
respect  for  Cottineau's  judgment,  and  abandoned
a  difficult  and  daring  enterprise,  whose  nature  is
not  known,  at  his  advice.

COTTING,  Jolin  Rugbies,  scientist,  b.  in  Ac-
ton, Mass.,  in  1783;  d.  in  Milledgeville,  Ga.,  13
Oct.,  1867. He  was  educated  at  Harvard  and  at


Dartmouth  medical  school,  and  was  ordained  as  a
Congregational  minister  about  1810.  He  then  de-
voted himself  to  the  study  of  chemistry  and  the
allied  sciences,  and  during  the  war  of  1812  was  em-
ployed by  a  Boston  firm  to  manufacture  chemical
compounds  never  before  made  in  this  country.
After  holding  several  professorships  of  chemistry,
he  removed,  in  1835,  to  Augusta,  Ga.,  having  been
induced  by  cotton-planters  of  that  state  to  make
an  agricultural  and  geological  survey  of  Burke
and  Richland  counties.  His  report,  published  in
1836,  contains  valuable  analyses  of  cotton  lands
and  a  table  of  fifty-seven  genera  of  fossils.  He  af-
terward entered  on  a  similar  survey  of  the  whole
state,  but  it  was  suspended  in  1837  from  lack  of
financial  support,  and  the  fine  collection  of  plants,
minerals,  and  fossils  that  he  had  made  were  dis-
tributed among  various  colleges.  The  maps  of  the
survey  were  finely  executed,  and  the  emperor  of
Russia  requested  copies  for  the  Royal  library  at  St.
Petersburg.  Dr.  Cotting  published  an  "  Introduc-
tion to  Chemistry,"  used  for  several  years  at  Har-
vard (Boston,  1822),  "  Synopsis  of  Lectures  on
Geology"  (Trenton,  N,  J.,  1825),  and  a  work  on
"  Soils  and  Manures,"

COTTON,  John,  clergyman,  b.  in  Derby,  Eng-
land, 4  Dec,  1585 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  23  Dec,
1652,  His  father  was  Roland  Cotton,  a  lawyer,
John  entered  Trinity  college,  Cambridge,  when
only  thirteen  years  old,  and  afterward  removed  to
Emmanuel  college,  where  he  obtained  a  fellowship.
He  soon  became  head  lecturer,  dean,  and  then
catechist,  and  gained  a  high  reputation  for  learn-
ing and  brilliancy.  While  connected  with  the  col-
lege he  imbibed  Puritan  opinions,  and  about  1612
became  minister  at  Boston,  in  Lincolnshire,  While
here  he  was  convinced  that  many  of  the  ceremonies
of  the  established  church  were  unscriptural,  and
was  suspended  for  some  time  by  his  bishop  for  re-
fusing to  conform  to  them ;  but,  as  the  majority  of
his  people  were  with  him,  he  was  restored,  and
kept  his  place  for  more  than  twenty  years,  educat-
ing many  young  men  for  the  ministry,  and  effect-
ing a  general  reformation  in  the  town  by  his  labors.
After  Bishop  Laud  obtained  control  of  the  church,
dissensions  arose  among  Mr,  Cotton's  parishioners,
and,  hearing  that  he  was  to  be  summoned  before
the  high  commission  court,  he  fled  to  London,
where  he  remained  some  time  in  concealment,  and
then  embarked  for  Boston,  in  New  England,  where
he  arrived  on  3  Sept.,  1633,  Within  a  fortnight
after  his  arrival  he  was  chosen  by  the  magistrates
to  be  a  teacher  in  the  first  church,  in  Boston,  of
which  John  Wilson  was  pastor.  He  retained  his
connection  with  this  church  till  his  death.  When
the  noted  Anne  Hutchinson  began  to  propagate
her  Antinomian  doctrines,  Mr.  Cotton  for  a  time
gave  her  countenance,  but  soon  opposed  her,  find-
ing that  he  had  been  led  away  by  false  represen-
tations. In  1642  he  was  invited,  together  M'ith
Hooker  and  Davenport,  to  assist  at  the  celebrated
assembly  of  divines  in  Westminster,  but  was  dis-
suaded from  accepting  by  Hooker,  who  wished  to
form  for  himself  a  system  of  church  government
for  New  England.  His  death  was  the  result  of  ex-
posure in  crossing  the  ferry  to  Cambridge,  when  on
his  way  to  preach.  Mr.  Cotton  had  a  reputation
for  profound  learning.  He  was  accustomed  to
study  twelve  hours  a  day,  and  loved,  as  he  said,
"  to  sweeten  his  mouth  with  a  piece  of  Calvin  "  be-
fore going  to  sleep.  He  was  a  critic  in  Greek,
wrote  Latin  with  elegance,  and  could  discourse  in
Hebrew.  His  pulpit  oratory  was  distinguished  by
simplicity.  Notwithstanding  his  own  experience
in  England,  he  was  extreme  in  his  views  as  to  the


COUCH


COUDIN


753


power  of  the  civil  authority  in  religious  matters,
and  carried  on  a  famous  controversy  on  the  sub-
ject with  Roger  Williams.  Mr.  Cotton  introduced
into  New  England  the  custom  of  keeping  the  Sab-
bath from  evening  to  evening.  A  tablet  to  his
memory,  with  a  Latin  inscription  by  Edward  Ever-
ett, was  erected  in  1857  in  St.  Botolph's  church,
Boston,  England,  chiefly  by  contributions  from  his
descendants  in  Boston,  Mass.  Cotton  was  a  volu-
minous writer,  being  the  author  of  nearly  fifty
books,  all  of  which  were  sent  to  London  for  pub-
lication. Soon  after  reaching  New  England  he
drew  up,  by  request  of  the  general  court,  an  ab-
stract of  the  laws  of  Moses  for  use  in  the  colony.
This  was  published,  though  not  adopted;  but  a
revision  of  the  abstract,  supposed  to  be  the  joint
work  of  Cotton  and  Sir  Henry  Vane,  was  adopted
and  printed  (London,  1041),  '  Of  his  other  works,
some  of  the  most  important  are  "  Set  Forms  of
Prayer"  (1642);  "The  Keys  of  the  Kingdom  of
Heaven,  and  the  Power  Thereof,"  giving  his  theo-
cratic ideas  of  government  (1044) ;  "  The  Bloody
Tenent  Washed  and  made  White  in  the  Blood  of
the  Lamb,"  one  of  his  letters  to  Roger  Williams,
who  had  charged  him  with  holding  a  '-bloody
tenent  of  persecution"  (1047);  and  the  famous
catechism  whose  full  title  reads,  "  Milk  for  Babes,
drawn  out  of  the  Breasts  of  both  Testaments,
chiefly  for  the  Spiritual  Nourishment  of  Boston
Babes  in  either  England,  but  may  be  of  use  for
any  Children  "  (London,  1640).  Two  of  his  tracts
relating  to  Roger  Williams,  edited  by  Reuben  A.
Guild,  were  published  by  the  Narragansett  club
(1806).  See  Mather's  "Magnalia"  and  Norton's
"Life  and  Death  of  Mr.  John  Cotton"  (London,
1648 ;  new  ed.,  with  notes  by  Prof.  Enoch  Pond,
Boston,  1834). — His  son.  Seaborn,  b.  at  sea  in
August,  1033 ;  d.  19  April,  1080,  was  graduated  at
Harvard  in  1651,  and  was  minister  at  Hampton,
N.  H.,  from  1000  till  his  death.— Another  son,
John,  b.  in  Boston,  13  March,  1640 ;  d.  in  Charles-
ton, S.  C.  18  Sept,  1099,  was  graduated  at  Harvard
in  1057.  He  was  minister  for  thirty  years  in  Plym-
outh, Mass.,  and  afterward  in  Charleston,  S.  C.
He  was  eminent  for  his  acquaintance  with  the
Indian  language,  frequently  preached  to  the  abo-
rigines at  Martha's  Vineyard  and  Plymouth,  and
revised  and  corrected  the  whole  of  Eliot's  Indian
Bible  (Cambridge.  1085). — Josiali,  son  of  the  second
John,  b.  8  Jan.,  1080;  d.  19  Aug.,  1750,  was  gradu-
ated at  Harvard  in  1098.  He  studied  theology,
taught  in  Marblehead  and  Plymouth,  and,  though
not  ordained  over  any  church,  preached  occasion-
ally for  several  years.  He  also  gave  his  attention
to  agriculture,  having  a  good  farm  in  Plymouth.
Having  acquired  considerable  knowledge  of  the
Indian  language,  he  visited  various  tribes  in  Plym-
outh colony  as  a  missionary  during  nearly  forty
years,  receiving  a  salary  of  £20  from  the  commis-
sioners for  propagating  the  gospel.  He  was  also
clerk  of  the  county  court,  and  register  of  probate.
He  prepared  a  vocabulary  of  the  language  of  the
Massachusetts  Indians  ("  Massachusetts  Historical
Collections,"  vol,  ii..  3d  series).

COUCH,  Darius  Nash,  soldier,  b.  in  South
East,  Putnam  co.,  N.  Y,,  23  July,  1822,  Pie  was
graduated  at  the  U.  S,  military  academy  in  1840,
and  assigned  to  the  4th  artillery,  with  which  he
served  in  the  Mexican  war,  gaining  the  brevet  of
first  lieutenant,  23  Feb.,  1847,  for  gallant  conduct
at  Buena  Vista.  He  received  his  full  commission
on  4  Dec,  served  against  the  Seminoles  in  1849-'50,
and  in  1853,  when  on  leave  of  absence,  made  an
exploring  expedition  into  Mexico,  which  is  thus
mentioned  in  the  U.  S.  senate  reports  of  "  Explora-
VOL.  I. — 48


tions  and  Surveys  for  a  Railroad  from  the  Missis-
sippi River  to  the  Pacific  Ocean  "  (1853-'6),  vol.  ix, :
"  should  there  be  two  species,  and  the  smaller  not
named,  I  shall  propose  to  call  it  C.  Couchii,  in
honor  of  its  indefatigable  discoverer,  Lieut.  D.  M.
Couch,  who,  at  his  own  risk  and  cost,  undertook  a
journey  into  northern  Mexico,  when  the  country
was  swarming  with  bands  of  marauders,  and  made
large  collections  in  all  branches  of  zoology,  which
have  furnished  a  great  amount  of  information  re-
specting the  natural  history  of  our  borders,  and
the  geographical  distribution  of  vertebrata  gener-
ally." Lieut.  Couch  wrote  an  account  of  his  expe-
dition, entitled  "  Notes  of  Travel,"  but  it  is  still  in
manuscript.  He  resigned  on  30  April,  1855,  was  a
merchant  in  New  York  city  in  1855-'7,  and  en-
gaged in  manufacturing  at  Norton,  Mass.,  from
1858  till  15  June,  1861,  when  he  became  colonel  of
the  7th  Massachusetts  volunteers.  He  was  made
brigadier-general  of  volunteers  in  August,  his  com-
mission dating  from  17  May,  and  on  the  reorgani-
zation of  the  Army  of  the'  Potomac  was  assigned
a  division  in  Gen.  Keyes's  corps,  with  which  he
distinguished  himself  at  Fair  Oaks,  Williamsburg,
and  Malvern  Hill.  He  was  promoted  to  major-
general  on  4  July,  1862,  commanded  a  division  in
the  retreat  from  Manassas  to  Washington,  30
Aug.  to  2  Sept.,  and  took  part  in  the  battle  of
Antietam  in  Franklin's  corps.  He  was  soon  after-
ward in  command  of  the  2a  army  corps,  and  took
a  prominent  part  in  Burnside's  operations  at
Fredericksburg,  and  Hooker's  at  Chancellorsville.
From  11  June,  1863,  till  1  Dec,  1864,  he  command-
ed the  Department  of  the  Susquehanna,  and  was
engaged  in  organizing  Pennsylvania  militia  to  re-
sist Lee's  invasion  of  July,  1803.  He  was  at  the
head  of  the  2d  division  of  the  23d  army  corps
from  December,  1804,  till  May,  1805,  was  at  the
battle  of  Nashville,  and  took  part  in  the  opera-
tions in  North  Carolina,  in  February,  1805,  to  ef-
fect a  junction  with  Schofield.  He  resigned  on  26
May,  1805,  and  was  the  unsuccessful  democratic
candidate  for  governor  of  Massachusetts.  He  was
collector  of  the  port  of  Boston  from  1  Oct.,  1866,
till  4  March,  1867,  when  the  failure  of  the  senate
to  confirm  his  appointment  forced  him  to  vacate
the  office.  He  became  president  of  a  Virginia
mining  and  manufacturing  company  in  1867,  but
subsequently  removed  to  Norwalk,  Conn.,  was
quartermaster-general  of  the  state  of  Connecticut
in  1877-'8,  and  adjutant-general  in  1883-4.

COUDIN,  Robert,  soldier,  b.  in  Jamaica,  Vt,,
18  Sept.,  1805 ;  d.  in  Boston,  Mass.,  9  July,  1874
His  grandfather,  Thomas  Coudin,  held  a  military
commission  under  George  II.  Robert  was  edu-
cated in  his  native  town,  and  in  1825  came  to  Bos-
ton, where  he  engaged  in  the  lumber  business.
Before  the  civil  war  he  was  colonel  of  the  old  2d
Massachusetts  militia  regiment.  He  was  commis-
sioned colonel  of  the  1st  Massachusetts  volunteers
on  25  May,  1861,  and  left  for  the  seat  of  war  on  15
June.  His  was  the  first  regiment  that  volunteered
"for  three  years  or  the  war."  Among  the  battles
in  which  Col.  Coudin  took  part  were  Bull  Run,
Williamsburg,  Fair  Oaks,  Glendale,  Malvern  Hill,
and  Chantilly.  At  the  battle  of  Bull  Run,  his
horse  being  shot  under  him,  he  marched  at  the
head  of  his  men,  loading  and  firing  with  them.
For  bravery  at  Williamsburg  he  was  recommended
for  promotion  by  Gen.  Hooker,  and  received  his
brigadier-general's  commission  on  26  Sei^t.,  1862.
His  appointment  expired  on  4  March,  1863.  At
the  close  of  the  war  he  became  captain  of  the
"Ancient  and  honorable  artillery  companj^"  of
Boston,  and  was  dn-ector  of  various  public  insti-


754


COUES


COURSOL


tutions. — His  son,  Robert  Jackson,  b.  in  Boston,
21  May,  1889 ;  d.  in  18(54,  entered  the  army  as  a
private  in  his  father's  regiment.  He  rose  by
bravery  on  the  battle-field  to  be  captain  in  the
5Gth  Massachusetts  regiment,  and  was  probably
killed  in  the  battle  of  Cold  Harbor,  3  June,  1804,
as  he  was  never  heard  from  after  that  day.

COUES,  Elliott  (cows),  naturalist,  b.  in  Ports-
mouth, N".  H.,  9  Sept.,  1843.  He  was  graduated
at  Columbian  university,  Washington,  D.  C.  in
1861,  and  has  since  received  from  that  institu-
tion the  degrees  of  A.  M.,  M.  D.,  and  Ph.  D.  In
1862  he  entered  the  U.  S.  army  as  medical  cadet,
and  in  1864  was  made  assistant  surgeon,  which
rank  he  retained  until  his  resignation  on  17  Nov.,
1881.  Meanwhile  he  had  received  the  brevet  of
captain  for  services  during  the  war,  and  in  1866
was  post  surgeon  at  Columbia,  S.  C.  In  1869  he  was
elected  professor  of  zoology  and  comparative  an-
atomy at  Norwich  university,  Vt.,  and  from  1873
till  1876  was  surgeon  and  naturalist  to  the  U.  S.
northern  boundary  commission,  and  in  1875  col-
laborator at  the  Smithsonian  institution.  From
1876  till  1880  he  was  secretary  and  naturalist  to
the  U.  S.  geological  and  geographical  survey  of
the  territories,  and  in  1877  became  professor  of
anatomy  in  the  National  medical  college.  Subse-
quent to  his  resignation  in  1883  he  was  appointed
professor  of  biology  in  the  Virginia  agricultural
and  mechanical  college.  Dr.  Coues  is  a  member  of
many  scientific  societies  both  in  the  United  States
and  Europe,  and  in  1877  was  elected  a  member  of
the  National  academy  of  sciences.  Within  a  few
years  he  has  become  prominently  identified  with
the  theosophist  movement  in  the  United  States,
and  is  a  member  of  the  general  council  and  presi-
dent of  the  American  board  of  control  of  the
Theosophical  society  of  India.  He  has  been  editor
or  associate  editor,  for  years,  of  the  "  Bulletin  of
the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey,"  "Bulletin  of  the
Nuttall  Ornithological  Club,"  "  American  Natural-
ist," "  American  Journal  of  Otology,"  "  Standard
Natural  History,"  "  The  Auk,"  "  Century  Diction-
ary," and  other  publications.  Prof.  Coues  is  the
author  of  several  hundred  monographs  and  minor
papers  in  scientific  periodicals.  Among  his  im-
portant works  are  "Key  to  North  American
Birds"  (Boston,  1872);  "Field  Ornithology"  (Sa-
lem, 1874);  "Birds  of  the  Northwest"  (Boston,
1874);  "Fur-bearing  Animals"  (1877);  "Mono-
graphs of  North  American  Rodentia,"  with  J.  A.
Allen  (Washington,  1877);  "Birds  of  the  Colorado
Valley"  (1878);  "Ornithological  Bibliography"
(1878-80) ;  "  New  England  Bird  Life,"  with  R.  E.
C.  Stearns  (1881) ;  "  Check-List  and  Dictionary
of  North  American  Birds "  (Boston,  1882) ;  "  Air-
Fauna  Columbiana,"  with  D.  W.  Prentiss  (1883) ;
"  Biogen,  a  Speculation  on  the  Origin  and  Nature
of  Life"  (Boston,  1884);  "New  Key  to  North
American  Birds "  (1884) ;  and  "  The  Daemon  of
Darwin  ",  (1884).

COUOHLAN,  Lawrence,  clergyman,  b.  in  Eng-
land about  1760 ;  d.  in  Nova  Scotia  in  1834.  He
was  a  Wesleyan  preacher,  emigrated  from  England
to  Nova  Scotia,  and  by  his  great  labors  did  much
to  establish  Methodism  there  and  in  the  neighbor-
ing provinces.  He  has  been  called  the  "  Apostle
of  Nova  Scotia."

COULDOCK,  Charles  Walter,  actor,  b.  in
Long  Acre,  London,  England,  26  April,  1815.  He
received  an  academic  education,  and  chose  the
stage  as  a  profession.  He  made  his  first  appear-
ance as  Othello  at  Sadler's  Wells  theatre  in  1835,
and  was  successful.  After  this  he  acted  with
Charles  Kean,  Ellen Tree,  Faunv  Kemble,  Mrs.


Fitz William,  and  W.  C.  Macready,  with  whom  he
became  a  favorite.  He  came  to  the  United  States
in  1849,  and,  at  his  farewell  performance  in  Eng-
land, played  Macduff  to  Macready's  Macbeth.  His
first  appearance  in  this  country  was  at  the  Broad-
way theatre.  He  subsequently  supported  Char-
lotte Cushman,  and  was  successful  as  Jacques  in
"  As  You  Like  It,"  and  as  Luke  Fielding  in  "  The
Willow  Copse."  After  again  supporting  Macready
in  England,  he  returned  to*  this  country,  and  in
1878-'9  played  with  John  E.  Owens  in  "  Cricket  on
the  Hearth,"  and  afterward  in  society  dramas.
His  rendition  of  Dunstan  Kirke  in  "  Hazel  Kirke,"
at  the  Madison  Square  theatre,  was  especially  pow-
erful. Mr.  Couldock  has  a  fine  voice,  and  his  style
of  acting  is  both  forcible  and  sympathetic.

COULTER,  John  Merle,  botanist,  b.  in  Ningpo,
China,  20  Nov.,  1851.  He  was  graduated  at  Plano-
ver  college,  Ind..  in  1870,  and  during  1872-3  was
botanist  to  the  U.  S.  geological  survey  of  the  terri-
tories in  the  Rocky  mountain  system.  In  1874  he
became  professor  of  natural  sciences  in  Hanover
college,  where  he  remained  until  1879,  when  he  was
appointed  to  the  chair  of  biology  at  Wabash.  Prof.
Coulter  is  editor  of  the  "  Botanical  Gazette,"  pub-
lished in  Crawfordsville,  Ind.,  and  is  the  author,  in
part,  of  "Synopsis  of  the  Flora  of  Colorado"
(Washington,  1874);  "Manual  of  Rocky  Mountain
Botany  "  (New  York,  1885) ;  and  in  part  of  "  Hand-
Book  of  Plant  Dissection  "  (New  York,  1886).

COURCELLES,  Daniel  de  Remi,  Seigneur  de,
French  governor  of  Canada.  He  was  sent  out  to
succeed  Mezy  in  1666,  and  in  the  same  year  led  an
expedition  on  snow-shoes  against  the  Mohawks,  aid-
ing Tracy  in  their  reduction.  In  1671  he  deter-
mined to  establish  a  post  on  Lake  Ontario,  to  act
as  a  barrier  between  the  Ottawas  and  the  Iroquois,
and  at  the  same  time  draw  off  trade  from  Hudson
river.  Having  constructed  a  large  plank  flat-boat
of  two  or  three  tons  burden,  provided  with  a  strong
rope  to  draw  it  over  rapids  and  shoals,  he  left  Mon-
treal on  3  June,  with  a  party  of  fifty-six.  They
reached  Lake  Ontario  on  12  June,  and  selected  a
site  for  a  post.  The  project  of  Courcelles  met  with
the  approval  of  Louis  XIV. ;  but  he  returned  to
France  in  1672  on  account  of  failing  health,  and  it
was  left  for  his  successor,  Frontenac,  to  carry  it
out,  which  he  did  on  14  July,  1673,  by  the  construc-
tion of  a  fort  at  Katarakoui  (Kingston).  See  Mar-
gry's  "  Decouvertes  et  etablissements  des  Frangais
dans  I'Amerique  septentrionale,"  i.,  169,  and  Brod-
head's  "  New  York  Colonial  Documents,"  ix.,  75.

COURSOL,  Michel  Joseph  Charles,  Canadian
jurist,  b.  in  Amherstburg,  Ontario,  3  Oct.,  1819.
He  was  educated  at  Montreal  college,  studied  law,
and  was  called  to  the  bar  in  1841.  In  the  latter
part  of  1864,  while  acting  as  judge  of  the  court  of
sessions,  Montreal,  he  attained  notoriety  by  dis-
charging Lieut.  Bennett  H.  Young  and  other  Con-
federate raiders,  who  on  19  Oct.,  1864,  entered  the
town  of  St.  Albans,  Vt.,  fifteen  miles  from  the  Cana-
da frontier,  and,  after  robbing  three  banks  of  over
$200,000  and  wounding  several  persons  (one  fatal-
ly), effected  their  escape  into  Canada.  Though  the
majority  of  the  Canadian  bar  approved  Judge
Coursol's  act,  and  he  was  not  without  justifiers
among  the  most  eminent  British  lawyers,  the  pro-
priety and  legality  of  his  conduct  was  called  in
question,  and  Young  and  several  of  his  associates
were  re-arrested  by  the  Canadian  authorities.  The
controversy,  which  at  one  time  promised  to  dis-
turb the  peaceful  relations  of  Great  Britain  and
the  United  States,  was  settled  with  nothing  more
serious  than  a  temporary  display  of  irritated  feel-
ing. The  president  of  the  United  States  revoked


COURT  DE  GEBELIN


COVELL


755


the  celebrated  proclamation  of  Gen.  Dix,  and  the
Canadian  authorities,  by  the  re-arrest  of  Youn^  and
others,  having  shown  their  disapproval  of  Judge
Coursol's  action,  mutual  concessions  ensued,  result-
ing in  restoring  the  former  peaceful  relationship  of
the  two  countries.  During  the  "  Ti-ent "  difficulty  in
November,  18G1,  Mr.  Coursol  raised  a  reginlent
known  as  the  "  chasseurs  Canadiens,"  and  in  1866,
when  there  was  fear  of  a  Fenian  invasion,  he
headed  his  battalion  and  marched  to  the  frontier
to  repel  the  invaders.  In  September,  1878,  he  re-
signed his  judgeship  to  contest  Montreal,  east,  in
the  house  of  commons,  and  was  elected.  He  has
been  president  of  St.  Jean  Baptiste  society,  a  pow-
erful politico-religious  French-Canadian  organiza-
tion, and  has  had  various  official  appointments.
In  1872  he  was  created  a  knight  of  the  order  of
Charles  II.,  of  Spain.^

COURT  DE  GEBELIN,  Antoiiie  (koor  deh
zhay  blan),  French  author,  b.  in  Nimes  in  1725 ;  d.
in  Paris,  10  May,  1784.  He  was  a  preacher  early  in
life,  and  afterward  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
antiquity,  mythology,  the  filiation  of  languages,
and  similar  subjects,  in  which  he  became  very
learned.  He  went  to  Paris  in  1763,  and  published
there  his  great  work  "  Le  monde  primitive,"  the
fruit  of  twenty  years'  labor  (9  vols.,  1775-'84).  The
completion  of  this  book,  which  was  to  have  in-
cluded several  more  volumes,  was  prevented  by  the
author's  death.  He  sympathized  deeply  with  the
Americans  in  the  war  for  independence,  and  co-
operated with  Benjamin  Franklin  and  others  in
publishing  a  work  entitled  "  Affaires  de  I'Angle-
terre  et  de  I'Amerique,"  advocating  the  patriot
cause  (15  vols.,  Paris,  1776  et  seg.).  Besides  these,
he  was  the  author  of  a  variety  of  works  in  history,
philosophv,  and  politics.

COURTENAY,  Edward  Henry,  mathemati-
cian, b.  in  Maryland  in  1803 ;  d.  in  Charlottesville,
Va.,  21  Dec,  1853.  He  was  graduated  first  in  his
class  at  the  U.  S.  military  academy  in  1821,  and
was  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps.  He  served  as
assistant  professor  of  natural  and  experimental
philosophy,  and  afterward  of  engineering,  at  West
Point  from  1821  to  1824.  He  assisted  in  the  con-
struction of  Fort  Adams,  R.  I.,  in  1824-'6,  and  on
1  Sept.,  1828,  returned  to  the  military  academy,
where  he  was  given  the  chair  of  natiiral  and  ex-
perimental philosophy,  16  Feb.,  1829,  and  held  it
till  his  resignation,  31  Dec,  1834.  He  was  pro-
fessor of  mathematics  in  the  University  of  Penn-
sylvania in  1834-'6,  division  engineer  on  the  Erie
railway  in  1836-'7,  and  then  again  entered  the  gov-
ernment service  as  civil  engineer.  He  was  em-
ployed in  the  construction  of  Fort  Independence,
Boston  harbor,  in  1837-41,  and  was  chief  engineer  of
the  dry  dock  at  the  Brooklyn  na\^-yard  in  1841-'2.
He  then  accepted  the  chair  of  mathematics  in
the  University  of  Virginia,  and  held  it;  till  his
death.  The  University  of  Pennsylvania  gave  him
the  degree  of  A.  M.  in  1834,  and  Hampden  Sidney
college  that  of  LL.  D.  in  1846.  He  translated  and
edited  Boucharlat's  "  Elementary  Treatise  on  Me-
chanics," for  the  use  of  the  cadets  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  (New  York,  1833),  and  wrote  a  "  Trea-
tise on  the  differential  and  Integral  Calculus,  and
the  Calculus  of  Variations  "  (1855).

COURTENAY,  Reginald,  clergyman,  b.  in
England  in  1813.  In  1835  he  was  graduated  at  Ox-
ford, and  in  1853  received  the  degree  of  D.  D.  Pie
was  rector  of  Thornton  Watlass,  Yorkshire,  from
1842  till  1853,  and  was  appointed  archdeacon  of
Middlesex,  Jamaica,  in  1853.  In  1856  he  was  con-
secrated bishop  of  Kingston,  and  coadjutor  to  the
bishop  of  Jamaica. He  retained  his  archdeaconry,


and  had  jurisdiction  over  the  entire  diocese,  which
includes  British  Honduras.  He  resigned  in  1879.
His  published  works  are  "  The  Future  States,  their
Nature  and  Evidences "  (1857) ;  "Account  of  the
Church  of  I]ngland  "  (published  in  English,  Italian,
and  Spanish) ;  and  "  Three  Pastoral  Charges."

COL'TINHO,  Aureliano  de  Soiisa  e  Oliveira
(coo-teen-yo).  Viscount  de  Sepitiba,  Brazilian  states-
n)an,  b.  in  the  province  of  Rio  Janeiro,  21  June,
1800;  d.  25  Sept.,  1855.  He  studied  at  the  Uni-
versity of  Coimbra,  Portugal,  where  he  was  gradu-
ated as  a  lawyer,  and  then  spent  two  years  at  the
military  academy  of  Lisbon.  On  his  return  to
Brazil,  he  was  chamberlain  of  the  emperor,  mem-
ber of  the  imperial  council,  and  senator.  In  1833,
while  filling  the  office  of  minister  of  justice,  he
brought  about  a  pacific  settlement  of  serious  diffi-
culties in  the  court,  and  also  the  elevation  of
young  Dom  Pedro  II.  to  the  throne.  He  discovered
a  conspiracy  against  the  prince  and  in  favor  of
Dom  Pedro  I.  Coutinho  rendered  important  ser-
vices to  Brazil  in  several  departments,  and  has  left
works  relative  to  internal  affairs.

COVARRUBIAS,  Francisco  Diaz  (co-var-
roo'-be-as),  Mexican  astronomer,  b.  in  Jalapa  in
1833.  He  distinguished  himself  as  a  student  in
the  mining-school,  where  he  was  graduated  in
1854,  and  became  assistant  professor  of  mathemat-
ics there.  President  Corainfort  appointed  him
chief  engineer  for  the  topographical  survey  of  the
valley  of  Mexico,  and  the  final  results  of  his  com-
mission were  the  topographical  map  of  the  Federal
district,  the  hydrographic  map  of  the  valley  of
Mexico,  and  the  accurate  ascertainment  of  the
geographic  position  of  the  city  of  Mexico.  He  re-
tired to  private  life  for  some  time,  and  President
Juarez  gave  him  the  office  of  chief  engineer  and
superintendent  of  public  roads.  He  was  also  chief
astronomer  of  the  National  observatory  of  Chapul-
tepec.  He  resigned  this  office  at  the  time  of  the
French  invasion,  but  Juarez  appointed  him  assist-
ant secretary  of  public  works  in  1867.  and  Presi-
dent Lerdo  sent  him  to  Japan  to  observe  the  tran-
sit of  Venus,  8  Dec,  1874.  He  went  to  Paris  in
1875,  and  represented  the  Mexican  geographical
society  at  the  geographical  congress,  then  being
made*  a  member  of  the  German  astronomical
society.  On  his  return  to  Mexico  he  published  a
book  relating  to  his  observations  of  the  transit  of
Venus,  and  President  Diaz  sent  him  as  Mexican
minister  to  the  five  Central  American  republics,
where  he  remained  for  two  years,  aiding  Diaz  in
the  persecutions  against  the  refugees  from  Mexico,
and  almost  bringing  about  serious  international
complications.  On  account  of  this  and  of  an
unfortunate  incident,  he  left  Guatemala  in
haste.  Ho  went  to  Europe  in  1881,  and  repre-
sented Mexico  at  the  Geographical  congress  in
Venice,  and  also  at  that  of  electricians  in  Paris,
and  was  appointed  consul-general  of  Mexico.  He
has  been  professor  of  mathematics,  geodesy,  and
astronomy  in  the  National  school  of  engineers,  and
also  filled  the  chair  of  natural  philosophy  in  the
National  preparatory  school.  He  has  published
scientific  works,  the  principal  ones  being  "La
posicion  geografica  de  Mejico,"  "  Tablas  geodesicas
para  las  latitudes  de  la  Repiiblica  Mejicana,"
"Tratado  de  topografia,  geodesia  y  astronomia,"
"  Nuevos  metodos  astronomicos,"  and  "  Elementos
de  analisis  trascendente."

COVELL,  James,  clergyman,  b.  in  Marblehead,
Mass.,  4  Sept.,  1796;  d.  in  Troy,  N.  Y.,  15  May,
1845.  His  parents  removed  to  Maine,  and  then  to
Pougbkeepsie,  N.  Y.,  where,  in  June,  1815,  James
was  licensed  as  a  travelling  preacher  in  the  Meth-


756


COVERNTON


COWAN


odist  church.  He  labored  chiefly  in  New  York
and  Vermont,  and  from  1888  till  1841  was  princi-
pal of  the  Troy  conference  academy,  West  Poult-
noy,  Vt.  He  published  a  "Dictionary  of  the
Bible  "  (New  York).

COVERNTON,  Charles  WiUiam,  Canadian
physician,  b.  in  Penton  Place,  Walworth,  London,
England,  12  Aug.,  1813.  He  was  educated  in
London  and  at  the  Abbe  Haffrangue's  college,
Boulogne-sur-Mer,  France.  After  studying  medi-
cine for  two  years,  in  1832  he  went  to  Edinburgh
university,  in  1835  was  graduated  at  the  Univer-
sity of  St.  Andrews,  and  in  the  same  year  obtained
the  diploma  of  London  college  of  surgeons.  He
arrived  in  Canada  in  June,  1830,  and  accompanied
the  militia  as  surgeon  during  the  rebellion  in  the
following  year.  In  1878  he  was  appointed  to  a
chair  in  the  faculty  of  medicine,  Trinity  college,
Toronto.  In  1882  he  was  appointed  by  the  gov-
ernment of  Ontario  a  member  of  the  Provincial
board  of  health,  in  1884  became  its  chairman,  and
was  present  as  a  delegate  of  the  board  at  the
4th  international  congress  of  hygiene  at  Geneva,
Switzerland,  in  1882,  and  in  October,  1884,  at  the
convention  from  state  boards  at  St.  Louis,  and  in
the  following  December  at  Washington,  D.  C.

COVERT,  John  M.,  physician,  b.  in  St.  Augus-
tine, Fla.,  25  July,  1832 ;  d.  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  18
Feb.,  1872.  He  was  graduated  at  Charleston  col-
lege, S.  C,  in  1853,  and  at  South  Carolina  medical
college  in  1855.  Soon  after  taking  his  medical  de-
gree he  went  to  Norfolk  as  a  volunteer  in  a  yellow-
fever  epidemic,  and  settled  there  in  the  practice  of
his  profession.  He  became  surgeon  of  the  1st
Louisiana  volunteers  in  1861,  and  was  subsequently
medical  director  on  Gen.  Lee's  staff.  He  returned
to  Norfolk  after  the  war,  and  in  1867  volunteered
to  go  to  Galveston,  Texas,  to  combat  the  yellow
fever.  He  removed  to  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  in  1869,
and  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  known  in  literary
circles  there  as  an  excellent  belles-lettres  scholar,
and  the  possessor  of  much  poetical  talent.

COVINGTON,  Leonara,  soldier,  b,  in  Aquasco,
Md.,  30  Oct.,  1768 ;  d.  in  French  Mills,  N.  Y.,  14
Nov.,  1813.  He  was  commissioned  as  lieutenant  of
cavalry  in  October,  1792,  and  joined  the  army  un-
der Gen.  Wayne.  He  distinguished  himself  at
Fort  Recovery,  30  June,  1794,  and  was  honorably
mentioned  by  his  commanding  officer  in  the  ac-
count of  the  battle  of  the  Miami.  He  was  made
captain  in  July  following,  but  in  September,  1795,
resigned  his  commission,  and  devoted  himself  to
agriculture.  He  served  for  several  years  in  the
Maryland  legislature,  and  as  a  member  of  con-
gress in  1805-'7.  In  1809  he  was  commissioned
lieutenant-colonel  of  cavalry,  colonel  a  month
later,  and  brigadier-general  in  1813,  when  he  was
ordered  to  duty  on  the  northern  frontier.  He  was
mortally  wounded  in  the  battle  of  Chrystler's
Field,  11  Nov.,  1813,  and  died  two  days  later.

COVODE,  John,  congressman,  b.  in  Westmore-
land county.  Pa.,  17  March,  1808;  d.  in  Harris-
burg,  Pa.,  11  Jan.,  1871.  He  was  of  Dutch  descent,
spent  his  early  years  on  a  farm,  and,  after  serving
a  short  apprenticeship  to  a  blacksmith,  engaged  in
the  coal  trade.  He  afterward  became  a  large
woollen  manufacturer,  and  a  stockholder  and  di-
rector in  several  railroad  lines.  After  two  terms
in  the  legislature,  he  was  elected  to  congress  as  an
anti-masonic  whig  in  1854,  and  re-elected  as  a  re-
publican in  1856,  serving  four  terms,  from  1855  till
1863.  In  his  second  term  he  made  a  national  repu-
tation by  his  vigor  and  penetration  as  chairman
of  the  special  committee  appointed  to  investigate
charges  against  President  Buchanan. His  report,


published  by  order  of  congress  (Washington,  1860),
attracted  much  attention.  He  earnestly  supported
President  Lincoln's  administration,  being  an  act-
ive member  of  the  Joint  committee  on  the  conduct
of  the  war.  President  Johnson  sent  Mr.  Covode
south  to  aid  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  disaffected
states ;  but  he  did  not  see  matters  as  the  president
desired,  and  was  recalled.  Mr.  Covode  was  again
elected  to  congrers  in  1868,  his  seat  being  unsuc-
cessfully contested  by  his  opponent,  and  was  active
in  opposing  the  president.  He  was  chairman  of
the  republican  state  committee  of  Pennsylvania  in

1869,  and  declined  a  renomination  to  congress  in

1870.  He  was  recognized  in  his  state  as  a  strong
political  power.  His  unthinking  impetuosity
made  him  many  bitter  enemies,  but  his  honesty
and  geniality  won  him  innumerable  friends.  He
was  known  as  "  Honest  John  Covode."

COWAN,  Edgar,  senator,  b.  in  Sewickley,
Westmoreland  co..  Pa.,  19  Sept.,  1815 ;  d.  in
Greensburg,  Pa.,  29  Aug.,  1885.  He  was  early
thrown  on  his  own  resources,  becoming  by  turns
clerk,  boat-builder,  school-teacher,  and  medical
student,  but  finally  entered  Franklin  college,  Ohio,
where  he  was  graduated  in  1839.  He  then  stud-
ied law  in  Greensburg,  Pa.,  and  was  admitted  to
the  bar  in  1842,  In  1861  he  was  elected  to  the
U.  S.  senate  by  the  people's  party,  and  served  till
1867,  distinguishing  himself  as  a  ready  and  fearless
debater.  He  was  chairman  of  the  committees  on
patents,  finance,  and  agriculture,  and  a  member  of
that  on  the  judiciary.  He  was  a  delegate  to  the
Union  convention  at  Philadelphia  in  1866,  and  in
January,  1867.  was  appointed  minister  to  Austria,
but  was  not  confirmed  by  the  senate.  At  the
close  of  his  term  he  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in
Greensburg.  Senator  Cowan  was  a  man  of  large
proportions  and  great  physical  strength,  being  six
feet  four  inches  in  height.  He  published  various
speeches  and  addresses  in  pamphlet  form. — His
son,  Frank,  author,  b.  in  Greensburg,  Pa.,  11
Dec,  1844,  was  educated  at  Mount  Pleasant  and
Jefferson  colleges,  but  never  graduated.  He  be-
came secretary  of  the  senate  committee  on  patents
in  1862,  read  law  with  his  father  during  the  vaca-
tions of  congress,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in
1865.  President  Johnson  made  him  one  of  his
secretaries  in  1866,  and  in  1867  he  began  the  study
of  medicine,  receiving  his  degree  from  George-
town medical  college  in  1869.  He  then  practised
medicine  in  Greensburg  till  1872,  when  he  estab-
lished a  journal  called  "Frank  Cowan's  Paper,"
which  continued  till  1875.  He  was  district  attor-
ney of  his  county  in  1878,  and  in  1880-'81  made  a
tour  of  the  globe,  entering  Corea  before  the  mak-
ing of  any  of  the  treaties  between  that  country  and
civilized  nations,  and  sent  to  the  U.  S.  govern-
ment much  information  about  its  exports  and  im-
ports, also  making  a  valuable  ethnological  collec-
tion. He  resumed  the  practice  of  law  in  1882,  and
in  1884-'5  made  a  second  tour  of  the  world.  Dr.
Cowan  is  a  member  of  several  scientific  societies.
He  has  lectured  in  various  parts  of  the  world  on
his  travels,  and  has  published  "  Curious  Facts  in
the  History  of  Insects"  (Philadelphia,  1865);
"  Zomara ;  a  Romance  of  Spain "  (Pittsburg,
1873);  "Southwestern  Pennsvlvania  in  Song  and
Story"  (Greensburg,  Pa.,  1881);  "The  City  of
the  Royal  Palm,  and  other  Poems  "  (Rio  de  Janerio,
1884);  besides  pamphlets  and  magazine  articles,
including  "  The  Hvidsaerk  Inscription  of  the  Falls
of  the  Potomac"  (1866),  a  hoax,  which,  although
immediately  explained  by  its  author,  has  found  its
way  into  European  books  of  reference.  Dr.  Cowan
has  also  published  musical  compositions.


COWDERY


COX


757


COWDERY,  Jonathan,  surgeon,  b.  in  Santlis-
field,  Mass.,  22  April,  1767:  d.  in  Norfolk,  Va.,  20
Nov.,  1852.  He  was  appointed  assistant  surgeon,
1  Jan.,  1800,  and  surgeon,  27  Nov.,  1804.  He  served
in  the  frigate  "  Philadelphia,"  which  was  stranded
on  the  coast  of  Tripoli,  81  Oct.,  1808,  and  was  a
prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Turks  nearly  two  years.
In  1806  he  published  a  journal  of  this  captivity.

CO  WELL,  Benjamin,  jurist,  b.  in  Wrentham,
Mass.,  in  1781 ;  d.  in  Providence,  R.  I.,  6  May,  1860.
He  was  graduated  at  Brown  in  1808,  studied  law,
and  settled  in  Providence.  He  was  a  clerk  of  the
Federal  courts,  and  for  a  time  chief  justice  of  the
court  of  common  pleas.  In  1850  he  published  a
volume  of  history,  entitled  "  The  Spirit  of  '76."

COWELL,  Joseph,  comedian,  b.  in  Kent,  Eng-
land, 7  Aug.,  1792;  d.  in  London,  14  Nov.,  1868.
He  made  his  first  appearance,  28  Jan.,  1812,  at
Davenport,  England,  as  Belcour  in  the  "West
Indian,"  and  first  appeared  in  London  in  1812,  at
Drury  Lane  theatre.  In  October,  1812,  he  acted
on  the  American  stage  as  Leclair  in  "  Foundling
of  the  Forest,"  and  as  Crack  in  "  Turnpike  Gate,"
at  the  Park  theatre  in  New  York.  Cowell  was  dis-
tinguished in  low  comedy,  and  as  a  comic  vocalist.
He  appeared  in  Philadelphia  as  manager  of  Walnut
street  theatre  circus.  Kate  Bateman  is  his  grand-
daughter. He  wrote  "  Thirty  Years  among  the  Play-
ers of  England  and  America"  (New  York,  1844).

COWEN,  Benjamin  S.,  physician,  b.  in  Wash-
ington county,  N.  Y.,  in  1798;  d.in  St.  Clairsville,
Ohio,  27  Sept.,  1869.  He  was  educated  in  his  na-
tive place  and  studied  medicine.  In  1820  he  re-
moved to  Moorefield,  Harrison  co.,  Ohio,  subse-
quently studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar
in  1829.  He  removed  to  St.  Clau-sville  in  1832,
and  after  a  time  edited  the  Belmont  "  Chronicle,"
of  which  he  was  proprietor  and  principal  editor
until  1852,  when  he  relinquished  it  to  his  son,  now
Brig.-Gen.  B.  R.  Cowen.  In  1839  he  was  a  dele-
gate to  the  convention  that  nominated  Gen.  Har-
rison for  president,  and  in  1840  was  elected  to
congress  by  the  whigs,  where  he  succeeded  Joshua
R.  Giddings  as  chairman  of  the  committee  on
claims.  He  took  strong  ground  in  favor  of  the
tariff  of  1842,  and  throughout  his  congressional
career  was  looked  upon  as  a  consistent  anti-slavery
man.  During  1845-'6  he  was  a  member  of  the
Ohio  legislature,  and  from  1847  till  1852  was  pre-
siding judge  of  the  court  of  common  pleas.  At
the  beginning  of  the  war  he  was  active  in  raising
men  and  money,  and  during  its  continuance  his
efforts  to  aid  the  government  never  relaxed.

COWLES,  Edward  Pitkin,  jurist,  b.  in  Canaan,
Conn.,  in  1815 ;  d.  in  Chicago,  111.,  2  Dec,  1874.
He  was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1886.  studied  law,
and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1839,  and  entered
into  practice  at  Hudson,  N.  Y.,  with  his  brother.
Col.  Cowles,  of  the  128th  New  York  volunteers,
who  was  killed  at  Port  Hudson.  In  1853  he  re-
moved to  New  York,  and  was  soon  afterward  ap-
pointed judge  of  the  supreme  court  by  Gov.  Clark,
and,  at  the  end  of  his  first  term,  was  reappointed
to  fill  a  vacancy  created  by  the  death  of  Judge
Morris.  On  leaving  the  supreme  court,  he  engaged
in  practice  with  Chief-Justice  Barbour,  afterward
of  the  superior  court.  While  on  his  way  home-
ward from  California,  he  died  at  Chicago,  from
gangrene,  resulting  from  a  slight  injury  of  the  foot.

COWLES,  Giles  Hoolter,  clergyman,  b.  in
Farmington,  Conn.,  26  Aug.,  1766;  d.  in  Austin-
burg,  Ohio,  16  July,  1835.  He  was  graduated  at
Yafe  in  1789,  entered  the  ministry  of  the  Congre-
gational church  in  jNIay,  1791.  a'nd  was  installed
pastor  of  the  first  church  at  Bristol  in  1792. In


1810  he  was  appointed  by  the  Connecticut  mission-
ary society  to  travel  through  Ohio,  and  formed  or
assisted  in  forming  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  Congre-
gational churches  in  the  northeastern  part  of  that
state.  He  became  pastor  at  Austinburg  and  Mor-
gan, Ohio,  in  1811.  Williams  college  conferred  on
him  the  degree  of  D.  D.  in  1828.

COWLES,  Henry,  clergyman,  b.  in  Norfolk,
Conn.,  24  April,  1808 ;  d.  6  Sept..  1881.  He  was
graduated  at  Yale  in  1826,  and  held  Congregation-
al pastorates  from  1828  till  1885.  He  was  a  pro-
fessor of  theology  at  Oberlin  from  1885  till  1848.
He  published  "Notes"  on  the  Bible  (16  vols.,  New
York,  1867-81);  "Hebrew  History"  (New  York,
1878) ;  and  other  works.

COX,  Abraham  Siddon,  surgeon,  b.  in  New
York  in  1800 ;  d.  at  Lookout  Mountain,  Tenn.,  29
July,  1864.  He  had  been  for  many  years  one  of
the  most  eminent  medical  practitioners  of  New
York  city.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  he  be-
came a  surgeon  in  the  army,  and  at  the  time  of
his  death  was  surgeon-in-chief  of  the  1st  division,
20th  corps,  Army  of  the  Cumberland.

COX,  Edward  Travers,  geologist,  b,  in  Cul-
pepper county,  Va.,  21  April,  1821.  His  father,
when  the  boy  was  only  four  years  old,  moved  to
New  Harmony,  Ind.,  and  joined  Robert  Owen's  com-
munity. He  was  educated  in  the  schools  belonging
to  the  community,  and  pursued  studies  in  geology
and  chemistry  under  Dr.  David  Dale  Owen,  whom
he  subsequently  assisted  in  making  the  geological
surveys  of  Kentucky  and  Arkansas,  both  in  the  field-
work  and  in  the  laboratory.  Mr.  Cox  continued
with  Dr.  Owen  until  the  death  of  the  latter  in  1859.
He  was  sent  by  a  party  of  capitalists  in  1864  to
New  Mexico  for  the  purpose  of  examining  mining
property,  and  investigations  of  other  geological  lo-
calities were  made,  including  the  examination  of  the
Spanish  Peak  coal,  the  Raton  Mountain  coal,  and
the  hot  springs  of  Ojo  Caliente,  the  water  of  which
was  qualitatively  analyzed  on  the  spot  by  him,  and
the  copper  mines  at  the  head  of  Gila  river,  as  well
as  the  deposits  of  magnetic  iron-ore  in  that  vicin-
ity. A  detailed  report  of  this  expedition  was  pub-
lished by  the  U.  S.  government  in  1865.  During
1865  he  made  an  examination  of  the  coal-seams
in  Gallatin  county.  111.,  at  the  request  of  A.  H.
Worthen,  state  geologist  of  Illinois,  and  established
their  order  of  sequence.  Later  he  examined  cer-
tain of  the  coal-measures  of  southern  Illinois,  and
a  report  of  his  results  was  published  in  the  sixth
volume  of  the  "Geological  Survey  of  Illinois"
(Springfield,  1875).  He  was  appointed  in  1868
state  geologist  of  Indiana,  and  held  that  office
until  1880.  Under  his  direction  the  work  accom-
plished Avas  published  as  eight  "Annual  Reports
of  the  Geological  Survey  of  Indiana"  (1809  to
1878).  He  was  the  first  to  make  a  correct  column
of  the  coals  of  western  Kentucky,  southern  Illinois,
and  Indiana,  and  also  filled  the  chair  of  geology
in  the  University  of  Indiana  in  virtue  of  his  office
on  the  geologicfil  survey.  After  his  resignation
he  spent  some  time  in  C'alifornia  examining  min-
ing property  as  an  expert,  and  in  this  capacity
visited  many  of  the  gold,  silver,  copper,  and  anti-
mony mines  in  the  west  and  in  Mexico.  More
recently  he  has  made  New  York  city  his  residence.

COX,  Hannah,  centenarian,  b.  in  Preston,
Conn.,  25  June,  1776;  d.  in  Holderness,  N.  H.,  29
Aug.,  1881.  Her  father  was  an  officer  in  the  Revo-
lutionary war,  and  lived  to  the  age  of  eighty-six.
When  siie  was  thirteen  years  old  her  family  Re-
moved to  Holderness,  which  was  her  home  until
her  death.  In  her  twenty-second  year  she  married
Robert  Cox,  who  died  in  1822,  leaving  her  with


758


COX


cox


seven  children.  Up  to  ninety-seven,  Mrs.  Cox  was
unremittingly  industrious.  Until  near  the  time  of
her  death  her  faculties,  with  the  exception  of  im-
paired hearing,  were  in  good  preservation :  she
walked  without  a  cane,  and  read  small  print  with-
out glasses.  After  she  had  reached  the  age  of  100
she  was  proud  to  recall  the  fact  that,  when  live
years  old,  she  had  knitted  socks  for  soldiers.

COX,  Hannah,  abolitionist,  b.  in  Longwood,
near  Philadelphia,  in  179(j ;  d.  there,  15  April,  187G.
She  joined  the  first  movement  in  favor  of  emanci-
pation, being  a  co-laborer  with  Benjamin  Lundy,
Garrison,  Lucretia  Mott,  and  John  G.  Whittier.
For  years  she  and  her  husband,  who  survived  her
in  his  91st  year,  received  fugitive  slaves.  Their
golden  wedding  was  celebrated  in  1873,  when  poems
were  sent  by  Whittier  and  Bayard  Taylor.

COX,  Henry  G.,  physician,  b.  in  Bermuda  about
1819 ;  d.  in  New  York  city,  29  May,  18G6.  He  re-
ceived a  thorough  English  and  classical  education,
and,  soon  after  attaining  his  majority,  was  elected
to  the  legislature  of  the  Bermuda  islands.  At  the
age  of  twenty-six  he  came  to  New  York  to  pursue
the  study  of  medicine,  was  graduated  in  1849  at
the  College  of  physicians  and  surgeons,  and  was
immediately  appointed  house  physician  at  Bellevue
liospital,  and  subsequently  to  a  place  on  the  medi-
cal staff  at  Quarantine  hospital,  Staten  Island.  In
18G0  he  settled  in  private  practice  in  the  city,  and
received  also  the  appointment  of  physician  to  the
State  hospital  on  Ward's  island,  an  office  that  he
held  for  numy  years.  On  the  organization  of  the
New  York  medical  college  in  1850,  he  was  appoint-
ed censor,  and  afterward  to  its  professorship  of
theory  and  practice.  Dr.  Cox  took  an  enthusiastic
interest  in  the  organization  of  the  Nursery  and
child's  hospital,  incorporated  in  1854,  and  to  his
watchfulness  in  its  earlier  years  is  due  much  of  the
usefulness  of  the  institution.  A  few  months  be-
fore his  death  the  commissioners  of  hospitals  ap-
pointed him  principal  consulting  physician.

COX,  Henry  Hamilton,  author,  b.  in  Ireland
about  1750;  d.  there  in  1822.  His  name  was  origi-
nally Henry  Hamilton,  and  he  is  said  to  have
served  in  the  British  army  in  India.  He  assumed
the  name  of  Cox  on  inheriting  a  landed  estate
from  his  grandfather,  Sir  Michael  Cox.  The  estate
was  heavily  encumbered,  and  he  came  to  America
with  a  view  of  living  in  obscurity  until  it  could  be
cleared  by  the  income  arising  from  it.  He  settled
in  York  county.  Pa.,  and  subsequently  in  Ches-
ter county,  assumed  the  garb  and  manners  of  a
Quaker,  and  was  admitted  into  their  society.  At
times,  however,  his  eccentric  manner  excited  the
suspicion  that  his  new  life  was  not  the  result  of
sincere  conviction,  and  that  something  in  his  former
life  remained  concealed.  His  estate  became  disen-
cumbered in  1817,  and  he  at  once  returned  to  Ire-
land. Although  he  bore  certificates  from  the
Quaker  society  in  Chester  county  to  that  of  Dub-
lin, it  is  said  that  on  his  voyage  home  he  doffed
his  plain  clothes  and  threw  his  broad-brimmed  hat
overboard.  He  was  the  original  of  "  The  Strange
Friend."  a  story  by  Bayard  Taylor,  published  in
the  "  Atlantic  Monthly."  Soon  after  he  arrived  in
Philadelphia  he  presented  to  the  Library  company
of  that  city  several  bound  volumes  of  manuscript
correspondence  between  the  military  and  civil  de-
partments of  the  British  government  during  the
reign  of  William  and  Mary.  It  was  subsequently
discovered  by  William  Hepworth  Dixon  that  these
manuscripts  filled  a  hiatus  in  a  series  of  volumes
belonging  to  the  British  government,  which  had
been  deposited  in  a  public  library  in  Dublin,  and,
upon  application,  the  Library  company  restored


them  to  their  proper  place.  It  was  supposed  that
they  had  come  into  the  possession  of  Mr.  Cox
through  some  of  his  ancestors,  who  had  held  public
office.  In  America  Mr.  Cox  was  known  as  Henry
Cox. He  published  "  The  Pennsylvania  Georgics."

COX,  Jacob  Dolson,  statesman,  b.  in  Montreal,
Canada,  27  Oct.,  1828.  His  parents  were  natives
of  the  United  States,  but  at  the  time  of  his  birth
were  temporarily  sojourning  in  Canada.  He  spent
his  boyhood  in  New  York,  removed  with  his  par-
ents to  Ohio  in  1840,  and  was  graduated  at  Ober-
lin  in  1851.  After  leaving  college  he  studied  law,
was  admitted  to  the  bar  in  1853,  and  settled  in
Warren,  Ohio.  In  1859-61  he  was  a  member  of
the  state  senate,  having  been  elected  by  the  repub-
licans. At  the  beginning  of  the  civil  war  he  held
a  state  commission  as  brigadier-general  of  militia,
and  took  an  active  part  in  raising  troops.  He
entered  the  national  army  on  28  April,  1861,  and
three  weeks  later  received  the  commission  of
brigadier-general  and  was  assigned  to  the  command
of  the  "brigade  of  the  Kanawha"  in  western  Vir-
ginia. On  29  July  he  drove  out  the  Confederates
under  Gen.  Wise,  taking  and  repairing  Gauley  and
other  bridges,  which  had  been  partially  destroyed.
Gen.  Cox  remained  in  command  of  this  depart-
ment, with  the  exception  of  a  short  interval,  until
August,  1862,  when  he  was  assigned  to  the  Army
of  Virginia  under  Gen.  Pope.  He  served  in  the
9th  corps  at  the  battle  of  South  Mountain,  14
Sept.-,  1862,  assuming  command  when  Gen.  Reno
fell,  and  also  at  Antietam,  three  days  later.  For
his  services  in  this  campaign  he  was  commissioned
major-general.  On  16  April,  1863,  Gen.  Cox  was
put  in  command  of  the  district  of  Ohio,  and  also
of  a  division  of  the  23d  army  corps.  He  served  in
the  Atlanta  campaign,  and  under  Gen.  Thomas  in
the  campaigns  of  Franklin  and  Nashville.  On  14
March,  1865,  he  fought  the  battle  of  Kingston,  N.
C,  and  then  united  his  force  with  Gen.  Sherman's
army.  At  the  close  of  the  war  he  resigned  his
command,  and  entered  on  the  practice  of  law  in
Cincinnati.  He  was  governor  of  Ohio  in  1866-7,
declined  the  office  of  commissioner  of  internal
revenue  tendered  him  by  President  Johnson  in
1868,  and  was  secretary  of  "the  interior  in  President
Grant's  first  cabinet  from  March,  1869,  till  Decem-
ber, 1870,  when,  on  account  of  disagreement  with
certain  measures  of  the  administration,  he  re-
signed. Returning  to  Cincinnati,  he  resumed  his
legal  practice.  In  October,  1873,  he  was  elected
president  of  the  Wabash  railroad,  and  removed  to
Toledo  to  take  charge  of  his  new  work.  In  1876
the  republicans  elected  him  representative  to  con-
gress, where  he  served  from  15  Oct.,  1877,  till  3
March,  1879.  The  degree  of  LL.  D.  has  been  con-
ferred upon  him  by  the  University  of  North  Caro-
lina, and  also  by  "Davison  university,  Ohio.  He
has  published  "  Atlanta  "  and  "  The  March  to  the
Sea;  Franklin  and  Nashville"  (New  York,  1882).

COX,  James,  artist,  b.  in  England  in  1751 ;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1834.  For  many  years  he
was  the  fashionable  drawing-master  in  Philadel-
phia and  did  much  to  advance  the  fine  arts.  Pie
made  a  remarkable  collection  of  works  on  the  fine
arts,  numbering  over  5,000  volumes,  which  he  sold,
during  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  to  the  Library
company  of  Philadelphia,  for  an  annuity  of  |400.

COX,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Monmouth,  N.  J.,  14
June,  1753;  d.  there,  12  Sept.,  1810.  His  early
education  was  received  in  the  public  schools.  At
the  age  of  twenty-four  he  commanded  a  company
of  militia,  and  afterward  served  at  the  battles  of
Germantown  and  Monmouth,  attaining  to  the  rank
of  brigadier-general. He  was  for  many  years  a


cox


member  of  the  state  assembly,  and  one  year  its
speaker.  He  was  also  a  representative  from  New
Jersey  m  the  10th  congress,  serving  from  22  Mav
1809,  until  his  death.— His  grandson,  Samuel  Sul-
livan, statesman,  b.  in  Zanesville,  Ohio,  30  Sept
1824;  d.  in  New  York  eitv,  10  Sept.,  1889.  Hi's
father  was  a  member  of  the  Ohio  senate.  He  at-
tended the  Ohio  university  at  Athens,  and  was
graduated  at  Brown  in  1846.  During  his  stay  in
college  he  maintained  himself  by  literary  work
and  obtained  the  prizes  in  classics,  history,  literary
criticism,  and  political  economy.  Adopting  the
profession  of  the  law,  he  returned  to  Ohio  to  begin
practice,  but  soon  laid  it  aside,  and  went  to  Eu-
rope. On  his  return  he  became,  in  1853,  editor  of
the  Columbus,  Ohio,  "  Statesman,"  and  from  that
time  turned  his  attention  to  political  issues. While

editing  this  jour-
nal he  published
a gorgeous de-
scription in so-
phomoric  strain,
which  procured
for  him  the  so-
briquet of  "  Sun-
set'^ Cox. Mr.
Cox  was  oifered,
in  1855,  the  sec-
retaryship of  le-
gation  in Lon-
don, but de-
clined it. The
opportunity  was
given  not long
after  of  going  to
Lima,  Peru,  in  a
similar  capacity,
and  he  accepted.
He  remained  in
Peru  one year,
and  on  his  re-
turn was  elected  to  congress,  and  re-elected  three
times,  serving  continuously  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till
3  March,  1865. During  three  terms  he  was  chair-
man of  the  committee  on  Revolutionary  claims.
Mr.  Cox  was  a  delegate  to  the  Chicago,  New  York,
and  St.  Louis  democratic  conventions  of  1864, 1868,
and  1876. During  the  civil  war  he  sustained  the
government  by  voting  money  and  men,  although  he
took  a  prominent  part  in  opposing  certain  policies
of  the  administration. In  1866  he  took  up  his  resi-
dence in  New  York  city,  and  was  elected  as  a  repre-
sentative to  congress  in  1868,  and  re-elected  three
times. He  served  on  the  committees  on  foreign  af-
fairs, banking,  the  centennial  exhibition,  and  rules.
At  the  opening  of  the  first  session  of  the  45th  con-
gress, in  1877,  he  was  one  of  three  candidates  for  the
speakership. Although  not  elected,  he  served  fre-
quently as  speaker  pro  tern. In  this  session  he  took
upon  himself,  by  a  special  resolution  of  his  own,
the  work  of  the  new  census  law. Pie  was  the  au-
thor also  of  the  plan  of  apportionment  adopted  by
the  house. He  was  the  introducer  and  champion
for  many  years  of  the  bill  concerning  the  life-sav-
ing service,  and  finally  witnessed  its  passage. Mr.
Cox's  work  in  congress  included  the  raising  of  the
salaries  of  letter-carriers,  and  granting  them  a  va-
cation without  loss  of  pay. This  latter  measure
involved  an  appropriation  of  $96,000,  but  its  re-
sults Justified  the  action. He  was  on  the  committee
to  investigate  the  doings  of  Black  Friday,  Federal
elections  in  cities,  the  New  York  post-office,  and  the
Ku-klux  troubles. He  was  also  for  many  years  one
of  the  regents  of  the  Smithsonian  institution,  his
term  closing  in  1865. In  1869  he  visited  Europe


COX


T59


and  northern  Africa,  journeying  through  Italy,
Corsica,  Algeria,  and  Spain.  In  1872  he  was  de-
feated as  candidate  at  large  for  the  state,  but  the
death  of  his  successful  competitor  necessitated  an-
other election,  which  resulted  in  Mr.  Cox's  return
to  his  seat.  He  was  re-elected  in  1874,  1876,  1878,
and  1880,  serving  twelve  consecutive  years,  making
a  total  congressional  service  on  his  part  of  twenty
years.  The  last  effort  of  Mr.  Cox,  and  for  which  the
Chamber  of  commerce  of  New  York  city  thanked
him,  was  the  passage  of  a  law  uniting  all  jurisdic-
tions in  the  Federal  jurisdiction,  so  as  to  preserve
New  York  harbor  and  its  tributaries  from  destruc-
tion. This  had  passed  in  the  house,  but  it  was  de-
feated on  a  point  of  order  in  the  senate.  In  the
summer  of  1882  Mr.  Cox  visited  Sweden,  Norway,
Russia,  Turkey,  and  Greece.  In  1885  he  was  ap-
pointed minister  to  Turkey,  but  returned  to  the
United  States  in  October  1886  after  a  year's  ab-
sence, and  in  November  was  re-elected  to  con-
gress. He  had  a  reputation  as  an  effective  and
humorous  speaker,  writer,  and  lecturer.  In  addi-
tion to  a  large  amount  of  newspaper  and  magazine
work,  he  published  "  The  Buckeye  Abroad  "  (New
York,  1851);  "Puritanism  in  Politics"  (1863);
"Eight  Years  in  Congress"  (1865);  "A  Search  for
Winter  Sunbeams"  (1870);  "Why  We  Laugh"
(1876);  "Free  Land  and  Free  Trade"  (1876);
"Arctic  Sunbeams"  (1882);  "Orient  Sunbeams"
(1882);  "Three  Decades  of  Federal  Legislation"
(1885) ;  and  "  The  Diplomat  in  Turkey  "  (1887).

COX,  Ken  yon,  painter,  b.  in  Warren,  Ohio,  27
Oct.,  1856.  After  preliminary  studies  in  Cincinnati
and  Philadelphia,  he  went  to  Paris  in  1877,  and  be-
came a  pupil  of  Carolus-Duran  and  of  (Jerome,
remaining  in  France,  with  short  intervals,  until
1882,  when  he  returned  to  New  York.  He  is  a
member  of  the  Society  of  American  artists.  His
works  include  "  Head  of  Venetian  Girl "  (1879) ;
"Lady  in  Black"  (1880);  "Pink  and  White"
(1881);  "Two  Portraits"  (1882);  "Thistledown"
(1883) ; and  ".A  Corner  Window"  (1884).

COX,  Lemuel,  master  mechanic,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  in  1736;  d.  in  Chariestown,  Mass.,  18  Feb.,
1806.  Until  about  the  age  of  forty-five  his  life  is
hid  in  obscurity.  At  this  time  he  was,  on  29  Dec,
1775,  imprisoned  at  Ipswich,  because  of  his  strong
attachment  to  royalist  principles.  In  1786  began
the  first  of  his  most  prominent  works  by  building
the  Boston  and  Chariestown  bridge.  Its  length
was  1,500  feet,  its  width  43  feet,  and  it  was  es-
pecially adapted  to  withstand  the  tidal  currents
and  ice.  Its  construction  occupied  but  thirteen
months.  In  1787  he  built  the  Essex  bridge  at  Sa-
lem, which  was  nearly  as  large.  His  success  with
these  and  others  built  by  him  in  Maine  and  Massa-
chusetts caused  him  to  be  invited  to  direct  the
construction  of  the  great  bridge  at  Waterford,  Ire-
land, in  1793.  Mr.  Cox  was  the  inventor  of  a  ma-
chine for  cutting  card-wire,  the  first  projector  of  a
powder-mill  in  Massachusetts,  and  the  first  to  sug-
gest employing  the  prisoners  on  Castle,  island  to
make  nails.  For  these  reasons  and  for  various
other  discoveries  in  the  mechanic  arts  a  grant  of
1,000  acres  of  land  in  Maine  was  made  to  him  by
an  act  of  legislature.

COX,  Melyille  Beveridg'e,  missionary,  b.  in
Hallowell,  Me.,  9  Nov.,  1799;  d.  in  Liberia,  Africa,
21  July,  1833.  His  early  education  was  obtained
in  the  common  schools.  At  the  age  of  about  nine-
teen he  became  a  Methodist,  and  preached  as  a
licentiate  in  various  towns  and  villages  in  Maine.
Failing  health  caused  him  to  seek  a  more  conge-
nial climate.  He  spent  a  few  years  in  Baltimore
and  vicinity,  where  he  received  an  appointment  as


760


COX


COXE


the  first  American  Methodist  missionary  to  the
colony  of  Liberia.  He  arrived  at  his  field  of  labor
on  8  March,  1833,  established  a  Sunday-school,  sum-
moned conferences,  and  organized  the  Methodist
Episcopal  church  in  Africa  under  the  supervision
and  control  of  the  general  conference  of  that  de-
nomination in  America.  In  less  than  five  months
from  his  arrival  he  became  a  victim  of  African
fever.  During  the  brief  period  of  his  sojourn  in
Liberia  he  v^^rote  "Sketches  of  Western  Africa"
which  was  appended  to  a  memoir  of  his  life  written
by  his  brother,  G.  F.  Cox,  D.  D.  (New  York,  1840).
COX,  Palmer,  artist,  b.  in  Granby,  Quebec,
Canada,  28  April,  1840.  He  was  graduated  at
Granby  academy  in  1858,  and  subsequently  re-
sided in  Springfield,  Mass.,  and  Lucknow.  Ont.,
until  1863.  From  1863  till  1875  he  made  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.,  his  home,  and  while  there  contributed
regularly  to  the  "  Golden  Era "  and  the  "  Alta
California."  In  1875  he  settled  in  New  York,
where  he  follows  artistic  and  literary  pursuits.  He
has  distinguished  himself  chiefly  by  illustrating
his  own  writings  with  characteristic  drawings,  as
shown  in  "  The  Brownie  Stories."  Mr.  Cox  has  con-
tributed to  various  magazines,  and  has  published
"Squibs  of  California"  (Hartford,  1874);  "Hans
von  Pelter's  Trip  to  Gotham  "  (New  York,  1876) ;
"How  Columbus  found  America"  (1877);  and
"That  Stanley "(1877).

COX,  Samuel  Hanson,  clergyman,  b.  in  Rah-
way,  N.  J.,  25  Aug.,  1793 ;  d.  in  Bronxville,  West-
chester CO.,  N.  Y.,  2  Oct.,  1881.  His  father,  who
at  the  time  of  his  death, in  1801,  was  engaged

in  mercantile  en-
terprises in  New
York  city,  was
descended  from
a  family  that  in
the  17th  century
settled  on  the
eastern  shore  of
Maryland,  where
the  name,  di-
versely spelled,
has  been  long
connected  with
the  Quakers  of
Talbot  county.
By  intermar-
riages with  other
families  of  the
peninsula,  this
connection  was
rendered  nomi-
nal at  different
periods ;  but,  as  the  father  of  Dr.  Cox  had  main-
tained his  relations  with  the  society,  he  received
his  academic  education  at  their  high-school  or  col-
lege at  Westtown,  near  Philadelphia.  He  also
received  private  instruction  in  Philadelphia,  and
was  a  law-student  in  Newark,  N.  J.,  in  1812,  when,
with  Southard,  Frelinghuysen,  and  others  that
became  eminent,  he  organized  a  volunteer  corps  of
riflemen,  which  occasionally  served  in  the  war,
notably  at  Fort  Green,  L.  I.  He  studied  theology
in  Philadelphia  under  Dr.  Wilson,  a  distinguished
Presbyterian  clergyman.  The  degree  of  M.  A.  was
conferred  upon  him  by  Princeton,  and  that  of  D.
D.  by  Williams.  He  was  ordained  in  1817,  and  ac-
cepted the  pastorate  of  Mendham,  Morris  co.,
N.  J.  In  1821  he  removed  to  New  York  as  pastor
of  the  Presbyterian  church  in  Spring  street,  and
thence  to  Laight  street  in  1825.  His  congregation
here  was  largely  composed  of  wealthy  merchants.
He  took  a  leading  part  in  the  foundation  of  the


{J/tf4<.iUjlt  M~^iUc<i*Zr>y. Cp-yC^


University  of  the  city  of  New  York  and  in  literary
conventions,  one  of  which  was  presided  over  by
John  Quincy  Adams,  called  to  aid  in  its  organiza-
tion. He  was  appointed  to  open  the  instructions
of  the  university  with  the  late  Dr.  Mcllvaine,
afterward  bishop  of  Ohio,  and  delivered  one  of  the
two  memorable  courses  of  lectures  in  the  winter  of
1831-2,  his  department  being  that  of  moral  phi-
losophy. During  the  cholera  season  of  the  latter
year  he  remained  at  his  post  until  stricken  down
by  the  disease.  In  impaired  health  Dr.  Cox  went
to  Europe  in  1833,  where  a  speech,  delivered  at  the
anniversary  of  the  British  and  foreign  Bible  so-
ciety in  London,  gained  him  distinction  and
opened  the  way  to  honors  and  attentions  in  Eu-
rope. The  anti-slavery  sentiment  then  predomi-
nant in  England  made  a  great  impression  on  Dr.
Cox,  and  he  publicly  defended  his  country,  when
it  was  gratuitously  assailed  on  that  point,  and  de-
livered a  celebrated  sermon  against  slavery,  soon
after  his  return,  which,  though  moderate  in  tone,
drew  upon  him  a  great  share  of  the  violence  with
which  the  agitators  were  then  visited.  He  was
never  identified  with  their  extreme  measures,  and
afterward  took  a  leading  conservative  position  in
all  questions  connected  with  the  south,  which  for
a  long  time  disturbed  the  Presbyterian  church.
In  recognition  of  this  service  to  tlie  counsels  of
his  brethren,  he  received  the  degree  of  LL.  D.  from
a  southern  college.  In  other  questions  his  theo-
logical standing  was  with  the  new  school,  of  which
he  was  a  prominent  champion.  In  the  order  and
discipline  of  his  church,  however,  he  maintained
the  highest  and  most  thorough  old-school  position.
He  was  elected  professor  of  pastoral  theology  in
the  Theological  seminary  at  Auburn  in  1834,  but
in  1837  became  pastor  of  the  1st  Presbyterian  con-
gregation in  Brooklyn,  L.  I.,  where  he  built  a  new
church  in  Henry  street.  In  1845  Dr.  Cox  attended
the  Evangelical  alliance  in  London.  In  1852,  his
health  declining,  he  visited  Nassau,  but  with  so  little
good  effect  that,  against  the  remonstrances  of  his
people  and  the  most  liberal  proposals  on  their
part,  he  resigned  his  charge,  and  retired  to  a  pleasant
property,  which  they  enabled  him  to  purchase,  at
Owego,  N.  Y.  He  considered  his  career  as  a  pastor
at  an  end,  but  frequently  delivered  lectures  and
appeared  in  pulpits  in  New  York  for  several  years
subsequently.  He  was  for  many  years  professor  of
ecclesiastical  history  in  the  Union  theological
seminary  of  New  York.  His  contributions  to  pe-
riodicals and  Journalistic  literature  were  numerous.
His  work  on  "  Quakerism "  (1833)  is  in  part  an
autobiography.  In  connection  with  the  duties  of
his  chair,  he  edited  Bower's  "  History  of  the  Popes  "
(New  York,  1847).  He  also  presided  for  a  time
over  the  Ladies'  college  at  Le  Roy,  N.  Y.  For  the
last  twelve  years  of  his  life  he  lived  in  retirement
in  Westchester  county.  Although  much  criticised
for  personal  eccentricities,  he  was  generally  recog-
nized as  a  man  of  high  character  and  commanding
talents,  of  great  boldness  in  expressing  his  strong
convictions,  and  of  singular  power  as  an  orator.
Dr.  Cox  was  the  eldest  of  three  sons,  all  of  whom
attained  professional  eminence.  James  died  pre-
maturely in  Philadelphia  in  1830.  Abraham  Lid-
don,  after  a  brilliant  practice  in  New  York,  where
he  became  professor  of  surgery  in  the  medical
college  now  connected  with  the  New  York  uni-
versity, of  which  he  was  one  of  the  founders,  died
in  the  service  of  his  country  near  Chattanooga  in
1863.— His  son,  Arthur  Cleveland  Coxe  (he  has
adopted  an  older  spelling  of  the  family  name),  P.  E.
bishop,  b.  in  Mendham,  N.  J.,  10  May,  1818.  His
parents  removed  in  1820  to  New  York  city,  where


COXE


COXE


761


^v^^^:^-<-<^«-.r-t^»*<_


his  early  education  and  training  were  obtained.
He  was  graduated  with  distinction  at  the  Uni-
versity of  the  city  of  New  York  in  1838  and  at  the
General  theological  seminary  of  the  Episcopal
church  in  1841.  He  was  an  adherent  of  the  Prot-
estant Episcopal  church  from  childhood,  under
the  influence  of  maternal  relatives  and  social  con-
nections. While  still in  college  he  became an

author  and  con-
tributor to  pe-
riodical litera-
ture. Pie  was
ordained  dea-
con on  27  June,

1841,  and  priest
on 25 Sept.,

1842.  He  took
charge  of  St.
Ann's  chureh,
Morrisania,  N.
Y.,  shortly  after
his  ordination
to  the  diacon-
ate,  and  thence
removed  in  the
spring  of  1843
to  Hartford,
Conn.,  where  he
was  rector  of
St.  John's  from

1843  till  1854.  He  accepted  the  rectorship  of  Grace
church,  Baltimore,  Md.,  in  1854,  and  two  years  later
he  was  elected  bishop  of  Texas,  but  declined.  From
an  early  period  in  his  ministry  he  took  part  in  the
councils  of  his  church.  He  was  a  member  of  the
general  convention  in  1853,  and  of  that  which  met
in  Richmond,  Va.,  in  1859.  In  1853  he  moved  an
addition  to  the  Litany,  while  Bishop  Alonzo  Pot-
ter made  a  similar  motion  in  the  house  of  bishops,
without  any  concert  between  them,  which  led,  in
connection  with  Dr.  Muhlenberg's  "  Appeal  to  the
Bishops,"  to  the  "Memorial  Papers"  and  the
adoption  of  additional  prayers,  and  finally  to  the
movement  for  the  revision  of  the  Prayer-Book.  In
1863  he  became  rector  of  Calvary  church,  New
York  city,  and  soon  afterward  was  elected  assist-
ant bishop  of  western  New  York.  He  was  conse-
crated in  Trinity  church,  Geneva,  N.  Y.,  4  Jan.,
1865,  and  on  the  death  of  Bishop  He  Lancey,  5
April  of  the  same  year,  he  succeeded  as  the
second  bishop  of  western  New  York.  In  1868
he  gave  his  assent  to  the  formation  of  a  new
diocese  out  of  a  portion  of  his  jurisdiction,  and
central  New  York  was  committed  to  other  hands.
He  has  taken  an  active  part  in  the  board  of  mis-
sions in  behalf  of  the  Greek  mission  and  the  exten-
sion of  the  missionary  episcopate  in  the  United
States.  In  the  interest  of  the  missionary  work  of
the  church  he  has  travelled  extensively  abroad,  and
in  1872,  when  the  charge  of  the  churches  in  Hayti
was  placed  in  his  hands,  he  visited  that  island,  or-
ganized churches,  and  ordained  clergy.  This  over-
sight he  held  until  a  bishop  of  Hayti  was  conse-
crated in  1874.  Bishop  Coxe  has  made  various
valuable  contributions  to  theological  learning,  bib-
lical criticism,  and  church  literature.  He  pub-
lished several  volumes  of  poems  before  receiving
ordination.  "Advent,  a  Mystery,"  appeared  in
1837,  followed  by  "  Jonathan,"' the  Lay  of  a  Scold  "
(New  York,  1838) ;  and  "  Athwold  "  (1838),  of  which,
after  its  suppression  for  forty  years,  a  new  and  en-
larged edition  was  recently  published.  "  Athana-
sion,  and  other  Poems,"  appeared  in  1842,  "  Hal-
loween "  in  1844,  and  "  Saul,  a  Mystery,"  in  1845.
In  1877  he  published  a  poem  entitled  "  The  Ladye


Chace."  As  early  as  1845  he  published  his  best-
known  volume  of  poems,  the  "Christian  Ballads"
(reprinted  in  Oxford,  England,  1850).  Soon  after
the  English  publication  of  the  "  Ballads  "  the  au-
thor visited  at  Freiburg,  Germany,  the  distin-
guished Hirscher.  the  precursor  of  Dr.  von  Dol-
linger  in  the  Old  Catholic  movement.  On  liis  re-
turn to  England  in  1852  he  published  an  account
of  this  visit  by  the  advice  of  Bishop  Wilberforce.
This  led  to  his  active  participation  in  the  forma-
tion of  the  Anglo-Continental  society.  On  his  re-
turn to  this  country  he  engaged  on  the  unpopular
side  of  a  conflict,  of  which  the  publication  of  re-
vised editions  of  the  Scriptures  by  the  American
Bible  society  was  the  subject.  His  "  Apology  for
the  English  Bible"  (1854)  ultimately  led  to  the
suppression  of  those  new  and  crude  revisions
made  at  great  cost  by  that  society.  In  1867-8
Bishop  Coxe  contributed  to  the  "Union  chreti-
enne,"  a  periodical  published  in  Paris  in  the  inter-
est of  Gallicanism  by  the  Abbe  Guettee,  a  series  on
the  subject  of  "Anglican  Orders."  In  1869  he
published  an  "Open  Letter  to  Pius  IX.,"  in  answer
to  the  brief  convoking  the  Vatican  council.  This
spirited  letter  was  translated  into  various  lan-
guages, and  has  had  a  wide  circulation  on  the  con-
tinent of  Europe.  In  1872  appeared  in  Paris  his
work,  "  L'episcopat  de  roccident,"  a  new  pres-
entation of  the  history  of  the  Church  of  England
and  a  refutation  of  Roman  Catholic  attacks.  In
1873,  in  collaboration  with  Bishop  Wilberforce  and
others,  he  engaged  in  a  serial  publication,  issued  in
Oxford,  England,  in  defence  of  Anglo-Catholic
principles  against  either  extreme.  He  had  sympa-
thized with  the  Oxford  movement  so  far  as  it  has
moved  within  the  bounds  of  Anglo-Catholicity ;
but  he  had  broken  loose  from  it,  as  a  party,  after
the  defection  of  Dr.  Newman,  and  in  1866  he  had
further  clearly  defined  his  position  by  the  publica-
tion of  "  The  Criterion,"  which  was  republished  in
England.  Bishop  Coxe  attended  the  second  Lam-
beth conference.  He  has  taken  an  active  part  in
opposition  to  the  New  Testament  revision.  Among
his  other  writings  are  "  Sermons  on  Doctrine  and
Duty  "  (1855) :  "  Thoughts  on  the  Services  "  (1859) ;
and  "  Apollos ;  or.  The  Way  of  God."  Besides  these
he  has  published  a  large  number  of  tracts,  editions
and  translations  of  foreign  works,  sermons,  letters,
lectures,  and  pamphlets.  During  1885-'6  he  was
engaged  in  editing,  with  large  additions  and  noies,
an  American  edition  of  the  Edinburgh  "  Transla-
tions of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers,"  edited  by  Drs.
Roberts  and  Donaldson,  of  which  the  last  volume
is  now  (November,  1886)  in  press.

COX,  WilHam,  journalist.  He  was  a  native  of
England,  and  died  there  about  1851.  At  an  early
age  he  came  to  the  United  States  and  obtained  em-
ployment on  the  New  York  "Mirror."  He  con-
tributed, under  the  pseudonym  of  "  An  Amateur,"
a  series  of  sketches  satirizing  the  literary  infirmi-
ties of  the  time,  which  were  afterward  published
as  "  Crayon  Sketches  "  (New  York,  1833),  and  gave
their  author  an  immediate  reputation.  He  re-
mained with  the  "Mirror "for  some  years,  when
he  returned  to  England.

COXE,  Eckley  Briiiton,  mining  engineer,  b.
in  Philadelphia,  4  June,  1839.  He  was  graduated
at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  in  1858,  where
also  he  took  a  three-years'  course  in  the  scientific
department.  After  spending  six  months  in  the
anthracite  coal  region  of  Pennsylvania  engaged  in
topographical  geology,  he  wei't  abroad  in  1860.
Two  years  were  spent  at  the  l^iCole  des  mines  in
Paris",  and  a  year  in  the  Freiberg  mining-school,
after  which he  continued for nearly two  years


762


COXE


COZZENS


studying  the  mines  in  England  and  continental
Europe.  Soon  after  his  return  to  the  United
States  he  embarked  in  the  coal  business,  and  his
mines  of  anthracite  in  Drifton,  Pa.,  are  among  the
most  successful  and  best-conducted  pieces  of  min-
ing property  in  the  state.  During  the  summer  of
1877  they  were  selected  by  the  faculty  of  Colum-
bia college  school  of  mines  as  affording  better  fa-
cilities for  study  than  any  other.  As  an  expert  on
the  mining  and  preparation  of  anthracite  coal,  and
on  the  subject  of  mine  surveying,  Mr.  Coxe  has
frequently  lectured  before  scientific  bodies.  He
has  been  prominent  in  the  American  institute  of
mining  engineers,  being  its  president  from  May,
1878,  till  February,  1880 ;  also  in  the  Institute  of
mechanical  engineers,  of  which  he  was  vice-presi-
dent from  April,  1880,  till  November,  1881 ;  and
he  is  a  member  of  the  American  society  of  civil
engineers.  He  has  published  papers  on  technical
subjects,  chiefly  in  the  transactions  of  the  societies
of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  has  translated  the
first  volume  of  the  fourth  edition  of  Weisbach's
"  Mechanics  of  Engineering,  and  Construction  of
Machines"  (New  York,  1872).  From  1880  till
1884  he  was  a  state  senator  in  Pennsylvania.

COXE,  John  Redman,  physician,  b.  in  Tren-
ton, N.  J.,  in  1773;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  22
March.  1864.  He  was  educated  in  Philadelphia,
completed  liis  classical  course  in  Scotland,  returned
home  in  1790,  studied  medicine  with  Dr.  Rush,
and,  after  receiving  his  diploma  in  1794,  studied  in
London,  Paris,  and  Edinljurgh.  In  1796  he  set-
tled in  Philadelphia,  and  in  1798,  during  the  vis-
itation of  yellow  fever,  was  appointed  by  the
Board  of  health  physician  to  the  port.  He  was
for  several  years  one  of  the  physicians  of  the
Pennsylvania  hospital,  and  also  of  the  Philadel-
phia dispensary.  In  1809  he  was  elected  professor
of  chemistry  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,
from  which  chair  he  was  transferred  in  1818  to
that  of  materia  medica  and  pharmacy,  which  he
held  until  1885.  Dr.  Coxe  was  the  first  to  practise
vaccination  in  Philadelphia.  He  published  a
treatise  on  "  Inflammation  "  (Philadelphia,  1794) ;
"  Importance  of  Medicine  "  (1800) ;  "  Vaccination  "
(1800);  "Combustion "(1811);  "  American  Dispen-
satory "  (1827) ;  "  Refutation  of  Harvey's  Claim  to
the  Discovery  of  the  Circulation  of  the  Blood"
(1834) ;  "  Appeal  to  the  Public  "  (1835) ;  "  Agaricus
Atramentarius  "  (1842) ;  "  Recognition  of  Friends
in  Another  World"  (1845);  and  "The  Writings
of  Hippocrates  and  Galen  Epitomized"  (1846).
He  edited  the  "  Philadelphia  Medical  Museum  "
(1805-11),  and  "Emporium  of  Arts  and  Sciences,"
continued  by  Dr.  Thomas  Cooper  (1812-'4).

COXE,  iftar^aret,  author,  b.  in  Burlington,
N.  J.,  about  1800.  She  published  "  Claims  of  the
Country  on  American  Females  "  (Columbus,  1842) ;
"  Botany  of  the  Scriptures " ;  "  Wonders  of  the
Deep  "  ;  and  "  Young  Ladies'  Companion."

COXE,  Tench,  political  economist,  b.  in  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  22  May,  1755;  d.  there,  17  July,  1824.
His  mother  was  a  daughter  of  Tench  Francis.  His
father  came  of  a  family  well  known  in  American
affairs.  One  ancestor  was  a  proprietor  of  the  prov-
ince of  West  Jersey,  and  sent  out  the  first  ship  that
ever  entered  the  Mississippi  from  the  gulf.  An-
other wrote  "A  Description  of  the  Province  of
Carolana,"  and  drew  that  scheme  for  the  union
of  the  colonies  against  French  aggression  which
Franklin  copied  in  the  "  Albany  Plan."  Tench  re-
ceived his  education  in  the  Philadelphia  schools,
and  intended  to  study  law ;  but  his  father  deter-
mined to  make  him  a  merchant,  and  he  was  placed
in  the  counting-house  of  Coxe  &  Furman,  becom-


ing a  partner  at  the  age  of  twenty-one.  Those
were  the  times  that  tried  men's  souls,  and  the  boy
proved  unequal  to  the  trial.  In  1776  he  resigned
from  the  militia,  turned  royalist,  left  the  city  to
join  the  British,  and  came  'back  in  1777  with  the
army  under  Howe.  When  Howe  left,  Coxe  was  ar-
rested and  paroled.  He  now  turned  whig,  and
began  a  long  political  career.  In  1786  he  was  sent
to  the  Annapolis  convention,  and  in  1788  to  the
Continental  congress.  He*  next  became  a  federal-
ist, and  was  made  assistant  secretary  of  the  treas-
ury in  1789,  and  commissioner  of  the  revenue  in
1792;  but  from  this  place  Adams  removed  him.
He  then  turned  republican,  and  in  the  canvass  of
1800  published  Adams's  famous  letter  to  him  re-
garding Pinckney.  For  this  he  was  reviled  by  the
federalists  as  a  renegade,  a  tory,  and  a  British  guide,
and  was  rewarded  by  Jefferson  in  1803  with  the
place  of  purveyor  of  public  supplies,  which  he  held
till  1812.  In  1804  Coxe  organized  and  led  a  party
at  Philadelphia  opposed  to  the  election  to  congress
of  Michael  Lieb,  and  this  brought  him  again  into
public  notice.  Though  a  republican,  he  was  for
three  months  daily  abused  by  the  "  Aurora  "  ;  was
called  a  tory,  a  Federal  rat,  a  British  guide  who
had  entered  "Philadelphia  in  1777  with  laurel  in  his
hat,  and  his  party  was  nicknamed  the  "quids."
The  term  is  commonly  supposed  to  have  been  first
applied  to  the  little  band  led  by  John  Randolph  in
1806,  but  this  is  a  mistake.  The  claims  of  Tench
Coxe  to  remembrance  are  his  labors  in  behalf  of
American  manufactures,  and  his  statistical  writ-
ings on  political  economy.  He  deserves,  indeed,  to
be  called  the  father  of  the  American  cotton  indus-
try. He  it  was  who  first  attempted  to  bring  an
Arkwright  machine  to  the  United  States,  and  first
urged  the  people  of  the  south  to  give  their  time
to  raising  cotton.  His  speech  before  the  delegates
of  the  constitutional  convention  is  in  the  "Ameri-
can Museum  "  of  September,  1787.  His  treasury
papers  are  in  the  "  American  State  Papers "  (vol.
i..  Finance).  His  chief  works  are:  "An  Inquiry
into  the  Principles  for  a  Commercial  System  for
the  United  States"  (1787);  "Examination  of  Lord
Sheffield's  Observations  on  the  Commerce  of  the
United  Provinces"  (1792);  "View  of  the  United
States"  (1787-94).  He  wrote  also  on  naval  power,
on  encouragement  of  arts  and  manufactures,  on
the  cost,  trade,  and  manufacture  of  cotton,  on  the
navigation  act,  and  on  arts  and  manufactures  in  the
United  States.

COZZENS,  Frederick  Swartwout,  merchant,
b.  in  New  York  city,  5  March.  1818 ;  d.  in  Brook-
lyn, N.  Y.,  23  Dec".,  1869.  He  was  educated  in
New  York  city,  trained  in  mercantile  pursuits,  be-
gan a  grocery  and  wine  business  at  the  age  of
twenty-one,  and  became  a  leading  wine-merchant.
He  introduced  the  Longworth  wines  from  Ohio
into  the  New  York  trade,  being  the  first  to  sell
native  wines  in  that  city.  His  leisure  hours  were
devoted  to  literature,  which  he  cultivated  as  a
means  of  recreation.  His  earliest  humorous  poems
and  sketches  were  printed  in  1847  in  "Itankee
Doodle."  A  series  of  articles  that  he  contributed
to  the  "  Knickerbocker  Magazine "  he  collected
and  published  in  1853  in  a  volume  entitled  "  Pris-
matics,"  under  the  pen-name  "  Richard  Haywarde,"
which  was  the  real  name  of  one  of  his  ancestors,
an  English  Moravian  missionary  in  America.  In
the  "Knickerbocker  Magazine"  he  also  issued  a
series  of  humorous  sketches  describing  the  misad-
ventures and  trials  of  a  city  man,  new  to  country
life,  who  had  purchased  a  rural  home.  They  were
called  the  "  Sparrowgrass  Papers,"  and,  when  pub-
lished in  a  volume  in  New  York  in  1856,  obtained


COZZENS


CRADOCK


763


a  wide  circulation,  and  gained  for  the  author  a
reputation  as  one  of  the  first  of  American  humor-
ists. In  1858  he  published  a  volume  of  travel  en-
titled "Acadia ;  a  Sojourn  among  the  Blue-Noses  " ;
""" History  of  New


in  the  same  year  also  a  "  True
Plymouth " in the New York


^'=^^


Ledger."  For
seven  years  be-
fore the  civil
war  he  con-
ducted, in  con-
nection with
his  business,
a  trade  -  pa-
per called  the
"Wine -Press,"
for  which  he
wrote  useful
and  entertain-
ing essays  on
grape  -  culture
and  wine-mak-
ing, and  on
a?sthetic  sub-
jects. He  re-
sided for  many
years  at  Yon-
kers,  where  the
scene  of  the
"  Sparrowgrass
Papers "  was
laid,  but,  after
failing  in  business  in  1868,  he  removed  to  Rahway,
N.  J.,  and  was  making  a  visit  in  Brooklyn  at  the
time  of  his  death.  His  other  published  works  are  a
"  Memorial  of  Col.  Peter  A.  Porter,"  who  was  killed
at  the  head  of  his  regiment  in  the  battle  of  Cold
Harbor  (1865) ;  "  Sayings  of  Dr.  Bushwhacker  and
other  Learned  Men,"  to  which  Verplanck  contrib-
uted several  essays  (New  York,  1867) ;  and  a  "  Me-
morial of  Fitz-Greene  Halleck,"  which  was  read
before  the  New  York  historical  society  and  after-
ward published  (1868).  See  Wilson's  ""Bryant  and
his  Friends." — His  uncle,  Issachar,  b.  in  Newport,
R.  L,  in  1781,  was  a  chemist  and  mineralogist  by  pro-
fession, and  was  the  author  of  a  "  Geological  His-
tory of  New  York  Island"  (New  York,  1843).—
Another  uncle,  WilHaui  B.,  hotel-keeper,  b.  in
Newport,  R.  I.,  in  1787;  d,  at  West  Point,  N.  Y.,
13  March,  1864,  was  for  ten  years  proprietor  of  the
American  hotel  in  New  York  city,  and  subsequently
opened  Cozzens's  hotel  at  West  Point. — William
Cole,  cousin  of  Frederick  Swartwout,  merchant,
b.  in  Newport,  R.  I.,  26  Aug.,  1811 ;  d.  there,  17
Dec,  1876.  In  1842  he  became  the  head  of  the
dry-goods  firm  of  William  C.  Cozzens  &  Co.,  and
about  1857  president  of  the  Rhode  Island  Union
bank.  In  1854  he  was  mayor  of  Newport,  subse-
quently a  representative  in  the  general  assembly,
and  in  1861  a  senator.  In  March,  1862,  the  gov-
ernor and  lieutenant-governor  having  resigned,
Mr.  Cozzens,  who  had  been  chosen  president  of  the
senate,  became  acting  governor  of  the  state  for
about  three  months.  An  historical  address  that
he  delivered  in  1863  was  published  under  the  title
"  History  of  Long  Wharf,  Newport."— Frederick
Schiller,  son  of  Frederick  Swartwout,  artist,  b.  in
New  York  city,  11  Oct.,  1846,  was  graduated  at  the
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute,  Troy,  N.  Y.,  in
1868.  He  worked  at  decorative  designing  in  New
York  city,  afterward  applied  himself  to  sketching,
and,  following  an  early  bent  for  marine  subjects,
soon  acquired  a  reputation  as  a  draughtsman  of
water-craft.  He  has  exhibited  water-color  sketches
m  New  York,  Boston,  and  Philadelphia,  and  is  es-
pecially successful  with  fog-effects  and  surf-boat


subjects.  He  has  published  a  series  of  lithographed
drawings  of  "  American  Yachts,"  accompanied  with
descriptions  by  Lieut.  James  D.  J.  Kelley.  He
has  also  produced  a  series  of  outline-drawings
of  vessels  of  all  kinds,  comprising  steamers  from
1819  to  the  present,  American  and  English  yachts,
and  all  varieties  of  American  craft  propelled  l)v
sails,  oars,  or  paddles.  These  sketches  were  pub-
lished in  the  magazine  "Outing"  in  1886,  prepara-
tory to  their  appearance  in  book-form  under  the
title  "Cozzens's  Outlines."

COZZENS,  Samuel  Woodworth,  author,  b.  in
Marblehead,  Mass.,  14  April,  1834;  d.  in  Thomas-
ton,  Ga.,  4  Nov.,  1878.  He  was  a  lawver,  and  for  a
time  U.  S.  district  judge  of  Arizona,  flis  published
works  include  "  The  Marvellous  Country  (Boston,
1876);  "The  Young  Trail-Hunters  Series,"  com-
prising "The  Young  Trail-Hunters,"  "Crossing
the  Quicksands,"  and  "  The  Young  Silver-Seekers  "
(1876  et  seq.) ;  and  "  Nobody's  Husband  "  (1878).

CRABB,  George  W.,  jurist,  b.  in  Tennessee;  d.
in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  in  1847.  He  removed  to  Ala-
bama at  an  early  age,  settled  at  Tuscaloosa,  then
the  capital,  was  assistant  secretary  of  the  senate,
and  afterward  state  comptroller.  He  served  with
distinction  in  the  Florida  war  of  1836  as  lieu-
tenant-colonel of  Chisolm's  regiment  of  Alabama
volunteers,  was  elected  to  the  state  senate,  and  be-
came major-general  of  the  militia.  In  1838  he
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  whig,  to  fill  a  vacancy,
and  re-elected  the  same  year,  but  was  defeated  in
1840.  He  supported  Polk  for  president  in  1844,  and
was  appointed  judge  of  the  Mobile  county  court
in  1846,  but  was  overtaken  by  a  malady  for  which
he  spent  a  winter  in  Cuba,  afterward  going  to
Philadelphia  for  medical  treatment,  and  there  died.

CRABBE,  Thomas,  naval  officer,  b.  in  Mary-
land in  1788 ;  d.  in  Princeton,  N.  J.,  29  Jime,  1872.
He  entered  the  service  from  Pennsylvania  as  a
midshipman,  15  Nov.,  1809,  served  in  the  war  of
1812-5,  was  promoted  lieutenant, 4  Feb.,  1815,  be
came  commander,  3  March,  1835,  commanded  Fort
Brook,  Tampa  bay,  during  the  campaign  against
the  Seminoles  in  1837,  was  commissioned  as  cap-
tain, 8  Sept.,  1841,  and  commanded  the  squadron
on  the  coast  of  Africa  in  1855-7.  He  was  retired  as
commodore,  16  July,  1862,  officiated  as  prize  com-
missioner in  1864-'5,  and  was  made  a  rear-admiral
on  the  retired  list,  25  July,  1866.

CRABTREE,  Lotta,  actress,  b.  in  New  York
city,  7  Nov.,  1847.  Her  father,  who  kept  a  book-
store for  many  years  in  Nassau  street.  New  York,
went  to  California  in  1851  and  there  engaged  in
gold-mining.  His  wife  and  daughter  followed  in
1854.  Lotta  made  her  first  appearance  on  the
stage  in  1855  as  a  singer  in  an  amateur  perform-
ance at  La  Porte.  At  the  age  of  eleven  she  played
the  part  of  Gertrude  in  the  "  Loan  of  a  Lover  "  at
Petaluma.  The  mother  and  daughter  were  mem-
bers of  a  variety  company  that  travelled  through
California  in  1860.  In  1864  Lotta  appeared  in
New  York  city  in  spectacular  plays  at  Niblo's  Gar-
den, and  first  gained  a  reputation  in  John  Brough-
am's "  Little  Nell  and  the  Marchioness."  She  soon
became  a  favorite  with  the  American  public  in  ec-
centa-ic  comedy,  playing  roles  especially  written  for
her.  Her  chief  successes  were  as  "  Topsy,"  "  Sam
Willoughby,"  "  Fireflv."  "  Musette,"  "  Zip,"  "  Bob,"
"  The  Little  Detective,"  and  "  Nitouche."

CRADOCK,  Matthew,  English  merchant,  d.  27
May,  1641.  He  was  a  wealthy  merchant  of  the  city
of  London,  and  was  chosen 'the  first  governor  of
the  Massachusetts  company,  18  March,  1641.
While  remaining  in  p]ngland,  he  conducted  a  trade
in  the  colony  through  his  agents,  and  was  liberal


764


CRADOCK


CRAGIN


in  advancing  funds  for  the  establishment  of  the
plantations.  It  was  at  his  suggestion  that  the  gov-
ernment was  transferred  from  the  London  com-
pany to  the  colonies.  At  his  decease  the  Ameri-
can colony  was  heavily  indebted  to  him  for  money
advanced.  In  1040  he  represented  the  city  of  Lon-
don in  the  long  parliament.

CRADOCK,  Thomas,  clergyman,  d.  in  Balti-
more county,  Md.,  in  1700.  He  was  rector  of  St.
Thomas's  parish,  and  in  17o8  preached  a  notable
sermon  before  the  governor  and  the  assembly,  de-
nouncing the  irregularities  of  the  clergy.  In  1754
he  published  a  translation  of  Buchanan's  Latin
Psalms  in  heroic  verse.

CRAFTS,  Ebeuezer,  pioneer,  b.  in  Pomfret,
Conn.,  in  1740;  d.  in  Craftsbury,  Vt,  in  1810.  He
was  graduated  at  Yale  in  1759,  and  became  a  mer-
chant in  Sturbridge,  Mass.  He  served  under  Lin-
coln during  the  Shays  rebellion  as  commander  of  a
regiment,  and  in  1790  emigrated  with  his  family  to
the  wilderness  of  Vermont  and  there  founded  the
town  that  is  called  after  him. — His  son,  Samuel
Chandler,  governor  of  Vermont,  b.  in  Woodstock,
Vt,  0  Oct.,  1708;  d.  in  Craftsbury,  Vt.,  19  Nov.,
1858,  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in  1790,  removed
with  his  father  to  Craftsbury,  Vt.,  the  same  year,
Avas  chosen  town-cleric  upon  the  organization  of  the
town  in  1792,  and  held  that  office  for  thirty-seven
years.  During  his  life  he  filled  every  office  within
the  gift  of  the  people  of  Vermont.  He  was  the
youngest  delegate  in  the  State  constitutional  con-
vention that  met  at  Windsor  in  1793,  was  elected
to  the  legislature  in  1790,  and  again  in  1800,  1801,
1808,  and  1805,  was  register  of  probate  for  the  Or-
leans district  from  1790  till  1815,  judge  of  the  Or-
leans county  court  from  1800  till  1810,  and  during
the  last  six  years  chief  judge.  He  was  clerk  of  the
house  of  representatives  in  1798-9,  and  a  member
of  the  executive  council  in  1809-12  and  1825-'7.
He  was  elected  a  representative  in  congress  in  1810,
and  served  for  four  successive  terms,  from  1817  till
1825.  In  the  latter  year  he  was  again  chosen  chief
judge  of  the  county  court,  and  served  till  1828,
when  he  was  elected  governor  of  the  state.  In  1829
he  presided  over  the  constitutional  convention  of
the  state,  and  was  re-elected  governor  in  that  year
and  in  1830.  In  1842  he  was  appointed  by  the  gov-
ernor, and  subsequently  elected  by  the  legislature,
to  fill  the  unexpired  term  of  Samuel  Prentiss  as  U.
S.  senator,  and  served  from  80  April,  1842,  till  3
March,  1843.  In  1802  he  accompanied  Dr.  Fran-
cois A.  Michaud  in  his  botanical  explorations  of
the  valley  of  the  lower  Mississippi.

CRAFTS,  James  Mason,  chemist,  b.  in  Boston,
Mass.,  8  March,  1889.  He  was  graduated  at  Law-
rence scientific  school  of  Harvard  in  1858,  after
which  he  spent  seven  years  abroad,  studying  chem-
istry and  kindred  sciences  at  the  Freiberg  mining-
school,  at  the  university  in  Heidelberg,  and  at  the
Ecole  des  mines  in  Paris.  On  his  return  to  the
United  States,  he  was  in  1808-70  professor  of  chem-
istry at  Cornell,  and  from  1870  till  1880  a  member
of  the  faculty  in  the  Massachusetts  institute  of
technology  in  Boston,  although  from  1874  till  1880
a  non-resident  professor.  He  is  a  member  of  many
scientific  societies  both  in  the  United  States  and
abroad,  is  a  fellow  of  the  chemical  society,  London,
and  in  1872  was  elected  a  member  of  the  National
academy  of  sciences.  Besides  several  honors  re-
ceived from  the  French  academy  of  sciences,  he
was  made  chevalier  of  the  legion  of  honor  by  the
French  government  in  1885.  Most  of  his  chemical
investigations  were  made  in  Paris,  largely  in  con-
nection with  Prof.  Charles  Friedel.  They  have
been  presented  before  the  French  academy  of  sci-


ences, and  include  researches  on  silicon  and  its  com-
binations with  compound  radicals,  and  investiga-
tions on  the  vapor  densities  of  halogen  compounds,
principally  iodine.  He  has  published  "A  Short
Course  of  Qualitative  Analysis"  (New  York,  1809).

CRAFTS,  Walter,  mining  engineer,  b.  in  New-
ton, Mass.,  21  Jan.,  1839.  He  was  graduated  at
Rensselaer  polytechnic  institute  in  1800,  and  spent
two  years  in  study  at  the  Freiberg  mining-school.
On  his  return  to  the  United  States  he  became  min-
ing superintendent  of  copper  mines  in  the  Lake
Superior  district,  Michigan,  and  from  1807  till  1870
was  in  charge  of  iron-mines  in  Berkshire  county,
Mass.  From  1870  till  1870  he  was  superintendent
of  the  Shelby  iron  company  in  Alabama.  In  1877
he  was  appointed  treasurer  and  manager  of  the
Crafts  iron  company  in  the  Hocking  valley,  Ohio,
and  in  1888  became  an  official  in  the  Columbus
and  Hocking  coal  and  iron  company.  As  an  au-
thority on  furnaces  and  their  treatment  he  has  a
high  reputation.  He  is  a  member  of  the  American
institute  of  mining  engineers.

CRAFTS,  Wilbur  Fisk,  clergyman,  b.  inFrye-
burg.  Me.,  12  Jan.,  1850.  He  was  graduated  at
Wesleyan  university,  Middletown,  Conn.,  in  1869,
and  at  the  school  of  theology  of  Boston  university
in  1872.  He  joined  the  New  England  conference
of  the  Methodist  Episcopal  church  in  1870,  and
preached  while  prosecuting  his  theological  studies
at  Nahant  and  Stoneham,  Mass.  In  1872  he  was
stationed  at  Haverhill,  and  subsequently  at  Dover,
N.  H.,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  Chicago,  III.,  and
other  places.  He  travelled  in  Europe  and  Pales-
tine, and,  having  united  with  the  Congregational
church,  was,  after  his  return,  pastor  of  a  church  in
Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  until  1883.  He  has  published
"  Through  the  Eye  to  the  Heart "  (New  York,  1878 ;
revised  ed.,  1878);  "Childhood,  the  Text-Book  of
the  Age  for  Parents,  Pastors,  and  Teachers  "  (Bos-
ton, 1875) ;  "  The  Ideal  Sunday-School  "  (Boston,
1870) ;  •'  Rescue  of  Child-Soul  "  (1880) ;  "  Successful
Men  of  To-day  "  (1883) ;  "  The  Sabbath  for  Man  "
(1885) ;  and,  with  his  wife,  "  Pocket  Lesson  Notes  "
(1880).— His  wife,  Sarah  J.  Timanus,  has  published
"  Letters  to  Primary  Teachers,"  treatises  on  Kinder-
garten teaching,  and  religious  books  for  the  young.

CRAFTS,  William,  lawyer,  b.  in  Charleston,
S.  C,  24  Jan.,  1787:  d.  in  Lebanon  Springs,  N.  Y.,
23  Sept.,  1820.  He  was  graduated  at  Harvard  in
1805,  studied  law,  became  an  eloquent  and  success-
ful pleader  in  Charleston^  especially  in  criminal
cases,  and  for  several  terms  was  a  member  of  the
legislature,  serving  both  in  the  senate  and  house  cf
representatives.  He  printed  essays  on  subjects  of
contemporary  interest  in  the  Charleston  "  Courier,"
of  which  he  was  for  a  time  the  edifor,  delivered
frequent  popular  addresses,  was  the  Phi  Beta  Kap-
pa orator  at  Cambridge  in  1817,  wrote  "  The  Sea-
Serpent,  or  Gloucester  Hoax,"  a  humorous  three-
act  drama,  contributed  humorous  sketches  to  the
"  Omnium  Botherum,"  a  journal  devoted  to  local
satire,  and  published  a  few  poems,  the  longest  of
which  are  "  Sullivan's  Island  "  and  "  The  Raciad."
A  selection  from  his  writings  and  orations  was  pub-
lished, with  a  memoir  by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Gilman
(Charleston,  S.  C,  1828).

CRAGIN,  Aaron  H.,  senator,  b.  in  Weston,  Vt,
3  Feb.,  1821.  He  received  a  common-school  edu-
cation, studied  law,  and  was  admitted  to  the  bar  at
Albany,  N.  Y.,  in  1847.  He  removed  to  Lebanon,
N.  H.,  and  began  practice  in  that  year,  was  elected
to  the  New  "Hampshire  legislature  in  1852,  and
served  till  1855,  when  he  entered  congress,  having
been  chosen  by  the  American  party,  fie  was  re-
elected in  1850,  and  served  till  3  March,  1859. He


CRAGIN

was  returned  to  the  legislature  in  that  year,  and
was  a  delegate  to  the  Kepubliean  national  conven-
tion at  Chicago  in  18G0.  In  18G5  he  was  elected
U.  S.  senator  from  New  Hampshire,  and  served  as
chairman  of  the  committee  on  contingent  expenses
of  the  senate;  was  re-elected  to  tlie  senate  in  1871,
and  was  chairman  of  the  committee  on  naval  af-
fairs. He  was  one  of  the  commissioners  appointed
for  the  sale  of  tlie  Hot  Springs  of  Arkansas.

CRAOIN,  Francis  Wliittemore,  naturalist,  b.
m  Greenfield,  N".  H.,  4  Sept.,  1858.  He  studied  at
Washburn  college  in  Topeka,  Kansas,  at  the  Brook-
lyn polytechnic  institute,  and  was  graduated  at
Lawrence  scientific  school  of  Harvard  univer-
sity in  1882.  Subsequently  he  travelled  through-
out the  United  States,  for  the  purpose  of  collecting
specimens  in  natural  history.  During  the  winter
of  1883-4  he  established,  under  the  patronage  of
Washburn  college,  the  Washburn  biological  survey
of  Kansas,  a  work  that  has  thrown  much  light  on
the  fauna  and  flora  of  the  great  central  plain  of
North  America,  and  has  resulted  in  the  discovery
of  many  new  species  of  both  animals  and  plants.
Mr.  Cragin  is  a  member  of  the  American  associa-
tion for  the  advancement  of  science,  and  of  the
Kansas  academy  of  science.  He  has  published  the
"  Bulletin  of  the  Washburn  College  Laboratory  of
Natural  History"  (September,  1884  et  seq.),  which
contains  the  reports  of  the  biological  survey,  with
notes  and  a  paper  on  the  natur.al  history  of  the
west  and  southwest.

CRAIDER,  Frederick,  Revolutionary  veteran,
d.  in  Meadville,  Miss.,  in  August.  1866,  at  the  age
of  108  years.  He  fought  in  the  Continental  army,
and  was  a  veteran  also  of  the  war  of  1812-'5.

CRAI(x,  Alexander  Jolinson,  educator,  b.  in
Goshen,  Orange  co.,  N.  Y.,  11  Nov.,  1823;  d.  in
Madison,  Wis.,  5  July,  1870.  After  receiving  a
common  school  education,  he  removed  in  1843  to
Palmyra,  Wis.,  where  he  lived  about  fifteen  years,
teaching  for  a  part  of  the  time  and  holding  several
local  offices.  He  became  a  practical  surveyor,  and
worked  at  the  carpenter's  trade  several  years,  also
furnishing  plans  for  school-buildings  in  different
parts  of  the  state.  He  became  principal  of  a  Mil-
waukee school  in  1854,  and  in  1858-^9  edited  the
Wisconsin  "  Journal  of  Education  "  at  Racine  and
Madison,  Wis.  In  1859-60  he  was  a  member  of
the  legislature.  He  was  president  of  the  State
teachers'  association,  and  was  chosen  assistant  state
superintendent  of  schools  in  1860,  and  from  1868
till  his  death  was  superintendent-in-chief.

CRAIG,  Henry  Knox,  soldier,  b.  in  Fort  Pitt,
Pittsburg,  Pa.,  7  March,  1791 ;  d.  in  Washington,
D.  C,  7  Dec,  1869.  After  being  educated  in  Pitts-
burg, he  was  appointed  second  lieutenant  in  the
2d  artillery,  17  March,  1812,  and  was  engaged  in
the  occupation  of  Fort  George  and  the  night  as-
sault at  Stony  Creek,  Canada.  He  was  promoted
to  captain,  23  Dqc,  1813,  commanded  Fort  Niaga-
ra, N.  Y.,  in  1814,  and  was  transferred  to  the  light
artillery,  17  May,  1815.  He  was  superintendent  of
lead-mines  in  Missouri  and  Illinois  from  1821  till
1825,  was  made  major  of  ordnance,  30  May,  1832,
and  was  chief  of  ordnance  of  the  army  of  occupa-
tion in  Texas  and  Mexico  in  1847.  He  distin-
guished himself  at  Palo  Alto  and  Resaca  de  la
Palma,  and  was  brevetted  lieutenant-colonel  for
bravery  at  Monterey,  23  Sept.,  1846.  He  was  made
full  lieutenant-colonel,  25  March,  1848,  was  inspec-
tor of  arsenals  till  1851,  and  then  became  colonel
of  ordnance.  He  had  charge  of  the  ordnance  bu-
reau at  Washington  till  1861,  and  was  retired
from  active  service,  1  June,  1863.  On  13  March,
1865,  he  was  brevetted  brigadier-general. In  1861


CRAIG


765


Col.  Craig  furnished  to  congress,  at  its  request,  an
5pcount  of  the  arms  transferred  by  Secretary  John
B.  Floyd  to  southern  arsenals  in  the  year  I860.—
His  nephew,  Isaac  Eugene,  artist,  b.  near  Pitts-
burg, Pa.,  about  1830.  After  studying  art  in  Pitts-
burg and  Philadelphia,  he  went  to  Europe  in  1853,
intending  to  devote  himself  to  the  Gernuin  school,
but  changed  his  mind  after  spending  a  few  days  in
the  Louvre,  and  remained  in  Paris  for  study.  He
returned  to  the  United  States  in  1855,  but  went  to
Europe  again  in  1862,  and  finally  settled  in  Flor-
ence. His  works  have  rarely  been  exhibited  in
public.  They  include  "  Saul  and  David  " ;  "  The
Emigrant's  Grave  "  ;  "  Daughter  of  Jainis  "  ;  "  The
Brazen  Serpent"  ;  "  Pygmalion  " ;  "  Shylock  Sign-
ing the  Bond  "  ;  "  Peace  " ;  "  Easter  Hymn  " ;  and
"  Venus  and  Cupid."  He  has  also  painted  a  por-
trait of  Joel  T.  Hart,  the  Kentucky  sculptor,  and
some  characteristic  and  striking  views  of  Venice.

CRAICJ,  James,  soldier,  b.  in  Pennsylvania,  7
May,  1820;  d.  in  St.  Joseph,  Mo.,  21  Oct.,  1888.
He  studied  law  and  removed  to  the  west.  In  the
Mexican  war  he  was  a  captain  in  the  Missouri
mounted  rifles  from  August,  1847,  till  November,
1848.  He  was  state  attorney  for  the  twelfth  judi-
cial circuit  in  1852-'6,  and  was  then  elected  to  con-
gress as  a  democrat,  serving  from  7  Dec,  1857,  till
3  March,  1861.  President  Lincoln  appointed  him
brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  21  March,  1862,
and  he  served  in  the  west.

CRAIG,  Sir  James  Henry,  British  soldier,  b.
in  Gibraltar  in  1749 ;  d.  12  Jan.,  1812.  His  father
was  civil  and  military  judge  at  Gibraltar.  At  the
age  of  fourteen  the  son  entered  the  army  with  the
rank  of  ensign,  and  in  1770  was  aide-de-camp  to
Gen.  Sir  Robert  Boyd,  governor  of  Gibraltar.  In
1771  he  was  captain  of  the  47th  foot,  with  which
he  went  to  America  in  1774.  He  was  engaged  in
the  battles  of  Lexington  and  Bunker  Hill,  where  he
was  severely  wounded,  as  he  was  also  at  the  en-
gagements at  Hubbardton  and  Freeman's  Farm.
He  was  included  in  the  convention  at  Saratoga,
and  was  sent  to  Britain  with  despatches.  In  De-
cember, 1777,  he  was  appointed  a  major  of  the  82d
regiment.  He  was  ordered  to  Nova  Scotia  in  1778,
and  engaged  in  the  operations  at  Penobscot  in  1779.
He  occupied  Wilmington,  N.  C,  in  January,  1781,
and  when  Cornwallis  surrendered  in  November,
1781,  he  abandoned  that  place.  At  this  time  he
held  the  rank  of  lieutenant-colonel.  In  1795  he  was
sent  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  being  now  a  ma-
jor-general, in  command  of  the  expedition  against
that  colony,  and,  aided  by  Admiral  Elphinstone
and  Maj.-Gen.  Clarke,  effected  its  conquest.  In
1797  he  went  to  India  and  commanded  the  success-
ful expedition  against  Manila.  He  was  promoted
lieutenant-general  in  January,  1801,  and  returned
to  Britain  in  1802.  In  1805  "he  was  on  duty  at  Lis-
bon, Gibraltar,  Malta,  and  Naples,  and  with  Sir
John  Stuart  led  the  Army  of  the  Mediterranean  to
Sicily.  In  1807,  when  the  relations  existing  be-
tween Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  were
strained,  he  was  sent  over  as  lieutenant-governor  of
Lower  Canada  and  commander-in-chief  of  the  forces
at  Quebec  H  is  official  career  in  Canada  was  not  suc-
cessful, chiefly  because  of  the  prejudice  and  hatred
with  which  the  French  Canadians  regarded  their
British  conquerors.  The  majority  in  the  province
showed  its  animus  by  electing  to  the  first  assembly
a  M.  Panet,  who  could  not  speak  a  word  of  Eng-
lish.. At  times  it  was  impossible  to  secure  the  at-
tendance of  a  sufficient  number  of  members  to  con-
duct the  public  business,  and  when  they  did  meet
it  was  only  to  contend  about  religion  and  nationali-
ty. The  bluff  soldier  found  such  an  assembly  in-


766


CRAia


CRAIGIE


tolerable,  and  the  first  assembly  was  dismissed.
The  second  (1810)  was  similar  in  composition,  and
was  also  dismissed.  During  the  following  election
Sir  James  H.  Craig,  or  his  council,  suppressed  '•  Le
Canadien,"  newspaper,  and  arrested  six  prominent
members  of  the  late  assembly.  Garneau,  the  French
Canadian  historian,  though  not  regarding  Sir  James
with  special  favor,  exonerates  him  from  any  great
culpability  in  the  matter,  placing  the  blame  upon
Chief-Justice  Sewell,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the
council.  In  1811  Sir  James  retired  from  the  gov-
ernment, and  on  19  June  returned  to  England.

CRAIG,  John,  philanthropist,  b.  in  Goffstown,
N.  II.,  in  1797;  d.  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  19  July,
1872.  He  was  educated  in  his  native  town  and  be-
came a  successful  business  man,  amassing  a  large
fortune  by  his  habits  of  industry  and  integrity.
Besides  giving  liberally  during  his  lifetime,  he  be-
queathed sums  amounting  to  $105,000  to  various
Universalist  educational  institutions.

CRAIG,  Lewis,  clergyman,  b.  in  Orange  county,
Va.,  in  1737;  d.  in  Kentucky  in  1838.  As  there
was  no  ordained  minister  at  hand  to  baptize  him,
he  began  preaching  before  his  baptism,  and  was  in-
dicted "  for  preaching  the  gospel  contrary  to  the
law."  His  conduct  during  the  trial  so  impressed
one  of  the  Jurors,  John  Waller,  that  it  was  the  oc-
casion of  Waller's  conversion.  On  4  June,  1768,
while  engaged  in  public  worship,  he  was  seized  by
the  sheriff,  and  was  required  by  the  court  to  give
security  not  to  preach  in  the  county  within  twelve
months.  Refusing  to  do  this,  he  was  committed  to
the  Fredericksburg  jail.  After  a  month's  confine-
ment, during  which  he  preached  through  the  prison-
bars  to  large  crowds,  he  was  released.  Soon  after-
ward he  was  ordained,  and  became  pastor  of  a  Bap-
tist church.  In  1771  he  was  again  imprisoned  for
three  months  in  Caroline  county.  In  1781  he  re-
moved to  Kentucky,  where  he  continued  his  min-
.isterial  labors  with  great  zeal  and  success. — His
brother,  EHjah,  clergyman,  b.  in  Orange  county,
Va.,  in  1743 ;  d.  in  Kentucky  in  1800.  Some  time
after  his  ordination  he  was  imprisoned  for  a
month  for  preaching  the  gospel.  In  Culpepper
jail  he  lived  on  rye-bread  and  water  and  preached  to
the  people  through  the  prison-bars.  After  this  he
was  "  honored  with  a  term  in  Orange  jail."  He  was
several  times  sent  as  a  delegate  from  the  Baptist
general  association  to  urge  the  Virginia  legislature
to  grant  entire  religious  liberty.  In  178(3  he  re-
moved to  Kentucky,  where  he  amassed  a  fortune.

CRAIG,  Lewis  S.,  soldier,  b.  in  Virginia;  d.
near  New  River,  Cal.,  6  June,  1852.  He  entered
the  army  as  second  lieutenant  of  the  2d  dragoons,
14  Oct.,  1837,  was  transferred  to  the  3d  infantry  in
August,  1838,  and  in  March,  1840,  made  assistant
commissary  of  subsistence.  He  was  promoted  to
first  lieutenant  in  June,  1840,  to  captain  in  June,
1846,  and  served  with  distinction  in  the  Mexican
war,  winning  the  brevet  of  major  for  gallant  con-
duct at  Monterey,  and  that  of  lieutenant-colonel  at
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  where  he  was  wounded.
He  met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  deserters  while
in  the  performance  of  his  duty.

CRAIG,  Robert  H.,  actor,  b.  in  New  York
city,  24  March,  1842 ;  d.  in  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  8  Dec,
1872.  He  made  his  first  appearance  at  Barnum's
old  museum,  New  York,  on  10  Sept.,  1860,  and
subsequently,  when  connected  with  the  Arch  street
theatre,  Philadelphia,  began  to  rise  in  public  favor
as  a  comedian.  He  made  a  success  at  the  Boston
museum  in  1870  as  a  burlesque  actor,  with  clever
imitations  of  noted  players.  He  had  talent  as  a
painter,  and  was  the  author  of  burlesques  on  "  Don
Juan,"  "  Faust,'"  "  Hamlet,"  and  "  Camille."


CRAIG,  William,  artist,  b.  in  Dublin,  Ireland,
in  1829 ;  drowned  in  Lake  George,  N.  Y.,  in  1875.
He  painted  in  water-colors,  and  exhibited  for  the
first  time  at  the  Royal  academy  in  Dublin  in  1846.
His  pictures  became  popular  in  Ireland,  and  in
1863  he  settled  in  this  country,  becoming  one  of
the  original  members  of  the  American  society  of
water-color  painters.  Toward  the  end  of  his  life
he  painted  rapidly,  and  so  his  later  works  were
not  equal  to  those  produced  early  in  life,  which
have  been  pronounced  "admirable  specimens  of
the  art,  tender  yet  brilliant  in  tone,  and  possessed  of
that  peculiar  transparency  of  coloring  which  is  so
noticeable  in  the  works  of  the  English  school."
Among  his  paintings  are  "  Mount  Washington "
(1867);  "Ruins  of  Fort  Ticonderoga"  (1868);
"Valley  of  the  Rocks,  Paterson,  N.  J."  (1869);
"On  the  Hudson"  (1870):  "Hudson  River  near
West  Point "  (1871) :  "  Metzingeis  Cascade,  near
Fishkill,  N.  Y."  (1872) ;  and  "  Falls  on  the  Boquet
River  "  and  "  Kilchum  Castle,  Scotland  "  (1875).

CRAIGHILL,  William  Price,  soldier,  b.  in
Charlestown,  Jefferson  co.,  W.  Va.,  1  July,  1833.
After  attending  Charlestown  academy  he  entered
the  U.  S.  military  academy,  where  he  was  grad-
uated in  1853,  standing  second  in  a  class  jf  fifty-
two,  and  was  assigned  to  the  engineer  corps.
He  superintended  the  building  of  Fort  Dela-
ware in  1858,  was  made  first  lieutenant  on  1
July,  1859,  and  served  most  of  the  time  till  1864  at
the  military  academy  as  instructor,  treasurer,  and
in  command  of  an  engineer  detachment  there.  He
was  made  captain  on  3  March,  1863,  was  engaged
in  constructing  defences  for  Pittsburg  when  it
was  threatened  by  Morgan  and  other  raiders,  and
was  chief  engineer  of  the  middle  department  from
April  till  June,  1864.  He  was  brevetted  lieuten-
ant-colonel, 13  March,  1865,  for  his  services  in  the
defence  of  Cumberland  Gap,  and  was  made  major
on  23  Nov.,  serving  on  the  board  for  carrying  out
in  detail  the  modifications  of  the  New  York  de-
fences from  20  June  till  10  Nov.,  1865.  From
1865  till  1867  he  superintended  the  defences  of
Baltimore  harbor.  Since  then  he  has  been  engaged
on  a  great  number  of  important  works,  including
the  improvement  of  the  Potomac,  near  Washing-
ton, from  1870  till  1874,  that  of  the  Appomattox
river,  1870-'71,  and  of  the  Delaware  in  1873.  He
was  sent  to  examine  movable  dams  and  other
works  in  France  and  Great  Britain  in  1877-'8.
On  2  Jan.,  1881,  he  was  promoted  to  lieutenant-
colonel.  Col.  Craighill  is  a  member  of  the  Mary-
land historical  society,  and  was  a  delegate  to  the
general  convention  of  the  Protestant  Episcopal
church  in  1880,  1883,  and  1886.  He  has  compiled
"Army  Officer's  Pocket  Companion"  (New  York,
1861);  translated  Dufour's  "Cours  de  tactiques"
(1863);  and,  jointly  with  Capt.  Mendell,  Gen.  Jomi-
ni's  "  Precis  de  I'art  de  la  guerre  "  (1862).

CRAIGIE,  William,  meteorologist,  b.  in  Bel-
naboth,  Aberdeenshire,  Scotland,  11  March,  1799 ;
d.  in  Hamilton,  Canada,  in  August,  1863.  He
studied  for  the  medical  profession  at  Mareschal
college,  Aberdeen,  and  at  the  Universities  of  Edin-
burgh and  Dublin.  He  came  to  Canada,  and  in
1834  settled  at  Ancaster,  Canada  West,  removing
in  1845  to  Hamilton.  As  a  scholar,  he  had  proba-
bly no  superior  in  Canada,  and  held  a  high  posi-
tion as  a  scientific  authority  on  meteorology,
botany,  horticulture,  and  agriculture.  The  results
of  his  labors  as  a  meteorologist  Avere  chronicled
for  many  months  in  the  columns  of  the  Hamilton
"  Spectator,"  and  he  frequently  lent  assistance  to
a  scientific  journal  published  in  connection  with
the  Smithsonian  institution. He  was  a  member


CRAIK


CRANCH


767


ot  the  Board  of  arts  and  manufactures  of  Canada
West,  and  of  the  Hamilton  horticultural  society.

CRAIK,  James,  physician,  b.  in  Scotland  in
1731 ;  d.  in  Fairfax  county,  Va.,  6  Feb.,  1814.  He
was  educated  to  be  a  surgeon  in  the  British  army,
but  came  to  Virginia  early  in  life,  accompanied
Washington  in  the  expedition  against  the  French
and  Indians  in  1754,  and  was  in  Braddock's  disas-
troufi  campaign  in  1755,  attending  that  general
after  his  defeat,  and  assisting  in  dressing  his
wounds.  We  owe  to  Dr.  Craik  the  details  of
Washington's  remarkable  escape  at  Braddock's  de-
feat. While  exploring  the  western  part  of  Vir-
ginia in  1779,  he  met  an  aged  Indian  chief,  who
told  him,  by  an  interpreter,  that  he  had  made  a
long  journey  to  see  Col.  Washington,  at  whom,  in
the  battle  of  Monongahela,  he  had  fired  his  rifle
fifteer  times,  ordering  all  his  young  men  to  do  the
samo.  During  the  Revolutionary  war  Dr.  Craik
served  in  the  medical  department,  and  rose  to  the
first  rank.  He  was  active  in  disclosing  the  con-
spiracy of  1777,  to  remove  the  commander-in-chief,
and  in  1781,  as  director-general  of  the  hospital  at
Yorktown,  was  present  at  the  surrender  of  Corn-
wallis.  After  the  war  he  removed  to  the  neigh-
borhood of  Mount  Vernon,  at  Washington's  re-
quest, and  attended  him  in  his  last  illness.  Wash-
ington spoke  of  him  as  "  my  compatriot  in  arms,
my  old  and, intimate  friend."

CRALLE,  Richard  K.,  author,  b.  in  South
Carolina;  d.  in  Virginia,  10  June,  1864.  He  was
a  relative  of  John  C.  Calhoun,  who  employed  him
as  his  confidential  clerk  and  arnanuensis  when  he
was  secretary  of  state.  He  had  previously  been  an
editor  and  Swedenborgian  clergyman  in  Washing-
ton. He  published  '*  Works  of  John  C.  Calhoun,"
with  a  memoir  (6  vols..  New  York,  1853-'0),  and
several  polemical  works  on  new-church  doctrines.

CRAM,  Thomas  Jeiferson,  soldier,  b.  in  New
Hampshire  about  1807 ;  d.  in  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  20
Dec,  1883.  He  was  graduated  at  the  U.  S.  mili-
tary academy  in  1820,  standing  fourth  in  a  class  of
forty-one,  and  served  there  as  assistant  professor
of  mathematics  in  1826-'9,  and  of  natural  and  ex-
perimental philosophy  in  1829-36.  He  resigned
on  16  Sept.,  1836,  and  was  for  two  years  assistant
engineer  on  railroads  in  Maryland  and  Pennsylva-
nia. He  was  reappointed,  with  the  rank  of  cap-
tain, 7  July,  1838,  and  served  as  topographical  en-
gineer on  various  surveys.  He  aided  in  making
military  reconnoissances  in  Texas  in  1845-'6,  and
in  1855-8  was  chief  topographical  engineer.  De-
partment of  the  Pacific.  He  was  promoted  to
major,  6  Aug.,  1861,  to  lieutenant-colonel  on  9
Sept.,  and  was  transferred  to  the  engineer  corps  on
3  March,  1863.  From  1861  till  1863  he  acted  as
aide-de-camp  to  Gren.  Wool,  being  engaged  in  the
capture  of  Norfolk,  Va.,  10  May,  1862.  He  was
made  colonel  on  23  Nov.,  1865,  and  on  13  Jan.,
1866,  was  brevetted  brigadier-general  and  major-
general  in  the  regular  army  for  his  services  during
the  civil  war.  After  this  "he  served  on  boards  of
engineers  for  the  improvement  of  harbors  on  the
great  lakes,  and  on  22  Feb.,  1869,  was  retired.

CRAMER,  John,  congressman,  b.  in  Water-
ford,  N.  Y..  26  Sept.,  1779 ;  d.  there,  1  June,  1870.
He  was  a  presidential  elector  in  1804,  casting  his
vote  for  Jefferson  and  Clinton,  served  in  the  state
house  of  representatives  in  1806  and  1811,  and  was
state  senator  in  1823-5.  While  senator  he  pro-
posed the  present  system  of  choosing  presidential
electors  on  a  general  ticket.  He  was  a  delegate  to
the  State  constitutional  convention  in  1821,  and
was  elected  to  congress  as  a  Jackson  democrat,  serv-
ing two  terms,  from  1833  till  1837. He  acquired  a


large  fortune,  and  retired  many  years  before  his
death  to  attend  to  his  private  interests.

CRAMER,  Michael  John,  clergyman,  b.  in
Schaffhausen,  Switzerland,  6  Feb.,  1835.  He  is
descended  from  a  Swedish  family  that  emigrated
to  Switzerland  soon  after  the  refornuition  to  es-
cape persecution.  Michael's  mother  died  in  1840,
and  in  1845  he  came  to  the  United  States  with  his
father,  and  settled  in  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  After
learning  tlie  printer's  trade,  he  entered  Ohio  Wes-
leyan  university,  where  he  supported  himself
during  his  course,  and  was  graduated  in  1860.
After  serving  four  years  in  tlie  Methodist  minis-
try, he  was  appointed  chaplain  in  the  army  by
President  Lincoln,  and  remained  there  till  he  was
sent  as  U.  S.  consul  to  Leipsic  by  President  John-
son in  1867.  While  there  he  attended  lectures  at
Leipsic  university,  and  also  organized  an  Ameri-
can chapel  service,  preaching  every  Sunday  during
his  stay.  He  was  appointed  U.  S.  minister  to
Denmark  by  President  Grant  in  September,  1870,
and  in  August,  1881,  was  transferred  by  President
Garfield  to  Switzerland.  In  July,  1885,  he  re-
turned to  this  country,  having  been  elected  in
June  to  the  chair  of  systematic  theology  in  Boston
university.  Dr.  Cramer  has  contributed  largely  to
periodicals  in  this  country,  Germany,  and  Den-
mark. He  married,  27  Oct.,  1863,  Mary  Frances
Grant,  sister  of  Gen.  Grant.  She  has  achieved
some  success  as  an  artist.

CRAMP,  John  Mockett,  author,  b.  in  St.
Peter's,  isle  of  Thanet,  Kent,  England,  25  July,
1796 ;  d.  in  Wolfville,  Nova  Scotia,  6  Dec,  1881.
He  was  educated  at  Stepney  college,  was  ordained,
7  May,  1818,  became  pastor  of  the  Baptist  church
in  Dean  street,  Southwark,  London,,  and  in  1842  of
the  Baptist  church  at  Hastings,  Sussex.  He  was
chosen  president  of  the  Baptist  college.  Montreal,
Canada,  in  1844;  president  of  Acadia  college,
Nova  Scotia,  in  1851 ;  and  reappointed  principal
of  the  theological  department  in  1853,  which  he
retained  until  1860,  when  he  was  reappointed  presi-
dent. He  retired  in  1869.  He  has  published  "A
Text-Book  of  Popery"  (Dublin,  1831;  enlarged
ed.,  London,  1839) ;  "  The  Reformation  in  Europe  "
(1833);  "Lectures  for  these  Times"  (1844) ;  "  Bap-
tist History  "  (1868) ;  "  The  Lamb  of  God  "  (1871) ;
"  Paul  and  Christ ;  a  Portraiture  and  an  Argu-
ment "  ;  and  a  memoir  of  the  late  Madame  Feller,
of  the  errand  Ligne  mission,  Canada.

CRAMPTON,  Sir  John  Fiennes  Twisleton,
Bart.,  British  diplomatist,  b.  in  Dublin  in  1807;  d.  in
Enniskerry,  County  VVicklow,  Ireland,  7  Dec,  1886.
He  was  educated  at  Eton  and  at  Trinity  college,
Dublin,  and  in  1852  was  appointed  minister  at
Washington.  He  resigned  in  1856,  in  consequence
of  a  demand  made  by  the  U.  S.  government,  which
charged  him  with  attempting  to  enlist  recruits  for
the  British  army  during  the  Crimean  war.  In  1857
he  was  sent  as  British  minister  to  Hanover,  trans-
ferred to  St.  Petersburg,  31  March,  1858,  and  to  Mad-
rid, 11  Dec,  1860  and  resigned  in  November,  1869.

CRANCH,  William,  jurist,  b.  in  Weymouth,
Mass.,  17  July,  1769;  d.  in  Washington,  1  Sept.,
1855.  His  father,  Richard,  a  native  of  England,
was  for  many  years  a  member  of  the  Massachusetts
legislature,  was  a  judge  of  the  court  of  common
pleas,  and  the  author  of  "  Views  of  the  Prophecies
concerning  Anti-Christ."  W^illiam  was  graduated
at  Harvard  in  1787,  studied  law.  and  was  admitted
to  the  bar  in  July,  1790.  After  practising  for
three  years  in  the  courts  of  Massachusetts  and  New
Hampshire,  in  October,  1794,  he  removed  to  Wash-
ington. In  1801  President  Adams  appointed  him
junior  ass-istant  judge  of  the  circuit  court  of  the


768


CRANDALL


CRANDALL^


District  of  Columbia.  In  1805  President  Jefferson
made  him  chief  justice  of  the  same  court,  an  office
that  he  held  till  1855.  During  that  period  but  two
of  his  decisions  were  overruled  by  the  U.  S.  su-
preme court.  Among  the  last  services  Imposed
upon  him  by  congress  was  the  final  hearing  of  pat-
ent causes  after  an  appeal  from  the  commissioner
of  patents.  He  published  nine  volumes  of  reports
of  the  U.  S.  supreme  court,  and  six  volumes  of  re-
ports of  the  circuit  court  of  the  District  of  Colum-
bia (1801  to  1841).  He  also  prepared  a  code  of  laws
for  the  district,  published  a  memoir  of  John  Adams
(1827),  and  in  1831  an  address  on  temperance.
He  was  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  arts  and
sciences. — His  son,  Christopher  Pearse,  painter,
b.  in  Alexandria,  Va.,  8  March.  1813,  was  gradu-
ated at  the  school  of  divinity,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in
1835,  but  retired  from  the  ministry  in  1842  to  de-
vote himself  to  art.  He  studied  in  Italy  in  1846-8,
lived  and  painted  in  Paris  and  in  Italy  in  1853-'63,
and,  returning  to  New  York,  was  elected  a  mem-
ber of  the  National  academy  in  1864;  but  he
has  not  contributed  to  its  exhibitions  since  1871.
His  present  residence  is  Cambridge,  Mass.  He  is  a
graceful  writer  of  both  prose  and  verse,  and  has
published  "Poems"  (Philadelphia,  1844);  "The
Last  of  the  Huggermuggers  "  (1856),  and  "  Kob-
boltozo "  (1857),  tales  for  children  illustrated  by
himself ;  a  translation  of  the  "  JEneid  "  into  blank
verse  (1872);  "Satan,  a  Libretto"  (Boston,  1874);
"Bird  and  the  Bell,  with  other  Poems"  (1875).
His  paintings  include  "  October  Afternoon "
(1867),  "  Washington  Oak,  opposite  Newburg,  N.
Y."  (1868) ;  "  Val  de  Moline,  Amalfi,  Italy  "  (1869) ;
"  Roman  Citizen,"  "  Forest  of  Fontainebleau,"
"Neapolitan  Fisherman,"  "Venice"  (1870);  and
"  Venetian  Fishing-Boats  "  (1871).— Caroline  A.,
his  daughter  and  pupil,  has  studied  also  in  the
Cooper  institute.  New  York,  and  under  William
Hunt.  She  paints  figure-pieces  with  success.  She
resides  in  Cambridge. — Jolin,  his  brother,  who  died
in  1891,  was  a  portrait-painter  in  Washington,  D.  C,
and  was  an  associate  of  the  National  academy,

CRANDALL,  Prudence,  educator,  b.  in  Hop-
kinton,  R.  I.,  3  Sept.,  1803 ;  d.  in  Elk  Falls,  Kan-
sas, 27  Jan.,  1890.  She  was  educated  in  Providence,
and  in  1831,  under  the  patronage  of  residents  of  the
town,  established  the  Canterbury,  Conn.,  boarding-
school.  In  1833  her  school  had  become  one  of  the
best  of  its  kind  in  the  state.  At  this  time  Miss
Crandall  admitted  a  young  negro  girl  as  a  pupil,
and  thereby  incurred  the  displeasure  of  nearly  all
her  former  patrons,  who  threatened  to  withdraw
their  daughters  from  her  care.  Opposition  strength-
ened her  decision  to  educate  the  oppressed  race,
and,  after  consultation  with  several  of  the  anti-
slavery  leaders,  she  issued  a  circular  announcing
that  on  the  first  Monday  of  April,  1833,  she  would


open  a  school  "  for  the  reception  of  young  ladies
and  little  misses  of  color."  "  Terms,  $25  per  quar-
ter, one  half  paid  in  advance."  In  the  list  of  ref-
erences are  the  names  of  Arthur  Tappan,  Samuel
J.  May,  William  Lloyd  Oarrison,  and  Arnold  Buf-
f  um.  The  circular  was  first  published  in  the  "  Lib-
erator" of  2  March,  1833.  In  Canterbury  there
was  great  indignation,  and  several  public  meetings
were  held.  Messrs.  May  and  Buffum  appeared
on  behalf  of  Miss
Crandall,  but  were
denied  a  hearing
on  the  ground
that  they  were
interlopers.  The
town  pledged  it-
self to  oppose  the
school,  and  a  pe-
tition was  sent
to  the  legislature,
praying  for  an
act  prohibiting
private  .  schools
for  non-resident
colored  persons.
Such  an  act  was
passed  in  May ;
but  in  the  mean
time,  in  spite  of
had  opened  her  sc


4L


-^U,.^<!lo.^^


all  opposition,  Miss  Crandall
hool,  and  began  her  work  with
a  respectable  number  of  pupils.  She  was  ar-
rested and  imprisoned  under  the  new  law,  and
in  August  and  October  was  twice  brought  to
trial.  She  was  convicted,  and  the  case  was  then
carried  up  to  the  supreme  court  of  errors,  where
judgment  was  reversed  on  a  technicality  in  July,
1834.  Pending  this  decision.  Miss  Crandall  was
the  object  of  persecutions  of  the  most  annoying
description.  The  term  "  boycott,"  not  then  known,
best  describes  the  measures  that  were  taken  to
compel  the  suspension  of  her  school.  Finally  her
house  was  set  on  fire  and  the  building  so  dam-
aged by  a  mob  that  it  was  deemed  best  to  aban-
don the  undertaking.  Such  was  the  beginning
of  the  higher  education  for  colored  people  in  New
England.  After  the  breaking  up  of  her  school,
she  married  the  Rev.  Calvin  Philleo,  a  Baptist
clergyman,  who  died  in  1876.  They  lived  at
various  places  in  New  York  and  Illinois,  and  in
Elk  Falls,  Kansas.  Miss  Crandall's  portrait  was
painted  by  Francis  Alexander  in  1838,  for  the
American  anti- slavery  society,  and  became  the
property  of  Samuel  J.  May,  who  gave  it  to  Cor-
nell university,  in  the  library  of  which  it  is  still
preserved.  The  illustration  presented  above  is
from  that  portrait.  Her  life  has  been  written  by
the  Rev.  John  C.  Kimball  (a  pamphlet,  printed
privately,  1886).


END OF VOLUME  I,
