The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, Vol. 5 (Anonymous (trans. John Payne), 1883)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1883 Villon Society edition (https://archive.org/details/JohnPayneVolume5.AlfLaylahWaLaylah.TheBookOfTheThousandNights). The first complete English translation (1882-84), from the Calcutta Arabic edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: now

FIRST COMPLETELY DONE INTO ENGLISH
PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE ORIGINAL
ARABIC, BY JOHN PA YNE (A UTHOR
OF 11 THE MASQUE OF SHADOWS," "IN-
TAGLIOS," " SONGS OF LIFE AND DEATH,"
^ L AUTRE C," " THE POEMS OF MASTER
FRANCIS VILLON OF PARIS," " NEW
POEMS," ETC. ETC.). IN NINE VOLUMES:

VOLUME THE FIFTH


LONDON'

PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONL\

IQ01


t.


KIRMAN EDITION
Limited to Five Hundred Copies


CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.


PAGE

1. THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD

KING AND THE DEVOUT MAN . I

2. THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING. 3

3. THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF

THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL ...0.5

4. ISKENDER DHOULKERNEIN AND A CERTAIN

TRIBE OF POOR FOLK 6

5. THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING ANOUSHIRWAN 8

6. THE JEWISH CADI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE . . 9

7. THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD 13

8. THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE 16

9. THE DEVOUT PLATTER-MAKER AND HIS WIFE 19
10. EL HEJJAJ BEN YOUSUF AND THE PIOUS MAN 23
n. THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE

WITHOUT HURT 25

12. THE SAINT TO WHOM GOD GAVE A CLOUD

TO SERVE HIM AND THE DEVOUT KING . 28

13. THE MUSLIM CHAMPION AND THE CHRISTIAN

LADY ..„.„..... Jfl

14. IBRAHIM EL KHAWWAS AND THE CHRISTIAN

KING'S DAUGHTER . 37


VI


PAGE


15. THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE ... 40

16. THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE

HERMIT ......... 42

17. THE KING OF THE ISLAND .... - 44

18. ABOULHUSN ED DURRAJ AND ABOU JAAFER

THE LEPER ........ 49

19. THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS .... 52

a. THE ADVENTURES OF BELOUKIYA .... 57

b. THE STORY OF JANSHAH &?

20. SINDBAD THE SAILOR AND SINDBAD THE

PORTER 149

a. THE FIRST VOYAGE OK SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . 152

h. THE SECOND VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . l6l

C. THE THIRD VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . 1 69

d. THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . 180

6. THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . I93

/ THE SIXTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR . . 202

g. THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE SAILOR. . 2IO

21. THE CITY OF BRASS ....... 219

22. THE MALICE OF WOMEN ...... 26a

a. THE KING AND HIS VIZIER'S WIFE .... 263

b. THE MERCHANT'S WIFE AND THE PARROT . . . 265
C. THE FULLER AND HIS SON ...... 267

d. THE LOVER'S TRICK AGAINST THE CHASTE WIFE . 267

e. THE NIGGARD AND THE LOAVES OF BREAD . . 269
/ THE LADY AND HER TWO LOVERS .... 270

g. THE KING'S SON AND THE OGRESS .... 272

h. THE DROP OF HONEY ....... 275

i. THE WOMAN WHO MADE HER HUSBAND SIFT DUST . 276
J. THE ENCHANTED SPRINGS ...... 278

h THE VIZIER'S SON AND THE BATHKEEPER'S WIFE . 283


Vll


PAGE


/. THE WIFE'S DEVICE TO CHEAT HER HUSBAND . . 285

m. THE GOLDSMITH AND THE CASHMERE SINGING-GIRL. 289

U. THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN . . . 293

O. THE KING'S SON AND THE MERCHANT'S WIFE . . 3OI
THE PAGE WHO FEIGNED TO KNOW THE SPEECH OF

BIRDS 303

q. THE LADY AND HER FIVE SUITORS . 306

T. THE MAN WHO SAW THE NIGHT OF POWER . . 314

S. THE STOLEN NECKLACE . . . . . . 316

t. THE TWO PIGEONS ....... 317

U. PRINCE BEHRAM OF PERSIA AND THE PRINCESS ED

DETMA 318

V. THE HOUSE WITH THE BELVEDERE .... 323

W. THE KING'S SON AND THE AFRIT'S MISTRESS . . 333

X. THE SaNDAL-WOOD MERCHANT AND THE SHARPERS . 336

y. THE DEBAUCHEE AND THE THREE-YEAR-OLD CHILD . 34I

Z. THE STOLEN PURSE 342

aa. THE FOX AND THE FOLK „ 345,


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT.


THE ANGEL OF DEATH WITH THE PROUD
KING AND THE DEVOUT MAN.

A certain king of the ancients was once minded to ride
out in state with the officers of his court and the grandees
of his realm and show forth to the folk the wonders of
his magnificence. So he bade his lords aad Amirs and
grandees equip them to this end and commanded his
keeper of the wardrobe to bring him of the richest of
raiment, such as befitted the King in his state and [his
master of the horse] to bring his steeds of the finest
breeds and most renowned pedigrees, which being done,
he chose out of the raiment what liked him and of the
horses that which he deemed good and donning the
clothes, together with a collar set with pearls and rubies
and all manner jewels, mounted and set forth in state,
making his horse prance and curvet among his troops and
glorying in his pride and magnificence. And Satan came
to him and laying his hand upon his nose, blew into his
nostrils the breath of pride and conceit, so that he mag-
nified himself and said in his heart, 1 Who among men is
like unto me?' And he became so puffed up with arro-
gance and conceit and so taken up with the thought of
his own glory and magnificence, that he would not vouch-
safe a glance to any» Presently, there came up a mac

VOL. V.


clad in tattered clothes and saluted him, but he returned
not his greeting, whereupon the stranger laid hold of his
horse's bridle. 'Lift thy hand,' said the King, 'thou
knowest not whose bridle-rein it is whereof thou takest
hold.' Quoth the other, 'I have an occasion to thee.'
* Wait till I alight/ replied the King, ' and then name it
i Nay,' rejoined the stranger, 'it is a secret and I will not
tell it but in thine ear.' So the King bowed his head to
him and he said, ' I am the Angel of Death and I purpose
to take thy soul.' ' Have patience with me a little,' said
the King, ' whilst I return to my house and take leave of
my people and children and neighbours and wife.' 'Not
so,' answered the angel ; ' thou shalt never return nor look
on them again, for the term of thy life is past.' So saying,
he took the soul of the King, — who fell off his horse's
back, dead, — and departed thence.

Presently, he met a devout man, of whom God the Most
High had accepted, and saluted him. He returned his
salute, and the Angel of Death said to him, ' O pious man,
I have a privy occasion to thee.' ' Tell it in my ear,' said
the devotee. Quoth the other, ' I am the Angel of Death.'
'Welcome to thee!' replied the man. 'Praised be God
for thy coming ! I am weary of awaiting thee ; for indeed
long hath been thine absence from him who longeth for
thee.' Quoth the angel, ' If thou have any business, make
an end of it/ But the other answered, saying, ' There is
nothing urgent to me as the meeting with my Lord, to
whom belong might and majesty ! ' And the angel said,
' How wouldst thou liefer have me take thy soul ? I am
bidden to take it as thou wiliest and choosest.' ' Wait till
I make the ablution and pray,' replied the devotee ; ' and
when I prostrate myself, then take my soul in the act'
Quoth the angel s e Verily s my Lord commanded me not
to take thy soul but with thy consent and as thou shouldst
wish] so I will do thy will.' Then the devout mm rose


s


and made the ablution and prayed : and the Angel of
Death took his soul in the act of adoration, and God
transported it to the place of mercy and acceptance and
forgiveness.

THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE RICH KING.

A certain king had heaped up treasure beyond count and
gathered store of all [precious] things, that God the Most
High hath created, that he might take his pleasure thereof,
against such time as he should have leisure to enjoy all
this abounding wealth that he had collected. Moreover,
he builded him a wide and lofty palace, such as beseemeth
kings, and set thereto strong doors of cunning fashion and
appointed for its service and guard servants and soldiers
and doorkeepers. One day, he bade the cooks dress him
somewhat of the goodliest of food and assembled his
household and retainers and lords and servants to eat with
him and partake of his bounty. Then he sat down upon
the throne of his kingship and the chair of his state and
leaning back upon his cushion, bespoke himself, saying s
4 O soul, behold, thou hast gathered together all the riches
of the world; so now take thy leisure therein and eat of $Tt(ri)t
this good at thine ease, in long life and abounding pros- CCttuUf.
perity 1 '

Hardly had he made an end of speaking, when there
came so terrible a knock at the gate that the whole palace
shook and the king's throne trembled. The servants were
affrighted and ran to the door, where they saw a man clad
in tattered raiment, with a cadger's wallet hanging at his
neck, as he were one who came to beg food. When they
saw him, they cried out at him, saying, ' Out on thee !
What unmannerly fashion is this ? Wait till the king
eateth and [after] we will give thee of what is left. 5 Quoth
he, 1 Tell your lord to come out and speak with me, for I


4


have a pressing errand to him and a weighty matter.'
' Away, fool ! ' replied they. ' Who art thou that we should
bid our lord come out to thee ? ' But he said, ' Tell him
of this.' So they went in and told the king, who said,
' Did ye not rebuke him and draw upon him and chide
him ! ' But, as he spoke, behold, there came another
knock at the gate, louder than the first, whereupon the
servants ran at the stranger with staves and weapons, to
fall upon him ; but he cried out at them, saying, ' Abide in
your places, for I am the Angel of Death.' When they
heard this, their hearts quaked and their wits forsook
them ; their understandings were dazed and their nerves
trembled for fear and their limbs lost the power of motion.
Then said the King to them, ' Bid him take a substitute
in my stead.' But the Angel answered, saying, 'I will
take no substitute, and i come not but on thine account,
to make severance between thee sad the good, tbou har4
gathered together and the riches thou hast heaped up
and treasured,' When the King heard this, he wept and
groaned, saying, ' May God curse the treasure that has
deluded and undone me and diverted me from the service
of my Lord ! I deemed it would profit me, but to-day it
is a regret for me and an affliction unto me, and behold,
I [must] go forth, empty-handed of it, and leave it to
mine enemies.'

Therewith God caused the treasure to speak and it said,
' Why dost thou curse me ? Curse thyself, for God created
both me and thee of the dust and appointed me to be in
thine hand, that thou mightest provide thee with me for
the next world and give alms with me to the poor and
sick and needy and endow mosques and hospices and
build bridges and aqueducts, so might I be a succour
unto thee in the life to come. But thou didst garnei me
and hoard me tip and bestowedst me on thine own Iusts s
neither gavesl thanks for me, as was due, but wast tin-


s


grateful; and now thou must leave me to thme enemies
and abidest in thy regret and thy repentance. But what
is my fault, that thou shouldest revile me?' Then the
Angel of Death took the soul of the King, before he ate
of the food, and he fell from his throne, dead. Quoth
God the Most High, ' Even while they rejoiced in what
had been given to them, we took them unawares and
behold, they were stricken with despair.' 1


THE ANGEL OF DEATH AND THE KING OF
THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.

There was once a proud and puissant king of the
children of Israel, who sat one day upon the throne of
his kingship, when he saw come in to him, by the gate
of the hall, a man of terrible and forbidding- aspect. The
King was affrighted at his sudden intrusion upon him and
his look terrified him ; so he sprang up and said to him,
'Who art thou, O man? Who gave thee leave to come
in to me and who sent thee to my house?' Quoth the
stranger, 'The Lord of the house sent me to thee and
I need no leave to come in to kings, nor can any door-
keeper exclude me, for I reck not of a Sultan's majesty
neither of the multitude of guards. I am he from whom
no tyrant is at rest, nor for any is there escape from my
grasp : I am the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer
of Companies.'

When the King heard this, trembling crept over his
body and he fell on his face in a swoon j but, presently
coming to himself, he said, { Art thou then the Angel of
Death?' 'Yes,' answered the stranger. 1 1 conjure thee
by AllaV quoth the King, ' grant me one day's respite,
that I may ask pardon of my sins and seek absolution of
1 Koran vL 44.


<5


my Lord and restore to their rightful owners the treasures
that are in my storehouses, so I may not be burdened with
the woe of a reckoning nor suffer the misery of punish-
ment therefor.' ' Away ! away ! ' replied the Angel. ' This
may nowise be. How can I grant thee a respite, whenas
the days of thy life are counted and thy breaths numbered
and thy moments fixed and written ? ' ' Grant me an hour, 5
said the King ; but the Angel answered, saying, ' The hour
was in the account and hath passed, and thou unheeding,
and hath expired, and thou taking no thought : and now
thy moments are accomplished, and there remains to thee
but one breath.' 'Who will be with me, when I am
transported to my grave ? ' asked the King. Quoth the
Angel, ' Nought will be with thee but thy work.' 1 1 have
no work,' said the King ; and the Angel, ' Doubtless, thine
abiding place will be in the fire and thy departure to the
wrath of the Almighty.' Then he took the soul of the
King, and he fell off his throne and dropped on the earth
[dead]. And there arose a mighty weeping and wailing
and clamour of lamentation for him among the people of
his court, and had they known that to which he went of
the wrath of his Lord, their weeping for him had been [yet]
sorer and their lamentation louder and more abounding.

ISKENDER DHOULKERNEIN AND A CERTAIN
TRIBE OF POOR FOLK.

It is related that Iskender Dhoulkernein 1 came once, in
his travels, upon a tribe of poor folk, who owned nought
of the goods of the world and who dug their graves over
against the doors of their houses and were wont at all

1 Alexander the Two-homed, a title given by Eastern writers to
Alexander the Great (as well as to another ancient king, whose identity
is uncertain), probably on account of his claim to descent from Jupiter
Amnion, whose distinctive feature was a ram's hom on either temple,,


7


times to frequent them and sweep the earth from them and
keep them clean and visit them and worship God the Most
High in them ; and they had no food save herbs and the
fruits of the earth. Iskender sent a man to them, to bid
their king to him, but he refused to come, saying, ' I have
no occasion to him.' So Iskender went to him and said
to him, ' How is it with you and what manner of folk are
you? For I see with you nothing of gold or silver nor
aught of the good things of the world.' 'None hath his
fill of the goods of the world,' answered the king. ' Why
do you dig your graves before the doors of your houses ? '
asked Iskender. ' That they may be the cynosure of our
eyes,' replied the king, 4 so we may look on them and still
take thought unto death neither forget the world to come.
Thus is the love of the world banished from our hearts and
we are not distracted thereby from the service of our Lord^
exalted be His name ! ' Quoth Iskender, 'Why do ye eat
herbs ? ' And the other answered, ' Because it misliketh
us to make our bellies the tombs of beasts and because
the pleasure of eating overpasseth not the gullet.'

Then he brought out a human skull and laying it before
Iskender, said to him, ' O Dhoulkernein, knowest thou
whose was this skull?' 'Nay,' answered Iskender; and
the other rejoined, 1 He whose skull this is was a king of
the kings of the world, who dealt tyrannously with his
subjects, oppressing the weak and passing his days in
heaping up the perishable goods of the world, till God
took his soul and made the fire his abiding-place ; and this
is his head.'

Then he produced another skull and laying it before
Iskender, said to him, 'Knowest thou this?' 'No,' an-
swered the prince ; and the other rejoined, ' This is the

skull of another king, who dealt justly by his subjects and
was tenderly solicitous for the people of his realm and his
dominions, till God took his soul and lodged him in His


8


Paradise and made high his degree [among His blessed]. 5
Then he laid his hands on Iskender's head and said,
'Whether of these twain art thou?' Whereupon Iskender
wept sore and straining the king to his bosom, said, " An
thou be minded to consort with me, I will commit to thee
the government of my affairs and share with thee in my
kingdom.' ' Away ! away ! ' replied the other. c I have no
mind to this.' ! Why so?' asked Iskender, and the King
answered, ' Because all men are thine enemies by reason
of the wealth and possessions thou hast gotten^ and all
men are my friends in verity, because of my contentment
and poverty, for that I possess nothing, neither covet
aught of the goods of the world ; I have no desire unto
them nor wish for them, neither reck I of aught save con-
tentment.' So Iskender pressed him to his bosom and
kissed him between the eyes and went his way.


THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF KING •
ANOUSHIRWAN.

It is told of the just King Anoushirwan * that he once
feigned himself sick and bade his stewards and intendants
go round about the provinces of his empire and the
quarters of his realm and seek him out a rotten brick
from some ruined village, that he might use it as medicine,
avouching that the physicians had prescribed this to him.
So they went the round of the provinces of his realm
and of all the lands under his dominion and returned and
said to him. ' In all the realm we have found no ruined
place nor old rotten brick.' At this he rejoiced and re-
turned thanks to God, saying, * I was but minded to prove
my kingdom and try my empire, that I might know U
there were therein any ruined [or deserted] place, w I
1 See Vol. I¥„ p. 327.


9


might rebuild [or repeople] it ; but, since there is no
place in it but is inhabited, the affairs of the realm are !NTt($U
well ordered and accomplished and [its] prosperity hath CCtdxfo
reached the pitch of perfection.'

'And know, O king,' [added Shehrzad] 'that these kings
of time past were not solicitous for the peopling of their
kingdoms, but because they knew that the more populous
a country is, the more abundant is that which is desired
therein, and for that they knew the saying of the wise and
the learned to be without doubt true, namely, ' Religion
depends on the King, the King on the troops, the troops
on the treasury, the treasury on the populousness [or
prosperity] of the country and the latter on the justice
of the government.' Wherefore they upheld no one in
tyranny or oppression neither suffered their dependents
to do injustice, knowing that kingdoms are not stablished
upon tyranny, but that cities and places fall into ruin f
when oppressors get the mastery over them, and their
inhabitants disperse and flee to other governments, where-
fore ruin falls upon the realm, the imports fail, the
treasuries become empty and the lives of the subjects
are troubled; for that they love not a tyrant and cease
not to offer up prayers against him, so that the King hath
no ease of his dominion and the shifts of fortune speedily
bring about his destruction.'

THE JEWISH CADI AND HIS PIOUS WIFE,

A certain Cadi of the children of Israel had a wife of
surpassing beauty, who was withal exceeding virtuous s
chaste and patient, and being minded to make the pil-
grimage to Jerusalem, appointed his brother Cadi in his

stead, during his absence, and commended bis wife to his
charge. Now this brother had heard of her beauty and
grace and had fallen in love with her. So, his brother


IO


being gone, he went in to her and sought her favours;
but she denied him and clave fast unto her chastity. The
more she repelled him, the more urgently he pressed his
suit upon her, till, despairing of her and fearing lest she
should acquaint his brother with his conduct, when he
returned, he suborned false witnesses to testify against her
of adultery and cited her before the King of the day, who
adjudged her to be stoned. So they dug a pit and making
her sit therein, stoned her, till she was covered with stones,
and [the wicked brother] said, ' Be the pit her grave.'

But, when it was dark night, a passer-by, making for
a neighbouring hamlet, heard her groaning and pulling
her out of the pit, carried her home to his wife, who
dressed her wounds and tended her till she recovered.
The peasant's wife had a child, which she gave to the
woman to nurse, and the latter used to lodge with the
child in another house by night. r . Now a certain thief saw
her and lusted after her. So he sent to her, to require
her of love, but she denied herself to him ; wherefore he
resolved to kill her and making his way into her chamber
by night, whilst she slept, thought to strike at her with
a knife ; but it smote the child and killed it ; which when
he knew, fear overtook him and he went forth the house
and God preserved her from him.

When she awoke in the morning, she found the child
by her side slain ; and presently his mother came and
seeing the boy dead, said to her, 'It was thou didst murder
him.' Therewith she beat her grievously and would have
killed her ; but her husband interposed and delivered the
woman, who fled forth for her life, knowing not whither
she should go. Presently, she came to a village, where
she saw a crowd of people collected about the trunk of
a tree, on which was a man crucified, but still in the
chains of life. She asked what he had done and they
said, s He hath committed a crime, which nothing can


II


expiate but death or the payment of such a fine by way
of alms,' Now she had with her somewhat of money,
so she said to them, ' Take the money and let him go.'
Accordingly, they set him free and he repented at her
hands and vowed to serve her, for the love of God the
Most High, till death should release him. Then he built
her a hermitage and lodged her therein ; moreover, he
betook himself to woodcutting and brought her her daily
bread. As for her, she was instant in the service of God,
so that there came no sick man or demoniac to her, but
she prayed for him and he was straightway made whole. 'Mt'gfjt

Now it befell, by the ordinance of God the Most High, CCCuXbt.
that He sent down upon her husband's brother a cancer
in the face and smote the villager's wife with leprosy and
afflicted the murderer of the boy with paralysis. When
the Cadi returned home from his pilgrimage, he asked his
brother of his wife, and he told him that she was dead,
whereat he mourned sore and accounted her with God.
After awhile, the folk heard of the pious recluse and
flocked to her cell from all parts of the length and breadth
of the earth. And the • Cadi said to his brother, '0 my
brother, wilt thou not seek out yonder pious woman ? It
may be God shall appoint thee healing at her hands.'
' O my brother,' replied he, ' carry me to her.' Moreover,
the husband of the leprous woman heard of the pious
woman and carried his wife to her, as did also the para-
lytic's family; and they all met at the door of her cell,
where they waited, till her servant came, and begged him
to ask leave of her to admit them ; and he did so.

Now she had a place wherefrom she could look out
upon those who came to her, without their seeing her,
and thence she saw them all and recognized them. So 5
when her servant came in to her, she veiled herself and
went out and stood in the door, looking at them : but they
knew her not. Then said she to them, 6 O folk, ye shall


12


not be rid of what is with you, till ye confess your sins;
for, when the creature confesses his sins, God relenteth
towards him and granteth him that for which he resorteth
to Him.' Quoth the Cadi to his brother, ' my brother,
repent to God and persist not in thy frowardness, for it
will be the more helpful to thy relief.' And the tongue of
the case spoke as follows :

Behold, oppressor and oppressed assembled are to-day, And God the

secret hath unveiled, till now that hidden lay.
This is a case in which, indeed, the sinners are brought low And God

exalteth those that be assiduous in His way.
Yea, and our Master and our Lord discovereth the truth, Whether the

sinner froward be or bow him to obey.
Woe unto those who strive with God and anger Him, as 'twere They

knew not what He doth prepare for those that Him gainsay I
O thou that power and glory seek'st, know, only in the fear Of God true

glory lies ; so cleave thou fast to Allah aye.

Then said the brother, ' Now will I tell the truth. I did
thus and thus with thy wife ; ' and he confessed the whole
matter, adding, 'And this is my sin.' Quoth the leprous
woman, ' As for me, I had a woman with me and imputed
to her [a crime,] of which I knew [her] not [to be guilty],
and beat her grievously; and this is my offence.' And
the paralytic said, ' And I went in to a woman to kill her,
after I had solicited her to commit adultery and she had
refused ; and I slew [instead] a boy that lay beside her ;
and this is my offence.' Then said the pious woman, ' O
my God, even as Thou hast made them to feel the misery
of disobedience, so show Thou them [now] the excellence
of obedience, for Thou canst all things ! ' And God (to
whom belong might and majesty) made them whole. Then
the Cadi fell a-looking on the pious woman and consider-
ing her straitly, till she asked him why he did thus and he
said, ' I had a wife, were she not dead, I had said that
thou wast she/ With this, she made herself known to him


and they both betook themselves to rendering thanks to
God (to whom belong might and majesty) for that which
He had vouchsafed them of the reunion of their loves ;
but the brother and the thief and the villager's wife began
to implore her forgiveness. So she forgave them, and they
all worshipped God in that place, and were assiduous m
her service, till Death sundered them.


THE SHIPWRECKED WOMAN AND HER CHILD.

(Quoth one of the Seyyids l ) I was going round about
the Kaabeh one dark night, when I heard a plaintive voice,
speaking from a contrite heart and saying, ' O Bountiful
One, Thy past favours ! Indeed, my heart is constant to
the covenant' When I heard this, my heart, fluttered, so
that I was nigh upon death , but I followed the voice and
found that it came from a woman, to whom I said, ' Peace
be on thee, O handmaid of God ! ' ' And on thee be peace,'
answered she, 4 and the mercy of God and His blessings I '
Quoth I, ' I conjure thee, by the Most Great God, tell me
what is the covenant to which thy heart is constant.' ' But
that thou adjurest me by the Almighty/ replied she, ' I
would not tell thee my secret. See what is before me.' So
I looked and saw a child lying asleep before her and breath-
ing heavily in his slumber. ' Know,' said she, ' that I set
forth, being big with this child, to make the pilgrimage to
this [Holy] House and took passage in a ship ; but the
waves rose against us and the winds were contrary and
the ship broke up under us. I saved myself on a plank s
and in this situation, I gave birth to the child.

s As I sat on the plank, with the boy on my lap and the r .. v
waves beating upon me, there swam up to me one of the ,
sailors, who climbed on to the plank and said to me, i By ^ l
1 Descendants of the Prophet


14

Allah, I desired thee, whilst thou was yet in the ship, and
now I have come at thee. So yield thyself to me, or I will
throw thee into the sea.' ' Out on thee 1 ' cried I. 1 Hast
thou no thought of that which thou hast seen, and is it no
warning to thee ? ' Quoth he, ' I have seen the like of this
many a time and come off safe and reck not' ' O fellow,'
rejoined I, ' we are now in a strait whence we hope to be
delivered by obedience and not by disobedience [of God's
commandments].' But he was instant with me, and I
feared him and thought to put him off ; so I said to him,
( Wait till the child sleeps.' And he took the child off my
lap and threw him into the sea. When I saw this, my
heart throbbed and anguish was sore upon me ; but I raised
my eyes to heaven and said, ' O Thou that intervenest
between a man and his heart, intervene between me and
this wild beast ! ' And by Allah, hardly had I spoken when
a beast rose out of the sea and snatched him off the plank.
When I found myself alone, my affliction redoubled and
my grief and longing for my child, and I recited the fol-
lowing verses :

The solace of my. eyes, my child, my dear, Is lost, and i am racked

with pain and fear:
I see my body wrecked, and all my heart On coals of love and dole is

wasting sheer.

No help is there for me in this my need, Save at Thy hands on whom
my hope I rear.

Thou, O my Lord, hast seen my sore distress, For loss of him, my child,
my suckling dear.

Take ruth on us and give him back to me ! Thou art my stay : incline
to me Thine ear.

In this condition I abode a day and a night, and on
the morrow I caught sight of the sails of a ship shining

afar off, nor did the winds cease to drive me and the
waves to bear me on, till I reached the vessel whose sails
i had seen. The sailors took me up into the ship, and


15


I looked and behold, my child amongst them. So I
threw myself upon him and said, ' O folk, this is my
child : how came ye by him ? ' i As we were sailing along
[yesterday],' quoth they, ' the ship suddenly stood still in
the sea and behold, [that which stayed us was] a [sea]
beast, as it were a great city, and this child on its back,
sucking his thumbs ; so we took him up into the ship.'
When I heard this, I told them all that had befallen me
and returned thanks to my Lord and vowed to Him that
I would never stir from His House nor swerve from His
service [whilst I lived] ; and since then, I have never re-
quired of Him aught but He hath given it me.'

When she had made an end of her story (adds the
Seyyid), I put my hand to my alms-pouch and would have
given to her, but she exclaimed, ' Away, idle man ! Have
I not told thee of His bounties and the graciousness of
His dealings [with me] and shall I take' an alms from
other than His hand?' And I could not prevail with her
to take aught of me ; so I left her and went away, re-
citing the following verses :

How many secret favours are there not in God ! His. mysteries elude the

most enlightened sight.
How often by His grace doth ease come after stress, How oft the broken

heart is solaced by His might !
How often in the mora is one oppressed by care- Yet gladness follows

on the coming of the night !
If things go hard with thee, trust in the Most High God, The ever-living

One that is in Heaven's height.
Claim thou the Prophet's voice to intercede for thee: Through him each

faithful soul shall have his heart's delight.

And she ceased not from the service of her Lord, cleaving
onto His [Holy] House, till death came to her.


i5


THE PIOUS BLACK SLAVE.

(Quoth Malik ben Dinar, 1 on whom God have mercy^
We were once afflicted with drought at Bassora and went
forth repeatedly to pray for rain, but saw no sign of our
prayers being answered. So I went, I and Itaa es Selerai
and Thabit el Benani and Neja el Bekkaa and Mohammed
ben Wasi and Eyoub es Sukhtiyani and Hebib el Farsi and
Hassan ben Abou Sinan and Otbeh el Ghulam and Salih
el Muzeni,* till we reached the place of prayer, when the
boys came out of the schools and we offered up prayers for
rain, but could see no sign of acceptance. So about mid-
day the people went away and I and Thabit el Benani
abode till nightfall, when we saw a black of comely visage,
slender-shanked and big-bellied, come up, clad in a pair of
woollen drawers | if he wore had be.tn priced^ it would
not have fetched a couple of dirhems. He fetched water
and made the ablution, then, going up to the prayer-niche,
prayed two inclinations deftly, his standing and bowing
and prostration being [well-nigh] simultaneous. Then he
raised his eyes to heaven and said, ' O my God and my
Master and my Lord, how long wilt thou reject the prayers
of Thy servants in that which offereth no hurt to Thy
sovereignty ? Is that which is with Thee expended or are
the treasuries of Thy kingdom exhausted ? I conjure Thee,
by Thy love to me, to pour out upon us Thy rain-clouds
forthwith 1 '

Hardly had he made an end of speaking, when the sky
clouded over and there came a rain, as of the emptying
!N"tgf)t of waterskins. When we left the oratory, we were up to
C££ClxblU. our knees in water, and we were lost in wonder at the

1 A renowned thologiaa arid ascetic, who flourished at Bass is
the eighth century.
a Well-known theologians and jurists of the time,


17


black. So I accosted him and said to him, ' Out on thee,
O black, art thou not ashamed of what thou saidst ? ' ' How
so?' asked he. 'Didst thou not adjure God by His love
for thee?' said L 'What giveth thee to know that He
loveth thee ? ' ' Away from me,' replied he, ' O thou that
art distracted [by the love of the world] from [the care of]
thine own soul 1 Where was I, when He gave me strength
to identify myself with Him and of His special favour
vouchsafed unto me the knowledge of Him ? 1 How deemest
thou that He aided me thus except of His love to me?
Verily, His love to me is after the measure of my love to
Him.' Quoth I, 'Tarry awhile with me, may God have
mercy on thee ! ' But he said, ' I am a slave and the Book
of God enjoins me to obey my lesser 2 master.' So he went
away and we followed him afar off, till we saw him enter
a slave- dealer's house.

Now the first half of the night was passed and the last
half was long upon us, so we went away ; but next morn-
ing, we repaired to the slave-dealer and said to him, ' Hast
thou a boy 8 to sell us for service?' 'Yes,' answered he,
s I have nigh upon a hundred boys, and they are all for
sale/ Then he showed us slave after slave, till he had
shown us threescore and ten j but my friend was not
amongst them, and the dealer said, 'These are all I have.'
But, as we were going away, we espied a ruinous hut behind
his house and going in, saw the black standing there. 1 It
is he, by the Lord of the Kaabeh!' cried I and turning
back to the dealer, said to him, 'Sell me yonder slave/
4 O Abou Yehya/ ' replied he, 'this is a plaguy, morose,

1 "Identification" and "Knowledge,'' stages of the Sufi mystic oa
the " Way " or journey to God.

55 i.e. earthly master;, as opposed to Gcd s his great, or heavenly masicr.

8 Male black slaves in the East, as in the United States, «e oucs
■sailed "boys/ 5 iiretpectiwly of agt.

4 Surname of Malik ben Dinar*

YGL, ¥„ §


1 8

unprofitable fellow, who "hath no concern by night but
weeping and by day but repentance.' ' It is for that I want
him,' said I. So the dealer called him, and he came our,
feigning drowsiness. Quoth his master, ' Take him at thine
own price, so thou hold me quit of all his faults.' So I
bought him for twenty dinars and said, ' What is his name ? '
' Maimoun/ answered the dealer - and I took him by the
hand and went ©ut with him, intending for my house ; but
he turned to me and said, 1 my lesser lord, why didst
thou buy me ? By Allah, I am not fit for the service of the
creature ! ' ' On my head be it/ replied I ; 1 1 bought thee
that I might serve thee myself.' e Why so?' asked he,
and I said, ' Wast thou not in company with us yesterday
in the place of prayer? ' 4 And didst thou hear me ?' quoth
he ; and I answered, ' It was I accosted thee yesterday and
spoke with thee.'

Then we went on till we came to a mosque, where he
entered and prayed a two-bow prayer ; after which he said,
' O my God and my Master and my Lord, the secret that
was between Thee and me Thou hast discovered unto men
and hast betrayed me therein among Thy creatures. How
then shall life be sweet to me, now that others than Thou
have happened upon that which is between Thee and me?
I conjure Thee to take my soul to Thee forthright.' So
saying, he prostrated himself, and I waited awhile till,
seeing that he did not raise his head, I went up to him
and moved him and found that he was indeed dead, the
mercy of God the Most High be upon him ! I laid him out
and looked at him, and behold, he was smiling. More-
over, whiteness had gotten the better of blackness in his
face, and it was radiant with light.

As we wondered at his affair, the door opened and a
young man came in to us and said, 1 Peace be on you ?
May God make great our reward and yours for our broth©?
Maimoun I Here is his shroud : wrap him in it 3 So say-


19


ing, he gave us two robes, never had we seen their like,
and we shrouded him therein. And now his tomb is a
place whither the folk resort to pray for rain and ask
favours of God j and how excellently well saith the poet
on this subject :

The pleasaunce of the just is in a garden of the skies, About whose
gates God's doorkeepers hold ever watch and ward.

Behold, there drink they of old wine, and mingled therewithal Tesnim, 1
that is, the wine of close communion with the Lord.

The secret of their hearts is safe from other than God's sight ; For that
their sprights with His are blent in one supreme accord.


THE DEVOUT PLATTER-MAKER AND HIS WIFE.

There was once among the children of Israel a worthy
man, who was strenuous in the service of his Lord and
abstained from the things of this world and had put them
away from his heart. He had a wife who helped him in
his endeavour and was still obedient to him. They earned
their living by making platters and fans, at which they
wrought all day, and at nightfall the man went out into
the streets and highways, to sell what they had made.
They were wont to fast continually, and one morning,
they arose, fasting, and wrought at their trade till the end
of the day, when the man went forth, according to custom,
to seek purchasers for his wares, and fared on, till he
came to the door of the house of a certain man of wealth
and condition.

Now the platter- maker was fair of face and comely of
jtspect, and the wife of the master of the house, who was
then absent, saw him and fell in love with him and her
heart inclined to him with an exceeding inclination ; so

site called her handmaid and said to her, * Make shift to
bring yonder man to me/ Accordingly the maid went
1 Maine of a fountain of Paradise.


20


Wgljt out to him and said, * Come in ; my lady hath a mind to
£££dXlX. buy some of thy wares, after she hath tried them and
looked at them.' The man thought she spoke truly and
seeing no harm in this, entered and sat down, as she bade
him. The maid shut the door upon him, whereupon her
mistress came out and taking him by the gown, drew him
into her chamber and said to him, ' How long shall I seek
of thee [a lover's] privacy? Verily, my patience is at an
end on thine account. See now, the place is perfumed
and food ready and the master of the house is absent this
night, and I give myself to thee, I whose favours kings
and captains and men of fortune have sought this long
while, but I have hearkened to none of them.' And she
went on talking thus to him, whilst he raised not his eyes
from the ground, for shame before God and fear of the
pains of His punishment, even as saith the poet :

'Twas shamefastness, I trow, and nothing else, that came 'Twixt me

and dalliance with many a noble dame.
The antidote it was to them, and should it pass s I'm lost ; for antidote

was none but very shame.

He strove to free himself from her, but could not; so
he said to her, 'I want one thing of thee.' 'What is
that ? ' asked she, and he answered, ' I wish for pure water
and that I may carry it to the highest place of thy house
and do an occasion therewith and cleanse myself of a
defilement, which I may not discover to thee.' Quoth
she, 'The house is spacious and hath closets and privy
places and lavatories at command.' But he replied, £ I
want nothing but to be at a height.' So she said to her
handmaid, ' Carry him up up to the belvedere at the top of
the house.' Accordingly the maid took him up thither
and giving him a vessel of water, went away and left him.

He made the ablution and prayed a two-bow prayei }
after which he looked at the ground, thinking to throw
himself down, but, seeing it afar off, feared to be torn to


21

pieces in the fall. Then he bethought him of the con-
sequence of his disobedience to God, and it became a
light matter to him to offer up his life and shed his blood,
[rather than sin] ; so he said, ' G my God and my Lord,
Thou seest that which is fallen on me ; neither is my case
hidden from Thee. Thou indeed canst all things, and the
tongue of my case reciteth and saith as follows :

My heart doth sign to Thee and eke my vitals too ; The soul within my

soul is open to Thy view.
Lo, if I speak with Thee, I cry indeed aloud, Or, if I'm mute, my signs

my speech to Thee renew,

Thou to whom indeed no second is conjoined, A wretched lovesick

soul and sad to Thee doth sue.

1 have a heart that pants for woe, as well Thouknowst ; But yet a hope

have I, my thoughts confirm it true.
The sacrifice of life, for all its worth be small, Is yet the hardest thing

of all that can ensue ;
So, an it be Thy will to save me, of Thy grace 8 Thou, surely, O my

hope, art able thereunto ! '


Then he cast himself down from the belvedere ; but
God sent an angel, who bore him up on his wings and
brought him to the earth, whole and unhurt. When he
found himself safe on the ground, he returned thanks to
God (to whom belong might and majesty) for His merciful
protection and went straight to his wife, empty-handed.
When she saw him, she asked him why he had tarried so
long and what was come of that he had taken with him
and why he returned empty-handed ; whereupon he told
her all that had befallen him, and she said, 1 Praised be
God, who delivered thee from seduction and intervened
between thee and calamity 1 ' Then she added, c O man,
the neighbours use to see us light our brasier every night :
and if they see us lo-night without fire, they will know that
we are destitute. Mow it behoves us, in gratitude to God,
t© hide our destitution and join the fast of this night to


22

that of yesterday and continue it for the sake of God the
Most High.' So she rose and filling the brasier with
wood, lighted it, to give the neighbours the change, re-
citing the following verses :

1 will conceal what is with me of trouble and distress And light my fire s

that so my strait the neighbours may not guess.
What God decreeth I accept, so haply He may see My humbleness to

Him and so accept of me no less.

2f{g!)t Then they made the ablution and stood up to pray.

CCCClxX. Presently, one of the neighbours' wives came in and asked
leave to take a light from the fire. ' At thy service/
answered they : but, when she came to the fire, she cried
out, saying, ' Ho, such an one, (to the platter-maker's
wife,) take up thy bread before it burns 1 ' Quoth the
wife to her husband, ' Hearest thou what she says ? ' ' Go
and look,' answered he. So she went up to the oven, and
behold, it was full of fine white bread. She took up the
loaves, thanking God (to whom belong might and majesty)
for the abounding good and great bounty He had be-
stowed on them, and carried them to her husband ; and
they ate of the bread and drank water and praised God
the Most High. Then said the woman to her husband,
* Come, let us pray to God the Most High, so haply He
may vouchsafe us what will quit us of necessity and enable
us to dispense with the weariness of toil for daily bread
and devote ourselves [wholly] to worshipping Him and
keeping His commandments.' So the man rose and prayed,
whilst his wife said ' Amen ' to his prayer, when, behold,
the roof clove in sunder and down fell a ruby, which lit
the whole house with its lustre. At this, they rejoiced
greatly and redoubled in praise and thanksgiving to God,
pn.ying what the Most High willed.

Then, the night being far spent, they lay down to sleep
and the woman dreamt that she entered Paradise and saw
therein many chairs and stools ranged in rows. She asked


23


what these were and it was answered her, * These are the
chairs of the prophets and the stools of the just and the
pious.' 'Which is the stool of such an one, my husband? 9
asked she ; and it was said to her, 1 Yonder one.' So she
looked and seeing a hole in its side, asked what it was.
Quoth they, ' It is the place of the ruby that came down to
you from the roof of your house. 8 Thereupon she awoke,
weeping and bemoaning the defect in her husband's stool
among the seats of the just ; so she told him the dream
and said to him, 4 Let us pray God to restore the ruby to
its place, for to suffer hunger and poverty during the few
days [of our life here] were easier than a default in thy
seat among the just in Paradise.' Accordingly, he prayed
to his Lord, and behold, the ruby flew up to the roof [and
disappeared,] whilst they looked at it And they ceased
not from their poverty and piety, till they went to the
presence of GocL, to whom belong might and- majesty.


EL HEJJAJ AND THE PIOUS MAR

It is told that El Hejjaj ben Yousuf eth Thekefi had
been long in pursuit of a certain man of the notables, and
when he [was at last taken and] came before him, he said
to him, 'O enemy of God, He hath given thee into my
hand.' Then he bade his men hale him to prison and said
to them, 4 Lay him in strait and heavy fetters and build a
cage over him, that he may not come forth of it nor any
go in to him.' So they bore him to prison and summoned
the blacksmith, who came and laid him in irons. Every
time the smith gave a stroke with his hammer, the prisoner
raised his eyes to heaven and said, L Verily, to Him belong
creation and commandment ! ' 1 Then they built the cage
©ver him and left him therein, deserted and lonely, where*

1 Koran vii. 52,


24


upon longing and consternation entered into him and the
tongue of his case recited the following verses :

Wish of the wistful, unto Thee my wishes tend ; My trust is in Thy

grace, that all doth comprehend.
My case from Thee unhidden is ; a look from Thee Is all the goal of my

desires, my wishes' end.
They've prisoned me and tried me sore with many a woe: Woe's me,

my strangerhood forlorn, without a friend !
Lone as I am, the thought of Thee my solace is And cheer, though

slumber from mine eyes my woes forfend.
Ay, an Thou but accept of me, I reck not, I ; What in my heart Thou

seest of Thee right well is kenned.

At nightfall, the gaoler left his men to watch him and
went to his house. On the morrow, when he repaired to
the prison, he found the prisoner gone and the fetters lying
on the ground ; whereat he was affrighted and made sure
of death. So he returned to his house and bade his family
farewell, after which he took his shroud and the perfumes
for his corpse, in his sleeve, and went in to El Hejjaj.
The latter smelt the perfumes and said, 5 What is that ? '
* O my lord,' replied the gaoler, 'it is I who have brought
it.' 1 And what moved thee to that ? ' asked the governor j
jW(($)t whereupon he told him his case, and El Hejjaj said, ' Out
CCCClnt. on thee ! Didst thou hear him say aught ? ' 1 Yes,' an-
swered the gaoler. * Whilst the blacksmith was riveting
his irons, he ceased not to look up to heaven and say,
«' Verily to Him belong creation and commandment.'"
6 Woe to thee ! ' rejoined El Hejjaj. ' Dost thou not know
that He, on whom he called in thy presence, delivered him
in thine absence ? ' And the tongue of the case recited the
following verses on the subject :

O Lord, how many a trouble Thou away from me hast done ! Yea, bus
for Thee I should nor sit nor stand beneath the sun,

Ay s from how many a parlous case, that I might not endure, Hut
Thou, indeed s delivered me, how many and many an om !


2|

THE BLACKSMITH WHO COULD HANDLE FIRE
WITHOUT HURT.

A certain pious man once heard that there abode in
such a town a blacksmith who could put his hand into the
fire and pull out the red-hot iron, without its doing him
any hurt. So he set out for the town in question and
enquiring for the blacksmith, watched him at work and
saw him do as had been reported to him. He waited till
he had made an end of his day's work, then, going up to
him, saluted him and said to him, ' I would fain be thy
guest this night.' 'With all my heart/ replied the smith,
and carried him to his house, where they supped together
and lay down to sleep. The guest watched his host, but
found no sign of [special] devoutness in him and said to
himself, ' Belike, he concealeth himself from me.' So
he lodged with him a second and a third night, but found
that he did no more than observe the ordinary letter of
the law and rose but little in the night [to pray]. At last
he said to him, ' O my brother, I have heard of the gift
with which God hath favoured thee and have seen the
truth of it with mine eyes. Moreover. I have taken note
of thine assiduity in religious exercises], but find in thee
no special fervour of piety, such as distinguisheth those
in whom such miraculous gifts are manifest. Whence,
then, cometh this to thee?' 'I will tell thee,' answered
the smith.

' Know that I was once passionately enamoured of a
certain damsel and required her many a time of love, but
could not prevail upon her, for that she still clave fast
unto chastity. Presently there came a year of drought
and hunger and hardship ; food failed and there befell
a sore famine in the land. I was sitting one day in my
house., when one knocked at the door : so I went oat and


f


2&

found her standing there ; and she said to me, " O my
brother, I am stricken with excessive hunger, and I lift
mine eyes to thee, beseeching thee to feed me for God's
sake ! " Quoth I, " Dost thou not know how I love thee
and what I have suffered for thy sake ! I will give thee
no whit of food, except thou yield thyself to me." But
she said, " Better death than disobedience to God." Then
she went away and returned after two days with the same
petition for food. I made her a like answer, and she
entered 9,110. Sett down, being nigh upon death. I set
food before her, whereupon her eyes ran over with tears,
and she said, "Give me to eat for the love of God, to
whom belong might and majesty !" "Not so, by Allah,"
answered I, "except thou yield thyself to me." Quoth
she, " Better is death to me than the wrath of God the
Most High." And she left the food untouched and went
away, repeating the following verses :

O Thou the Only God, whose grace embraceth all that be, Thine ears

have heard my moan, Thine eyes have seen my misery ;
Indeed, privation and distress are heavy on my head ; I cannot tell of

all the woes that do beleaguer me.
I'm like a man athirst, that looks upon a running stream, Yet may not

drink a single draught of all that he doth see.
My flesh would have me buy its will : alack, its pleasures flee ! The sin

that pays their price abides to all eternity.

I saw no more of her for two days, when she came a
third time and knocked at the door. I went out to her,
and lo, hunger had taken away her voice ; but, [after a
little,] she said, " O my brother, I am worn out with want
and know not what to do, for I cannot show my face to any
but thee. Wilt thou feed me for the love of God the Most
High?" "Not so," answered I, "except thou yield to
me." And she entered and sat down. Now I had no food
ready, [so I went out to prepare some]; but, when the
meat was dressed and I had laid it in a platter, behold, the


2/


grace of God the Most High entered into me and I said to
myself, " Out on thee ! This woman, weak of wit and
faith, hath forborne food, till she can endure from it no
longer, for stress of hunger ; and lo, she refuseth time
after time, and thou still persistest in disobedience to
God the Most High!" And I said, "O my God, I re-
pent to Thee of that which I purposed ! " Then I took
the food and carrying it in to her, said, " Eat and [fear
not :] no harm shall betide thee. It is for the love of
God, to whom belong might and majesty." When she
heard this, she raised her eyes to heaven and said,
" O my God, if this man be sincere, I pray Thee forbid
fire to do him hurt in this world and the next, for Thou
art He that answereth prayer and art powerful to do
whatsoever thou wilt 1 "

Then I left her and went to put out the fire in the brasier.
1 Now the time was the winter-cold, and a hot coal fell on
my body ; but, by the ordinance of God, (to whom belong
might and majesty), I felt no pain and it was borne in
upon me that her prayer had been answered. So I took
the coal in my hand, (and it burnt me not,) and going in to
her, said, " Rejoice, for God hath granted thy prayer ! " 3Cl'gf)t
And she dropped the morsel from her hand and said, " O CCCClxXUL
my God, now that Thou hast shown me my desire of him
and hast granted me my prayer for him, take Thou my
soul, for Thou art Almighty ! " And straightway He took
her soul to Him, the mercy of God be upon her ! And the
tongue of the case recited and spoke the following verses
on the subject :

She prayed and God answered the voice of her prayer And the sinner,

who wooed her to lewdness, did spare.
He showed her her wishes accomplished on him And tr^ve her the

death that she sought then and there.
She came to his door, hoping succour to get, And sought of him sola©©

to ease her despair.


28


But he clave to his error and followed his lusts And thought to enjoy

her perforce, unaware
Of that which God willed to him. Sudden there came Repentance osa

him, though he purposed it ne'er.
Fast fated, O God, are men's fortunes j To man If his destiny fare

not, to it he must fare.


THE DEVOTEE TO WHOM GOD GAVE A CLOUD
TO SERVE HIM AND THE DEVOUT KING.

There was once among the children of Israel a man
of the devout, renowned for piety and continence and
asceticism, He was a wanderer in the mountains and
was used to pass the night in prayer; and God answered
his prayers and gave him all he asked. Moreover, He
had subjected to him a cloud, 'that journeyed with him,
wherever he went, and poured water on him copiously,
that he might make his ablutions and drink. After a time,
his fervour abated, whereupon God took the cloud away
from him and ceased to answer his prayers. Great was
his grief because of this, and he ceased not to regret the
time of grace and divine favour and to lament and be-
moan himself, till, one night, he saw in a dream one who
said to him, ' An thou wouldst have God restore thee thy
cloud, seek out such a king, in such a town, and beg him
to pray for thee : so will God give thee back thy cloud, by
virtue of his pious prayers.' And he repeated the follow-
ing verses :

I rede thee to the pious prince repair, Who's powerful to order thine
affair.

As he pray God for thee, the thing thoa sjekst Of sraist galore shall

reach thee at his prayer.
Among the Kings in worth, he doth excel And is illustrious beyond

compare,


29


Yea, thou with Mm shalt surely light on that Shall gladden thee and do
away thy care ;

Fare, then, o'er plains and deserts to his stead And leave not journeying
till thou find him there.

When the hermit awoke, he set out for the town, to
which he had been directed by the dream, and coming
thither, enquired for the King's palace. At the gate he
found an officer sitting on a great chair and clad in
splendid apparel ; so he saluted him and he returned his
salutation and said to him, 'What is thy business?' C I
am a wronged man, 1 answered the devotee, 'and come
to prefer my complaint to the King.' Quoth the officer,
' Thou mayst not win to him to-day ; for he hath ap-
pointed unto petitioners such a day in every seven, on
which they may go in to him ; so go thy ways soberly till
then.' The hermit was vexed with the King for thus
sequestering himself from the folk and said in himself,
* How shall this man be of the friends of God (to whom
belong might and majesty) and be on this wise? 8 Then
he went away and awaited the day of audience.

When it came, he repaired to the palace, where he
found a number of folk at the gate, awaiting admission s
and stood with them, till there came out a Vizier, clad
in rich raiment and attended by guards and servants, who
said, ' Let those, who have petitions to present, enter. 8
So the hermit entered with the rest and found the King-
seated in the midst of his officers and grandees. The
Vizier took up his post before him and brought forward
the petitioners, one by one, till it came to the hermit's
turn, when the King looked on him and said, ' Welcome to
the lord of the cloud ! Sit down, till I be at leisure for thee.'

The hermit was confounded at his words and confessed
his dignity and excellence; and when the King had made
an end with the petitioners, he rose and dismissed his
Viziers and grandees ; then, taking the stranger by the


30


hand, he carried him to the door of the [inner] palace,
where they found a black slave, splendidly arrayed, with
a helmet on his head and on his right hand and his left
bows and coats of mail. He rose and hastening to obey the
King's commandment, opened the door, and they went in,
hand in hand, till they came to a low door, which the
King opened himself and brought the hermit into a
ruinous and neglected building and a chamber, wherein
was nought but a prayer-carpet, an ewer for ablution and
some mats of palm-leaves. Here the King put off his
royal habit and donned a gown of coarse white wool and
a tall cap of felt. Then he sat down and making the
hermit sit, called out to his wife, who answered from
within, saying, ' Here am I.' Quoth he, 4 Knowst thou
who is our guest to-day ? ' ' Yes,' replied she ; { it is the
lord of the cloud.' And the King said, i Come in : it
matters not for him.' So there entered a woman, as she
were a vision, with a face that glittered like the new
'MfgfH moon ; and she was clad in a gown and veil of coarse
CCCcIxXtfa, wool. Then said the King, 'O my brother, dost thou
desire to hear our story or that we should pray for thee
and let thee go ? ' ' Nay,' answered the hermit ; ' I wish
to hear your story, for I long to know it'

4 Know then,' said the King, ' that my forefathers handed
down the throne, one to the other, and it descended from
great one to great one, in unbroken succession, till it
came to me. Now God had made this hateful to me, for
I would fain have gone a-wandering, a pilgrim, over the
earth and left the folk to govern themselves • but I feared
lest they should fall into temptation and anarchy and
swerve from the law of God, and the union of the Faith-
be broken up. Wherefore I took upon me the kingship
and appointed to every head of them a set stipend and
donned the royal robes and posted officers at the doors s
as a terror to evil doers and for the defence of honest folk


3*

and the maintenance of law and order. When I had made
an end of this, I entered this place and putting off my
royal habit, donned these clothes thou seest; and this
my uncle's daughter is agreed with me to renounce the
world and helps me to serve God. So we use to weave
these palm- leaves [into mats or baskets] and earn, in the
course of the day, wherewithal to break our fast at night-
fall ; and thus have we lived nigh upon forty years. Abide
thou with us, so God have mercy on thee, till we sell our
mats ; so shalt thou sup and sleep with us this night and
on the morrow go thy ways with that thou desirest, so it
please God the Most High.'

So he abode with them till the end of the day, when
there came a boy five [feet] high, who took the mats they
had made and carrying them to the market, sold them for
a carat. 1 With this he bought bread and beans and re-
turned with them to the King. The hermit 'supped and
lay down to sleep with them ; but, in the middle of the
night, they both arose and fell to praying and weeping.
When daybreak was near, the King said, ' O my God, this
Thy servant beseeches Thee to return him his cloud ; and
Thou art able to this ; so, O my God, answer Thou his
prayer and restore him his cloud.' The Queen said 'Amen'
to his prayer and behold, the cloud appeared in the sky;
whereupon the King gave the hermit joy and the latter
took leave of them and went away, the cloud following him
as of old. Moreover, whatsoever he required of God after
this, in the names of the pious King and Queen, He granted
it to him ; and he made thereon the following verses :

God 'mongst His servants hath elect, whose pious souls, I ween, Range
in the gardens of His love, untroubled and serene.

Their bodies' lusts at peace are grown and trouble them no mors, For
that which harbours in their breasts of hearts made pure and clean.

One sees them silent, bearing them right humbly to their Lord s For
they His mysteries behold, unseen as well as seen.

1 The twenty-fourth part of a mithcal or dinar, i.e. about §d.


32


THE MUSLIM CHAMPION AND THE
CHRISTIAN DAMSEL.

The Khalif Omar ben el Khettab (whom God accept)
once levied an army of Muslims, to encounter the enemy
before Damascus, and they laid strait siege to one of the
Christians' strengths. Now there were among the Muslims
two men, brothers, whom God had gifted with valour and
daring against the foe, so that the commander of the be-
sieged fortress said to his captains and champions, ' Were
but yonder two taken or slain, I would warrant you against
the rest of the Muslims.' Wherefore they set for them all
manner of snares and ambushes and ceased not to lie in
wait for them, till, at last, they took one of them prisoner
and slew the other, who died a martyr. They carried the
prisoner to their general, who looked at him and said, ' To
kill this man were pity; but his return to the Muslims
Ijffgfet would be a calamity. Would he might be brought to
CCCClnb. embrace the Christian Faith and be to us an aid and a
support ! ' c O Amir/ answered one of his knights, ' I will
bring him to abjure his faith, and on this wise. We know
that the Arabs are passionately fond of women, and I have
a daughter of surpassing beauty and grace, whom when he
sees, he will be ravished by her.' Quoth the general, 1 1
give him into thy charge : take him.'

So he carried him to his house and set food before him.
Moreover, he clad his daughter in raiment, such as added
to her beauty and grace, and made her stand before the
Muslim, as she were a handmaid obedient to her lord and
awaiting his commandment, that she might fulfil it. When
the prisoner saw the snare that was set for him, he com-
mended himself to God the Most High for protection and
closing his eyes, applied himself to prayer and reciting the
Koran. Now he had a mellow voice and a penetrating


3 2


THE MUSLIM CHAMPION AND THE
CHRISTIAN DAMSEL.

The Khalif Omar ben el Khettab (whom God accept)
once levied an array of Muslims, to encounter the enemy
before Damascus, and they laid strait siege to one of the
Christians' strengths. Now there were among the Muslims
two men, brothers, whom God had gifted with valour and
daring against the foe, so that the commander of the be-
sieged fortress said to his captains and champions, ' Were
but yonder two taken or slain, I would warrant you against
the rest of the Muslims.' Wherefore they set for them all
manner of snares and ambushes and ceased not to lie in
wait for them, till, at last, they took one of them prisoner
and slew the other, who died a martyr. They carried the
prisoner to their general, who looked at him and said, ' To
kill this man were pity ; but his return to the Muslims
^CfCtbt would be a calamity. Would he might be brought to
CCtcIl'Xb. embrace the Christian Faith and be to us an aid and a
support ! ' c O Amir/ answered one of his knights, ' I will
bring him to abjure his faith, and on this wise. We know
that the Arabs are passionately fond of women, and I have
a daughter of surpassing beauty and grace, whom when he
sees, he will be ravished by her.' Quoth the general, ' I
give him into thy charge : take him.'"

So he carried him to his house and set food before him.
Moreover, he clad his daughter in raiment, such as added
to her beauty and grace, and made her stand before the
Muslim, as she were a handmaid obedient to her lord and
awaiting his commandment, that she might fulfil it. When
the prisoner saw the snare that was set for him, he com-
mended himself to God the Most High for protection and
closing his eyes, applied, himself to prayer and reciting the
Koran. Now he had a mellow voice and a penetrating


33


wit ; and the young lady fell passionately in love with him
and said in herself, ' Would God he would consent to admit
me into the Faith of Islam ! ' And the tongue of her case
recited the following verses :

Wilt turn away, from me whose soul is thrall to thee, thy face, From

me whose life thy ransom is, whose heart thy dwelling-place?
Indeed, my people I will well to leave and leave a faith Other than that

of the sharp sword ; yea, Islam I embrace
And testify that there's no Lord save God and God alone ; For constant

5s the proof thereof and doubt can find no place.
Union, mayhap, will He decree with one that is averse And ease a

heart distressed for love and longing, of His grace.
For oft-times doors are open thrown, that erst were shut, and he Is

granted his desires, whom woe hath brought to sorry case.

She abode thus seven days, till her patience failed her
and her breast was straitened and she threw herself at his
feet, saying, ' I conjure thee by thy faith, give ear unto my
words!' *What are they? 5 asked he ; and- she said, 1 Ex-
pound unto me Islam.' So he expounded to her the tenets
of the Faith, and she became a Muslim, after which she
purified herself and he taught her to pray. Then said she
to him, Know, O my brother, that I did but embrace
Islam for thy sake and to win thy favour.' Quoth he,
' The law of Islam forbids sexual commerce between man
and woman, save after a marriage before two legal wit-
nesses, and a dowry and next friend [for the woman] are
also requisite. Now I know not where to find witnesses
or next friend or dowry ; but, if thou canst make shift to
bring us out of this place, I hope to win to the land of
Islam, and I vow to thee that none other in Islam shall
be wife to me than thou.' 'I will contrive this/ answered
she and calling her father and mother, said, to them, ' This
Muslim's heart is softened and he inclineth to enter our
faith, so I will grant him that which he desire th of me;
but he says, "It were not fitting for me to do this in
i town where my brother was slain. Could I but come
vol. v. *


without it, my heart would be diverted [from the thought
of him] and I would do that which is required of me."
Now there is no harm in letting me go forth with him tc
another place, and I will be warrant to you and to the
Amir for that which ye require of him.'

So her father went to their chief and told him of this,
whereat he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and bade carry
them forth the town to a village that she named. So they
went out to the village, where they abode the rest of that
day, and at nightfall, they made ready to set out and fare
upon their way, even as saith the poet :

"The time of departure," quoth they, "draweth nigh And " How

oft will ye threat me with parting ? '' I cry.
No business have I but to traverse the earth, Mile by mile and o'er

deserts forever to hie.
If the loved ones prick forth tow'rds a land, for their sake, Once again

of the sons of the road 1 become I.
On my longing, to guide me to them, I rely, And it shows me the way

nor directs me awry.

ICtgfjt ^he yo un g Muslim mounted a swift horse and took the
CtCCUxfU. girl up behind him, and they set out and fared on all that
night till morning, when he turned aside with her from
the highway and alighting, they made the ablution and
prayed the morning prayer. As they were thus engaged,
they heard the clank of arms and ring of bridles and
men's voices and tramp of horse ; whereupon he said to
her, ' O such an one, the Christians are upon us ! What
shall we do? For the horse is jaded, so that he cannot
go another step.' ' Out on thee ! ' exclaimed she. ' Art
thou then afraid?' 'Yes,' answered he; and she said,
'What didst thou tell me of the power of thy Lord and
His readiness to succour those who cry to Him ? Come,
let us make supplication to Him and beseech Him :
surely s He will vouchsafe us His succour and visit us with
1 i.e. wayfarers.


36


prayer and fared forward ; and when the day broke and
the light appeared to them, they saw [in the distance]
the standards of Medina and the Khalif and a company
of Muslims issuing forth to meet them.

Now it was Omar's wont to rise for morning-prayer in
the darkness before dawn, and bytimes he would proceed
to the mosque, followed by two men, and standing in the
prayer-niche, begin by reciting the chapter of the Cattle 5
or that of Women ; 2 whereupon the sleeper awoke and he
who was in act to make the ablution accomplished it and
he who was afar came to prayer ; nor had he made an end
of [the prayers of] the first inclination, before the mosque
was full of people ; then would he pray his second inclina-
tion, repeating a short chapter in haste. But, on the
morning in question, he hurried over his devotions, both
first and second inclinations, repeating in each a short
chapter; then, turning to his companions, said to themj
1 Come, let us go out to meet the bride and bridegroom ; 5
at which they wondered, understanding not his words ; but
he went out and they followed him, till they came to the
gate of the city, where they met the young Muslim and
his bride coming towards them and saluted them. Omar
carried the bride and bridegroom into Medina and bade
make a marriage-feast; and the Muslims came and ate.
Then the young Muslim went in to his bride, and God the
Wgf)t Most High vouchsafed him children by her, who fought in
CCCClnblt. His wa y an d preserved their genealogies, for they gloried
therein. And how excellent is what is said on the subject;

I saw thee weeping at the gates and moaning passing sore, Whilst all„

except the curious, to answer thee forbore.
Hath evil eye ensorcelled thee or hath misfortune fall'n On thee and

doth a barrier keep thee from the loved one's door ?
Awake, O wretch, devote thyself this day to God His praise ?, Repent

and turn thee to the Lord, as men have turned of yore,

1 Koran vi. 2 Koran iv.


37


The rams of<the Forgiving One, belike, shall wash away The past and

on the sinner's head the grace of God shall pour ;
Ay, and the captive, shackled though he be, shall yet escape, And IB

the prison of God's wrath the slave shall pine no more.

And they ceased not to be in all delight and solace of
life, till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and
the Sunderer of Companies.

IBRAHIM BEN EL KHAWWAS AND THE
CHRISTIAN KING'S DAUGHTER.

(Quoth Sidi Ibrahim ben el Khawwas, 1 on whom be the
mercy of God), My soul was instant with me, once upon a
time, to go forth into the country of the infidels ; and I
strove with it and essayed to put away this thought from
me, but it persisted and would not be denied. So I went
forth and journeyed about the land of the unbelievers and
traversed it in all its parts, for the grace of God enveloped
me and His protection encompassed me, so that I met not
a Christian, but he turned away his eyes and held aloof
from me, till I came to a great city at whose gate I found
a company of black slaves, clad in armour and bearing iron
maces in their hands. When they saw me, they rose to
their feet and said to me, ' Art thou a physician ? ' I said,
'Yes.' Quoth they, 'By order of the King,' and carried
me before their monarch, who was a handsome man of ma-
jestic aspect. When I came into his presence, he looked
at me and said, ' Art thou a physician ? ' £ Yes,' answered

1 Apparently some well-knov/n saint, the title sidi (my lord) being
one peculiar to men renowned for sanctity. Khawwas means " basket-
maker," and this surname denotes that the saint in question, in all
probability, earned his living by basket-making, like the pious King
in the story of the saint to whom God gave a cloud, etc. See supra, p.
28. It is incumbent upon devout Muslims, even to the Khalifs, to earn
their bread by manual labour of some kind. See " The Devout Prince,'
Vol IV. p. 24.9.


38

I ; and he said to his officers, ' Carry him to her and ac-
quaint him with the condition, ere he enter.' So they
took me out and said to me, ' Know that the King hath a
daughter, who is stricken with a sore distemper, which no
physician hath availed to cure : and none goeth in to her
and treateth her, without curing her, but the King putteth
him to death. So bethink thee what thou wilt do ? ' Quoth
I, 'The King sent me to her; so carry me to her.' Ac-
cordingly, they brought me to her door and knocked ; and
1 heard her cry out from within, saying, ' Admit the physi-
cian, lord of the wondrous secret 1 ' And she recited the
following verses :

Open the door, for the physician's here? And see, I have a secret
wonder-dear.

flow many near in spirit distant are ! How many spirit-distant yet
are near !

I was an exile midst you, but the Truth 1 Willed that my solace should
eftsoon appear.

Religious kinship bound us arid we met, As lover and belov'd, in joy
and cheer.

He summoned me to meeting ; but the spy And censor 'twixt our loves
did interfere.

Out on ye ! Leave your chiding and your prats ; For unto you I may
not lend an ear.

With that which passes by I've no concern j Upon the eternal things
my hopes I rear.

And behold, an old man opened the door in haste and
said to me, ' Enter.' So I entered and found myself in a
saloon strewn with sweet-scented herbs and with a curtain
drawn across one corner, from behind which came a sound
of groaning, weak as from an emaciated body. I sat down
before the curtain and was about to pronounce the saluta-
tion, when I bethought me of the words of him whom God
bless and preserve, s Accost not a jew nor a Christian with
the salutation, and when ye meet them in the way, constrain
El Ilecc, one of the names of God.


39


them to the straitest part thereof.' So I held my peace, but
she cried out from behind the curtain, saying, 'Where is
the salutation, that is due from one true believer in the Unity
of God and His indivisibility to another, O Khawwas ? ' I
was astonished at her speech and said, * How knowest
thou me?' ' When the heart and thoughts are pure,' an-
swered she, 'the tongue speaks clearly from the secret
places of the soul. I besought Him yesterday to send me
one of His saints, at whose hands I might have deliverance,
and behold, it was cried to me from the recesses of my
house, " Grieve not ; for we will send thee Ibrahim el
Khawwas." ' Then said I to her, ' What ails thee ? ' 'It
is now four years,' answered she, ' since there appeared to
me the manifest Truth, and He [or it] is the story-teller,
the comrade, the ally ; whereupon my folk looked upon me
with evil eyes and taxed me with madness, and there came
not in to me physician or visitor from them, but terrified
and confounded me.' ' And who led thee to the know-
ledge of the true faith?' asked I. 'God's manifest signs
and His visible portents,' replied she ; ' and when the road
is patent to thee, thou seest with thine own eyes both proof
and proven'

Whilst we were talking, in came the old man affected to
her guard and said to her, 'What doth thy physician?
Quoth she, ' He knoweth the disease and hath hit upon CC^CiXXb 5
the remedy.' When he heard this, he manifested joy and
gladness and accosted me with a cheerful favour, then went
and told the King, who bade him- entreat me with all con-
sideration. So I visited her daily for seven days, at the
end of which time she said to me, 1 O Abou Ishac, 1 when
shall be our flight to the land of Islam ? ' ' How canst
thou go forth,' replied I, ' and who would dare to attempt
thine escape?' 1 He/ rejoined she, 8 who sent thee to me,,'
' Thou sayst well,' answered I. So on trie morrow, we went
1 Surname of EI Khawwas.


40


out by the gate of the city and [men's] eyes were veiled
from us, by His commandment, [who] when He desireth
aught, saith to it, 'Be,' and it is; 1 so that I journeyed
with her in safety to Mecca, where she abode by the House'
of God seven years, till the days of her life came to an end.
The earth of Mecca was her tomb, and never saw I any
more steadfast in prayer and fasting than she, may God send
down His mercies upon her and have compassion on him
who saith :

When they brought me the physician (and indeed upon my face Sickness

and constant floods of tears had left full many a trace,)
He drew the veil away and saw nought neath it but a soul Sans life or

body or aught else to fill the empty place.
" Indeed, " said he to them, ' ' a thing uneath is this to cure % Love hath

a secret not to win by sheer conjecture's grace."
Quoth they, " An one know not what is therein and if there be No way

its nature to define and symptoms to embrace,
How then shall medicine thereon have anywise effect ? " Leave me ;

indeed, I will not judge, by guess-work, of the case.

THE JUSTICE OF PROVIDENCE.

A certain prophet once worshipped on a high mountain,
at whose foot was a spring of running water, and he was
wont to sit by day on the mountain-top, where none could
see him, calling upon the name of God the Most High
and watching those who came to the spring. One day, as
he sat looking on the spring, there came up a horseman,
who dismounted thereby and taking a bag from his neck,
laid it down beside him, after which he drank of the water
and rested awhile, then mounted and rode away, leaving
the bag behind him. Presently up came another man, to
drink of the spring, who saw the bag and finding it full of
gold, took it up and made off with it in safety, after he had
drunken. A little after, came a woodcutter, with a heavy

1 Koran xxxvi. 82.


41


faggot on his back, and sat down by the spring to drink^
when, behold, back came the horseman, in great concern,
and said to him, ' Where is the bag [with the thousand
dinars] that was here ? ' ' I know nothing of it/ replied
the woodcutter, whereupon the other drew his sword and
smote him and killed him. Then he searched his clothes,
but found nothing ; so he left him and went away.

When the prophet saw this, he said, ' O Lord, this man
hath been slain unjustly, for another had the thousand
dinars.' But God answered him, saying, ' Busy thyself
with thy service, for the ordering of the affairs of the uni-
verse is none of thine affair. Know that the horseman's
father had despoiled the second man's father of a thousand
dinars ; so I gave the son possession of his father's money.
As for the woodcutter, he had slain the horseman's father,
wherefore I enabled the son to avenge himself.' Then
said the prophet, 'Verily, there is none other god than
Thou ! Glory to Thee ! Thou [alone] knowest the hid- $Tf($)t
den things.' 1 Moreover, one of the poets hath made the CCCCl.l'XfX
following verses on the matter :

The prophet saw what to the eyes of men was evident And fell

a-questioning of that which mortal sight outwent.
When what they apprehended not his eyes beheld, " O Lord, What

is this thing ? " quoth he. " Yon man that's slain was innocent.
One, without travail or fatigue, to riches did attain, Although in poor

and needy guise himself he did present ;
And, O Creator of mankind, this other one was slain, For all he had

committed nought that called for punishment."
"Know," answered God, "his father's good it was thou sawst him take j

It came to him by heritage, by right of free descent.
The woodcutter the horseman's sire had slain ; so, when his son The

occasion found, he took his wreak of him, incontinent.
Put off this thought from thee, for We have, in created things, A secret

that of human sight transcendeth the extent.
Submit thee to Our laws and bow unto Our might s for know, Qw

ordinance for profit works and eke for detriment."

1 Koran v. IDS.


4-2


THE FERRYMAN OF THE NILE AND THE
HERMIT.

(Quoth a certain pious man), I was once a ferryman on the
Nile and used to ply between the eastern and the western
banks. One day, as I sat in my boat, waiting for custom,
there came up to me an old man of a bright countenance,
clad in a patched gown and bearing in his hand a gourd-
bottle and a staff. He saluted me and I returned his
greeting ; and he said to me, ' Wilt thou ferry me over
and give me to eat for the love of God the Most High ? '
'With all my heart,' answered I. So he entered the boat
and I rowed him over to the eastern side. When he was
about to land, he said to me, ( I desire to lay a trust on
thee.' Quoth I, 'What is it?' Know,' rejoined he, 'that
God hath revealed to me that [my end is at hand and
that] thou wilt come to me to-morrow, after the hour of
noon, and wilt find me dead under yonder tree. Wash
me and wrap me in the shroud thou wilt find under my
head and bury me in the sand, after thou hast prayed over
me and taken my gown and bottle and staff, which do
thou deliver to one who will come and require them of
thee.' And I marvelled at his word.

Next day, I forgot what he had said till near the hour
of afternoon-prayer, when I remembered and hastening
to the appointed place, found him under the tree, dead,
with a new shroud by his head, exhaling a fragrance of
musk. So I washed him and shrouded him and prayed
over him, then dug a hole in the sand and buried him,
after I had taken his gown and bottle and staff, with
which I rowed back to the western side and passed the
aight there.

On the morrow, as soon as the city gate was opened.,


43


there came to me a young man, whom I had known as
a lewd fellow, clad in fine clothes and his hands stained
with henna, and said to me, 'Art thou not such an one
[the ferryman] ? ' ' Yes,' answered I ; and he said, ' Give
me what thou hast in trust for me.' Quoth I, c What is
that?' 'The gown, the bottle and the staff,' replied he,
' Who told thee of them ? ' asked I ; and he answered,
' I know nothing save that I was yesterday at the wedding
of one of my friends and spent the night singing [and
making merry,] till hard upon day, when I lay down to
sleep and take rest ; and behold, there stood by me one
who said to me, ' God the Most High hath taken such an
one the hermit to Himself and hath appointed thee to fill
his place ; so go to so and so, the ferryman, and take of
him the dead man's gown and bottle and staff, that he
left with him for thee.' So I brought them out and gave
them to him, whereupon he put off his clothes and donned
the gown, then taking the gourd and staff, went his way
and left me.

I fell a-weeping for wonder and pity; but, that night,
whilst I slept, the Lord of Glory (blessed and exalted be
He) appeared to me in a dream and said to me, ' O My
servant, is it grievous to thee that I have granted to one
of My servants to return to Me? Indeed, this is of My
bounty, that I vouchsafe to whom I will, for I am able to
do all things.' And I repeated the following verses :

The lover with the Loved 1 of will's bereaved quite ; All choice to thee's

forbid, an but thou know aright.
Whether to thee He grant favour and grace or hold Aloof from thee

nowise may blame upon Him light.
His very rigours, e'en, except thou glory in s Away 1 Thou hast no call

to stand with the contrite.
Knowst not His presence from His absence ? Then art thou In iwm

and that thou seek'st in front and out of sight.

1 Lover and Beloved^ mystical names for the believer and God.,


44


If I be haled away to slaughter for Thy sake Or yearning yield Thee up

the last spark of my spright,
'Tis in Thy hand ; hold off, grant or deny, 'tis one ; At that -which

Thou ordainst 'tis vain to rail or flite.
No aim in this my love have 1 but Thine approof 5 So, an thou choose

to hold aloof, 'tis good and right.

THE KING OF THE ISLAND.

There was once a rich and notable man of the children
of Israel, who had a pious and blessed son. When the
former's last hour drew nigh, his son sat down at his head
and said to him, ' O my lord, give me an injunction.'
'Dear my son,' replied his father, 'I charge thee, swear
not by God, whether truly or falsely.' Then he died and
certain lewd fellows of the children of Israel heard of
the injunction he had laid on ,his son and fell to coming
to the latter and saying, ' Thy father had such and such
monies of mine, and thou knowest it ; so give me what is
due to me or else make oath [to the contrary].' The man
would not disobey his father's injunction, so gave them all
they claimed ; and they ceased not to deal thus with him,
till his wealth was exhausted and he fell into sore distress.

Now he had a pious and blessed wife, who had borne
him two little sons; so he said to her, 'The folk have
multiplied claims on me and what while I had wherewithal
to quit myself of them, I stinted not to give it up ; but
now there is nothing left us, and if others make claim
upon me, we shall be distressed and tormented, I and
thou ; so it were better for us to flee to some place, where
none knows us, and earn our bread among the uttermost
of the folk.' Accordingly, he took ship with her and his
two children, knowing not whither he should go ; but
God decreeth ; there is no reverser of His decrees f and
quoth the tongue of the case :

1 Koran xiiL 41.


45


O thou, that thy dwelling departest for fear of the foe And ease in thy

flight overtakes thee and freedom from woe,
Grudge not at estrangement, for often the exile, by length Of distance

from homestead and country, right puissant doth grow.
If the pearls in the prison abided for aye of their shells, Kings' crowns

to them never were given for dwelling, I trow.


The ship was wrecked, but the man and his wife and
children saved themselves, each on a plank. The waves
separated them and the wife was cast up in one country
and the elder son in another. The second son was picked
up by a ship, and the waves threw the father on a desert
island, where he landed and made the ablution. Then he
pronounced the call to prayer and fell to his devotions,
when, behold, there came up out of the sea creatures of tNTl'ftftt
various colours and prayed with him. When he had finished, CCCClXXI.
he went up to a tree and stayed his hunger with its fruits ;
after which he found a spring of water and- drank thereof
and praised God, to whom belong might and majesty.
He abode thus three days and whenever he stood up
to pray, the sea-creatures came out and prayed like as he
prayed.

On the fourth day, he heard one crying aloud and say-
ing, ' O just man, that didst so piously honour thy father
and so reverest the decrees of thy Lord, grieve not, for
God requiteth thee that which thou hast lost. In this
island are treasures and things of price, which God willeth
thou shalt inherit, and they are in such a place ; so bring
thou them to light. Moreover, we will send ships unto
thee; and do thou bestow largesse on the folk and bid
them to thee, and we will incline their hearts unto thee/
So he sought out the appointed place, and God (to whom
belong might and majesty) discovered to him the treasures
in question. Then ships resorted to him, and he gave
abundant largesse to the crews, saying to them, 6 Direct
the folk unto me and I will give them such and such things


46


■xnd appoint to them this and that.' Accordingly, there
came folk from all parts and countries, nor had ten years
passed over him, before the island was peopled and he
became its king. ■ None repaired to him, but he entreated
him with munificence, and his report was noised abroad
throughout the length and breadth of the earth.

Now his elder son had fallen into the hands of a man,
who reared him and instructed him in all manner of polite
accomplishments ; and in like manner, the younger was
adopted by one who gave him a good education and
brought him up for a merchant. As for their mother, she
happened upon a merchant, who gave her charge over his
property and made a covenant with her that he would not
deal traitorously by her, but would aid her to obey God (to
whom belong might and majesty) ; and he used to carry
her with him in his travels by sea and land. Now the
elder son heard the report of, the King, without knowing
who he v/as ; so he made for the island and was well re-
ceived by the King, who made him his private secretary.
After awhile, the other son also sought out the King,
attracted by the fame of his piety and justice, and was made
by him his steward.

They abode awhile in his service, neither knowing
other, till it chanced that the merchant aforesaid, hearing
of the King's beneficence and generous dealing with the
folk, freighted a ship with rich stuffs and other of the best
of the produce of the country, and taking the woman with
him, set sail for the island. He arrived there in due course
and landing, presented himself before the King with his
gift. The latter rejoiced therein with an exceeding joy
and ordered him a splendid recompense. Now there were s
among the gifts, certain drugs, of which he would have
the merchant acquaint him with the names and uses; so
Ifcftgfjt he said to him, 1 Abide with us this night. 8 Quoth he,
CCCdxXXU s I have in the ship a pious woman whom God hath com-


47


mitted to my ward, and I have promised her to entrust the
care of her to none but myself ; for indeed I build upon
her prayers and have felt the blessing of her counsels. 9
4 1 will send her two trusty men,' rejoined the King, ' who
shall pass the night in the ship and guard her and all that
is with her.' The merchant agreed to this and abode with
the King, who called his secretary and steward and said
to them, Go and pass the night in this man's ship and
keep it safe, if it please God the Most High.'

So they went up into the ship and seating themselves,
one in the bows and the other on the poop, passed
a part of the night in repeating the praises of God (to
whom belong might and majesty). Then said one to the
other, ' Harkye, such an one ! The King bade us keep
watch and I fear lest sleep overtake us ; so, come, let
us discourse of stories of fortune and of the good and
evil chances we have seen.' ' O my brother,' replied the
other, 'as for my tribulations, fate parted me from my
mother and a brother of mine, whose name was even as
thine ; and it befell thus. My father took ship with us
from such a place, and the winds and waves rose against
us and were contrary, so that the ship was wrecked and
God sundered our union.' ' What was the name of thy
mother, my brother ? 5 asked the first. ' So and so,'
answered the other. 'And of thy father?' 'So and so.'
When the first one heard this, he threw himself upon
the other's neck, saying, 'By Allah, thou art my very
brother ! ' And each fell to telling the other what had
befallen him in his youth, whilst their mother heard all
they said, but held her peace and constrained her soul to
patience.

When it was morning, one brother said to the other,

* Come, brother, let us go to my lodging and talk there. f

* It is well,' replied the other. So they went away and
presently, the merchant came back and finding the womaa


48

in great concern, said to her, ' What hath befallen thee ? '
Quoth she, 'Thou sentest to me yesternight men who
purposed ill to me, and I have been sore troubled with
them.' At this, he was wroth and going in to the King,
made his complaint to him. Now the King loved the
two brothers, for that which he had noted in them of
virtue and trustworthiness • so he summoned, them forth-
with and sending for the woman, that he might hear from
her own lips what she had to say against them, said to
her, ' O woman, what complaint hast thou against these
two men?' 'O King,' replied she, 'I conjure thee, by
the Great God, the Bountiful One, the Lord of the Ninth
heaven, bid them repeat the words they spoke yesternight.'
So he said to them, ' Repeat what ye said and conceal
nought thereof.' Accordingly, they repeated their con-
versation, and behold, the King gave a great cry and
rising from his throne v threw himself upon them, saying,
* By Allah, ye are my very sons ! 5 Therewith the woman
discovered her face and said, ' And I am their mother.'
So they were all united and abode in all delight and
solace of life, until death separated them. So glory be
to Him who delivereth His servant, whenas he resorteth
to Him, and disappointeth not his hope and his trust in
Him ! And how well saith the poet on the subject:


Each thing hath its appointed time, to its predestinate : With God, my

brother, to confirm it lies or abrogate.
Repine thou not at any thing wherewith thou stricken art ; For troubles

oft in prosperous times do lie for us in wait.
How many an one lies down to sleep, afflicted with what seems A strait,

but is at heart a cause of joy and fortunate !
How many a wretch, on whom men's eyes look hatred and contempt,

Is by God's wonder-working grace redeemed from low estate !
Lo, this is one who did endure affliction aforetime ; Hurt and. distress

were sore on him and unrelenting fate.
Time severed him from those he held m%»st dear, and each from eacis,

After long union of their loves, was forced to separate.


49

Bat his Lord gave him fortune fair and brought him those he loved. la
all God doth are monishments for men to meditate.

Glory to Him whose providence embraces all that be, Whose presence
ever near to us, clear proofs do intimate.

lie is the Near One, whom no wit conceiveth nor indeed Days' journeys
nearer bring to us nor of His distance bate i


ABOULHUSN ED DURRAJ AND ABOU JAAFER
THE LEPER.

(Quoth Aboulhusn ed Durraj), I had been many times to
Mecca (which God increase in honour) and the folk used
to follow me by reason of my knowledge of the road and
the watering-places. It chanced one year that I was
minded to make the pilgrimage to the Holy House of God
and visit the tomb of His prophet (on whom be peace and
blessing), and I said to myself, ' I know the road and will
go alone.' So I set out and journeyed till I came to El
Cadesiyeh * and entering the mosque there, saw a leper
seated in the prayer-niche. When he saw me, he said
to me, 'O Aboulhusn, I crave thy company to Mecca,
Quoth I to myself, ' I wished to avoid companions, and
how shall I company with lepers ? ' So I said to him, ' 1
will bear no one company.' And he was silent.

Next day I continued my journey alone, till I came to
Acabeh, 2 where I entered the mosque and was amazed to
find the leper seated in the prayer-niche. 1 Glory be to
God ! ' said I in myself. ' How hath this fellow foregone
me hither? ' But he raised his eyes to me and said,
smiling, 1 Aboulhusn, He doth for the weak that which
the strong wonder at ! ' I passed that night in perplexity,
confounded at what I had seen, and in the morning set out
again by myself: but when I came to Arafat and entered
the mosque, behold, there w&S the leper seated in the
A A city in Irak, 2 A place near Mecca..

VOL. V. 4


niche ! So I threw myself upon him and kissing his feet,
said, ' my lord, I crave thy company.' But he said,
3€tC$t 'This may nowise be,' Whereupon I fell a-weeping and
CCCCfocXXU, lamenting, and he said, ' Peace : weeping will avail thee
nothing.' And he recited the following verses :

For my estrangement dost thou weep, — whenas it came from thee,-~=

And restoration dost implore, when none, alas ! may be?
Thou sawst my weakness and disease, as it appeared, and saidst, " He

goes nor comes, or night or day, for this his malady."
S.eest not that God (exalted be His glory) to His slave Vouchsafeth all

he can conceive of favours fair and free !
If I, to outward vision, be as it appears and eke In body, for despite of

Fate, e'en that which thou dost see,
And eke no victual though I have, unto the holy place Where crowds

unto my Lord resort, indeed, to carry me,
1 have a Maker, hidden are His bounties unto me ; Yea, there's no

parting me from Him, and without peer is He.
Depart from me in peace and leave me and my strangerhood ; For with

the lonely exile still the One shall company.

So I left him and continued my journey; and every stage
I came to, I found him before me, till I came to Medina,
where I lost sight of him and could hear no news of him.
Here I met Abou Yezid el Bustani and Abou Bekr es
Shibli and a number of other doctors, to whom I told my
case and they said, ' God forbid that thou shouldst gain
his company after this ! This was Abou Jaafer the leper,
in whose name, at all tides, the folk pray for rain and by
whose blessing prayers are answered.' When I heard this,
my longing for his company redoubled and I implored
God to reunite me with him. Whilst I was standing on
Arafat, one plucked me from behind, so I turned and be-
hold it was Abou Jaafer. At this sight, I gave a loud cry
and fell down in a swoon ; but, when I came to myself, he
was gone.

This increased my yearning for him and. the ways were
straitened upon me and I prayed God to give me sight of


§1


him ; nor was it but a few days after, when one pulled rae
from behind, and I turned and behold, it was he again.
Quoth he, ' I conjure thee, ask thy desire of me.' So I
begged him to pray three prayers to God for me; first,
that He would make me love poverty ; secondly, that I
might never lie down to sleep upon known provision ; and
thirdly, that He the Bountiful One would vouchsafe me to
look upon His face. So he prayed for me, as I wished,
and departed from me. And indeed God hath granted me
the first two prayers ; for He hath made me in love with
poverty, so that, by Allah, there is nought in the world
dearer to me than it, and since such a year, I have never
lain down upon assured provision ; yet hath He never let
me lack of aught. As for the third prayer, I trust that He
will vouchsafe me that also, even as He hath granted the
two others, for He is bountiful and excellently beneficent
And may God have mercy on him who saith :

Renouncement, lowliness, the fakir's garments be 5 In patched and

tattered clothes still fares the devotee.
Pallor adorneth him, as, on their latest nights, The moons with pallor

still embellished thou mayst see.
Long rising up by night to pray hath wasted him, And from his lids ths

tears stream down, as 'twere a sea.
The thought of God to him his very housemate is ; For bosom-friend,

by night, th' Omnipotent hath he.
God the Protector helps the fakir in his need, And birds and beasts ho

less to succour him agree.
On his account, the wrath of God on men descends, And by his grace 5

the rains fall down on wood and lea.
And if he pray one day to do away a plague, The oppressor's slain and

men from tyrants are made free ;
For all the folk are sick, afflicted and diseased, And he's the pitying

leach withouten stint or fee.
His forehead shines ; an thou but look upon his face, Thy heart m

calmed, the lights of heaves appear to thee,
O thou that shunnest these, their virtues knowing noi 3 Woe's thee I

Thou'rt shut from them by thine iniquity,,


52


Thou think'st them to o'ertake, for all thou'rt fettered fast ; Thy sim

from thy desire do hinder thee, pet-die.
Thou wouldst to them consent and rivers from thine eyes Would run

for them, if thou their excellence couldst see.
Uneath to him to smell, who's troubled with a rheum, Are flowers ; the

broker knows what worth the garments be.
So supplicate thy Lord right humbly for His grace, And Providence,

belike, shall help thy constancy ;
And thou shalt win thy will and from estrangement's stress And eke

rejection's pains shall be at rest and free.
The asylum of His grace is wide enough for all That seek ; The One

True God, the Conqueror is He !


THE QUEEN OF THE SERPENTS.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a Grecian sage called Daniel, who had scholars and
disciples, and the wise men of Greece were obedient to
his commandment and relied upon his learning ; but God
had denied him a son. One night, as he lay musing and
weeping over the lack of a son, to whom he might bequeath
his learning, he bethought himself that God (blessed and
exalted be He) gives ear unto the prayer of those who
resort to him and that there is no doorkeeper at the gate
of His bounties and that He favours whom He will with-
out stint and sends none empty away. So he besought
the Most High, the Bountiful, to vouchsafe him a son, to
succeed him, and to endow him abundantly with His
tMIClI/i favours. Then he returned and lay with his wife, who con-
COCinxtU. ceived by him the same night.

A few days after this he took ship for a certain place, but
the ship was wrecked and he saved himself on a plank,
with the loss of all his books, save only five leaves thereof
When he returned home, he laid the five leaves in a chest
and locking it, gave the key to his wife, who was then big
with childj and said to her, ' Know that ray last hour is at


S3


hand and that the time of my translation from this tempo
rary abiding-place [of the world] to that which is eternal
draws nigh. Now thou art with child and wilt haply bear
a son after my death. If this be so, name him Hasib
Kerimeddin and rear him well. When the boy grows up
and says to thee, "What inheritance did my father leave
me ? " give hirn these five leaves, which when he has read
and digested, he will be the most learned man of his time.'
Then he bade her farewell and heaving one sigh, departed
the world and all that is therein, the mercy of the Most
High God be upon him ! His family and friends wept over
him and washed him and bore him forth in great state and
buried him.

After awhile, his widow bore a handsome boy and named
him Hasib Kerimeddin, as her husband had charged her j
then she summoned the astrologers, who took the altitude
of the planets and drawing the boy's horoscope, said to
her, 1 Know that this boy will live many years ; but a great
peril will befall him in the early part of his life, from which
if he escape, he will be given the knowledge of wisdom.'
She suckled him two years, then weaned him, and when he
was five years old, she sent him to school, but he would
learn nothing. So she took him from school and set him
to leam a trade ; but he would not learn and there came
no work from his hands. She wept over this and the folk
said to her s ' Marry him : peradventure he will take thought
for his wife and learn a trade.' So she sought out a girl
and married him to her j but marriage wrought no change
m him and he still remained idle as before.

One day, some neighbours of hers, who were woodcut-
ters, came to her and said, ' Buy thy son an ass and cords
and a hatchet, and let him go with us to the mountain and
cut wood. The price of the wood shall be his and ouiSj
and with his share he shall provide thee and his wife. 5 '
When she heard -this, she rejoiced greatly and bought Hasib


54


an ass and hatchet and cords ; then, carrying him to the
woodcutters, delivered him into their hands and commended
him to their care. ' Have no concern for the boy/ answered
they ; ' he is the son of our Sheikh [Daniel,] and our Lord
will provide him.' So they carried him to the mountain,
where they cut firewood and loaded their asses therewith ;
then returned to the city and selling what they had cut,
spent the price on their families. This they did every day
for some time, till one day, as they were cutting wood on
the mountain as usual, a violent storm of rain broke over
them, and they took refuge in a great cave, till the storm
should be past. It chanced that Hasib went apart from
the rest into a corner of the cavern and sitting down, fell
to smiting the earth [idly] with his axe. Presently, he
noted that the ground gave out a hollow sound under the
axe ; so he dug there awhile and came to a round flagstone,
jNHgfst with a ring in it. When he saw this, he was glad and
CECtaxib. called his comrades the woodcutters, who came to him and
speedily clearing away the earth from the stone, pulled it
up and found under it a trap door, which, being opened,
discovered a cistern full of bees' honey. 1 Then said they
to each other, ' We must return to the city and fetch vessels,
in which to carry away the honey, and sell it and divide
the price, whilst one of us stays by the cistern, to guard it
from other than ourselves.' Quoth Hasib, ' I will stay and
keep watch over it' So they left him there and repairing
to the city, fetched vessels, which they filled with honey
and loading their asses therewith, carried them to the city
and sold the contents.

Thus they did several days in succession, sleeping in
the city by night, whilst Hasib abode on guard by the
cistern, [till but little remained,] when they said to one
another, ' It was Hasib found the honey, and to-morrow

1 Honey is so called by the Easterns, to distinguish it from "date-
honey," as they style the drippings from ripe dates.


55


he will come down to the city and claim the price of ii f
saying, " It was I found it ; " nor is there any means of
quitting ourselves of this but that we let him down into
the cistern, to get the rest of the honey, and leave him
there ; so will he perish miserably, and none will know
of him.' They all fell in with this and returning to the
cavern, said to Hasib, ' Go down into the well and get us
the rest of the honey.' So he went down and passed up
to them the rest of the honey, after which he said to
them, 'Draw me up, for there is nothing left.' They
made him no answer, but, loading their asses, went away
and left him alone in the cistern. When they reached
the city, they repaired to Hasib's mother, weeping, and
said to her, ' May thy head outlive thy son Hasib ! ' ' How
did he die?' asked she. Quoth they, 'We were cutting
wood in the mountain, when there fell on us a great storm
of rain and we took shelter from it in a cavern. Presently,
thy son's ass broke loose and fled into the valley, and he
ran after it, to turn it back, when there came out upon
them a great wolf, who tore thy son in pieces and ate the
ass.' When she heard this, she buffeted her face and
strewed dust on her head and fell a-mourning for her
son, whilst the woodcutters sold the honey, with the pro-
ceeds of which they opened shops and became merchants
and passed their lives in eating and drinking and making
merry ; but, every day, they brought Hasib's mother meat
and drink.

Meanwhile, when Hasib found himself alone, he began
to weep and call for help and say, ' There is no god but
God, the Most High, the Supreme ! I shall surely perish
miserably ! ' As he was thus bemoaning himself, a great
scorpion fell upon him ; so he rose and killed it. Then he
bethought him and said, 6 The cistern was full of honey :
how came this scorpion here ? : Therewith he rose and
examined the well right and left, till he found the crevice


56


from which the scorpion had fallen and saw light shining
through it. So he took out his knife and enlarged the
opening, till it was big enough to allow him to pass, when
he crept through it and found himself in a passage in the
rock. Following this passage, he came to a vast gallery,
which led him to a great iron door, made fast with a pad-
lock of silver, in which was a golden key. He looked
through the chink of the door and saw a great light shining
within ; so he took the key and opening the door [found
himself in an open space and] walked on till he came
to a great pond, full of something that glistened like
water. Hard by he saw a high mound of green jasper
and on the top of the mound a throne of gold, inlaid
with all manner jewels, round which were set many stools,
some of gold, some of silver and others of emerald.
He climbed the mound and counting the stools, found
tNTtgl)! them twelve thousand in" number. Then he mounted
CCCClxXXb- the throne and seating himself thereon, sat marvelling
at the pond and the stools, till drowsiness overcame him
and he fell asleep.

Presently, he was aroused by a great snorting and hiss-
ing and rustling, and opening his eyes, saw seated on each
stool a great serpent, a hundred cubits in length, with eyes
that blazed like live coals. At this sight, great fear got
hold on him ; his spittle dried up, for the excess of his
affright, and he despaired of life. Then he turned towards
the pond and saw [that what he had taken for water was
none other than a multitude of] small serpents, none
knoweth their number save God the Most High. After
awhile, there came a serpent as big as a mule, bearing on
its back a charger of gold, wherein lay another serpent,
that shone like crystal and whose face was as that of a
woman. Thereupon, one of the serpents seated there
came up and lifting her off the dish, set her on one of the
stools. Then she cried out to the other serpents in their


57

language, whereupon they all fell down from their stools
and did her homage. But she signed to them to sit, and
they did so.

Then she saluted Hasib in human speech and he re-
turned her salutation ; and she said to him with fluent
speech, ' Have no fear of us, O youth. I am the Queen
of the Serpents and their Sultaness.' When he heard this,
he took heart and she bade the serpents bring him food.
So they brought apples and grapes and pomegranates and
pistachio-nuts and filberts and walnuts and almonds and
bananas and set them before him, and the Queen said,
' W elcome, youth ! What is thy name ? ' ' My name is
Hasib Kerimeddin/ answered he; and she rejoined, 'O
Hasib, eat of these fruits, for we have no other meat, and
fear nothing from us.' So he ate his nil and praised God
the Most High. Then they took away the tray from before
him, and the Queen said to him, ' O Hasib, tell me whence
thou art and how earnest thou hither.' So he told her his
story from first to last, adding, 8 God [only] knows what
will betide me after this ! ' Quoth the Queen, ' Nothing j^fqfjj
but good shall betide thee: but, O Hasib, I would have ££££|xn^
thee abide with me awhile, that I may tell thee my history
and acquaint thee with the rare adventures that have come
to my knowledge.' ' I hear and obey,' answered he ; and
she said, ' Know then, O Hasib, that


THE ADVENTURES OF BELOUKIYA.

There was once in the city of Cairo a wise and pious
king of the children of Israel, who was devoted to the
study of books of learning, and he had a son named
Beloukiya. When he grew old and weak and was mgh
upon death, his grandees and officers of state came in to
him, to salute him, and he said to them s " Q folk, know


5 8


that the hour is at hand of my departure from this world
to the next, and I have no charge to lay on you, save to
commend my son to your care." Then said he, " I testify
that there is no god save God," and heaving one sigh,
departed the world, the mercy of God be on him ! They
laid him out and washed him and buried him in great
state. Then they made his son Beloukiya king in his
stead ; and he ruled the kingdom justly and the people
had peace in his time.

It befell one day that he entered his father's treasuries,
to look about him, and coming upon a hidden door s
opened it and found himself in a little closet, wherein
stood a column of white marble. On the top of the
column was a coffer of ebony, which he opened and saw
therein a casket of gold, containing a book. He read
the book and found therein a description of our lord
Mohammed (whom God bless and preserve) and how he
should be sent in the latter days and be the lord of the
first and the last : and his heart was taken with love of
him. So he assembled all the notables of the scribes and
diviners and priests of the children of Israel and read the
book to them, adding, " O folk, needs must I bring my
father out of his grave and burn him." "Why wilt thou
burn him?" asked they, and he answered, "Because he
hid this book from me and imparted it not to me. (Now
the old king had compiled it from the Pentateuch and the
Book of Abraham and had hidden it in his treasury and
imparted it to none.) " O King," rejoined they, " thy
father is dead; his body is in the dust and his affair is
in the hands of his Lord ; thou shalt not take him forth
of his tomb." So he knew that they would not suffer him
to do this thing and leaving them, repaired to his mother,
to whom said he, " O my mother s I have found s in one of
my lather's treasuries, a book containing a description of
Mohammed (whom God bless and keep), a prophet who


59


shall be sent in the latter days, and my heart is taken with
his love; wherefore I am resolved to wander over the
earth, till I foregather with him ; else I shall die of long-
ing for the love of him." Then he doffed his clothes and
donned a pilgrim's gown of striped goat's hair cloth and
sandals, saying to his mother, " Forget me not in thy
prayers." She wept and said, " O my son, what will be-
come of us after thee ? " But he answered, saying, " I can
endure no longer, and I commit my affair and thine to
God the Most High."

Then he set out in the direction of Syria, without the
knowledge of any of his people, and coming to the sea-
shore, took passage in a ship, which he found there.
They sailed till they came to an island, where they cast
anchor and Beloukiya landed with the crew, but, be-
coming separated from the rest, sat down under a tree
and fell asleep. When he awoke, he found that the ship
had set sail without him, and in that island he saw serpents
as big as camels and palm-trees, who sang the praises of
Allah and blessed Mohammed, proclaiming the unity of
God and glorifying the Most High ; whereat he wondered Hfgfjt
greatly. When they saw him, they,, flocked to him and CCCCU'XXbfl.
one of them said to him, "Who and whence art thou
and whither goest thou ? " Quoth he, " My name is
Beloukiya; I am of the children of Israel, and am come
out in quest of Mohammed (whom God bless and pre-
serve), being distracted for love of him. But who are ye,
O noble creatures?" "We are of the dwellers in Hell,"
answered they ; " and God the Most High created us for
the punishment of unbelievers." " And how came ye
hither?" asked he, and they answered, "Know that Hell,
of the greatness of its boiling, breathes twice a year, ex-
haling in the summer and inhaling in the winter, and hence
the summer heat and the winter cold. When it exhales,
it casts us forth of its maw, and we are drawn in again


6o


with the inhaled breath." Quoth Beloukiya, "Are there
greater serpents than you in Hell ? " And they said, " We
are cast out with the expired breath but by reason of our
smallness ; for in Hell every serpent is so great, that, were
the biggest of us to pass over its nose, it would not be
ware of us." " Ye sing the praises of God," said Belou-
kiya, " and invoke blessings on Mohammed, whom God
bless and preserve! Whence know ye of Mohammed?"
" O Beloukiya," answered they, " the name of Mohammed
is written on the gates of Paradise ; and but for him, God
had not created Paradise nor heaven nor hell nor earth,
for He made all things that be, solely on his account,
and hath coupled his name with His own in every place :
wherefore we love Mohammed, whom God bless and
preserve ! "

The serpent's converse did but inflame Beloukiya's love
for Mohammed and yearning for his sight; so- he took
leave of them and making his way to the sea-shore, found
there a ship lying at anchor, in which he embarked and
sailed till he came to another island. Here he landed
and walking about, found there serpents, great and small,
none knoweth their number save God the Most High,
and amongst them a white serpent, more brilliant than
crystal, seated in a golden charger borne on the back of
another serpent as big as an elephant. Now this was
none other than myself ; so, when I saw Beloukiya, I
saluted him and he returned my salutation, and I said to
him, " Who and what art thou and whither goest thou ? "
" I am of the children of Israel," answered he ; " my
name is Beloukiya, and I am a wanderer for the love of
Mohammed, whose description I have read in the revealed
scriptures and of whom I go in quest. But what art thou
and what are these serpents about thee?" Quoth I { " I
am the Queen of the Serpents ; and when thou fore™
gatherest with Mohammed (whom God bless and preserve),.


6i

bear him my salutation." Then he took leave of me and
journeyed till he came to Jerusalem.

Now there was in that city a man by name Uffan, who
was deeply versed in all sciences, more especially in
geometry and astronomy and mathematics, as well as in
white magic and the Cabala ; and he had studied the
Pentateuch and the Evangel and the Psalms and the Book
of Abraham and had read in certain books that whoso
should wear the ring of our lord Solomon, men and Jinn
and birds and beasts and all created things would be sub-
ject to him. Moreover, he had discovered that Solomon
lay buried in a cavern beyond the Seven Seas, with the
ring on his finger, which none, man nor genie, could take
therefrom, and that none could sail upon the Seven Seas ^f{g|j|
in ships ; and he had found, out by study that there was a mt
certain herb, whose juice if one expressed and anointed IxXXbUu
therewith the soles of his feet, he should .walk dryshod
upon the surface of any sea that God the Most High had
created ; but none could come at this herb, except he had
with him the Queen of the Serpents.

When Beloukiya arrived at Jerusalem, he [entered the
temple and] sat down to do his devotions. Presently,,
Uffan came up and seeing him reading the Pentateuch and
worshipping God the Most High, accosted him and asked
him who and whence he was and whither bound. " My
name is Beloukiya," answered the prince. "I am from
the city of Cairo and am come forth, wandering, in quest
of Mohammed, whom God bless and preserve!" Quoth
Uffan, " Come with me to my house, that I may entertain
thee." "I hear and obey," cried Beloukiya. So the
sage took him by the hand and carried him to his house,
where he entreated him with the utmost honour and said
to him, " O my brother, tell me thy history and how thou
earnest by the knowledge of Mohammed (whom God bless
and preserve) and who directed thee in this road." So he


62


related to him his story, from first to last, at which Uffan
well-nigh lost his wits for wonder and said to him, " O my
brother, bring me to the Queen of the Serpents and I will
bring thee in company with Mohammed, albeit the time
of his coming is yet far distant. For thou must know that
I have found in my books that there is a certain herb 3
whose juice if one express and anoint therewith the soles
of his feet, he shall go dryshod upon whatsoever sea God
the Most High hath made ; and if one have with him the
Queen of the Serpents and traverse the mountains where
the herbs grow, each herb by which he passes will speak
and proclaim its virtues, by the ordinance of God the Most
High. So, if we can take the Queen of the Serpents, we
will put her in a cage and carry her to the mountains
aforesaid ; and when we have found the magical herb, we
will let her go her way. Then will we anoint our feet
with the juice of the herb and fare over the Seven Seas,
till we come to the burial-place of our lord Solomon g
when we will take the ring off his finger and rule even as
he ruled and come to our desire ; for, with the aid of the
ring, we will enter the Ocean of Darknesses 1 and drink of
the Water of Life, and so God will let us tarry till the
latter days and we shall foregather with Mohammed,
whom God bless and preserve ! "

Beloukiya consented to lead him to my abiding-place :
so Uffan made him a cage of iron and providing himself
with two bowls, one full of milk and the other of wine;' took
ship with Beloukiya and sailed till they came to the island,
where they landed and walked on inland. Then Uffan set
up the cage, in which he laid a snare, and placing in it the
two bowls, withdrew, he and Beloukiya, and concealed
themselves afar off. Presently, up came the Queen of the
Serpents (that is, myself) and examined the cage. When
I smelt the milk, 1 slid off the back of my bearer and

1 Mare Tenebrarunru


6s


entering the cage, [drank up the milk. Then I] went to
the bowl of wine and drank of it, whereupon my head
became giddy and I slept. When Uffan saw this, he ran
up and locking the cage upon me, set it on his head and
made for the ship, he and Beloukiya. After awhile I awoke
and finding myself in a cage of iron on a man's head and
seeing Beloukiya walking beside the bearer, said to him,
" This is the reward of those who do no hurt to men."
" O Queen," answered he, " have no fear of us, for we will
do thee no hurt. We would but have thee guide us to the
herb whose juice, rubbed upon the soles of the feet, confers
the power of walking dryshod upon what sea soever God
the Most High hath created ; which when we have found,
we will return thee to thy place and let thee go thy way."

Then they fared on till they came to the hills where grew
the herbs, and as they went, each herb they passed began
to speak and avouch its virtues by permission of God the
Most High. As they were going along and the herbs
speaking right and left, one of the latter spoke out and
said, "I am the herb, which if one gather and press and
anoint his feet with my juice, he shall fare dryshod over
what sea soever God the Most High hath created." When
Uffan heard this, he set down the cage and gathering what
might suffice them of the herb, bruised it and filled two
vials with the juice ; and with what was left they anointed
their feet. Then they took up the cage and journeyed
days and nights, till they reached the island, where they
opened the cage and let me out. When I found myself at
liberty, I asked them what use they thought to make of
the juice of the herb ; and they answered, saying, " We
purpose to traverse the Seven Seas to the burial-place of
our lord Solomon and take the ring from his finger."
Quoth L u Far is it from your power to possess yourselves
of the ring!" "Wherefore?" asked they, and I replied,
84 Because God the Most High vouchsafed unto our lord


64


Solomon the gift of this ring and peculiarly favoured him
therewith, for that he said to Him, ' O my Lord, bestow
upon me a dominion, that shall beseem none after me ; for
Thou art the Giver of gifts.' 1 So the ximg is not for you.
Had ye taken the herb, whereof whoso eateth shall not die
until the first blast [of the last trumpet], it had better
availed you than this ye have gotten ; for ye shall nowise
come at your desire of it."

When they heard this, they repented them exceedingly
and went their ways, whilst I went in quest of my subjects
lfsc$i and found them fallen in piteous plight, the weaker of
fCCCixnix. them having died in my absence and the stronger grown
weak. When they saw me, they rejoiced and flocking about
me, enquired what had befallen me. So I told them what
had passed, after which I gathered them together and
repaired with them to the mountain Caf, where I use to
winter, spending the summer in the place where thou now
seest me s O Hasib. This, then, is my story and what
befell me [with Beloukiya and Uffan].'

Hasib marvelled at her words and said to her, 4 1 beseech
thee, of thy favour, bid one of thy subjects bring me out to
the surface of the earth, that I may go to my people.' 4 O
Hasib,' replied she, 'thou shaft not depart from us till
winter come, and needs must thou go with us to the moun-
tain Caf and divert thyself with the sight of hills and sands
and trees and birds magnifying the One God, the Victo-
rious, besides Marids and Afrits and Jinn, whose number
none knoweth save God the Most High.' When Hasib
heard this, he was sore chagrined and concerned ; then he
said to her, ' Tell me of Uffan and Beloukiya ; when they
departed from thee and went their way, did they win to
the burial-place of our lord Solomon or not; and if they
won thither, did they avail to take the ring or not ? 5
* Know,' answered she, 1 that, when they left me ; they

1 Kormn xxxviii. 34,


J


6s


anointed their feet with the juice of the magical herb, and
walking over the water, fared on from sea to sea, beholding
the wonders of the deep, till they had traversed the Seven
Seas and came in sight of a mighty mountain, soaring high
into the air, whereat they rejoiced and said to one another,
" Verily we have attained our desire." So they landed and
found that the stones of the mountain were of emerald and
its dust of musk, and in it was a stream of running water.
They entered the passes of the mountain and walked on s
till they saw a cavern afar off, surmounted by a great dome,
and light shining therefrom. So they made for the dome
and entering the cavern, beheld th throne of gold

set with all manner jewels, and about it stools innumerable,
none knoweth their number save God the Most High. On
the throne they saw our lord Solomon lying, clad in robes
of green silk, gold inwoven and broidered with all manner
jewels and precious stones : hiss light hand was folded upon
his breast and on the middle finger was the seal-ring, whose
lustre outshone that of all the other jewels in the place.

Then Uffan taught Beloukiya charms and conjurations
and said to him, " Repeat these conjurations and stint not
therefrom till I take the ring." Then he went up to the
throne ; but, as he drew near unto it, a mighty serpent
issued from beneath it and cried out at him with so
terrible a cry that the whole place trembled and sparks
flew from its mouth, saying, " Begone, or thou art a dead
'man ! " But Uffan paid no heed to it and busied himself
with his incantations. Then the serpent blew such a fiery
blast at him, that the place was like to be set on fire, and
said to him, "Woe to thee i Except thou turn back, I will
consume thee 1 " Yet was he not troubled at this, but put
out his hand to the ring and touched it and strove to draw
it off Solomon's finger :. whereupon the serpent blew on
him [once more] and he became a heap of ashes

When Beloukiya saw this, he fell down in a swoon 5 and
vol, v. S


65


^Tt'Sl)t the Lord (exalted be His majesty) bade Gabriel descend
£££CX£. [and save him], before the serpent should blow on him.
So Gabriel descended to the earth and finding Uffan re-
duced to ashes and Beloukiya fallen of a swoon, aroused
the latter and saluting him, enquired how he had come
thither. Beloukiya related to him his history, telling him
how he had not come thither but for the love of
Mohammed, and besought him to tell him where the
latter was to be found, " O Beloukiya," replied the angel,
" go thy ways, for the time of Mohammed's coming is yet
far distant." Then he ascended to heaven, and Beloukiya
wept sore and repented of that which he had done, calling
to mind my words, whenas I said to them, " Far is it from
your power to possess yourselves of the ring." Then he
returned to the sea-shore and passed the night them
marvelling at the mountains and seas and islands, that
encompassed him, and weeping over "his case.

When it was day, he anointed his feet with the magical
juice and descending to the water, set out and fared on
over the surface of the sea nights and days, marvelling at
the terrors and wonders of the deep, till he came to an
island as it were Paradise. So he landed and found him-
self in a great and pleasant island, spacious and goodly,
abounding in good things. Its dust was saffron and its
gravel cornelian and precious stones ; its hedges were of
jessamine, its brushwood Comorin and Sumatra aloes-
wood and its reeds sugar-cane. Its vegetation was of the
goodliest of trees and of the brightest and sweetest of
odoriferous flowers, of all "kinds and colours : round about
it were roses and narcissus and amaranths and gilly-flowers
and camomiles and lilies and violets, and therein gazelles
frisking and wild cattle coming and going. Its trees were
tall and the singing of its birds, as they warbled oa the
branches and solaced the afflicted lover, was sweeter than
the voices of those that chant the Koran. Its streams


6;


were flowing and its springs welling with sweet water;;
brief, it comprised all beauty and charms.

Beloukiya marvelled at the goodliness of the place, but
knew that he had wandered from the road he had come,
on his way over the Seven Seas in Uffan's company. He
spent the day in exploring the island and at nightfall he
climbed into a tree, to sleep; but, as he sat there, ponder-
ing the beauty of the place, the sea became troubled and
there rose to the surface a great beast, which gave such
a terrible cry that the isle trembled to its foundations.
As Beloukiya gazed upon him and marvelled at the vast-
ness of his bulk, he came ashore, followed by a multitude
of other sea-beasts, each holding in his paw a jewel that
shone like a lamp, so that the whole island became as
light as day for the lustre thereof. After awhile, there
appeared from the inward of the island lions and panthers
and lynxes and other beasts of the land, none knoweth
their number save God the Most High, who flocked down
to the shore and foregathering with the beasts of the sea,
conversed with them till daybreak, when they separated
and went each his own way

As soon as it was day, Beloukiya, terrified by what he
had seen during the night, came down from the tree and
anointing his feet with the magical juice, set out once
more upon the surface of the water and fared on days and
nights over the second sea, till he came to a great moun-
tain, through whose midst ran a valley without end, the
stones whereof were loadstone and its beasts lions and
hares and panthers. He landed and wandered from place
to place till nightfall, when he sat down on a rock by the
seaside, to eat of the dried fish thrown up by the sea.
Presently, he turned and saw a huge panther making for
him, to devour him ; so he anointed his feet in haste with
the juice and descending to the surface of the water, fled
over the third sea, in the darkness, for it was black night


68


axA there was a high wind ; nor did he stay his course till
he reached another island, on which he landed and found
there trees, [bearing fruits] both soft and hard of skin, 6
3Cfgfjt So he took of these fruits and ate and praised God the
££C£X'lt. Most High ; after which he walked about the island till
nightfall, when he lay down to sleep.

He spent ten days in exploring the place, after which he
again anointed his feet and setting out over the fourth sea. s
travelled nights and days, till he came to a third island
of fine white sand, without trees or grass. He landed and
walked about the island awhile, but, finding its only in-
habitants sakers, that nested in the sand, he again anointed
his feet and sped on over the fifth sea, till he came to a
little island, whose soil and hills were of crystal. Therein
were the veins wherefrom gold is wrought and marvellous
trees with flowers in hue like gold, Beyer had he seen their
like in his wanderings. He landed and walked about, till
it became dark, when the flowers began to shine like stars.
When he saw this, he marvelled and said, " Assuredly, the
flowers of this island are of those which wither from the
sun and fall to the earth, where the wind smites them and
they gathei under the rocks and become hermetic powder,
which the folk collect and make gold thereof."

He lay there that night and at sunrise he again anointed
his feet and descending to the shore, fared on over the
sixth sea days and nights, till he came to a fifth island.
Here he landed and found mountains covered with trees,
whose fruits were as human heads hanging by the hair, and
others whose fruits were green birds hanging by the feet j
also a third kind, which burnt like fire and whose fruits
were like prickly pears,- — if a drop [of the juice] thereof
fell on a man, he was consumed,-— and others, whose fruits
wept and laughed, besides many other marvels which he
saw there. Then he returned to the sea-shore and. finding

2 e.g. cherries and pomegranates.


6g


there a great tree, sat down beneath it till dusk, when he
climbed up into the branches to sleep. As he sat ponder-
ing the wonderful works of God, the sea became troubled,
and there rose therefrom the daughters of the ocean, each
holding in her hand a jewel that shone like the morning.
They came ashore and sitting down under the tree, danced
and sported and made merry, whilst Beloukiya watched
them and marvelled at their gambols, till the morning,
when they returned to the sea and disappeared. Then he
came down and anointing his feet, set out on the surface
of the seventh sea, over which he journeyed two whole
months, without getting sight of land, what while he
suffered exceeding hunger, so that he was fain to snatch
up fish from the surface of the sea and devour them raw,
for stress of want.

At the end of this time, he came to a sixth island abound-
ing in trees and streams, where he landed, it being the
forenoon. He walked about, looking right and left, till
he came to an apple-tree and put out his hand to pluck of
the fruit, when, behold, one cried out to him from the tree,
saying, " An thou draw near to this tree, I will cut thee in
twain." So he looked and saw a giant forty cubits high,
after the measure of the people of that day, whereat he
was sore affrighted and drew back from the tree. Then
he said to the giant, " Why dost thou forbid me to eat of
this tree ? " " Because," replied the other, " thou art a son
of Adam and thy father Adam forgot the covenant of God
and disobeyed Him and ate of the tree." Quoth Beloukiya,
"Who art thou and to whom doth this island, with its trees,
belong ? " " My name is Sherahiya," replied the giant, "and
I am of the guards of King Sekher, to whom the island
belongs and who hath given me charge over it. But who
art thou and how comest thou hither?" Beloukiya told
him his story and Sherahiya bade him be of good cheer
and brought him to eat. So he ate his fill and taking leave


70


of the giant, set out again and fared on over mountains
and sandy deserts for ten days, at the end of which time
he saw, in the distance, a cloud of dust hanging like a
canopy in the air and making towards it, came presently
to a great valley, two months' journey in length, where he
heard a mighty clamour of cries and clash of arms and
tramp of horse. As he drew near, he saw a multitude of
horsemen engaged in sore battle and the blood running
from them like a river. Their voices were like thunder
and they were armed with bows and javelins and swords
and spears and maces of iron and fought with the utmost
fury.

tNftC^H At this sight, he was sore affrighted and knew not what
CCCCX'CU. to do ; but, as he hesitated, they caught sight of him and
held their hands from one another and left fighting. Then
a troop of them came up to him, wondering at his make,
and said to him, "What art thou and how earnest thou
hither?" Quoth he, "1 am of the sons of Adam and am
come out, distraught for the love of Mohammed, whom
God bless and preserve; but I have wandered from my
road." They marvelled at his speech and said, "Never saw
we a son of Adam till now, nor did any ever come to this
land." " But what are ye, O creatures ? " asked Beloukiya.
* { We are of the Jinn," answered they ; and he said, " What
is the cause of the fighting amongst you and where is your
abiding-place and what is the name of this valley and this
land ?" " Our abiding-place is the White Country," replied
they. "This place is called the land of Sheddad, son of
Aad, and every year God the Most High commandeth us
to come hither and wage war upon the unbelieving Jinn."
"And where is the White Country?" asked Beloukiya.
"It is distant five-and-seventy years' journey behind the
mountain Caf," answered they s "and we have no other
business, when we are not doing battle with the unbelieving
jinn, than to magnify God and hallow Him. Moreover,.


yi


we have a king called Sekher, and needs must thou g©
with us to him, that he may divert himself with thy
sight."

Then they took him and fared on with him, till they
came to their abiding-place, where he saw a multitude of
tents of green silk, none knoweth their number save God
the Most High, and in their midst a pavilion of red satin,
a thousand cubits in compass, with cords of blue silk and
pickets of gold and silver. This was the royal pavilion :
so they made their way thither and carried Beloukiya into
the presence of King Sekher, whom he found seated upon
a throne of red gold, set with pearls and jewels, with the
kings and princes of the Jinn on his right hand and on
his left his councillors and Amirs and officers of state,
So he went up to him and kissing the earth before him,,
saluted him. The King returned his salute and com-
manding a chair to be set for him besid6 himself, bade
him sit down and asked him who he was and how he
came thither ; whereupon Beloukiya related to him all
that had befallen him in his wanderings and he marvelled 3Cig!)t
thereat. Then he called for food and the servants spread CCC£X£iii
the tables and set on fifteen hundred platters of gold and
silver and brass, some containing twenty and some fifty
boiled camels, and other some fifty head of sheep ; at
which Beloukiya marvelled exceedingly. Then they ate
and he ate with them, till he was satisfied, and returned
thanks to God the Most High ; after which they cleared
the tables and set on fruits, and they ate thereof, glorifying
God and invoking blessings on His prophet Mohammed.

When Beloukiya heard them make mention of Mo-
hammed, he wondered and said to King Sekher, " I have a
mind to ask thee some questions." " Ask what thou wilt,**
rejoined the King, and Beloukiya said, " O King, what, are
ye and what is your origin and how come ye to know
and love Mohammed, whom God bless and preserve ? "


72

48 Know," answered the King, " that God created the fire,
in seven stages, one above the other, at a distance of a
thousand years' journey between each two stages. The
first stage he named Jehennem and appointed for the
punishment of the transgressors of the true-believers,
who die unrepentant, and the second he named Lezza
and appointed for unbelievers. The name of the third
is Jehim and is appointed for Gog and Magog. The
fourth is called Saair and is appointed for the host of
Iblis. The fifth is called Seker and is prepared for those
who neglect prayer. The sixth is called Hutemeh and
is appointed for jews and Christians. The seventh is
named Hawiyeh and is prepared for hypocrites. The
most endurable of them all is Jehennem, being the top-
most ; yet in it are a thousand mountains of fire, in each
mountain seventy thousand valleys of fire, in each valley
seventy thousand cities of fire, in each city seventy
thousand citadels of fire, in each citadel seventy thousand
houses of fire, in each house seventy thousand couches of
fire and in each couch seventy thousand kinds of torment.
As for the other hells, none knoweth the number of kinds
of torment that be therein save God the Most High."

When Beloukiya heard this, he fell down in a swoon,
and when he came to himself, he wept and said, "O
King, what will our case be?" "Fear not," answered
Sekher ; " whoso loveth Mohammed and believeth in his
religion, the fire shall not burn him, for he is made free
therefrom for his sake, whom God bless and preserve S
As for us, God created us of the fire ; for the first that he
made in Jehennem were two creatures, whom He called
Melit and Khelit. Now Melit was made in the likeness
of a pied wolf, with a tail after the likeness of a woman,
and Khelit in that of a lion, with, a tail like a tortoise.,
twenty years' journey in length. God commanded their
toils to couple and do die deed of kind, and of them were


73


born serpents and scorpions, whose dwelling is in the fire,

that therewith God may torment those whom He casteth

therein ; and these increased and multiplied. Then God

commanded the tails of Khelit and Melit to couple a

second time, and Melit's tail conceived by that of Khelit

and bore fourteen children, seven male and seven female,

who grew up and intermarried, one with the other. They

all were obedient to their father, except one of them,

Iblis to wit, who disobeyed him and was changed into

a worm. Now Iblis was one of the Cherubim, for he had

served God till he was raised to the heavens and taken

into the especial favour of the Merciful One, who made 'JCiqfiS

him chief of the Cherubim. When God created Adam, fCCUtlb.

He commanded Iblis to prostrate himself to him, but he

refused ; so God expelled him [from heaven] and cursed

him. Of his lineage are the devils ; and as for the other

six males, they are the ancestors of the true-doelieving Jinn,

and we are their descendants."

Beloukiya marvelled at the King's words and besought
him to bid one of his officers carry him back to his native
land. " That may we not do," answered Sekher, " save by
commandment of God the Most High ; but, an thou desire
to return to thine own country, I will set thee on one of
my mares and bid her carry thee to the farthest limit of
my dominions, where thou wilt meet with the troops of
another king, Berakhiya by name, who wall recognize the
mare and take thee off her back and send her back to me ;
and this is all we can do for thee." When Beloukiya heard
this, he wept and said, " Do what thou wilt, King." So
Sekher caused bring the mare and setting Beloukiya on
her back, said to him, " Beware lest thou alight or strike
the mare or cry out in her face j else she will kill thee ;
but abide quiet on her back till she stop with thee ; then
dismount and go thy way," Then Beloukiya took leave of
the King and setting out, rode on a long while between


74


the rows of tents, till he came to the royal kitchens,
where he stopped and gazed in wonderment on the great
cauldrons, each holding fifty camels, hung up over the
fire that blazed fiercely under them. King Sekher saw
him from afar gazing on the cauldrons, and thinking him
to be anhungred, commanded some of his officers to bear
him two roasted camels. So they carried them to him
and bound them behind him on the mare's back.

Then he took leave of them and fared on, till he came
to the limit of King Sekher's dominions, where the mare
stood still and Beloukiya dismounted and began to shake
the dust of the journey from his clothes. As he was thus
engaged, there accosted him a party of men, who recogniz-
ing the mare, carried her and Beloukiya before their King,
whom he found seated in a splendid pavilion, in the midst
of his troops and champions and vassal princes, in like
state to that of King Sekher. So he saluted him, and the
King returned his greeting and seated him beside himself;
after which he called for food and they ate their fill and
returned thanks to God. Then they set on fruits, and
when they had eaten thereof, King Berakhiya said to his
guest, " When didst thou leave King Sekher ? " " Two
days ago/' replied Beloukiya. " Dost thou know," asked
Berakhiya, "how many days' journey thou hast come in
these two days ? " " No," answered he, and the King
j^fpjt rejoined, "Thou hast come threescore and ten months'
tCCCXtb. journey ; and when thou mountedst the mare, she was
affrighted at thee, knowing thee for a son of Adam, and
would have cast "thee off ; so they bound on her back these
two camels, to steady her." When Beloukiya heard this,
he marvelled and thanked God for safety. Then said the
King, " Tell me thy story and what brought thee hither."
So he told him his story from first to last, ana the King-
marvelled at his words.'

Here the Queen of the Serpents broke off, and Hasib 8


after he had marvelled at her story, again besought her to
let one of her subjects conduct him to the surface of the
earth, that he might go to his family; but she answered,
' O Hasib, I know that the first thing thou wilt do, after
greeting thy family, will be to go to the bath and wash
thyself ; and as surely as thou dost this, it will be the cause
of my death.' Quoth Hasib, ' I swear that I will never
again enter the bath, so long as I live, but will wash at
home, when washing is incumbent on me.' ' I would not
trust thee,' rejoined the Queen, ' though thou shouldst
swear to me a hundred oaths ; for I know thou art a son
of Adam and that to thee no oath is sacred. Thy father
Adam made a covenant with God the Most High, who
kneaded the clay whereof He fashioned him forty days and
made His angels prostrate themselves to him ; yet did he
perjure himself and forgot his promise and disobeyed the
commandment of his Lord.' When Hasib 'heard this, he
held his peace and burst into tears nor did he leave weep-
ing for the space of ten days, at the end of which time
he begged the Queen to acquaint him with the rest of
Beloukiya's adventures. Accordingly, she began again as
follows :

'Beloukiya tarried two months with King Berakhiya, then
took leave of him and fared on over wastes and deserts
nights and days, till he came to a high mountain, on whose
summit he beheld a great angel seated, celebrating the
praises of God and invoking blessings on Mohammed.
Before him lay a tablet covered with black characters and
white, on which his eyes were fixed, and his wings were
outspread, one to the western and the other to the eastern
horizon. Beloukiya ascended the hill and saluted the
angel, who returned his salute and enquired who he was
and what brought him thither, Accordingly, he repeated
to him his history, from beginning to end, and. besought
him, in turn, to acquaint him with his own name and


76


occupation and the meaning of the tablet that lay before
him. " My name is Michael," replied the angel, " and I am
charged with the alternation of night and day ; and this is
my occupation till the Day of Judgment."

The prince wondered at his words and at his aspect and
the greatness of his size and taking leave of him, fared
onward till he came to a vast meadow, full of trees, through
which ran seven rivers. In one part of the meadow, he
saw a great tree and under it four angels, the first in the
likeness of a man, the second in the likeness of a wild
beast, the third in the likeness of a bull and the fourth in
the likeness of a bird, engaged in magnifying God the
Most High and saying, " O my God and my Master and
my Lord, I conjure Thee, by Thy splendour and by the
glory of Thy prophet Mohammed (on whom be blessing
and peace) to vouchsafe Thy mercy and forgiveness to all
things created in my likeness ; for Thou canst do all
things ! "

Beloukiya continued his journey, till he came to another
mountain and ascending it, found a great angel seated on
the summit, glorifying God and hallowing Him and in-
voking blessings on Mohammed ; and he was continually
opening and shutting his hands and closing and extending
his fingers. The prince accosted him and saluted him ;
whereupon the angel returned his greeting and enquired
who he was and how he came thither. So Beloukiya
acquainted him with his adventures and besought him to
tell him, in turn, who he was and what was his function and
what mountain was that. Quoth the angel, " This is the
mountain Caf, that encompasseth the world, and in my
grasp are all countries that God hath made. When He is
minded to afflict any country with earthquake or famine or
slaughter or to bless it with plenty and prosperity. Tie bids
me execute His commandment, and this I do without Stir-
ling from my place ; for my hands lay hold upon the roots


78


of this fish, and he said, * O Lord, show me the fish, that I
may look upon it.' So God commanded an angel to take
Jesus and show him the fish. Accordingly, he earned
the prophet to the sea, wherein the fish dwelt, and bade
him look upon it. He looked, but [at first] saw nothing,
when, suddenly, the monster darted past like lightning.
At this sight, Jesus swooned away, and when he came to
himself, God spoke to him,, saying., ' O Jesus, hast thou
seen the fish and noted its length and breadth ? ' 'By
Thy splendour and majesty, O Lord,' replied Jesus, 4 1 saw
no fish ; but there passed me by a great bull, whose length
was three days' journey, and I know not what manner of
thing this is.' s O Jesus/ rejoined the Almighty, 'this
that thou sawest and which was three clays in passing by
thee, was [but] the head of the fish ; and know that every
day I create forty fish like unto this.' And Jesus marvelled
at the power of God the Most High."

Quoth Beloukiya s "What hath God made beneath this
nether sea?" "Under the sea," replied the angel, 45 God
created a vast [abyss of] air, under the air the fire and
under the fire a mighty serpent, by name Felec ; and were
it not for the fear of God the Most High, this serpent
Niljljt would swallow up all that is above it, without feeling it.
eaCHbU. When God created this serpent, He said to it, £ Open thy
mouth and I will give thee somewhat to keep for me.'
So it opened its mouth and God put Hell into its maw,
saying, ' Keep it until the Day of Resurrection,' When
that day comes, God will send His angels to bring Hell
and chain it up until the Day of Judgment, when, at His
commandment, it will open its gates and there will issue
therefrom sparks bigger than mountains."

When Beloukiya heard these things, he wept sore and
taking leave of the angel, fared on westward, till he came
in sight of a great shut gate, before which sat two creatures.
When he drew near, he saw that one of the gate-keepers


So


whence we are appointed to distribute them to the various
parts of the earth, the salt to the seas and the fresh to
the lakes and rivers ; and this is our employ until the Day
of Resurrection. But thou, whence comest thou and
whither art thou bound ? " So he told them his story
and asked them of the road. They bade him traverse
the ocean, that lay before him : so he anointed his feet
with the juice of the magical herb and taking leave of
the angels, set out upon the surface of the sea and sped
on over the water nights and days, till he met a handsome
youth journeying along like himself, whereupon he saluted
him and he returned his greeting. After this, he espied
four great angels faring over the surface of the sea, and
their going was like the blinding lightning ; so he stationed
himself in their road, and when they came up to him, he
saluted them and conjured them by the Almighty, the
Glorious One, te tell him their names and whither tbey
were bound. " My name is Gabriel,'" replied the first
angel, " and these my companions are called Israfil and
Michael and Azrael. Know that there has appeared in
the East a mighty dragon, which has laid waste a thousand
cities and devoured their inhabitants ; wherefore God the
Most High hath commanded us to go to him and seize
him and cast him into Jehennem."

Beloukiya marvelled at the vastness of their stature and
fared on, as before, days and nights, till he came to an
!N"tQf)t island, where he landed and walked about, till he saw a
££££XCbttl. comely young man of shining visage, sitting weeping and
lamenting between two stately tombs. So he saluted him,
and he returned his salutation, and Beloukiya said to him,
" Who art thou and what are these two tombs and why sit-
test thou here between them, weeping ? " The stranger
looked at him and wept sore, till he wet his clothes
with his t( .rs ; then said, " Q my brother, mine is a
strange and wonderful story ; but do thou first tell me


8i

who thou art and what brought thee hither, and after I will s
in turn, relate to thee my history." So Beloukiya sat down
by him and related to him all that had befallen him from
his father's death, adding, " This is my whole history, and
God [alone] knoweth what will betide me after this." When
the other heard his story, he sighed and said, " Alas, un-
happy one ! What things thou hast seen in thy life ! [But
my experiences are yet more surprising,] for know that
I have looked upon our lord Solomon, in his life, and have
seen what is past count or reckoning. Indeed, my story is
marvellous and my case extraordinary, and I would have
thee tarry with me, till I tell thee my history and how
I come to be sitting here." '

Here Hasib interrupted the Queen of the Serpents and
said to her, 'I conjure thee by God, O Queen, release me
and bid one of thy servants carry me forth jto the surface
of the earth, and I will swear an oath to thee that I will
never enter the bath as long as I live.' But she said, ' This
is a thing that may not be, nor will I credit thee upon thine
oath.' When he heard this, he wept and all the serpents
wept on his account and fell to interceding for him with
their Queen and saying, ' We beseech thee, bid one of us
carry him forth to the surface of the earth, and he will
swear an oath to thee never to enter the bath his life long.'
Thereupon the queen (whose name was Yumeleika) turned
to Hasib and made him swear to her, after which she bade
a serpent carry him forth to the surface of the earth ; but,
as she was about to go away with him, he turned to Queen
Yumeleika and said to her, i I would fain have thee tell
me the history of the young man, whom Beloukiya found
sitting between two tombs.' So she said, ' Know, Q j^t'cr/hj
Hasib, that the young man said, to Beiouldya 5 " Know 5 O LtSXXttX
my brother, that


6


82


THE STORY OF JANSHAH.

My father was a king called Teigmous, who reigned over
the land of Kabul and the Benou Shehlan, ten thousand
warlike chieftains, ruling each over a hundred walled cities
and a hundred citadels ; and he was suzerain also over
seven vassal princes, and tribute came to him from the
East and from the West. He was just and equitable in
his rule and God the Most High had given him all this
and had bestowed on him this mighty empire, yet had He
not vouchsafed him a son, to inherit the kingdom after
him, though this was his dearest wish. So one day he
summoned the astrologers and men of learning and art.
and mathematicians and bade them draw his horoscope
and look if he should be vouchsafed a son to succeed him.
Accordingly, they consulted their 'books and calculated his
nativity and made an observation of the stars on his
account ; after which they informed him that he would be
blessed with a son, but by none other than the daughter of
the King of Khorassan. At this news he rejoiced greatly
and bestowing on the astrologers treasure beyond count or
reckoning, dismissed them. Then he summoned his chief
Vizier, a renowned warrior, by name Ain Zar ? who was
held equal to a thousand cavaliers in battle, and repeating
to him what the astrologers had said, bade him make
ready to set out for Khorassan and demand the hand of
King Behrwan's daughter for him.

The Vizier at once proceeded to equip himself for the
journey and encamped without the town with his retinue,
whilst King Teigmous made ready the most costly pre.
sents for the King of Khorassan, amongst the rest fifteen
hundred bales of silk and pearls and. rubies and other
precious stones, besides gold and silver and a prodigious
quantity of all that goes to the equipment of a bride, and


4

83

loading them upon camels and mules, delivered them to
Ain Zar, with a letter to the following purport. ' King
Teigmous to King Behrwan, greeting. Know, O King,
that we have taken counsel with the astrologers and sages
and mathematicians, and they tell us that we shall have a
son, and that by none other than thy daughter. Wherefore
I have despatched unto thee my Vizier Ain Zar, with great
plenty of bridal gear, to demand her of thee in marriage,
and I appoint him to stand in my stead and to enter into
the marriage-contract in my name. Yea, and I desire that
thou wilt grant him his request without delay or equivoca-
tion, for it is my own, and all the favour thou showest him,
I take for myself ; but beware of crossing me in this, for
God hath bestowed upon me the kingdom of Kabul and
hath given me dominion over the Benou Shehlan and
vouchsafed me a mighty empire; and if I marry thy
daughter, we will be as one thing in the kingship, thou
and I, and I will send thee every year as much treasure as
will suffice thee. And this is my desire of thee.'

So the Vizier departed with a great company and
journeyed till he drew near the capital of Khorassan.
When King Behrwan heard of his approach, he despatched
his principal officers to meet him, with a convoy of pro-
visions and fodder. The two parties foregathered and
alighting without the city, exchanged salutations and
abode there, eating and drinking, ten days, at the end of
which time they mounted and rode on into the town 5
where they were met by King Behrwan, who came out to
receive King Teigmous's Vizier and alighting, embraced
him and carried him to his palace. Then Ain Zar brought
out the presents and laid them before King Behrwan,
together with King Teigmous's letter, which when the
King read, he rejoiced with an exceeding joy ar.d bade
the Vizier welcome, saying s 4 Rejoice in the accomplish-
ment of thine errand, for if King Teigmous sought ol


84


me my life, I would not deny it to him.' Then he went
in forthright to his daughter and her mother and his
kinsfolk and acquainting them with the King of Kabul's
demand, sought counsel of them, and they said, ' Do what
"HfCjfat seemetn good to thee.' So he returned straightway to
Jj t Ain Zar and notified to him his consent ; and the Vizier
abode with him two months, at the end of which time
he said to him, 1 We beseech thee to bestow upon us that
for which we came and that we may depart to our own
country/ 4 1 hear and obey,' answered the King and
assembled his Viziers and officers and the grandees of his
realm and the monks and priests. The latter performed
the ceremony of marriage between his daughter and King
Teigmous [by proxy] and King Behrwan bade decorate
the city after the goodliest fashion and spread the streets
with carpets [in honour of the occasion]. Then he
equipped his daughter for the Journey and gave her all
manner of presents and rarities and precious metals, and
Ain Zar departed with the princess to his own country.

When the news of their approach reached King Teig-
mous, he bade celebrate the wedding festivities and de-
corate the city; after which he went in to the princess
and did away her maidenhead ; nor was it long before
she conceived by him and accomplishing her months,
bore a male child like the moon at its full. When King
Teigmous knew that his wife had given birth to a goodly
son, he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and calling the
sages and astrologers and mathematicians, bade them
draw the horoscope of the new-born child and tell him
what would befall him in his lifetime. So they made
their calculations and found that he would, in his fifteenth
year, be exposed to great perils and hardships, which if
lie survived, he would be happy and fortunate during the
rest of his life and become a greater and more powerful
king than his father. The King rejoiced greatly in this


85


prediction and named the boy Janshah. Then he de-
livered him to the nurses, who reared him on goodly wise,
till he reached his fifth year, when his father taught him
to read the Evangel and instructed him in horsemanship
and the use of arms, so that, to King Teigmous's exceed-
ing delight, he became, in less than seven years, a doughty
cavalier, proficient ia all martial exercises, and was wont
to ride a-hunting.

It chanced one day that King Teigmous and his son
lode out, a-hunting, into the plains and deserts and hunted
till mid-afternoon of the third day, when the prince started
a gazelle of a rare colour, which fled before him. So he
gave chase to it, followed by seven of King Teigmous's
men, all mounted on swift horses, and rode after the
gazelle, which fled before them till she brought them to
the sea-shore. They all ran at her, to take her ; but she
escaped from them and plunging into the waves, swam 'Mtciti
out to a fishing bark, that was moored near the shore, and £C
leapt on board. Janshah and his followers dismounted
and boarding the boat, made prize of the gazelle and were
about to return to shore with her, when the prince espied
a great island in the offing and said to his men, 1 1 have
a mind to visit yonder island.' 6 We hear and obey/
answered they and launching out, sailed till they came to
the island, where they landed and explored the place.
Then they again embarked and set out to return home-
ward, but the night overtook them and they lost their way
on the sea. Moreover, a contrary wind arose and drove
the boat into mid-ocean, so that, when they awoke in the
morning, they found themselves out of sight of land.

Meanwhile, King Teigmous missed his son and com-
manded his troops to make search for him. So they
dispersed on ail sides and a company of them, coming to
the sea-shore, found there one of the prince's attendants,
whom he had left in charge of the horses. They asked


86


Mm what was come of his master and the other six ser-
vants, and he told them what had passed ; whereupon they
returned with him to the King and told him what they had
learnt. When Teigmous heard their report, he wept sore
and cast the crown from his head, biting his hands for
vexation. Then he rose forthright and wrote letters and
despatched them to all the islands of the sea. Moreover,
be fitted out a hundred ships and filling them with troops,
sent them in quest of Janshah. They cruised about for
ten days, but finding no trace of the prince, returned and
told the King, who withdrew with his troops to his capital
city, where he abode in sore concern. As for janshah's
mother, when she heard of his loss, she buffeted her face
and fell a-mourning for her son [as if he were dead].

Meanwhile Janshah and his companions drove before
the wind till they came to a r . second island, where they
landed and walked about. Presently they came upon a
spring of running water in the midst of the island and saw
a man sitting thereby. So they went up to him and saluted
him, and he returned their greeting in a voice like the pipe
of birds. Whilst they were marvelling at the man's speech,
he suddenly split himself in twain, and each half went a
different way. Then there came down from the hills a
multitude of men of all kinds, who no sooner reached the
spring, than they divided into two halves and rushed on
Janshah and his companions, to eat them. When the
latter saw this, they turned and fled seaward ; but the can-
nibals pursued them and caught and ate three of the
huntsmen. Janshah and the other three reached the boat
in safety and putting out to sea, sailed days and nights,
without knowing whither they went Being pressed by
hunger, they killed the gazelle and lived on her flesh, till
the winds drove them to a tiiird island, as u were Paradise,
full of trees and waters and orchards laden with all manner
fruits and streams running under the trees.


8;


The place pleased the prince and he sent his three com- .
panions ashore to explore it, whilst he himself remained
by the boat. So they landed and searched the island,
East and West, but found none ; then they fared on inland,
till they came to a castle of pure crystal, compassed about
with ramparts of white marble, within which was a garden,
full of all manner sweet-scented flowers and fruits beyond
description, both hard and soft of skin, and trees and birds
singing upon the branches. Midmost the garden was a
vast basin of water, and beside it a great estrade, on which
stood a throne of red gold, set with all kinds of jewels and
surrounded by a number of stools. They entered and
explored the place in all directions, but found none there,
so returned to Janshah and told him what they had seen.
When he heard their report, he landed and accompanied
them to the palace, which he entered and explored in every
part, marvelling at the goodliness of the place. They
walked about the gardens and ate of the fruits, till it grew
dark, when they returned to the estrade and sat down,
Janshah on the throne and the three others on the stools
around him. Then the prince called to mind his separa-
tion from his father's throne and country and friends and
kinsfolk and fell a-weeping and lamenting over their loss,
whilst his men wept round him.

Presently, they heard a mighty clamour, that came from
seaward, and looking in the direction of the sound, were
ware of a multitude of apes, as they were a swarm of
locusts. Now the palace and island belonged to these
apes, who, finding the boat moored to the strand, had
scuttled it and after repaired to the palace, where they
found Janshah and his servants. The latter were sore
affrighted at the sudden appearance of the apes, but a
company of them came up to the throne and kissing the
earth before the prince, stood before him, with their pawc
upon their breasts [in token of homage]. Then they


88


brought gazelles, which they slaughtered and skinned $
then, roasting pieces of the flesh, they laid them on platters
of gold and silver and spreading the table, made signs to
Janshah and his men to eat. So the prince and his fol-
lowers came down and ate, and the apes with them, till
they were satisfied, when he apes took away the meat and
set on fruits, of which they ate and praised God the Most
High. Then Janshah questioned the apes by signs what
they were and to whom the place belonged, and they signed
to him in reply, as who should say, 4 This island belonged
aforetime to our lord Solomon son of David (on whom be
3NTfti!)t P eace ) an d he used to come hither once a year for his
|i»fi, pleasance. And know, O King, that thou art become
our Sultan and we are thy servants ; so eat and drink,
and whatsoever thou biddest us, that will we do/ So
saying, they kissed the earth before Janshah and went
their ways.

The prince lay the night on the throne and his men on
the stools about him, and on the morrow, at daybreak,
the four Viziers [or chiefs of the apes] presented them-
selves before him, attended by their followers, who ranged
themselves about him, rank upon rank, until the place
was full. Then the Viziers exhorted him by signs to do
justice amongst them and rule them with equity; after
which the apes cried out to each other and went away,
all but a few who remained to serve him. After awhile,
there came up a company of apes with huge dogs, bridled
and saddled like horses, and signed to Janshah and his
followers to mount and go with them. So they mounted,
marvelling at the greatness of the dogs, and rode forth,
attended by the four Viziers and a swarm of apes like
locusts, some on foot and others riding [on dogs,] till
they came to the sea-shore. Janshah looked for the boat
and finding it not, turned to the Viziers and enquired
what was come of it, to which they answered, { Know, O


89


King, that, when thou earnest to our island, we knew that
thou wouldst be Sultan over us and we feared lest thou
shouldst embark in the boat and flee" from us, in our
absence ; so we sank it'

When Janshah heard this, he turned to his men and
said to them, ' There is nothing for it but to submit
patiently to what God the Most High hath ordained ; for
we have no means of escaping from these apes.' Then
they fared on inland, till they came to the banks of a
river, on the other side of which was a high mountain,
whereon Janshah saw a multitude of ghouls, riding on
horses, and marvelled at the vastness of their bulk and
the strangeness of their favour ; for some of them had
heads like oxen and others like camels. So he turned to
the apes and said to them, ! What are these ghouls ? '
And they answered, saying, * Know, O King, that these
ghouls are our mortal enemies and we come'' hither to dG
battle with them.' As soon as the ghouls espied the
army of the apes, they rushed down to the river-bank
and standing there, fell to pelting them with stones as big
as maces, and there befell a sore battle between them.
Presently, Janshah, seeing that the ghouls were getting
the better of the apes, cried out to his men, saying, ' Take
your bows and arrows and shoot at them and keep them
off from us.' So they shot at the ghouls and slew of
them much people, whereupon there befell them sore
dismay and defeat and they turned to flee, which when
the apes . saw, they forded the river and chased the ghouls,
killing many of them in the pursuit, to the top of the
hill, where they disappeared.

Here Janshah found a tablet of alabaster, whereon were
written these words, 1 O thou that enterest this land, know
that thou wilt become Sultan over these apes and that, so
long as thou abidest with them, they will be victorious
over the ghouls ; nor is there any escape for thee from


go


them, except by the passes, that run east and west through
the mountains. If thou take the eastern pass, it will lead
thee through a country swarming with ghouls and wild
beasts and Marids and Afrits, and thou wilt come, after
three months' journeying, to the ocean that encompasses
the earth ; but, if thou follow the western pass 5 it will
bring thee, after four months' journeying, to the Valley of
Ants, When thou comest thither, beware of the ants and
fare on, till thou come to a high mountain that burns like
fire. After thou hast followed the road, that leads through
this mountain, ten days, thou wilt come to a great river,
whose current is so swift that it dazzles the eyes. Now
this river dries up every Saturday, and on the [opposite]
bank is a city inhabited by Jews, who reject the faith
of Mohammed ; there is not a Muslim amongst them
nor is there other than this city in the country. And know
MtC$t also that he who wrote this tablet was the lord Solomon,
son of David, on whom be peace ! ' When Janshah read
these words, he wept sore and repeated them to his men.
Then they mounted again and returned with the apes, in
triumph, to the castle, where Janshah abode. Sultan over
them, for a year and a half.

At the end of this time, he one day commanded the
apes to mount and go forth a -hunting with him, and they
rode out into the wastes and wilds and fared on from
place to place t till they drew near the Valley of Ants ?
which J anshah knew by the description of it in the tablet
of Solomon. Here he called a halt and they all abode
there, eating and drinking, ten days, after which Janshah
took his men apart by night and said to them, ' I purpose
to flee through the Valley of Ants and make for the town
of the Jews ; it may be God will deliver us from these
apes ana we will go our ways/ And they replied, 1 We
hear and obey/ So they waited till some little of the
night was spent, then, donning their armour and girding


9 l


themselves with swords and daggers and so forth, they set
out and fared on westward till morning.

When the apes awoke and missed Janshah and his men,
they knew that they had fled. So they mounted and
pursued them, some taking the eastern road and others
that which led to the Valley of Ants, nor v/as it long be-
fore the latter came in sight of the fugitives, as they were
about to enter the valley, and hastened after them. When
Janshah and his men saw them, they fled into the Valley
of Ants ; but their pursuers soon overtook them and would
have slain them, when, behold, a multitude of ants, like
swarming locusts, as big as dogs, rose out of the earth and
rushed upon the apes. They devoured many apes and the
latter killed many of the ants ; but help came to the latter
and there ensued a sore battle between them till the even-
ing. Now an ant would go up to an ape and smite him
and cut him in twain, whilst it was all that half a score
apes could do to master one ant and tear him in sunder.

As soon as it became dark, Janshah and his men took .
to flight and fled along the heart of the valley till the Ktgtt
morning. With the break, of day, the apes were upon tlb.
them, which when the prince saw, he cried out to his men,
saying, 'Smite with your swords.' So they drew their
swords and laid about them right and left, till there ran at
one of them an ape, with tusks like an elephant, and smote
him and cut him in sunder. Then the apes redoubled
upon Janshah and he fled with his followers into the lower
part of the valley, where he saw a vast river and by its side,
a great host of ants. When the latter espied Janshah, they
surrounded him, and one of the huntsmen fell to smiting
them with his sword and cutting them in twain ; where-
upon they all set upon him and killed him. At this pass ?
up came the apes from over the mountain and. fell upon
Janshah ; but he tore off his clothes and plunging into the
river, with his remaining servant, struck out for the middle


92


of the stream. Presently, he caught sight of a tree on. the
other bank of the river ; so he swam up to it and laying
hold of one of its branches, swung himself ashore, where
he fell to wringing his clothes and spreading them in the
sun to dry. As for the huntsman, the current carried him
away and dashed him in pieces against the rocks, what
while there befell a sore battle between the ants and the
apes, until the latter gave up the pursuit and returned to
their own land.

Janshah abode alone on the river-bank, weeping, till
nightfall, when he took refuge in a cavern and passed the
night there, in great fear and grief for the loss of his
companions. At daybreak, he set out again and fared
on days and nights, eating of the herbs of the earth, till
he came to the mountain that burnt like fire, and thence
to the river that dried up every Saturday. Now it was
a mighty river and on the opposite bank stood a great
city, which was the city of the jews mentioned in the
tablet of Solomon. Here he abode till the next Saturday,
when the river dried up and he walked over to the other
side [dryshod] and entered the city, but saw none in the
streets. However, after awhile, be came to the door of
a house, so he opened it and entering, saw within the
people of the house [sitting] in silence and speaking not
Quoth he, ' I am a stranger and hungry ; ' and they signed
to him, as who should say, 1 Eat and drink, but speak
not.' So he ate and drank and slept till the morning,
when the master of the house bade him welcome and
asked him whence he came and whither he was bound,
Janshah wept sore and told him all that had befallen him
and how his father was King of Kabul ; whereat the Jew
marvelled and said, 'Never heard we of that city s but we
have heard from the merchants of the caravans that in
that direction lies a country called Yemen/ ' How far
is that country from this place?'" asked Janshah, and the


93


Jew said, 'The merchants pretend that it is seven-and-
twenty months' journey from their land hither.' 'And
when does the caravan come?' asked Janshah. 'Next
year it will come,' replied his host ; whereat the prince
wept and fell a-sorrowing for himself and his followers
and lamenting his separation from his father and mother
and all that had befallen him in his wanderings. Then
said the Jew, ' young man, do not weep, but abide with
us till the caravan comes, when we will send thee with it
to thine own country.' So he abode with the Jew two whole
months and every day he went out a-walking in the streets
of the city for his diversion.

One day, as he walked about the streets, as of wont, he
heard a man crying aloud and saying, 'Who will earn a
thousand dinars and a slave-girl of surpassing beauty and
grace, at the price of half a day's labour?' But none
answered him and Janshah said in himself, 'Were not
the work perilous and difficult, he would not offer such a
price for half a day's labour.' Then he accosted the
crier and said to him, 4 1 will do the work.' So the man
took him by the hand and carried him to a lofty and
splendid house, where they found a Jew merchant seated
on a chair of ebony, to whom said the crier, ' O merchant,
I have cried [for thee] every day these three months, and
none hath answered, save this young man/ The Jew bade
Janshah welcome and taking him by the hand, carried him
into a magnificent saloon and called for food. So the
servants spread the table and set on all manner meats, of
which the merchant and Janshah ate and washed their
hands. Then wine was set on and they drank; after
which the Jew rose and bringing Janshah a purse of a
thousand dinars and a slave-girl of ravishing beauty, said
to him, ' Take the girl and money to thy hire. The work
thou shait do to-morrow,/ So saying, he withdrew and
Janshah lay with the damsel that night.


94


On the morrow, the merchant bade his slaves carry him
to the bath and clothe him in a costly suit of silk, whenas
he came out. So they did as he bade them and brought
him back to the house, whereupon the merchant called for
wine and harp and lute } and they drank and played and
made merry till the half of the night was past, when the
Jew retired to his harem and Janshah lay with the fair
slave till the morning. Then he went to the bath and on
his return, the merchant came to him and said, 4 Now must
thou do the work for me/ 'I hear and obey/ replied
Janshah. So the merchant let bring two mules and setting
Janshah on one, mounted the other himself. Then they
[rode forth the city and] fared on from morn till noon,
when they came to a lofty mountain, to whose height there
was no limit. Here the Jew halted and alighting, bade
Janshah do the same. The latter obeyed and the merchant
gave him a knife and a cord, saying, ' I desire that thou
slaughter this [thy] mule.' So Janshah tucked up his
sleeves and skirts and going up to the mule, bound her
legs with the cord, then threw her down and cut her
throat ; after which he skinned her and lopped off her
head and legs and she became a [shapeless] heap of flesh.
Then said the Jew, ' Slit open the mule's belly and enter
it and I will sew it up on thee. There must thou abide
awhile and whatsoever thou seest in her belly, acquaint me
therewith.' So Janshah slit the mule's belly and crept into
it, whereupon the merchant sewed it up on him and with-
drawing to a distance, hid himself in the skirts of the
mountain.

I^tgfjt Presently a huge bird swooped down on the dead mule
tlbtt. and snatching it up, flew up with it to the top of the
mountain, where it set it down and would have eaten it ;
but Janshah, being ware of this, slit the mule's belly and

came forth. When the bird saw him, it took fright at him
and flew away; whereupon he stood up and looking right


and left, saw nothing but the carcases of dead men, dried
in the sun, and exclaimed, ' There is no power and no
virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme!' Then
he looked down and saw the merchant standing at the
mountain-foot, looking for him. As soon as the Jew caught
sight of him, he called out to him, saying, 'Throw me
down of the stones that are about thee, that I may direct
thee to a way by which thou mayst descend.' So Janshah
threw him down nigh upon two hundred of the stones s
with which the summit was strewn and which were all
rubies and chrysolites and other precious stones; after
which he called out to him, saying, 'Show me the way
down and I will throw thee some more.' The Jew made
him no answer, but gathered up the stones and binding
them on the back of his mule, went his way, leaving
Janshah alone on the mountain-top.

When the latter found himself deserted, 'he began to
weep and implore help, and thus he abode three days 5
after which he rose and fared on over the mountain two
months' space, feeding upon herbs, till he came to its
skirts and espied afar off a valley, full of trees and streams
and birds singing the praises of God, the One, the Vic-
torious. At this sight he rejoiced greatly and stayed not
his steps till he came to a cleft in the rocks, through
which [in the season of the rains] a torrent fell down into
the valley. He made his way down [the dry bed of the
water-course] into the valley and walked on therein, gazing
right and left, until he came in sight of a great castle,
rising high into the air. As he drew near, he saw an old
man of comely aspect and face shining with light standing
at the gate, with a staff of cornelian in his hand, and
going up to him, saluted him. The old man returned his
greeting and bade him welcome., saying, 1 Sit down, O ray
son. 7 So he sat down at the door of the castle and the
other said to him, s How earnest thou to this land, that


g6


no son of Adam hath trodden before thee, and whither
art thou bound ? ' When Janshah heard his words, he wept
sore at the memory of all he had suffered and his tears
choked his speech. 'O my son,' said the old man, 'leave
weeping ; for indeed thou makest my heart ache.' So
saying, he rose and set food before him and bade him
eat. He ate and praised God the Most High, after which
the old man besought him to tell him his history.

So Janshah related to him all that had befallen him, from
first to last, at which he marvelled exceedingly. Then said
the prince, ' I prithee, tell me who is the lord of this valley
and to whom doth this great castle belong?' ' O my son,'
answered the old man, 'this valley and castle and all that
is therein belong to the lord Solomon, son of David, on
whom be peace ! As for me, my name is Sheikh Nesr,
king of the birds ; for thou must know that the lord
Solomon committed this castle to my charge and taught

t&ttt, me th e language of birds and made me king over all the
birds that be in the world ; wherefore they all come hither
once in every year, and I pass them in review. Then they
depart; and this is why I dwell here.' When Janshah
heard this, he wept sore and said to the Sheikh, ' O my
father, how shall I do to win to my native land ? ' ' Know,
O my son, 5 replied Sheikh Nesr, ' that thou art near the
Mountain Caf, and there is no departing for thee from this
place ; but tarry with me here and eat and drink and divert
thyself with viewing the apartments of this castle, till the
birds come, when I will give thee in charge to one of them,

^ and he will bring thee to thy native country.'

So Janshah abode with Sheikh Nesr in all delight of life s
taking his pleasance in the valley and eating of its fruits
and laughing and making merry with the old man, till the
day appointed for the coming of the birds, when the Sheikh
gave him the keys of the castle, bidding him amuse him-
self with exploring all its apartments and viewing what was


97


therein, but charging him straitly not to open such a dooi,
else he would never again know fair fortune. Then he
went forth to meet the birds, which came up, kind by kind,
and kissed his hands ; a/id he said to them, ' With me is
a youth, whom destiny hath brought hither from a far land,
and I desire of you that you take him up and cany him
to his own country.' And they answered, ' We hear and
obey.'

Meanwhile, Janshah went round about the castle, open-
ing the various doors and viewing the apartments into
which they led, till he came to the door which Sheikh
Nesr had warned him not to enter. Its fashion pleased
him, for it had on it a lock of gold, and he said in himself,
' This door is goodlier than all the others ; I wonder what
is behind it, that Sheikh Nesr should forbid me to open
it. Come what may, needs must I enter and see what is
in this apartment ; for that which is decreed unto the
creature, he must perforce fulfil.' So he unlocked the
door and entering, found himself in a vast garden, full of
streams and trees, laden with fruits, both hard and soft
of skin, whose branches swayed gracefully, whenas the
zephyr blew upon them. Midmost the garden was a great
lake, the gravel of whose bed was gems and jewels and
precious stones ; and hard by the lake stood a little pavilion,
builded all of gold and silver and crystal, with lattice-
windows of jacinth. The floor of this pavilion was paved
with green beryl and balass rubies and emeralds and other
jewels, set mosaic-fashion, and in its midst was a golden
basin, full of water and compassed about with figures of
birds and beasts, wroughten of gold and silver and casting
water from their mouths. When the zephyr blew on them,
it. entered their ears [and passed through pipes hidden in
their bodies,] and therewith the figures sang out, each in
its own tongue. Beside the fountain was a great es trade,,
and thereon stood a vast throne of cornelian, inlaid with

VOL. V. |


98


pearls and jewels, over which was a tent 1 of green silk set
up, fifty cubits in compass and embroidered with jewels
and precious metals. Within this tent was a closet contain-
ing the [magical] carpet of the lord Solomon (on whom be
peace), and the pavilion was compassed about with beds
of roses and basil and eglantine and all manner sweet-
smelling herbs and flowers.
!£ftt$f)t Janshah explored the marvels of the place, till he was
fctJ, weary of wonder, when he returned to the pavilion and
mounting the throne, fell asleep under the tent set up
thereon. He slept there awhile and presently awaking,
went forth and sat down on a stool before the door. As
he sat, marvelling at the goodliness of the place, there flew
up three birds like doves [but as big as vultures] and
lighted on the brink of the lake, where they sported awhile.
Then they put off their feathers and became three maidens,
as they were moons, that had not their like in the world.
They plunged into the lake and swam about and toyed and
laughed, while Janshah marvelled at their beauty and grace
and the justness of their shapes.

Presently, they came up out of the water and fell to
walking about and taking their pleasure in the garden;
whereat Janshah's reason was like to depart from him and
he rose and followed them. When he overtook them, he
saluted them and they returned his salute; after which
quoth he, 1 Who are ye, O illustrious ladies, and whence
come ye ? ' ' We are from the invisible world of God the
Most High,' replied the youngest damsel, ' and come hither
to divert ourselves. And he marvelled at their beauty and
said to the youngest, ' Have compassion on me and incline
unto me and take pity on my case and on all that has be-
fallen me in my life.' 'Leave this talk,' rejoined she, 'and
go thy ways ; ' whereat the tears streamed from his eyes,
and he sighed heavily and repeated the following vers;;,, °
1 or canopy.


99


She shone out in the garden in garments all of green, With open ves&

and collars and flowing hair beseen.
" What is thy name ? " I asked her, and she replied, " I'm she Who

roasts the hearts of lovers on coals of love and teen."
Of passion and its anguish to her I made my moan ; " Upon a rock,"

she answered, " thy plaints are wasted clean."
41 Even if thy heart," I told her, " be rock in very deed, Yet hath God

made fair water well from the rock, I ween. "

When the maidens heard his verses, they laughed and
played and sang and made merry. Then he brought
thero somewhat of fruit, and they ate and drank and lay
with him till the morning, when they donned their feather-
vests and becoming doves once more, flew away and dis-
appeared from his sight. His reason well-nigh fled with
them, and he gave a great cry and fell down in a swoon*
in which he lay all that day.

Meanwhile, Sheikh Nesr returned from the assembly of
the birds and sought for Janshah, that he might send him
with the latter to his native land, but found him not
and knew that he had entered the forbidden door. So he
went thither and seeing it open, entered and found the
prince lying aswoon under a tree. He fetched scented
waters and sprinkled them on his face, whereupon he re- Mfgfel
vived and turned right and left, but seeing none by him,
save the old man, sighed heavily and repeated the following
verses :

Like the full moon she shines, upon a night of fortune fair, Slender of

shape and charming all with her seductive air.
She hath an eye, whose sorcery enchanteth every wit, A mouth 8 as

agates, set a-row midst roses red, it were.
The night-black torrent of her locks falls down unto her hips ; Beware

the serpents of her curls, I counsel thee beware S
Indeed, her glance, her sides are soft, but harder is her heart Than rock

to him who loveth her ; there is no softness there.
The arrows of her looks she darts from out her eyebrows' bow j They

hit and never miss the mark, though from afar they fare.
Alas, her beauty I it outdoes ah other loveliness j Mo maid of mortal

mould there is that can with her compare.,


ICQ

When the Sheikh heard this, he said, ' O my son, did
1 not warn thee not to open the door? But now tell me
what hath befallen thee.' So Janshah told him all that had
passed between him and the three maidens, and Sheikh
Nesr said, ' Know, O my son, that these three maidens
are of the daughters of the Jinn and come hither every
year [for a day], to divert themselves and make merry until
mid-afternoon, when they return to their own country. 5
4 And where is their country ? ' asked Janshah. ' By Allah,

my son,' answered the old man, ' I know not : but now
take heart and put away this love from thee and come
with me, that I may send thee to thine own land with the
birds.' When Janshah heard this, he gave a great cry
and fell down in a swoon ; and presently, coming to him-
self, said, 1 O my father, I care not to return to my native
land. I conjure thee by Allah, let me abide with thee, that

1 may again foregather with, the maidens and look upon
the face of her I love, though it be but once a year. And
know, O my father, that I will never again name my
people, though I die before thee.' And he sighed and
repeated the following verses :

Would that the phantom 1 never came to mock the lover's pain Anights,
and would this love were not created for men's bane 1

Except my heart were all afire with memories of thee, The tears adown
my wasted cheeks would not in torrents rain.

My soul to patience I exhort forever, day and night, Whilst still my
body is consumed with fires of love in vain.

So saying, he fell at Sheikh Nesr's feet and kissed them
and wept sore. c Have compassion on me,' exclaimed he,
' so God take pity on thee 1 ' 'By Allah, O my son,' replied
the old man, ' I know nothing of the maidens nor of their
country ; but, if thy heart be indeed set on one of them 5
abide with me till this time next year, and when the day

1 El kheyal, the word commonly used by Arab poets to denote the
vision of the beloved one in sleep.


101


of their coming arrives, hide" thyself under a tree in the
garden. As soon as they have alighted and laid aside
their feather-garments and plunged into the lake and are
swimming about at a distance from their clothes, run up
and seize the vest of her to whom thou hast a mind.
When they see thee, they will come ashore and she, whose
vest thou hast taken, will accost thee and say to thee with
the sweetest 01 speech and the most bewitching smiles,
" Give me my clothes, O my brother, that I may don them
and cover my nakedness withal." But be not thou per-
suaded ; for, if thou yield to her wishes and give her back
the vest, she will don it and fly away and thou wilt never
see her again ; but, when thou hast gotten the vest, put
it under thine armpit and hold it fast, till I return from the
assembly of the birds, when I will make accord between
you and send thee back to thy native land, and the maiden
with thee. And this, O my son, is all I can do for thee.'
When Janshah heard this, his heart was solaced and he
abode with Sheikh Nesr yet another year, counting the
hours until the day of the coming of the birds.

At last the appointed time arrived and the old man said
to him, ' Do as I enjoined thee with the maidens, for I go
to meet the birds.' So saying, he departed, whilst Janshah
repaired to the garden and hid himself under a tree, where
none could see him. Here he abode a first day and a
second and a third, but the maidens came not ; whereat he
was sore troubled and wept and groaned without ceasing,
till he swooned away. When he came to himselt, he sat,
looking now at the lake and now at the sky, and anon at
the earth and anon at the open country, whilst his heart
fluttered for stress of love and longing. As he was in this
case, behold, the three doves appeared in the distance and
flew till they reached the garden and lighted down beside
the lake. They turned right and left, but saw no one ; so
they put off their feathers and became three naked maidens,


102


as they were ingots of virgin silver. Then they plunged
into the lake and swam about, laughing and frolicking.
Quoth the eldest, ' O ray sister, I fear lest there be some
one lying in wait for us in the pavilion.' 'O sister,
answered the second, 4 since the days of King Solomon,
none hath entered the pavilion, be he man or genie. ' By
Allah, my sisters,' added the youngest, laughing, ' if
there be any hidden there, he will assuredly take none
but me/

Then they swam out to the middle of the lake, and
when Janshah, who. was watching them, with a heart
fluttering for stress of passion, saw them at a distance
from their clothes, he sprang to his feet and running like
the darting lightning [to the brink of the lake,] snatched
up the feather-vest of the youngest damsel, her on whom
his heart was set and whose name was bnemseh. At this,
the girls turned and seeing him,,, were affrighted and veiled
themselves from him with the water. Then they swam
towards the shore and looking on him, saw that he was
bright of face as the moon at her full and said to him,
6 Who art thou and how comest thou hither and why hast
thou taken the clothes of the lady Shemseh ? ' ' Come
hither to me,' replied he, 'and I will tell you my story.'
Quoth Shemseh, ' Why hast thou taken my clothes, rather
than those of my sisters ? ' 1 light of mine eyes,'
answered he. 'come forth of the water, and I will tell
thee my case and why I chose thee out.' ' O my lord
and solace of my eyes and fruit of my heart,' rejoined
she, ' give me my clothes, that I may put them on and
cover my nakedness withal ; then will I come forth to
thee.' But he replied, saying, ' O princess of fair ones,
how can I give thee back thy clothes and slay myself for
love-longing ? Verily, I will not give them to thee, till
Sheikh Nesr, the king of the birds, returns,,' £ If thou
wilt not give me my clothes, 5 quoth she, * withdraw a little


io3

apart from us, that my sisters may come forth and dress
themselves and give me somewhat wherewith to cover
myself.' ' I hear and obey,' answered he and retired into
the pavilion, whereupon the two eldest princesses came
out and donning their clothes, gave Shemseh somewhat
thereof, not enough to fly withal, and she put it on and
came forth of the water, as she were the moon at her
full or a browsing gazelle.

Then they entered the pavilion, where they found
Janshah sitting on the throne ; so Shemseh saluted him
and sitting down near him, said to him, ' O fair of face,
thou hast undone thyself and me ; but tell us thy history,
that we may know how it is with thee.' At these words,
he wept till he wet his clothes with his tears ; and when
she saw that he was distracted for love of her, she rose
and taking him by the hand, made him sit by her side
and wiped away his tears with her sleeve. Then said she
to him, ' O fair of face, leave this weeping and tell us thy
story.' So he related to her all that had befallen him, ^{{rj){
whereupon she sighed and said, 1 O my lord, since thou foxli
lovest me so dear, give me my clothes, that I may fly to
my people and tell them what has passed between thee
and me, and after I will come back to thee and carry
thee to thine own country.' When he heard this, he wept
and replied, 'Is it lawful to thee before God to slay me
wrongfully? 1 'O my lord,' said she, 'and how shall I
do that ? ' * If I give thee thy clothes,' rejoined he, ' thou
wilt fl> away from me, and I shall die forthright.'

At this she and her sisters laughed and she said to him,
' Take comfort and be of good cheer, for I must needs
marry thee.' So saying, she bent down to him and em-
braced him and kissed him between the eyes and on his
cheeks. They clipped each other awhile, after which thej
drew apart and sat down on the throne. Then the eldest
princess went out into the garden and gathering fruits and


104

flowers, brought them into the pavilion, and they ate and
drank and sported and made merry. Now Janshah was
accomplished in beauty and grace and slender and elegant
of shape, and the princess Shemseh said to him, ' By Allah,
O my beloved, I love thee with an exceeding love and will
never leave thee ! ' When he heard her words, his heart
dilated and he laughed for joy ; and they abode thus awhile
in mirth and gladness.

Whilst they were laughing and taking their pleasure in
the pavilion, Sheikh Nesr returned from the assembly of
the birds and came in to them ; whereupon they all rose to
him and saluted him and kissed his hands. He gave them
welcome and bade them be seated. So they sat down and
he said to Shemseh, ' Verily, this youth loves thee with an
exceeding love ; so, God on thee, deal kindly with him,
for he is of the great ones of mankind and of the sons of
the kings, and his father rules over the land of Kabul and
is possessed of a mighty empire.' ' I hear and obey/ an-
swered she and kissing the Sheikh's hands, stood before
him [in token of respect and obedience]. 4 If thou speak
truly,' said he, 4 swear to me by Allah that thou wilt never
betray him, what while thou abidest in the chains of life."
So she swore a great oath that she would never betray
Janshah, but would assuredly marry him, and added, ' I will
never forsake him.' The Sheikh believed in her oath and
said to Janshah, ' Thanks be to God, who hath made you
at one ! ' At this the prince rejoiced with an exceeding

JCtgf)t g reat j°y> an d ne ari d Shemseh abode three months with

iXXttt. Sheikh Nesr, feasting and making merry.

At the end of that time, the princess said to Janshah, * I
wish to go with thee to thy native land, that we may marry
and abide there.' ' I hear and obey,' answered he and took
counsel with Sheikh Nesr, who bade him go and com-
mended the princess to his care, 'Then said she, 'O
Sheikh Nesr, bid him give me my feather-vest' So the


Sheikh bade Janshah give it to her, and he did so ; where-
upon she donned it and said to the prince, 'Mount my
back and keep fast hold of my feathers, lest thou fall off ;
and do thou shut thine eyes and stop thine ears, so thou
mayst not hear the roar of the revolving sphere, as we pass
through the air.' He did as she bade him and Sheikh
Nesr described to her the land of Kabul, that she might
not miss her way, and bade them farewell, commending
the prince to her care. She took leave of her sisters and
bade them return to her people and tell them what had
befallen her with Janshah; then, rising into the air, she
flew off, like the wafts of the wind or the dazzling lightning,
and stayed not her course from the forenoon till the hour
of afternoon prayer, when she espied afar off a valley
abounding in trees and streams and alighted there to rest.
Janshah dismounted and kissing her between the eyes, sat
with her awhile on the bank of a river there ; then they
rose and explored the valley, taking their pleasure therein
and eating of the fruits of the trees, till nightfall, when
they lay down under a tree and slept till the morning.

As soon as it was day, the princess arose and taking
Janshah on her back, flew on with him till mid-day, when
she perceived, by the appearance of the landmarks that
Sheikh Nesr had described to her, that they were nearing
the city of Kabul and alighted in a wide and blooming
champaign, wherein were gazelles feeding and springs
welling and rivers flowing and trees laden with ripe fruits.
So Janshah dismounted and kissed her between the eyes ;
and she said to him, ' my beloved and solace of mine
eyes, knowst thou how many days' journey we have come
[since yesterday]?' 'No,' answered he, and she said,
1 We have come thirty months' journey.' Quoth he,
' Praised be God for safety S ' Then they sat down side
by side and ate and drank and toyed and laughed.

Presently, there came up to them two of the King's


io6

servants, of those who had been of the prince's company
in the chase, and one of them was he whom he had left
Dy the horses, when he embarked in the fishing-boat. As
soon as they saw Janshah, they knew him and saluted him;
then said they, ' With thy leave, we will go to thy father
and bear him the glad tidings of thy coming. 5 ' Go,'
replied the prince, 'and fetch us tents, for we will abide
here seven days to rest ourselves, till he make ready and
MlQ$t come forth to meet us, that we may enter in due state.'
&Xtb. So the officers hastened back to King Teigmous and said
to him, 'Good news, O King of the age!' 'What is it?'
asked he. 'Is my son Janshah come back?' 'Yes,'
answered they ; ' he has returned from his absence and is
now near at hand in the Kerani meadow.'

When the King heard this, he rejoiced greatly and fell
down in a swoon for excess of joy; then, coming to him-
self, he bade his Vizier give each of the men a splendid
dress of honour and a sum of money and said to them,
'Take this, in reward for your good tidings, whether ye
lie or speak sooth.' 'Indeed, we lie not,' replied the
slaves, ' for but now we sat with him and saluted him and
kissed his hands, and he bade us go and fetch him tents
for that he would abide in the meadow seven days, till such
time as the Viziers and Amirs and grandees should come
out to meet him.' Quoth the King, ' How is it with my
son?' And they answered, 'He hath with him a houri,
as he had brought her out of Paradise.' At this, the King
bade beat the drums and sound the trumpets for gladness
and despatched messengers to announce the good news
io Janshah's mother and to the wives of the Amirs and
notables. So the criers spread themselves about the city
and acquainted the people with the glad tidings of the
prince's coming.

Then the King made ready and setting out, with his
officers and troops, for the meadow, came upon janshah


107


and Shemseh sitting there. When the prince saw them,
he rose and went to meet them ; and the troops knew
him and dismounted, to salute him and kiss his hands;
after which they escorted him to his father, who, at sight
of his son, threw himself from his horse's back and
clipped him in his arms and wept sore. Then they took
horse again and rode till they came to the banks of a
river, when the troops alighted and pitched the tents and
pavilions and standards, to the sound of trumpets and
cymbals and drums and flutes. Moreover, the King caused
set up a pavilion of red silk for the princess Shemseh, who
put off her feather raiment and entering the pavilion, sat
down there.

Presently, the King and his son came in to her, and
when she saw Teigmous, she rose and kissed the earth
before him. The King sat down and seating Janshah on
his right hand and Shemseh on his left, bade her welcome
and said to his son, ' Tell me all that hath befallen thee
in thine absence.' So Janshah related to him all his
adventures, whereat he marvelled greatly and turning to
the princess, said, ' Praised be God for that He hath put
it into thy heart to reunite me with my son ! Verily this
is of [His] exceeding 1 bounty! And now I would have ^ftttt
thee ask of me what thou wilt, that I may do it in thine ftxfoe
honour.' Quoth she, ' I ask of thee that thou build me
a palace in the midst of a garden, with water running
under it.' And the King answered, 1 1 hear and obey.'

As they sat talking, up came Janshah's mother, attended
by all the wives of the Viziers and Amirs and notables
of the city. When the prince caught sight of her, he
rose and leaving the tent, went to meet her and they em-
braced a long while, whilst the queen wept for excess of
Joy and repeated the following verses :

1 Should be "manifest" bounty {Koran xxviL 1 6),


io8

Joy hath o'ercome me so, that, for the very stress Of that which gladdens

me, to weeping I am fain.
Tears are become, as 'twere, your nature, O my eyes, So that ye weep

as well for gladness as for pain,

Then the King departed to his pavilion and Janshah
carried his mother to his own tent, where they sat
talking and complaining, one to the other, of all they
had suffered for separation, till there came up some of
Shemseh's attendants, to announce the coming of the
princess. When the queen heard this, she rose and
going to meet Shemseh, saluted her and seated her by
her side. They sat awhile and presently the queen and
her attendants returned with Shemseh to the latter's tent
and sat there.

Meanwhile King Teigmous gave great largesse to his
troops and subjects and rejoiced in his son with an exceed-
ing joy, and they abode there ten days, feasting and making
merry. At the end of this time, the King commanded to
depart, and they all mounted and returned in state to the
city, which was decorated after the goodliest fashion, for
the folk had adorned the houses with precious stuffs and
jewellery and spread costly brocades under the horses' feet.
The drums beat for glad tidings and the notables of the
kingdom rejoiced and brought rich gifts, and the lookers
on were filled with amazement. Moreover, they fed the
poor and needy and held high festival for the space of ten
days ; and the lady Shemseh rejoiced with an exceeding
joy, whenas she saw this.

Then King Teigmous summoned architects and builders
and men of art and bade them build a magnificent palace
in such a garden. So they straightway proceeded to do
his bidding, and when Janshah knew of this, he bade the
workmen fetch a block of white marble and hollow it oat
in the likeness of a chest ; which being done, he took the
feather-vest of the princess Shemseh and laid it therein ;


A


io9


then, closing the opening with melted lead, he commanded
them to bury the marble chest in the foundations and
build over it the arches on which the palace was to rest.
They did as he bade them, nor was it long before the
palace was finished on the goodliest wise. Then they
furnished it and it was a magnificent palace, standing in
the midst of the garden, with streams running from under
it. As soon as it was ready, the King caused Janshah's
wedding to be celebrated with the greatest magnificence
and they brought the bride to the castle in state and went
their ways.

When Shemseh entered, she smelt the scent of the ^ffg^
feather-vest and knew where it was and had a mind to "fixbt
take it. However, she waited till midnight, when Janshah
was drowned in sleep ; then rose and going straight to the
place where the marble coffer was buried, dug till she
came upon it and took it up. She did away the ieadea
stopper and taking out the feather-vest, put it on. Then
she flew up into the air and perching on the summit of
the palace, cried out to those who were therein, saying,
'Fetch me Janshah, that I may bid him farewell.' So
they told him and he came out and seeing her on the
roof of the palace, clad in her feather raiment, said to
her, ' Why hast thou done this thing ? ' ' O my beloved
and solace of mine eyes and fruit of my heart,' replied
she, ' by Allah, I love thee passing dear and I rejoice with
an exceeding joy in that I have brought thee to thy friends
and country and seen thy father and mother. And now,
if thou love me as I love thee, come to me at the Castle
of Jewels.'

So saying, she flew away and Janshah fell down in a
swoon, being well-nigh dead for despair. His people

carried the news to King Teigmous, who mounted at once
and riding to the palace, found his son lying on the
ground, senseless, whereat he wept and sprinkled rose-


I IO


water on his face. When the prince came to himself and
found his father at his head, he wept passing sore, and the
King asked what had befallen him. So he told him what
had happened, and the King said, ' O my son, be not con-
cerned, for I will assemble all the merchants and pilgrims
in the land and enquire at them of the Castle of Jewels.
If we can find out where it is, we will journey thither
and demand the Princess Shemseh of her people, and
I hope in God the Most High, that He will give her back
to thee.'

Then he went out and calling his four Viziers, bade
them assemble all the merchants and travellers in the
town and question them of the Castle of Jewels, adding,
6 Whoso knows it and can direct us thither, I will give
him fifty thousand dinars.' The Viziers accordingly went
forth and did as the King bade them, but none could give
them news of the Castle of Jewels ; so they returned
and told the King, who bade bring beautiful slave-girls
and concubines and singers and players upon instruments
of music, whose like are not found but with kings, and
sent them to Janshah, so haply they might divert him
from the love of the lady Shemseh. Moreover, he de-
spatched couriers and spies to all the [neighbouring]
lands and islands and climes, to enquire for the Castle
of Jewels, and they made quest for it two months long,
but none could give them news of it. So they returned
and told the King, whereupon he wept sore and going
in to his son, found him sitting in the midst of the
concubines and singers and players on harp and psaltery
and so forth, none of whom could avail to console him
for the lady Shemseh. 'O my son,' said Teigmous, S I
can find none who knows the Castle of Jewels ; but I
will bring thee a fairer than she.' When Janshah heard
this, his eyes ran over with tears and he recited tlv_
following verses i


Ill


Patience hath fled, but passion abideth and desire, And all my body's

wasted with love and longing dire.
When will the days unite me with Shemseh ? Lo» my bones Are all

consumed and rotted for separation's fire.

Now there was a King of Hind, by name Kefid, who
reigned over a thousand cities, in each of which were as
many citadels ; he had four Viziers and under him were
kings and princes and Amirs. Moreover, he had great
plenty of troops and warriors and champions and under
his hand were a thousand chieftains, each ruling over a
thousand tribes, that could muster each four thousand
cavaliers ; and indeed he was a king of great might and
prowess and his armies filled the whole earth. Between
him and King Teigmous there was a fierce feud, for that
the latter had made war upon him and ravaged his kingdom
and slain his men and carried off his treasures. So, when
it came to King Kefid's knowledge that King Teigmous
was occupied with the love of his son and with concern
and care for his sake, so that he neglected the affairs of
the state and his troops were grown few and weak, he sum-
moned his viziers and officers and said to them, 1 Ye all
know that King Teigmous invaded our dominions and
plundered our goods and slew my father and brothers, nor
indeed is there one of you, but he hath ravaged his lands
and carried off his goods and made prize of his women and
slain some kinsman of his. Now to-day I have heard that
he is taken up with the love of his son Janshah and that
his troops are grown few and weak ; and this is the time
to take our wreak on him. So don ye your harness of
battle forthright and make ready for war without delay,
and we will go to him and fall upon him and slay him and
his son and possess ourselves of his kingdom.' They all 'HtQtl
answered with one voice, saying, 6 We hear and obey, 5 and ^ ¥ <Hf
proceeded at once to equip themselves and levy troops.
The preparations occupied three months 5 at the end of


112


which time the King set out at the head of his army, with
drums beating and trumpets sounding and banners flying,
and fared on till they reached the frontiers of the land of
Kabul and entered the dominions of King Teigmous,
where they began to ravage the country and do havoc
among the folk, slaying the old and taking the young
prisoners.

When the news reached King Teigmous, he was exceed-
ing wroth and assembling his grandees and officers of
state, said to them, ' Know that Kefid hath come to our
country with troops and champions and warriors, whose
number none knoweth save God the Most High, and is
minded to do battle against us ; what deem ye ? ' 'O
King of the age,' replied they, ' let us go out to him and
give him battle and drive him forth of our country-' So
he commanded them to prepare for battle and brought
forth to them hauberks and cuirasses and helmets and
swords and all manner warlike gear, such as slay warriors
and do to death the champions of mankind. So the troops
and warriors and champions flocked to the standards and
King Teigmous marched out at the head of his army, with
drums and cymbals beating and flutes and clarions sound-
ing and banners flying, to meet the army of Hind.

When he drew near the foe, he called a halt and en-
camping with his host in the Valley of Zehran, hard by
the frontier, despatched to King Kefid the following letter :
i Know that what thou hast done is of the fashion of the
lewd rabble and wert thou 'indeed a king, the son of a king,
thou hadst not thus invaded my kingdom and slain my
subjects and done unright upon them. Knowest thou not
that all this is the fashion of a tyrant ? Verily, had I known
that thou wouldst dare to invade my dominions, I had come
to thee and prevented thee therefrom this long while since.
Yet, even now, if thou wilt retire and leave mischief between
us and thee, well and good ; but if not, come out to me in


113


the listed field and measure thyself with me in fair fight"
This letter he committed to an officer of his army and sent
with him spies to spy him out news.

When the messenger drew near the enemy's camp, he
saw a multitude of tents of silk and satin, with pennons of
blue silk, and amongst them a great pavilion of red satin,
surrounded by guards. He made for this tent and found
that it was that of King Kefid and saw therein the latter
seated on a chair set with jewels, in the midst of his
Viziers and captains and grandees. So he displayed the
letter and straightway there came up to him a company of
guards, who took it from him and carried it to the King.
Kefid read it and wrote the following reply ; 4 King Kefid
to King Teigmous. Know that I mean to take my wreak
of thee and wash out the stain on my honour by laying
waste thy lands and dishonouring thy women and slaying
the old and carrying the young into slavery; and to-
morrow, come thou out to combat in the open field, and
I will show thee war and battle.' Then he sealed the letter
and delivered it to the messenger, who carried it to King
Teigmous and informed the latter that he had seen in the ^fcdt
enemy's camp warriors and horsemen and footmen beyond tuxbtld
count, there was no bound to them, When Teigmous read
the answer, he was beyond measure enraged and bade his
Vizier Ain Zar take a thousand horse and fall upon the
army of Kefid in the middle watch of the night.

Meanwhile, King Kefid commanded one of his Viziers*
Ghetrefan by name, to take five thousand horse and attack
King Teigmous's camp in like manner. So the two parties
set out and meeting halfway, man cried out against man
and there befell a sore battle between them till daybreak;,
when Ghetrefan's men were routed and fled back to their
camp in confusion. When Khefid saw this, he was exceed-
ing wroth and said to the fugitives, 6 What hath befallen
you, that ye have lost your captains?' ' O King of the
vol. v. 8


ii4


age,' answered they, 1 there met us halfway the Vizier Am
Zar, with champions and cavaliers, so that, before we were
ware, we found ourselves in the enemy's midst, face to face
with them, and fought a sore battle with them from mid-
night till morning. Then the Vizier and his men fell to
smiting the elephants on the face and shouting out at them,
till they took fright and turning tail to flee, trampled down
the horsemen, whilst none could see other for the clouds
of dust. The blood ran like a torrent and much folk were
slain, and indeed, had we not fled, we had all been cut off
to the last man.' When Kefid heard this, he exclaimed,
6 May the sun not bless you and may his wrath be sore
upon you ! '

Meanwhile, Ain Zar returned to King Teigmous and
told him what had happened. The King gave him joy
of his safety and rejoiced greatly and bade beat the drums
and sound the trumpets, in honour of the victory; after
which he called the roll of his troops and found that two
hundred of his stoutest champions had fallen. Then King
Kefid marched his army into the field and drew them out in
order of battle in fifteen lines of ten thousand horse each,
under the commandment of three hundred captains and
princes, mounted on elephants and chosen from amongst
the doughtiest of his warriors. So he set up his standards
and banners and blew the trumpets and beat the drums,
whilst the champions sallied forth, offering battle. As for
King Teigmous, he drew out his troops in ten lines of
ten thousand horse each, and with him were a hundred
champions, riding on his right hand and on his left.
Then rode forward to the fight each renowned cavalier^
with drums and cymbals beating and pipes and hautboys
sounding and trumpets blaring, and the two hosts clashed
together, whilst the earth for all its wideness was straitened
for the multitude of the cavaliers and ears were deafened
for the tramp of the horses and the shouting of the mea


The dust volleyed up in clouds and hung vaulted over
them, and they fought a sore battle from the first of the
day till the coming of the darkness; when they separated
and each army drew off to its own camp. Then the two 3Cfc$H
kings mustered their troops and found that they had lost, &k'lX«
Kefid five thousand men and Teigmous three thousand of
the flower of his braves, whereat they were sore concerned.
On the morrow, the two hosts again drew out in battle
array, and Kefid cried out to his men, saying, ' Which of
you will sally forth into the field and open us the chapter
of war and battle?' Thereupon came out from the ranks
a warrior named Berkaik, a mighty man of war, riding on
an elephant. When he reached the King, he alighted
and kissing the earth before him, sought of him leave to
challenge the foe to single combat. Then he mounted
his elephant and pricking into the middle of the field,
cried out, ' Who is for jousting, who is for foining, who is
for fighting?' When King Teigmous heard this, he said
to his troops, ' Which of you will do battle with this
champion?' Whereupon a cavalier came out from the
ranks, mounted on a charger, mighty of make, and dis-
mounting, kissed the earth before the King and craved
his permission to engage Berkaik. Then he mounted
again and drove at Berkaik, who said to him, £ Who art
thou, that thou makest mock of me by coming out against
me, alone? ' ' My name is Ghezenfer ben Kemkhil,' replied
the Kabul champion ; and the other, ' I have heard tell of
thee in my own country ; so up and do battle between the
ranks of the champions.'

Then Ghezenfer drew a mace of iron from under his
thigh and Berkaik took his sword in his hand, and they
fought a sore battle, till Berkaik smote Ghezenfer on the
head with his sword, but the helmet turned the blow and
no hurt betided him therefrom ; whereupon Ghezenfer, in
his turn, dealt Berkaik so terrible a buffet on the head


u6

with his mace, that he beat him down on to his elephant's
back [and killed him]. With this out sallied another
horseman and saying to Ghezenfer, ' Who art thou that
thou shouldst slay my brother ? ' hurled a javelin at him
with such force that it pierced his thigh and nailed his
greaves to his flesh. The Kabul champion, feeling him-
self wounded, took his sword in his hand and smote at
Berkaik's brother and cut him in sunder, and he fell to the
earth, wallowing in his blood, whilst Ghezenfer rode back
to King Teigmous.

When Kefid saw the death of his champions, he cried
out to his troops to set on, as also did the King of Kabul ;
and the two armies drove at each other. Horse neighed
against horse and man cried out upon man and the swords
flashed from the scabbards, whilst the drums beat and the
trumpets sounded. Then horseman charged upon horse-
man and every renowned champion- pricked forward, whilst
the faintheart fled from the push of pike and men heard
nought but the clang of arms and the roar of the battle.
Slain were the warriors that were slain and they stinted
not from the fight till the going down of the sun in the
pavilion of the heavens, when the two hosts drew asunder
and returned each to its own camp. Then King Teigmous
numbered his men and found that he had lost five thousand
men and four standards, whereat he was sore concerned ;
whilst King Kefid in like manner counted his troops and
found that he had lost six hundred of the flower of his
horsemen and nine standards.

The two armies rested on their arms three days' space,
after which Kefid wrote a letter to a king called Facoun el
Kelb (to whom he claimed kinship by his mother) and the
°Migf)t latter forthwith assembled his troops and marched to the
■ y ''~° succour of the King of Hind. So, as King Teigmous was
sitting at his pleasance, there came one in to him and said,,
£ J see a cloud of dust rising into the air in the distance J


ii7


So he despatched a company, to learn the meaning of this $
who presently returned and said to him, 4 O King, when we
drew near the cloud of dust, the wind smote it and it lifted
and discovered seven standards and under each standard
three thousand horse, making for King Kefid's camp.'
Then King Facoun joined himself to the King of Hind and
saluting him, enquired how it was with him and what was
this war in which he was engaged. ' Knowest thou not,'
answered Kefid, ' that King Teigmous is my enemy and the
murderer of my father and brothers ? Wherefore I am come
forth to do battle with him and take my wreak on him. f
Quoth Facoun, ' The blessing of the sun be upon thee ! '
And the King of Hind carried King Facoun to his tent and
rejoiced in him with an exceeding great joy.

To return to Janshah. He abode shut up in his palace?
without seeing his father or allowing one of the damsels or
singing-women in his service to come in to him, for two
months' space, at the end of which time he grew troubled
and restless at not seeing the King and said to his atten-
dants, ' What ails my father that he cometh not to visit
me?' They told him that he had gone forth to do battle
with the King of Hind, whereupon quoth Janshah, ' Bring
me my horse, that I may go to my father.' But he said in
himself, ' I am taken up with the thought of my beloved,
and I deem well to journey to the city of the Jews, where
haply God shall grant me to meet the merchant, and maybe
he will hire me once more and deal with me as before, for
none knoweth wherein is good.' So he took with him
a thousand horse and set out, the. folk deeming that he
purposed to join his father in the field, and they fared
on till dusk, when they halted for the night in a vast
meadow. As soon as he knew that all his men were
asleep, the prince rose and girding his middle;, mounted
his horse and rode out, intending for Baghdad, for that
he had heard from the Jews that a caravan came thence to


n8

tneir city once in every two years and thought to journey
thither therewith.

When his men awoke and missed the prince and his
horse, they mounted and sought him right and left, but
finding no trace of him, rejoined his father and told him
what his son had done ; whereat he was beyond measure
concerned and cast the crown from his head, whilst the
sparks were like to fly from his mouth, and he said,
c There is no power and no virtue but in God ! I have
lost my son, and the enemy is before me.' But his Viziers
and vassals said to him, ' Patience, O King of the age !
Nought but good ensueth patience/ Then he collected
his forces and abandoning his camp, retired to his capital,
where he armed the inhabitants and fortified the place,
setting up mangonels and other engines upon the walls.
King Kefid followed him and sat down before the town,
offering battle seven nights and eight days, after which
he withdrew to his tents, to tend his wounded. On this
wise he did every month, and they ceased not to beleaguer
HCfgfjt the place thus seven years.

tttXt. Meanwhile, Janshah arrived at Baghdad, where he heard
from a merchant that the city of the Jews was situate in
the extreme Orient and that a caravan would start that
very month for the city of Mizrecan in Hind, ' whither do
thou accompany us,' said the merchant, e and we will fare
on to Khorassan and thence to the city of Shimaoun and
Khouarezm, from which latter place the city of the Jews
is distant a year and three months' journey.' So Janshah
waited till the time of the departure of the caravan, when
he joined himself thereto and journeyed, till he reached
the city of Mizrecan, whence he again set out and after
enduring great hardships and perils and the extreme of
hunger and thirst, arrived at the town of Shimaoun. Nor
did he fail in every city to which he came to enquire after
the Castle of Jewels, but none could give him news of it


ii9


and all said, * Never heard we this name.' At Shimaoun
he made enquiry for the city of the Jews, and they
directed him the road thither. So he set out and
journeyed nights and days till he came to the place,
where he had given the apes the slip, and continued his
journey thence to the river, on the opposite bank of which
stood the city of the Jews. He sat down on the shore
and waited till Saturday came round and the river dried
up, when he crossed over to the opposite bank and enter-
ing the city, betook himself to the house of his former
host. The Jew and his family rejoiced in his return and
set meat and drink before him, saying, 4 Where hast thou
been during thine absence?' 'In the kingdom of God
the Most High,' 1 answered he and lay with them that
night.

On the morrow he went out to walk about the city and
presently heard a crier crying aloud and saying, 1 O folk s
who will earn a thousand dinars and a handsome slave-
girl and do half a day's work for us ? s So Janshah went
up to him and said, 'I am your man.' Quoth the crier,
'Follow me,' and carrying him to the house of the Jew
merchant, where he had been aforetime, said to the latter $
4 This young man will do thy work.' The merchant gave
him welcome [not recognizing him] and carried him into
the harem, where he set meat and drink before him, and
he ate and drank. Then he brought him the dinars and
the fair slave, with whom he lay that night.

On the morrow, he took the money and the damsel and
committing them to his host, returned to the merchant,
who mounted and rode out with him, till they came to
the foot of the mountain, where they halted and the
merchant, bringing out a knife and cords, bade Janshah
throw down the mare on which he rode and bind her legs
with the cords. So he threw her down and bound her
1 A formula of evasion*


120


and slaughtered her and cut off her legs and slit her belly,
as the Jew ordered him ; whereupon quoth the latter,
' Enter her belly, till I sew it up on thee ; and whatsoever
thou seest therein, tell me of it, for this is the work the
hire whereof thou hast taken.' So Janshah entered the
mare's belly and the merchant sewed it up on him, then s
withdrawing to a distance, hid himself.

Presently, a great bird swooped down on the carcase
and flying up with it to the mountain-top, would have
eaten it, which when Janshah felt, he took out his knife
and slitting the mare's belly, came forth. The bird was
scared at his sight and flew away, and Janshah went up
to the edge of the crest and looking down, espied the
merchant standing at the foot of the mountain, as he
were a sparrow. 1 So he cried out to him, ' What is thy
will, O merchant ? ' ' Throw me down of the stones that
lie about thee,' replied the Jew, * that I may direct thee
in the way down.' Quoth Janshah, ' I am he with whom
thou didst thus and thus five years agone, and through
thee I suffered hunger and thirst and sore toil and much
hardship ; and now thou hast brought me hither once
more and thinkest to destroy me. By Allah, I will not
throw thee aught ! ' So saying, he turned his back on

Xf(lf)t him and set out for the castle of the lord Solomon.'

tlX'XU. He fared on many days and nights, tearful-eyed and
heavy at heart, eating, when he hungered, of the fruits of
the earth and drinking, when he thirsted, of its streams,
till he came in sight of the castle and saw Sheikh Nesr
sitting at the gate. So he hastened up to him and kissed
his hands ; and the Sheikh bade him welcome and said to
him, ' O my son, what ails thee that thou returnest to this
place, after I sent thee home with the Princess Shemseh,
comforted 8 and glad at heart? 5 Janshah wept and told
1 By reason of the great distance.

a Lit. cool-eyed, i.e. having the eyes unheated by tears*


him all that had befallen him and how she had flown awa^
from him, saying, 'An thou love me, come to me at the
Castle of Jewels;' at which the old man marvelled and
said, ' By Allah, O my son, I know not the Castle of
Jewels, nor, by the virtue of our lord Solomon, have I
ever in my life heard its name ! ' ' What shall I do ? ' said
Janshah. ' I am dying of love and longing.' Quoth
Sheikh Nesr, ' Take patience until the coming of the
birds, when I will enquire at them of the Castle of Jewels.'

So Janshah's heart was comforted and he abode with
Sheikh Nesr, until the appointed day arrived, when the
Sheikh said to him, ' O my son, learn these names 1 and
come with me to meet the birds.' Presently, the birds
came flying up and saluted Sheikh Nesr, kind after kind,
and he asked them of the Castle of Jewels, but they all
made answer that they had never heard of such a place.
When Janshah heard this, he wept and lamented, till he
swooned away, whereupon Sheikh Nesr called a huge bird
and said to him, ' Carry this youth to the land of Kabul,'
and described to him the land and the way thither. Then
he set Janshah on the bird's back, bidding him sit straight
and beware of inclining to either side, or he would fall
and be torn to pieces in the air, and to stop his ears from
the wind, lest he be dazed by the noise of the revolving
sphere and the roaring of the seas.

So the bird took flight and flew with him a day and a
night, till he set him down by the King of the Beasts s
whose name was Shah Bedra, and said to him, * We have
gone astray.' And he would have taken him up again and
flown on with him ; but Janshah said, 1 Go thy ways and
leave me here, till I die or find the Castle of Jewels. I

1 Apparently some magical formula,, consisting of the hidden names of
God (which are supposed by the Orientals to have a thaumaturgic power)
or what not else enabling one to understand the speech of birds and


122


will not return to my country.' So the bird left him with
Shah Bedra and flew away. The King bade him welcome
and said to him, ' my son, who art thou and whence
comest thou with yonder great bird?' So Janshah told
him his story, whereat Shah Bedra marvelled and said,
' By the virtue of the lord Solomon, I know not of this
castle ; but [when the beasts come to pay their respects
to me, we will ask them thereof, and] if any know it,
we will reward him bountifully and send thee thither
by him.'

tNlgf)! So Janshah took patience and abode with Shah Bedra,
totti [who gave him certain tablets, inscribed with magical
formulas,] saying 4 O my son, commit to memory that
which is in these tablets ; [so wilt thou be gifted to under-
stand the language of beasts ;] and when the beasts come,
question them of the Castle of Jewels.' He did as the
King bade him, and before long, up came the beasts,
kind after kind, and saluted Shah Bedra, who questioned
them of the Castle of Jewels ; but they all replied, ' We
know not this castle, nor ever heard we of it.' At this
Janshah wept sore and lamented for that he had not gone
with the bird that brought him from Sheikh Nesr's castle ;
but Shah Bedra said to him, ' Grieve not, O my son, for
I have a brother who is older than I • his name is King
Shimakh and he rules over all the Jinn in the country.
He was once a prisoner to King Solomon, for that he
rebelled against him ; nor is there among the Jinn an
elder than he and Sheikh Nesr. Belike he knows of this
castle.' So saying, he set Janshah on the back of a beast
and gave him a letter to his brother, commending him to
his care.

So the beast set off with the prince and fared on days

and nights, till it. came to King Shimakh's abiding-place
and stood still afar off ; whereupon janshah alighted and
walked on, till he found himself in the presence of the


123


King, to whom he presented his brother's letter, after
having kissed his hands. The King read the letter and
welcomed the prince, saying, ' By Allah, O my son, in all
my life I never saw nor heard of this castle ! But tell
me thy story and who and whence thou art and whither
thou art bound.' So Janshah related to him his history
from beginning to end, at which the King marvelled and
said, ' O my son, I do not believe that our lord Solomon
even ever saw or heard of this castle ; but I know a
hermit in the mountains, who is exceeding old and whom
all birds and beasts and Jinn obey ; for he ceased not to
conjure against the kings of the Jinn, till they submitted
themselves to him in their own despite, by reason of the
might of his spells and his enchantments. I myself once
rebelled against King Solomon and he sent this hermit
against me, who overcame me with his craft, and his en-
chantments and imprisoned me, and since then I have
been his vassal. His name is Yegmous and he dwells
in a retreat in the mountains called the Hermitage of
Diamonds. He is a cunning artificer in all manner
strange works and a crafty warlock and necromancer,
full of guile and versed in every kind of magic and
sorcery and enchantment, and all birds and beasts and
mountains obey him and come at his beck, for the stress
of his conjurations. Moreover, he hath made him a staff,
in three pieces, and this he plants in the earth and
conjures over it; whereupon flesh and blood issue from
the first piece, sweet milk from the second and wheat
and barley from the third. He hath travelled in all
countries and quarters and knoweth all ways and regions
and places and castles and cities, nor do I think there
is any place hidden from his ken. So needs must I send
thee to him ; haply he may direct thee to the Castle of
Jewels ; and if he cannot do this, none can, for all things
obey him, by reason of his skill in magic'


124


So saying, Shimakh called a great bird, that had feet
like those of an elephant and four wings, each thirty cubits
long, and set Janshah on its back, bidding it carry nim to
the hermit. Now this bird flew but twice a year, and
there was with King Shimakh an officer, by name Tim-
shoun, who used every day to carry off two Bactrian
camels from the land of Irak and cut them up for it, that
it might eat them. So it rose into the air and flew on
days and nights, till it came to the mountain of the
Citadels 1 and the hermitage of Diamonds, 2 where Janshah
alighted and going up to the hermitage, found Yegmous
at his devotions. So he entered the chapel and kissing
the earth before the hermit, stood [in an attitude of
respect]. When Yegmous saw him, he said to him,
'Welcome, O my son, O pilgrim from a far country and
stranger in the lands ! Tell me the cause of thy coming
hither.' So Janshah wept and acquainted him with all
that had befallen him and that he was in quest of the
Castle of Jewels. Yegmous marvelled greatly at his story
and said, ' By Allah, O my son, never in my life heard I
of this Castle, nor saw I ever one who had heard of or
seen it, for all I was alive in the days of Noah, prophet
of God (on whom be peace), and have ruled the birds and
beasts and Jinn ever since his time ; nor do I believe that
Solomon himself knew of it. But wait till the birds and
beasts and chiefs of the Jinn come to do their homage to
me and I will question them of it; peradventure, some
one of them may be able to give us news of it and God
the Most High shall make it easy to thee [to win thither].'

So Janshah abode with the hermit, until the day of the
assembly, when Yegmous questioned all the birds and
beasts and Jinn of the Castle of Jewels, but they all re-
plied, 6 We never saw or heard of such a place.* At thisg
Janshah fell a-weeping and lamenting and prostrated him-
1 Kitae* a Elmos.


125


self in supplication to God the Most High; but, as he
was thus engaged, there flew down from the heights of
the air a great black bird, which had tarried behind the
rest, and kissed the hermit's hands. The latter asked it
of the Castle of Jewels, and it replied, saying, ' O hermit,
when I and my brothers were fledglings, we dwelt behind
the mountain Caf on a hill of crystal, in the midst of a
great desert, and our father and mother used to go and
come with our food every day. They went out one day,
[in quest of food,] and were absent from us seven days
and hunger was sore upon us ; but on the eighth day they
returned, weeping, and we asked them the reason of their
absence. Quoth they, "A Marid swooped down on us
and carried us off to the Castle of Jewels and brought
us before King Shehlan, who would have slain us; but
we told him that we had left a young brood behind us ;
so he spared our lives [and let us go]." And were my
parents yet in the bonds of life,' added the bird, 'they
would give thee news of the castle.'

When Janshah heard this, he wept and besought the
hermit to bid the bird carry him to the nest he spoke
of on the crystal hill, behind the mountain Caf. So the
hermit said to the bird, ' I desire thee to obey this youth
in whatsoever he may command thee.' ' I hear and obey/
answered the bird and taking Janshah on its back, flew
with him days and nights, till it set him down on the hill
of crystal and said, 1 This is where our nest was.' Janshah ^Tfgfjt
begged it to carry him farther on to where the old birds foxib.
used to forage for food. So it took him up again and
flew on with him seven nights and eight days, till it set
him down on the top of a high hill, named Kermous, and
left him there, saying, 4 1 know of no land behind this
hill.' Then it flew away and Janshah sat down on the
hill-top and fell asleep. When he awoke, he saw some-
what gleaming afar off [as it were lightning] and filling


126


the air with its radiance 5 and wondered what this could
be. So he descended the mountain and made towards
the light.

Now this light came from the Castle of Jewels, which
was distant two months' journey from Mount Kermous,
and its walls were fashioned of red rubies and the build-
ings within them of yellow gold. Moreover, it had a
thousand turrets builded of precious stones and metals,
brought from the Sea of Darknesses, and on this account
it was named the Castle of Jewels. It was a vast great
castle and the name of its king was King Shehlan, the
father of Shemseh and her sisters. Now, when the prin-
cess Shemseh left Janshah, she returned to the Castle of
Jewels and told her father and mother all that had passed
between the prince and herself. Quoth they, ' Thou hast
not dealt righteously with him : ' and she, ' Be sure that
he will follow me hither, for he loves me passionately.'
So King Shehlan repeated the story to his guards and
officers of the Marids of the Jinn and bade them bring
him every mortal they should see.

Now, as chance would have it, Shemseh had that very
day despatched a Marid on an occasion in the direction
of Mount Kermous, and on his way thither he caught
sight of Janshah; so he hastened up to him and saluted
him. The prince was terrified at his sight, but returned
his greeting, and the Marid said to him, 'What is thy
name?' ' My name is Janshah,' answered he, and burst-
ing into tears, related to the genie his adventures and
how he was come thither in quest of the princess Shemseh
and the Castle of Jewels. The Marid was moved to pity
by his story and said to him, 'Weep not, for thou art
come to thy desire. Know that [yonder stands the Castle
of Jewels, where dwells she whom thou seekest]* She
loves thee dear and has told her parents of thy love for
her, and all in the castle love thee for her sake ; so


127


take comfort and be of good cheer.' Then he took
him on his shoulders and made off with him to the Castle
of Jewels.

When the news of Janshah's coming reached Shemseh
and her father and mother, they all rejoiced with an ex-
ceeding joy, and King Shehlan took horse and rode out,
with all his guards and Afrits and Marids, to meet the !KTfCji)t
prince. As soon as he came up with him, he dismounted tfXXbi
and embraced him, and Janshah kissed his hand. Then
Shehlan put on him a robe of honour of vari-coloured
silk, laced with gold and set with jewels, and a coronet
such as never saw mortal king, and mounting him on a
splendid mare of the horses of the kings of the Jinn,
brought him in great state to the castle. Janshah was
dazzled by the splendour of this castle, with its walls of
rubies and other jewels and its pavement of crystal and
chrysolite and emerald, and fell a-weeping for very won-
derment; but the King wiped away his tears and said,
' Leave weeping and be of good cheer, for thou hast come
to thy desire.' Then he carried him into the inner court
of the castle, where he was received by a multitude of
beautiful damsels and pages and slaves, who seated him
in the place of honour and stood to do him service, whilst
he was lost in amazement at the goodliness of the place
and its walls, that were all builded of precious metals
and jewels

Meanwhile, King Shehlan repaired to his hall of audience,
where he sat down on his throne and bidding his atten-
dants bring in the prince, rose to receive him and seated
him by his own side on the throne. Then he called for
food and they ate and drank and washed their hands :
after which in came the Queen, Shemseh's mother, and
saluting Janshah, bade him welcome. 1 Thou hast come
to thy desire after weariness./ quoth she, 'and thine eyes
sleep after watching; so praised be God for thy safety! 5


128


So saying, she went away and forthwith returned with the
princess Shemseh, who saluted Janshah and kissed his
hands, hanging her head in confusion ; after which her
sisters came up to him and greeted him in like manner.

Then said the Queen to him, ' my son, our daughter
Shemseh hath indeed sinned against thee, but do thou
pardon her for our sakes.' When Janshah heard this, he
cried out and fell down in a swoon, and they sprinkled on
his face rose-water mingled with musk and civet, till he
came to himself and looking at Shemseh, said, ' Praised be
God who hath brought me to my desire and quenched the
fire of my heart ! ' ' May He preserve thee from the Fire ! '
replied she. f But now tell me what hath befallen thee
since our parting and how thou madest thy way to this
place; seeing that few even of the Jinn ever heard of the
Castle of Jewels and we are beyond the dominion of any
king nor knoweth any the road hither.'

So he related to her all the adventures and perils and
hardships he had suffered for her sake and how he had
left his father at war with the King of Hind. Quoth
the Queen, ' Now hast thou thy heart's desire, for the
princess Shemseh is thy handmaid, we give her to thee •
and next month, if it be the will of God the Most
High, we will celebrate the marriage festival and send
you both back to thy native land, with an escort of a
thousand Marids, the least of whom, if thou shouldst
bid him slay King Kefid and his people, would destroy

tNffgftt tnem t0 tne * ast man * n ^ e twm kling of an eye/
ftnbtt Then King Shehlan sat down on his throne and sum-
moning his grandees and officers of state, bade them
make ready for the marriage festivities and decorate the
city seven days and nights. * We hear and obey,' answered
they and busied themselves two months in the prepara-
tions, after which they celebrated the marriage of the
prince and princess and held a mighty festival, never


129


was seen its like. Then they brought Janshah in to his
bride and he abode with her in all delight and solace of
life two years, at the end of which time, he said to her,
'Thy father promised to send us to my native land, that
we might pass one year there and the next here.' ' I heal
and obey,' answered she and going in to King Shehlan at
nightfall, told him what the prince had said. Quoth he,
' Have patience with me till the first of the month, that
I may make ready for your departure.'

Accordingly, they waited till the appointed time, when
the King brought out to them a great litter of red gold,
set with pearls and jewels and covered with a canopy of
green silk, painted in the liveliest colours and embroidered
with precious stones, dazzling the eyes with its goodliness.
Moreover, he gave his daughter three hundred beautiful
damsels to wait upon her and bestowed on Janshah the
like number of white slaves of the sons of the Jinn, Then
he mounted the litter, with Janshah and Shemseh and their
suite, after the prince and princess had taken leave of the
latter's mother and family, and chose out four of his officers
to carry the litter.

So the four Marids took it up, each by one corner, and
rising with it into the air, flew onward till mid-day, when
the King bade them set down the litter and they all
alighted. Then they took leave of one another and King
Shehlan commended Shemsheh to the prince's care, and
giving them in charge to the Marids, returned to the
Castle of Jewels, whilst the prince and princess remounted
the litter, and the Marids, taking it up, flew on for ten
whole days, in each of which they accomplished thirty
months' journey, till they came in sight of King Teigmous's
capital Now one of them knew the land of Kabul ; so,
when he saw the city, he bade the others set down the H't^fffe
litter there. &a6t&

Meanwhile, King Teigmous had been routed and fled

VOL. V. 9


IJO


into the city, where King Kefid laid close siege to him and
he was in sore straits. He sought to make peace with the
King of Hind, but the latter would give him no quarter ;
so, seeing himself without resource or hope of relief, he
determined to strangle himself and be at rest from this
trouble and misery. Accordingly, he bade his Viziers and
officers farewell and entered his house, to take leave of his
harem ; and the whole place was full of weeping and wail-
ing and lamentation. In the midst of the general desola-
tion, the Marids came down with the litter upon the palace,
that was in the citadel, and Janshah bade them set it down
in the midst of the Divan. They did his bidding and he
descended with his company and seeing all the folk of the
city in grief and desolation and sore distress, said to the
princess, ' O beloved of my heart and solace of mine eyes,
see in what a piteous plight is my father ! ' Thereupon she
bade the Marids fall upon the besieging host and slay
them all, even to the last man ; and Janshah commanded
one of them, by name Keratesh, who was exceeding strong
and valiant, to bring King Kefid to him in chains. So
they waited till midnight, when they repaired to the
enemy's camp, and Keratesh made straight for Kefid 's
tent, where he found him lying on a couch. So he took
him up, shrieking for fear, and flew with him to Janshah,
who bade the four Marids bind him on the litter and sus-
pend him in the air over his camp, that he might witness
the slaughter of his men. They did as the prince bade
them and leaving Kefid, who had swooned for fear, hang-
ing in the air, fell upon the enemy's camp.

As for King Teigmous, when he saw his son, he well-
nigh died for excess of joy and giving a loud cry, fell down
in a swoon. They sprinkled rose-water on his face, till he
came to himself, when he and his son embraced and wept
sore. Then the princess Shemseh accosted the King and
kissing his hand, invited him to go up with her to the roof


j


13 s

of the palace and witness the slaughter of his enemies by
her father's Marids. So he went up to the roof and sitting
down there with his son and daughter-in-law, watched the
Marids do havoc among the besiegers and marvelled at
their manner of waging war. For one of them smote upon
the elephants and their riders with maces of iron and
pounded men and beast into one shapeless heap of flesh,
whilst another blew in the faces of those who fled, so that
they fell down dead, and the third caught up a score of
horsemen, beasts and all, and flying up with them into the
air, cast them down from on high, so that they were torn t&Ct^l
in pieces or crushed to atoms in the fall. tJXXlX*

When King Kefid came to himself, he found himself
hanging between heaven and earth and marvelled at this.
Then he saw the slaughter of his troops and wept sore
and buffeted his face ; nor did the carnage cease among
the army of Hind for two whole days, till" they were cut
off even to the last man, when Janshah commanded a,
Marid, by name Shimwal, to clap King Kefid in irons
and lay him in prison in a place called the Black Tower.
Then King Teigmous bade beat the drums and despatched
messengers to announce the glad news to Janshah's mother,
who mounted forthright and rode to the palace, where she
no sooner espied her son than she clasped him in her arms
and swooned away for stress of joy. They sprinkled
rose-water on her face, till she came to herself, when she
embraced him again and wept for excess of gladness.
When the lady Shemseh knew of her coming, she came
to her and saluted her, and they embraced each other
and sat down to converse.

Meanwhile, King Teigmous threw open the gates of the
town and despatched couriers to ail parts oi the kingdom,
to announce his happy deliverance, whereupon all his
vassals and officers and the notables of the realm flocked
to give him joy of his victory and of the safe return of


132

his son &.ad brought him great plenty of rich gifts and
presents. Then he made a second bride-feast for the
princess Shemseh, and they decorated the city and held
high festival ; after which they unveiled the bride before
Janshah with the utmost magnificence, and the latter
presented her with a hundred beautiful slave-girls to wait
upon her.

Some days after this, the princess went in to the King
and interceded with him for Kefid, saying, ' Let him return
to his own land, and if henceforward he be minded to do
thee any hurt, I will bid one of the Marids snatch him
up and bring him to thee.' ' I hear and obey,' replied
Teigmous and bade Shimwal bring him the prisoner, who
came and kissed the earth before him. Then he com-
manded to strike off his chains and mounting him on a lame
mare, said to him, ' The princess Shemseh hath interceded
for thee . so begone to thy kingdom,, but if thou fall again
to thine old tricks, she will send one of the Marids to
seize thee and bring thee hither.'
Wfgf)t So Kefid set off homeward, in the sorriest of plights,
whilst Janshah and his wife abode in all delight and solace
of life, passing every second year with Shemseh's father and
mother at the Castle of Jewels, whither they betook not
themselves but in the litter aforesaid, borne by the Marids
and flying between heaven and earth ; and the length of
their journey thither from the land of Kabul was ten days,
in each of which they accomplished thirty months' travel.

They abode on this wise a long while, till, one year, they
set out for the Castle of Jewels, as of their wont, and on
their way thither alighted in this island to rest and take
their pleasure therein. They sat down on the river-bank
and ate and drank ; after which, the princess, having a
mind to bathe, put off her clothes and plunged into the
water. Her women followed her example and they swam
about awhile, whilst Janshah walked on along the bank of


133


the stream. Presently, as they were swimming about and
playing with one another, a huge shark seized the princess
by the leg, and she cried out and died forthright, whilst
the damsels fled out of the river to the pavilion, to escape
from the shark ; but, after awhile, they returned and taking
her up, carried her to the litter.

When Janshah saw his wife dead, he fell down in &
swoon and they sprinkled water on his face, till he re-
covered and wept over her. Then he despatched the
Marids, to bear the sad news to her parents and family,
who presently came thither and washed her and shrouded
her ; after which they buried her by the river-side and made
mourning for her. They would have carried Janshah with
them to the Castle of Jewels ; but he said to King Shehlan,
4 1 beseech thee to dig me a grave beside her tomb, that ;
when I die, I may be buried by her side.' Accordingly,
the King commanded one of his Marids to do as Janshah
wished, after which they departed and left me here to
weep and mourn for her till I die ; for I," said the young
man, 4< am Janshah and this is my story and the reason of
my sojourn between these two tombs." And he repeated
the following verses :

Home is no longer home to me, now ye are gone away, Nor is the
pleasant neighbour now a neighbour, sooth to say.

The comrade, whom withal therein I companied, no more A comrade
and eke the lights [of heaven] no lights are they.


When Beloukiya heard Janshah's story, he marvelled tN"fgf)f
and exclaimed, " By Allah, O my brother, methought I tSXXX,L
had indeed wandered over the world and compassed it

about ; but thy story maketh me to forget all I have sees.
And now/* added he, " I beg thee, of thy favour and
courtesy, to direct me in the way of safety." So Janshah


134


directed him into the right road, and Beloukiya took lea.ve
of him and fared on nights and days, till he came to
a great sea; so he anointed his feet with the juice of
the magical herb and setting out over the water, sped
onward till he came to an island abounding in trees and
springs and fruits, as it were Paradise. He landed and
walked about, till he saw an immense tree, with leaves
as big as the sails of a ship. So he went up to the tree
and found under it a table spread with all manner rich
meats, whilst on the branches sat a great bird, whose
body was of pearls and emeralds, its feet of silver,
its beak of red cornelian and its feathers of precious
j^flQjjt metals, and it was engaged in singing the praises of God
tXXXJCtio. the Most High and blessing Mohammed, on whom be
benediction and peace 1

When Beloukiya saw the bird, hp said, " What manner
of creature art thou and what dost thou here ? " Quoth
the bird, u I am one of the birds of Eden [and followed
Adam,] when God the Most High cast him out thence.
Now Adam took with him four leaves of the trees of the
garden, to cover his nakedness withal, and they fell to
the ground after awhile. One of them was eaten by
a worm, and of it came silk : the gazelles ate the second
and thence came musk ; the third was eaten by bees and
gave rise to honey, whilst the fourth fell in the land of
Hind and from it sprang all manner spices. As for me,
I wandered over the earth, till God gave me this island
for a dwelling-place, and I took up my abode here. This
table thou seest is spread by God the Most High for the
entertainment of all the saints and holy men of the world,
who come hither every Friday and visit the place and eat
of this food ; and after they have eat-. , the table is caken
up again to heaven ; nor doth the food ever waste o*
corrupt." So Beloukiya ate his fill of the meats and
praised God the Most High.


i3S


Presently, there came up El Khizr 1 (on whom be peace),
at sight of whom Beloukiya rose and saluting him, was
about to withdraw, when the bird said to him, " Sit, O
Beloukiya, in the presence of El Khizr, on whom be
peace ! " So he sat down again, and El Khizr asked him
who he was and how he came there. Beloukiya related
to him all his adventures and enquired how far it was
thence to Cairo. " Five-and-ninety years' journey," replied
the prophet ; whereupon Beloukiya burst into tears, then,
falling at El Khizr's feet, kissed them and said to him,
" O my lord, I beseech thee to deliver me from this
strangerhood • for that I am nigh upon death and know
not what to do, and thy reward be with God." Quoth
El Khizr, " Pray to God the Most High to allow me to
carry thee to Cairo, ere thou perish."

So Beloukiya wept and offered up supplication to God,
who granted his prayer and bade El Khizr carry him to
his people. Then said the prophet, u Lift thy head, for
God hath heard thy prayer ; so take fast hold of me with
both thy hands and shut thine eyes." The prince did as
he was bidden and El Khizr took a step forward, then
said to him, " Open thine eyes." So Beloukiya opened
his eyes and found himself at the door of his palace at
Cairo. He turned, to take leave of El Khizr, but found
no trace of him and entered the palace. When his mother "j^g^i
saw him, she gave a loud cry and swooned away for excess JjxXXttt.
of joy, and they sprinkled water upon her face. After a
while she came to herself and embraced her son and

1 One of the legendary saints of the Muslims, often confounded with
Elias and sometimes also with St. George of Cappadocia, but held by
the best authorities to have been a true-believing Persian and Vizier to
King Kaikobad (founder of the Kayanian dynasty in the sixth century
before Christ), who, having found and drank of the wmer of li to, received
the <dft of immortality and wili not die tiii the blowing of the first
trumpet. The name El Xlnzr (green) denotes litis unlading youth.


136


wept sore, whilst Beloukiya wept and laughed by turns.
Then all his friends and kindred came and gave him joy
of his safe return, and the good news was noised abroad
in the land and there came to him presents from all parts.
Moreover, they beat the drums and blew the flutes and
rejoiced mightily. Then Beloukiya related to them his
adventures, at which they marvelled exceedingly and wept,
till all were weary of weeping.


All this the Queen of the Serpents related to Hasib
Kerimeddin, and he said to her, ' But how knowest thou
of these things ? 5 'O Hasib,' answered she, ' it was on
this wise. Thou must know that I once had occasion, some
five-and-twenty years ago, to send one of my serpents to
Egypt and gave her a letter for Beloukiya, saluting him.
So she carried the letter to him and he read it and said to
the messenger, " I have a mind to go with thee to the
Queen of the Serpents, for I have an occasion to her."
Quoth she, " Close thine eyes." So he closed them and
opening them again, found himself on the mountain where
I now am. Then his guide carried him to a great serpent,
and he saluted the latter and asked for me. " She hath
gone to the Mountain Caf," answered the serpent, " as is
her wont in the winter ; but next summer she will come
hither again. As often as she goeth thither, she appointed!
me to reign in her room, during her absence ; and if thou
have any occasion to her, I will accomplish it for thee. 5 '
Quoth he, u I beg thee to bring me the herb, which whoso
crusheth and drinketh the juice thereof sickeneth not
neither groweth grey nor dieth." " Tell me first," said the
serpent, u what befell thee since thou leftest the Queen of
the Serpents, to go with Uffan in quest of King Solomon's
tomb/ 5 So he related to her all his travels and adventures*,
including the history of Jans hah, and besought her to grant


237


him his request, that he might go to his own country,**
" By the virtue of the lord Solomon," replied she, " I know
not where the herb of which thou speakest is to be found."
Then she bade the serpent, which had brought him thither,
carry him back to Egypt : so the latter said to him, " Shut
thine eyes." He did so and opening them again, found
himself on the mountain Mukettem. 1 When I returned
from the mountain Caf,' added the Queen, i the serpent ray
deputy informed me of Beloukiya's visit and repeated to
me his story : and this, O Hasib, is how I came to know
the adventures of Beloukiya and the history of Prince
Jan shah of Kabul.'

Hasib marvelled at the Queen's story and wept many
tears over it ; then he again besought her to let him
return to his family ; but she said, ' I fear me that, when
thou gettest back to earth, thou wilt fail of thy promise
and prove traitor to thine oath and enter the bath.' But
he swore to her another solemn oath that he would never
again enter the bath as long as he lived ; whereupon she
called a serpent and bade her carry him up to the surface
of the earth. So the serpent took him and led him from
place to place, till she brought him out on the platform
of an abandoned cistern [and there left him].

He walked to the city and coming to his house by the
last of the day, at the season of the yellowing of the sun 5
knocked at the door. His mother opened it and seeing
her son, screamed out and threw herself upon him and
wept for excess of joy. His wife heard her mother-in-law
weeping ; so she came out to her and seeing her husband*
saluted him and kissed his hands ; and each rejoiced in
other with an exceeding joy. Then they entered the house
and sat down to converse ; and presently Hasib asked his
mother of the woodcutters, who had left him to perish in

* A range of mountains immediately without Cairo on the eastern side,


138

the cistern. Quoth she, ' They came and told me that a
wolf had eaten thee in the valley. As for them, they aie
become merchants and own houses and shops, and the
world is grown wide for them. But every day they bring
me meat and drink, and thus have they done since I lost
thee.' ' To-morrow,' said Hasib, ' do thou go to them and
say, " My son Hasib hath returned from his travels ; so
come ye and salute him.'"

Accordingly, on the morrow, she repaired to the wood-
cutters' houses and delivered to them her son's message,
which when they heard, they changed colour and gave her
each a suit of silk, embroidered with gold, saying, 'Give
this to thy son and tell him that we will be with him to-
morrow.' So she returned to Hasib and gave him their
together a number of merchants and acquainting them
presents and message. Meanwhile, the woodcutters called
with all that had passed between themselves and Hasib,
took counsel with them what they should do. Quoth the
merchants, ' It behoves each one of you to give him half
his goods and slaves ; ' and they agreed to do this.

So, next day, each of them took half his wealth and
going in to Hasib, saluted him and kissed his hands.
Then they laid before him what they had brought, saying,
1 This of thy bounties, and we are in thy hands.' He
accepted their peace-offering and said to them, ' What is
past is past : that which befell us was decreed of God and
destiny avoideth precaution.' Quoth they, 4 Come, let us
walk about and take our pleasure in the city and visit the
bath.' 1 Not so/ answered he. ' I have taken an oath
never again to enter the bath, so long as I live.' ' At
least,' rejoined they, ' come to our houses, that we may
entertain thee.' He agreed to this, and each of them
entertained him for a night and a day ; nor did they cease
to do thus for a whole week [for they were seven in
number].


139


Hasib was now master of lands and houses and shops,
and all the merchants of the city foregathered with him
and he told them all that had befallen him. He became
one of the chief of them and abode thus awhile, till, one
day, as he was walking in the town, he chanced to pass
the door of a bath, whose keeper was one of his friends.
When the bathman saw him, he ran up to him and saluted ■.
him and embraced him, saying, 'Favour me by entering
the bath and washing, that I may show thee hospitality.'
Hasib refused, alleging that he had taken a solemn oath
never again to enter the bath ; but the bathman was instant
with him, saying, ' Be my three wives triply divorced, an
thou enter not and be washed ! ' When Hasib heard him
thus conjure him by the triple oath of divorcement, he
was confounded and replied, ' O my brother, hast thou
a mind to ruin me and make my children orphans and lay
a load of sin upon my neck ? ' But the man threw himself
at his feet and kissed them, saying, ' I conjure thee to
enter, and be the sin on my neck ! ' Then all the people
of the bath set upon Hasib and dragging him in, pulled off
his clothes.

So, seeing no help for it, he sat down against the wall
and began to pour water on his head ; but hardly had he
done so, when a score of men accosted him, saying,
' Come with us to the Sultan, for thou art his debtor/
Then they despatched a messenger to the Sultan's Vizier,
who straightway took horse and rode, attended by three-
score men, to the bath, where he alighted and going in
to Hasib, saluted him and said, ' Welcome to thee ! '
Then he gave the bathman a hundred dinars and mounting
Hasib on a charger he had brought with him, returned
with him to the Sultan's palace, where he set food before
him and clad him in two dresses of honour, each worth
five thousand dinars. When ihey had eaten and drunken
and washed their hands, the Vizier said to Hasib, ' Knov«


that God hath been merciful to us, for the Sultan is nigh
upon death for leprosy, and the books tell us that his life
is in thy hands.' Then he took him and carried him
through the seven vestibules of the palace, till they came
to the King's chamber.

Now the name of this King was Kerezdan, King of
Persia and of the Seven Countries, and under his sway
were a hundred sovereign princes, sitting on chairs of
red gold, and ten thousand captains, under each one's
hand a hundred deputies and as many sword-bearers and
axe-men. They found the King lying on a bed, with his
head wrapped in a napkin, and groaning for excess of
pain. When Hasib saw this ordinance, his wit was dazed
for awe of the King : so he kissed the earth, before him
and invoked blessings on him. Then the Grand Vizier,
whose name was Shemhour, rose (whilst all present rose
also to do him honour) and welcoming Hasib, seated him
on a *"§ n chair at the King's right hand ; after which he
ftXXXtb. ca -hed for food and the tables were laid.

When they had eaten and drunken and washed their
hands, Shemhour turned to Hasib and said to him, ' We are
all thy servants and will give thee whatsoever thou seekest,
even to the half of the kingdom, so thou wilt but cure
the King.' So saying, he led him to the royal couch,
and Hasib, uncovering the King's face, saw that he was
at the last extremity : so he said to the Vizier, ' It is true
that I am the son of the prophet Daniel, but I know
nothing of his art : for they put me thirty days in the
school of medicine and I learnt nothing of the craft. I
would well I knew somewhat thereof and might heal the
King.' When the Grand Vizier heard this, he bent over
Hasib's hand and kissed it, saying, ' Do not multiply words
upon us i for, though we should gather together to us
physicians from the East and from the West, none could
heal the King but thou/" £ How can I heal him/'


141

rejoined Hasib, ' seeing I know neither his disease noi
its remedy ? ' ' His cure is in thy hands,' replied Shem-
hour ; and Hasib said, 1 If I knew the remedy of his
sickness, I would heal him.' Quoth the Vizier, 'Thou
knowest it right well ; the remedy of his sickness is the
Queen of the Serpents, and thou knowest her abiding-
place and hast been with her.'

When Hasib heard this, he knew that all this came of
his entering the bath and repented, whenas repentance
availed nothing ; then said he, c What is the Queen of the
Serpents ? I know her not nor ever in my life heard I of
this name.' ' Deny not the knowledge of her,' rejoined
the Vizier ; 'for I have proof that thou knowest her and
hast passed two years with her. 5 ' I never saw nor heard
of her till this moment,' repeated Hasib ; whereupon
Shemhour opened a book and after making sundry calcu-
lations, raised his head and spoke [oi: read] "as fallows .
' The Queen of the Serpents shall foregather with a man
and he shall abide with her two years ; then shall he return
from her and come forth to the surface of the earth, and
when he enters the bath, his belly will become black.'
Then said he, ' Look at thy belly. 5 So Hasib looked at
his own belly and behold, it was black : but he [still
denied and] said, 4 My belly was black from the day my
mother bore me.' Quoth the Vizier, ' I had posted three
men at the door of every bath, bidding them note all who
entered and let me know when they found one whose belly
was black ; so, when thou enteredst, they looked at thy
belly and finding it black, sent and told me, after we had
all but despaired of coming across thee. All we want of
thee is to show us the place whence thou earnest out and
after go thy ways ; for we have those with us who will take
the Queen of the Serpents and fetch her to us.' Then all
the other Viziers and officers and grandees flocked about
Hasib and conjured him, till they were weary, to show


I 4 2


them the abode of the Queen but he persisted in his
denial, saying, ' I never saw nor heard of such a creature/

When the Grand Vizier saw that entreaties availed
nothing, he called the hangman and bade him strip Hasib
and beat him soundly. So he beat him, till he saw death
face to face, for excess of pain, and the Vizier said to him,
c Why wilt thou persist in denial, whenas we have proof
that thou knowest the abiding-place of the Queen of the
Serpents ? Show us the place whence thou earnest out and
go from us ; we have with us one who will take her, and
no harm shall befall thee.' Then he raised him and giving
him a dress of honour of cloth of gold, embroidered with
jewels, spoke him fair, till he yielded and consented to
show them the place.

At this, the Vizier rejoiced greatly and they all took
horse and rode, guided by Hasib, till they came to the
cavern where he had found the cistern full of honey. He
entered, sighing and weeping, and showed them the well
whence he had issued ; whereupon the Vizier sat down
thereby and sprinkling perfumes upon a chafing-dish, began
to mutter charms and conjurations, for he was a crafty
magician and diviner and skilled in cabalistic arts. He
repeated three several formulas of conjuration and threw
fresh incense upon the brasier, crying out and saying,
' Come forth, O Queen of the Serpents ! ' When, behold,
the water of the well sank down and disappeared and a
great door opened in the side, from which came a great
noise of crying like unto thunder, so terrible that they
thought the well would fall in and all present fell down in
a swoon ; nay, some even died [for fright].

Presently, there issued from the well a serpent as big as
an elephant, casting out sparks, like red hot coals, from
its mouth and eyes and bearing on its back a charger of
red gold, set with pearls and jewels, In the midst whereof
lay a serpent with a human face, from whose body issued


143


such a splendour that the place was illumined thereby.
She turned right and left, till her eyes fell upon Hasib,
to whom said she, ' Where is the covenant thou madest
with me and the oath thou sworest to me, that thou
wouldst never again enter the bath? But there is no
recourse against destiny nor can any flee from that which
is written on his forehead. God hath appointed the end
of my life to be at thy hand, and it is His will that I be
slain and King Kerezdan healed of his malady.' So
saying, she wept sore and Hasib wept with her. As for
the Vizier Shemhour, he put out his hand to lay hold of
her ; but she said to him, c Hold thy hand, O accursed one,
or I will blow upon thee and reduce thee to a heap of
black ashes. 5 Then she cried out to Hasib, saying, ' Put
out thine hand and take me and lay me in the brass dish
that is with you : then set me on thy head, for my death
was fore-ordained, from the beginning of the world, to be
at thy hand, and thou hast no power to avert it.' So he
took her and laid her in the dish, and the well returned
to its natural state.

Then they set out on their return to the city, Hasib
carrying the dish on his head, and as they went along,
the Queen of the Serpents said to him privily, * Hearken
to me, and I will give thee a friendly counsel, for all thou
hast broken faith with me and been false to thine oath ;
but this was fore-ordained from all eternity. It is this :
when thou comest to the Vizier's house, he will bid thee
kill me and cut me in three; but do thou refuse, saying,
" I know not how to slaughter," and leave him to do it
himself. When he has killed me, he will lay the three
pieces in a brass pot and set it on the fire. Then there
will come a messenger, to bid him to the King, and he
will say to thee s 55 Keep up the fire under the pot, till the
scum rises; then skim it off and pour it into a phial to
cool. As soon as it is cool, drink it and neither ache


144


nor pain will be left in all thy body. When the second
scum rises, skim it off and pour it into a phial against
my return, that I may drink it for an ailment I have in
my loins." Then will he go to the King, and when he
is gone, do thou wait till the first scum rises and set it
aside in a phial ; but beware of drinking it, or no good
will befall thee. When the second scum rises, skim it off
and put it in a phial, which keep for thyself. When the
Vizier returns and asks for the second phial, give him
3sTlO[!jl the first and note what will happen to him/ Then drink
ftXXXb. the contents of the second phial and thy heart will become
■the abode of wisdom. After this, take up the flesh and
laying it in a brazen platter, carry it to the King and give
him to eat thereof. When he has eaten it and it has
settled in his stomach, cover his face with a handkerchief
and wait by him till noonday, when he will have digested
the meat Then give him somewhat of wine to drink and
by the decree of God the Most High he will be healed
of his disease and be made whole as he was. This, then,
is ray charge to thee ; give ear unto it and keep > it in thy
memory.'

Presently, they came to the Vizier's house, and he said
to Hasib., ' Come in with me.' So he entered and set
down the platter, whilst the troops dispersed and went
each his own way, and the Vizier bade him kill the
Queen of the Serpents ; but he said, ' I am no butcher
and never in my life killed I aught. An thou wilt have
her slaughtered, kill her with thine own hand. 5 So
Shemhour took the Queen from the platter and slew her,
whereat Hasib wept sore and the Vizier laughed at him s
saying, ' O wittol, how canst thou weep for the killing of a
serpent ? ' Then he cut her in three and laying the pieces
in a brass pot, set. it on the fire and sat down to await the
cooking of the flesh.

Presently, there came a messenger from the King, who


said to him, s The King calls for thee forthright ; ' and he
answered, £ I hear and obey.' So he gave Hasib two phials
and bade him drink the first scum and keep the second
against his return, even as the Queen of the Serpents had
foretold ; after which he went away and Hasib tended
the fire under the pot, till the first scum rose, when he
skimmed it off and set it aside in one of the phials. After
a while, the second scum rose ; so he skimmed it off and
putting it in the other phial, kept it for himself.

When the meat was done, he took the cauldron off the
fire and sat waiting, till the Vizier came back and said to
him, ' Hast thou done as I told thee?' ' Yes,' answered
Hasib. Quoth the Vizier, ' What hast thou done with the
first scum ? ' 'I drank it but now,' replied Hasib, and
Shemhour said, 'Feelst thou no change in thy body?'
' Yes,' answered Hasib ; ' I feel as I were on fire from
head to foot.' The crafty Vizier made no t'eply, but said,
4 Give me the second phial, that I may drink what is
therein, so haply I may be made whole of this ailment
in my loins.' So Hasib brought him the first phial and
he drank it off, thinking it contained the second scum.
Hardly had he done this, when the phial fell from his hand
and he swelled out and dropped down dead; and thus
was exemplified in him the saying, ' He, who diggeth a
pit for his brother, falleth into it himself/

When Hasib saw this, he wondered and feared to drink
of the second phial ; but he remembered the Queen's
injunction and bethought him that the Vizier would not
have reserved the second scum for himself, had there
been aught of hurt therein. So he said, ' I put my trust
in God,' and drank off the contents of the phial. No
sooner had he done so than God the Most High made
the fountains of wisdom to well up in his heart and
opened to him the sources of knowledge, and joy and
gladness overcame him. Then he laid the serpent's flesh on
a platter of brass and went forth to carry it to the palace.

VOL. V. I©


146


On his way thither, he raised his eyes and saw the.
seven heavens and all that therein is, even to the lote-
tree, beyond which there is no passing, 1 and the manner of
the revolution of the spheres. Moreover, God discovered
to him the ordinance of the planets and the scheme of
their movements and the fixed stars, and he saw the con-
formation of the sea and land and understood the causes
and consequences of eclipses of the sun and moon, whereby
he became informed with the knowledge of the arts of
geometry and cosmography, as well as those of astrology
and astronomy and mathematics and all that hangs thereby.
Then he looked at the earth and saw all minerals and
vegetables that are therein and knew their virtues and
properties, so that he became in an instant versed in
medicine and chemistry and natural magic and the art
of making gold and silver.

When he came to the palace v he went in to the King
and kissing the earth before him, said, < Thou hast outlived
thy Vizier Shemhour.' The King was sore troubled at the
news of the Grand Vizier's death and wept sore for him,
whilst his grandees and officers wept also. Then said
Kerezdan, ' He was with me but now, in all health, and
went away to fetch me the flesh of the Queen of the
Serpents, if it should be cooked ; what befell him, that
he is now dead, and what calamity hath betided him ? '
So Hasib told him how he had drunk the contents of the
phial and had forthwith swelled out and died. The King
mourned sore for his loss and said, 'What shall I do
without him ? ' 4 Grieve not, O King of the age/ rejoined
Hasib ; ' for I will cure thee in three days and leave no
whit of disease in thy body.' At this the King's breast
dilated and he said, ' I will well to be made whole of this
affliction, though after years.'

So iY.i: r»}aitc) before the King and made him

1 Koran liii. 14.


147


eat a piece of the flesh of the Queen of the Serpents,
Then he covered him up and spreading a napkin over his
face, bade him sleep. He slept from noon till sundown,
when, his stomach having digested the piece of flesh, he
awoke. Hasib gave him to drink and bade him sleep
again. So he slept till the morning, and on the morrow,
Hasib made him eat another piece of the flesh ; and thus
he did with him three days following, till he had eaten
the whole, when his skin began to shrivel up and peel off
in scales and he sweated, so that the sweat ran down from
his head to his feet. Therewith he became whole and
there abode in him no whit of disease, which when Hasib
saw, he carried him to the bath and washed his body ;
and when he came forth, it was like a wand of silver and
he was restored to perfect health, nay, sounder than he
had ever been.

So he donned his richest robes and seating himself on
his throne, made Hasib sit beside him. Then he called
for food, and they ate and drank and washed their hands ;
after which ail his Viziers and Amirs and captains and the
grandees of his realm and the chiefs of the people came in
to him and gave him joy of his recovery ; and they beat
the drums and decorated the city in token of rejoicing.
Then said the King to the assembly, ' O Viziers and Amirs
and grandees, this is Hasib Kerimeddin, who hath healed 3Ct($fjl
me of my sickness, and I make him my chief Vizier in the tft'Hbt
room of the Vizier Shemhour. He who loves him loves
me and he who honours him honours me and he who
obeys him obeys me.' ' We hear and obey/ answered they
and flocked to kiss Hasib's hand and give him joy of the
Vizierate.

Then the King bestowed on him a splendid dress of
honour of cloth of gold, set with pearls and jewels, the
least of which was worth five thousand dinars. Moreover,
lie gave him three hundred male white slaves and the like


148


mvrnber of concubines, as they were moons, and three hun-
dred Abyssinian slave-girls, beside five hundred mules laden
with treasure and sheep and oxen and buffaloes and other
cattle, beyond count, and commanded all his Viziers and
Amirs and grandees and notables and the officers of his
household and his subjects in general to bring him gifts.

Then Hasib took horse and rode, followed by the Viziers
and Amirs and grandees and all the troops, to the house
which the King had set apart for him, where he sat down
on a chair and the Viziers and Amirs came up to him and
kissed his hand and gave him joy of the Vizierate, vying
with each other in paying court to him. When his mother
and household knew what had happened, they rejoiced
greatly and congratulated him on his good fortune, and
the woodcutters also came and gave him joy. Then he
mounted again and riding to the house of the late Vizier,
laid hands on all that was therein and transported it to his
own abode.

Thus did Hasib, from a know-nothing, unskilled to read
writing, become, by the decree of God the Most High,
proficient in all sciences and versed in all manner of
knowledge, so that the fame of his learning was blazed
abroad in all the land and he became renowned for pro-
found skill in medicine and astronomy and geometry and
astrology and alchemy and natural magic and the Cabala
and all other arts and sciences.

One day, he said to his mother, ' My father Daniel was
exceeding wise and learned ; tell me what he left by way
of books or what not.' So his mother brought him the
chest and taking out the five leaves aforesaid, gave them
to him, saying, 'These five scrolls are all thy father left
thee.' So he read them and said to her, ' O my mother;,
these leaves are part of a book. Where is the rest? 9
Quoth she. 'Thy father was shipwrecks; a ffhile before
thy birth and lost all his books, save these five scrolls.'


149


Then she told him how Daniel had committed them to
her care, enjoining her, if she bore a male child, to give
them to him, when he grew up and asked what his father
had left him. And Hasib abode in all delight and solace
of life, till there came to him the Destroyer of Delights
and the Sunderer of Companies,


SINDBAD THE SAILOR AND SINDBAD THE
PORTER.

There lived in the city of Baghdad, in the reign of the
Khalif Haroun er Reshid, a porter named Sindbad, a poor
man who carried [burdens] on his head for hire. One
day of great heat he was carrying a heavy load and what
with the heat and the burden, he became exceeding weary
and sweated amain. Presently he came to the gate of a
merchant's house, before which the ground was swept and
watered, and there the air was temperate. There was a
wide bench beside the door ; so he set his load thereon,
to rest and take breath, and there came out upon him ^{crljf
from the porch a pleasant breeze and a delicious fragrance. tJX'XXbti
He sat down on the edge of the bench, to enjoy this, and
heard from within the melodious sound of lutes and other
stringed instruments and heart-delighting voices singing
and reciting all manner verses with clear and goodly
speech, together with the song of birds warbling and
glorifying God the Most High in various voices and
tongues, turtles and mocking-birds and merles and night-
ingales and cushats and curlews, whereat he marvelled in
himself and was moved to great delight.

Then he went up to the gate and saw within a great
garden, wherein were slaves and pages and such a train of
servants and attendants and so forth as is only found with,
kings and sultans, and there was wafted to him the


150

fragrance of all manner rich and delicate meats and
generous wines. So he raised his eyes to heaven and
said, 'Glory to Thee, O Lord, O Creator and Provider,
who providest whom Thou wilt without stint ! my God,
I cry Thee pardon for all sins and repent to Thee of all
offences ! O Lord, there is no gainsaying Thee in Thine
ordinance and Thy dominion, neither wilt Thou be ques-
tioned of that Thou dost, for Thou indeed art Almighty,
extolled be Thy perfection ! Whom Thou wilt Thou
makest rich and whom Thou wilt Thou rnakest poor S
Whom Thou wilt Thou exaltest and whom Thou wilt
Thou abasest and there is no god but Thou 1 How great
is Thy majesty and how mighty Thy dominion and how
excellent Thy governance ! Verily, Thou favourest whom
Thou wilt of Thy servants, whereby the owner of this
place abideth in all delight of life and taketh his ease of
pleasant scents and delicious meats'' and generous wines of
all kinds. For indeed Thou appointest unto Thy servants
that which Thou wilt and that which Thou hast fore-
ordained unto them ; wherefore are some weary and some
easeful and some enjoy fair fortune and delight, whilst
other some suffer the extreme of travail and misery, even
as do I.' And he recited the following verses :

How many by my toil, unresting and unstayed. Do joy in pleasant food

and cool, delightful shade !
Indeed, I pass my days in weariness galore ; Strange is my case and

sore the load upon me laid ;
Whilst others, who ne'er knew a burden like to mine, Delight in fortune

fair, untroubled nor dismayed.
They take their ease of life and eat and drink at will, With affluence

and power by favouring Fate purveyed ;
Yet am I like to these and they are like to me, And of a drop of sperm

each living soul is made.
Natheless, 'twixt them and me a difference there is, As 'twere 't«vixt

vinegar and wine, •when all is said.
Yet, nowise, O my God, I think to rail at Thee | Thou'rt wise and jasl

Thy sway and none may Thee upbraid.


i5i

When he had made an end of his verses, he took up his
burden and was about to fare on, when there came forth
the gate to him a little fair-faced page, well-shaped and
richly clad, who caught him by the hand, saying, 1 Come
in and speak with my lord, for he calls for thee.' The
porter would have excused himself, but the page would
take no refusal ; so he left his load with the doorkeeper in
the vestibule and followed the boy into the house, which
he found goodly of ordinance and full of majesty and
cheer, till he brought him to a vast and splendid saloon,
wherein he saw a company of nobles and great lords^
seated, each according to his rank, at tables heaped with
all manner flowers and sweet-scented herbs, besides great
plenty of rich meats and fruits and confections and wines
of the choicest vintages. There also were fair maids^
singing and playing upon instruments of music, and in
the highest room sat a man of reverend and majestic
aspect, whose cheeks hoariness had smitten, and he was
well-made and fair of favour, stately of aspect and fuE
of gravity and venerance and dignity.

The porter was confounded at that which he beheld
and said in himself, ' By Allah, this must be either one
of the pavilions of Paradise or some king's palace ! *
Then he saluted the company respectfully, wishing them
all kinds of prosperity, and kissing the earth before them,
stood in a humble attitude, with his head bowed down. 3<ftflf)i
The master of the house bade him draw near and be llXXXbUL
seated and bespoke him kindly, bidding him welcome.
Then he set before him various kinds of rich and delicate
meats, and the porter called upon the name of God and
ate his fill, after which he exclaimed, * Praised be God,
come what may ! ' and washing his hands, returned thanks
to the company for his entertainment Quoth the host s
£ Thou art welcome and thy day is a blessed one. But
what is thy name and condition ? ' 8 O my lord/ answered


152


the other, 'ray name is Sindbad the porter, and I carry
folk's goods on my head for hire.' The host smiled and
rejoined, ' Know, O porter, that my name is even as thine,
for I am Sindbad the Sailor ; and now I would have thee
repeat to me the verses thou didst recite at the gate but
now.' The porter was abashed and replied, 1 God on
thee ! Excuse me, for toil and misery and lack of good
teach a man ill manners and indiscretion.' ' Be not
ashamed/ said the host ; 4 thou art become my brother ;
but repeat to me the verses, for they pleased me, when
I heard thee recite them at the gate.' So the porter
repeated the verses and they pleased the merchant, who
said to him, ' Know, O porter, that my story is a wonderful
one, and thou shalt hear all that befell me and all I under-
went before I won to this state of prosperity and became
stablished whereas thou seest me ; for I came not to this
high estate but after sore travail and great weariness and
perils galore, and how much toil and trouble have I not
suffered aforetime ! Indeed, I have made seven voyages,
by each of which hangs a marvellous history, such as
confounds the reason, and all this came to pass by the
decree of fortune and fore-ordained fate ; for there is
neither flight nor refuge from that which is written.
Knowj then, O my lords,' continued he s turning to his
guests, ' that


THE FIRST VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

My father was one of the richest and most considerable
merchants of my native place and died, whilst I was yet a
child, leaving me much wealth in money and lands and
houses. When I grew up, I laid hands on. the whole and
ate and drank freely and "wore rich clothes and lived lavishly


iS3


with my friends and companions of my own age, thinking
this way of life would last for ever. Thus did I a great
while, till, at last, when I returned to my senses and awoke
from my heedlessness, I found my wealth wasted and my
case changed, and gone was all I had. At this I was
stricken with dismay and confusion and bethought me of
a saying of our lord Solomon, son of David (on whom be
peace), which I had heard aforetime from my father,
" Three things are better than other three ; the day of
death is better than the day of birth, a live dog than a dead
lion and the grave than poverty." Then I sold the remains
of my property and got together three thousand dirhems,
with which I resolved to travel to foreign countries, re-
membering the saying of the poet :

By sheer endeavour, one winneth to fortune's height, And he who

craveth advancement must watch anight.
In midmost ocean the seeker of pearls must plunge Arid so attaineth

to wealth and lordship and might ;
And he sans travail who seeketh eminence His life in the quest of vanity

wasteth quite.

So I bought me merchandise and what not else was
needed for a sea-voyage and embarked, with a company of
merchants, on board a ship bound for Bassora. There we
took ship again and putting out to sea, sailed days and
nights and passed from island to island and ocean to ocean
and place to place, buying and selling and bartering every-
where, till we came to an island as it were one of the
pleasaunces of Paradise. Here the captain cast anchor
and making fast to the shore, put out the landing-stage.
So all on board landed and made furnaces 1 and lighting
fires therein, busied themselves in various ways, some
cooking and some washing, whilst other some walked
about the island for their pleasure and the xctsc fell to eating

1 The ordinary Eastern furnace is a great jar or por. sunk is the cv.rtfr.
In which a fire of wood is lighted e


154


and drinking and making merry. I was one of those who
explored the place, but, as we were thus variously engaged,
behold, the captain cried out to us from the deck at the top
of his voice, saying, " Ho, passengers, flee for your lives and
leave your gear and hasten back to the ship and save your-
selves from destruction, God preserve you ! For this is no
island, but a great fish stationary in the midst of the sea,
on which the sand has settled and trees have sprung up of
old time, so that it is become like unto an island; but,
when we lighted fires on it, it felt the heat and moved ; and
presently it will sink with you into the sea and ye will all
be drowned. So leave your gear and save yourselves, ere
Mt'gjK ye perish ! "

bcntX. When we heard the captain's warning, we left our gear
and fled back to the ship for our lives and some reached
it ; but, before the rest, of whom I was one, could do so,
the island shook and sank into jhe abysses of the deep,
with all that were thereon, and the surging sea closed over
it with its clashing billows. I sank with the others, but
God the Most High preserved me from drowning and threw
in my way a great wooden tub of those that had served the
ship's company for washing. I gripped it for dear life and
bestriding it, paddled with my feet, whilst the waves sported
with me right and left. Meanwhile the captain made sail
and departed with those who had reached the ship, regard-
less of the drowning men, and I followed the vessel with
my eyes, till she disappeared from sight and I looked for
nothing but death.

In this plight, the darkness closed in upon me and the
winds and waves bore me on all that night and the next
day, till the tub brought to with me under the lee of a lofty
island, with trees overhanging the water. I caught hold
of a branch and made shift to clamber up on to the land s
after coming nigh upon death. When i reached the shore,,
I found my feet cramped and bearing traces of the nibbling


155


of fish upon their soles, the which I felt not for excess ot
fatigue and misery. I threw myself down on the ground,
like a dead man, and swooned away, nor did I return to
my senses till next morning, when the sun revived me. I
tried to walk, but found my feet swollen, so made shift to
crawl on my hands and knees towards the interior of the
island where I found abundance of fruits and springs of
swee'. water. I ate of the fruits and drank of the springs ;
and thus I abode days and nights, till my strength and
spirits began to revive and I was able to move about. So
I bethought me and cutting myself a staff to lean upon, fell
to exploring the island and diverting myself with gazing
upon the things that God the Most High had created there.

One day, as I walked along the sea-shore, I caught sight
of some live thing in the distance and thought it a wild
beast or one of the creatures of the sea; but, as I drew
near it, I saw that it was a magnificent mare, tethered
on the beach. So I went up to her, but she cried out
against me with a great cry, so that I trembled for fear
and turned to go away, when there came forth a man from
under the earth and followed me, crying out and saying,
" Who and whence art thou and how earnest thou hither? "
" O my lord," answered I, " I am a shipwrecked man,
a stranger, to whom God vouchsafed a wooden tub ; so
I saved myself thereon and it floated with me, till the
waves cast me up on this island." When he heard this,
he said, "Come with me," and taking me by the hand,
carried me into a great underground chamber and made
me sit down at the upper end. Then he brought me
food and I ate, being anhungred, till I was satisfied and
refreshed; after which he questioned me of myself,
and I told him all that had befallen me, adding, " For
God's sake, G my lord, excuse me ; I have told thee the
truth of my case ; and now I desire that thou tell me who
thou art and why thou abidest here under the earth and


156

why thou hast tethered yonder mare on the brink of the
sea." " Know," answered he, " that I am one of several
who are stationed in different parts of the island, and
we are of the grooms of King Mihrjan and under our
hand are all his horses. Every month, at the new moon,
we bring hither the best of the King's mares, that have
never been covered, and tether them on the sea-shore
and hide ourselves in this place under the ground, so that
none may see us. Presently, the stallions of the sea scent
the mares and come up out of the water and seeing no
one, leap the mares and cover them. When they have
done their will of them, they try to drag them away with
them, but cannot, by reason of the tether ; so they cry
out at them and set on them with hoofs and teeth, which
we hearing, know that the stallions have dismounted ; so
we run out and shout at them, whereupon they are
affrighted and return to the sea v Then the mares con-
ceive by them and bear colts and fillies worth a treasury
of money, whose like is not to be found on the face of
the earth. This is the time of the coming forth of the
sea-horses ; and so it please God the Most High, I will
$H($)t carry thee to King Mihrjan and show thee our country,
toxl. Well is it for thee that thou hast happened on us, else
hadst thou perished miserably and none known of thee,
for there cometh none hither save ourselves : but I will
be the means of the saving of thy life and of thy return
to thine own land."

I called down blessings on him and thanked him for his
kindness and courtesy. While we were talking, the stallion
came up out of the sea and giving a great cry, sprang upon
the mare and covered her. When he had done his will of
her, he dismounted and would have carried her away with
him, but could not by reason of the tether. She kicked
and cried out at him, whereupon the groom took a sword
sad buckler and ran out, smiting the buckler with the


is;

sword and calling to his companions. With this up came
a company of men, shouting and brandishing spears, and
the stallion took fright at them and plunging into the seaj
like a buffalo, disappeared under the waves. After this,
we sat a while, till the rest of the grooms came up, each
leading a mare, and seeing me with their fellow, questioned
me, and I repeated my story to them. Thereupon they
drew near me and spreading the table, ate and invited me
to eat ; so I ate with them, after which they took horse
and mounting me on one of the mares, set out with me
and fared on without ceasing, till they came to the capital
city of King Mihrjan, and going in to him, acquainted
him with my case. Then he sent for me and gave me
a cordial welcome and bade me repeat my story to him.
So I related to him all that had befallen me from first to
last, whereat he marvelled exceedingly and said to me,
" By Allah, O my son, thou hast indeed been miraculously
preserved ! Were not the term of thy life a long one, thou
hadst not escaped from these straits ; but praised be God
for safety ! " Then he spoke comfortably to me and en-
treated me with kindness and consideration. Moreover,
he made me his agent for the port and registrar of all
ships that entered the harbour and clad me in sumptuous
apparel. In this capacity, I attended him regularly, to
receive his commandments, and he favoured me and did
me all manner of kindness. Indeed, I was high in credit
with him, as an intercessor for the folk and an intermediary
between them and him, whenas they would aught of him.

I abode thus a great while and as often as I went down
to the port, I questioned the merchants and travellers and
sailors of the city of Baghdad, so haply I might hear of an
occasion to return to my native land, but could find: none
who knew it or knew any who resorted thither. At this I
was chagrined, for I was weary of long strangerhood ; but,
one day, going in to King Mihrjan, I found with him a


158


company of Indians and saluted them. They returned my
!N"tCll)t salutation and asked me of my country ; after which I
fclXlt. questioned them of theirs and they told me that they were
of various castes, some being called Shatriyas, who are
the noblest of their castes and neither oppress nor offer
violence to any, and others Brahmins, a folk who abstain
from wine, but live in delight and solace and merriment
and own camels and horses and cattle. Moreover, they
told me that the people of India are divided into two-and-
seventy castes, and I marvelled at this exceedingly.

Amongst other things that I saw in King Mihrjan's
dominions was an island called Kasil, wherein all night
is heard the beating of drums and tabrets, but we were
told by the neighbouring islanders and by travellers that
the inhabitants are people of diligence and judgment. 1 In
this sea I saw also a fish two hundred cubits long and
another half that length, with a head like that of an owl,
besides many other wonders and rarities, which it would
be tedious to recount to you. I occupied myself thus in
exploring the islands till, one day, as I stood in the port,
with a staff in my hand, according to my wont, I saw a
great ship, wherein were many merchants, making for the
-harbour. When it reached the anchorage, the master
furled his sails and making fast to the shore, put out the
landing-stage, whereupon the crew fell to unlading the
cargo, whilst I stood by, taking note of them. They
were long in bringing the goods ashore and I said to
the master, "Is there aught left in thy ship?" "Yes,

1 Sic in Boulac, Breslau and Macnaghten Editions. The two other
texts of this story, which I have consulted, i.e. that of M. Langles
(1814) and of Calcutta (1814-1818), and which are practically the same,
substitute for this last phrase the words, " And the sailors say that Ed
Dejjal is there." Ed Dejjal is the False Messiah or Antichrist of the
Muslims, who, they fable 3 will come in the latter days and lay waste
the earthj, at the head of an army of Jews, till encountered and slain
by Jesus.


159


O my lord," answered he ; " there are divers bales of
merchandise in the hold, whose owner was drowned at
one of the islands in our way ; so his goods abode in our
charge and we purpose to sell them and note their price,
that we may carry it to his people in the city of Baghdad.,
the Abode of Peace." "What was the merchant's name?®
asked I, and he answered, " Sindbad ; " whereupon I straitly
considered him and knowing him, cried out to him with
a great cry, saying, " O master, I am that Sindbad of whom
thou speakest and these are my goods • for, when the fish
sank under us and we were plunged into the sea, God
threw in my way a great tub of wood, of those the crew
had used to wash withal, and the winds and waves carried
me to this island, where, by God's grace, I fell in with
King Mihrjan's grooms and they brought me hither to
their master. When the latter heard my story, he en-
treated me with favour and made me his harbour-master,
and I have prospered in his service and found acceptance
with him."

When the master heard what I said, he exclaimed,
" There is no power and no virtue but in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! Verily, there is neither conscience
nor good faith left among men ! " " O captain," said I,
t£ what mean these words, seeing that I have told thee my
case ? " And he answered, saying, " Because thou heardest
me say that I had with me goods whose owner was
drowned, thou thinkest to take them without right ; but
this is forbidden to thee, for we saw him drown before our
eyes, together with many others, nor was one of them
saved. So how canst thou pretend that thou art the
owner of the goods?" u O captain," said I, "listen to my
story and give heed to my words, and my soothfastness will
be manifest to thee ; for falsehood is of the fashion of the
hypocrites." Then I recounted to him all that had befallen
me since I left Baghdad with him up to the time when we


Mil


i6o


came to the fish, which we took for an island, and reminded
him of certain things that had passed between him and me ;
whereupon both he and the merchants were certified of the
truth of my story and recognized me and gave me joy of
my deliverance, saying, " By Allah, we thought not that
thou hadst escaped drowning ! But God hath granted
thee new life." Then they delivered my bales to me, and
I found my name written thereon, nor was aught thereof
lacking. So I opened them and making up a present
for King Mihrjan of the richest and most costly of the
contents, caused the sailors carry it to the palace, where I
presented it to the King, acquainting him with what had
happened, at which he wondered exceedingly and the truth
of all that I had told him was made manifest to him.
Wherefore his affection for me redoubled and he showed
me exceeding honour and bestowed on me a great present
in return for mine. Then I sold, my bales and what else I
possessed, making a great profit on them, and bought me
other goods and gear of the growth and fashion of the
island. When the ship was about to start on her home-
ward voyage, I embarked in her all that I possessed and
going in to the King, thanked him for all his favours and
craved his leave to return to my country and friends. He
gave me leave and bestowed on me great plenty of the
stuffs and produce of the country ; and I took my leave of
him and embarked. Then we set sail and fared on nights
and days, by the permission of God the Most High, and
Fortune served us and Fate was favourable to us, so that
we arrived in safety at Bassora, where I landed, rejoiced at
my safe return to my native land. Thence, after a short
stay, I set out again for Baghdad and in due time reached
that city, with store of goods and commodities of great
price. I went straight to my house and all my friends and
kinsfolk came to greet me. Then I bought me slaves and
servants, black and white and male and female 8 in great


i6i


plenty, and houses and lands and gardens, till I was
richer and in better case than before, and gave myself
up to feasting and banqueting and making merry with my
friends and companions more assiduously than ever, forget-
ting all I had suffered of fatigue and hardship and stranger-
hood and all the perils of travel. This, then, is the story
of my first voyage, and to-morrow, God willing, I will tell
you that of the second of my seven voyages,'


Then Sindbad the Sailor made the porter sup with him
and gave him an hundred dinars, saying, 4 Thou hast
cheered us with thy company this day.' The porter
thanked him and went his way, pondering that which
he had heard and marvelling at the things that betide
mankind. He passed the night in his own house and
on the morrow repaired to the abode of , Sindbad the
Sailor, who received him with honour and seated him
by himself. Then, as soon as the rest of the company
were assembled, he set meat and drink before them and
when they had well eaten and drunken and were merry
and in cheerful case, he took up his discourse and bespoke
them, saying, 4 Know, O my brethren, that


THE SECOND VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

I abode a while, as I told you yesterday, in the enjoyment ^{fy
of all the comforts and pleasures of life, until one day the faUH
longing seized me to travel again and see foreign countries
and traffic and make profit by trade. So I took a great

sum of money and buying goods and gear fit for travel,
packed them into bales. Then I went down to the river-
bank, where I found a handsome new ship about to saii t ,

VOL. ¥. II


l62


well manned and provided and equipped with sails of fine
cloth. I took passage in her, with a number of other
merchants, and we weighed anchor the same day. Fair
weather attended us, and we sailed from place to place,
buying and selling and bartering, till chance brought us
to a lovely island, abounding in trees laden with ripe
fruits and fragrant flowers and limpid streams and musical
with the song of birds ; but there was no dweller there,
no, not a blower of the fire. The captain made fast with
us to this island, and the merchants and sailors landed
and walked about, enjoying the shade of the trees and
the song of the birds, that chanted the praises of the
One, the Victorious, and marvelling at the works of the
Omnipotent King. I landed with the rest and sitting
down by a spring of sweet water, that welled up among
the trees, took out some victual 1 had with me and ate
of that which God the Most High had allotted me. I
sat thus, enjoying the pleasant freshness of the breeze
and the fragrance of the flowers, till presently I grew
drowsy for very pleasance and lying down, soon fell
asleep. When I awoke, I found myself alone, for the
ship had sailed with all who were therein, and left me
behind, nor had one of the merchants or sailors bethought
himself of me. I searched the island right and left, but
found neither man nor genie, whereat I was beyond measure
troubled and my gall was like to burst for excess of chagrin
and anguish and concern, for that I was left quite alone,
without aught of meat or drink or worldly gear, weary and
heart-broken. So I gave myself up for lost and said,
" Not always does the pitcher come off unbroken. I
escaped the first time and happened on one who brought
me to an inhabited place, but this time there is no hope
of falling in with such a deliverer." Then I fell a-weeping
and wailing and gave myself up to despair, blaming myself
for having again adventured uDon the perils and hardships


i6$

of travel, whenas I was at my ease in my own house in
my native city, taking my leisure with pleasant food and
rich raiment, and lacking nothing, neither money nor
goods, and this the more after all the toils and dangers
I had undergone in my first voyage, wherein I had so
narrowly escaped destruction. And I repented me of
having left Baghdad and exclaimed, "Verily we are God's
and to Him we return ! " For indeed I was even as one
mad, and I rose and walked about the island, unable for
trouble to abide in any one place. Then I climbed a tall
tree and looked in every direction, but saw nothing but
sky and sea and trees and birds and islands and sands*
However, after a while, I caught sight of some great white
thing, afar off in the interior of the island ; so I came
down from the tree and making for that which I had
seen, found it a huge white dome of vast height and
compass. I walked all round it, but found no door
thereto, nor could I muster strength or nimbleness to
climb it, by reason of its exceeding smoothness and
slipperiness. So I marked the spot where I stood and
went round about the dome to measure its compass,
which I found fifty good paces.

As I stood, casting about how to gain an entrance, the
sun was suddenly hidden from me and the air became
dark. Methought a cloud had come over the sun, but it
was the season of summer and the day drew near to sun-
down ; so I marvelled at this and lifting my head, looked
steadfastly at the sun, when I saw that what I had taken
for a cloud was none other than an enormous bird, whose
outspread wings, as it flew through the air, obscured the
sun and veiled it from the island. At this sight my ^KTtqfjs!
wonder redoubled and I bethought me of a story that I tsxilb*
"had heard aforetime of pilgrims and travellers, how in
certain islands dwells a huge bird, called the roc, which
feeds its young on elephants, and was assured that the


io4

dome aforesaid was none other than one of its eggs. As
I looked and wondered at the marvellous works of God
the Most High, the bird alighted on the egg and brooded
over it with its wings covering it and its legs spread out
behind it on the ground, and in this posture it fell asleep,
glory be to Him who sleepeth not j When I saw this, I
arose and unwinding the linen of my turban, twisted it
into a rope, with which I girt my middle and bound myself
fast to the roc's feet, saying in myself, " Peradventure, this
bird may carry me to a land of cities and inhabitants, and
that will be better than abiding in this island."

I passed the night on wake, fearing to sleep, lest the bird
should fly away with me at unawares ; and as soon as the
dawn broke and day appeared, the roc gave a great cry
and spreading its wings, flew up with me into die air. It
ceased not to soar, till I thought it had reached the limit
of the skies } after which it descended, little by little, till it
lighted on the top of a high hill. As soon as I found my-
self on the earth, I made haste to unbind myself, quaking
for fear of the bird, though it took no heed of me nor was
ware of me, and loosing the linen of my turban from its
feet, made off. Presently, I saw it catch up something
from the ground and rise into the air with it, and observing
this narrowly, saw it to be a huge great serpent, with which
it flew away out of sight. I marvelled at this and faring
on, found myself on a crest overlooking a great valley,
exceeding wide and deep and bounded by vast mountains,
that soared high into the air : none could see their summits,
for the excess of their height, nor could any avail to climb
up thereto. When I saw this, I blamed myself for that
which I had done and said, " Would God I had remained
in the island ! It was better than this desert place ; for
there I had at least fruits to eat and water to drink, and
here are neither trees nor fruits nor streams. Rut there is
no power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the


1 65

Supreme! Verily, as often as I am quit of one peril, I fail
into a worse and a more grievous. "

However, I took courage and walking along the valley,
found that its soil was of diamond, the stone wherewith
they pierce jewels and precious stones and porcelain and
onyx, for that it is a hard dense stone, whereon neither
iron nor steel hath effect, neither can we cut off aught
therefrom nor break it, save by means of the leadstone.
Moreover, the valley swarmed with huge snakes and vipers,
as big as palm-trees, that would have made but one gulp
of an elephant ; and they came out by night, hiding during
the day, lest the rocs and eagles should pounce on them
and tear them in pieces, as was their wont, why I know
not. And I repented of what I had done and said, " By
Allah, I have made haste to bring destruction upon my-
self!" As I went along, forgetttng my hunger and thirst
in my concern for my life, the day began to wane and I
looked about for a place where I might pass the night,
being in fear of the serpents. Presently, I caught sight
of a cave near at hand, with a narrow doorway ; so I
entered and rolled a great stone that I found within to
the mouth of the cave and stopped it up, saying in myself,
" I am safe here for the night ; and as soon as it is day,
I will go forth and see what destiny will do." Then I
looked within the cave and saw at the further end a great
serpent brooding on her eggs, at which my hair stood on
end; but I raised my eyes to heaven and committing my
case to fate and destiny, abode all that night without sleep
till daybreak, when I rolled back the stone from the mouth
of the cave and went forth, staggering like a drunken man
for stress of watching and fear and hunger.

As I walked along the valley, there fell down before me
a great piece of meat ; but 1 saw none, at which I marvelled!
greatly and presently bethought me of a story I had heard
aforetime of merchants and pilgrims and travellers, how


i66

Ehe mountains where are the diamonds are fenced about
with great perils and terrors, nor can any win thither; but
the merchants who traffic in diamonds have a device by
which they get them, that is to say, they take a sheep and
kill and skin it and cut it in quarters and cast them down,
from the mountain-tops into the valley, where, the meat
being sticky with the fresh blood, some of the jewels cling
to it. There they leave it till midday, when the eagles and
vultures swoop down upon it and carry it up to the moun-
tain-tops, whereupon the merchants come and shout at
them and scare them from the meat. Then they come and
taking the diamonds, go their ways with them and leave
Mt'gflt the meat to the birds and beasts ; nor can any come at the
SlXlb. diamonds, but on this wise. So, when I saw the carcase
fall and bethought me of the story aforesaid, I filled my
pockets and girdle and turban and the folds of my clothes
with great plenty of the best of •'the diamonds ; and as
I was thus engaged, down fell another great quarter of
meat before me. Then I unrolled the linen of my turban
and setting the meat on my breast, bound myself thereto
and lay down on my back, so that I was hidden by the
meat, which was thus raised above the ground. Hardly
had I done this, when an eagle swooped down upon the
meat and driving its talons into it, flew up with it and me
clinging thereto and alighted on the top of one of the
mountains, where it fell to rending the carcase ; but there
arose a great noise of shouting and clattering of wood, at
which the bird took fright and flew away.

Then I loosed myself from the meat, with clothes daubed
with blood therefrom, and stood up ; whereupon up came
the merchant, who had cried out at the eagle, and seeing
me standing there, bespoke me not, but was affrighted at
me and shook with fear. However, he went up to the
carcase and turning it over, found no diamonds sticking to
it, whereat he gave a great cry and exclaimed, "Alas, my


1 67

disappointment ! There is no power and no virtue but in
God, with whom we seek refuge from Satan the accursed ! w
And he bemoaned himself and beat hand upon hand, say-
ing, "Alas, the pity of it! How cometh this?" Then
I went up to him and he said to me, "Who art thou and
how earnest thou hither?" "Fear not," answered I. "I
am a man and a good one and a merchant. My story is a
rare one and the manner of my coming hither is a marvel.
So be of good cheer ; thou shalt have of me what will
gladden thy heart, for I have with me great plenty of
diamonds, each better than aught thou couldst get other-
wise, and I will give thee thereof what shall suffice thee ;
so fear nothing." So saying, I gave him abundance of
diamonds and he rejoiced therein and thanked and blessed
me. Then we talked together till the other merchants,
each of whom had thrown down his piece of meat, hearing
me in discourse with their fellow, came up and saluted me.
I told them my story and how I came thither, and they
gave me joy of my safety, saying, " By Allah, a new life
hath been decreed to thee, for none ever won to yonder
valley and came off thence alive before thee ; but praised
be God for thy safety ! "

I passed the night in their company in a safe and
pleasant place, beyond measure rejoiced at my deliverance
from the Valley of Serpents and my arrival in an inhabited
land ; and on the morrow we set out and journeyed along the
crest of the mountains, seeing many serpents in the valley,
till we came to a wide and fair island, wherein was a grove
of great camphor-trees, under each of which a hundred
men might shelter. When the folk have a mind to get
camphor, they pierce the upper part of the stem with
a long gimlet, whereupon the liquid camphor, which is
the sap of the tree, runs out, as it were milk, and. they
catch it in vessels, where it hardens like gum ; but, after
this s the tree withers and becomes dry firewood. More-


i68

over, there is in this island a kind of wild beast, called
a, rhinoceros, that feeds upon grass and leaves of trees,
as do oxen and buffaloes with us ; but it is a huge bear.t,
bigger of body than the camel, and has a great and thick
horn, half a score cubits long, amiddleward its head,
wherein, when cleft in twain, is the likeness of a man.
Travellers say that this beast will carry off a great elephant
on its horn and graze about the island and the sea-coast
therewith and take no heed of it, till the elephant dies and
its fat melting in the sun, runs down into the rhinoceros's
eyes and blinds him, so that he lies down on the shore.
Then comes the roc and carries off both elephant and
rhinoceros, to feed its young withal. Moreover, I saw
in this island many kinds of oxen and buffaloes, whose
like are not found in our country.

Here I sold some of my diamonds for gold and silver
money and bartered others for the produce of the country,
and loading them upon beasts of burden, fared on with
the merchants from valley to valley and town to town,
buying and selling and viewing foreign countries and the
works and creatures of God, till we came to Bassora,
where we abode a few days, after which I continued my
!Nto!)t journey to Baghdad and arrived at home with great store
hxibu of diamonds and money and goods. I foregathered with
my friends and relations and gave alms and largesse and
made presents to all my friends and companions. Then
I betook myself to eating and drinking and making merry
with my fellows, and forgot all my sufferings. And all
who heard of my return came and questioned me of my
adventures and of foreign countries, and I related to them
all that had befallen me, whereat they wondered exceed-
ingly and gave me joy of my safe return. This, then, m
the end of the story of my second voyage ; and to-morrow,
God willing, I will tell you what beteii mat is my third
voyage.'


1 69

The company marvelled at his story and ate the evening
meal with him ; after which he ordered an hundred dinars
to be given to the porter, who thanked him and blessed
him and went his way, wondering at what he had heard.
Next morning, as soon as it was day, he rose and praying
the morning-prayer, repaired to the house of Sindbad the
Sailor, even as he had bidden him, and gave him good-
morrow. The merchant welcomed him and made him
sit with him, till the rest of the company arrived ; and
when they had well eaten and drunken and were merry
and in good case, their host began as follows, saying,
1 Hearken, O my brothers, to the story of my third voyage,
which is more wonderful than those you have already
heard. Know that


THE THIRD VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

As I told you yesterday, I returned from my second
voyage with great increase of wealth, God having requited
me all that I had lost, and I abode awhile at Baghdad in
the enjoyment of the utmost ease and prosperity, till I
was once more seized with longing for travel and adven-
ture and yearned after traffic and gain, for that the heart
is naturally prone to evil. So I laid in great plenty of
suitable goods and repairing to Bassora, found there a
great ship ready to sail, with a numerous company of
merchants and others, men of worth and piety and con-
sideration. I took passage with them and we set sail,
commending ourselves to the blessing of God the Most
High and trusting in Him to bring our voyage to a safe
and prosperous issue. We fared on from sea to sea and from
island to island and city to city, in all delight and con-
tentment, buying and selling and taking our pleasure, till,


170

one day, as we sailed midmost the surging sea, swollen
with clashing billows, the master, who stood in the ship's
side, examining the sea in all directions, cried out with
a great cry and bade furl the sail and cast out the anchors.
Then he buffeted his face and plucked out his beard and
rent his clothes, saying, "Alas!" and "Woe worth the
day ! O merchants, we are all lost ! " So we said to him,
" O master, what is to do ? " and he replied, " Know,
my brethren, (may God preserve you,) that the wind
has gotten the better of us and driven us out of our
course into mid-ocean, and fate, for our ill fortune, hath
brought us to the Mountain 1 of the Zughb, 2 who are a
folk like apes, never fell any among them and came off
alive, and my heart misgives me that we are all dead men."

Hardly had he made an end of his speech when the
ship was boarded by an innumerable multitude of the
islanders, who are the most frightful of wild creatures
like apes, foul of favour and little of stature, being but
four spans high, yellow-eyed and black-a-viced and covered
with black hair like felt ; none knoweth their language nor
what they are, and they shun the company of men. They
swarmed like locusts about the vessel and the shore, and
we feared to strike them or drive them away, because of
their vast multitude, lest, if we slew one, the rest should
fall on us and kill us, for numbers prevail over courage ;
so we let them do their will, albeit we feared they would
plunder our goods and gear. They swarmed up the cables
and gnawed them in sunder, and on like wise they did with
all the ropes of the ship, so that it fell off from the wind
and stranded upon the mountain. Then they laid hands
on all the merchants and crew, and landing us on the
island, made off with the ship and its cargo we knew
aot whither.

We abode on the island, eating of its herbs and fruiti
1 i.e. mountainous island. 2 fa. hairy folk.


and drinking of its streams, till, one day, we espied in its
midst what seemed an inhabited house. So we made for
it and found it a strong castle, compassed about with lofty
walls and having a gate of ebony, with two leaves, both
of which stood open. We entered and found within a
spacious courtyard, with many high doors opening upon
it, and at the farther end a great stone bench and brasiers,
with cooking gear hanging thereby and great plenty of
bones thereabout ; but we saw no one and marvelled
thereat exceedingly. Then we sat down in the courtyard
and presently falling asleep, slept from the forenoon till
sundown, when we were awakened by a rumbling noise in
the air. The earth shook under us and behold, there
came down upon us from the top of the castle a huge
creature, in the likeness of a man, black of colour and tall
of stature, as he were a great palm tree, with eyes like
coals of fire and tusks like boar's tusks and a vast big
mouth like the mouth of a well. Moreover, he had lips
like camel's lips, hanging down upon his breast, and ears
like two djerms, 1 falling over his shoulders s and the nails
of his hands were like lion's claws.

When we saw this frightful monster, we fell down and
became as dead men for excess of fear and terror. He Hfgtlt
sat awhile on the bench, then, coming to us, took me up
in his hand and turned me over and felt me, as a butcher
feels a sheep, and I but a little morsel in his hands ; but
finding me lean and in poor case, for stress of toil and
trouble and weariness, let me go and took up another,
whom in like manner he turned over and felt and let go ;
nor did he cease to feel the rest of us, one after another,
till he came to the master of the ship. Now he was a
stout broad-shouldered fellow, fat and in good case : so he

1 The well-known large boat, used for the Nile traffic in grain, etc.
The comparison is to the bird's-eye view of the djerai, as it appeals.,
coming towards a spectator.


172

pleased the monster, who seized him, as a butcher seizes a
beast, and throwing him down, set his foot on his neck
and broke it ; after which he fetched a long spit and
thrusting it into his fundament, brought it forth of the
crown of his head. Then, lighting a great fire, he set
over it the spit with the dead man thereon, and turned it
over the coals, till the flesh was roasted, when he took the
spit off the fire and set it [upright in the ground] before
him. Then he tore the body, limb from limb, as one
joints a fowl, and rending the flesh with his nails, fell to
eating of it and gnawing the bones, till there was nothing
left but some bones, which he threw on one side. This
done, he lay down on the bench and stretching himself
out, fell asleep and snored like the death-rattle of a lamb
or a cow, with its throat cut ; nor did he wake till morning,
when he rose and went out.

As soon as we were certified that he was gone, we began
to talk with one another, bemoaning ourselves and saying,
" Would God we had been drowned in the sea or that the
apes had eaten us t That were better than to be roasted
over the coals ; by Allah, this is a foul death ! But what
God wills cometh to pass and there is no power and no
virtue save in Him, the Most High, the Supreme ! We
shall assuredly perish miserably and none will know of us ;
for there is no escape for us from this place." Then we
arose and roamed about the island, so haply we might find
a means of flight or a place to hide us in, for indeed death
was a light matter to us, so we were not roasted and eaten.
However, we could find no hiding-place and the evening
overtook us ; so, of the excess of our terror, we returned
to the Castle and sat down.

Presently, the earth shook under us and the black came
up to us and turning us over s felt us, one after another, till
he found one to his liking, whom he took and served as he
had done the captain, killing and roasting and eating him ;


173


after ;vhich he laid down on the bench and slept and snored
all night, like a beast with its throat cut, till daybreak, when
he arose and went out as before. Then we drew together
and said to one another, " By Allah, we were better cast
ourselves into the sea and be drowned than be roasted and
eaten, for this is a vile death ! " " Rather let us cast about
to kill him," quoth one of us, " and be at peace from him
and rid the Muslims of his barbarity and tyranny." Then
said I, " O my brothers, if there is nothing for it but to
kill him, let us carry some of this wood and planks down to
the sea-shore and make a boat, so, if we succeed in killing
him, we may either embark in it and let the waters carry
us whither God will, or else abide here till some ship pass,
when we will take passage therein. If we win not to kill
him, we will embark in the boat and put out to sea ; and if
we be drowned, we shall at least escape being slaughtered
and roasted : whilst if we escape> we escape^ and if we be
drowned, we die martyrs." "By Allah," said they all,
" this is a good counsel ; " and we agreed upon this, and
set about carrying it out. So we haled the pieces of wood
[that lay about] down to the beach and making a boat,
moored it to the strand, after which we stowed therein
somewhat of victual and returned to the castle.

No sooner was it dark than the earth shook under us and
in came the black upon us, as he were a raging dog. He
came up to us and feeling us, one by one, took one of us
and killed and roasted and ate him, after which he lay
down on the bench and snored like thunder. As soon as
we were assured that he slept, we arose and taking two
iron spits of those set up there, heated them in the fiercest
•of the fire, till they were red-hot, when we gripped fast
hold of them and going up to the giant, as he lay snoring
on the bench, thrust them into his eyes and pressed upon
them, all of us, with our might, so that his eyes were put
out and he became blind. Thereupon he gave a great cry,


174


that our hearts trembled thereat, and springing up from
the bench, fell a-groping after us, blind-fold. We fled
from him right and left and he saw us not, for he was
altogether blind ; but we were in deadly fear of him and
gave ourselves up for lost, despairing of escape. Then he
made for the door, feeling for it with his hands, and went
out, roaring aloud, so that the earth shook under us, for
the noise of his roaring, and we quaked for fear.

We followed him out of the castle and betook ourselves
to the place where we had moored our boat, saying to one
another, " If this accursed wretch abide absent till the
going down of the sun and come not to the castle, we
shall know that he is dead; and if he come back, we will
embark in the boat and paddle till we escape, committing
our affair to God." But, as we spoke, up came the black,
with other two as they were ghouls, fouler and more
frightful than he, with eyes like^. red-hot coals ; which
when we saw, we embarked in haste in the boat and
casting off the moorings, pushed out to sea. As soon
as the giants caught sight of us, they cried out at us and
running down to the sea-shore, fell a-pelting us with rocks,
whereof some reached us, and other some fell into the
sea. We paddled with all our might till we were beyond
their reach, but the most part of us were slain by the
stone-throwing, and the winds and waves sported with
us and carried us into the midst of the surging sea s
swollen with clashing billows. We knew not whither we
we went and my fellows died one after another, till there

"Mt'gfjt remained but myself and two others on board the boat ;

fcxUmf. for, as often as one died, we threw him into the sea. We
were sore exhausted for stress of hunger, but we heartened
one another and paddled with our might, till the winds
cast us upon an island;, as we were dead men for fea: and
hunger and weariness.

We landed and walked about the island,, which abounded


275


in trees and streams and birds, eating of the fruits and
rejoicing in our escape from the black and our deliverance
from the perils of the sea; and thus we did till nightfall,
when we lay down and fell asleep for excess of weariness.
After a while we were aroused by a hissing noise, like
the wind, and awaking, saw an enormous serpent making
for us, which seized one of my companions and swallowed
him at one gulp, down to his shoulders ; then it gave
another gulp and swallowed the rest of him, and we
heard his ribs crack in its belly. Then it went its way,
and we abode in sore amazement and grief for our comrade
and mortal terror for ourselves, saying, " By Allah, this
is a marvellous thing ! Each kind of death [that besets
us] is more terrible than the last. We were rejoicing in
our escape from the black and our deliverance from the
perils of the sea ; but now we have fallen into that which
is worse. There is no power and no virtue 'but in God 1
By Allah, we have escaped from the black and from
drowning; but how shall we escape from this ill-omened
serpent ? "

Then we walked about the island, eating of its fruits and
drinking of its streams, till dusk, when we climbed up into
a high tree and went to sleep there, I being on the topmost
branch. As soon as it was dark night, up came the serpent,
looking right and left, and making for the tree on which
we were, climbed up to my comrade and swallowed him
down to his shoulders. Then it coiled about the tree with
him, whilst I heard his bones crack in its belly, and it
swallowed him whole, after which it slid down from the
tree. When the day broke, I came down, as I were a dead
man for excess of fear and anguish, and thought to cast
myself into the sea and be at peace from the world ; but
could not bring myself to this s for life is dear. So I took
five broad and long pieces of wood and bound one cross-
wise to the soles of my feet and another over my head and


176

the others m like fashion on my right and left sides and
over my breast and made them fast with ropes, which I
twisted of the grass of the island. Then I lay down on the
ground on my back, so that I was completely fenced in by
the pieces of wood which enclosed me like a bier.

As soon as it was dark, up came the serpent, as usual, and
made towards me, but could not get at me to swallow me,
for the wood that fenced me in. So it crawled round me
on every side, whilst I looked on, like one dead for excess
of terror ; and every now and then it would go away and
come back ; but as often as it tried to come at me, it was
hindered by the pieces of wood with which I had bound
myself on every side. It ceased not to beset me thus
from sundown till sunrise, when it made off, in the utmost
rage and disappointment. Then I unbound myself, well-
nigh dead for fear and sleeplessness, and went down to the
sea-shore, whence I saw a ship afar off it; the midst of the
waves. So I tore off a great branch of a tree and made
signs with it, shouting out the while ; which when the
ship's company saw, they said to each other, " We must
stand in and see what this is ; belike it is a man." So
they steered for the island and presently heard my cries,
whereupon they put out a boat and taking me on board,
questioned me of my case. I told them all my adventures,
at which they marvelled exceedingly and covered my
nakedness with some of their clothes. Moreover, they set
before me food and cold fresh water, and I ate and drank
my fill and was mightily refreshed, and God gave me new
life after I had looked for nothing but death. So I praised
the Most High and thanked Him for His exceeding mer-
cies, and my heart revived in me, till meseemed as if all I
had suffered were but a dream.

We sailed on with a favouring wind till we came to an
Island called Es Selahiteh, when the captain cast anchoi
and the merchants and sailors landed with their goods, to


177


sell and buy. Then the captain turned to me and said, Nfgfit
" Hark ye, thou art a stranger and poor and tellest us that O-X'llX.
thou hast undergone great hardships ; wherefore I have
a mind to advantage thee with somewhat that may further
thee in thy native land, so thou wilt still pray for me."
" So be it," answered I ; " thou shalt have my prayers."
Quoth he, " Know then that there was with us a man,
a traveller whom we lost, and we know not if he be alive
or dead, for we have had no news of him ; so I purpose
to commit his goods to thy charge, that thou may est sell
them in the island. A part of the proceeds we will give
thee for thy pains, and the rest we will keep till we return
to Baghdad, where we will enquire for his family and de-
liver it to them. Dost thou agree to this ? " I thanked
him for his kindness and accepted his offer with gratitude,
whereupon he bade the sailors and porters carry the bales
in question ashore and deliver them to me. Quoth the
ship's clerk to him, " master, what bales are these and
what merchant's name shall I write upon them? " " Write
on them the name of Sindbad," answered the captain,
" him who was with us in the ship and whom we lost at
such an island ; for we mean this stranger to sell them,
and we will give him a part of the price for his pains and
keep the rest, till we return to Baghdad, where, if we find
him we will pay it to him, and if not, we will make it
over to his family." And the clerk said, " It is well and
justly thought."

When I heard my name, I bethought me that these must
be my goods ; so I waited till all the merchants had
landed and were gathered together, talking and chaffering ;
then, taking courage, I went up to the captain and said to
him, 44 O my lord, knowest thou what manner of man was
this Sindbad, whose goods thou hast committed to me to
sell?" "I know nothing of him," answered the captain,
" save that he was a man from the city of Baghdad, Sindbad
vol.. v. 12


178


by name, and that we missed him after touching at such
an island and have heard nothing of him since then." At
this I gave a great cry and said, " captain, whom God
keep, know that I am that Sindbad and that I was not
drowned, but that, landing with the rest of the merchants
on the island in question, I sat down in a pleasant place by
myself and ate somewhat of food I had with me and en-
joyed the freshness of the air, till I became drowsy and
fell fast asleep ; and when I awoke, I found the ship had
sailed without me. These, then, are my goods, and all the
merchants that fetch jewels from the Valley of Diamonds
know me and will bear me witness of the truth of my story •
for I related to them how you forgot me and left me be-
hind and told them all that had befallen me."

When the merchants and crew heard my words, they
gathered about me and some of them believed me and
others disbelieved ; but presently one of the merchants,
hearing me mention the Valley of Diamonds, came up and
said to them, " Hark ye, good people ! When I related to
you the most wonderful thing of all that befell me in my
travels and told you how, being with other merchants, trying
for diamonds in the Valley of Serpents and casting
down each our quarter of meat, as of wont, there came up
a man hanging to mine, — ye believed me not and gave me
the lie. Now this is the very man, by token that he gave
me diamonds of great value, whose like are not to be
found, requiting me more than would have come up stick-
ing to my quarter of meat ; and I carried him with me to
Bassora, where he took leave of us and went on to his
native city, whilst we returned to our own land. This is
he, and God hath sent him hither that the truth of my
story may be made manifest to you. Moreover these are
his goods, for, when he first foregathered with us, he told
us of them, and that his name was Sindbad and how he
came to be left on the island ; and the truth of his words


179


is manifest." With this the captain came up to me and
considered me straitly awhile, after which he said to me
"What was the mark on thy bales?" "Thus and thus,'*
answered I and reminded him of somewhat that had passed
between him and me, when I shipped with him from
Bassora. Thereupon he was convinced that I was indeed
Sindbad and embraced me and gave me joy of my safety,
saying, " By Allah, my lord, thy case is indeed wonderful
and thy story extraordinary, but praised be God who hath
brought thee and me together again, and hath restored thee ^U$)l
thy goods and thy gear ! " Then I disposed of my goods
to the best of my skill, and profited largely on them,
whereat I rejoiced exceedingly and congratulated myself
on my safety and the recovery of my goods.

After this we continued our voyage from island to island,
trading everywhere till we came to the land of Hind/
where we bought cloves and ginger and all manner of
spices ; and thence we fared on to the land of Sind, 3
where also we bought and sold. In the course of this
voyage in the Indian seas, I saw wonders without number,
amongst others a fish like a cow and others like asses J
and I saw also a bird that comes out of a sea-shell and
lays eggs and hatches them on the surface of the water,
never coming up from the sea to the land. Then we
set sail again with a fair wind and after a prosperous
voyage, arrived in safety, by the blessing of God the Most
High, at Bassora, where I abode a few days and after re-
turned to Baghdad, having gained in this voyage what was
beyond count and reckoning. I gave alms and largesse and
clad the widow and the orphan, by way of thanksgiving
for my happy return, and fell to feasting and making
merry with my companions and friends and forgot all that
had beialiea me aad all the perils and hardships I had


* Southern India,


India west of the Indus,


i8o

suffered. This, then is the history of my third voyage 9
and to-morrow, if it be the will of God, you shall hear
that of my fourth voyage, which is still more wonderful
than those you have already heard.'


Then he bade give the porter an hundred dinars as of
wont and called for food. So they spread the tables and
the company supped and went their ways, marvelling at
what they had heard. The porter passed the night in
his own house and as soon as the day broke and the
morning appeared with its light and shone, he rose and
praying the morning prayer, betook himself to Sindbad
the Sailor, who received him with an open and cheerful
favour and made him sit with him till the rest of his
friends arrived, when he caused ,.set on food and they
ate and drank and made merry. Then Sindbad the Sailor
bespoke them and related to them the story of his fourth
voyage, saying, ( Know, O my brethren, that

THE FOURTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

I had not long been in the enjoyment of ease and
repose, after my return from my third voyage, when a
company of merchants entered Baghdad and foregather-
ing with me, talked with me of foreign travel and traffic,
till my soul yearned to go with them and divert itself with
the sight of strange countries, and I longed for the society
of the various races of mankind and for traffic and gain.
So I resolved to travel with them and providing myself with
great store of costly goods s more than ever before, trans-
ported them to Bassora, where I look ship with the
merchants in question, who were of the chief of the
town*


i8i

We set out, trasting in the blessing of God the Most
High, and sailed, with a favouring breeze, from island to
island and sea to sea, till, one day, there arose against us
a contrary wind and the captain cast out his anchors and
brought the ship to a standstill, fearing lest she should
founder in mid-ocean. Then we all fell to prayer and
humbling ourselves before God the Most High; but, as
we were thus engaged, there smote us a furious squall,
which tore the sails to rags ; the cable parted and [the
ship, capsizing,] cast us all into the sea. I kept myself
afloat half the day, till, when I had given myself up for
lost, God threw in my way one of the planks of the ship, tfrjTfgfjf
on which I and some others of the merchants clambered ftll
and paddled with our feet in the sea. We abode thus
a day and a night, the wind and waves helping us on, till,
on the forenoon of the second day, the breeze freshened
and the waves rose and cast us upon an island, well-nigh
dead for cold and weariness and fear and hunger and
thirst and lack of sleep. We walked about the shore and
found abundance of herbs and roots, of which we ate
and stayed our failing spirits, then lay down and slept
till morning.

As soon as it was light, we arose and walked about the
island, till we came in sight of [what seemed] an inhabited
house afar off. So we made towards it, but no sooner
had we reached the door thereof, than a number of naked
men issued from it and without word said, laid hold of us
and carried us to their king, who signed to us to sit. So
we sat down and they set food before us, whose like we
had never seen in all our lives. My companions ate of
it, for stress of hunger, but my stomach revolted from it
and 1 would not eat; and my refraining from it was, by
God's favour, the cause of ray being alive till now: for
no sooner had my comrades tasted of it than their reason
fled and their condition changed and they began to eat


g82


like madmen. Then the savages gave them to drink of
cocoa-nut oil and anointed them therewith; and no
sooner had they drunken thereof, than their eyes turned
in their heads and they fell to eating greedily against
their wont. When I saw this, I was confounded and
grieved for them, nor was I less concerned for myself,
for fear of the savages. So I watched them narrowly,
nor was it long before I discovered them to be a tribe
of cannibals. All who fell in their way they brought to
their king and fed them upon this food and anointed
them with cocoa-nut oil, whereupon their bellies ex-
panded that they might eat amain, whilst their reason
fled and they lost the power of thought and became
idiots. Then they stuffed them with cocoa-nut oil and
the aforesaid food, till they grew fat and stout, when they
slaughtered them and roasted them for their king's eating :
but, as for the savages themselves, they ate human flesh raw.

When I was aware of this, I was sore dismayed for myself
and my comrades, who were now become so brutalized
that they knew not what was done with them and the
savages committed them to one, 1 who used every day to
lead them out and pasture them on the island like cattle.
As for me, I wasted away and became sickly for fear and
hunger and my flesh shrivelled on my bones ; which when
the savages saw, they left me alone and took no thought
of me, so that one day I gave them the slip and made for
the beach, where I espied a man seated on a high place.
I looked at him and knew him for the herdsman, who had
charge of my fellows, and with him were great plenty of
others like unto them. As soon as he saw me, he knew
me to be in possession of my reason and signed to me
from afar, as who should say, " Turn back and take the
right-hand road, for that will lead thee into the king's
highway." So I turned back, as he bade me, and fob
1 Apparently not a savage.


183


lowed the right-hand road, now running for fear and now
slackening pace, to rest me, till I was out of his sight. By
this time, the sun had gone down and the darkness set
in ; so I sat down to rest and would have slept, but sleep
came not to me that night, for stress of fear and hunger
and weariness. When the night was half spent I rose
and walked on, till the day broke and the sun rose over
hill and plain. Now I was weary and hungry and thirsty ;
so I ate my fill of the herbs and roots that grew in the
island and stayed my stomach, after which I set out again.

I fared on thus, night and day, seven days and nights,
staying my hunger with roots and herbs, till, on the morn-
ing of the eighth day, I caught sight of something moving
in the distance. So I made for it, though my heart quaked
for all I had suffered first and last, and found that it was
a company of men gathering pepper. As soon as they
saw me, they hastened up to me and surrounding me on
all sides, asked me who I was and whence I came. I
acquainted them with my case and all the hardships and 3Cu$t
perils I had suffered and how I had escaped from the fcflt't.
savages, whereat they marvelled and gave me joy of my
safety, saying, " By Allah, it is wonderful that thou shouldst
have escaped from these blacks, who swarm in the island
and devour all who fall in with them, nor is any safe from
them."

They made me sit by them, till they had made an end
of their work, and brought me good food, of which I ate,
for I was hungry, and rested awhile ; after which they
took ship with me and carrying me to the island where
they abode, brought me before their king, who received
me kindly and questioned me of my case ; whereupon
I told him all that had befallen me, from the day of my
leaving Baghdad. He wondered greatly at my adventures,
he and his courtiers, and made me sit by him ; then he-
called for food and I ate with him and washed my hands


1 84

and returned thanks to God the most High for all His
mercies. Then I left the King and walked about the city,
which I found rich and populous, abounding in markets
well stocked with food and merchandise and full of buyers
and sellers. So I gave myself joy of having reached so
pleasant a place and took my ease there after my
fatigues ; and I made friends with the townsfolk, nor was
it long before I became better considered and more in
favour with them and their King than any of the chief
men of the realm.

Now I saw that all the people, great and small, rode
handsome thorough-bred horses barebacked and without
saddles, at which I wondered and said to the King, " O
my lord, why dost thou not ride with a saddle ? Therein is
ease for the rider and increase of power." " What manner
of thing is a saddle ? " asked he. " I never saw nor used
one in all my life." " With thy permission," rejoined I,
" I will make thee a saddle, that thou mayst ride on it and
see the comfort thereof." And he said, " Do so." So
I asked him for wood, which being brought me, I sought
out a skilful carpenter and showed him how to make the
saddle-tree, portraying him the fashion thereof in ink on
the wood. Then I took wool and carded it and made felt
of it and covering the saddle-tree with leather, stuffed it
and burnished it and bound on the girth and stirrup-
leathers j after which I fetched a blacksmith and described
to him the fashion of the stirrups and bridle-bit. So he
forged a fine pair of stirrups and a bit, and I filed them
smooth and tinned them. Moreover, I made fast to them
fringes of silk and fitted bridle-leathers to the bit. Then
I fetched one of the best of the royal horses and saddling
and bridling him, hung the stirrups to the saddle and led
him to the King. The thing took his fancy and he thanked
me; then he mounted and rejoiced greatly in the saddle
and rewarded me handsomely. When the King's Vizier


i8§

saw the saddle, he sought of me the like and I made it for
him. Moreover, all the grandees and officers of state
sought saddles of me ; so I fell to making saddles, with
the help of the carpenter and blacksmith, whom I had
taught the craft, and selling them to all who sought, till I
amassed great wealth and became in high honour and
favour with the King and his household and officers.

I abode thus till, one day, as I was sitting with the King,
in all honour and contentment he said to me, " Hark ye,
such an one ! Thou art become one of us and we hold
thee in such honour and affection that we cannot part with
thee now nor suffer thee to leave our city ; wherefore I have
somewhat to require of thee, in which I will not have thee
gainsay me. "O King," answered I, "what is it thou
desirest of me? Far be it from me to gainsay thee in
aught, for I am indebted to thee for many favours and
bounties and much kindness, and (praised be. God .') I am
become as one of thy servants." Quoth he, " I have a
mind to marry thee to a rich, handsome and agreeable
wife, so thou mayst be domiciled with us and I will lodge
thee with me in my palace; wherefore gainsay me not
neither cross me in this." When I heard this, I was
abashed and held my peace nor could make him any
answer, by reason of my much bashfulness before him.
Quoth he, " Why dost thou not answer me, O my son ? "
And I answered, saying, " O King of the age, it is thine to
command." So he summoned the Cadi and the witnesses
and married me straightway to a noble lady of surpassing
beauty, high descent and great wealth. Then he gave me JCfo^t
a great and goodly house, together with slaves and officers, ulUi
and assigned me stipends and allowances. So I became
in all delight and ease and contentment and forgot all that
had befallen me of weariness and trouble and hardship i
for I loved my wife dearly and she loved me no less, and
we were at one and abode in the utmost comfort and


1 86

happiness. And I said in myself, " When I return to my
native land, I will carry her with me." But whatever is
decreed to a man, needs must it be, and none knoweth
what shall befall him.

We lived thus a great while, till God the Most High
bereft a neighbour of mine of his wife. Now he was a
friend of mine ; so I went in to condole with him on his
loss and found him in very ill plight, full of trouble and
weary of heart and mind. I condoled with him and
comforted him, saying, " Mourn not for thy wife ; God
will surely give thee a better in her stead, and thy life
shall be long, so it please the Most High." But he wept
sore and replied, " O my friend, how can I marry another
wife and how shall God replace her to me with a better
than she, seeing that 1 have but one day left to live?"
" O my brother," said I, return to thy senses and fore-
bode not thine own death, for thou art well and in good
health and case." "By thy life, O my friend," rejoined
he, "to-morrow thou wilt lose me and wilt never see
me again till the Day of Resurrection." "How so?"
asked I, and he said, "This very day they bury my
wife, and me with her in one tomb ; for it is the custom
with us, if the wife die first, to bury the husband alive
with her, and in like manner the wife, if the husband die
first; so that neither may enjoy life after the other." "By
Allah," cried I, " this is a most vile custom and not to be
endured of any ! "

Meanwhile, the most part of the townsfolk came in and
fell to condoling with my friend for his wife and himself.
Presently, they laid the dead woman out and setting her
on a bier, carried her and her husband without the city,
till they came to a place in the side of a mountain by the
sea, where they raised a great stone and discovered the
mouth of a stone- lined pit or well, leading down into a
vast underground cavern that ran beneath the mountain,


1 87

Into this pit they threw the coffin, then tying a lope
of palm-fibres under the husband's armpits, they let him
down into the cavern, and with him a great pitcher of
fresh water and seven cakes of bread. When he came
to the bottom, he did himself loose from the rope and
they drew it up ; then stopping the mouth of the pit with
the stone, they returned to the city, leaving my friend in
the cavern with his dead. wife. When I saw this, I said
in myself, " By Allah, this kind of death is more horrible
than the first ! " 1 And I went in to the King and said to
him, " O my lord, why do ye bury the live with the
dead ? " Quoth he, " It has been our custom, from time
immemorial, if the husband die first, to bury his wife
with him, and the like with the wife, if her husband die
first, so we may not sever them, alive or dead. " " O King
of the age," asked I, "if the wife of a foreigner like myself
die among you, deal ye with him as with yonder man ? "
"Assuredly," answered he; "we do with him even as thou
hast seen." When I heard this, my gall-bladder was like
to burst, for the violence of my dismay and concern for
myself ■ my wit became dazed and I went in fear lest my
wife should die before me and they bury me alive with
her. However, after a while, I comforted myself, saying,
" Haply I shall die before her, for none knoweth which
shall go first and which follow."

Then I applied myself to diverting my mind from this
thought with various occupations ; but it was not long
before my wife sickened and died, after a few days' illness,
and the King and the rest of the folk came to condole with
me and her family for her loss. Then they washed her
and arraying her in her richest clothes and ornaments, laid
her on the bier and carried her to the mountain aforesaid,
where they lifted the cover of the pit and cast her in ; aftei
which all my friends and acquaintances came round me, to
1 i.e. that (of being eaten by the cannibals) from which he had escaped-


1 88

bid me farewell in my lifetime and condole with me for
myself, whilst I cried out amongst them, saying, " I am
a foreigner and not subject to your custom !" They paid
no heed to my words, but laying hold of me, bound me by
force and let me down into the cavern, with a pitcher of
fair water and seven cakes of bread, as of wont. When I
came to the bottom, they called out to me to cast myself
loose from the cords, but I refused to do so ; so they threw
them down on me and closing the mouth of the pit with
the stone aforesaid, went their ways,
Wig!)! I found myself in a vase cavern under the mountain, full
fr^fr of dead bodies, that exhaled a fetid and loathsome smell,
and fell to blaming myself for what I had done, 1 saying,
u By Allah, I deserve all that hath befallen me ! What
possessed me to take a wife in this city? There is no
power and no virtue but in God the Most High, the
Supreme S As often as I say, ' I have escaped from one
calamity,' I fall into a worse. By Allah, this is a fearful death
to die ! Would I had been drowned at sea or perished in
the mountains ! It were better than to die this miserable
death !" Then I threw myself down on the bones of the
dead and lay there, imploring God's help and in the
violence of my despair, invoking death, which came not to
me, till hunger well-nigh gnawed me in sunder and thirst
consumed me, when I sat up and feeling for the bread, ate
a morsel and drank a mouthful of water. After this, I
arose and exploring the cavern, found that it extended a
long way right and left, with hollow places in its sides J
and its floor was strewn with dead bodies and rotten bones,
that had lain there from of old time. So I made myself a
place in the sides of the cavern, afar from the freshly buried
dead, and there slept.

! abode thus a long while, knowing not night from day,
eating not till I was well-nigh torn in pieces with hunger,
" & is* in undertaking another voyage.


189


neither drinking till driven thereto by excess of thirst,
for fear ray victual should fail me before my death ; and
my bread and water diminished, till I had but a little left,
albeit I ate but a morsel every day or two and drank but
a mouthful. One day, as I sat thus, pondering my case
and bethinking me how I should do, when my store was
exhausted, the stone that covered the opening was suddenly
raised, and the light streamed down upon me. Quoth I,
"I wonder what is to do!" Then I espied folk standing
about the mouth of the pit, who presently let down a dead
man and a live woman, weeping and bemoaning herself,
and with her the usual pittance of bread and water. I
saw her, but she saw me not ; and they closed up the
opening and went away. Then I took the thighbone of
a dead man and going up to the woman, smote her on the
crown of the head, and she fell down in a swoon. I
smote her a second and a third time, till she was dead,
when I laid hands on her bread and water and found on
her great plenty of jewels and ornaments and rich apparel.
I carried the victual to my niche in the side of the cavern
and ate and drank of it sparingly, no more than sufficed
to keep the life in me, lest it come speedily to an end and
I perish of hunger and thirst.

I abode thus a great while, killing all the live folk they
let down into the cavern and taking their provision of
meat and drink, till, one day, as I slept, I was awakened
by something routing among the bodies in a corner of
the cave, and said, "What can this be?" So I sprang
up and seizing the thighbone aforesaid, made for the
noise. As soon as the thing was ware of me, it fled from
me into the inward of the cavern, and behold, it was a
wild oeast However, I followed it to the further end,
till I saw afar off a tiny point of light, like a star, now-
appearing and now disappearing. So I made for it, and
ac 1 drew near, it grew larger and brighter, till I was-


190


certified that it was a crevice in the rock, leading to the
open country ; and I said in myself, " There must be
some reason for this opening ; either it is the mouth of
a second pit, such as that by which they let me down, or
else it is a [natural] fissure in the rock." So I bethought
me awhile and nearing the light, found that it came from
a breach in the sea-wall of the mountain, which the wild
beasts had made, that they might enter and feed upon the
dead bodies. When I saw this, my spirits revived and
hope came back to me and I made sure of life, after
having looked for nothing but death. So I went on, as
in a dream, and making shift to scramble through the
breach, found myself on the slope of a high mountain,
overlooking the salt sea and cutting off all access thereto
from the island, so that none could come at that part of
the beach from the city.

I praised God and thanked Him, rejoicing greatly in the
prospect of deliverance ; then 1 returned to the cavern and
brought out all the food and water I had saved up and
donned some of the dead folk's clothes over my own ; after
which I gathered together all the collars and necklaces of
pearls and jewels and trinkets of gold and silver set with
precious stones and other ornaments and valuables I could
find upon the corpses, and making them into bales with
the grave-clothes and raiment of the dead, carried them
out to the sea-shore, where I established myself, purposing
to wait there till it should please God the Most High to
send me deliverance by means of some passing ship. I
visited the cavern daily and as often as I found folk buried
alive there, I killed them and took their victual and
valuables.

^fgfj! Thus I abode awhile till, one day, as I sat on the beach,
Mb, pondering my case, I caught sight of a ship passing in the

midst of the surging sea, swollen with clashing billows.
So I took a piece of a shroud. I had with me and tying it


igi


to a staff, ran along the sea-shore, making signals therewith
to the people in the ship, till they espied me and hearing
my shouts, sent a boat to fetch me off. When it drew near 8
the crew called out to me, saying, " Who art thou and how
earnest thou in this place, where never saw we any in our
lives ? " I answered that I was a merchant, who had been
wrecked and saved myself on one of the planks of the ship,
with some of my goods, and that, by the blessing of God
and my own strength and skill, I had succeeded after severe
toil in landing with my gear in that place, where I waited
for some one to pass and take me off. So they took me
and the bales I had made of the jewels and valuables from
the cavern, tied up in clothes and shrouds, and rowed back
with me to the ship, where the captain said to me, u How
earnest thou to yonder place?" All my life I have sailed
these seas and passed to and fro by this mountain ; yet
never saw I here any living thing save wild beasts and
birds." I repeated to him the story I had told the sailors,
but acquainted him with nothing of that whicn had befallen
me in the city and the cavern, lest there should be any of
the islanders in the ship. Then I took out some of the
best of the jewels and ornaments and offered them to the
captain, saying, "O my lord, thou hast been the means of
my delivery; so take this from me in requital of thy good
offices." But he refused to accept it, saying, "When we
find a shipwrecked man on the sea-shore or on an island, we
take him up and feed him, and if he be naked, we clothe
him ; nor take we aught from him, nay, when we reach
a port of safety, we set him ashore with a present of our
own money and entreat him kindly and charitably, for the
love of God the Most High." So I prayed that his life
might be long and rejoiced in my escape, trusting to be
delivered from my stress.

Then we pursued our voyage and sailed from island
to island and sea to sea, till, by God's grace, we arrived


192


in safety at Bassora, where I tarried a few days, then
went on to Baghdad and foregathered with my friends
and family, who rejoiced in my happy return and gave
me joy of my safety. I laid up in my storehouses all
the goods I had brought with me, and gave alms and
largesse and clothed the widow and the orphan. Then
I gave myself up to pleasure and enjoyment, returning to
my old merry way of life ; but, whenever I call to mind
my sojourn in the cavern among the dead, I am like to
lose my reason. This, then, is the story of my fourth
voyage, and to-morrow I will tell you that which befell
me in my fifth voyage, which was yet rarer and more
wonderful than those which forewent it.'


When Sindbad the Sailor had made an end of his
story, he called for supper ; so they spread the table and
the guests ate the evening meal ; after which he gave
the porter an hundred dinars as usual, and he and the
rest of the company went their ways, glad at heart and
marvelling at what they had heard, for that each story
was more extraordinary than that which forewent it. The
porter passed the night in his own house, in all joy and
cheer and wonderment, and next morning, as soon as it
was day, he prayed the morning prayer and repaired to
the house of Sindbad the Sailor, who welcomed him and
made him sit with him till the rest of the company
arrived, when they ate and drank and made merry and
jb^TtCll) t the talk went round amongst them. Presently, their host
tilbL began the story of the fifth voyage and bespoke them,
saying, ' Know 8 O my brethren, that


393


THE FIFTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

When I had been awhile on shore and had forgotten all
my perils and sufferings, I was again seized with a long-
ing to travel and see foreign countries. So I bought costly
merchandise and making it up into bales, repaired to
Bassora, where I found in the port a fine tall ship, newly
built and fitted ready for sea. She pleased me, so I
bought her and embarking my goods in her, hired a
master and crew, over whom I set certain of my slaves
and servants as inspectors- A number of merchants took
passage with me and paid me freight ; and we set sail in
all joy and cheer, promising ourselves a prosperous voyage
and much profit. We sailed from place to place, selling
and buying and viewing the countries by wfnch we passed s
till one day we came to a great uninhabited island, waste
and desolate, whereon was a vast white dome. The mer-
chants landed to examine this dome, leaving me in the
ship ; and when they drew near, behold, it was a huge roc's
egg. They fell a-beating it with stones, knowing not what
it was, and presently broke it open, whereupon much water
ran out of it and the young roc appeared within. So they
pulled it forth of the shell and killed it and took of it great
store of meat.

Now I was in the ship and knew not what they did, but
presently one of them came up to me and said, " O my
lord, come and look at the egg that we thought to be
a dome." So I looked and seeing the merchants beating
it with stones, called out to them to desist, for that the
roc would come and break up our ship and destroy us,
But they paid no heed to me and gave not over smiting
upon the egg, till presently the day grew dark and the sub
was hidden from us s as if some great cloud had passed

VOL. V. 13


194


between us and it. So we raised our eyes and saw that
what we took for a cloud was the roc flying between us
and the sun, and it was its wings that darkened the day.
When it saw its egg broken, it gave a loud cry, whereupon
its mate came flying up and they both began circling about
the ship, crying out at us with voices louder than thunder.
I called out to the master and the crew to put out to sea
and seek safety in flight, before we were all destroyed.
So the merchants came on board and we cast off and
made haste to gain the open sea. When the rocs saw this,
they flew off and we crowded sail on the ship, thinking
to get beyond their reach ; but presently they reappeared
and flew after us, each with a huge rock in its claws, that
it had brought from the mountains. As soon as the male
bird came up with us, he let fall upon us the rock he held
in his talons ; but the master steered the ship aside, so
that the rock missed her by some small matter and plunged
into the sea with such violence, that the ship surged up
and sank into the trough of the sea and the bottom of
the ocean appeared to us. Then the she-bird let fall her
rock, which was smaller than that of her mate, and as
fore-ordained fate would have it, it fell on the poop of
the ship and crushed it, breaking the rudder into twenty
pieces ; whereupon the vessel foundered and all on board
were cast into the sea.

As for me, I struggled for dear life, till God threw in my
way one of the planks of the ship, to which I clung and
bestriding it, fell a-paddling with my hands and feet. Now
the ship had gone down hard by an island and the winds
and waves bore me on, till, by permission of God the
Most High, they cast me up on the shore of the island*
at the last gasp for toil and distress and hunger and thirst.
So I landed more dead than alive, and throwing myself
down on the beach, lay there awhile, till I began to re-
cover myself, when 1 walked about the island and found


i9S


it as it were one of the pleasaunces of Paradise, abounding

in trees, laden with ripe fruits, and flowers of all kinds and

running streams and birds warbling the praises of Him

to whom belong power and eternity. So I ate my nil

of the fruits and slaked my thirst with the water of the Wfa|)t

streams and returned thanks to God the Most High and folbtt*

glorified Him ; after which I sat till nightfall, hearing

no voice and seeing none.

Then I lay down, well-nigh dead for travail and affright,
and slept without ceasing till morning, when I arose and
walked among the trees, till I came to a spring of running
water, by which sat an old man of venerable aspect, girt
about with a waistcloth made of the leaves of trees.
Quoth I to myself, " Belike this old man is of those
who were wrecked in the ship and hath made his way
to this island." So I went up to him and saluted him,
and he returned my greeting by signs, but spoke not ; and
I said to him, " O old man, what ails thee to sit here?"
He shook his head and moaned and signed to me, as who
should say, " Take me on thy back and carry me to the
other side of the stream." And I said to myself, " I will
deal kindly with him and do what he desires ; it may be
God will reward me." So I took him on my shoulders and
carrying him to the place to which he pointed, said to
him, " Dismount at thy leisure." But he would not get
off my back and wound his legs about my neck. I looked
at them and seeing that they were like a buffalo's hide for
blackness and roughness, was affrighted and would have
cast him off; but he clung to me and gripped my neck
with his legs, till I was well-nigh choked ; the world grew
black in my sight and I fell to the ground senseless.
But lie [still kept his seat and] beat me with his feet on
the back and shoulders, till he enforced me rise, for excess
of pain. Then he signed to me with his head to carry him
hither and thither among the trees, to the best of the


;


ig6

fruits ; and if I refused to do his bidding or loitered, he
beat me with his feet more grievously than if I had beet
beaten with whips. So I carried him about the island,
like a captive slave, and he used to do his occasions on
my back, dismounting not day nor night; but, when he
wished to sleep, he wound his legs about my neck and lay
down and slept awhile, then arose and beat me, where-
upon I sprang up in haste, unable to gainsay him, because
of the pain he inflicted on me. And indeed I repented
me of having taken compassion on him and said in my-
self, " I did him a kindness and it hath turned to my
hurt ; by Allah, never more will I do any a service so
long as I live ! "

I abode thus a long while in the utmost wretchedness,
hourly beseeching God the Most High that I might die,
for stress of weariness and misery, till one day I came to a
place wherein was abundance of gourds, many of them dry.
So I took a great dry gourd and cutting open the neck,
scooped out the inside and cleaned it ; after which I
gathered grapes from a vine that grew hard by and squeezed
them into the gourd till it was full of the juice. Then
I stopped up the mouth and set it in the sun, where I left
it for some days till it became strong wine ; and every day
I used to drink of it, to comfort and sustain me under my
fatigues with that froward devil, and as often as I drank, I
forgot my troubles and took new heart.

One day, he saw me drinking and signed to me as who
should say, " What is that ? " Quoth I, " It is an excellent
cordial, that cheers the heart and revives the spirits."
Then, being heated with wine, I ran and danced with him
among the trees, clapping my hands and singing and
making merry. When he saw this, he signed to me to
give him the gourd, that he might drink, and i feared him
and gave it him. So he took it and draining it, cast it on
the ground, whereupon he grew merry and began to jig Ko


197


and fro on my shoulders ; but presently the fumes of the
wine rising to his head, he became helplessly drunk and
his every limb relaxed and he swayed to and fro on my
back. When I saw that he had lost his senses for drunken-
ness, I put my hand to his legs and loosing them from my
neck, stooped down and threw him to the ground, hardly 3?Tf($$
crediting my deliverance from him and fearing lest he iflbttfe
should shake off his drunkenness and do me a mischief.
So I took up a great stone from among the trees and smote
him therewith on the head with all my might and crushed
in his skull and killed him, may God have no mercy on
him !

Then I returned, with a heart at ease, to my former
station on the sea-shore and abode in the island many
days, eating of its fruits and drinking of its waters and
keeping a look out for passing ships ; till, one day, as I sat
on the beach, recalling all that had befallen me and say-
ing, " I wonder if God will save me alive and restore me
to my country and ray friends ! " I suddenly caught sight
of a ship making for the island. Presently, it cast anchor
and the passengers landed. So I made for them, and when
they saw me, they hastened up to me and questioned me
of my case and how I came thither. I told them all that
had befallen me, whereat they marvelled exceedingly and
said, " He who rode on thy shoulders is called the Old Man
of the Sea, and none ever fell into his clutches and came
off alive but thou ; so praised be God for thy safety J "
Then they set set food before me, of which I ate my fill, and
gave me somewhat of clothes wherewith I clad myself and
covered my nakedness ; after which they took me up into
the ship, and we sailed days and nights, till fate brought
us to a place called the City of Apes, builded with lofty
houses, all of which gave upon the sea. Now every night,
as soon as it is dusk, the dwellers in this city use to come
forth of the seaward doors of their houses and putting out to


i 9 8


sea in boats and ships, pass the night thus in their fear lest
the apes should come down on them from the mountains.

I landed to visit the city, but meanwhile the ship set sail
without me and I repented of having gone ashore, and
calling to mind my companions and what had befallen me
with the apes, first and last, sat down and fell a-weeping
and lamenting. Presently one of the townsfolk accosted
me and said to me, " my lord, meseems thou art a
stranger to these parts?" "Yes," answered I, "I am
indeed an unfortunate stranger, who came hither in a ship
that cast anchor here, and I landed to visit the town ; but
when I would have gone on board again, I found they had
sailed without me." "Come," said he, "and embark with
us, for, if thou lie the night in the city, the apes will destroy
thee." " I hear and obey," replied I and rising, straight-
way embarked with him in one of the boats, whereupon
they put out to sea and anchoring a mile from the land,
passed the night there. At daybreak, they rowed back to
the city and landing, went each about his business. Thus
they did every night, for if any tarried in the town by night
the apes came down on him and killed him. As soon as it
was day, the apes left the place and ate of the fruits of the
gardens, then went back to the mountains and slept there
till nightfall, when they again came down upon the city.

Now this place was in the farthest part of the country of
the blacks, and one of the strangest things that befell me
during my sojourn there was on this wise. One of those,
in whose company I passed the night in the boat, said to
me, " O my lord, thou art a stranger in these parts ; hast
thou any craft at which thou canst work?" "By Allah, O
my brother," replied I, " I have no trade nor know I any
handicraft, for I was a merchant and a man of substance
and had a ship of my own, laden with great store of goods
and merchandise ; but it foundered at sea and all were
drowned but I, who saved myself on a piece of plank, that


199


God vouchsafed me of His favour." With this, he fetched
me a cotton bag and giving it to me, said, " Take this bag
and fill it with pebbles from the beach and go forth with a
company of the townsfolk, to whom I will commend thee.
Do as they do and haply thou shalt gain what may further
thy return to thy native land." Then he carried me to the
beach, where I filled my bag with small pebbles, and
presently we saw a company of folk issue from the town,
each bearing a bag like mine, filled with pebbles. To
these he committed me, commending me to their care and
saying, " Take this man with you, for he is a stranger, and
teach him how to gather, that he may get his living, and
God will reward you." <f We hear and obey," answered
they and bidding me welcome, fared on with me till we
came to a spacious valley, full of lofty trees, that none
might climb.

Now in this valley were many apes, which fled at sight
of us and climbed up into the trees ; whereupon my com-
panions began to pelt them with the stones they had in
their bags, and the apes fell to plucking of the fruit of the
trees and casting them at the folk. I looked at the fruits
they cast at us and found them to be cocoa-nuts ; so I
chose out a great tree, full of apes, and going up to it,
began to pelt them with stones, and they in return pelted
me with nuts, which I collected, as did the rest : so that
by the time I had made an end of my bagful of pebbles,
I had gotten great plenty of nuts ; and as soon as my com-
panions had in like manner gotten as many nuts as they
could carry, we returned to the city, where we arrived be-
fore the end of the day. Then I went in to the man who
had brought me in company with the nut-gatherers and
gave him all I had gotten, thanking him for his kindness :
but he would not accept them and gave me the key of a
closet in his house, saying, " Choose out the worst of the
auts and sell them and provide thyself with the price and


199


God vouchsafed me of His favour." With this, he fetched
me a cotton bag and giving it to me, said, " Take this bag
and fill it with pebbles from the beach and go forth with a
company of the townsfolk, to whom I will commend thee.
Do as they do and haply thou shalt gain what may further
thy return to thy native land." Then he carried me to the
beach, where I filled my bag with small pebbles, and
presently we saw a company of folk issue from the town,
each bearing a bag like mine, filled with pebbles. To
these he committed me, commending me to their care and
saying, " Take this man with you, for he is a stranger, and
teach him how to gather, that he may get his living, and
God will reward you." " We hear and obey," answered
they and bidding me welcome, fared on with me till we
came to a spacious valley, full of lofty trees, that none
might climb.

Now in this valley were many apes, which fled at sight
of us and climbed up into the trees ; whereupon my com-
panions began to pelt them with the stones they had in
their bags, and the apes fell to plucking of the fruit of the
trees and casting them at the folk. I looked at the fruits
they cast at us and found them to be cocoa-nuts ; so I
chose out a great tree, full of apes, and going up to it,
began to pelt them with stones, and they in return pelted
me with nuts, which I collected, as did the rest : so that
by the time I had made an end of my bagful of pebbles,
I had gotten great plenty of nuts ; and as soon as my com-
panions had in like manner gotten as many nuts as they
could carry, we returned to the city, where we arrived be-
fore the end of the day. Then I went in to the man who
had brought me in company with the nut-gatherers and
gave him all I had gotten, thanking him for his kindness j
but he would not accept them and gave me the key of a
closet in his house, saying, " Choose out the worst of the
uuts and sell them and provide thyself with the price and


200


lay up the rest here. And go thou forth every day and
gather nuts, as thou hast done to-day, and lay up the rest
here, so haply thou mayest collect enough to serve thee for
thy return home." " God requite thee ! " answered I and
did as he counselled me, going out daily with the cocoa-
nut gatherers, who commended me to each other and
showed me the best-stocked trees.

Thus did I for some time, till I had laid up great store of
excellent nuts, besides a large sum of money, the price
of those I had sold. I became thus at my ease and
bought all I saw and had a mind to and passed my time
pleasantly, till one day, as I stood on the beach, a great
ship cast anchor before the city and landed a company
of merchants, who proceeded to sell and buy and trade
for cocoa-nuts and other commodities. Then I went to
my friend and told him of the coming of the ship and
how I had a mind to return to my "own country; and he
said, " It is thine to decide." So I thanked him for his
bounties and took leave of him ; then, going to the
captain of the ship, I agreed with him for my passage

XtgTjt and embarked my cocoa-nuts and what else I possessed.

blue. We weighed anchor the same day and sailed from place
to place ; and wherever we stopped, I sold and traded
with my cocoa-nuts, and God requited me more than I
had lost. Amongst other places, we came to an island
abounding in cloves and cinnamon and pepper, and the
country people told me that by the side of each pepper-
pod grows a great leaf that shades it [from the sun] and
casts the water off it in the rainy season ; but, when the
rain ceases, the leaf turns over and falls down by the side
of the pod. Here I took in great store of pepper and
cloves and cinnamon, in exchange for cocoa-nuts, and we
passed thence to the island of El Usrat, whence conies
the Comorin aloes, and thence to another island, five days 3
journey in length, where grows the Chinese aloes, which


202


THE SIXTH VOYAGE OF SINDBAD THE
SAILOR.

I abode some time, after my return from my fifth voyage,
in great joy and comfort, and forgot what I had suffered,
till, one day, as I sat making merry and enjoying myself
with my friends, there came in to me a company of mer-
chants, bearing signs of travel, and talked with me of
travel and adventure and greatness of gain and profit
Their sight recalled to my mind the days of my return
from travel, and my joy at once more seeing my native
land and foregathering with my friends and relations ; and
; my soul yearned for travel and traffic. So I resolved to
undertake another voyage, and buying me rich mer-
chandise, made it up into bales, with which I journeyed
from Baghdad to Bassora. Here I found a great ship
2Cfgf)t ready for sea and full of merchants and notables, who
Mi. had with them goods of price ; so I joined myself to
them and took passage in the vessel with my goods.

We left Bassora with a fair wind and sailed from place
to place, in all delight and solace of life, buying and sell-
ing and profiting and diverting ourselves with the sight
of foreign countries, till one day, as we went along, the
captain suddenly gave a great cry and cast his turban on
the deck. Then he buffetted his face and plucked out
his beard and fell down in the waist of the ship, for
stress of grief and chagrin. So all the merchants and
sailors came about him and asked him what was to do,
and he answered, saying, " Know, Q folk, that we have
wandered from our course and come into a sea whose
ways I know not. Yonder is a great mountain, upon
which we are drifting, and unless God vouchsafe us a
means of escape, we are all dead men ; wherefore pray
ye to the Most High, that He deliver us from this strait/


203


Then he climbed the mast and would have loosed the
sails ; but the wind redoubled upon the ship and drove
her backward ; whereupon her rudder broke and she turned
round three times and fell off towards the mountain. With
this the captain came down from the mast, saying, There
is no power and no virtue but in God the Most High, the
Supreme, nor can we avert that which is decreed ! By-
Allah, we are fallen on sure destruction, and there is no
way of escape for us ! "

Then we all gave ourselves up for lost and fell a-weeping
over ourselves and bidding each other farewell. Presently
the ship struck upon the mountain and broke up, and all
on board her were plunged into the sea. Some were
drowned and others made shift to get upon the mountain.
I was amongst these latter, and when we got ashore, we
found a great island, compassed about with a ring of
mountains, whose base was strewn with wrecked ships
and goods and gear in countless profusion, cast up by
the sea. So we climbed the cliffs into the inward of the
island, and my companions, dispersing hither and thither
therein, were confounded at what they saw and became
as madmen at sight of the countless riches with which
its shores were strewn. As for me, I walked on inland,
till I came to a stream of sweet water, that welled up at
the foot of the mountains and disappeared in the earth
under the range of hills on the opposite side. I looked
into the bed of this stream and saw therein great plenty
of rubies and great royal pearls and all kinds of jewels
and precious stones, so that all the channel glittered by
reason of their multitude, and they were as gravel in the
bed of the rivulets that ran through the fields.

Moreover we found in the island abundance of the finest
aloes-wood, both Chinese and Comorin ; and there also is
a spring of crude ambergris, which exudes over the sides,
as it were gum, for the great heat of the sun, and runs


204


down to the sea-shore, where the monsters of the deep
come up and swallowing it, return into the sea. But it
burns in their bellies ; so they cast it up again and it rises
to the top of the water, where it congeals and its colour
and qualities are changed. By-and-by, the waves cast it
ashore and the ambergris-gatherers collect and sell it The
rest of the ambergris congeals on the banks of the stream
and when the sun shines on it, it melts and scents the
whole valley with a musk-like fragrance : then, when the
sun ceases from it, it congeals again. But none can
get to this place where is the crude ambergris, because
of the mountains aforesaid, which enclose the island on
all sides and on which all ships that approach it are
wrecked.

We continued thus to explore the island, marvelling at
the riches we found there and the wonderful works of
God, but sore troubled and dismayed for our own case.
Now we had picked up on the beach some small matter of
victual from the wreck and husbanded it carefully, eating
but once every day or two, in our fear lest it should fail
as and we perish miserably of hunger and thirst. More-
over, we were weak for sea-sickness and my companions
died one after another, till there were but a few of us left.
Each that died we washed and shrouded in some of the
clothes and linen cast ashore by the waves ; and after
a little, the rest of my fellows died, one by one, till I had
buried the last of the party and abode alone on the island,
with but a little victual left. And I wept over myself,
saying, " W ould God I had died before my companions
and they had washed me and buried me ! It had been
better than that I should die and none wash me and
shroud me and bury me. But there is no power and no
'f(jjf virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme !" After
Mxi, awhile I arose and dug me a deep grave on the sea-shore,
saying in myself, " When I grow weak and know thai


205


death corneth to rae, I will lay me down in this grave and
die there, so the wind may drift the sand over me and
cover me and I be buried therein." Then I fell to re-
proaching myself for my little wit in leaving my native
land and betaking me again to foreign travel, after all
I had suffered during my first five voyages,, each marked
by greater perils and more terrible hardships than its fore-
runner, especially as I had no need of money, seeing that
I had enough and more than enough and could not spend
what I had, no, nor half of it, in all my life ; and I re-
pented me of my folly, having no hope of escape from
my present stress, and bemoaned myself.

However, after a while, I bethought me and said to my-
self, " By Allah, this stream must have an issue somewhere,
and belike its course leads to some inhabited place ; so
methinks I cannot do better than make me a little boat,
big enough to sit in, and carry it down arid launching it
on the river, embark in it and commit myself to the
current. If I escape, I escape, by God's leave ; and if I
perish, better die in the river than here." So I gathered a
number of pieces of aloes- wood and bound them together
with ropes from the wreckage ; then I chose out from the
broken-up ships straight planks of even size and fixed
them firmly upon the aloes-wood. On this wise I made
me a boat [or raft] a little narrower than the channel of
the stream, and tying a piece of wood on its either side, to
serve as an oar, launched it on the river. Then I loaded
it with the best of the crude ambergris and pearls and
jewels and of the wrecked goods and what was left me of
victual, and embarking, did according to the saying of the
poet :

Depart from a place, if therein be oppression^ And leave the house tell

of its builder's fate ;
Country for country thou'lt find, if thou seek it, Life for life never, early

or late.


2o6


And fret not thy soul for the buffets of fortune : Each stress hath its terns

and its fore-ordained date.
He whose death in one land is decreed, in none other His life shall have

end than in that fixed by Fate.

I drifted with the stream, pondering the issue of my
affair, till I came to the place where it disappeared beneath
the mountains, and the current carried the raft with it into
the underground channel. Here I found myself in utter
darkness and the stream bore me on through a narrow
tunnel, which grew straiter and straiter, till the raft
touched either side and my head rubbed against the
roof. Then I blamed myself for having undertaken this
adventure and said, 11 If this tunnel grow any straiter,
the raft will not pass, and I cannot turn back ; so I shall
inevitably perish miserably in this place." And I threw
myself down on my face on the raft, by reason of the
straitness of the channel, whilst the stream ceased not
to carry me along the tunnel, which now grew wider and
now straiter. I fared on thus, knowing not night from
day, for the excess of the darkness that encompassed
me and my fear and concern for myself lest I should
perish, till, being sore aweary for the intensity of the gloom
and worn with hunger and watching, I fell asleep, as I lay
on the raft on my face. How long I slept I know not, but,
when I awoke, I found myself in the open air and the raft
moored to an island in the midst of a number of Indians
and blacks.

As soon as the folk saw that I was awake, they came up
to me and bespoke me in their language ; but I understood
not what they said and thought I must be still asleep and
that this was a dream that had betided me for stress of
trouble and weariness. When they saw I understood them
not and made them no answer, one of them came forward
and said to me in Arabic, " Peace be on thee, O my
brother! Who art thou and what brings thee hither?


1L


207

How earnest thou into this river and what manner of
land is beyond yonder mountains, for never knew we any
make his way thence to us?" Quoth I, "Who are ye and
what is this place?" "O my brother," answered he, "we
are husbandmen and gardeners, who came out to water
our fields and gardens and finding thee asleep on this
raft, laid hold of it and made it fast by us, against thou
shouldst awake at thy leisure. So tell us how thou earnest
hither?" "For God's sake, O my lord," rejoined I, "give
me to eat, for I am starving - s and after ask me what thou
wilt." So he hastened to fetch me food and I ate my fill,
till I was refreshed and my life returned to me. Then I
returned thanks to God the Most High, rejoicing in the
happy issue of my toils, and told them all my adventures jNTtQl)
from first to last. tSixii,

When I had made an end of my story, they consulted
among themselves and said to each other, " We must carry
him with us and present him to our King, that he may
acquaint him with his adventures." So they took me,
together with the raft and its lading, and brought me to
their King, telling him what had happened ; whereupon he
saluted me and bade me welcome. Then he questioned
me of my condition and adventures, and I repeated to him
my story, at which he marvelled exceedingly and gave me
joy of my deliverance ; after which I fetched from the raft
great store of jewels and precious stones and ambergris
and aloes-wood and presented them to the King, who
accepted them and entreated me with the utmost honour,
appointing me a lodging in his own palace. So I con-
sorted with the chief of the islanders, and they paid me
the utmost respect. Moreover, all the travellers and mer-
chants who came to the place questioned me of the affairs
of my native land and. of the Khalif Haroun er Reshid and
his rule there and I. told them of him and of that for which
he was renowned, and they praised him for this ; whilst


208


I in turn questioned them of the manners and customs of
their own countries. One day, the King himself questioned
me of the manners and way of government of my country,
and I acquainted him with the fashion of the Khalifg
sway in the city of Baghdad and the justice of his rule.
The King marvelled at my account of his ordinances and
said, " By Allah, the Khalifs ordinances are indeed wise
and his fashions praiseworthy and thou hast made me love
him by what thou tellest me ; wherefore I have a mind to
send him a present by thee." " I hear and obey, O my
lord," answered I; "I will carry thy present to him and
inform him that thou art his sincere lover."

Then I abode with the King in great honour and ease
and consideration, till, one day, as I sat in his palace,
I heard tell of a company of merchants, that were fitting
out a ship for Bassora, and said in myself, ' £ I cannot do
better than make the voyage with these/* So I rose at
once and going in to the King, kissed his hand and
acquainted him with my wish to set out with the merchants,
for that I longed after my people and family and native
land. Quoth he, " Thou art thine own master ; yet, if it
be thy will to abide with us, on our head and eyes be it;
for thou gladdenest us with thy company.'* " O my lord,"
answered I, " thou hast indeed overwhelmed me with thy
favours ; but I weary for a sight of my friends and family
and native land." When he heard this, he summoned the
merchants in question and commended me to their care,
paying my freight and passage-money. Moreover, he
bestowed on me great riches from his treasuries and com-
mitted to my charge a magnificent present for the Khalif
Haroun er Reshid.

Then I took leave of him and of all my intimates and
acquaintances in the island and embarked, with the mer-
chants aforesaid. We set sail with a fair wind, committing
ourselves to the care of God (may He be exalted and


209


glorified !), and by His permission in due time arrived^
after a prosperous voyage, at Bassora, where I passed a
few days, equipping myself and packing up my goods.
Then I went on to Baghdad, where I sought an audience
of the Khalif and laid the King's presents before him.
He asked me whence they came and I said to him, " By
Allah, O Commander of the Faithful, I know not the
name of the city nor the way thither ! " And I related
to him all that had befallen me in my last voyage ; at
which he wondered exceedingly and bade his scribes record
my story and lay it up in his treasuries, for the edification
of all who saw it. Then he conferred on me exceeding
great favours, and I repaired to my house, where I stored
up all my goods and possessions. Presently, my friends
came to me and I distributed presents among my family
and gave alms and largesse ; after which I. gave myself
up to pleasure and merry-making and forgot all that i
had suffered. This, then, O my brothers, is what befell
me in my sixth voyage, and to-morrow, if it please God
the Most High, I will tell you the story of my seventh
and last voyage, which is still more wonderful and extra-
ordinary than that of the first six.


Then he bade lay the table, and the company ate the
evening meal with him ; after which he gave the porter
an hundred dinars, as of wont, and they all went their
ways, marvelling beyond measure at that which they had
heard. Next morning, as soon as he had done his devo- 2C{(r|}f
tions, the porter and the rest of the guests betook them- udjait
selves to the house of Sindbad the Sailor, and when they
were all assembled, the host began the story of his seventh
voyage, saying, 1 Know, O company, thai


VOL. ¥*


84


sio


THE SEVENTH VOYAGE OF SIN DEAD THE

SAILOR.

After my return from my sixth voyage, in which I made
abundant profit, I abode some time in all possible ease
and delight, feasting and making merry day and night,
till I began once more to long to sail the seas and see
foreign countries and company with merchants and hear
new things. So I packed up a quantity of precious stuffs
into bales and repaired with them to Bassora, where I
found a ship ready for sea, and in her a company of
considerable merchants. I shipped with them and we
set forth on our venture, in health and safety, and sailed
with a fair wind, till we came to a city called Medinet-es-
Sin ; but, [awhile after we had left this place,] as we
fared on in all cheer and confidence, devising of traffic
and travel, there sprang up a violent head wind and a
tempest of rain fell on us and drenched us and our goods.
So we covered the bales with drugget and canvas, lest
they should be spoiled by the rain, and betook ourselves
to prayer and supplication to God the Most High, for
deliverance from the peril that was upon us. But the
captain arose and girding his middle, tucked up his skirts
and climbed to the mast-head, whence he looked out
right and left and fell a-buffeting his face and plucking
out his beard. So we asked him what was to do, and he
replied, saying, "Seek ye deliverance of God the Most
High from this our strait and bemoan yourselves and take
leave of each other ; for know that the wind hath gotten
the mastery of us and hath driven us into the uttermost
of the seas of the world." Then he came down from the
mast-head and opening his chest pulled out a bag oi
cotton, from which he took a powder like ashes. This
he wetted with water and after waiting awhile, smelt it;


211


then he took out of the chest a little book, in which he
read awhile and said to us, " Know that in this book is
a marvellous saying, denoting that whoso cometh hither
shall surely perish, without hope of escape ; for that this
part of the world is called the Clime of Kings, in which
is the sepulchre of our lord Solomon, son of David, (on
whom be peace !) and therein are serpents of vast bulk
and fearsome aspect : and what ship soever cometh to these
parts, there riseth to her a great fish out of the sea and
swalloweth her up with all on board."

Great was our wonder at the captain's speech, but hardly
had he made an end of speaking, when the ship was
suddenly lifted out of the water and let fall again and we
heard a terrible great cry like the hurtling thunder, whereat
we were smitten with terror and became as dead men,
giving ourselves up for lost. Then there came up to us a
huge fish, as big as a great mountain, at whose sight we
became wild for terror and made ready for death, marvel-
ling at its vast size and gruesome aspect; when lo, a
second fish made its appearance, bigger than the first. So
we bemoaned ourselves and bade each other farewell ; but,
at that moment, up came a third fish bigger than the two
first, whereupon we lost the power of thought and reason
and were stupefied for the excess of our fear. Then the
three fish began circling about the ship and the biggest
opened its mouth to swallow it, and we looked into its
mouth and behold, it was wider than the gate of a city.
So we besought God the Most High and called for succour
upon His Apostle (on whom be blessing and peace !)
when, suddenly, a violent squall of wind arose and smote
the ship, which rose out of the water and settled upon a
great reef, where it broke up and fell asunder and all. on
board were plunged into the' sea. As for me, I tore off all
my clothes but my shirt and swam, till I fell in with a
plank, to which I clung and bestrode it ? in the most piteous


212


plight for fear and distress and hunger and thirst, whilst
the winds and the waters sported with me, and the waves
carried me up and down.

Then I reproached myself for my folly in quitting my
hardly earned repose to follow new ventures and said to
myself, " O Sindbad, every time [thou undertakest a voyage,]
thou sufferest hardships and weariness ; yet wilt thou not
renounce sea-travel ; or, an thou say, ' I renounce,' thou
iiest in thy renouncement. Endure then [with patience]
that which thou sufferest, for indeed thou deservest all that
ICfgftt betideth thee. Verily, all this is decreed to me of God the
tjlxib. Most High, to turn me from my covetousness, whence
arises all that I endure, for I have wealth galore." Then
I returned to my senses and said, "Verily, this time I
repent to God the Most High, with a sincere repentance,
of my lust for gain and venture and will never again name
travel with my tongue nor in my thought." And I ceased
not to humble myself to God the Most High and weep and
bewail myself, recalling my former state of happiness and
cheer, and thus I abode two days, at the end of which time
I came to a great island, 1 abounding in trees and streams.

I landed and ate of the fruits of the island and drank of
its waters, till I was refreshed and restored and my strength
returned to me. Then I walked about till I came to a
great river of sweet water, running with a strong current ;
whereupon I called to mind the raft I had made aforetime
and said to myself, " Needs must I make me another raft
[and commit myself to the current ;] haply I may win out
of this strait. If I escape I have my desire and I vow to
God the Most High to foreswear travel ; and if I perish, I
shall be at peace from toil and misery."

So I gathered together great store of pieces of wood
from the trees, (which were all of the finest sandal-wood,
though I. knew it not,) and made shift to twist grasses and

1 or peninsula.


213


creepers into a kind of rope, with which 1 bound the
wood together and so contrived a raft. Then I embarked
thereon and committed myself to the current, saying, " If
I be saved, it is of God's grace ; " and it bore me on three
days, whilst I lay on the raft, eating not and drinking,
when I was athirst, of the water of the stream, till I was
giddy and weak as a new-fledged bird, for stress of fear
and hunger and fatigue.

At the end of this time, I came to a high mountain,
under which ran the river; which when I saw, I was
afraid, by reason of the straitness I had suffered in my
former underground journey, and I would fain have stayed
the raft and landed in that place ; but the current over-
powered me and drew it into the subterranean passage ;
whereupon I gave myself up for lost and said, " There is
no power and no virtue save in God the Most High, the
Supreme S " However, after a little, the raft shot out of
the tunnel into the open air and I saw beneath me a wide
valley, into which the river fell with a noise like thunder
and a swiftness as of die wind. The torrent bore me
along the valley, holding on to the raft, for fear of falling,
whilst the waves tossed me right and left, nor could I
avail to stop the raft nor turn it to the shore, till I came
to a great and goodly city, wherein was much people.

When the townsfolk saw me on the raft, falling down
with the current, they threw out a net and ropes upon the
raft and grappling to it, drew it ashore with me, where-
upon I fell down amidst them, as I were a dead man for
stress of fear and hunger and lack of sleep. After a while,
there came up to me an old man of reverend aspect, well
stricken in years, who welcomed me and threw over me
abundance of handsome clothes, wherewith I covered my
nakedness. Then he carried me to the bath and brought
me cordial drinks and delicious perfumes. When 1 came
out, he bore me to his house, where his people made


214


much of me, and stablishing me in a pleasant place, set
rich food before me, of which I ate my fill and returned
thanks to God the Most High for my deliverance. Then
his pages brought me hot water, and I washed my hands,
and his handmaids brought me silken napkins, with which
I dried them and wiped my mouth. Moreover, he assigned
me an apartment in his house and charged his pages and
women to wait upon me and do my will. So they were
assiduous in my service, and I abode with him in the
guest-chamber three days, taking my ease of good eating
and drinking and sweet scents, till I recovered from my
fatigues and life and strength returned to me.

On the fourth day, my host came in to me and said f
u Thou cheerest us with thy company, O my son, and praised
be God for thy safety ! But wilt thou now come down with
me to the bazaar and sell thy goods? Belike with their
price thou mayst buy thee wherewithal to traffic." When
I heard this, I was silent awhile for amazement and said
in myself, "What mean these words and what goods
have I?" Then said he, "O my son, be not troubled
nor careful, but come with me, and if any offer thee what
contenteth thee for thy goods, take it ; but, if not, I will
lay them up for thee in my storehouses, against a fitting
occasion." So I bethought me and said to myself, " Let
us do his bidding and see what are these goods of which
he speaks." And I said to him, " O my old uncle, I hear
and obey; I may not gainsay thee in aught, for God's
blessing is on that which thou dost."

So he carried me to the market, where I found that he
had taken the raft in pieces and delivered the sandal-
wood of which it was made to the broker, to cry for sale-
'HfglH' Then the merchants came and bid for the wood., till its
Mik price reached a thousand dinars, when they left bidding
and my host said to me, " O my son, this is- the current
price of thy goods : wilt thou sell them for this or shall


I lay them up for thee in my storehouses, till the price
rise ? " " my lord," answered I, " I leave it to thee ;
do as thou wilt." Then said he, " Wilt thou sell the wood
to me for a hundred dinars over and above what the
merchants have bidden for it ? " And I replied, " I will
well." So he bade his servants transport it to his store-
houses and carrying me back to his house, counted out
to me the purchase money ; after which he laid it in bags
and setting them in a privy place, locked them up with an
iron padlock and gave me the key.

Some days after this, my host said to me, " O my soQj
I have somewhat to propose to thee, wherein I trust thou
wilt do my bidding." Quoth I, " What is it ? " And he
said, " I am a very old man and have no child but one
daughter, who is young and comely and endowed with
abounding wealth and beauty. Now I have a mind to
marry her to thee, that thou mayst abide with her in this
our country, and I will make thee master of all that I
possess, for I am an old man and thou shalt stand in my
stead." I was silent and made him no answer, whereupon,
" my son," continued he, " do my desire in this, for
I wish but thy good ; and if thou wilt but do as I say,
thou shalt be as my son and all that is under my hand
shall be thine. If thou have a mind to traffic and travel
to thy native land, none shall hinder thee ; so do as thou
wilt." " By Allah, O my uncle," replied I, u thou art
become to me even as my father, and I am a stranger
and have undergone many hardships ; nor, for stress of
that which I have suffered, is aught of judgment or know-
ledge left to me. It is for thee, therefore, to decide."
With this, he sent for the Cadi and the witnesses and
married me to his daughter in great state. When I went
in to her, I found her a perfect beauty, well shapen and
graceful, clad in rich raiment and covered with a profusion
of trinkets and necklaces and other ornaments of gold


2l6


and silver and precious stones, worth millions of money.
She pleased me and we loved one another; and I abode
with her in all delight and solace of life, till her father
was taken to the mercy of God the Most High. So we
washed him and buried him, and I laid hands on all his
property. Moreover, the merchants instated me in his
office, for he was their chief and none of them bought
aught but with his knowledge and by his leave.

When I became acquainted with the townsfolk, I found
that at the beginning of each month they underwent a
transformation, in that their faces changed and they became
like unto birds and put forth wings, wherewith they flew
away out of sight and none abode in the city save the
women and children ; and I said in myself, " When the
first day of the month comes, I will ask one of them to
carry me with them, whither they go." So, when the time
came, I went in to one of the townsfolk and begged him
to carry me with him, that I might divert myself with the
rest and return with them. " This may not be," answered
he ; but I importuned him, till he consented. Then I
went out with him, without telling any of my family or
servants or friends, and he took me on his back and flew
up with me so high into the air, that I heard the angels
glorying God in the pavilion of the heavens, whereat I
wondered and exclaimed, " Praised be God 1 Extolled be
His perfection ! "

Hardly had I made an end of speaking, when there
came out a fire from heaven and all but consumed the
company ; whereupon they all fled from it and descended
and casting me down on a high mountain, went away,
exceeding wroth with me, and left me there alone. When
I found myself in this plight, I repented of what I had
done and reproached myself for having undertaken that
for which I was unable, saying, a There is no power and no
virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme I No sooner


217


am I delivered from one affliction than I fall into a worse.* 8
Presently, as I sat, knowing not whither I should go, there
came up two young men, as they were moons, each staying
his steps with a rod of red gold. So I went up to them
and saluted them. They returned my greeting and I con-
jured them by Allah to tell me who and what they were.
Quoth they, "We are devout servants of the Most High
God, abiding in this mountain," and giving me a rod of
gold after the likeness of those they had with them, went
their ways and left me.

I walked on along the mountain-top, leaning on the
staff and pondering the case of the two youths, till I saw
a serpent come forth from under the mountain, with a man
in her jaws, whom she had swallowed even to the navel,
and he was crying out and saying, " Whoso delivereth me
from this serpent, God will deliver him from every strait ! "
So I went up to the serpent and smote her Oh the head
with the staff, whereupon she cast the man forth of her
mouth. Then I smote her a second time, and she turned l^fiCrfjt
and fled ; whereupon he came up to me and said, " Since fclxbi
my deliverance from yonder serpent hath been at thy
hands, I will never leave thee, and thou shalt be my
comrade on this mountain." " With all my heart," an-
swered I, and we fared on along the mountain, till we
fell in with a company of folk, and I looked and saw
amongst them the very man who had cast me down there.
So I went up to him and spoke him fair, excusing myself
to him and saying, " O my friend, it is not thus that
brethren should deal with brethren." Quoth he, " It was
thou who [well-nigh] destroyed us by glorifying God on
my back." " Excuse me," answered I ; " for I had no
knowledge of this ; but if thou wilt take me with thee,
I swear not to say a word." So he relented and con-=
sented to carry me with him, on condition that, so long
as I abode on his back, I should abstain from pronouncing


218


the name of God or glorifying Him. Then I gave the
wand of gold to him whom I had delivered from the
serpent and bade him farewell, and my friend took me on
his back and flew with me as before, till he brought me to
the city and set me down in my own house.

My wife came to meet me and gave me joy of my safety,
saying, " Henceforth beware of going forth with yonder
folk, neither consort with them, for they are brethren of
the devils, and know not the name of God the Most High,
neither worship Him." " And how did thy father with
them?" asked I. "My father," answered she, " was not
of them, neither did he as they ; and now he is dead, me-
thinks thou wouldst do well to sell all we have and with
the price buy merchandise and return to thine own country
and people, and I with thee ; for I care not to tarry here,
since my father and mother are dead." So 1 sold all my
late father-in-law's property, piecemeal, and looked for
one who should be journeying thence [to Bassora,] that
I might join myself to him.

Presently, I heard of a company of the townsfolk who
had a mind to make the voyage, but could not find a ship ;
so they bought wood and built them a great ship, in
which I took passage with them and paid them the hire*
Then we embarked, my wife and I, with all our moveables,
leaving our lands and houses and so forth, and set sail,
with a favouring wind, for Bassora, where we arrived in
due course, after a prosperous voyage. I made no stay
there, but freighted another vessel and set out forthright
for Baghdad, where I arrived in safety and repairing to
my house, foregathered with my kinsfolk and household
and laid up my goods in my storehouses. When my
friends and family heard of my return, they came to
welcome me and give me joy of my safety ; and I related
to them all that had befallen me, whereat they marvelled
exceedingly, having given up hope of me, for that I had


219


been absent from them seven-and-twenty years in this
my seventh voyage.

Then I foreswore travel and vowed to God the Most High
to venture no more by land or sea, for that this last voyage
had surfeited me of travel and adventure ; and I thanked
God and praised and glorified Him for having restored
me to my country and home and friends. Consider,
therefore, O Sindbad, O landsman,' continued the host,
addressing himself to the porter, ' what sufferings I have
undergone and what perils and hardships I have endured
[before coming to my present state of prosperity].' ' For
God's sake, O my lord,' answered the porter, 'pardon
me the wrong I did thee. 3 And they ceased not from
friendship and loving fellowship, [abiding] in all cheer
and delight and solace of life, till there came to them
that which destroyeth delights and sundereth companies,
that which layeth waste the palaces and " peopleth the
tombs, to wit, the Cup of Death, and glory be to the
Living One who dieth not I


THE CITY OF BRASS.

It is related that the Commander of the Faithful Abdul-
melik ben Merwan 1 was seated one day in his palace at
Damascus, conversing with his grandees and officers of
state of the histories of people of old time, when the talk
turned upon the traditions of our lord Solomon, son of
David, (on whom be peace,) and of that which God the
Most High had bestowed on him of lordship and dominion
over men and Jinn and birds and beasts and reptiles and
other created things, and quoth one of those who were
present, 8 Of a truth we hear from those who forewent us
that God (blessed and exalted be He I) vouchsafed unte

1 Fifth Khalif of the Ommiade dynasty? A.D. 685-705.


220


none the like of that which He vouchsafed unto our loid
Solomon and that he attained unto that whereto never
attained other than he, in that he was wont to imprison
Jinn and Marids and Satans in vessels of copper and stop
XtC[!)t them with molten lead and seal them with his signet'
fclxfM, Then said Talib ben Sehl, (who was a seeker after
treasuies and had books that discovered to him hoards and
treasures hidden under the earth,) ' O Commander of the
Faithful, (God make thy dominion to endure and exalt thy
dignity in the lands !) my father told me of my grandfather,
that the latter once took ship with a company, intending
for the island of Sicily, and sailed till there arose against
them a contrary wind, which drove them from their course
and brought them to a great mountain in one of the lands
of God the Most High. Quoth my grandfather, " This
was in the darkness of the night and as soon as it was day,
there came forth to us, from the caves of the mountain,
folk black of colour and naked of body, as they were wild
beasts, understanding not what was said to them ; nor was
there any one of them who knew Arabic, except their King,
who was of their own kind. When the latter saw the ship,
he came down to it with a company of his followers and
saluting us, bade us welcome and questioned us of our case.
So we told him how we had been driven from our course
by a contrary wind, and he said, ' No son of Adam hath
ever come to our land before you : but fear not, no harm
shall befall you, and rejoice in the assurance of safety and
return to your own country.' Then he entertained us three;
days, feeding on the flesh of birds and wild beasts and fish,
than which they had no other meat, and on the fourth day
he carried us down to the beach, that we might divert our-
selves by looking upon the fishermen. There we saw a
fisherman, casting his nets to catch fish, and presently he
pulled them up, and behold, in them was a casting-bottle
©f copper, stopped with lead and sealed with the signet of


221


Solomon, son of David, on whom be peace. He brought
the vessel to land and broke it open, when there came forth
a blue smoke, which rose to the zenith, and we heard a
terrible voice, saying, ' I repent ! I repent 1 Pardon, O
prophet of God ! I will never return to that which I did
aforetime.' Then the smoke became a terrible great giant,
frightful to look upon, whose head was level with the
mountain tops, and he vanished from our sights, whilst our
hearts were like to burst for terror ; but the blacks thought
nothing of it. Then we returned to the King and ques-
tioned him of the matter ; whereupon quoth he, ' Know
that this was one of the Jinn whom Solomon, son of David,
being wroth with them, shut up in these vessels and cast
into the sea, after stopping the mouths with melted lead.
Our fishermen ofttimes, in casting their nets, bring up the
vessels, which being broken open, there come forth of them
genies, who, deeming that Solomon is still alive and par-
doneth them, make their submission to him and say, M I
repent, O prophet of God ! " '

The Khalif marvelled at Talib's story and said, ' Glory be
to God! Verily, Solomon was given a mighty dominion.'
Now En Nabigheh edh Dhubyani 1 was present, and he
said, ' Talib hath spoken sooth, as is proven by the saying
of the All-wise, the Primaeval One :

And Solomon, when God the Lord of old to him did say t "Take thou
the Khalifate and rule with firm and strenuous sway.

Whoso obeyeth thee reward for his obedience, And who gainsayeth thf
command, imprison him for aye."

Wherefore he used to put them in vessels of copper and
ast them into the sea.'

The poefs words seemed good to the Khalif, and he
aid, 1 By Allah, I long to look upon some of these vessels, 2

1 A famous pre-lslamitic poet. His introduction here is, of course,,
on anachronism.


222


« O Commander of the Faithful,' replied Talib, 'it is in
thy power to do so, without stirring abroad. Send to thy
brother Abdulaziz ben Merwan, so he may write to Mousa
ben Nuseir, 1 governor of Morocco, bidding him take
horse thence to the mountains whereof I spoke and which
adjoin the confines of his government, and fetch thee
therefrom as many of the vessels in question as thou hast
a mind to.' The Khalif approved his counsel and said,
* Thou hast spoken truly, O Talib, and I desire that thou
be my messenger to Mousa ben Nuseir, touching this
matter ; wherefore thou shalt have the white ensign 2 and
all thou hast a mind to of wealth and honour and so forth,
and I will care for thy family during thine absence. 5
4 With all my heart, O Commander of the Faithful,'
answered Talib. ' Go, with the aid and blessing of God,'
said the Khalif and bade write a letter to his brother
Abdulaziz, his viceroy in Egypt, and another to Mousa
ben Nuseir, his viceroy in Northern Africa, bidding him,
ceasing all excuse, take guides and go himself in quest
of the vessels of Solomon, leaving his son to govern in
his room. Moreover, he charged him to be not remiss
in the matter and to spare neither men nor money. Then
he sealed the letters and committed them to Talib, bidding
him advance the [royal] ensigns before him and make
his utmost speed ; and he gave him treasure and horesraen
and footmen, to further him on his way, and made pro-
({fit vision for the wants of his household during his absence,
fclxbtlt. So Talib set out and arrived in due course at Cairo,
where the governor came out to meet him and entertained
him and his company whilst they tarried with him. Then
he gave them a guide, to bring them to Upper Egypt,

1 The conqueror of Spain.

s White was the distinctive colour of the house of Umeyyeh, and. the
gift of a white ensign may therefore be supposed to have conferred
absolute power, in the way of requisitions, etc, upon an envoy.


223


where the Amir Mousa had his abiding-place ; and when
the latter heard of Talib's corning, he went forth to meet
him and rejoiced in him. Talib gave him the Khalif's
letter, and he read it and laying it on his head, said, ' 1
hear and obey the Commander of the Faithful.' Then he
assembled his chief officers and acquainting them with
the Khalifs commandment, sought counsel of them how
lie should accomplish it. ' O Amir,' answered theyi ' if
thou seek one who shall guide thee to the place in
question, send for the Sheikh Abdussemed son of Abdul-
cuddous es Semoudi, for he is a man of experience, who
has travelled much and knoweth all the seas and wastes
and deserts and countries of the world and the inhabitants
and wonders thereof ; wherefore send thou for him and
he will surely guide thee to thy desire.'

So Mousa sent for him, and behold, he was a very old
man, broken down with lapse of years and days. The
Amir saluted him and said, ' O Sheikh Abdussemed, our
lord the Commander of the Faithful, Abdulmelik ben
Merwan, hath commanded me thus and thus. Now I
have small knowledge of the land wherein is that which
the Khalif desires ; but it is told me that thou knowest
it well and the way thither. Wilt thou, therefore, go
thither with me and help me to accomplish the Khalifs
need? So it please God the Most High, thy pains and
travail shall not be wasted.' 1 1 hear and obey the bidding
of the Commander of the Faithful,' replied the Sheikh j
' but know, O our lord, that the road thither is long and
difficult and the ways few.' ' How far is it ? ' asked Mousa,
and the Sheikh answered, ' It is a journey of two years and
some months thither and the like back, and the way is
full of perils and terrors and toils and wonders. Now
thou art a champion of the Faith 1 and our country is hard

x As governor of a newly-conquered country, part of which was still
in dispute.


224


by that of the enemy, and peradventure the Nazarenes
may come out upon us in thine absence; wherefore it
behoves thee to leave one to rule thy government in thy
stead.' ' It is well,' answered the Amir and appointed his
son Haroun governor during his absence, requiring the
troops to take the oath of fealty to him and bidding them
obey him in all he should command, which they promised
to do.

Now this Haroun was a man of great prowess and a
renowned warrior, and the Sheikh Abdussemed feigned
to him that the place they sought was distant [but] four
months' journey along the shore of the sea, with camping-
places all the way, adjoining one another, and grass and
springs, adding, ' God will assuredly make the matter easy
to us for thy sake, O lieutenant of the Commander of the
Faithful.' Quoth the Amir Mousa, ' Knowest thou if any
of the kings have trodden this land before us?' 'Yes,'
answered the Sheikh ; ' it belonged aforetime to Darius
the Greek, 'King of Alexandria.' But he said to Mousa
[privily], ' O Amir, take with thee a thousand camels laden
with victual and store of gugglets. 1 ' ' And what shall we
do with these [latter]?' asked the Amir. Quoth the
Sheikh, 'In our way is the desert of Cyrene, the which
is a vast desert, four days' journey long, and lacketh water,
nor therein is voice to be heard or soul to be seen. More-
over there bloweth the Simoum and [other hot] winds
called El Jewajib, that dry up the waterskins; but, if the
water be in gugglets, no harm can come to it' 'True,
answered Mousa and sending to Alexandria, let bring
thence great plenty of gugglets. Then he took with him
his Vizier and two thousand horse, clad in complete steel,
and set out, whilst Abdussemed forewent them, riding
on his hackney, to guide them.

* Lit. ficaa-gugglets, i.e. earthenware jars used for holding ficaa, a thia
kind of beer ? made of barley or raisins.


225


They fared on diligently, now passing through inhabited
countries and now ruins and anon traversing frightful
deserts and thirsty wastes and anon mountains that rose
high into the air; nor did they leave journeying a whole
year's space, till, one morning, when the day broke, after
they had travelled all night, the Sheikh found himself in a
land he knew not and said, 'There is no power and no
virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme ! ' Quoth
the Amir, ' What is to do„ O Sheikh ? ' And he answered,
saying, ' By the Lord of the Kaabeh, we have wandered
from our road 1 ' ' How cometh that ? ' asked Mousa, and
Abdussemed replied, ' The stars were obscured and I could
not guide myself by them.' 'Where are we now?' said
the Amir, and the Sheikh, ' I know not ; for I never set
eyes on this land till now.' Quoth Mousa, ' Guide us back
to the place where we went astray ; ' but the other said,
' I know it no more.' Then said Mousa, ' Let us push on ;
it may be God will guide us to it or direct us aright of His
power.' So they fared on till the hour of noonday prayer,
when they came to a fair and wide champaign, level as it
were the sea in a calm, and anon there appeared to them,
in the distance, some great thing, high and black, in whose
midst was as it were smoke rising to the confines of the
sky. They made for this and stayed not in their course,
till they drew near thereto, when, behold, it was a high
castle, firm of fashion and great and gruesome as it were a
lofty mountain, builded all of black stone, with frowning
battlements and a door of gleaming China steel, that
dazzled the eyes and dazed the wit. Round about it were
a thousand steps and in its midst was a dome of lead, a
thousand cubits high, which appeared afar off as it were
smoke.

When the Amir saw this, he marvelled thereat exceed-
ingly and how this place was void of inhabitants ; and the
Sheikh, after he had certified himself thereof, said, ' There

VOL. V. 15


226


is no god but God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God I
Quoth Mousa, 'I hear thee praise God and hallow him
and [meseems] thou rejoicest.' ' O Amir/ answered Ab-
dussemed, 'rejoice, for God (blessed and exalted be He !)
hath delivered us from the frightful deserts and thirsty
wastes.' 'How knowest thou that?' asked Mousa, and
the other, ' I know it for that my father told me of my
grandfather that he said, 'We were once journeying in
this land and straying from the road, came to this palace
and thence to the City of Brass ; " between which and the
place thou seekest is two months' travel ; but thou must
take to the sea-shore and leave it not, for there be wells
and watering and camping places, established by King
Iskender Dhoulkernein ; for, when he went in quest of
Morocco, he found by the way thirsty deserts and wastes
and wilds and dug therein wells and built cisterns.' Quoth
Mousa, 'May God rejoice thee with good news!' and
Abdusserned said, £ Come, let us go look upon yonder
palace and its marvels, for it is an admonition to whoso
will be admonished.'

So the Amir went up to the palace, with the Sheikh
and his chief officers, and coming to the gate, found it
open. Now this gate was builded with lofty columns and
porticoes whose walls were inlaid with gold and silver
and precious stones, and there led up to it nights of steps,
among which were two wide stairs of coloured marble,
never was seen their like ; and over the doorway was
a tablet, whereon were graven letters of gold in the
ancient Greek character, ' O Amir,' said the Sheikh,
' shall I read ? ' ' Read and may God bless thee S ' replied
Mousa. ' For all that betideth us in this journey de-
pended! upon thy blessing.' So the Sheikh, who was a
very learned man and versed in all tongues and charactere,
went up to the tablet and read the following verses i


227


Their vestiges, after that they once did do, Forewarn os that we in thefe

footsteps must ensue.
O thou who haltst by the dwellings for news of folk Who have doffed

their state and bidden their power adieu,
Enter this palace, for there is the last-left news Of lords in the dust wh©

gathered, a puissant crew.
Death smote them and rent them asunder, and in the dust They lost

what they erst did gather with such ado.
Tis as they had set their burdens down to rest In haste, then mounted

and fared on their way anew.

When the Amir heard this, he wept till he lost his
senses and said, 'There is no god but God, the Living s
the Eternal, who ceaseth not ! ' Then he entered the
palace and was confounded at its beauty and the goodli-
ness of its ordinance. He diverted himself awhile by
viewing the figures and images therein, till he came to
another door, over which also were written verses s and
said to the Sheikh, 1 Come, read me these."' So he came
forward and read as follows :

How many in their halls have halted for a day Of old, then taken leave

and fared upon their way S
They saw what from the shifts of fortune did befall Others than they,

therein who lighted down to stay.
That which they stored they shared among themselves and left To others

to enjoy its sweets and passed away.
With what delight arrayed were they, what dainties ate And drank !

But eaten now within the dust are they.

At this the Amir wept sore ; the world grew pale before
his eyes and he said, ' Verily, we were created for a mighty
matter ! ' Then they proceeded to explore the palace and
found it desert and void of living thing, its chambers
and dwelling-places laid waste and desolate. In the midst
stood a lofty pavilion, with a dome rising high into the
air, and about it were four hundred tombs, builded of
yellow marble. The Amir drew near unto these and
behold, amongst them was a great tomb, wide and long.


228


and at its bead a tablet of white marble, whereon, were
graven the following verses ;

How often have I stood, how oft set on in fight I How many a thiag^

indeed, hath passed before my sight S
How much have I consumed of meat and drink, and songs How many

have I heard of singing wench and wight !
How much did I command and eke how much forbid ! How many a

lampired hold, thou'dst deem beyond man's might
To take, I've stormed and sacked and all the cloistered maids, That hid

within its walls, discovered to the light !
But, of my ignorance, I sinned that I might win Hopes that must pass

away, undurabie and slight.
Bethink thee, then, O man, before thou drink the cup Of death, and

reckon up thy reckoning forthright.
Yet but a little while and on thy head the. dust Shall sure be steewri and

life shall fail unto thy spright,

The Amir and his companions wept ; then, drawing neat
unto the pavilion, they saw that it had eight doors of
sandal-wood, studded with nails of gold and stars of silver
and inlaid with all manner precious stones. On the first
door were written these verses :

That which I left, I left it not of generous purpose 5 nay, But fate and
fortune fore-ordained still o'er mankind bear sway.

What while content and prosperous I was, my hoarding-place, Even as
a raging lion fierce, I did defend alway.

Ne'er was I still and of my good so niggard, not a grain Of mustard-
seed, though I were cast on fire, I gave away,

Till, of the fore-ordained decree of God, the Lord of Might, The Maker
and the Fashioner, I stricken was one day.

Death, sudden, irrevocable, in haste upon me came : I could not ward
it with my store, nor eke the vast array

Of troops I gathered neath my hand availed me any jot ; Nor friend nor
neighbour aided me the feet of fate to stay.

All my life's days, or if it were in solace or in stress, Still in my journey
to the grave I toiled and wearied aye.

I fared the road that all must fare, till, when the money-bags Am ittfk
though dinar, without cease, to dinar thou shouldst lay s


229


Before the morrow all hath passed to other than thyself And unto thee

a bier-bearer and grave-digger bring they,
And all alone, with but thy load of sins and crimes to bear Thee com-

pany, thou meetest God upon thy judgment-day.
See with thy neighbours and thy folk how deals the world nor let. Its

vanities delude thy wit nor lead thy feet astray.

When Mousa heard these verses, he wept till he swooned
away; then, coming to himself, he entered the pavilion
and saw therein a long tomb, dreadful to look upon,
whereon was a tablet of China steel, bearing the follow-
ing inscription: 5 In the name of the Eternal God, the
One, the Everlasting; in His name who begetteth not nor 'JCtglj!
is begotten and to whom there is no like ; in the name of
God the Lord of Majesty and Might, the Living One who
dieth not ! O thou who comest to this place, take warn-
ing by that which thou seest of the doings of time and the
vicissitudes of fortune and be not deluded by the world
and its pomps and lies and fallacies and vain allurements,
for that it is deceitful and flattering and treacherous, and
the things thereof are but a loan, which it will take again
from the borrower. It is like unto the dreams of the
dreamer and the vain visions of the sleeper or as the
mirage of the desert, which the thirsty take for water; 3
and Satan maketh it fair for men even unto death. These
are the ways of the world ; wherefore put not thou thy
trust therein neither incline unto it, for it bewrayeth him
who leaneth upon it and committeth himself thereunto in
his affairs. Fall not thou into its toils neither take hold
upon its skirts, [but be warned by my example]. I pos-
sessed four thousand bay horses and a palace, and I had
to wife a thousand daughters of kings, high- bosomed
maids, as they were moons. Moreover, I was blessed
with a thousand sons, as they were fierce lions, and I
abode a thousand years, glad of heart and mind, and
£ Koran xxiv, 39*


230

amassed treasures beyond the competence of all the kings
of the regions of the earth, deeming that delight would
still endure to me; but there fell on me unawares the
Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies, he
who desolates the abodes of men and lays waste the in-
habited places, the slayer of great and small, babes and
children and mothers, he who hath no compassion on the
poor man, by reason of his poverty, neither feareth he
kings, because of their commandment and forbiddance.
Yea, we abode in security in this palace, till there de-
scended upon us the judgment of the Lord of the Worlds,
the Lord of the heavens and the earths; the vengeance
of the Manifest Truth 1 overtook us and there died of us
every day two, till a great company of us had perished.
When I saw that destruction had entered our dwellings
and taken up its abode with us and drowned us in the sea
of deaths, I summoned a writer and bade him write these
verses and admonitions, the which I let grave, with rule
and compass, on these doors and tablets and tombs. Now
I had an army of a thousand thousand horsemen, hardy,
strong-armed warriors, armed with spears and coats of
mail and sharp swords; so I bade them don their long
hauberks and gird on their keen swords and mount their
high-mettled chargers and couch their dreadful spears ;
and whenas there fell on us the doom of the Lord of
heaven and earth, I said to them, " Ho, all ye soldiers and
troopers, can ye avail to ward off that which is fallen on me
from the Omnipotent King ?" But they availed not unto
this and said, " How shall we war with Him to whom no
chamberlain bars access, the Lord of the gate that hath
no doorkeeper ? " Then quoth I to them, " Bring me my
treasures." Now I had in my treasuries a thousand cisterns,
in each of which were a thousand quintals of red gold and
the like of white silver, besides pearls and jewels of all
1 A name of God.


231


kinds and other things of price, beyond the competence o£
the kings of the earth So they did as I bade them and
when they had laid all the treasure before me, I said to
them, " Can ye ransom me with all this treasure or buy me
therewith one day of life ? " But they could not ; so I re-
signed myself to fore-ordained fate and submitted to the
judgment of God, enduring patiently that which He decreed
unto me of affliction, till he took my soul and made me
to dwell in my grave. And if thou ask of my name, I am
Koush, the son of Sheddad, son of Aad the Greater.'

An thou wouldst know my name, who lived so long ago, After the shifts

of time and fortune's changes, know
I'm Sheddard's son, who held dominion o'er mankind And over all the

earth was monarch, high and low.
The stubborn peoples all abased themselves to me And all the North

was mine from Adrian to Cairo.
In glory still I reigned ; the nations of the earth My .mischief feared and

I their kings did overthrow.
Yea, armies I beheld and tribes beneath my hand ; The world and all

therein did dread me, friend and foe.
When I took horse, I saw the number of my troops A million cavaliers

on neighing steeds arow ;
And treasures, too, were mine, past reckoning or count, The which I

garnered up 'gainst fortune's sudden blow.
Fain had I bought my life with all my wealth, although For but a

moment's space to lengthen it ; but no,
God would have nought but that He willed should come to pass ; So I

abode alone, cut off my brethren fro',
And death came to me, death that sunders all mankind, And from my

state I passed unto the stead of woe.
There found I all I'd wrought of old, for which in pledge I now abide %

and I a sinner was, I trow.
Bethink thee, on a brink that standest, and beware The chances of events

and fortune's overthrow.

The Amir Mousa wept till he swooned av/ay, for what he
saw of the slaughtering-places of the folk ; then, as they
went about the palace, viewing its sitting-chambers and
pleasaunces, they came upon a table of yellow onyx, up-


232


borne on four feet of juniper-wood, and thereon these
words graven : s A thousand kings blind of the right eye
and a thousand blind of the left and yet other thousand
sound of both eyes have eaten at this table, all of whom
have departed the world and taken up their sojourn in the
tombs and the burial-places.'

All this the Amir wrote down and left the palace^ taking
with him nothing but the table aforesaid. Then he fared
on with his retinue three days' space, under the guidance
of the Sheikh Abdussemed, till they came to a high hill,
whereon stood a horseman of brass. In his hand he held
a lance with a broad head of blinding brightness, whereon
were graven the following words : ' O thou that comest
hither, if thou know not the way to the Brazen City, rub
the hand of this horseman and he will turn round and
presently stop. Then take the direction in which he faces
and fare on boldly, for it will bring thee, without hardship,
3?fgftf to the City of Brass.'

ftixx* The Amir accordingly rubbed the horseman's hand and
he revolved, like the dazzling lightning, and stopped,
facing in a direction other than that wherein they were
journeying. So they took the road to which he pointed
and finding it a beaten track, fared on days and nights till
they came to a pillar of brass, wherein was one sunken up
to his armpits. He had two great wings and four arms, two
like men's arms and other two as they were lions' paws,
with claws of iron, and he was black and tall, with hair like
horses' tails and eyes like blazing coals, slit endlong in his
face. Moreover, he had a third eye. as it were that of a
lynx, amiddleward his forehead, from which flew sparks
of fire, and he cried out, saying, ' Glory to my Lord, who
hath adjudged unto me this grievous punishment and sore
affliction until the Day of Resurrection I ' When the folk
saw him, they lost their reason for affright and turned to
flee ; and the Amir Mousa said to the Sheikh Abdussemed,


233


"What is this?' 'I know not, ' answered he, whereupon
quoth Mousa, ' Draw near and question him ; haply he
will discover to thee his case/ ' God assain the Amir 1 '
replied the Sheikh. ' Indeed, I am afraid of him ; ' but the
Amir rejoined, saying, 1 Fear not; he is hindered from thee
or any other by that wherein he is.'

So Abdussemed drew near to the pillar and said to him
who was therein, ' creature, what is thy name and what
art thou and how earnest thou here on this wise ? ' ! I am
an Afrit of the Jinn/ replied he, ' by name Dahish, son of
El Aamesh, and am confined here by way of punishment,
by the judgment of the Almighty, till it please Him, to
whom belong might and majesty, to release me.' Then
said Mousa, { Ask him why he is prisoned in this column/
So the Sheikh asked him of this, and he replied, saying,
' My story is strange and my case extraordinary, and it is
on this wise. One of the sons of Iblis had ah idol of red
cornelian, whereof I was guardian, and there served it a
king of the kings of the sea, a prince of great power and
prowess, ruling over a thousand thousand warriors of the
Jinn, who smote with swords before him and answered to
his call in time of need. All these were under my com-
mandment and did my bidding, being all rebels against
Solomon, son of David, on whom be peace ! And I used
to enter the [hollow] belly of the idol and command and
forbid them thence. Now this King's daughter loved the
idol and was frequent in prostration to it and assiduous in
its service ; and she was the fairest woman of her day,
accomplished in beauty and grace and elegance. She was
described unto Solomon and he sent to her father, saying,
"Give me thy daughter to wife and break thine idol of
cornelian and testify that there is no god but God and
that I am His prophet, If thou do this, that which is
ours shall be thine and thy debt shall be our debt ; but,
if thou refuse, make ready to answer the summons [of


234


God] and don thy grave-clothes, for I will come upon
thee with an irresistible host, that shall fill the waste
places of the earth and make thee even as yesterday that
is passed away and hath no returning."

When this message reached the King, his pride revolted
from obeying Solomon's bidding and he said to his Viziers,
" Know that Solomon, son of David, hath sent, requiring
me t'.) give him my daughter to wife and break my idol
of cornelian and enter his faith : what say ye of this ? "
u O mighty King," answered they, " how shall Solomon
do thus with thee? Even could he come at thee in the
midst of this vast ocean, he could not prevail against thee,
for the Marids of the Jinn will fight on thy side and thou
wilt seek succour of thine idol whom thou servest, and he
will help thee and give thee the victory over him. So
thou wouldst do well to consult thy Lord," meaning the
idol aforesaid, " and hear what he says. If he say,
'Fight him,' fight him, and if not, not." So the King
went in forthright to his idol and offered up sacrifices and
slaughtered victims ; after which he fell down before him,
prostrate and weeping, and repeated the following verses :

Lord, I know thy puissance and thy power confess : Solomon would

have me break thee. In my stress,
Lord, to thee for succour I myself address. Order % thy commandment

I obey no less.

Then I, of my ignorance and lack of wit and recklessness
of the commandment of Solomon and want of knowledge
of his power, entered the belly of the idol and made
answer as follows :

Solomon I fear not, dread him not to foe, For that, of my wisdom,

everything I know.
An he would be waging war upon me, lo I I will creep and snatch his
life from him, I trow.

When the King heard this, he hardened his heart and
resolved to do battle with the prophet ; wherefore he beat


235


the messenger grievously and returned a flouting answef
to Solomon, threatening him and saying, " Thy soul hath
suggested to thee a vain thing : dost thou threaten me
with lying words? But gird thyself for battle; for, an thou
come not to me, I will assuredly come to thee."

The messenger returned to Solomon and told him all
that had passed, which when the prophet heard, he was
exceeding wroth and levied an army of men and Jinn and
birds and beasts and reptiles. He commanded his Vizier
Ed Dimuyat, King of the Jinn, to assemble the Marids of
the Jinn from all parts, and he gathered together unto him
six hundred millions of devils. Moreover, by his order,
his Vizier Asef ben Berkhiya levied him an army of men,
to the number of a thousand thousand or more. These all
he equipped with arms and armour and mounting, with his
host, upon his magic carpet, flew through the air, whilst
the beasts fared under him and the birds flew overhead,
till he lighted down on the island of the refractory King
and encompassed it about, filling the earth with his hosts. 'Mfg^l
Then he sent to our King, saying, " Behold, I am come :
defend thyself against that which is fallen upon thee, or
else make thy submission to me and confess my apostle-
ship and give me thy daughter to wife and break thine idol
and worship the one God, the alone Worship-Worth, and
testify, thou and thine, that there is no god but God and
that I am His prophet. This if thou do, thou shalt have
peace and pardon ; but, if not, it will avail thee nothing to
fortify thyself in this island, for God, blessed and exalted
be He, hath commanded the wind to obey me; so I will
bid it bear me to thee on my carpet and make thee an
example to deter others." But the King made answer to
his messenger, saying, " It may not in any wise be as he
demandeth ; so tell him I come forth to him." Then he
gathered together all the Jinn that were under his hand,
to the number of a thousand thousand, and added to them


236

other than they of Marids and Satans from the islands o!
the sea and the mountain-tops and opened his armouries
and distributed to them arms and armour.

Meanwhile the prophet Solomon drew out his host in
battle array, dividing the beasts into two bodies, one on the
right wing and the other on the left, and bidding them
tear the enemies' horses in sunder. Moreover, he com-
manded the birds to hover over their heads and whenas the
assault should be made, that they should [swoop down
upon their battle and] tear out their eyes with their beaks
and buffet their faces with their wings ; and they answered,
saying, "We hear and obey God and thee, O prophet of
God ! " Then Solomon seated himself [on his carpet] on
a throne of alabaster, inlaid with jewels and plated with
red gold, and commanding the wind to bear him aloft,
arrayed the beasts and vipers and serpents before him,
setting his Vizier Asef ben Berkhiya and the kings of
mankind on his right and his Vizier Ed Dimiryat and the
kings of the Jinn on his left. Then they all set on us
together, and we gave them battle two days over a vast
plain ; but, on the third day, disaster befell us and the
judgment of God the Most High was executed upon us.

The first to charge upon them were I and my troops,
and I said to my companions, "Abide in your places,
whilst I sally forth to them and provoke Ed Dimiryat to
single combat." And behold, he came forth as he were
a vast mountain, casting out fire and smoke, and shot at
me a flame of fire ; but I swerved from it and it missed
me. Then I cast at him, in my turn, a flame of fire, and
it smote him ; but his poison 1 overcame my fire and he
cried out at me so terrible a cry that meseemed the skies
were fallen on me, and the mountains shook at his voice.
Then he commanded his hosts to charge ; so they rushed
on m and we on them, each crying out upon otheE,


237


whilst the air was filled with flames and smoke and hearts
were like to cleave in sunder. The birds and the flying
Jinn fought in the air and the beasts and men and the
Jinn of the earth in the dust, and the battle raged and
I fought with Ed Dimiryat, till I was aweary. At last,
I grew weak and turned to flee from him, whereupon my
companions and tribesmen likewise took to flight and
my hosts were put to the rout, and Solomon cried out s
saying, "Take yonder proud tyrant, accursed and in-
famous ! " Then man fell upon man and genie upon
genie and the armies of the prophet charged down upon
us, with the beasts on their right hand and on their left,
rending our horses and devouring our men, whilst the
birds hovered above them in the air, pecking out our eyes
with their claws and beaks and buffeting our faces with
their wings, till the most of us lay prone upon the face
of the earth* like palm tree trunks . and defeat befell our
king and we became a spoil unto Solomon.

As for me, I fled from before Ed Dimiryat ; but he
followed me three months' journey, till I fell down for 2*Tl($t
weariness and he overtook me and pouncing upon me, ftixXU.
made me prisoner. Quoth I, " By the virtue of Him who
hath advanced thee and abased me, spare me and bring
me before Solomon, on whom be peace 1 " So he carried
me before Solomon, who received me after the foulest
fashion and let bring this pillar and hollow it out. Then
he set me therein and chained me and sealed me with his
signet, and Ed Dimiryat bore me to this place. Moreover
he charged a great angel to guard me, and this pillar is
my prison until the Day of Judgment.'

The folk marvelled at his story and at the frightfulness
of his favour, and the Amir Mousa said, ' There is no god
but God ! Of a truth Solomon was gifted with a mighty
dominion.* Then said the Sheikh Abdussemed to the
genie, 1 Harkye, I would fain ask thee of a thing, where-


238


of do thou inform us.' ' Ask what though wilt.' answered
Dahish and the Sheikh said, 'Are there hereabouts any
of the Afrits imprisoned in vessels of brass in the time
of Solomon, on whom be peace?' 'Yes,' replied the
genie ; ' there be such in the sea of El Kerker, on the
shores whereof dwell a people of the lineage of Noah,
on whom be peace ; for their country was not reached by
the Deluge and they are cut off there from the [other]
sons of Adam.' 'And which,' asked Abdussemed, 'is the
way to the City of Brass and the place wherein are the
vessels of Solomon, and what distance is there between
us and it ? ' Quoth the Afrit, ' It is near at hand,' and
directed them in the way thither.

So they left him and fared on till their appeared to
them, afar off, a great blackness and therein two fires
facing one another, and the Amir Mousa said to the
Sheikh/ 'What is yonder vast blackness and its twin
fires?' 'Rejoice, O Amir,' answered the guide; 'for this
is the City of Brass, as it is described in the Book of
Hidden Treasures. Its walls are of black stone and it
hath two towers of Andalusian brass, which appear to the
beholder in the distance as they were twin fires, and hence
is it named the City of Brass.'

Then they fared on without ceasing till they drew near
the city and saw it as it were a piece of a mountain or a
mass of iron cast in a mould. So they lighted down and
sought for a gate, but saw none neither found any trace
of opening in the walls, albeit there were five-and-twenty
gates to the city, but none of them was visible from with-
out. Then said the Amir, ' O Sheikh, I see no sign of
any gate to this city;' and he answered, saying, 'O Amir s
thus is it described in my Book of Hidden Treasures ; it
hath five-and-twenty gates, but none thereof may be
opened save from within the city.' 'And how/ asked
Mousa, s shall we do to enter the city and view its


239


wonders ! ' ' May God assain the Amir S ' said Talib.
' Let us rest here two or three days, and God willing, we
will make shift to come into the city.'

Then Mousa bade one of his men mount a camel and
ride round about the city, so haply he should light upon a
gate or breach by which they might enter. So he mounted
and rode round the city two days and two nights, without
drawing rein to rest, but found the wall thereof as it
were one block, without breach or way of ingress ; and on
the third day, he came again in sight of his companions,
amazed at what he had seen of the extent and loftiness of
the place, and said, ' O Amir, the easiest place of access is
this where you are encamped.' Then Mousa took Talib
and Abdussemed and ascended a high hill that overlooked
the town. When they reached the top, they turned and
beheld beneath them a city, never saw eyes a greater or
goodlier, full of lofty palaces and glittering^ domes and
fair-builded mansions and running streams and orchards
laden with fruit and flowered pleasaunces, a gated city and
an inexpugnable; but it was silent and deserted, without
sound or movement or sign of life, except the hooting of
the owl in its market-places and the wheel of the birds
over its gardens and the croak of ravens in its streets and
thoroughfares, bewailing those that had been therein.

The Amir stood awhile, sorrowing for the desolation of
the city and saying, ' Glory to Him whom nor ages nor
times change, Him who created all things of His might 1 '
Presently, he chanced to look aside and caught sight of
seven tablets of white marble afar off. So he drew near
them and finding inscriptions graven thereon, called the
Sheikh and bade him read these. Accordingly, he came
forward and examining the inscriptions, found that they
contained matter of admonition and warning and restraint
to those of understanding. On the first tablet was in-
scribed, in the ancient Greek character^ the following % 6 Q


240


son of Adam, how heedless art thou of that which is before
thee ! Verily, thy years and months and days have diverted
thee therefrom. Knowest thou not that the cup of death is
filled for thee and that ere long thou must drain it to the
dregs ? Look to thyself before thou enter thy grave.
Where be they who held the dominion over the lands and
abased God's servants and led armies? By Allah, the
Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies and
the Devastator of inhabited houses came down upon them
and transported them from their spacious palaces to the
narrow room of the grave.'

And at the foot of the tablet were written the following
verses :

Where be the kings and where be they the earth who peopled? Where?

That which they built thereon they left and to the grave did fare.
There, after death had razed them out, corruption they became, Pledged

to the tomb to answer that they did and wrought whilere.
Where be the armies that they raised, the wealth they garnered up?

Nothing they served to ward off death or bribe him to forbear.
The Lord of the Ninth Heaven's decree fell down on them in hasie :

Strongholds and treasures thereagainst all unavailing were.

When the Amir heard this, he cried out and the tears
ran down his cheeks and he exclaimed, £ By Allah, it is
surest and most fitting to abstain from the world 1 ' And
he called for inkhorn and paper and wrote down what
was graven on the tablet.

Then he drew near the second tablet and found these
words graven thereon : ' O son of Adam, what hath se-
duced thee [from the service of] the Ancient of Days and
made thee forget that thou must one day pay the debt of
death ? Knowest thou not, thou that takest thought unto
the world and cleavest fast thereto, that it is a perishing
dwelling, wherein there is abiding for none? Where be
the kings who peopled Irak and possessed the four quarters
of the world ? Where be they who peopled Ispahan and


241


the land of Khorassan? The voice of the summoner ol
death called them and they answered him. and the herald
ol destruction hailed them and they replied, saying, " Here
are we." Verily, that which they builded and fortified
profited them not, neither did what they had gathered and
provided [against a time of stress] avail for their defence.'

And at the foot of the tablet were graven the following
verses :

Where be they these halls who builded and their galleries reared offi

high, Galleries whose stately fashion nought resembles neath the sky
Armies levied they and warriors, in their fear of him delights Who uq-

doth ; but they availed not, when th' appointed day drew nigh.
Where be the Chosroes, sovereigns of the strengths that none might

storm? As they'd never been, the countries have they left and

fleeted by.

The Amir wept and exclaimed, ' By Allah, we are indeed
created for a grave matter ! ' Then he copied the above
inscription and passed on to the third tablet, whereon was 1bCfC$)t
written what follows : i O son of Adam, thou busiest thee fcllxxui
with the love of the world and neglectest the command-
ment of thy Lord. All the days of thy life pass by and
thou art content to live thus. Make ready thy provision
against the appointed day and prepare to answer the Lord
of all creatures.'

And at the foot were written these verses :

Where's he who peopled all the lands, both Hind and Sind s of yore ?

He who transgressed and sinned and played the tyrant heretofore ?
Ethiops and Abyssinians all unto his beck did bow, What while himself

he magnified and arrogantly bore.
Look not for news of that which is within his tomb, for thou O&e who

can tidings give of this shalt meet with nevermore.
The stroke of imminent death on him fell and from its assault Not all the

halls he built could save nor all his hoarded store,

At this Mousa wept sore, then, going on to the fourth
tablet, he read the following inscription thereon : 1 son
of Adam, how long shall thy Lord bear with thee and thog
VOL. ¥. 16


242

every day sunken in the sea of thy delight ? Hath it then
been revealed unto thee that thou shalt not die ? O son
of Adam, let not the deceitful delights of thy days and
nights and hours delude thee, but remember that death
lieth in wait for thee, ready to spring on thy shoulders, nor
doth a day pass but he riseth with thee in the morning and
lieth down with thee by night. Beware, then, of his onset
and make provision thereagainst. As it was with me, so is
it with thee ; thou wastest thy whole life and squanderest
the delight of thy days. Hearken, therefore, to my rede
and put thy trust in the Lord of Lords ; for there is no
stability in the world ; it is but as a spider's web.'

And at the foot of the tablet were written the following
verses :

Where's he who traced the house and builded it forthright And fortified
its walls and reared it to the height ?

Where be the castles' lords ? They who abode therein Departed have the
strengths they governed, every wight.

All lie within the tombs, in pledge against the day Whereon the secret
things shall all be brought to light.

None but the Most High God endureth without cease, The ever Worship-
worth, Lord of ail power and might.

When the Amir read this, he swooned away and
[presently coming to himself] marvelled exceedingly and
wrote it down. Then he drew near the fifth tablet
and behold, thereon was graven what follows : ' O son
of Adam, what is it distracts thee from the obedience of
thy Creator and the Author of thy being, Him who' reared
thee, whenas thou wast little, and fed thee, whenas thou
grewest up? Thou art ungrateful for His bounty, albeit
He watcheth over thee with His favours, letting down the
curtain of His protection over thee. Needs must there
be for thee a time more bitter than aloes and hotter than
live coals. Provide thee s therefore, against it ; for who
shall sweeten its bitterness or quench, its flaming fires ?


243


Bethink thee who forewent thee of peoples and heroes
and take warning by them, ere thou perish.'

And at the foot of the tablet were graven the following
verses :

Where be the kings of the kings of the earth? Indeed, they are sped,
And here, with that which they gathered, they lie in the grave-
yard's bed.

Once, when they mounted, thou'dst see, in the train of their glory,
troops That filled the lands, when they mounted, and over the
countries spread.

How many a monarch they humbled, how many an army destroyed J
How much in their day they conquered, and how much blood did
they shed !

Upon them, in haste, the commandment o' the Lord of the heavens
came And after a life all untroubled, o'erthrown were they sudden
and dead.

The Amir marvelled at this and wrote it down ; after
which he passed on to the sixth tablet and found thereon
the following inscription : ' O son of Adam, think not
that immunity will endure [for ever,] seeing that death is
irrevocably decreed unto thy head. Where be thy fathers
and thy brethren, where thy friends and dear ones ? They
have all gone to the dust of the tombs and presented them-
selves before the Glorious, the Forgiving One, as if they
had never eaten nor drunken, and they are a pledge for
that which they have earned. So look to thyself, ere thy
tomb come upon thee.'

And at the foot of the tablet were graven these verses :

Where be the kings of the kings of the Franks and where Is he who, I

trow, abode in Tenjeh whilere?
Their works in a book are written, which to the One, The Almighty,

one day shall witness against them bear.

At this Mousa marvelled and wrote it down, saying,
4 There is no god but God ! Indeed, how goodly were
these folk ! ' Then he went up to the seventh tablet and


244


behold, thereon was written what follows : ' Glory to Him
who fore-ordaineth death to all He createth, the Living
One, who dieth not ! O son of Adam, let not thy days
and their delights delude thee, neither thine hours and
the sweet of their tides, and know that death cometh to
thee and sitteth upon thy shoulders. Beware, then, of his
assault and make ready for his onset. As it was with me,
so is it with thee ; thou wasteth the sweet of thy life and
the delight of thine hours. Give ear, then, to my rede and
put thy trust in the Lord of Lords and know that there
is no stability in the world, but it is as it were a spider's
web and all that is therein shall cease and die. Where is
he who laid the foundations of Amid 1 and builded it and
builded Farikin 2 and exalted it? Where be the peoples
of the strong places? Whenas they had inhabited them
[awhile], they descended, after their might, into the tombs.
They have been carried off [by death] and we shall be
[in like manner] afflicted. None abideth save God the
Most High, God the Forgiving One.'

The Anir Mousa wept and copied all this, and indeed
the world was belittled in his eyes. Then he descended
the hill ana rejoined his troops, with whom he passed the
rest of the day, casting about for a 'means of access to the
city. And he said to his Vizier [and] Talib ben Sehl and
his chief officers, ' How shall we do to enter this city and
view its marvels ? It may be we shall find therein where-
withal to propitiate the favour of the Commander of the
Faithful.' ' God prolong the Amir's fortune 1 ' replied
Talib. ' Let us make a ladder and mount the wall there-
with, so haply we may come at the gate from within/
Quoth the Amir, ' This is what came to my thought also,
and it is good counsel' And he called for carpenters and
blacksmiths and bade them cut wood and make a ladder

1 The ancient name of Diarbekir.

a Qu^S'-e Meyyafarikin, a town in the same pashalik.


245


clamped and banded with iron. So they made a strong
ladder and wrought at it a whole month. Then all the
company laid hold of it and set it up against the wall, and
it reached the top as truly as if it had been made for it
aforetime. The Amir marvelled at the excellence of their
work and said, ' The blessing of God be upon you ! It
seemeth as though ye had taken the measure of the wall.'
Then said he to his men, 'Which of you will mount the
ladder and walk along the wall and cast about for a way of
descending into the city, so to see how the case stands and
let us know how we may open the gate ? ' Quoth one of
them, i I will go up, O Amir, and descend and open to
you.' And Mousa answered, saying, 'Go and the blessing
of God go with thee ! '

So he mounted the ladder; but, when he came to the
top of the wall, he stood up and gazed fixedly down into
the city, then clapped his hands and crying Out, at the top
of his voice, ' By Allah, thou art fair ! ' cast himself down
into the place and was dashed to pieces. Quoth Mousa,
' By Allah, the man is destroyed ! ' But another came up
to him and said, ' O Amir, this was a madman and doubt-
less his madness got the better of him and undid him. I
will go up and open the gate to you, if it be the will of
God the Most High.' ' Go,' replied Mousa, ' and may God
bless thee ! But beware lest thou lose thy head, even as
did he.' Then the man mounted the ladder, but no sooner
had he reached the top of the wall than he laughed aloud
and saying, ' Well done 1 Well done 1 ' cast himself down
into the city and died forthright.

When the Amir saw this, he said, ' If this be the fashion
of a reasonable man, what is that of the madman ? If all
our men do thus, we shall have none left and shall fail of
our errand and that of the Commander of the Faithful.
Let us depart hence, for we have no concern, with this
city.' But another of the company said, 5 Feradventure


246


another may be steadier than they.' So a third mounted
the wall and a fourth and a fifth and all cried out and cast
themselves down, even as did the first; nor did they leave
to do thus, till a dozen had perished.

Then, said the Sheikh Abdussemed, 4 This adventure is
reserved for none other than myself, for the man of ex-
perience is not like the inexperienced.' Quoth the Amir,
* Indeed, I will not have thee go up, for thou art our guide
and if thou perish, we shall all be cut off to the last man.'
But he answered, saying, ' Peradventure, that which we
seek may be accomplished at my hands, by the grace of
God the Most High.' So they all agreed to let, him go up,
and he arose and heartening himself, said, 1 In the name
of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful ! ' and mounted
the ladder, calling on the name of God and reciting the
Verses of Safety. 1 When he reached the top of the wall,
he clapped his hands and gazed fixedly down into the city ;
whereupon the folk below cried out to him with one
accord, saying, £ Sheikh Abdussemed, for God's sake
cast not thyself down ! ' And they said, * Verily, we are
God's and to Him we return ! If the Sheikh fall, we are
all dead men.'

Then he laughed long and loud and sat a great while,
reciting the names of God and repeating the Verses of
Safety ; then he rose and cried out at the top of his voice,
saying, ' O Amir, have no fear : no hurt shall betide you,
for God (to whom belong might and majesty) hath averted
from me the wiles and malice of Satan, by the blessing of
the words, " In the name of God, the Compassionate, the
Merciful ! "' ' O Sheikh,' quoth Mousa, ' what didst thou
see?' 'When I came to the top of the wall/ answered
Htg|)l Abdussemed, ' I saw ten maidens, as they were moons

trtxxtb.

1 Certain verses of the Koran (such as, " There is no power and no
might, etc., eta") so called from their supposed efficacy in delivering
from danger him who repeats them in his need.


247


calling and beckoning to me with their hands, as who
should say, " Come hither to us ; " and meseeraed there
was below me a lake of water. Therewith I thought to
throw myself down, when behold, I espied my twelve
companions lying dead ; so I restrained myself and recited
somewhat of the book of God the Most High, whereupon
He dispelled from me the damsels' wiles and sorceries
and they disappeared. And doubtless this was an en-
chantment devised by the people of the city, to repel
those who should seek to enter the place.'

Then he walked on along the wall, till he came to the
two towers of brass [from which the city took its name,]
and saw therein two gates of gold, without locks or visible
means of opening ; whereat he marvelled and gazed about
him awhile, till he espied, amiddleward one of the gates,
a horseman of brass with hand outstretched, as if pointing,
and thereon somewhat written. So he we,nt up to it and
read these words : ' Turn the pin in my navel twelve
times, and the gate will open.' Accordingly, he examined
the horseman's body and finding in his navel a pin of
gold, firm-set and curiously wrought, turned it twelve
times, whereupon the horseman revolved like the blind-
ing lightning and the gate swung open with a noise like
thunder. He entered and found himself in a long passage,
which brought him down some steps into a guardroom,
furnished with goodly benches, whereon sat men dead,
with richly wrought targets and keen swords and bended
bows and arrows on the string hanging at their heads.

Passing on, he came to the outer gate and finding it
secured with curiously wrought locks and bars and bolts
and other fastenings of wood and iron, said in himself s
4 Belike the keys are with yonder dead folk.' So he turned
back to the guardroom and seeing, amongst the dead
soldiers^ an old man seated upon a high bench, who
seemed the chiefest of them s said in himself, 6 Who knowg


248

but they are with this old man? Doubtless he was the
seneschal of the city, and these others were under his
hand.' So he went up to him and lifting his gown, saw
the keys hanging to his girdle, whereat he rejoiced with
an exceeding joy and was like to fly for gladness. Then
he took them and going up to the gate, undid the locks
and drew back the bolts and bars, whereupon the great
gate swung open with a noise like the pealing thunder.
At this he cried out, saying, ' God is most great 1 ' And
the folk without answered him with the same words,
rejoicing and thanking him for his deed.

The Amir Mousa also rejoiced with an exceeding joy in
the Sheikh's safety and the opening of the city-gate, and
they all pressed forward to enter; but Mousa cried out
to them, saying, ' O folk, it is not safe that we all enter
at once, lest some ill chance betide us. Let half enter
and other half tarry without.' So he entered with half
his men, bearing their weapons of war, and saw the door-
keepers and guards and chamberlains and officers lying
dead on couches of silk. Then they passed through the
inner gate and coming upon their comrades lying dead,
buried them ; after which they fared on till they came to
a great market-place, full of lofty buildings, none of which
overpassed other, and saw all the shops open, with the
scales hung out and the brazen vessels ranged in order
and the magazines full of all manner goods and the
merchants sitting in their places, dead, with shrivelled
skin and rotted bones, a warning to those who can take
warning ; and here they saw four separate markets.

Then they went on till they came to the silk-market,
where they found silks and brocades, woven with red gold
and white silver upon all manner of colours, and the
owners lying dead upon mats of scented goats 5 leather,
as if they would speak ; after which they traversed the
market of pearls and rubies and other jewels and came t©


1


249


that of the money-changers, whom they saw sitting dead
upon silken carpets, in shops full of gold and silver.
Thence they passed to the drug-market, where they saw
the shops filled with drugs of all kinds and bladders of
musk and ambergris and aloes and camphor and other
perfumes in vessels of ivory and ebony and khelenj-wood
and Spanish brass, the which is equal in value to gold,
and various kinds of Indian cane ; but the shopkeepers
were all dead, nor was there with them aught of food.

Hard by this last market they came upon a palace,
magnificently built and decorated ; so they entered and
found therein banners displayed and drawn swords and
bended bows and bucklers hanging by chains of gold
and silver and helmets gilded with red gold. In the
vestibules stood benches of ivory, plated with glittering
gold and covered with silken stuffs, whereon lay men g
whose skin had dried up on their bones; the unknowing
had deemed them sleeping, but, for lack of food, they had
perished and tasted the cup of death.

When the Amir Mousa saw this, he stood still, glorifying
God the Most High and hallowing Him and contemplating
the beauty of the palace and the fair perfection of its
ordinance, for it was builded after the goodliest and
stablest fashion and the most part of its adornment was
of green lapis-lazuli ; and on the inner door, which stood
open, were written, in characters of gold and ultramarine s
the following verses :

Consider what thou seest here, O mortal, and beware And to thine end

take thought before thou hence away must fare.
Needs must each dweller in a house depart therefrom ; so look Provision

of good works, which thee shall profit, thou prepare.
See here a folk, who did adorn their dwellings and are now Become the

pledges of the dust for that they wrought whilere.
They builded, but their buildings served them nought g they hoarded

wealth, That might not save them, when their day* of life accom*

plished wera,


250


How much they hoped for, over that which was to them ordained !
Ther; to the grave they passed and hope availed them nothing there.

Yea, they descended from their height of glory to the strait Abjection
o! the tomb, and ill was this their last repair.

Whenas as they buried were, came one that cried to them and said,
"Where be the thrones, the diadems, the raiment ye did wear?

Where be the faces that were veiled and curtained round about, Whereon,
of yore, were bywords made, so bright they were and fair ? "

And the tomb answer for them made to him that questioned them.
Saying, " The roses of the cheeks are faded out fore'er.

Long time they ate and drank their fill ; now, after pleasant food, Them-
selves are eaten in their turn ; the worms upon them fare."

When the Amir read this, he wept, till he was like to
swoon away, and bade write down the verses, after which
t'§|)t ^ e P asse d on into the inner palace and came to a vast hall,
&IX"Xt) 4 at eac h °f w hose four corners stood a lofty and spacious
pavilion, enamelled with gold and silver and painted in
various colours. Midmost the hall was a great fountain
of alabaster, surmounted by a canopy of brocade, and in
each of the pavilions was a richly-wrought fountain and
cistern paved with marble and streams flowing in channels
along the floor and meeting in a great cistern of many-
coloured marble.

Quoth the Amir to the Sheikh Abdussemed, * Come, let
us visit yonder pavilions.' So they entered the first and
found it full of gold and silver and pearls and rubies and
other precious stones and metals, besides chests filled with
brocades, red and white and yellow. Then they repaired
to the second pavilion and opening a closet there, found
it full of arms and armour, such as gilded helmets and
Davidean 1 hauberks and Indian swords and Arabian spears
and Chorasmian maces and other warlike gear. Thence
they passed to the third pavilion, wherein they saw closets
locked and covered with curtains wrought with all manner
broidery,. They opened one of these and found it full of

1 See note s Vol. II. p. 209,


251

weapons curiously wrought and Inlaid with gold and silver
and jewels. Then they entered the fourth pavilion and
opening one of the closets there, beheld in it great store
of eating and drinking vessels of gold and silver^ with
platters of crystal and cups set with fine pearls and goblets
of cornelian and so forth. So they all fell to taking that to
which they had a mind, and each of the soldiers carried off
what he could.

When they left the pavilions, they saw in the midst of the
palace a door of teak-wood, inlaid with ivory and ebony
and plated with glittering gold, over which hung a silken
curtain, wrought with all manner broideries, and on this
door were locks of white silver, that opened by artifice
without a key. The Sheikh Abdussemed went boldly up
thereto and by the aid of his knowledge and skill, suc-
ceeded in opening the locks, whereupon the door swung
back and admitted them into a corridor paved with marble
and hung with tapestries broidered with figures of all
manner beasts and birds, whose bodies were wroughten
of red gold and white silver and their eyes of pearls and
rubies, amazing all who saw them. Passing along the
corridor, they came to a saloon builded all of polished
marble, inlaid with jewels, so wonder-clear and smooth
that it seemed to the beholder as there were water running
over its floor and whoso walked thereon slipped. The
Amir bade the Sheikh strew thereon somewhat, that they
might walk over it ; which being done, they made shift to
pass on till they came to a great pavilion of stone, plated
with red gold and crowned with a dome of alabaster, about
which were set lattice- windows, painted and jewelled with
wands of emerald, beyond the competence of any king ;
nor had they seen aught goodlier in all the place.

Under this dome was a canopy of brocade, reared
upon columns of red gold and^ wrought with figures of
birds with feet of emerald, and beneath each bird was


2C2


a. network of fine pearls. The canopy was spread above
a fountain of ivory and cornelian, plated with glittering
gold and set with pearls and rubies and other jewels, and
thereby stood a couch and a pillar of red gold. On the
top of the pillar was perched a bird fashioned of red
rubies and holding in its bill a pearl, that shone like a
star ; and on the couch lay a damsel, as she were the
shining sun 5 never saw eyes a fairer. She was clad in a
robe of fine pearls., with a crown of red gold on her
head, filleted with gems, and on her brow were two great
jewels, whose light was as the light of the sun. On her
breast she wore a jewelled amulet, filled with musk and
ambergris and worth the empire of the Csesars, and round
her neck hung a collar of rubies and great pearls, [hollow
and] full of odoriferous musk. Whoso looked on her
would deem her alive and not dead, for it seemed as if
she gazed on them with eyes as they were gazelles' eyes,
jKTfClfjt that followed them from side to side.

tilxxbt. The Amir Mousa marvelled at her beauty and was con-
founded at the blackness of her hair and the redness of
her cheeks and said to her, ' Peace be on thee, O damsel ! '
But she returned not his salutation and the Sheikh said
to him, ' O Amir, verily this damsel is dead and there is
no life in her ; so how shall she return thy greeting ?
Indeed, she is but a corpse embalmed with exceeding art ;
her eyes were taken out after her death and quicksilver
set under them, after which they were restored to their
sockets. Wherefore they glisten and when the air moves
the lashes, she seems to wink and it appears to the
beholder as though she looked at him, for all she is
dead.' At this the Amir marvelled beyond measure and
said, 1 Glory be to God, who subjecteth His creatures unto
death ! '

Now the couchu on which the damsel lay, had steps,
and thereon stood two slaves, one white and the other


253


black. The first held a mace of iron and the second
a sword of watered steel, whose radiance dazzled the eye ;
and between them, on one of the steps of the couch,
lay a golden tablet, whereon were written, in characters
of white silver, the following words : ' In the name of
God, the Compassionate, the Merciful 1 Praise be to God,
the Creator of mankind, the Lord of Lords, the Causer
of Causes ! In the name of the Eternal God, the Ever-
lasting, the Ordainer of Fate and Fortune ! O son of
Adam, how unknowing art thou in thine unending hope
and how heedless of the inevitable end ! Knowst thou
not that death calleth for thee and hasteneth to seize upon
thy soul? Be ready, therefore, for the last journey and
provide thee [for thy departure] from the world ; for,
assuredly, ere long thou shalt leave it. Where is Noah and
his progeny ? Where be the kings of the Chosroes and
the Csesars ? Where the kings of India and Chaldaea and
the monarchs of the four quarters of the earth ? Where be
the sons of Amalek and the giants of old time ? Indeed,
the dwelling-places are void of them and they have departed
lands and kindred. Where be the kings of the Arabs and
the princes of the barbarians ? They are dead, all of them,
and are become corruption. Where be the lords of high
degree ? They are all dead. Where are Korah and Haman?
Where is Sheddad son of Aad ? Where be Canaan and the
Lord of the Stakes 1 ? By Allah, the Reaper of lives 2 hath
cut them off and made void the lands of them. Did they
provide them against the appointed day or make ready to
answer the Lord of all creatures ?

O man, if thou know me not, I will acquaint thee with
my name : I am Tedmureh, daughter of the kings of the
Amalekites, of those who held dominion over the lands
and brought low the necks of mankind. I possessed that
which never king possessed and was righteous in my rule
1 ?haraoh s so called in the Koraa. Si Death.


2S4

and did justice among my subjects ; yea, I gave gifts and
largesse and freed slaves, male and female. Thus lived I
many years in all ease and delight of life, till death knocked
at my gates and calamities took up their abode with me
and with my folk ; and it was on this wise. There betided
us seven successive years of drought, wherein no drop of
rain fell on us from heaven and no green thing sprouted
for us on the face of the earth. So we ate what was with
us of victual and [when we had made an end thereof] we
fell upon the cattle and ate them, till there was nothing
left. Then I let bring my treasures and meted them with
a measure and sent out trusty men to buy food. They
visited all the lands in quest thereof and left not a single
city unsought, but found no victual and returned to us
with the treasure, after a long absence, disappointed, and
gave us to know that they could not avail to barter fine
pearls for wheat, bushel for bushel neither weight for
weight. So, when we despaired of succour, we displayed
all our riches and things of price and shutting the gates of
the city, resigned ourselves to the judgment of our Lord
and committed our affair to our Master. Then we all
died, as thou seest us, and left what we had builded and
what we had treasured up. This, then, is our story, and
after the substance abideth the trace.'

Then they looked at the foot of the tablet and read
these verses :

son of Adam, let not hope make mock of thee, I pray. From all

thy hands have treasured up thou shalt be snatched away.

1 see thou covetest the world and all its fleeting show, And young and

old have done the like before thee many a day.
Wealth, by fair means and foul, they got ; but all their hoarded store,

When once their term accomplished was, could buy them no delay.
Annies they led and gathered gold galore, then left their wealth And

what they'd built and to the tombs departed straight and lay
Down in a narrow lodging in the dust, and there asleep, In pledge fas

that they wrought of yore, they do abide alway j


255

As 'twere a caravan, whose folk had halted for the night And set their
burdens in a house, wherein there was no stay,

And quoth its lord to them, ' O folk, there is no sojourn here For you j '
and so they girt their beasts and fared upon their way,

Misliking, after lighting down to rest them, to depart Forthright again,
filled full of care and trouble and dismay.

So look thou furnish thee with store of good shall gladden thee To-
morrow, and the fear of God thy practice govern aye.

And under this was written : ' By Allah, the fear of God
Is the best of all things, the keystone of certainty and the
[only] sure stay. Verily, death is the manifest truth and
the sure promise, and therein, O man, is the goal and place
of returning. Take warning, therefore, by those who have
foregone thee to the dust and hastened in the way of the
predestined end. Seest thou not that hoariness calls thee
to the grave and that the whiteness of thy locks maketh
moan for thee of thy life? Wherefore be thou on the
watch, ready for thy departure and account. O son of
Adam, what hath seduced thee from the service of thy
Lord ? Where be the peoples of old time ? [They are
become] a warning to whoso will take warning. Where be
the kings of China and the lords of power and prowess ?
Where is Sheddad ben Aad and where the cities he built
and stablished? Where is the proud tyrant Nimrod and
Pharaoh who rebelled against God and denied Him ? Death
followed hard upon them and laid them low, sparing neither
great nor small, male nor female ; yea, and the Reaper of
Mankind cut them off, by Him who maketh the night to
return upon the day !

Know, O thou who comest to this place, that she whom
thou seest here was not deluded by the world and its frail
delights, for it is deceitful, perfidious, a house of perdition
and vanity, and salutary to the creature is the remembrance
of his sins ; wherefore she feared her Lord and made fair
her dealings and provided herself against the appointed
day. Whoso cometh to our city and God vouchsafeth him


256

to enter it, let him take of the treasure what he may, but
touch not aught that is on my body, for it is the covering
of my nakedness and my furniture for the last journey;
wherefore let him fear God and despoil nought thereof ;
else will he destroy himself. This have I set for a warning
from me to him and a trust ; wherewith, peace be on you
and I pray God to keep you from sickness and calamity/
I^Tt'crljt When the Amir Mousa read this, he wept till he swooned
bta'Xblt. away and presently coming to himself, wrote down all he
had seen and heard and was admonished thereby. Then
he bade his men fetch the camels and load them with
these treasures and vases and jewels. ' O Amir,' quoth
Talib, e shall we leave yonder damsel with what is upon
her? Behold, they are things that have not their equal
and whose like is not to be found and more perfect than
aught else thou takest; nor couldst thou find a goodlier
gift wherewithal to propitiate the favour of the Commander
of the Faithful.' ' O man/ replied Mousa, ' heardst thou
not what the lady says on the tablet ? More by token
that she gives it in trust to us, and we are no traitors
[that we should betray a trust].' ( And shall we,' rejoined
Talib, ' because of these words, leave yonder jewels and
riches, seeing that she is dead ? What should she do
with these that are the adornments of the world and the
ornament of the live? We have more right to them than
she, seeing that one garment of cotton would suffice for
her covering.' So saying, he mounted the steps of the
couch, but when he came within reach of the two slaves,
the mace-bearer smote him on the back and the other
struck him with the sword he held in his hand and cut
off his head, and he fell down dead. Quoth the Amir,
'May God have no mercy on thy soul ! Indeed, there
was enough in these treasures, and covetise assuredly
dishonoured! a man.' Then he bade admit the troops;
so they entered and loaded the camels with the treasures j


257


after which they went forth the city and the Amir let
shut the gate as before.

They fared on along the sea-shore a whole month, till
they came in sight of a high mountain, overlooking the
sea and full of caves, wherein dwelt a tribe of blacks,
speaking an unknown tongue and clad in skins, with
hooded cloaks of the same on their heads. When they
saw the troops, they took fright and fled into the caverns,
whilst their women and children stood at the doors, look-
ing on the strangers. ' O Sheikh,' said the Amir, ' what are
these folk ? ' ' They are those whom we seek,' answered
Abdussemed. So they halted and setting down their
loads, pitched their tents ; whereupon down came the
King of the blacks from the mountain and drew near the
camp.

Now he understood the Arabic tongue ; so, when he
came to the Amir, he saluted him and Mousa returned
his greeting and entreated him with honour. Then said
he to the Amir, ' Are ye men or Jinn ? ' £ We are men,'
answered Mousa ; ' but doubtless ye are Jinn, of the
vastness of your stature and your dwelling apart in this
mountain, that is cut off from mankind.' ' Nay,' rejoined
the black ; ' we also are children of Adam, of the lineage
of Ham, son of Noah, on whom be peace ; and this sea
is known as El Kerker.' Quoth Mousa, ' O king, what
is your religion and what worship ye ? ' And he answered,
saying, ' We worship the God of the heavens and our
religion is that of Mohammed, whom God bless and
keep ! ' ' And how came ye by the knowledge of this,'
asked the Amir, ' seeing that no prophet inspired of God
hath visited this country ? ' ' Know, O Amir,' replied the
King, ' that there appeared to us [aforetime] from out
the sea a man, from whom issued a light that illumined
the whole horizon, and he cried out, in a voice that was
heard of far and near,, saying, ( O children of Ham, bow

VOL. V. I?


258


down to Him who seeth and is not seen and say, <£ There
is no god but God and Mohammed is His apostle ! " And
he added, " I am Aboulabbas el Khizr." Before this, we
used to worship one another, but he called us to the
service of the Lord of all creatures. Moreover, he taught
us to repeat these words, " There is no god save God
alone, who hath no partner, and His are the kingdom
and the praise. He giveth life and death and He can
do all things." Nor do we draw near unto God (to whom
belong might and majesty) but with these words, for we
know none other ; but every Friday eve we see a light
upon the face of the earth and hear a voice saying, " Holy
and glorious, Lord of the Spirit and the Angels ! What
He willeth, is, and what He willeth not, is not. Every
blessing is of the grace of God and there is neither power
nor virtue save in Him the Most High, the Supreme ! "

But ye,' said the black king, ' who and what are ye and
what brings you to this land?' 'Quoth Mousa, 'We are
officers of the sovereign of Islam, the Commander of the
Faithful Abdulmelik ben Merwan, who hath heard tell of
the lord Solomon, son of David (on whom be peace), and
of that which God the Most High bestowed upon him of
supreme dominion, how he held sway over Jinn and beasts
and birds and was wont, whenas he was wroth with one of
the Marids, to shut him in a yessel of brass and stopping
its mouth on him with lead, whereon he impressed his seal,
to cast him into the sea of Kerker. Now we have heard
tell that this sea is in your country; so the Commander of
the Faithful hath sent us hither, to fetch him some of these
vessels, that he may look thereon and divert himself with
their sight. This, then, is our case and what we seek of
thee, O King, and we desire that thou further us in the
accomplishment of our errand for the Commander of the
Faithful' ' With all my heart/ replied the black king
and carrying them to the guest-house, entreated them


259


with the utmost honour and furnished them with all they
needed, feeding them upon fish.

They abode thus three days, at the end of which time
he bade his divers fetch some of the vessels of Solomon
from out the sea. So they dived and brought up twelve
vessels, whereat the Amir and his company rejoiced in
the accomplishment of the Khalif s need. Then Mousa
gave the King of the blacks many and great gifts, and he
in turn made him a present of wonders of the deep, being
fish in human form, 1 saying, ' Your entertainment these
three days has been of these fish.' Quoth the Amir,
'Needs must we carry some of these to the Khalif, for
they will please him more than the vessels of Solomon.'

Then they took leave of the black king and setting out
on their homeward journey, travelled till they came to
Damascus, when Mousa went in to the Commander of
the Faithful and told him all that they had seen and
heard, together with the manner of the death of Talib
ben Sehl; and the Khalif said, 'Would I had been with
you, that I might have seen what you saw!' Then he
took the brazen vessels and opened them, one after
another, whereupon the devils came forth of them, say-
ing, s We repent, O prophet of God ! Never again will
we return to the like of this thing.' And the Khalif
marvelled at this, saying, ' Never gave God unto any
man the like of that which He bestowed upon Solomon,
son of David ! ' As for the mermaids, they made them
tanks of wood, full of water, and laid them therein ; but
they died of the great heat.

Then the Khalif divided the spoils of the Brazen City
among the faithful, and the Amir Mousa sought leave of jNTtgftt
him to appoint his son governor of Africa in his stead, fclxxbu't,
that he might betake himself to the holy city of Jerusalem^
there to worship God. So the Commander of the Faithful
1 i»e. mermaids.


invested Haroura with the government and Mousa repaired
to Jerusalem, where he died. This, then, is all that hath
come down to us of the story of the City of Brass,, and
God [alone] is All- knowing 1


THE MALICE OF WOMEN.

There was once, of old days and in bygone ages and
times, a rich and powerful king, who ruled over many men
of war and vassals, and he had grown old without being
blessed with a son. At last, when he began to despair of
male issue, he sought the intercession of the Prophet
(whom God bless and preserve !) with the Most High and
implored Him, by the glory of His saints and prophets
and martyrs and others of the Faithful that were dear to
Him, to grant him a son, to be the ^.solace of his eyes and
inherit the kingdom after him. Then he rose forthright
and withdrawing to his sitting-chamber, sent for the
daughter of his uncle 1 and lay with her. By God's
grace, she conceived by, him, and when the months ot
her pregnancy were accomplished, she bore a male child,
whose face was as the round of the moon on its fourteenth
night. When the boy reached the age of five, he was
committed to the charge of a sage of the sages, a very
learned man, by name Es Sindibad, who taught him
science and polite letters, till, by the time he was ten
years old, there was none of his time could vie with him in
knowledge and good breeding and understanding. Then
his father delivered him to a company of Arabian cavaliers,
who instructed him in horsemanship and martial exercises,
till he became proficient therein and came and went in the
listed field and excelled all his peers and all the folk, of
his day

4 i.e. his wife.


26 1

One day, his governor, being engaged in observing the
stars, drew the youth's horoscope and discovered that, if
he spoke one word during the seven following days, he
would be a dead man. So he went in straightway to the
old King and informed him of this, and he said, ' What
shall we do, O sage ? ' ' O King,' answered the other,
4 it is my counsel that he be kept in a place of pleasance,
where he may divert himself with hearing music, until the
seven days be past.' So the King sent for the fairest of
his favourites and committed the prince to her, saying,
4 Take thy lord into the palace with thee and let him not
leave thee till after seven days.' The damsel accordingly
took the prince by the hand and carried him to the palace
in question, which was compassed about by a running
stream, whose banks were planted with all manner fruit-
trees and sweet-scented flowers. Moreover, in this palace
were forty apartments and in every apartment ten slave-
girls, each skilled in some instrument of music, so that,
when she played, the palace danced to her melodious
strains ; and here the prince passed one night.

Now he was handsome and graceful beyond description,
and when the King's favourite looked at him, love gat hold
upon her heart and she was ravished with him. So she
went up to him and offered herself to him, but he made
her no answer; whereupon, being confounded by his beauty f
she cried out to him and required him of himself and im-
portuned him. Moreover, she threw herself upon him and
strained him to her bosom, kissing him and saying, 'Q
king's son, grant me thy favours and I will set thee in
thy father's stead ; yea, I will give him to drink of poison,
so he may die and thou enjoy his wealth and kingship.*
When the prince heard this, he was sore enraged against
her and said to her [by signs], s O accursed one, so it
please God the Most High, I will assuredly requite thee
this thy deed, whenas I can speak; for I will go out to


262


my father and tell him, and he will kill thee.' So saying,
he arose, in a rage, and went out from her ; whereat she
feared for herself. So she buffeted her face and rent her
clothes and tore her hair and uncovered her head, then
went in to the King and threw herself at his feet, weeping
and lamenting. When he saw her in this plight, he was
sore concerned and said to her, ' What ails thee, O damsel ?
How is it with thy lord [my son] ? Is he not well ? ' 'O
King,' answered she, 'this thy son, whom thy counsellors
avouch to be dumb, required me of myself and I repelled
him, whereupon he did with me as thou seest and would
have slain me ; so I fled from him, nor will I ever again
return to him nor to the palace.'

When the King heard this, he was beyond measure
wroth and calling his Viziers, bade them put the prince
to death. However, they said to each other, ' If we do
the King's commandment, he wilLsurely repent of having
ordered his son's death, for he is passing dear to him and
came to him after he had despaired of an heir; and he
will turn on us and blame us, saying, " Why did ye not
dissuade me from slaying my son ? " ' So they took
counsel together, to turn him from his purpose, and the
chief Vizier said, ' I will warrant you from his mischief
this day.' Then he went in to the King and prostrating
himself before him, craved leave to speak. The King
gave him leave, and he said, ' O King, though thou hadst
a thousand sons, yet were it no light matter to thee to
put one of them to death, on the report of a woman,
speak she truth or falsehood ; and belike this is a lie and
a trick of her against thy son; for indeed, O King, I
have heard tell great plenty of stories of the craft and
perfidy of women.' Quoth the King, i Tell me somewhat
of that which hath come to thy knowledge thereof.' And
the Vizier answered, saying s i It hath reached me, O King,
that


263


THE KING AND HIS VIZIER'S WIFE.

There was once a king, who was given to the love of
women, and one day, being alone in his palace, he espied
a beautiful woman on the roof of her h ouse and could not
contain himself from falling in love with her. He asked
[his servants] to whom the house belonged and they said,
" To thy vizier such an one." So he called the vizier in
question and despatched him on an errand to a distant
part of the kingdom ; then, as soon as he was gone, he
made an excuse to gain access to his house. When the
vizier's wife saw him, she knew him and springing up,
kissed his hands and feet and welcomed him. Then she
stood afar off, busying herself in his service, and said to
him " O our lord, what is the cause of thy gracious visit ?
Such an honour is not for the like of me'" Quoth he,
" Love of thee and desire to thee hath moved me to this."
Whereupon she kissed the earth before him a second time
and said, " O our lord, indeed I am not worthy to be the
handmaid of one of the king's servants; whence then
have I the great good fortune to be in such favour with
thee ? " Then the king put out his hand to her, but she
said, " This thing shall not escape us ; but take patience,
O king, and abide with me all this day, that I may make
ready for thee somewhat of victual." So the king sat down
on his vizier's couch and the lady brought him a book
wherein he might read, whilst she made ready the food.
He took the book and beginning to read, found therein
moral instances and exhortations, such as restrained him
from adultery and broke his intent to commit sin.

After awhile, she returned and set before him a collation
of ninety dishes of different kinds and colours, and he ate
a spoonful of each and found that the taste of them was
one. At this, he marvelled exceedingly and said to the


264


lady, iS O damsel, I see these meats to be many [and
various of hue], but the taste of them is one." "God
prosper the king ! " replied she. " This is a parable I
have set for thee, that thou mayst be admonished thereby."
Si And what is its meaning ? " asked he. " May God amend
the case of our lord the king ! " answered she. " In thy
palace are ninety concubines of various colours, but their
taste is one." When the king heard this, he was ashamed
and rising hastily, went out and returned to his palace,
without offering her any affront ; but, in his haste and
confusion, he forgot his signet-ring and left it under the
cushion where he had been sitting.

Presently the vizier returned and presenting himself
before the king, kissed the earth and made his report to
him of the state of the province in question. Then he
repaired to his own house and sat down on his couch,
and chancing to put his hand under the cushion, found
the king's seal-ring. So he looked at it and knew it and
taking the matter to heart, held aloof from his wife nor
spoke with her for a whole year, while she knew not the
'MiUbt reason of his anger. At last, being weary of estrangement,
feixilx, s ^ e sent f° r h er f atner and told him the case, whereupon
quoth he, " I will complain of him to the king, some day
when he is in presence."

So, one day, he went in to the king and finding the
vizier and the cadi of the army before him, made his
complaint in the following words. " May God the Most
High amend the king's case ! I had a fair garden, which
I planted with my own hand and spent my substance
thereon, till it bore fruit and its fruit was ripe, when I
gave it to this thy vizier, who ate of it what seemed good
to him, then forsook it and watered it not, so that its
flowers withered and its beauty departed and it became
waste." Then said the vizier, " O king, what this man
says is true. 1 did indeed care for the garden and ate


26$


thereof, till, one day, going thither, I saw the track of
the lion there, wherefore I feared him and withdrew from
the garden." The king understood the parable and knew
that, by the track of the lion, he meant his own seal-ring,
which he had forgotten in his house ; so he said, " Return
to thy garden, vizier, and fear nothing, for the lion
came not near it. It hath been told me that he went
thither, but by the honour of my fathers and forefathers,
he offered it no hurt." " I hear and obey," answered the
vizier, and returning home, made his peace with his wife
and thenceforth put faith in her chastity.


And I have heard also, O King/ continued the Vizier,
'that

THE MERCHANT'S WIFE AND THE PARROT.

There was once a merchant who travelled much, and
he had a fair wife, whom he loved, and was jealous over
her, by reason of the greatness of his love. So he bought
her for a hundred dinars a green parrot, which talked like
a man and used to tell him all that passed in his absence.
Whilst he was abroad on one of his voyages, his wife fell
in love with a young Turk, who used to visit her, and she
entertained him and lay with him whilst her husband was
away. When the latter returned, the parrot told him what
had happened, whereat he was sore enraged and offered
to kill his wife; but she said, "O man, fear God and
return to thy wits. How can a bird have sense or under-
standing ? If thou wilt that I make this manifest to thee,
so thou mayst know its truth from its leasing, go this
sight and lie with one of thy friends, and in the morning
come back and question the parrot [of what passed during
the night,] and thou wilt see if it speak truth or not 8 '


266


The husband accordingly went forth and passed the
night with one of his friends, whilst, as soon as it was
dark, the wife covered the parrot's cage with a piece of
leather and fell to sprinkling water on it from above.
Moreover, she fanned it sharply with a fan and flashed
light on it from the lantern, as it were the glancing
lightning, grinding the while at the hand-mill. Thus
she did, without ceasing, till daybreak ; and the parrot
thought that the sprinkling of the water on its cage was
rain and the fanning a stormy wind and the flashing of
the lantern lightning and the noise of the hand-mill
thunder. When her husband returned, she bade him
question the parrot ; so he went up to the cage and began
to talk with the bird and question it of the past night.
Quoth it, " O my lord, who could see or hear aught last
night ? " " And why so ? " asked he. " Because," replied it,
"of the much rain and wind and thunder and lightning."
" Thou liest," said the merchant. " There was nothing of
all this last night." Quoth the bird, " I tell thee but what
I saw and heard." Then was he certified that the parrot
had lied in all it had told him of his wife and would have
made his peace with the latter; but she said, "By Allah,
I will not be friends with thee, till thou kill this parrot
that lied to thee of me." So he rose and killed the parrot ;
but, a few days after, he saw the young Turk come forth
of his house and knew that the parrot had spoken the
truth and repented of having slain it. Then he went in at
once to his wife and cut her throat and casting her into
the river, vowed never to take another wife. This,' said
the Vizier, ' I tell thee, O King, that thou mayst know
how great is the craft of women and that haste begetteth
repentance.'

So the King turned from putting his son to death, but,
next day, the favourite came in to him and kissing the
ground before him, said ? ' O King, why dost thou delay to


26/


do me justice ? Indeed, the kings have heard that thou
commandest a thing and thy Vizier countermandeth it
Now the obedience of kings is in the fulfilment of their
commandments, and every one knows thy justice and
equity : so do thou me justice on thy son. I have heard
tell that

THE FULLER AND HIS SON.

There was once a fuller, who used every day to go forth
to the bank of the Tigris, to clean clothes ; and his son
was wont to go with him and swim about in the river,
whilst his father was fulling, nor did the latter forbid him
from this. One day, as the boy was swimming, he was
taken with cramp in the arms and sank, whereupon the
fuller plunged into the water and caught hold of him ; but
the boy clung about him and pulled him down and so
father and son were both drowned. Thus is it with thee,
O King. Except thou prevent thy son and do me justice
on him, I fear lest both of you sink together, thou and he. ^Tftrhj
Moreover/ continued she, ' for an instance of the malice frlXXX.
of men, I have heard tell that

THE LOVER'S TRICK AGAINST THE CHASTE
WIFE.

A certain man loved a beautiful and graceful wo maris,
married to a man whom she loved and who loved her.
Moreover, she was chaste and virtuous, like unto me, and
her lover found no way to her ; so, when his patience was
at an end, he bethought him of a device to get his will.
Now the husband had a young man, whom he had brought
up in his house and who was in high trust with him. So
the lover addressed himself to the youth and insinuated
himself into his favour by presents and fair words, till he


268


became more- obedient to him than the hand to the mouth
and did whatever he bade him. One day, he said to him,
" Harkye, such an one ; wilt thou not bring me into thy
dwelling some time when thy lady is gone out ? " " Yes,"
answered the steward ; so, when his master was at the shop
and his mistress gone forth to the bath, he took his friend
and bringing him into the house, showed him all that was
therein.

Now the lover was minded to play a trick upon the lady ;
so he took white of egg, that he had brought with him in
a vessel, and sprinkled it on the merchant's bed, unseen of
the young man, after which he left the house and went his
way. Presently, the merchant came home and going to
the bed, to rest himself, found thereon something wet. So
he took it up in his hand and looked at it and deemed
it human sperm ; whereat he looked at the young man
with angry eyes and said to hir% "Where is thy mistress?"
" She is gone forth to the bath and will return forthright,"
replied he. When the man heard this, his suspicion was
confirmed and he said, "Go and bring her back at once."
The steward accordingly fetched her and when she came
before her husband, the latter sprang upon her and beat
her grievously, then, binding her hands behind her, offered
to kill her ; but she cried out to the neighbours, who came
to her, and she said to them, " My husband has beaten me
without cause and is minded to kill me, though I know not
what I have done." So they said to him, " Why hast thou
dealt thus by her?" And he answered, saying, "She is
divorced." Said they, " Thou hast no right to maltreat
her ; either divorce her or use her kindly, for we know her
chastity. Indeed, she hath been our neighbour this long
time and we know no evil of her." Quoth he, " When I
came home, i found on my bed human s.perrn T and 1
know not the meaning of this." Upon this, one of those
present came forward and said, " Show it to me." When


269


he saw it, he smelt it and calling for fire and a frying-pan,
fried the white of egg. Then he made the husband and
the others taste of it, and they were certified that it was
white of egg. So the husband was convinced of his wife's
innocence and the neighbours made peace between them ;
and so the lover's wicked trick came to nought. And
know, O King, that this is an instance of the malice of
men and their perfidy.'


When the King heard this, he bade put his son to death j
but the second vizier came forward and kissing the earth
before him, said, ' O King, hasten not to slay thy son, for
he was not vouchsafed to his mother but after she had
despaired, and we trust that he will live to become a
treasure to thy realm and a guardian of thy good. Where-
fore, have patience, O King; belike he will speak and
excuse himself; and if thou make haste to slay him, thou
wilt surely repent, even as the merchant repented.' Quoth
the King, ' And how was it with the merchant, O vizier ? '
8 O King,' answered the vizier, i I have heard that

THE NIGGARD AND THE LOAVES OF BREAD.

There was once a merchant, who was niggardly in his
eating and drinking. One day, he went on a journey to
a certain town and as lie walked in the market streets, he
came upon an old woman with two cakes of bread. He
asked her if they were for sale, and she said, " Yes." So
he chaffered with her and bought them at a low price and
took them home to his lodging, where he ate them that
day. On the morrow, he returned to the same place and
finding the old woman there with other two cakes, bought
these also ; and thus he did twenty days' space, at the end
of which time the old woman disappeared, He made


270


enquiry for her, but could hear nothing of her, till, one
day, as he was walking about the streets, he chanced upon
her ; so he accosted her and asked why she had ceased to
attend the market and bring him the two cakes of bread.
At first, she evaded giving him a reply ; but he conjured
her to tell him ; so she said, " Know, O my lord, that I
was attending upon a certain man, who had an ulcer on
his spine, and his doctor used to knead flour with butter
into a plaster and lay it on the place of the pain, where
it abode all night. In the morning, I used to take the
flour and make it into two cakes, which I sold to thee
or another ; but presently the man died and I was cut off
from making the cakes." When the merchant heard this,
he repented, whenas repentance availed nothing, saying,
Ml'gf)t H Verily, we are God's and to Him we return ! There is
tfU'XXt no power and no virtue but in Him, the Most High, the
Supreme ! " And he repeated the saying of the Most High,
" Whatsoever betideth thee of good, it is from God, and
whatsoever betideth thee of ill, it is from thyself," 1 and
vomited till he fell sick.


Moreover, O King,' continued the second vizier 9 ' 1 haw
heard telL of the malice of women, that


THE LADY AND HER TWO LOVERS.

There was once a man, who was swordbearer to one of
the kings, and he loved a certain woman of the common
people. One day, he sent his page to her with a message,
as of wont between them, and the latter sat down with her
and toyed with her. She inclined to him and pressed him
to her bosom, whereupon he sought to lie with her and
1 Koran iv. 8l.


271


she consented unto him ; but, as they were thus, the sword-
bearer knocked at the door. So she clapped the young
man into an underground chamber there and opened the
door to his master, who came in, sword in hand, and sat
down on her bed. Then she came to him and sported and
toyed with him, kissing him and pressing him to her
bosom, and he took her and lay with her.

Presently her husband knocked at the door and he said
to her, "Who is that?" "My husband," replied she.
Quoth he, " How shall 1 do ? " And she, " Draw thy sword
and stand in the vestibule and rail at me and revile me ;
and when my husband comes in to thee, do thou go forth
and go thy ways." He did as she bade him, and when
the husband entered, he saw the king's swordbearer stand-
ing with his drawn sword in his hand, reviling and threat-
ening his wife; but, when the other saw him, he was
ashamed and sheathing his sword, went forth the house.
Quoth the man to his wife, " What means this ? " And she
answered, saying, " O man, how blessed is the hour of thy
coming ! Thou hast saved a true believer from death ;
and it was on this wise. I was on the housetop, spinning,
when there came up to me a youth, panting and distracted
for fear of death, fleeing from yonder man, who followed
hard upon him with his drawn sword. The young man fell
down before me, and kissed my hands and feet, saying,
' O my lady, save me from him who would kill me without
just cause!' So I hid him in the underground chamber
there and presently in came yonder man to me with his
naked sword in his hand, demanding the youth. But I
denied him to him, whereupon he fell to reviling and
threatening me as thou sawest. And praised be God who
sent thee to me, for I was at my wits' end and had none
to deliver me ! "

" Well hast thou done, O woman ! " answered the husbancL
u Thy reward is with God and may He abundantly requite


2/2


thee ! " Then he went to the trapdoor and called to the
page, saying, "Come forth and fear not; no harm shall
befall thee." So he came out, trembling for fear, and
the husband condoled with him on what had befallen him,
saying, "Be of good cheer: none shall hurt thee;" whilst
the page called down blessings on his head. Then they
both went forth, nor was either aware of that which the
woman had contrived. This, then, O King,' said the
vizier, 'is one of the tricks of women; so beware lest
thou put faith in their speech.'

The King was persuaded and turned from putting his
son to death, but, next day, the favourite came in to him
and kissing the earth before him, said, ' O King, do me
justice on thy son and be not turned from thy purpose by
thy Vizier's prate, for there is no good in wicked viziers,
and be not as the king, who relied on the word of a
certain wicked vizier of his/ ' And how was that ? ' asked
the King. Quoth she, ' It hath 'been told me, O august
md well-advised King, that

THE KING'S SON AND THE OGRESS.

A certain king had a son, whom he loved and favoured
over all his other children ; and this son said to him one
day, " O my father, I have a mind to go a-hunting." So
the king bade furnish him and commanded one of his
viziers to bear him company and do all he needed during
his absence. The vizier accordingly took all that was
necessary for the journey and they set out with a retinue
of slaves and servants and officers, and fared on till they
came to a green and well-watered champaign abounding
in pasture and game. Here the prmce called a halt and
they loosed the hawks and lynxes and dogs and caught
great plenty of game, whereat they rejoiced and abode
there some days, in all pleasance and delight of life. Then


273


the prin.ce gave the signal for departure, but, as they went
along, a beautiful gazelle, as if the sun shone from her
forehead, that had strayed from the herd, sprang up before
the prince, whereupon his soul longed to make prize of
her and he coveted her. So he said to the vizier, " I have
a mind to follow yonder gazelle." " Do what seemeth
good to thee," said the vizier. So the prince rode after
the gazelle, till he lost sight of his companions, and chased
her all that day till dusk, when she took refuge in the
mountains and the darkness closed in upon him. Then
he would have turned back, but knew not the way ; whereat
he was sore concerned and said, "There is no power and
no virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme ! "

He rode on all night, in quest of relief, but found none,
and when the day appeared, he fared on at hazard, fearful
and exhausted with hunger and thirst and the heat of the
sun, until midday, when he came in sight of a great city,
with massive walls and lofty turrets • but it was ruined and
desolate, nor was there any live thing therein save the owl
and the raven. As he stood among the ruins, marvelling
at their ordinance, his eyes fell on a young and beautiful
damsel sitting weeping, under one of the city walls. So he
went up to her and said, a Who art thou and who brought
thee hither?" "I am called Bint et Temimeh, daughter
of Et Tiyakh, King of the Gray Country," answered
she. "I went out one day on an occasion, when an Afrit
of the Jinn snatched me up and soared with me between
heaven and earth ; but as he flew, there fell on him a
flame o* fire and consumed him, and I dropped here,
where I have hungered and thirsted these three days ; but,
when I saw thee, I coveted life."

The prince was smitten with compassion for her and ^ff^fjt
took her up behind him, saying, "Take heart and be of tllxnti
good cheer; for, if God (blessed and exalted be He !)
restore me to my people and family, I will send thee back

VOL. V. 1 8


274


to thine own people." Then he rode on, praying to God
for deliverance, and presently she said to him, " O King's
son, put me down, that I may do an occasion under yonder
wall." So he drew bridle and she alighted and hid herself
behind the wall. He waited for her a long while and she
came back, with the foulest of favours ; which when he
saw, he quaked for fear of her and his hair stood on end
and he turned pale. Then she sprang up behind him,
wearing the most hideous of aspects, and presently she
said to him, "O King's son, what ails thee that I see thee
troubled and thy favour changed ? " Quoth he, " I have
bethought me of somewhat that troubles me." And she,
" Seek aid against it of thy father's troops and warriors."
"He whom I fear," answered the prince, "cares nothing
for troops, neither can warriors affright him." " Then," re-
joined she, ''aid thyself against him with thy father's wealth
and treasures." Quoth he, " He whom I fear will not be
satisfied with wealth and treasures." And she, " Ye pretend
that ye have in heaven a God who sees and is not seen and
who can do all things." " Yes," answered he ; "we have
none but Him." "Then," said she, "pray thou to Him;
haply He will deliver thee from thine enemy." So he raised
his eyes to heaven and began to pray with his whole heart,
saying, " O my God, I implore Thee to succour me against
that which troubles me." Then he pointed to her with
his hand, and she fell to the ground, burnt and black as
a coal. Therewith he thanked God and praised Him and
fared onward. And God (blessed and exalted be He!)
of His grace made the way easy to him and guided him
into the right road, so that he reached his father's capital,
after he had despaired of life. Now all this befell by the
contrivance of the vizier, who travelled with him to the
end that he might cause him to perish by the way ; but
God the Most High succoured him, 5 And this/ said
the damsel, ' have I told thee, O King, that thou mayst


275


know that wicked viziers deal not honestly by their kings
neither counsel them with sincere intent, wherefore be thou
ware of them in this matter.'

The King gave ear to her speech and commanded to
put his son to death ; but the third vizier said [to his
brother viziers,] 1 1 will warrant you from the King's
mischief this day ; ' and going in to him, kissed the earth
before him and said, 4 O King, I am thy loyal counsellor
and affectionately solicitous for thee and thine estate, and
indeed, I give thee a true counsel ; it is that thou hasten
not to slay thy son, the solace of thine eyes and the fruit
of thine entrails. Belike his offence is but a slight matter,
which this damsel hath made great to thee ; and indeed I
have heard tell that the people of two villages once de-
stroyed each other, because of a drop of honey.' * How
was that ? ' asked the King, and the Vizier answered, say-
ing, ' Know, O King, that

THE DROP OF HONEY.

A certain man used to hunt the wild beasts in the desert,
and one day he came upon a grotto in the mountains,
where he found a hollow full of bees' honey. So he took
somewhat thereof in a water-skin he had with him and
throwing it over his shoulder, carried it to the city, followed
by a hunting dog which was dear to him. He stopped at
the shop of an oilman and offered him the honey for sale
and he bought it. Then he emptied it out of the skin that
he might see it, and in the act a drop fell to the ground,
whereupon the flies flocked to it and a bird swooped
down upon the flies. Now the oilman had a cat, which
pounced upon the bird, and the huntsman's dog, seeing
the cat 9 sprang upon it and killed it • whereupon the oil-
man ran at the dog and killed it and the huntsman in turn
leapt upon the oilman and killed him. Now the oilman


276


was of one village and the huntsman of another ; and when
the people of the two places heard what had passed, they
took up arms and rose on one another in anger, and there
befell a sore battle ; nor did the sword leave to play amongst
them, till there died of them much people, none knoweth
their number save God the Most High. And amongst
other stories of the malice of women,' continued the Vizier,
' I have heard tell, O King, that

THE WOMAN WHO MADE HER HUSBAND
SIFT DUST.

A man once gave his wife a dirhem to buy rice ; so she
went to the rice-seller, who gave her the rice and began
to jest with her and ogle her, for she was fair and graceful,
saying, " Rice is not good but with sugar, which if thou wilt
have, come in with me awhile." So she went in with him
into his shop and he did his will of her and said to his
slave, " Weigh her out a dirhem's worth of sugar." But
he made the slave a privy sign, and the latter, taking the
napkin, in which was the rice, emptied it out and put in
its place earth, and for the sugar stones, after which he
knotted the napkin up again and left it by her. Now the
man's object, in doing this, was that she should come to
him a second time ; so, when she went forth of the shop,
he gave her the napkin and she took it, thinking to have
in it rice and sugar, and went her way; but when she
returned home and set it before her husband, he found in
it earth and stones. So, when she came back with the
cooking-pot, he said to her, "Did I tell thee that I had
aught to build, that thou bringest me earth and stones ? n
When she saw this, she knew that the rice-seller's slave had
tricked her ; so she said to her husband, " O man, in my
trouble of mind for what hath befallen me, I went to fetch


277

the sieve and brought the cooking-pot* "What hath
troubled thee?" asked he; and she said, "I dropped the
dirhem thou gavest me in the market and was ashamed to
search for it before the folk; yet I grudged to lose the
money, so I gathered up the earth from the place where it
fell and brought it away, thinking to sift it [when I came
home]. Wherefore I went to fetch the sieve, but brought
the cooking-pot instead." Then she fetched the sieve and
gave it to her husband, saying, " Do thou sift it ; for thine
eyes are better than mine." So he sat, sifting the earth,
till his face and beard were covered with dust ; and he dis-
covered not her trick, neither knew what had befallen her-
This then, O King, ' said the Vizier, ' is an instance of the
malice of women, and consider the saying of God the
Most High, " Verily, the malice of you [women] is great \" 1
And again, " Indeed, the malice of Satan is weak [in com-
parison with that of women]." '2

The King gave ear to his Vizier's speech and was per-
suaded thereby and by what he cited to him of the sayings
of God and the lights of good counsel arose and shone
in the firmament of his understanding and he turned from
his purpose of putting his son to death. But, on the
fourth day, the favourite came in to him and kissing the
earth before him, said, 'O august King and lord of good
counsel, I have made plainly manifest to thee my grievance
and thou hast dealt unjustly by me and hast forborne to
avenge me on him who hath wronged me, for that he is
thy son and the darling of thy heart; but God (blessed
and exalted be He !) will succour me against him, even as
he succoured the king's son against his father's vizier. 9
* And how was that?' asked the King. 1 1 have heard tell,
O King,' replied she, ' that

1 Koran, xii. 28,

% Koran iv. 78. This quotation Is misapplied^ u the words quoted!
no not bear the construction here indicated.


2/8


THE ENCHANTED SPRINGS.

There was once a king who had an only son ; and
when the latter grew up to man's estate, he contracted
him in marriage to another king's daughter. Now she
was beautiful and graceful and her cousin had sought her
in marriage of her father, but she would none of him. So,
when he knew that she was to be married to another,
despite and jealousy gat hold on him and he bethought
himself and sent a rich present to the vizier of the bride-
groom's father, desiring him to use craft to make an end
of the prince or go about with him, to bring him to leave
his intent of marrying the princess and adding that he
was the lady's cousin and that it was jealousy of her that
moved him to this. The vizier accepted the present and
sent an answer, saying, " Be of good cheer, for I will do
all that thou wishest."

Presently, the bride's father wrote to the prince, bidding
him to his capital, that he might go in to his daughter,
whereupon the king his father despatched him thither,
sending with him the vizier aforesaid and a thousand
horse, besides presents and litters and tents and pavilions.
The vizier set out with the prince, plotting the while in
his heart to do him a mischief; and when they came into
the desert, he called to mind a certain spring of running
water in the mountains there, called Ez Zehra, whereof
what man soever drank became a woman. So he called
a halt near the place and presently mounting again, said
to the prince, " Hast thou a mind to go with me and look
upon a spring of water nigh at hand ? " The prince assented,
knowing not what should befall him in the future, and
they rode on, unattended, till they came to the spring.
The prince alighted and washed his hands and drank,
whereupon he straightway became a woman. When he
knew what had befallen him, he cried out and wept till he


279


swooned away, and the vizier came up to him and said,
" What ails thee ? " So he told him what had happened,
and the vizier feigned to condole with him and weep for
his affliction, saying, " God the Most High succour thee in
thine affliction ! How came this grievous calamity upon
thee, and we carrying thee, rejoicing, that thou mightest
go in to the king's daughter? Verily, now I know not
whether we shall go to her or not ; but it is thine to decide.
What dost thou bid me do ? " Quoth the prince, " Go back
to my father and tell him what hath befallen me, for I will
not stir hence till this affliction be removed from me or I
die in my grief." So he wrote a letter to his father, telling
him what had happened, and the vizier took it and set
out to return, leaving the troops with the prince and glad
at heart for the success of his plot. As soon as he reached
the king's capital, he went in to him and telling him what
had passed, delivered to him the prince's letter. The
king mourned sore for his son and sent for the wise men
and masters of hidden arts, that they might discover to
him this thing that had happened to the prince, but none
could give him an answer. As for the vizier, he sent to
the lady's cousin, giving him the glad news of the prince's
misfortune, which when he heard, he rejoiced greatly and
thought to marry the princess and wrote to the vizier,
thanking him exceedingly and sending him rich presents
and great store of treasure.

Meanwhile, the prince abode by the stream three days
and nights, eating not nor drinking and committing him-
self, in his strait, unto God (blessed and exalted be He !)
who disappointed! not whoso putteth his trust in Him.
On the fourth night, there came to him a cavalier with a
crown on his head, as he were of the sons of the kings,
and said to him, " O youth, who brought thee hither?"
The prince told him his story, in a voice broken with
fears, and the horseman pitied his case and said to him s


28o


u It was thy father's vizier who brought this thing upon
thee, for he is the only man alive that knows of this spring :
but mount thou behind me and come with me to my dwell-
ing, for thou art my guest this night." " Tell me first who
thou art," said the prince ; and the other answered, saying,
"I am a king's son of the Jinn, as thou a king's son of
mankind ; so take heart and be of good courage, for I will
surely do away thy grief and trouble ; and this is an easy
thing unto me."

So the prince mounted behind the stranger, and they
rode on, leaving the troops, from the first of the day till
midnight, when the King's son of the Jinn said to the
prince, " Knowest thou how many days' travel we have ac-
complished in this time ? " !< Not I," answered the prince,
and the other, " We have a come a full year's journey for a
swift horseman." The prince marvelled at this and said,
*' How shall I do to return to my people?" " That is not
thine affair, but mine," replied the genie. "As soon as
thou art quit of thy trouble, thou shalt be with thy people
in less than the twinkling of an eye ; for that is an easy
matter to me." When the prince heard this, he well-nigh
lost his wits for excess of joy ; it seemed to him as he were
in the mazes of a dream, and he exclaimed, " Glory be to
Him who can restore the wretched to happiness ! " They
fared on all that night, and on the morrow they found them-
selves in a green and smiling country, full of towering trees
and warbling birds and excellent fair gardens and splendid
palaces and running waters and odoriferous flowers. Here
the King's son of the Jinn alighted and bidding the prince
do the like, took him by the hand and carried him into
one of the palaces, where he found a great and puissant
king and abode with him all that day, eating and drinking.

As soon as it was night, the King's son of the Jinn
mounted his courser and taking the prince up behind him,
fared on swiftly till morning, when they found themselves


28 1

in a black and desert country, full of black rocks and
stones, as it were a piece of hell ; and the prince said to
the genie, " What is the name of this land ? " " It is
called the Black Country," answered the other, " and
belongs to one of the Kings of the Jinn, by name Dhoul
Jenahain, against whom v .none of the other kings may pre-
vail, neither may any enter his dominions without his
leave ; so abide thou here, whilst I go ask it. So saying,
he went away and returning after awhile, they fared on
again, till they came to a spring of water welling forth of
a black rock, and the King's son of the Jinn bade the
prince alight and drink. So he lighted down and drank
of the spring, and no sooner had he done so than, by God's
grace, he became a man as before. At this he was beyond
measure rejoiced and said to the genie, " O my brother,
how is this spring called?" Quoth the other, "It is
called the Women's Spring, for that no woman drinks
thereof but she becomes a man : wherefore do thou praise
God the Most High and thank Him for thy restoration and
mount." So the prince prostrated himself in gratitude to
God the Most High, after which he mounted again and
they fared on diligently all that day, till they came to the
genie's palace, where the prince passed the night in all
delight and solace of life.

They spent the next day in eating and drinking till
nightfall, when the genie said to the prince, " Hast thou
a mind to return to thy people ? " " Yes," replied he ;
"for indeed I long for them." Then the king's son of
the Jinn called one of his father's slaves, Rajiz by name,
and said to him, " Take this young man on thy shoulders
and let not the day dawn ere he be with his wife and
father-in-law." " I hear and obey," answered the slave,
and withdrawing awhile, reappeared in the form of an
Afrit. When the prince saw this, he lost his senses for
affright, but the genie said to him, " Fear not ; no harm


282


shall befall thee* Mount thy horse and leap him on to
the Afrit's shoulders." ";Nay," answered he ; "I will leave
my horse with thee arid bestride his shoulders myself."
So he bestrode the Afrit's shoulders and shut his eyes, as
the genie bade him ; whereupon the Afrit rose with him
into the air and ceased not to fly between earth and
heaven, whilst the prince was unconscious, nor was the
last third of the night come before he lighted down with
him on the roof of his father-in-law's palace. Then said
the Afrit, "Alight and open thine eyes; for this is the
palace of thy father-in-law and his daughter." So he
alighted and the Afrit flew away and left him on the roof
of the palace.

When the day broke and the prince recovered from his
trouble, he went down into the palace and his father-in-law,
espying him, came to meet him and marvelled to see him
descend from the roof of. the palace, saying, "We see folk
enter by the doors; but thou comest from the skies."
Quoth the prince, " What God (may He be hallowed and
glorified !) wills, cometh to pass." And he told him all
that had befallen him, from first to last, whereat the king
marvelled and rejoiced in his safety and bade his vizier
make ready splendid bride-feasts. So did he and they
held the marriage festival, after which the prince went
in to his bride and abode with her two months, then
departed with her for his father's capital : but, as for the
lady's cousin, he died of jealousy and despite. When the
prince and his bride drew near his father's city, the king
came out to meet ihem with his troops and viziers, and
so God (blessed and exalted be He !) aided the prince
against his bride's cousin and his father's vizier. And I
pray God the Most High,' added the damsel, 'to aid thee
against thy viziers, O King, and I beseech thee to do me
justice on thy son I *


283


When the King heard this (it being the fourth day), he
bade put his son to death ; but the fourth vizier entered Kt($t
and kissing the ground before him, said, ' May God stablish fclnXtb.
and protect the King ! O King, be deliberate in doing
this thou art resolved upon, for the wise man doth nothing
till he have considered the issue thereof, and the proverb
says, !! He who looks not to the issue of his actions,
fortune is no friend to him ; " and whoso acteth without
consideration, there befalleth him what befell the bath-
keeper with his wife.' 'And what was that?' asked the
King. 'I have heard tell, O King,' answered the vizier,
4 that

THE VIZIER'S SON AND THE BATH KEEPER'S
WIFE.

There was once a bathkeeper, to whom resorted the
notables and chiefs of the folk, and one day there came in
to him a handsome young man of the sons of the viziers,
who was fat and stout of body. So he stood to serve him
and when the young man put off his clothes, he saw not
his yard, for that it was hidden between his thighs, by
reason of the excess of his fat, and there appeared thereof
but what was like unto a filbert. At this, the bathkeeper
fell a-lamenting and smiting hand upon hand, which when
the youth saw, he said to him, "O bathkeeper, what ails
thee to lament thus ? " And he answered, saying, " O my
lord, my lamentation is for thee, because thou art in sore
straits, for all thy fair fortune and goodliness and exceeding
grace, seeing thou hast nought wherewithal to do delight,
like unto other men." Quoth the young man, " Thou sayst
sooth, but thou mindest me of somewhat I had forgotten."
"What is that?" asked the bathkeeper, and the youth
said, " Take this dinar and fetch me a handsome woman,
that I may prove myself on her." So he took the money


284


and betaking himself to his wife, said to her, " O woman,
there is come in to me in the bath a young man of the sons
of the viziers, as he were the moon on the night of her
full ; but he hath no yard like other men, for that which
he hath is but some small matter like unto a filbert. I
lamented over his youth and he gave me this dinar and
begged me to fetch him a woman, on whom he might
approve himself. Now thou art worthier of the money
than another, and no harm shall betide us from this, for I
will protect thee. So do thou sit with him awhile and
laugh at him and take this dinar from him." So she took
the dinar and rising, adorned herself and donned the
richest of her clothes. (Now she was the fairest woman of
her time.) Then she went out with her husband, and he
carried her in to the young man in a privy place. When
she came in to him, she looked at him and finding him
a handsome youth, fair of favour, ,as he were the moon at
its full, was confounded at his beauty and grace ; and
on like wise his heart and wit were amazed at sight of
her. So he rose forthright and locking the door, took the
damsel in his arms and pressed her to his bosom and they
embraced, whereupon the young man's yard rose on end,
as it were that of an ass, and he mounted her breast and
swived her, whilst she sobbed and sighed and writhed and
wriggled under him. Now the bathkeeper was standing
behind the door, awaiting what should betide between
them, and he began to call her, saying, " O Umm Abdal-
lah, enough ! Come out, for the day is long upon thy
sucking child." Quoth the youth, " Go forth to thy child
and come back ; " but she said, " If I go forth from thee,
my soul will depart my body; so I must either leave the
child to die of weeping or let him be reared an orphan,,
without a mother." So she ceased not to abide with him,
till he had done his desire of her half a score times, what
while her husband stood at the door, calling her and crying


285


out and weeping and imploring succour. But none came
to him and he ceased not to do thus, saying, " I will kill
myself!" till at last, finding no way of access to his wife
and being distraught with rage and jealousy he went up to
the top of the bath and casting himself down therefrom,
died.

Moreover, O King,' continued the Vizier, 'there hath
reached me another story of the malice of women.' ' What
is that?' asked the King, and the Vizier said, 'Know,
O King, that

THE WIFE'S DEVICE TO CHEAT HER HUSBAND.

There was once a woman, who had no equal in her day
for beauty and grace and perfection ; and a certain lewd
fellow, setting eyes on her, fell passionately in love with
her, but she was chaste and inclined not to adultery. It
chanced one day that her husband went on a journey to
a certain town, whereupon the young man fell to sending
to her many times a day; but she made him no reply.
At last, he resorted to an old woman, who dwelt hard by,
and complained to her of his suffering for love of the
woman and his longing to enjoy her. Quoth she, "I will
warrant thee this; no harm shall befall thee, for I will
surely bring thee to thy desire, if it please God the Most
High." So he gave her a dinar and went his way. Next
day she went in to the woman and clapping up an ac-
quaintance with her, fell to visiting her daily, eating the
morning with her and the evening meal and carrying away
food for her children, Moreover, she used to sport and
jest with her, till the wife became corrupted and could
not endure an hour without her company.

Now she was wont, when she left the lady's house, to
feed a bitch, that was in that quarter, with the fragment*


286


that remained over, and thus she did day by day, till the
bitch became fond of her and followed her wherever she
went. One day she took a cake of dough and putting
therein much pepper and butter, gave it to the bitch to
eat, whereupon the animal's eyes began to water, for the
heat of the pepper, and she followed the old woman,
weeping. When the lady saw this, she was amazed and
said to the old woman, " O my mother, what ails this bitch
to weep?" u O my daughter," answered she, "hers is
a strange story. Know that she was once a most lovely
and accomplished young lady and a close friend of mine.
A young man of the quarter fell in love with her and his
passion increased on him, till he took to his pillow, and
he sent to her many times, begging her to have com-
passion on him, but she refused, albeit I gave her good
counsel, saying, £ O my daughter, have pity on him and
consent to that which he wishes.' She gave no heed to
my advice, until, at last, the young man's patience failing
him, he complained to one of his friends, who cast an
enchantment on her and changed her into a bitch. When
she saw what had befallen her and that there was none
to pity her save myself, she came to my house and began
to fawn on me and lick my hands and feet and whine and
shed tears, till I recognized her and said to her, ' How
Mtgfji °ft en did I not warn thee ? But my advice profited thee
folxxxfo* nothing.' However, I had compassion on her case and
kept her by me ; and as often as she bethinks herself of
her former estate, she weeps thus."

When the lady heard this, she was taken with great fear
and said, "By Allah, O my mother, thou affrightest me
with this thy story.'*' "Why so?" asked the old woman.
"Because/ answered the lady, "a certain handsome young
man fell in love with me and hath sent many times to me,
but hitherto I have repelled him ; and now I fear lest there
befall me the like of what befell this bitch." u O my


287

daughter/' rejoined the old woman, " look thou to what I
counsel thee and beware of crossing me, for I am in great
fear for thee. If thou know not his abiding-place, de-
scribe him to me, that I may fetch him to thee, and let not
any one's heart be angered against thee." So the lady
described him to her, and she feigned not to know him
and said, "When I go out, I will ask after him." But
when she left the lady, she went straight to the young man
and said to him, " Be of good cheer, for I have played
with the girl's wits, [so that she hath consented ; ] so come
thou to-morrow at noonday and wait at the end of the
street, till I come and carry thee to her house, where thou
shalt take thine ease with her the rest of the day and all
night long." At this the young man rejoiced greatly and
gave her half a score dinars, saying, " When I have gotten
my desire [of her,] I will give thee other ten dinars."

Then she returned to the lady and said to her, " I have
seen him and spoken with him on the matter. I found
him exceeding wroth with thee and minded to do thee
hurt, but I plied him with fair words till he agreed to come
to-morrow at the time of the call to midday prayer."
When the lady heard this, she rejoiced exceedingly and
said, " O my mother, if he keep his promise, I will give
thee ten dinars." Quoth the old woman, " Look to none
but me to bring him to thee." When the next day came,
she said to the lady, " Make ready the morning meal and
adorn thyself and don thy richest clothes and ornaments,
whilst I go and fetch him to thee." Accordingly, she clad
herself in her richest apparel and made ready food, whilst
the old woman went out to look for the young man, The
latter came not and she went round looking for him, but
could come by no news of him ; so she said to herself
"What is to be done? Shall the food she has made ready
be wasted and I lose the reward she promised me ? In-
deed, I will not lose my pains thus, but will look her out


288


another man and carry him to her." So she walked about
the streets till her eye fell on a handsome and elegant
young man, who bore on his face the traces of travel.

Now this was the lady's husband ; but she knew it not ;
so she went up to him and saluted him, saying, " Hast
thou a mind to meat and drink and a girl adorned and
ready?" "Where is this to be had?" asked he. "At
home, in my house," answered she and carrying him to his
own house, knocked at the door. The lady opened to them
and hastened in again, to make an end of her dressing and
perfuming ; whilst the old woman brought the husband
into the saloon and made him sit down. Presently, in
came the lady, who no sooner set eyes on her husband
than she knew him and guessed how the case stood ;
nevertheless, she was not taken aback and forthwith be-
thought her of a device to hoodwink him. " Is this how
thou keepest our contract ? " cried she. "Hou canst thou
betray me and deal thus with me ? Know that, when
I heard of thy coming, I sent this old woman to try thee
and she hath made thee fall into that against which I
warned thee : so now I am certified of thine affair and that
thou hast broken faith with me. I thought thee chaste till
now, till I saw thee, with my own eyes, in this old woman's
company and knew that thou didst frequent loose women."

So saying, she pulled off her slipper and fell to beating
him about the head, whilst he excused himself and swore
to her by God the Most High that he had never in his life
been untrue to her nor had done aught of that whereof she
suspected him. But she stinted not to weep and scream
and beat him, crying out and saying, " Come to my help,
O Muslims ! " till he laid hold of her mouth with his hand
and she bit it. Moreover, he humbled himself to her and
kissed her hands and feet, whilst she continued to cuff him
and would not be appeased. At last, she made a privy
sign to the old woman to come and hold her hand from


289


him. So she came up to her and kissed her hands and
feet, till she made peace between them and they sat down
together ; whereupon the husband began to kiss her hands,
saying, " God requite thee with all good, for that thou hast
delivered me from her ! " And the old woman marvelled
at the wife's cunning and ready wit. This, then, O King,'
said the vizier, ' is one of many instances of the craft and
malice and perfidy of women.'

When the King heard this story, he was persuaded by
it and turned from his purpose to kill his son ; but, on the
fifth day, the damsel came in to him with a cup of poison tNTtgfjt
in her hand, calling aloud for help and buffeting her cheeks fclxXJCtii
and face, and said to him, 4 O King, either thou shalt do
me justice and avenge me on thy son, or I will drink
this cup of poison and die, and my blood will be on thy
head at the Day of Resurrection. Thy viziers accuse me
of malice and perfidy, but there be none in the world more
perfidious than men. Hast thou not heard the story of the
goldsmith and the Cashmere singing-girl ? ' 4 What befell
them, O damsel ? ' asked the King ; and she answered,
saying, c It hath come to my knowledge, O august King,
that

THE GOLDSMITH AND THE CASHMERE
SINGING-GIRL.

There lived once, in a city of Persia, a goldsmith who
delighted in women and in drinking wine. One day, being
in the house of one of his friends, he saw painted on the
wall the figure of a beautiful damsel, never beheld eyes a
fairer or a more pleasant. He looked at the picture again
and again, marvelling at its beauty, and fell so desperately
in love with it, that he sickened for passion and came near
to die. It chanced that one of his friends came to visit
him and sitting down by him, enquired how he did and

VOL V. 19


290


what ailed him. " O my brother," replied the goldsmith s
"that which ails me is love, and it befell on this wise.
I saw the figure of a woman painted on the wall of my
brother such an one's house and became enamoured of it."
Quoth the other, "This was of thy lack of wit; how
couldst thou fall in love with a painted figure on a wall,
a thing that can neither harm nor profit, that seeth
not neither heareth, that neither taketh nor withholdeth."
'* Surely," said the sick man, " he who painted yonder
picture must have limned it after the likeness of some
beautiful woman." "Belike," rejoined his friend, "he
painted it from imagination." " In any case," replied the
goldsmith, " I am dying for love of the picture, and if
there live the original thereof in the world, I pray God to
keep me in life, till I see her."

When those who were present went out, they enquired
for the painter of the picture and finding that he had de-
parted to another town, wrote him a letter, complaining of
their friend's case and asking whether he had drawn the
figure of his own invention or copied it from a living
model; to which he replied that be had painted it after
a certain singing-girl belonging to one of the viziers in
the city of Cashmere in the land of Hind. When the
goldsmith heard this, he set out for Cashmere, where
he arrived, after much travail, and tarried awhile. There
he clapped up an acquaintance with a certain druggist, a
fellow of a keen and sprightly wit, and being one day in
company with him, questioned him of their king and his
polity; to which the other answered, saying, • " Our king is
just and righteous in his governance, equitable and benefi-
cent to his subjects, and misliketh nothing in the world
save sorcerers ; but, whenever a sorcerer or sorceress falls
into his hands, he casts them into a pit without the city
and there leaves them to die of hunger." Then he
questioned him of the king's viziers, and the druggist told


291


him of each vizier, his fashion and condition, till the talk
came round to the singing-girl and he told him that she
belonged to such a vizier.

The goldsmith took note of the tatter's abiding-place
and waited some days, till he had devised a scheme to his
mind ; and one night of rain and thunder and stormy
winds, he provided himself with thieves' tackle and re-
paired to the house of the vizier in question, where he
grappled a rope ladder with grappling irons to the battle-
ments and climbed up to the roof of the palace. Thence
he descended to the inner court and making his way into
the harem, found all the slave-girls lying asleep, each on
her own couch and amongst them a damsel, as she were the
moon on its fourteenth night, lying on a couch of alabaster
and covered with a coverlet of cloth of gold. At her head
stood a candle of ambergris, and at her feet another, each
in a candlestick of glittering gold, and under her pillow
lay a casket of silver, in which were her jewels. He raised
the coverlet and drawing near her, considered her straitly,
and behold, it was she whom he desired and of whom
he was come in quest. So he took out a knife and
wounded her in the hinder parts, a manifest [but super-
ficial] wound, whereupon she awoke in terror ; but, when
she saw him, she was afraid to cry out, thinking he came
to steal her jewels ; so she said to him, " Take the box and
what is therein, but slay me not, for it will profit thee
nothing." So he took the box and went away.

On the morrow, he donned clothes after the fashion of ^ftgfji
men of learning and doctors of the law and taking the folxxjebti
casket, went in therewith to the king of the city, before
whom he kissed the earth and said to him, " O king, I
am a loyal well-wisher to thee and come hither, a pilgrim
to thy court from the land of Khorassan, attracted by the
report of thy just governance and righteous dealing with
thy subjects and minded to be under thy standard. I


292


reached this city yestereve and finding the gate shut }
lay down to sleep without : but, as I lay betwixt sleep
and wake, I saw four women come up, one riding on a
broom, another on a wine-jar, a third on an oven-peel
and a fourth on a black bitch, and knew that they were
witches making for the city. One of them came up to
me and kicked me with her foot and beat me grievously
with a fox's tail she had in her hand, whereat I was wroth
and smote her with a knife I had with me, wounding her
in the hinder parts, as she turned to flee from me. When
she felt the wound, she fled before me and in her flight
let drop this casket, which I picked up and opening,
found therein these costly jewels. Wherefore do thou
take it, for I have no need of it, being a wanderer in
the mountains, who have put away the world from my
heart and renounced it and all that is in it, seeking [only]
the favour of God the Most High." Then he set the
casket before the king and went away. The king opened
the box and emptying out all the trinkets it contained?
fell to turning them over, till he chanced upon a necklace
of which he had made gift to the vizier to whom the girl
belonged. So he called the vizier in question and said to
him, " This is the necklace I gave thee ? " He knew it
and answered, "It is; and I gave it to a singing-girl of
mine." Quoth the king, "Fetch her to me forthwith."
So he fetched her to him, and he said, "Uncover her
hinder parts and see if there be a wound therein or no."
The vizier accordingly bared her backside and finding a
knife wound there, said, "Yes, O my lord, there is &
wound." Then said the king, " Doubtless, this is the
witch of whom the devotee told me," and bade cast her
into the witches' well So they carried her thither forthwith.

As soon as it was night and the goldsmith knew that
his plot had succeeded, he repaired to the pit, taking with
him a purse of a thousand dinars, and entering into con-


293


verse with the warder, sat talking with him till a third
part of the night was past, when he broached the matter
to him, saying, " Know, O my brother, that this girl is
innocent of that they lay to her charge and that it was
I brought this calamity upon her." Then he told him the
whole story, adding, " Take this purse of a thousand
dinars and give me the damsel, that I may carry her to
my own land, for the money will profit thee more than
keeping her in prison; moreover God will requite thee
for us, and we will both, offer up prayers for thy safety and
prosperity." When the warder heard this story, he mar-
velled exceedingly at this device and taking the money,
delivered the girl to the goldsmith, on condition that he
should not abide one hour with her in the city. So the
goldsmith took the girl and fared on with her, without
ceasing, till he reached his own country, and so he attained
his desire. See then, Q King,' said the' damsel, ' the
malice of men and their wiles. Now thy viziers hinder
thee from doing me justice [on thy son], but to-morrow
both thou and I will stand before the Just Judge, and He
shall do me justice on thee, O King.'

When the King heard this, he commanded to put his
son to death, but the fifth vizier came in to him and
kissing the earth before him, said, ' O mighty King, delay
and hasten not to slay thy son, for oftentimes haste
engendered! repentance; and I fear for thee lest thou
repent, even as did the man who never laughed again. 5
'And how was that, O Vizier ? ' asked the King. 4 1 have
heard tell, O King,' answered the Vizier, e that

THE MAN WHO NEVER LAUGHED AGAIN,

There was once a man who was rich in lands and houses

and goods and slaves 5 and he died and went to the mercy
of God the Most High, leaving a young son, who, when,
he grew up, gave himself to feasting and hearing music


2Q4


and singing and wasted his substance in gifts and prodi-
gality, till he had squandered all the money his father left
l^ffjljt him. Then he betook himself to selling his slaves and
&lXJO;blft. lands and houses and spent the proceeds on like wise, till
he was reduced to beggary and must needs labour for his
living. He abode thus a year's space, at the end of which
time he was sitting one day under a wall, awaiting who
should hire him, when there came up to him a man of
comely aspect and apparel and saluted him. " O uncle, w
said the young man, "hast thou known me aforetime?"
"Not so, O my son," replied the other, "I know thee not
at all ; but I see the trace of gentle breeding on thee,
despite thy present case." "O uncle," rejoined the poor
man, " needs must Fate and fore-ordained fortune be accom-
plished; but, O uncle, bright of face, hast thou any occasion
wherein thou wouldst employ me?" "Yes," said the
other, " I wish to employ thee jn an easy matter." "What
is it ? " asked the young man, and the stranger, " I have
with me ten old men in one house, but we have none to
serve us ; so, if thou wilt take service with us, thou shalt
have food and clothing to thy heart's content, besides what
cometh to thee of money and other goods, and haply God
will restore thee thy fortune by our means." " With all
my heart," replied the youth. " But," said the other, " I
have a condition to impose on thee." Quoth he, " What
is that ? " And the old man said, " O my son, it is that
thou keep our secret in what thou seest us do, and if thou
see us weep, that thou question us not of the cause of our
weeping." "It is well, O uncle," replied the young manj
whereupon the other bade him, " Come with me, O my
son, with the blessing of God the Most High ! "

So he followed him to the bath ? where he caused cleanse
Ms body of the crusted dirt s after which he sent for a
handsome garment of linen and clad, him therein. Then
lie carried him to a lofty and spacious house, wherein were


295


sitting-chambers facing one anothei and saloons, in each
a fountain of water, with the birds warbling over it, and
windows on every side, giving upon a fair garden within
the house. The old man brought him into one of the
sitting-chambers, which was paved and lined with vari
coloured marble and spread with silken carpets, and the
roof thereof decorated with ultramarine and glittering gold ;
and here he found ten old men in mourning apparel, seated
opposite one another, weeping and wailing. He marvelled
at their case and was about to ask the reason, when he
remembered the condition and held his peace. Then he
who had brought him delivered to him a chest containing
thirty thousand dinars and said to him, " O my son, spend
from this chest what is fitting for our entertainment and
thine own ; and be thou faithful and remember that where-
with I charged thee as to secrecy." " I hear and obey,"
answered he and served them days and nights, till one of
them died, whereupon his fellows washed him and shrouded
him and buried him in a garden behind the house ; nor did
death cease to take them, one after another, till there
remained but he who had hired the youth.

Then the two dwelt together alone for years and years,
nor was there with them a third save God the Most High,
till the old man fell sick ; and when the other despaired of
his life, he went up to him and condoling with him, said,
" O uncle, I have served you twelve years and have not
failed of your service a single hour, but have been loyal
and faithful to you and served you with my might." " Yes,

my son," answered the old man, " thou hast served us
[well; but now] my comrades are gone to the mercy of
God (to whom belong might and majesty) and needs must

1 die also." "O my lord," said the other, "thou art in
danger of death and I would fain have thee acquaint me
with the cause of your weeping and wailing and of your
unceasing mourning and lamentation." "0 my son/'


296


answeied the old man, "it concerns thee not to know this>
so importune me not of what I may not do : for I have
vowed to'God the Most High that I would acquaint none of
His creatures with this, lest he be afflicted with what befell
me and my comrades. If, then, thou desire to be delivered
from that into which we fell, look thou open not yonder
door," and pointed to a certain part of the house ; " but,
if thou have a mind to suffer what we have suffered, then
open it and thou shall learn the cause of that: which thou
hast seen us do ; and whenas thou knowest it, thou wilt
repent, what time repentance will avail thee not/' Then
tb3"lgf)t his sickness increased on him and he accomplished his
fttaxk, term [of life] and departed to the presence of his Lord ;
and the young man washed him with his own hands and
shrouded him and buried him with his comrades ; after
which he abode alone in the house and took possession of
all that was therein.

Yet he was uneasy and troubled concerning the case of
the old man, till, one day, as he sat pondering the words of
his dead master and his injunction not to open the door,
he suddenly bethought himself to go and look for it So
he repaired to the part whither the dead man had pointed
and sought till, in a dark and unfrequented corner, he-
found a little door, over which the spider had spun its
webs and which was fastened with four locks of steel.
Then he recalled the old man's warning and restrained
himself and went away ; and he held aloof from it seven
days, whilst all the time his heart would have him open it
On the eighth day his curiosity got the better of him and
he said, "Come what will, I must open the door and see
what will happen to me. Nothing can avert what is de-
creed and fore-ordained of God the Most High nor doth
aught befall but by His will/' So saying, he rose and
broke the locks and opening the door, found himself in &
narrow passage, which he followed for three hours, at th@


end of which time he came out 'on the shore of a vast
ocean and fared on along the beach, marvelling at this sea,
[of which he had no knowledge] and turning right and
left, till, presently, a great eagle swooped down upon him
and seizing him in its talons, flew away with him betwixt
heaven and earth, till it came to an island in the midst of
the sea, where it cast him down and flew away, leaving him
dazed and knowing not whither he should go.

After awhile, as he sat pondering his case, he caught
sight of the sails of a ship in the midst of the sea, as it
were a star in the mid-heaven ; and his heart clave to it,
so haply his deliverance might be therein. He continued
gazing at the ship, till it drew near 3 when he saw that it
was a galley builded all of ivory and ebony, inlaid with
glittering gold, with oars of sandal and aloes-wood. In
it were ten damsels, high-bosomed maids, ,as they were
moons, who, when they saw him, came ashore to him and
kissed his hands, saying, " Thou art the king, the bride-
groom ! " Then there came to him a young lady, as she
were the sun shining in the cloudless sky, bearing a silken
napkin, wherein were a royal robe and a crown of gold
set with all manner rubies and pearls, She threw the
robe over him and set the crown on his head, after which
the damsels bore him in their arms to the galley, where
he found all kinds of silken carpets and hangings of
various colours. Then they spread the sails and stretched
out into mid-ocean.

[Quoth the young man] Indeed, when they put to sea
with me, meseemed it was a dream and I knew not whither
they went with me. Presently, we drew near to land, and
I saw the shore full of troops magnificently arrayed and
clad in complete steel, none knoweth their number save
'God (blessed and exalted be He i) As soon as the galley
had made fast to the land, they brought me five horses of
noble breeds, housed . and saddled with goldj inlaid with


298


all manner pearls and precious stones. I chose out one of
them and mounted it, whilst they led the four others before
me. Then they raised the banners and the standards over
my head, whilst the troops ranged themselves right and left,
and we set out, with drums beating and cymbals clashing,
and rode on, — whilst I debated in myself whether I were
on sleep or on wake, believing not in that my estate, but
taking all this for the pageant of a dream, — till we drew
near to a green champaign, full of palaces and gardens
and trees and streams and flowers and birds chanting the
praises of God, the One, the Victorious. At our approach,
an army poured out from amid the palaces and gardens,
as it were the torrent, when it pours down [from the
mountains,] and overflowed the plain. The troops halted
at a little distance from me and there rode forth from
amongst them a king, preceded by some of his chief
officers on foot.

He came up to the young man and dismounted, where-
upon the latter dismounted also, and they saluted each
other after the goodliest fashion. Then said the King,
"Come with us, for thou art my guest." So they took
horse again and rode on in great state, conversing as they
went, till they came to the royal palace, where they
alighted and the king taking the young man by the hand,
^figljt led him into the palace, followed by his suite, and making
tJJCC* him sit down on a throne of gold, seated himself beside
him. Then he unbound the chinband from his face ; and
behold, the king was a young lady, like the sun shining in
the cloudless sky, accomplished in beauty and elegance
and amorous grace and all perfection. Quoth she to the
young man, who was lost in wonder at her beauty and
grace and at the splendour and affluence he saw about
him, " Know, O King, that I am the queen of this country
and that ail the troops thou hast seen, whether horse Of
foot, are women, there is no man amongst them : for m


299

this our state the men delve and sow and reap and occupy
themselves with the tillage of the earth and other me-
chanical crafts and arts, whilst the women govern and
fill the great offices of state and bear arms/'

At this he marvelled past measure and as they were
in discourse, in came a tall gray-haired old woman of
venerable and majestic aspect, and it was told him that
this was the vizieress. Quoth the queen to her, "Bring
me the Cadi and the witnesses." So she went out to do
this, and the queen, turning to him, conversed with him
in friendly fashion and enforced herself to reassure him
and do away his shamefastness with speech blander than
the zephyr, saying, " Art thou content to take me to wife ? "
Thereupon he arose and would have kissed the earth be-
fore her ; but she forbade him and he replied, saying, " O
my lady, I am the least of thy servants." " S>eest thou all
these servants and soldiers and riches and treasures?"
asked she ; and he answered, "Yes." Quoth she, '"' All
these are at thy commandment ; dispose of them and give
and bestow as seemeth good to thee." Then she pointed
to a closed door and said, "All these things are at thy
disposal, save yonder door ; that shalt thou not open, else
wilt thou repent, when repentance will avail thee not."
Hardly had she made an end of speaking when the
vizieress entered, followed by the Cadi and the witnesses,
all old women of reverend and majestic aspect, with their
hair streaming over their shoulders ; and the queen bade
them draw up the contract of marriage between herself and
the young man. So they performed the marriage-ceremony
and the queen made a great bride-feast, to which she bade
all the troops ; and after they had eaten and drunken, he
went in to his bride and found her a clean maid.

So he did away her maidenhead and abode with bes
seven years in ail delight and solace of life, till, one day 5
he bethought himself of the forbidden door and said in


300


himself, " Except there were therein treasures greater and
finer than any I have seen, she had not forbidden me there-
from.* 9 So he rose and opened the door, when, lo, behind
it was the very bird that had brought him to the island,
and it said to him, " An ill welcome t© a face that shall
never prosper ! " When he saw it and heard what it said,
he fled from it j but it followed him and seizing him in its
talons, flew with him an hour's journey betwixt heaven
and earth 5 till it set him down in the place whence it had
first carried him off and flew away. When he came to his
senses, he called to mind his late great and glorious estate
and all the honour and fair fortune he had lost and fell to
weeping and wailing.

He abode two months on the sea-shore, where the bird
had set him down, hoping yet to return to his wife, till,
as he sat one night wakeful, mourning and musing, he
heard one speaking and saying, " How great were the
delights ! Far, far from thee is the return of that which
is past ! " When he heard this, he redoubled in his re-
grets and despaired of recovering his wife and his late fair
estate ; so he returned, weary and broken-hearted, to the
house where he had dwelt with the old men and knew
that they had fared even as he and that this was the cause
of their weeping and mourning; wherefore he held them
excused. Then, being overcome with chagrin and regret,
he took to his chamber and gave himself up to mourning
and lamentation ; and he ceased not to weep and lament
and left eating and drinking and pleasant scents and
laughter, till he died and they buried him beside the old
men. See, then, O King/ continued the Vizier, 4 what
cometh of haste ; verily, it is unpraiseworthy and begetteth
repentance ; and in this I give thee true and loyal counsel'
3Cfgf)t When the King heard the Vizier's story, he turned from
tUCCIo slaying his son ; but, on the sixth day, the favourite came
in to him with a naked knife in her hand and said to him 9


30i

' Know, O my lord, that, except thou hearken to my com
plaint and protect thy right and thine honour against these
thy vizisrs, who are banded together against me, to do me
wrong, I will kill myself with this knife, [and my blood
will testify against thee on the Day of Judgment]. Indeed,
they pretend that women are full of tricks and malice and
perfidy and design by this to defeat me of my right and
hinder the King from doing me justice ; but s behold, I
will prove to thee that men are more perfidious than
women by the story of a king of the kings and how he
gained access to the wife of a certain merchant.' 1 And
what passed between them ? ' asked the King. 4 1 have
heard tell, O august King,' replied she, ' that

THE KING'S SON AND THE MERCHANT'S WIFE.

A certain jealous merchant had a beautiful wife ; and of
the excess of his fearfulness and jealousy of her, he would
not abide with her in any town, but built her a pavilion
without the city, apart from all other buildings, and forti-
fied it with high walls and strong doors, secured with
curious locks ; and when he had occasion to go into the
city, he locked the doors and hung the keys about his
neck. One day, when the merchant was abroad, the king's
son of the city came forth, to take his pleasure in the open
country without the walls, and coming to the solitary
pavilion, stood still to examine it. Presently, he caught
sight of a lovely lady looking out of one of the windows
and being smitten with amazement at her grace and beauty,
cast about for a means of getting to her, but could find
none. So he called to one of his attendants,, who brought
him pen and paper and inkhorn, and wrote her a letter,
setting forth his case for love of "her. Then he set it on
the point of an arrow and shot it at the pavilion, and it fell


302


is the garden, where the lady was then walking with her
maidens. She bade one of the latter hasten and bring her
the letter, for she could read writing ; and when she had
read it and saw what he said in it of his love and passion
and longing, she wrote him a reply, to the effect that she
was smitten with a yet fiercer passion for him and threw
the letter down to him from one of the windows of the
pavilion. When he saw her, he picked up the reply and
after reading it, came under the window and said to her,
"Let me down a string, that I may send thee this key,
which do thou take and keep by thee." So she let down
a string and he tied the key to it.

Then he went away and repairing to one of his father's
viziers, complained to him of his passion for the lady and
that he could not live without her ; and the vizier said ?
" And how dost thou bid me contrive ? " Quoth the
prince, " I would have thee lay me in a chest and commit
it to the merchant, feigning to him that it is thine and
desiring him to keep it for thee in his country-house some
days, that I may have my will of her ; then do thou de-
mand it back from him." The vizier answered, " With all
my heart." So the prince returned to his palace and
fixing the padlock, the key whereof he had given the lady,
on a chest he had by him, entered the latter, whereupon
the vizier locked it upon him and setting it on a mule s
carried it to the pavilion of the merchant. The latter,
seeing the vizier, came forth to him and kissed his hands s
saying, " Belike our lord the vizier hath some need or
business which we may have the pleasure of accomplishing
for him?" "Yes," answered the vizier; "I would have
thee set this chest in the priviest place in thy house and
keep it till I seek it of thee." So the merchant made the
porter carry it in and set It down in one of his store-
houses, after which he went out upon some occasion of his.
As soon as he was gone, his wife went up to the chest and


303


unlocked it with the key the prince had given her, where-
upon there came forth a youth like the moon. When she
saw him, she donned her richest apparel and carried him
to her sitting-chamber, where they abode seven days s
eating and drinking and making merry ; and as often as
her husband came home, she put the prince back into the
chest and locked it upon him.

One day, the king asked for his son and the vizier
hurried off to the merchant's [town] house and sought of
him the chest. The merchant accordingly repaired in jNTi$t)t
haste to his pavilion, at a time other than of his wont, and 'QXtll.
knocked at the door. When his wife v/as ware of him, she
hurried the prince back into the chest, but, in her con-
fusion, forgot to lock it. The merchant bade the porters
take it up and carry it to his house in the town. So they
took up the box by the lid, whereupon it flew open and
discovered the prince lying within. When the merchant
saw him and knew him for the king's son, he went out to
the vizier and said to him, "Go in, thou, and take the
King's son ; for none of us may lay hands on him." So the
vizier went in and taking the prince, went away with him.
As soon as they were gone, the merchant put away his wife
and swore that he would never marry again. And I have
heard tell also, O King,' continued the damsel, ' that

THE PAGE WHO FEIGNED TO KNOW THE
SPEECH OF BIRDS.

A certain man of condition once entered the slave-market
and saw a page put up for sale ; so he bought him and
carrying him home, gave him in charge to his wife, with
whom he abode awhile. One day the man said to his
wife, "Go forth to-morrow to the garden and take thy
pleasure therein." And she replied, "With all my heart sr


304


When the page heard this, he made ready in secret meat
and drink and fruits and dessert and sallied forth with
them privily that night to the garden, where he laid the
meat under one tree, the drink under another and the
fruits and conserves under a third, in the way his mistress
should pass. Next morning, the husband bade him accom-
pany the lady to the garden ; so she took horse and riding
thither with him, dismounted and entered.

Presently, as they were walking about, a crow croaked,
and the page said, " Thou sayst truly," whereupon his
mistress said to him, " Dost thou know what the crow
said?" "Yes, O my lady/ 5 answered he; "he said,
' Under yonder tree is meat ; go and eat it.' " So she went
up to the tree and finding a dish of meat ready dressed,
was assured that the youth understood the speech of birds
and marvelled exceedingly. They ate of the meat and
walked about awhile, taking their pleasure in the garden,,
till the crow croaked a second time, and the page again
replied, a Thou sayst well." " What said he ? " asked the
lady, and the page, " O my lady, he says that under such
a tree is a pitcher of old wine and a gugglet of water
flavoured with musk." So she went up to the tree and
finding the wine and water there, redoubled in wonder-
ment and the page was magnified in her eyes. They sat
down and drank, then arose and walked in another part
of the garden. Presently, the crow croaked again and the
page said, " Right." Quoth the lady, " What says he now ? "
and the page, " He says that under yonder tree are fruits
and confections." So they went thither and found all as
he said and sat down and ate. Then they walked about
again till the crow croaked a fourth time, whereupon the
page took up a stone and cast it at him. Quoth she,
" What said he, that thou shouldst stone him ? " 46 O my
lady," answered he, "he said what I cannot tell tliee/ s
46 Say on." rejoined she, " and be not abashed, for there


305


is nought between me and thee." But he ceased not to
say, No," and she to press him to speak, till at last she
conjured him to tell her, and he answered, " The crow
said to me, { Do with thy mistress even as doth her
husband.' "

When she heard this, she laughed till she fell backward
and said, " This is a light matter, and I may not cross
thee therein." So saying, she went up to a tree and
spreading the carpet under it, [lay down and] called to
him to come and do her need, when, behold, her husband,
who had followed them unawares and saw this, called out
to the page, saying, " Harkye, boy ! What ails thy mistress
to lie there, weeping ? " " O my lord," answered the page,
" she fell off the tree and was [all but] killed ; and none
but God (may He be exalted and glorified !) restored
her to thee. Wherefore she lay down awhile to recover
herself." When the lady saw her husband standing by
her, she rose and made a show of weakness and pain,
saying, <s O my back ! O my sides ! Come to my help, O
my friends ! I shall never survive this." So her husband
was deceived and sending the page for the horse, set her
thereon and carried her home, the boy holding one stirrup
and the man the other and saying, " God vouchsafe thee
ease and recovery I "

These then, O King,' said the damsel, 4 are some in-
stances of the craft and perfidy of men ; wherefore let not
thy viziers turn thee from succouring me and doing me
justice. Then she wept, and when the King saw her
weeping, (for she was the dearest to him of all his slave-
girls,) he once more commanded to put his son to death ;
but the sixth vizier entered and kissing the earth before
Mm, said, 6 May God the Most High advance the King !
Verily I am a loyal counsellor to thee, in that I counsel l3ffgf)i
thee to deal deliberately in the matter of thy son ; for tsxtilh
falsehood is as smoke and truth is a strongly stablishect
vol. v. so


306


[fortress] ; yea, and the light thereof dispels the darkness
of falsehood. Know that the perfidy of women is great s
even as saith God the Most High in His Holy Book,
"Verily, the malice of you [women] is great." And indeed
I have heard tell of a certain woman who befooled the
chiefs of the state on such wise as never did any before
her.' 'And how was that?' asked the King. 1 I have
heard tell, O King,' answered the vizier, ' that

THE LADY AND HER FIVE SUITORS.

A certain woman of the daughters of the merchants was
married to a man who was a great traveller. It chanced
once that he set out for a far country and was absent so
long that his wife, for pure weariness, fell in love with a
handsome young man of the sons of the merchants, who
returned her passion, and they loved each other with an
exceeding love. One day, the youth fell out with another
man, who lodged a complaint against him with the chief
of the police, and he cast him into prison. When the
news came to his mistress, she well-nigh lost her wits and
rising, donned her richest clothes and repaired to the
house of the chief of the police, whom she saluted and
presented with a petition to the effect that the prisoner
was her brother, who had been unjustly accused and con-
demned on false witness, and that she had none other to
come in to her nor to provide for her support and beseech-
ing him of his grace to release him. When the magistrate
had read the petition, he cast his eyes on her and fell in
love with her ; so he said to her, " Go into the house, till
I bring him before me ; then will I send for thee and thou
shalt take him." "O my lord," answered she, "I have
none save God the Most High. Indeed, I am a stranger
and may not enter any one's house." Quoth the chief of
the police, £S I will not let him go ? except thou enter my


307


house and I take my will of thee." " If it must be so,"
rejoined she, "thou must come to my house and sit and
sleep and rest the whole day there." " And where is thy
house ? " asked he. " In such a place," answered she and
appointed him for such a time.

Then she went out from him, leaving his heart taken
with love of her, and repaired to the Cadi of the city, to
whom said she, " O my lord the Cadi, look into my case,
and thy reward be with God the Most High ! " Quoth he,
"Who hath wronged thee?" and she answered, saying,
"O my lord, I have a brother and I have none but him,
and it is on his account that I come to thee ; for that the
chief of the police hath imprisoned him for a wrong-doer,
on the evidence of false witnesses. [Indeed, he is wronged]
and I beseech thee to intercede for him with the chief of
the police." When the Cadi looked on her, he fell in love
with her and said to her, " Enter the house and rest awhile
with my women, whilst I send to the chief of the police to
release thy brother. If I knew the forfeit that is upon
him, I would pay it out of my own monies, so I may have
my desire of thee, for thou pleasest me with thy sweet
speech." Quoth she, " If thou, O my lord, do thus, we
must not blame others." But the Cadi answered, saying,
" An thou wilt not come in, go thy ways." Then said she,
" If thou wilt have it so, O my lord, it will be safer and
better in my house than in thine, for here are slave-girls
and servants and goers-in and comers-out, and indeed I
am a woman who knows nought of this fashion ; but
necessity compels." " And where is thy house ? " asked the
Cadi. "In such a place," answered she and appointed
him for the same time as the chief of the police.

Then she went to the Vizier, to whom she preferred her
petition for the release of her [pretended] brother from
prison: but he also required her of herself, saying, " Suffer
me to have my desire of thee and I will set thy brother


3o8


free." Quoth she, " If thou wilt have it so, be it in my
nouse, for there it will be safer both for me and for thee.
It is not far distant and thou knowest that which behoveth
us [women] of cleanliness and elegance." " Where is thy
house ? " asked he. " In such a place," answered she and
appointed him for the same time as the two others.

Then she went out from him to the King of the city and
told him her story and sought of him her brother's release.
" Who imprisoned him ? " asked he ; and she replied,
{S The chief of the police." When the King heard her
speech, it transfixed his heart with the arrows of love and
he bade her enter, the palace with him, that he might send
to the Cadi and release her brother. " O King," answered
she, " this thing is easy to thee, whether I will or not ; and
if the King will indeed have this of me, it is of my good
fortune ; but, if he will come to my house, he will do me
the more honour, even as saith the poet :

Friends, have ye seen or heard o' the visit of a wight Whose virtues are
indeed illustrious in my sight ? "

Quoth the King, " We will not cross thee in this." So
she told him where her house was and appointed him for
the same time as the three others,
IjKtfo. Then she left him and betaking herself to a carpenter,
said to him, " I would have thee make me a cabinet with
four compartments, one above another, each with its door
to lock up. Let me know thy hire and I will give it
thee." " My hire will be four dinars," replied the man ;
" but, O noble lady, if thou wilt vouchsafe me thy favours,
I will ask nothing else of thee." " If thou wilt have it so/'
rejoined she, "then make the cabinet with five compart-
ments, each to lock up." " It is well," said he ; " sit down s

my lady, and I will make it for thee forthright, and after

1 will come to thee at my leisure." So she sat down,
whilst he fell to work on the cabinet, and when he had


309


made an end of it, she carried it home and set it up in the
sitting-chamber. Then she took four gowns and carried
them to the dyer, who dyed them each of a different colour ;
after which she busied herself in making ready meat and
drink and fruits and flowers and perfumes.

When it was the appointed time, she donned her costliest
apparel and scented and adorned herself, then spread the
room with various kinds of rich carpets and sat down to
await who should come. The Cadi was the first to appear,
and when she saw him, she rose and kissed the earth
before him, then made him sit down by her on the couch
and fell to jesting and toying v/ith him. By and by, he
would have her do his desire, but she said, " O my lord, put
off thy clothes and turban and don this yellow cassock and
this kerchief, whilst I bring thee meat and drink ; and
after thou shalt do thy desire." So saying, she took his
clothes and turban and clad him in the yellow cassock and
the kerchief; but hardly had she done this, when there
came a knocking at the door. Quoth he, " Who is that at
the door ? " And she answered, " My husband." " What
is to be done? " said the Cadi ; u and where shall I go ? "
"Fear nothing," replied she; "I will hide thee in this
cabinet." Quoth he, " Do as seemeth good to thee." So
she took him by the hand and pushing him into the lowest
compartment, locked the door on him.

Then she went to the door, where she found the chief
of the police; so she kissed the earth before him and
brought him into the saloon, where she made him sit
down and said to him, " O my lord, this is thy house
and I am thy handmaid, and thou shalt pass all this day
with me ; wherefore do thou doff thy clothes and don this
red gown, for it is a sleeping gown." So she took away
Ms clothes and made him don the red gown and set on
his head an old patched rag she had by her ; after which
she sat down by Mm on the couch and they sported


3io

awhile, till he put out his hand to her ; but she said to
him, " my lord, this day is thine, all of it, and none
shall share it with thee ; but first, of thy favour and
grace, write me an order for my brother's release, that
my heart may be at ease." " I hear and obey," answered
he ; " on my head and eyes be it ; " and wrote a letter to
his treasurer, to the following effect : " As soon as this
letter reaches thee, do thou, without delay and without
fail, set such an one free, neither answer the bearer a
word." Then he sealed it and she took it from him, after
which she began again to toy with him on the couch,
when, behold, some one knocked at the door. Quoth he,
" Who is that ? " " My husband," answered she. " What
shall I do ? " asked he, and she said, " Enter this cabinet,
till I send him away and return to thee." So she clapped
him into the second compartmept and locked the door
on him ; and all this time the Cadi heard what they said
and did.

Then she went to the door and opened it, whereupon
the Vizier entered. She kissed the earth before him and
received him with all worship, saying, " O my lord, thou
honourest us by thy coming to our house ; may God never
deprive us of the light of thy countenance ! " Then she
seated him on the couch and said to him, u O my lord s
these thy clothes and turban are the apparel of the vizier-
ate ; so leave them to their own time and don this light
gown, which is better fitted for carousing and making
merry and sleep." So he put off his clothes and turban
and she dressed him in a blue cassock and a tall red cap,
after which she began to toy with him and he with her,
and he would have done his desire of her ; but she put
him off, saying, {< O my lord, this shall not escape us. w
Presently there came a knocking at the door, and the
Vizier said to her, " Who is that ? " " My husband, 55 an-
swered she. Quoth he, " What is to be done ? " " Fear


3ii

nothing," said she j " but enter this cabinet, till I get rid
of him and come back to thee." So she put him in the
third compartment and locked the door on him, after
which she went out and opened the door and in came
the King.

When she saw him, she kissed the earth before him,
and taking him by the hand, led him into the saloon and
seated him on the couch at the upper end. Then said she
to him, "Verily, O King, thou dost us honour, and if we
brought thee the whole world and all that therein is as a
gift, it would not equal a single one of thy steps towards l^fgf)!
us : but give me leave to speak one word." " Say what &XCh«
thou wilt," answered he, and she said, "O my lord, take
thine ease and put off thy clothes and turban." So
he put off his clothes, which were worth a thousand
dinars, and she clad him in a patched gown, not worth
ten dirhems, and fell to talking and jesting with him,
whilst the folk in the cabinet heard all that passed, but
dared not say a word. Presently, the King put his hand
to her neck and sought to do his desire of her ; but she
said, " This thing shall not escape us ; but, first, I had
promised myself to entertain thee in this sitting-chamber,
and I have that which shall content thee." At that
moment, some one knocked at the door and he said to
her, "Who is that?" "My husband," answered she, and
he, " Make him go away of his own accord, or I will go
forth to him and send him away perforce." " Nay, O my
lord," replied she; "have patience till I send him away
by my skilful contrivance." " And how shall I do ? " asked
the King ; whereupon she took him by the hand and
making him enter the fourth compartment of the cabinet,
locked it upon him.

Then she went out and opened the door 3 when the
carpenter entered and saluted her. Quoth she s " What
manner of thing is this cabinet thou hast made me ? F '


312


" What ails it, O my lady ? " asked he, and she said, " The
[top] compartment is too strait." "Not so/' answered
he ; and she, " Go in thyself and see ; it is not wide
enough for thee." Quoth he, " It is wide enough for
four," and entered the fifth compartment, whereupon she
locked the door on him. Then she took the letter of the
chief of the police and carried it to the treasurer, who
kissed it and delivered her lover to her. She told him all
that had passed and he said, "And how shall we do
now? 55 Quoth she, "We will remove hence to another
city, for there is no tarrying for us here after this." So
they packed up their goods and loading them on camels 2
set out forthright for another city.

Meanwhile, the five abode in the cabinet three whole
days, without eating or drinking, until at last the carpenter
could retain his water no longer ; so he made water on the
King's head, and the King made^ water on the Vizier's
head, and the Vizier on the Chief of the Police, who did
the like with the Cadi ; whereupon the latter cried out and
said, " What filth is this ? Doth not this strait that we are
in suffice us, but you must make water upon us ? " The
Chief of the Police recognized the Cadi's voice and an-
swered, saying, " God increase thy reward, O Cadi S " And
when the Cadi heard him, he knew him for the Chief of
the Police. Then the latter lifted up his voice and said,
"What means this nastiness?" and the Vizier answered,
saying, "God increase thy reward, O Chief of the Police !"
whereupon he knew him to be the Vizier. Then the Vizier
lifted up his voice and said, " What means this nastiness ? "
But when the King heard his Vizier's voice, he held his
peace and concealed his affair. Then said the Vizier,
" May God curse the woman for her dealing with us ! She
hath brought hither all the chiefs of the state, except the
King." Quoth the King, " Hold thy peace, for I was the
first to fall into the toils of this lewd baggage," ££ And IJ :


3*3

cried the carpenter, 44 what have I done? I made her &
cabinet for four dinars, and when I came to seek my hire?
she tricked me into entering this compartment and locked
the door on me." And they fell to talking with one
another, to divert the King and do away his chagrin.

Presently the neighbours came up to the house and
seeing it deserted, said to one another, "But yesterday
our neighbour the wife of such an one was in it; but now
there is no sound to be heard therein nor soul to be seen.
Let us break open the doors and see how the case stands,
lest it come to the ears of the King or the Chief of the
Police and we be cast into prison and regret that -we did
not this thing before." So they broke open the doors
and entered the saloon, where they saw the cabinet and
heard the men within groaning for hunger and thirst.
Then said one of them, " Is there a genie in the cabinet ? "
" Let us heap faggots about it," quoth another, " and burn
it with fire." When the Cadi heard this, he cried out at
them, saying, lc Do it not ! " And they said to one another,
" Verily, the Jinn make believe to be mortals and speak
with men's voices." Thereupon the Cadi repeated some
verses of the sublime Koran and said to the neighbours,
" Draw near to the cabinet." So they drew near, and he
said, " I am so and so the Cadi, and ye are such an one
and such an one, and we are here a company." Quoth
the neighbours, " And how came ye here ? " And he told
them the whole case from beginning to end.

Then they fetched a carpenter, who opened the five
doors and let out the Cadi and the Vizier and the Chief
of the Police and the King and the Carpenter ; and when
they saw how they were accoutred, each fell a-laughing
at the others. Now she had taken away all their clothes •
so each of them sent to his people for fresh clothes and
put them on and went out, covering himself therewith
from the sight of the folk. See, therefore, O our lord


3*4


the King/ said the vizier, 8 what a trick this woman
played off upon the folk 1 And I have heard tell also
that

THE MAN WHO SAW THE NIGHT OF POWER.

A certain man had longed all his life to look upon the
Night of Power, 1 and it befell that, one night, he looked
up at the sky and saw the angels and Heaven's gates
opened and beheld all things in the act of prostration
before their Lord, each in its several room. So he said to
his wife, " Harkye, such an one, God hath shown me the
Night of Power, and it hath been proclaimed to me, from
the invisible world, that three prayers will be granted unto
me ; so do thou counsel me what I shall ask." Quoth she,
" O man, the perfection of man and his delight is in his
yard ; so do thou pray God to greaten thy yard and mag-
nify it." So he lifted up his hands to heaven and said,
" O my God, greaten my yard and magnify it" Hardly

1 One of the last nights of Ramazan, (supposed, on the authority of a
tradition of the Prophet, to be either the 20th, 22nd, 24th or 28th of the
month, on which the Koran is said to have been revealed en bloc to
Gabriel, who communicated it piece-meal to Mohammed, beginning at
once with chapter xcvi. (or, according to some, chapter lxxiv.). On this
night the Muslims believe that the affairs of the universe are settled for
the ensuing year, that all created things prostrate themselves in adoration
to Allah (cf. the mediaeval legend of Christmas Eve, when the cattle
were fabled to worship God in the stalls, etc.), salt water becomes sweet,
the angels descend to bless the faithful and all prayers, prayed in cog-
nisance of the fact, are granted. "Verily we sent it [the Koran] down
on the Night of Power, and what giveth thee to know what is the Night
of Power? The Night of Power is better than a thousand months ; the
angels and the Spirit (Gabriel) descend therein, by leave of their Lord t
with every commandment. Peace is it till the breaking of the dawn."
—Koran sccvii. u By the Manifest Book, we sent it down on a blessed
night ...... whereon is apportioned each determined decree 9 as &

commandment from us." — Koran xliv. i, 2 and 3.


315

had he spoken when his yard became as big as a calabash
and he could neither sit nor stand nor move ; and when
he would have lain with his wife, she fled before him from
place to place. So he said to her, " O accursed woman,
what is to be done ? This is thy wish, by reason of thy
lust." " Nay, by Allah," answered she ; " I did not ask
for this huge bulk, for which the gate of a street were too
strait. Pray God to make it less." So he raised his eyes
to heaven and said, " O my God, rid me of this thing and
deliver me therefrom." And immediately his yard dis-
appeared altogether and he became smooth [like a woman].
When his wife saw this, she said, ' I have no occasion for
thee, now thou art become yardless;" and he answered
her, saying, " All this comes of thine own ill-omened counsel
and the infirmity of thy judgment. I had three prayers
accepted of God, wherewith I might have .gotten me my
good, both in this world and the next, and now two are
gone in pure waste, by thy lewd wish, ar-.d there remaineth
but one." Quoth she, " Pray God the Most High to
restore thee thy yard as it was." So he prayed to his Lord
and his yard was restored to its first case. Thus the man
lost his three wishes by the ill counsel and lack of sense of
the woman ; and this, O King,' said the vizier, ' have I told
thee, that thou mightest be certified of the thoughtlessness
of women and their little wit and silliness and see what
comes of hearkening to their counsel. Wherefore be not
persuaded by them to slay thy son, the darling of thy heart,
and thus blot out thy remembrance after thee.'

The King gave ear to his vizier's words and forbore to
put his son to death ; but, on the seventh day, the damsel
came in, shrieking, and lighting a great fire in the King's
presence, made as she would cast herself therein ; where-
upon they laid hands on her and brought; her before him.
Quoth he, 1 Why hast thou done this ?' And she answered,
saying, £ Except thou do me justice on thy son, I will cast


myself into the fire and accuse thee of this on the Day of
Resurrection, for I am weary of life and before coming
hither, I wrote my last dispositions and gave alms of my
goods and resolved upon death. And thou wilt repent
with all repentance, even as did the King of having
punished the pious woman.' 1 How was that ? ' asked the
King. ' I have heard tell, O King,' replied she, * that

THE STOLEN NECKLACE,

There was once a devout woman, who had renounced
the world and devoted herself to the service of God.
Now she used to resort to a certain king's palace, the
dwellers wherein looked for a blessing by reason of her
presence, and she was held of them in high honour. One
day, she entered the palace, according to her wont, and
sat down beside the queen. Bresently the latter gave
her a necklace, worth a thousand dinars, saying, "Keep
this for me, whilst I go to the bath." So she entered the
bath, which was in the palace, and the pious woman laid
the necklace on the prayer-carpet and stood up to pray.
As she was thus engaged, there came a magpie, which
snatched up the necklace, [unseen of her,] and carrying
it off, hid it in a crevice in one of the palace-walls. When
the queen came out of the bath, she sought the necklace
of the recluse, and the latter searched for it, but found it
not nor could light on any trace of it ; so she said to the
queen, " By Allah, O my daughter, none has been with
me. When thou gavest me the necklace, I laid it on the
prayer-carpet, and I know not if one of the servants saw
. it and took it without my heed, whilst I was engaged in
prayer. God only knows what is come of it ! " When the
King heard what had happened, he bade his consort put
7 "lofyl the woman to the question by tire and beating; so they
tfXtbi'L tortured her with all manner tortures, but could not bring


3i7


her to confess or to accuse any. Then he commanded to
lay her in irons and cast her into prison, and they did as
he bade.

One day, after this, as the King sat in the inner court of
his palace, with the queen by his side and water flowing
around him, he saw the magpie fly into a crevice of the
wall and pull out the lost necklace, whereupon he cried
out to a damsel who was with him, and she caught the
bird and took the necklace from it. By this the King
knew that the pious woman had been wronged and re-
pented of that he had done with her. So he sent for her
and fell to kissing her head and sought pardon of her-
weeping. Moreover, he commanded great treasure to be
given to her, but she would none of it. However, she
forgave him and went away, vowing never again to enter
any one's house. So she betook herself to wandering in
the mountains and valleys and worshipped God the Most
High till she died. And for an instance of the malice of
the male sex/ continued the damsel, 1 1 have heard
tell that

THE TWO PIGEONS.

A pair of pigeons once stored tip wheat and barley m
their nests in the winter, and when the summer came, the
grain shrivelled and became less ; so the male pigeon said
to his mate, " Thou hast eaten of this grain." " No, by
Allah," replied she ; " I have not touched it ! " But he
believed her not and beat her with his wings and pecked
her with his bill, till he killed her. When the cold season
returned, the corn swelled out and became as before^
whereupon he knew that he had slain his mate unjustly
and wickedly a nd repented, when repentance availed him
not Then he lay down by her side, mourning over her
and weeping for grief, and left eating and drinking, till he
fell sick and d <*»<■'


3i8

But/ added the damsel, ' I know a story of the malice
of men more extraordinary than either of these.' ' Let us
hear it,' said the King ; and she said, 4 1 have heard telL,

King, that

STORY OF PRINCE BEHRAM OF PERSIA AND
THE PRINCESS ED DETMA.

There was once a king's daughter, by name Ed Detma^
who had no equal in her time for beauty and elegance
and symmetry and amorous grace and the art of ravishing
men's wits, nor was there one more accomplished than
she in horsemanship and martial exercises and all that
behoveth a cavalier, and all the king's sons sought her
in marriage; but she would none of them, saying, u None
shall marry me except he overcome me at push of pike
and stroke of sword in the open field. If any can do this,

1 will willingly wed him- but, if" I overcome him, I will
take his horse and clothes and arms and write with fire
upon his forehead, ' This is the freedman of Ed Detma.' "
So the sons of the kings flocked to her from far and near,
and she overcame them and put them to shame, stripping
them of their arms and branding them with fire.

At last, the son of a king of the kings of the Persians, by
name Behram, heard of her and journeyed from afar to her
father's court, bringing with him men and horses and great
store of wealth and royal treasures. When he drew near
the city, he sent her father a rich present and the king
came out to meet him and received him with the utmost
honour. Then the prince sent a message to him by his
vizier, demanding his daughter's hand in marriage ; but
the king answered, saying, " O my son, I have no power
over my daughter Ed Detma, for she hath sworn by her
soul to marry none except he overcome her in the listed
field." Quoth the prince, " It was to this intent that I


3i9

journeyed hither from ray father's court." And the king
said, " Thou shalt meet her to-morrow." Accordingly, on
the morrow, he sent to bid his daughter, who donned her
harness of war, and the folk, hearing of the coming en-
counter, flocked from all sides to the field. Presently the
princess rode into the lists, armed cap-a-pie and vizor down,
and the prince pricked out to meet her, equipped at all
points after the goodliest fashion. Then they drove at each
other and fought a great while, wheeling and feinting and
advancing and retreating, till the princess, finding in him
such valour and horsemanship as she had seen in none else,
began to fear lest he should put her to shame before the
bystanders and knew that he would assuredly overcome her,
unless she could contrive to trick him. So she raised her
vizor and discovered her face, more brilliant than the full
moon, which when he saw, he was confounded by her
beauty and his strength failed and his heart faltered. When
she knew this, she fell upon him at unawares and tore him
from his saddle, and he became in her hands as he were
a sparrow in the clutches of an eagle, knowing not what
was done with him for amazement and confusion. So she
took his horse and clothes and armour and branding him
with firej let him go.

When he recovered from his stupor, he abode several
days without eating or drinking, for despite and love of
the princess that had taken hold upon his heart. Then
he sent a letter by certain of his slaves to his father,
advising him that he could not return home, till he had
gotten his will of the princess or died for lack of her.
When his father read the letter, he was sore concerned for
his son and would have succoured him with troops and
soldiers; but his viziers dissuaded him from this and
exhorted him to patience; so he committed his affair to
God the Most High.

Meanwhile, the prince cast about for a means of coming


■


320

to his desire and disguising himself as a decrepit old man,
repaired to a garden, in which the princess used to walk
most of her days. Here he sought out the gardener and
said to him, " I am a stranger from a far country and from
my youth upward I have been a gardener, and none is
more skilled than I in the care of trees and the culture of
fruits and flowers and so forth." When the gardener
heard this, he rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy and
carried him into the garden, where he commended him to
his underlings, and the prince betook himself to the
service of the garden and the tending of the trees and
the bettering of their fruits.

One day, as he was thus employed, he saw some slaves
enter the garden, leading mules laden with carpets and
vessels, and asked them the meaning of this, to which
they replied that the princess was minded to take her
pleasure. When he heard this, he hastened to his lodging
and fetching some of the jewels and raiment he had
brought with him from Persia, sat down in the garden
and spread them out before him, shaking and trembling,
as if for decrepitude, and making a show of extreme
tODdQul, old a S e - Presently a company of damsels and eunuchs
entered, with the princess in their midst, as she were the
moon among stars, and dispersed about the garden, pluck-
ing the fruits and diverting themselves. By and by they
espied the prince sitting under one of the trees and
making towards him, found him, [as it seemed,] a very
old man, whose hands and feet trembled for decrepitude,
and before him store of precious jewels and splendid orna-
ments. So they marvelled at his case and asked him what
he did there with the jewels. Quoth he, "I would fain buy
me one of you to wife therewith." They laughed at him
and said, " If one of us marry thee, what wilt thou do
with her?" "I will give her one kiss,'' 1 answered he,
" and let her go." Then, said the princess, " I give thee


±


321


this damsel to wife." So he rose and coming up to her,
trembling and staggering and leaning on a staff, kissed
her and gave her the jewels and ornaments ; whereat she
rejoiced and they went away, laughing at him. Next day,
they came again to the garden and finding him seated in
the same place, with more jewels and ornaments than
before, said to him, " O old man, what wilt thou do with
these jewels?" And he answered, saying, "I wish to take
one of you to wife with them, even as yesterday." So the
princess said, " I marry thee to this damsel j" and he
came up to her and kissed her and gave her the jewels,
and they went away.

But the princess said in herself, " I have more right to
all these fine things than my waiting-women, and no harm
can betide me. 5 ' So, on the morrow, she went down
privily into the garden, in the habit of one of her damsels,
and presenting herself before the prince, said to him, " O
old man, the king's daughter hath sent me to thee, that
thou mayst marry me." He looked at her and knew her ;
so he answered, " With all my heart," and gave her jewels
and ornaments of the costliest. Then he rose to kiss her,
and she off her guard and fearing nothing ; but, when he
came up to her, he suddenly laid hold of her with a strong
hand and throwing her down, did away her maidenhead.
Then he pulled the beard from his face and said to her,
" Dost thou not know me ? " " Who art thou ? " asked
she, and he answered, " I am Behram, the king's son of
Persia, who have changed my favour and am become a
stranger to my people and estate for thy sake and have
lavished my treasures for thy love."

So she rose from under him in silence and spoke not a
word of reply to him, being dazed for what had befallen
her and seeing nothing for it but to be silent, for fear of
disgrace ; and she bethought herself and said ; " If I kill
him, it will profit me nothing, and nought will serve me

VOL. V„ 21


but that I flee with him to his own country.** Then she
gathered together her wealth and treasures and sent to
him, acquainting him with her resolve, to the intent that
he also might equip himself ; and they agreed upon a night
on which to depart. So, at the appointed time, they
mounted swift horses and set out under cover of the night,
nor did day break till they had traversed a great distance ;
and they fared on till they drew near his father's capital in
the land of the Persians. When the king heard of his
son's coming, he came out to meet him with his troops and
rejoiced in him with an exceeding joy. Then, after a few
days, he sent the princess's father a splendid present, with
a letter to the effect that his daughter was with him and
demanding her wedding equipage. ,Ed Detma's father
received the messengers with exceeding joy, (for that he
had deemed his daughter lost and had grieved sore for her
loss,) and invested them with robes of honour; after which
he made bride-feasts and summoning the Cadi and the
witnesses, let draw up the marriage contract between his
daughter and the prince of Persia. Then he made ready
her equipage and despatched it to her, and Prince Behram
abode with her till death sundered them.

See, therefore, O King,' continued the favourite, 'the
malice of men in their dealing with women. As for me, I
will not go back from my due till I die.' So the King
once more commanded to put his son to death ; but the
seventh vizier came in to him and kissing the earth before
him, said, ' O King, have patience with me whilst I speak
words of good counsel to thee ; for he who is patient and
acteth deliberately attaineth unto his hope aud enjoyeth
his desire, but whoso acteth hastily, repentance overtaketh
him. Now I have seen how this damsel hath profligately
striven to abuse the King and incite him to unnatural
cruelties ; but I his slave, whom he hath overwhelmed with
his favours and bounties, do proffer him true and loyal


323


counsel ; for that I, O King, know of the malice of women
that which none knoweth but myself; and [in particular]
there hath come to my knowledge, on this subject, the story
of the old woman and the son of the merchant.' 'And
what fell out between them, O vizier ? ' asked the King. ' I
have heard tell, King/ answered the seventh vizier, ' that

THE HOUSE WITH THE BELVEDERE.

There was once a wealthy merchant, who had a son who
was very dear to him, and the latter said to him one day,
" O my father, I have a boon to ask of thee." Quoth the
merchant, " O my son, what is it, that I may give it thee
and bring thee to thy desire, though it were the light of
mine eyes." " Give me money," rejoined the youth, "that
I may journey with the merchants to the city of Baghdad
and see its sights and look upon the palace of the Khalifs ;
for the sons of the merchants have described these things
to me and I long to see them for myself." " O my child 3
O my little son," answered his father, " how can I endure
to part from thee?" But the youth said, "I have said
my say and needs must I journey to Baghdad with or
without thy consent ; for such a longing for its sight hath
fallen upon me as can only be assuaged by the going 'Mlgljt
thither." " ' ~ &X£tX.

When the merchant saw that there was no help for it, he
provided his son with goods to the value of thirty thousand
dinars and gave him in charge to certain merchants in
whom he trusted. Then he took leave of the youth, who
journeyed with his friends the merchants till they reached
Baghdad, the Abode of Peace, where he entered the market
and wishing to hire a house, was shown one so handsome
and spacious and elegant that he well-nigh lost his wits
for admiration ; for therein were gardens and fountains
and running waters and pavilions facing one another, with


324


floors of coloured marbles and ceilings inlaid with gold
and lapis lazuli, and its gardens were full of warbling birds,,
So he asked the porter what was its rent, and he replied,
"Ten dinars a month." Quoth the young man, "Speakest
thou truly or dost thou jest with me?" "By Allah," answered
the porter. £S I speak nought but the truth, for none who
taketh up his abode in this house lodgeth in it more than
a week or two." " And how is that ? " asked the other.
" O my son," replied the porter. cs whoso taketh this house
cometh not forth of it, except sick or dead, wherefore it
is known among the folk of Baghdad, so that none offereth
to take it, and thus cometh it that its rent is fallen so low.* 5
At this the young merchant marvelled exceedingly, saying,
" Needs must there be some reason for this." However,
after considering awhile and seeking refuge with God from
Satan the Stoned, he rented the house and took up his
abode there. Then he put away apprehension from his
thought and busied himself with selling and buying; and
some time passed over him without any ill case befalling
him.

One day j as he sat at the door, there came up a grizzled
old woman, as she were a speckled snake, calling aloud
on the name of God and magnifying Him at a great rate
and at the same time putting away the stones and other
obstacles from the path. Seeing the youth sitting there,,
she looked at him and marvelled at his case ; 1 whereupon
quoth he to her, " O old woman, dost thou know me or
am I like any thou knovvest ? " When she heard him
speak, she hastened up to him and saluting him, said,
" How long hast thou dwelt in this house ? M " Two
months, O my mother," answered he. And she said, " Q
my son, it was at this that I marvelled ; for I know thee
not, neither dost thou know me, nor yet are thou like unto
any one I know ; but I marvelled for that none other time
i at seeing him in occupation of e house of so fatal a reptttfe


325


thou hath taken up his abode in this house but hath gone
forth from it, dead or sick, saving thee alone. Doubtless
thou hast, not gone up to the upper story neither, looked
out from the belvedere there." So saying, she went her
way and he fell a-pondering her words and said, " I have
not gone up to the top of the house ; nor did I know that
there was a belvedere there."

Then he arose forthright and going in, searched the
house, till he espied, in a corner among the trees, a narrow
door, over which the spider had spun its v/ebs, and said in
himself, 5S Belike the spider hath not spread its web over
the door, but because death is within." However, he
heartened himself with the saying of God the Most High,

Say, nought shall befall us save what God hath prescribed
unto us;" 1 and opening the door, ascended a narrow
flight of stairs,, till he came to the top, where he found
a belvedere, in which he sat down to rest and enjoy the
view. Presently, he caught sight of an elegant house hard
by, surmounted by a lofty belvedere, overlooking the whole
of Baghdad, in which sat a damsel fair as a houri. No
sooner had he set eyes on her, than her beauty took posses-
sion of his whole heart and made away with his reason,
afflicting him with the pains of Job and the grief of Jacob.
Fire was lighted in his entrails and he said, " They say that
whoever takes up his abode in this house dies or falls sick.
If this be so, this damsel is assuredly the cause. Would I
knew how I shall win free of this affair, for my senses are
gone ! "

Then he descended from the turret, pondering his case,
and sat down in the house, but could not rest. So, after
awhile, he went out and sat at the door, absorbed in
melancholy thought, and presently up came the old woman,

praising and magnifying God [aloud], as she went. When
he saw her, hi rose and accosting her courteously, said to
1 Kcra$i, is. Sl„


326


her, "O my mother, I was in health and well-being, till
thou madest mention to me of the belvedere ; so I found
the door and ascending to the top of the house, saw thence
what took away my senses ; and now methinks I am a lost
man, and I know no physician for me but thyself." When
she heard this, she laughed and said, " No harm shall
befall thee, so God please." Whereupon he went into the
house and coming back with a hundred dinars in his sleeve,
said to her, " Take this, O my mother, and deal with me
as lords with slaves and succour me quickly ; for, if I
die, my blood will be laid to thy charge at the Day of
Resurrection." " With all my heart," answered she ; "but,
O my son, thou must lend me thine aid in some small
matter, whereby hangs the accomplishment of thy desire."
Quoth he, " What would thou have me do, O my mother?"
u Go to the silk-market," said she, " and enquire for the
shop of Aboul Feth ben Caidanu Sit down by him and
salute him and say to him, 'Give me the face- veil thou
hast by thee, figured with gold:' for he hath none hand-
somer in his shop. Then buy it of him at his own price
and keep it till I come to thee to-morrow, God willing."
So saying, she went away and he passed the night [as]
upon coals of tamarisk wood.

Next morning, he took a thousand dinars in his pocket
and repairing to the silk-market, sought out the shop of
Aboul Feth, whom he found a man of dignified aspect,
surrounded by servants and attendants ; for he was a
merchant of great wealth and consideration, and of the
goods that God the Most High had bestowed upon him
was the damsel who had ravished the young man's heart.
She was his wife and had not her match for beauty, nor
was her like to be found with any of the sons of the kings.
So he saluted him and Aboul Feth returned his salute and
bade him be seated. Accordingly, he sat down by him
and said to him, " O merchant, I wish to look at such a


327


face-veil." So he bade his servants bring him a parcel of
silk from the inner shop and opening it, brought out a
number of veils, whose beauty amazed the youth. Among
them was the veil he sought; so he bought it for fifty
dinars and bore it home, well pleased. 1Cfa|)t

Hardly had he reached his house when up came the old
woman, to whom he gave the veil. She bade him bring a
live coal, with which she burnt one of the corners of the
veil, then folded it up as before and repairing to Aboul
Feth's house, knocked at the door. Quoth the damsel,
" Who is there ? " And she answered, " I, such an one.'*
Now the damsel knew her for a friend of her mother, so,
when she heard her voice, she came out and opening the
door to her, said, " What dost thou want, O my mother ?
My mother has left me and gone to her own house." " O
my daughter," answered the old woman, "I know thy
mother is not with thee, for I have been with her in her
house, and I come not to thee, but because I fear to miss
the hour of prayer; wherefore I desire to make my
ablutions with thee, for I know thou art clean and thy
house pure." 1 The damsel admitted her and she saluted
her and called down blessings upon her. Then she took
the ewer and went into the lavatory, where she made her
ablutions and prayed in a place there. Presently, she
came out again and said to the damsel, " O my daughter,
1 doubt thy servants have been in yonder place and denied
it ; so do thou show me another place where I may pray,
for the prayer I have prayed I account void." Thereupon
the damsel took her by the hand and said to her, " O my
mother, come and pray on my carpet, where my husband
gits." So she stood there and prayed and worshipped and
bowed and prostrated herself; and presently s she took
the damsel unawares and made shift to slip the veil under

1 One of the conditions ©f prayer among the Muslims is that it fee
performed in a clean place.


328


the cushion, unseen of her. Then she prayed for her and
went away.

At nightfall, Aboul Feth came home and sat down upon
the carpet, whilst his wife brought him food and he ate
what sufficed him and washed his hands ; after which he
leant back upon the cushion. Presently, he caught sight of
a corner of the veil protruding from under the cushion ; so
he pulled it out and knowing it for that he had sold to the
young man, at once suspected his wife of unchastity. So
he called her and said, "Whence hadst thou this veil P
And she swore an oath to him [that she knew not whence
it came,] saying, u None hath come to me but thou."
Then he was silent for fear of scandal, and said in himself
u If I open up this chapter, I shall be put to shame before
all Baghdad ; " for he was one- of the intimates of the
Khalif and had nothing for it but to hold his peace. So he
asked no questions, but said to his wife, whose name was
Muhziyehj, 45 1 hear that thy mother lies ill of heart-ache
and all the women are with her, weeping over her; so
do thou go to her." Accordingly, she repaired to her
mother's house and found her well, ailing nothing ; and
the latter said to her, " What brings thee here at this hour? "
So she told her what her husband had said and sat with
her awhile ; but, presently, up came porters, who brought
all her clothes and paraphernalia and what not else belonged
to her of goods and vessels from her husband's house and
deposited them in that of her mother. When the latter saw
this, she said to her daughter, te Tell me what hath passed,
between thee and thy husband, to bring about this." But
she swore to her that she knew not the cause thereof and
that there had befallen nothing between them, to call for
this conduct Quoth her mother, " Needs must there be
a cause for this." And she answered, saying, " I Vjaow al
none, and after this, with God the Most High be it to
make provision 1" Whereupon her mother fell a- weepi V;


329


find lamented her daughter's separation from the like of
this man, by reason of his sufficiency and fortune and the
greatness of his rank and estate.

On this wise, things abode some days, after which the
old woman paid a visit to Muhziyeh in her mother's house
and saluted her affectionately, saying, " What ails thee, O
my daughter, O my beloved one ? Indeed, thou hast
troubled my mind/' Then she went in to her mother and
said to her, " Q my sister, what is this about thy daughter
and her husband ? I hear he has put her away. What hath
she done to call for this ? " Quoth the mother, " Peradven-
ture her husband will return to her by the virtue of thy
prayers ; so do thou pray for her, for thou art a constant
faster and a stander up by night to pray." Then the three
women fell to talking and the old woman said to the damsel,
" O my daughter, have no care, for, God willing, I will
make peace between thee and thy husband before many
days." Then she left them and going to the young mer-
chant, said to him, " Make ready a handsome entertainment
for us, for I will bring her to thee this very night" So he
rose and provided all that was fitting of meat and drink and
so forth and sat down to await them : whilst the old woman
returned to the girl's mother and said to her, " O my sister,
we make a splendid bride-feast to-night j so let thy daughter
go with me, that she may divert herself and make merry
with us and forget her troubles ; and I will bring her back
to thee even as I took her away." So the mother dressed
her daughter in her finest clothes and jewels and accom-
panied her to the door, where she commended her to the
old woman's care, saying, " Look thou let none of the
creatures of God the Most High see her, for thou knowest
her husband's rank with the Khalif ; and do not tany s hut
bring her back to me as soon as possible.*'

The old woman carried the girl to the young man 9 s
house;, and she entered;, thinking it the place where the


33Q

Kfgfjt wedding was to be held : but, when she came into the
foci- saloon, the youth sprang up to her and embraced her and
kissed her hands and feet. She was confounded at his
beauty, as well as at the elegance of the place and the
profusion of meat and drink and flowers and perfumes that
she saw therein, and deemed all this but a dream. When
the old woman saw her amazement, she said to her, " The
name of God be upon thee, O my daughter! Fear not;
I am here with thee and will not leave thee for a moment.
Thou art worthy of him and he of thee." So the damsel
sat down, in great confusion ; but the young man jested
and toyed with her and entertained her with stories and
verses, till her breast dilated and she became at her ease.
Then she ate and drank and growing warm with wine, took
the lute and sang and inclined to the youth's beauty.
When he saw this, he was drunken without wine and his
life was a light matter to him [compared with her love].

Presently the old woman went out and left them alone
together till the next morning, when she went in to them
and gave them good morrow and said to the damsel, " How
hast thou passed the night, O my lady ? " <£ Well," answered
the girl, " thanks to thine adroitness and the excellence of
thine intermediation." Then said the old woman, " Come s
let us go back to thy mother." But the young man pulled
out a hundred dinars and gave them to her, saying, " Take
this and leave her with me to-night." So she left them
and repaired to the girl's mother, to whom quoth she,
"Thy daughter salutes thee, and the bride's mother is
instant with her to abide with her this night." " O my
sister," replied the mother, " bear her my greeting, and
If it please the girl, there is no harm in her staying the
night ; so let her do this and divert herself and come back
to me at her leisures, for all I fear for her Is chagrin os
account of her husband."

The old woman ceased not to make excuse after excuse


33i


and to put off cheat upon cheat upon the girl's mother, till
Muhziyeh had tarried seven days with the young man, of
whom she took a hundred dinars each day for herself;
but at the end of this time, the girl's mother said to her,
" Bring my daughter back to me forthright ; for I am
uneasy about her, because she has been so long absent,
and I misdoubt me of this." So the old woman went
out, angered at her words, and going to the young man's
house, took the girl by the hand and carried her away,
leaving him lying asleep on his bed, for he was heavy
with wine. Her mother received her with joy and gladness
and rejoiced in her with an exceeding joy, saying, " O my
daughter, my heart was troubled about thee, and in my un-
easiness I offended against this my sister with an injurious
speech, that wounded her." " Rise and kiss her hands and
feet," replied Muhziyeh ; " else art thou no mother of mine j
for she hath been to me as a servant in doing all I needed."
So the mother went up to the old woman and made her
peace with her.

Meanwhile, the young man recovered from his drunken-
ness and missed the damsel, but was content to have
enjoyed his desire. Presently, the old woman came in to
him and saluted him, saying, " What thinkest. thou of my
fashion ? " Quoth he, " It was excellently well contrived
of thee." Then said she, " Come, let us mend what we
have marred and restore the girl to her husband, for we
have been the cause of their separation." " How shall I
do ? " asked he, and she answered, " Go to Aboul Feth's
shop and salute him and sit down by him, till thou seest
me pass by, when do thou rise in haste and catch hold of
my dress and revile me and rail at me, demanding of me
the veil. And do thou say to the merchant, 6 O my lord,
thou knowest the face-veil I bought of thee for fifty dinars ?
i gave it to a slave-girl of mine, who burnt a corner of it by
accident ; so she gave it to this old woman, who took it.


33^

promising to get it darned and return it, and went away,
nor have I seen her from that day to this/ " " With all my
heart," replied the young man and rising forthright, repaired
to the shop of the silk merchant, with whom he sat till he
saw the old woman pass, telling her beads on a rosary she
held in her hand ; whereupon he sprang up and laying hold
of her clothes, began to revile and rail at her, whilst she
answered him with fair words, saying, "Indeed, my son p
thou art excusable."

The people of the bazaar flocked round them, saying,
" What is to do ? ,J and he replied, ££ Know, O folk, that I
bought a veil of this merchant for fifty dinars and gave it
to my slave-girl, who wore it awhile, then sat down to
fumigate it. 1 Presently, a spark flew out of the chafing
dish and lighting on the edge of the veil, burnt a hole in
it. So we committed it to this pestilent old woman, that
she might give it to who should darn it and return it
to us 5 and we have never set eyes on her again till this
day." " This young man speaks the truth," answered the
old woman. "I did indeed have the veil of him, but I
took it with me into one of the houses where I used to visit
and forgot it there, nor do I know where i left it ; and
being a poor woman, I feared its owner and dared not face
him."

t Now the girl's husband was listening to all they said
and when he heard the tale that the crafty old woman had
contrived with the young man, he rose to his feet and said,
"God is Most Great! I crave pardon of the Almighty for
my offences and what my heart suspected S " And he
praised God who had discovered to him the truth. Then
he accosted the old woman and said to her, " Dost thou
use to visit us ? " " O my son," replied she, " I visit you
and other than you. for the sake of alms ; but from that
day to this, none hath given me any news of the veil/*
1 With the smoke of aloes-wood or other perfume.


333


Quoth the merchant, " Hast thou asked at my house ? "
" my lord," answered she, " I did indeed go to thy
house and ask ; but they told me that the lady of the
house had been divorced by her husband ; so I asked no
farther." With this, the merchant turned to the young
man and said, " Let the old woman go her way ; for the
veil is with me." So saying, he brought it out from the
shop and gave it to the darner before all the folk. Then
he betook himself to the damsel and giving her some
money, took her again to wife, after making abundance of
excuses to her and asking pardon of God, because he
knew not what the old woman had done. This then, O
King/ said the Vizier, { is an .instance of the malice of
women, and for another to the same purport, I have heard
tell that

THE KING'S SON AND THE AFRIT'S MISTRESS.

A certain king's son was once walking alone for his
pleasure, when he came to a green meadow, abounding in
trees laden with fruit and birds singing on the branches,
and a river running through it. The place pleased him ;
so he sat down there and taking out some conserves he
had brought with him, began to eat. Presently, he espied a
great smoke rising up to heaven and taking fright, climbed
up into a tree and hid himself among the branches.
Thence he saw an Afrit rise out of the midst of the
stream, with a chest of marble, secured by a padlock, on
his head. He set down the chest on the sward and
opened it, and there came forth a damsel like the sun
shining in the cloudless sky. He gazed on her awhile,
then laid his head in her lap and fell asleep, whereupon
she lifted up his head and laying it on the chest, rose and
walked about.

Presently, she chanced to raise her eyes to the tree in


334


which was the prince, and seeing him, signed to him to
come down. He refused, but she swore to him that,
except he came down and did as she bade him, she
would wake the Afrit and point him out to him, when he
would straightway kill him. The prince, fearing she would
do as she said, came down, whereupon she kissed his
hands and feet and conjured him to do her occasion, to
which he consented ; and when he had satisfied her desires,
she said to him, "Give me the seal-ring on thy finger."
So he gave it to her and she laid it in a silken handker-
chief she had with her, wherein were more than fourscore
others. When the prince saw this, he asked her what she
did with all these rings and she answered, saying, " Know
that this Afrit carried me off from my father's palace and
shut me in this box, which he carries about on his head
wherever he goes ; and he hardly leaves me a moment, of
the excess of his jealousy over me, and hinders me from
what I desire. When I saw this, I swore that I would deny
my favours to no one, and these rings thou seest are after
the tale of the men who have had to do with me ; for
I took from each a ring and laid it in this handkerchief
And now go thy ways, that I may look for another than
thee, for the Afrit will not awake yet awhile."

So the prince returned to his father's palace, hardly
crediting what he had heard, and when the King heard
that his son had lost his ring, he bade put him to death,
knowing not how the damsel had beguiled him. (Now she
feared this not, neither took any account thereof.) Then
he rose and entered his palace ; but his Viziers came in
to him and prevailed with him to abandon his purpose.
The same night, the King sent for them and thanked them
for having dissuaded him from slaying his son • and the
latter also thanked them, saying,, " It was well done of
you to counsel my father to let me live, and God willing,
1 will abundantly requite you/ 5 Then he related to them


335


how he had lost the ring, and they offered up prayers for
his long life and advancement and withdrew. See then,,
O King,' said the Vizier, ' the malice of women and what
they do unto men.'

The King hearkened to the Vizier's counsel and again
countermanded his order to slay his son, Next morning s
it being the eighth day, as the King sat in his audience-
chamber in the midst of his grandees and amirs and officers
and men of learning, the prince entered s with his hand in
that of his governor, Es Sindibad, and praised his father
and his Viziers and grandees in the most eloquent words
and thanked them ; so that all who were present wondered
at his eloquence and fluency and the excellence of his
speech. His father rejoiced in him with an exceeding
joy and calling him to him, kissed him between the eyes,
Then he called Es Sindibad and asked him why his son
had kept silence these seven days, to which he' replied, * O
my lord, it was I who enjoined him to this, in my fear for
him of death; for, when I took his nativity, I found it
written in the stars that, if he should speak during this
period, he would surely die \ but now the danger is over s
by the King's fortune.'

At this the King rejoiced and said to his Viziers, ' If I
had killed my son would the fault have fallen on me or
the damsel or Es Sindibad?' But they refrained from
answering and Es Sindibad said to the prince, 'Answer ^fafjj
thou, O my son.' Quoth he, ' I have heard tell that certain hXui
guests once alighted at a merchant's house, and he sent
his slave-girl to the market, to buy a jar of milk. So she
bought it and set out on her return ; but, on her way
fiome, there passed over her a kite, holding a serpent in
its claws, and a drop of the serpent's venom fell into the
Jar of milk, unknown of the girl. So, when she came
back, the merchant took the milk from her and drank of
it, lie and his guests j but hardly had it settled in their


33$


stomachs when they all died. Now tell me, O King,
whose was the fault in this case?* Some said, 'It was
the fault of the company, who drank the milk, without
examining it* And other some, 'That of the girl, who
left the jar uncovered.' But Es Sindibad said to the
prince, 4 What sayest thou, O my son ? ' s I say,' answered
the prince, 'that the folk err; it was neither the fault oi
the damsel nor of the company, for their appointed hour
was come, with the exhaustion of their divinely-decreed
provision, and God had fore-ordained them to die thus/

When the courtiers heard this, they marvelled greatly
and lifted up their voices, calling down blessings on the
prince and saying, ' O our lord, thou hast made a peerless
answer, and thou art the wisest man of thy time.' ' In-
deed, I am no sage,' answered the prince ; ' the blind
sheikh and the three-year-old child and the five-year-old
were wiser than L' 4 Q youth/ said the bystanders,
'tell us the stories of these three who were wiser than
thou/ 6 With, all my heart/ answered he, { I have heard
tell that


There was once a rich merchant, who was a great traveller.
One day, being minded to journey to a certain city, he asked
those who came thence what kind of goods brought most
profit there. d Sandal-wood," answered they ; "for it sells
at a high price." So he laid out all his money in sandal-
wood and set out for the city in question. When he arrived
there, it was the close of the day, and he met an old woman
driving her sheep. Quoth she to him, "Who art thou, O
mas ? '* and he answered, saying, " I am a stranger, a
merchant/ 5 "Beware of the townsfolk/* said she, "for
they are cheats and robbers, who impose on strangers


337


that they may get the better of them and devour their
substance. Indeed, I give thee good counsel."

Then she left him and on the morrow there met him
a man, who saluted him and said to him, " O my lord,
whence comest thou?" "From such a place," answered
the merchant. "And what merchandise hast thou brought
with thee ? " asked the other. " Sandal-wood," replied he ;
"for I hear it is high of price with you." Quoth the
townsman, "He erred who told thee that ; for we burn
nothing but sandal-wood under our cooking-pots, and its
value with us is but that of firewood." When the merchant
heard this, he sighed and repented and knew not whether
to believe him or not Then he alighted at one of the
khans of the city and when it was night, he saw a mer-
chant make a fire of sandal-wood under his cooking-pot
Now this was the man who had spoken with him and this
was a trick of his. When the townsman saw the merchant
[looking at him,] he said to him, " Wilt thou sell me thy
sandal-wood for a measure of whatever thy soul shall
desire?" "I sell it to thee," answered the merchant,
purposing to take gold, and the buyer transported all the
wood to his own house and stored it up there.

Next morning, the merchant, who was a blue-eyed man,
went out to walk in the city ; but, as he went along, one
of the townsfolk, who was also blue-eyed and had but one
eye, caught hold of him, saying, " Thou art he who stole
my eye and I will never let thee go [till thou restore it
to me]." The merchant denied this, saying, "I never
stole [thine eye] ; the thing is impossible." Whereupon
the folk collected round them and besought the one-eyed
man to grant him till the morrow, that he might give
him the price of his eye. So the merchant procured one
to be surety for him s and they let him go. Now his shoe
had been real ia the struggle with the one-eyed man ; so
he stopped at a cobbler's stall and bade him mend it,
VOL. Vo 22


33§


snd he should have of him what would content him,
Then he went on, till he came to some people sitting
playing at forfeits and sat down with thera, to divert his
grief and anxiety. They invited him to play with there
and he did so ; but they practised on him and overcoming
him, offered him his choice, either to drink up the sea
or disburse all he had. " Have patience with me till
to-morrow," said he, and they granted him the delay he
sought ; whereupon he went away, sore concerned for what
had betided him and knowing not how he should do, and
sat down in a place [apart], heavy at heart and full of
melancholy thought.

Presently, the old woman passed by and seeing him
thus, said to him, "Meseems the townsfolk have gotten
the better of thee, for I see thee troubled and heavy of
heart. Tell me what ails thee." So he told her all that
had passed and she said, "As for,.him who cheated thee
in the matter of the sandal-wood, thou must know that
with us it is worth ten dinars a pound. But I will give
thee a counsel, whereby I trust thou shalt deliver thyself ;
and it is this. By such and such a gate lives a blind
sheikh, a cripple, who is knowing, wise and experienced,
and all resort to him and ask him what they will, and he
counsels them what will be for their advantage; for he
is versed in craft and magic and trickery. Now he is a
sharper and the sharpers resort to him by night [and
recount to him the tricks they have played during the
day], and he [passes judgment upon them and] tells them
which got the better and which was bettered. So go thou
to his lodging and hide thyself from thine adversaries, so
thou mayst hear what they say, unseen of them ; and haply
thou shalt learn from the sheikh some subterfuge that may
$TtCd)t avail to deliver thee from them."

t)Ub. So he went to the place in question and hid himself near
the blind man. Before long, up came the latter's company


339


who were wont to take him as their judge, and amongst
them the merchant's four adversaries. They saluted the
sheikh and each other and sat down round him, where-
upon he set food before them and they ate. Then each
began to tell what had befallen him that day, and amongst
the rest came forward he of the sandal-wood and told how
he had bought of one sandal-wood, below its price, and
bad agreed to pay for it a measure of whatever the seller
should desire. Quoth the old man, " Thine opponent hath
the better of thee." " How can that be," asked the other,
" seeing that, if he say, ' I will take the measure full of
gold or silver,' I will give it him and still be the gainer ? **
And the sheikh answered, " And if he say, ' I will take the
measure full of fleas, half male and half female,' what wilt
thou do ? " So the sharper knew that he was beaten.

Then came forward the one-eyed man and said, " O
Sheikh, I met a blue-eyed man to-day, a" stranger to the
town ; so i picked a quarrel with him and caught hold of
him, saying, 4 It was thou robbedst me of my eye ; ' nor did
I let him go, till some became surety for him that he should
return to me to-morrow and satisfy me for my eye." Quoth
the sheikh, " If he will, he may have the better of thee."
" How so ? " asked the sharper ; and the sheikh said, " He
may say to thee, ' Pluck out thine eye, and I will pluck
out one of mine ; then will we weigh them both, and if
thine eye be of the same weight as mine, thou speakest
truth in what thou avouchest.' So wilt thou owe him the
price of his eye and be stone blind, whilst he will still see
with his other eye." So the sharper knew that the merchant
might baffle him with this subterfuge.

Then came the cobbler and said, " O Sheikh, a man
brought me his shoe to-day, saying, ' Mend this shoe and
thou shall have of me what will content thee.' Now
nothing will content me but ali he hath." Quoth the
sheikh, "If he will, he may take his shoe from thee and


34°


give thee nothing." a How so ? " asked the cobbler, and
the sheikh, " He has but to say to thee, 5 The Sultan's
enemies are put to the rout ; his foes are become weak
and his children and helpers are multiplied. Art thou
content or no ? ' " 84 If thou say, ' I am content, 5 ' he will
take his shoe and go away ; and if thou say s . 5 1 am not
content/ he will take his shoe and beat thee therewith
over the face and neck." So the cobbler owned himself
beaten.

Then came forward the gamester and said, " O Sheikh, I
played at forfeits with a man to-day and beat him and
adjudged him to drink up the sea or give up to me all his
wealth." " If he will," replied the sheikh, u he may baffle
thee." "How so?" asked the sharper, and the sheikh,

He has but to say, 'Take the mouth of the sea in thine
hand and give it me and I will drink it.' But thou wilt
not be able to do this so he will baffle thee with this
subterfuge." When the merchant heard this, he knew
how it behoved him to deal with his adversaries. Thea
the sharpers went their way and the merchant returned to
his lodging.

On the morrow-, the gamester came to him and summoned
him to redeem his forfeit; so he said to him, "Give vat
die mouth of the sea and I will drink it up." Whereupon
he confessed himself beaten and redeemed his forfeit by
paying a hundred dinars. Then came the cobbler and
sought of him what should content him. Quoth the mer-
chant, " Our lord the Sultan hath overcome his foes and
put his enemies to nought and his children are multiplied.
Art thou content or no ? " "I am content," replied the
cobbler aud giving up the shoe without payment, wens
away. Next came the one-eyed man and demanded the
price of his eye. "Pluck out thine eye," said the merchant,
" and I will pluck out one of mine. Then will we weigh
them, and if they are equal in weight, I will acknowledge


34i


the truth of thine avouchment and pay thee the price o!
thine eye ; but, if they differ, thou liest and I will sue thee
for the price of ray eye." Quoth the one -eyed man, " Grant
me time;" but the merchant answered, saying, "I am
a stranger and grant time to none, nor will I part from
thee, [till thou satisfy me]." So the sharper ransomed his
eye by paying him a hundred dinars and went away. Last
of all came the buyer of the sandal-wood and said, " Take
the price of thy ware." " What wilt thou give me ? "
asked the merchant, and the other, "We agreed for a
measure of whatever thou shouldst desire : so, if thou wilt,
take it full of gold and silver." " Not I," answered the
merchant. " Nothing will serve me but I must have it full
of fleas, half male and half female/' " This is a thing none
may avail unto," said the sharper, and confessing himself
beaten, returned him his sandal-wood and redeemed him-
self from him with a hundred dinars, to be off his bargain.
Then the merchant sold the sandal-wood at his own price
and returned to his own country. t&Ctgfj

As for the three-year-old child,' continued the prince,
i I have heard tell that •


THE DEBAUCHEE AND THE THREE- YEAR-
OLD CHILD.

A certain profligate man, who was addicted to women
once heard of a beautiful and graceful woman who dwelt
in a town other than his own. So he journeyed thither,
taking with him a gift, and wrote her a letter, seeking
access to her and setting out all that he suffered for longing
and desire for her and how the love of her had driven him
to forsake his native land and come to her. She gave him
leave to visit her and received him with all honour and
worship, kissing his hands and entertaining him with the
best of meat and drink. Now she had a little three- year-


342


old son, whom she left and busied herself in cooking rice.
Presently the man said to her, " Come, let us go to bed ; "
and she, " My son is sitting looking at us." Quoth the
man, " He is a little child, understanding not neither
knowing how to speak." " Thou wouldst not say thus,"
answered the woman, " if thou knewest his intelligence.' - *
When the boy saw that the rice was done, he fell to weep-
ing bitterly, and his mother said to him, "What ails thee
to weep, O my son?" "Give me some rice," answered he,
"and put butter in it." So she ladled him out somewhat
of rice and put butter therein ; and he ate a little, then
began to weep again. Quoth she, "What ails thee now?"
and he answered, saying, "O my mother, I want some
sugar with my rice." At this the man was angered and
said to him, "Thou art none other than a curst child."
" It is thou who art curst," answered the boy, " seeing
thou weariest thyself and journeyest from city to city, in
quest of lewdness. As for me, I wept because I had some-
what in my eye, and my weeping brought it out ; and now
I have eaten rice with butter and sugar and am content ;
so which is the curst of us twain ? " The man was con-
founded at this rebuke from a little child and grace entered
him and he repented. Wherefore he laid not a finger on
the woman, but went out from her forthright and returned
to his own country, where he lived a contrite life till he
died.

As for the story of the five-year-old child,' continued the
prince, * I have heard tell, O King, that

THE STOLEN PURSE.

Four merchants once owned a thousand dinars m com-
mon ; so they laid them in one purse and set out to buy
goods therewith. On their way, they happened on a
beautiful garden; so they left the purse with a woman


343


who kept the garden and entered. After they had walked
about awhile and eaten and drunken and made merry, one
of them said to the others, " I have with me scented fuller's
earth ; come, let us wash our heads therewith in this run-
ning water." Quoth another, "We lack a comb; "and a
third, "Let us ask the keeper; belike she hath a comb."
Thereupon one of them arose and accosting the keeper,
whereas his comrades could see him, but not hear what he
said, said to her, "Give me the purse." Quoth she, "I
will not give it up, except ye be all present or thy fellows
bid me give it thee." Then he called to his companions,
saying, " She will not give it me." And they said to her,
"Give it him," thinking he meant the comb. So she
gave him the purse and he took it and made off.

When the three others were weary of waiting, they went
to the keeper and said to her, "Why wilt r .thou not give
him the comb ? " " He asked me for nought but the
purse," answered she, " and I gave it not but with your
consent, and he went his way with it." When they heard
this, they buffeted their faces and said to her, "We autho-
rized thee only to give him the comb." And she, " He
named not a comb to me." Then they laid hands on her
and haled her before the Cadi, to whom they made their
complaint, and he condemned her to make good the purse
and bound a number of her debtors surety for her. So RTtght
she went forth, confounded and knowing not what she uXbl.
should do.

Presently, she met a five-year-old boy, who, seeing her
troubled, said to her, "What ails thee, O my mother?"
But she gave him no answer, making no account of him,
because of his tender age, and he repeated his question a
second and a third time, till, at last, she told him all that
had passed. " Give me a dirhem, to buy sweetmeats
withal," said the boy ; " and I will tell thee how thou
niayst acquit thyself." So she gave him a dirhem and


344


said to him, " What hast thou to say ? " " Return to the
Cadi," quoth he, "and say to him, 'It was agreed between
myself and them that I should not give them back the
purse, except all four of them were present. Let them all
four come and I will give them the purse, as was agreed.' "
So she went back to the Cadi and said to him as the boy
had counselled ; and he said to the merchants, " Was it
thus agreed between you ? " " Yes," answered they.
" Then bring me your fellow," said the Cadi, u and take
the purse." So they went in quest of. their fellow, whilst
the keeper came off scot free and went her way without
hindrance.'

When the King's viziers and those who were present in
the assembly heard the prince's words, they said to his
father, ' O our Lord the King, of a truth thy son is the
most accomplished man of his time/ and they called down
blessings upon the King and the prince. Then the King
strained his son to his bosom and kissed, him between the
eyes and questioned him of what had passed between the
favourite and himself ; and the prince swore to him, by
God the Supreme and by His Holy Prophet, that it was
she who had required him of love and he refused. ' More-
over,' said he, £ she promised me that she would give thee
poison to drink and kill thee, so should the kingship be
mine ; whereupon I waxed wroth and said to her, [by
signs] " O accursed one, when I can speak, I will requite
thee." So, in her fear of me, she did as thou hast seen.'
The King believed his words and sending for the damsel,
said to those present, 1 How shall we put this damsel to
death ? ' Some counselled to cut out her tongue and other
some to burn it with fire ; but, when she came before the
King, she said to him, ' My case with thee is like unto the
story of the fox and the folk. 5 ' How so ? * asked he; and
she said, { I have heard tell, O King, that


345


STORY OF THE FOX AND THE FOLIC

A fox once made his- way into a city by the wall and
entering a currier's storehouse s played havoc with what
was therein and spoiled the -skins for the owner. One day,
the currier set a trap for him and taking him, beat him
with the hides, till he fell down senseless, whereupon the
man, deeming him to be dead, cast him out into the road,
by the city-gate. Presently, an old woman came up and
seeing the fox, said, " A fox's eye, hung about a child's
neck, is salutary against weeping." So she pulled out his
right eye and went away. Then came a boy, who said.)
" What does this tail on this fox ? " and cut off his brush..
After awhile, up came a man and saying, " A fox's gall
clears^ away dimness from the eyes, if they be anointed
therewith," [took out his knife and made to slit the fox's
paunch] \ but the latter said in himself, " We bore with
the pulling out of toe eye and trie cutting off of the tail ;
but, as for the slitting of the paunch, there is no putting
up with that. 55. So saying, he sprang up and made off
through the gate of the city.*

Quoth the King, ' I excuse her s and in my son's hands
be her doom. If he will, let him torture her, and if he will,
let him put her to death,' Quoth the prince, ' Forgiveness
is better than vengeance and it is of the fashion of the
noble ; ' and the King repeated, '' It is for thee to decide, O
my son.' So the prince set her free, saying, ' Depart from
our neighbourhood and may God pardon what is past I '

Therewith the King rose from his couch of estate and
seating his son thereon, crowned him with his crown and
bade the grandees of his realm swear fealty and do homage
to him. And he said, 'O folk, indeed, I am stricken in
years and desire to withdraw apart and give myself up to
the service of my Lord, and I call you to witness that 1

VOL. V. 23


1


divest myself of the royal dignity, even as I have divested
myself of my crown, and set it on my son's head.' So the
troops and officers swore fealty to the prince, and his father
gave himself up to the worship of his Lord nor stinted
from this, whilst his son abode in his kingship, doing justice
and righteousness; and his power was magnified and his
dominion strengthened and he abode in all delight and
solace of life, till there came to him the Destroyer of
Delights and the Sunderer of Companies.


SND OF VOL. V~
