The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, Vol. 9 (last) (Anonymous (trans. John Payne), 1884)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1884 Villon Society edition (https://archive.org/details/JohnPayneVolume9AndLast.AlfLaylahWaLaylah.TheBookOfTheThousand). The first complete English translation (1882-84), from the Calcutta Arabic edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

j


^Ji~~- ^.zi^ ■__ - - - I


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: now

FIRST COMPLETELY DONE INTO ENGLISH
PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE ORIGINAL
ARABIC, BY JOHN PA YNE (A UTHOR
OF " THE MASQUE OF SHADOWS,' 7 "IN-
TAGLIOS," " SONGS OF LIFE AND DEATH,"
" LAUTREC," "THE POEMS OF MASTER
FRANCIS VILLON OF PARIS, " "NEW
POEMS, n ETC. ETC). IN NINE VOLUMES.-

VOLUME THE NINTH.


LONDON'

PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY
igoi


KIRMAN EDITION,
Limited to Five Hundred Copies

No*.... 3.3. 2.


CAPTAIN RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON,

IN TOKEN OF

ADMIRATION AND GRATITUDE

FOR

MUCH KINDNESS.


I.

:


CONTENTS OF THE NINTH VOLUME.


PAGE


1. THE MERCHANT OF OMAN i

2. IBRAHIM AND JEMILEH 23

3. ABOULHUSN OF KHOR \SSAN .... 47

4. KEMEREZZEMAN AND THE JEWELLER'S WIFE. 67

5. ABDALLAH BEN FAZIL AND HIS BROTHERS . 129

6. MAROUF THE COBBLER AND HIS WIFE

FATIMEH 180

INDEX TO THE TALES 245

THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS AND ONE

NIGHT : ITS HISTORY AND CHARACTER . 263


i


I


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT.


THE MERCHANT OF OMAN.

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid was one night exceeding
wakeful ; so he called Mesrour and said to him, 1 Fetch
me Jaafer in haste.' Accordingly, he went out and re-
turned with the vizier, to whom said the Khalif, * O Jaafer,
wakefulness hath gotten hold of me this night and for-
biddeth sleep from me, nor know I what shall do it away
from me.' 6 Commander of the Faithful/ answered
Jaafer, ' the wise say, " Looking on a mirror, entering the
bath and hearkening unto song do away care and chagrin.'' '
'O Jaafer/ rejoined Haroun, * I have done all this, but it
hath brought me no whit of relief, and I swear by my
pious forefathers, except thou contrive that which shall
do away this [restlessness] from me, I will strike off
thy head.'

Quoth Jaafer, ' O Commander of the Faithful, wilt thou
•do that which I shall counsel thee ? ' ' And what is that ? '
asked the Khalif. * It is,' replied the vizier, ' that thou
take boat with us and drop down the Tigris with the tide
to a place called Kern es Serat, so haply we may hear or
see some new thing, for it is said, " The solace of care is
in one of three things ; to wit, that a man see what he
never before saw or hear what he never yet heard or tread
an earth he hath never yet trodden." It may be this shall
be the means of doing away thy restlessness, O Commander
of the Faithful, if it be the will of God the Most High*

VOL IX. i


%

There, on both sides of the stream, are windows and
balconies facing one another, and it may be we shall
hear or see from one of these somewhat wherewith our
hearts may be lightened.'

Jaafer's counsel pleased the Khalif, so he rose from his
place and taking with him the vizier and his brother El
Fezl and Isaac 1 the boon-companion and Abou Nuwas
Wg!)t and Abou Delef 2 and Mesrour the headsman, entered the
^UCCllbtl. wardrobe, where they all donned merchants' habits. Then
they went down to the Tigris and embarking in a gilded
boat, dropped down with the stream, till they came to the
place they sought, where they heard the voice of a damsel
singing to the lute and chanting the following verses :

I say to my love, whilst the wine-cup is here And the thousand-voiced

bird in the coppice sings clear,
* How long this delaying from gladness ? Awake ; For life's but a loan

for a day or a year.
So take thou the cup from a loveling's white hands, Whose languishing

lids are as those of a deer.'
I sowed a fresh rose in his cheek, but amidst His locks a pomegranate

for fruit did appear.
Indeed, very fire wouldst thou deem his fair cheek And the place of the

scratching 3 dead ashes and sere.
Quoth my censor, * Forget him ; ' but where's my excuse, When the

down sprouts and creeps on the face of my dear?

When the Khalif heard this, he said, * O Jaafer, how
goodly is that voice!' 'O our lord/ answered the vizier,
'never smote my hearing aught sweeter or goodlier than
this singing ! But hearing from behind a wall is only half

1 i.e. Isaac of Mosul.

2 Abou Delef el Ijli, a well-known soldier of the time, renowned for
his liberality and culture. His introduction here is probably an anachro-
nism, as he does not appear to have served under Haroun er Reshid P
but under his sons El Mamoun and El Mutessim Billah.

8 i.e. the part thereof which he had scratched or buffeted, in Oriental
fashion, for separation or other chagrin.


3


hearing • how would it be, if we heard it from behind
a curtain?' ' Come ,'0 Jaafer,' said the Khalif, Met us go
up and intrude upon the master of the house ; it may be
we shall look upon the songstress, face to face.' 'I hear
and obey/ answered Jaafer. So they landed and sought
admittance ; whereupon there came out to them a young
man, fair of favour, sweet of speech and eloquent of
tongue, who said to them, ' Welcome and fair welcome,

lords that favour me [with your presence !] Enter in
all ease and liberty.'

They followed him into a saloon, four-square, whose roof
was decorated with gold and its walls adorned with ultra-
marine. 1 At its upper end was an estrade, whereon stood
a goodly settle 3 and thereon sat a hundred damsels like
moons. The young man cried out to them and they came
down from their seats. Then he turned to Jaafer and
said to him, 'O my lord, I know not the worshipful of
you from the more worshipful, but, in God's name, let him
that is highest in rank among you favour me by taking the
highest room, and let his brethren sit each in his several
station.' So they sat down, each according to his rank,
whilst Mesrour abode standing to do them service ; and
the host said to them, ' O my guests, with your leave, shall

1 set food before you?' 'Yes,' answered they. So he
called for food, whereupon four damsels with girded waists
set before them a table, whereon were rare meats of that
which flies and walks the earth and swims the seas, sand-
grouse and quails and chickens and pigeons [and what
not else], and written on the marges of the tray were
verses such as sorted with the entertainment.

They ate till they had enough and washed their hands,,

1 Syn. lapis lazuli {lazoured),

2 Or divan extending round all three sides of the recess. Var. 6S A
couch of ivory and ebony, whereon was that which befitted it of mattresses
and cushionsg and on it five damsels." — Breslau.


/


!


4

after which said the young man, * O my lords, if you have
any want, let us know it, that we may have the honour or
satisfying it/ 4 It is well,' answered they. 'We came not
to thy dwelling but because of a voice we heard from
behind the wall of thy house, and we would fain hear it
[again] and know her to whom it belongs. So, if thou
deem well to vouchsafe us this favour, it will be of the
munificence of thy nature, and we will after return whence
we came.' * Ye are welcome,' answered the host and
turning to a black slave-girl, said to her, i Fetch me thy
mistress such an one/ So she went away and returning
with a chair of chinaware, cushioned with brocade, set it
down ; then withdrew again and presently returned with
a damsel, as she were the moon on the night of its full,
who sat down on the chair. Then the black girl gave
^ff(r|)t he r a bag of satin, from which she brought out a lute,
&C£££XlbtU. inlaid with jacinths and jewels and furnished with pegs
of gold, and tuned its strings, even as saith the poet of
her and her lute :

When in her lap she sets it, the soul in it she sets, Its pegs [and strings]

its organs by which its thought hath speech ;
Nor doth her right hand outrage its beauties, 1 but her left On equal wise
and measure amendeth still the breach. 2

Then she strained it to her bosom, bending over it as
the mother bends over her child, and swept the strings,
which complained as the child complains to its mother;
after which she played upon it and sang the following

verses :

Vouchsafe me Fortune the return of him I love, and I Will chide him,

saying, * Pass about thy cups, O friend ; fill high
And drink of wine that mingleth not with heart of man but he Still
bai ters care for cheer and calls a truce with tear and sigh-

1 By striking the strings, while tuning a

s i.e* by screwing the strings up to the proper pitch, by means of the
pegs.


5

Un to its bearing in its cup the zephyr 1 doth suffice: Didst e'er a fall

moon 3 in its hand a star 8 that bore espy?
How many a night with its full moon I've held converse of yore, Whilst,

o'er the Tigris shed, its light lit up the darkling sky !
As to the westward she inclined, it was as if she drew A gilded sword

that stretched athwart the water far and nigh.

When she had made an end of her song, she wept sore
and all who were in the place cried out with weeping, till
they were well-nigh dead ; nor was there one of them
but took leave of his senses and rent his clothes and
buffeted his face, for the goodliness of her singing. Then
said Er Reshid, 'This damsel's song denoteth that she is
one parted from her beloved.' Quoth her master, 'She
hath lost her father and mother.' Eut the Khalif said,
* This is not the weeping of one who hath lost her father
and mother, but the affliction of one who Jiath lost her
beloved.' And he was delighted with her singing and
said to Isaac, ' By Allah, I never saw her like ] ' * O my
lord,' answered Isaac, ' indeed I marvel at her to the
utterest and am beside myself for delight.'

Now with all this Er Reshid stinted not to look upon
their host and observe his charms and the elegance of his
fashion ; but he saw on his face a pallor as he would die ;
so he turned to him and said, * Harkye ! ' 'At thy service,
O my lord,' answered he. * Knowest thou who we are ? '
asked the Khalif; and he said 'No.' Quoth Jaafer, 'Wilt
thou that I tell thee the names of each of us?' 'Yes,'
answered the young man ; and the vizier said, ' This is the
Commander of the Faithful, descendant of the uncle of
the Prince of the Apostles/ and told him the names of the
others of the company ; after which quoth Er Reshid,

1 i& a slim-shaped cupbearer. The Arabs constantly compare the
waftings of the zephyr to the swaying movements of slender and graceful
girls.

3 a fair-faced cupbearer § The sparkling wine-cup.


6


*I desire that thou tell me the cause of the paleness of
thy face, whether it be acquired or natural from thy birth.
l O Commander of the Faithful,' answered he, ' my case
is rare and my affair extraordinary \ were it graven with
needles on the corners of the eye, it would serve as an
admonition to him who will be admonished.' 6 Tell it
me,' said the Khalif. < Peradventure, thy healing maybe
at my hand.' ' O Commander of the Faithful,' said the
young man, ' lend me thine ears and give me thy whole
mind.' 'Come/ said the Khalif ; 'tell it me, for thou
makest me long to hear it/

' Know then, O Commander of the Faithful/ replied the
young man, 'that I am a merchant of the merchants of
the sea and come from the city of Oman, where my father
was a rich merchant, having thirty ships trading upon the
sea, whose yearly hire was thirty thousand dinars ; and
he had partners trading with his money and journeying
on the sea. He was a man of worth and generosity and
taught me writing and all whereof a man hath need.
When his last hour drew near, he called me to him and
gave me the customary injunctions ; then God the Most
High admitted him to His mercy and may He continue
the Commander of the Faithful [on life !]

One day, as I sat in my house with a company of
merchants, one of my servants came in to me and said,
" O my lord, there is a man at the door, who craves
admittance to thee." So I gave leave and he came in,
bearing on his head a covered box. He set it down and
uncovered it, and behold, therein were fruits out of season
and [vegetables] conserved in salt and fresh, such as are
not found in our country. I thanked him and gave him
a hundred dinars, and he went away, grateful Then
I divided these things amongst my guests and asked
them whence they came. Quoth they, " They come from
Bassora/ ; and praised them and went on to expatiate upon


7


the beauties of Bassora and were all of accord that there
was nothing in the world goodlier than Baghdad and its
people. Then they fell to describing Baghdad and the
excellence of its air and the beauty of its ordinance and
the goodly manners of its people, till my soul longed for
it and all my hopes clave to the sight of it.

So I arose and selling my ships and houses and lands
and slaves, male and female, got together a thousand
thousand dinars, besides jewels and precious stones, with
which I freighted a ship and setting out therein, sailed
nights and days till I came to Bassora, where I abode
awhile. Then I hired a bark and embarking therein with
all my goods, sailed up the river some days till I arrived
at Baghdad. I enquired where the merchants abode and
what part thereof was pleasantest of sojourn and was
answered, "The Kerkh quarter.'' So I went thither and
hiring a house in a street called the Street of Saffron,
transported my goods to it and took up my lodging therein.

Here I abode some days, till, one Friday, I sallied forth
apleasuring, taking with me somewhat of money. I went
first to a mosque, called the Mosque of Mensour, where
the Friday service was held, and when we had made an
end of prayers, I went out with the folk to a place called
Kern es Serat, where I saw a tall and goodly house, with
a balcony overlooking the river-bank, wherein was a lattice-
window. So I betook myself thither with a company of
folk and saw there an old man sitting, handsomely clad
and exhaling a sweet scent. His beard flowed down upon
his breast, where it divided into two waves like silver-wire,
and about him were four damsels and five pages in attend-
ance upon him. So I said to one of the folk, " What is
the name of yonder old man and what is his business ? "
" His name is Tahir ibn el Alaa," answered he, "and he
is a keeper of girls ; all who go in to him eat and drink
and look upon fair ones." ££ By Allah," quoth I, <£ this


8


long while have I gone about in quest of the like
of this ! "

3C(gftt So I went up to the old man and saluting him, said to-
itacxlit. ^im, « O my lord, I desire to be thy guest to-night." And
he said, " With all my heart ; but, O my son, with me arc-
many damsels, some whose night is ten dinars, some forty
and others more. Choose which thou wilt have." Quoth
I, "I choose her whose night is ten dinars." And I counted
out to him three hundred dinars, being the price of a
month ; whereupon he committed me to a page, who
carried me to a bath within the house and tended me on
goodly wise. When I came out of the bath, he brought
me to the door of a chamber and knocked, whereupon
out came a damsel, to whom said he, " Take thy guest."
She received me with welcome and courtesy, laughing
and rejoicing, and brought me into si rare apartment,
decorated with gold. I looked at Jier and saw her like
the moon on the night of its full, having in attendance
on her two damsels like stars. She made me sit and
seating herself by my side, signed to her maids, who set
before us a table covered with dishes of various kinds of
meats, fowls and quails and sandgrouse and pigeons. So
we ate till we were satisfied, and never in my life saw
I aught more delicious than this food. When we had
eaten, she caused remove the table [of meats] and set on
the table of wine and flowers and fruits and sweetmeats :.
and I abode with her a month on this wise.

At the end of the month, I repaired to the bath ; then^
going to the old man, I said to him, " O my lord, I want
her whose night is twenty dinars." " Pay down the
money," said he. So I fetched money and counted out
to him six hundred dinars for a month's hire, whereupon
he called a boy and said to him, "Take thy lord here. n
So he carried me to the bath and thence to the door of
a chamber, at which he knocked and there came out a


9


damsel, to whom quoth he, "Take thy guest w She re-
ceived me on the goodliest wise and I found in attendance
on her four slave-girls, whom she commanded to bring
foed. So they brought a table spread with all kinds of
meats, and I ate. When I had made an end of eating and
the table had been removed, she took the lute and sang
the following verses :

O windwafts of musk, from the land of Babel to us-ward that fare, In
the name of my passion and heat, I charge you my messages bear ;

For lo, in those regions of yours are dwellings of yore that I knew, The
homes of our loved ones, to wit, the noblest of all that are there ;

And in them abideth the maid, for whom many a lover doth pine F
Distraught with the pangs of desire, but getteth no grace of the fair.

I abode with her a month, after which I returned to the
old man and said to him, " I want her of the forty dinars-
fa night]," "Pay the money," said he. So I counted
out to him twelve hundred dinars and abode with her a
month, as it were one day, for what I saw of the beauty
of her person and the goodliness of her converse. After
this I went to the old man one evening and heard a great
clamour and loud voices. So I said to him, "What is to
do ? " And he answered, saying, " This is the night of
our greatest holiday, whereon all the townsfolk embark
on the river and divert themselves by gazing upon one
another. Hast thou a mind to go up to the roof and
amuse thyself by looking upon the folk?" "Yes,"
answered I, and went up to the roof, whence I [looked
down upon the river and] saw [a great multitude of]
folk with flambeaux and cressets, and great mirth and
merriment toward.

Then I went up to the end of the roof and saw there
a little chamber railed off by a goodly curtain^ and in
its midst a couch of juniper-wood, plated with gold and
covered with a handsome carpet. On this sat a lovely
young lady, confounding all beholders with her beauty


and grace and symmetry, and by her side a youth, whose
hand was on her neck ; and he was kissing her and she
him. When I saw them, O Commander of the Faithful,
I could not contain myself nor knew I where I was, so
dazzled was I by her beauty : but, when I came down,
I questioned the damsel with whom I was and described
the young lady to her. "What wilt thou with her?"
asked she; and I said, "She hath taken my wit." She
smiled and said, "O Aboulhusn, hast thou a mind to
her?" "Ay, by Allah!" answered I; "for she hath
captived my heart and soul." Quoth she, "This is the
daughter of Tahir ibn el Alaa ; she is our mistress and we
are all her handmaids ; but knowest thou, O Aboulhusn,
what is the price of her night and day?" And I said,
"No." "Five hundred dinars," answered she; "for she
is one for whom kings might sigh in vain." 1

"By Allah," quoth I, "I will spend all I have "on
this damsel ! " And I lay, heartsore for desire, till the
morning, when I donned a suit of the richest royal
raiment and betaking myself to Ibn el Alaa, said to him,
"O my lord, I want her whose night is five hundred
dinars." Quoth he, "Pay the money." So I counted
out to him fifteen thousand dinars for a month's hire and
he took them and said to the page, " Carry him to thy
mistress such an one." So he took me and carried me
to a saloon, than which my eyes never saw a goodlier on
the face of the earth, and there I found the young lady
seated. When I saw her, O Commander of the Faithful,
my reason was dazed with her beauty, for she was like
the full moon on its fourteenth night, full of grace and
symmetry and loveliness. Her speech put to shame the
tones of the lute, and it was as it were she to whom the
poet referred in the following verses :

1 Lit she is a regret in the hearts of kings.


II


Quoth she (and verily desire ran riot in her side, What while the dusky

night let down the darkness like a tide),
" Night, in thy blackness is there none to company with me ? Is there no

swiver for this kaze of all men, far and wide ?"
Then with her palm she smote thereon and said, what while she sighed

The sighing of the sorrowful, the sad, the weeping-eyed,
<e As by the toothstick's use appears the beauty of the teeth, So, like a

toothstick is the yard unto the kaze applied.
0, Muslims, stand your yards not up on end and is there none 'Mongst

you will succour her who doth to you complain ? " she cried,
Therev/ith my yard thrust out, erect, from underneath my clothes, And

said to her, " Here, here's for thee ! " And I the while untied
The laces of her drawers. She made a show of fear and said, " Who'rt

thou ? " And I, " A youth thy cry that answereth," replied
And straightway fell to routing her with what was like her wrist, A lusty

routing, that full sore the buttocks mortified ;
Till when, three courses run, I rose, ' ' Fair fall thee of the swivel'*

Quoth she, and I, 4 4 May solacement thyself therefrom betide 1 "

And how excellent is the saying of another 1

A fair one, to idolaters if she her face should show, They'd leave their

idols and her face for only Lord would know.
If in the Eastward she appeared unto a monk, for sure, He'd cease from

turning to the West and to the East bend low ; 1
And if into the briny sea one day she chanced to spit, Assuredly the

salt sea's floods straight fresh and sweet would grow.

And that of another:

I looked one look upon her and dazed was all my thought, For all the

rare perfections wherewith the maid was fraught.
Suspicion that I loved her discovered unto her, And straight the suppo-
sition her cheeks to redden wrought.

I saluted her and she said to me, "Welcome and fair
welcome ! " and taking me by the hand, made me sit
down beside her; whereupon, of the excess of my passion,
- See Vol. VIIL p. 78, note


12


I fell aweeping for fear of parting and poured forth the
tears of the eye, reciting the following verses :

The nights of estrangement I love ; yet not that in them I delight, But
fate peradventure shall cause reunion ensue their despite ;

And eke, on like wise, I abhor the days of enjoyment, because I see
that all things in this world still issue in ceasing outright.

She strove to solace me with soft speech, but I was
drowned in the sea of passion, fearing, even in the midst
of union, the anguish of separation, for excess of longing
and desire • and I bethought me of the misery of absence
and estrangement and repeated these verses :

Even in her arms I me bethought of severance from her And from mine

eyes the tears ran down, a ruddy- coloured flood,
Like tragacanth, and straight I wiped mine eyes upon her neck, For of

the use of camphor 1 'tis to stay the flow of blood.

Then she called for food and" there came four damsels,
high-bosomed maids, who set before us meats and fruits
and sweetmeats and flowers and wine, such as befit none
but kings. So we ate and sat at the wine, compassed
about with flowers and herbs of sweet savour, in a
chamber fit only for kings. Presently, one of her maids
brought her a bag of silk, which she opened and taking
thereout a lute, laid it in her lap and touched its strings,
whereupon it complained, as the child complains to its
mother, and she sang the following verses :

Drink not of wine except it be at the hands of a loveling slim. Who in,
brightness of soul resembles it and it resembles him.

The drinker of wine, in very sooth, hath no delight thereof, Except the
cheek of the fair be pure, who doth the goblet brim.

On this wise, O Commander of the Faithful, I abode

with her, month after month, till all my money was spent j

1 Camphor is with the Arabs a favourite object of comparison fos
anything white, especially a white skin*


13


wherefore, as I sat with her [one day], I bethought me of
[coming] separation from her and my tears streamed down
upon my cheeks like rivers, and I became not knowing
night from day. Quoth she, "Why dost thou weep?"
And I answered, " O light of mine eyes, I weep because
of our [coming] parting." " And what/' asked she, " shall
part thee and me, my lord?" "O my lady," said I,
" from the time I cam® to thee, thy father hath taken of
me, for every night, five hundred dinars, and now I have
nothing left Indeed the poet speaks sooth when he says :

Exile at home, I trow, is lack of good, And wealth is home in very
stTangerhood."

"Know/* rejoined she, "that it is my father's wont,
whenas a merchant abideth with him and hath spent all
his money, to give him hospitality three days ; then doth
he put him out and he may never return to us. But keep
thou thy secret and conceal thy case and I will contrive so
that thou shalt abide with me till such time as God will ;
for, indeed, there is a great love for thee in my heart.
Thou must know that all my father's wealth is under my
hand and he knows not the tale thereof; so, every day,
I will give thee a purse of five hundred dinars, which do
thou give him, saying, 4 Henceforth, I will pay thee only
day by day.' He will hand the purse to me, and I will
give it to thee again, and we will abide thus till such time
as God pleases."

I thanked her and kissed her hand; and on this wise
I abode with her a whole year, till it chanced one day
that she beat one of her handmaids grievously and the
latter said, "By Allah, I will torture thy heart, even as
thou hast tortured me ! " So she went to the girl's father
and discovered to him all our practice, whereupon he
arose forthright and coming in to me, as I sat with his
daughter, said to me, "Harkye, such an one I" u At thy


14


service, n replied L Quoth he, "It is our wont, when a
merchant grows poor with us, to give him hospitality
three days ; but thou hast had a year with us, eating and
drinking and doing what thou wouldst Then he turned
to his servants and said to them, "Pull off his clothes."
They did as he bade them and gave me ten dirhems and
an old suit worth other five; after which he said to me,
"Go forth; I will not beat thee nor revile thee; but go
thy ways and if thou abide in this town, thy blood be on
thine own head."

So I went forth, in my own despite, knowing not
whither to go, for all the trouble in the world was fallen
on my heart and I was occupied with melancholy thought.
Then I bethought me of the wealth which I had brought
from Oman and said in myself, "I came hither with a
million dinars and have made away with it all in the house
of yonder ill-omened old man, and now I go forth from
him, naked and broken-hearted! But there is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme !"

I abode three days in Baghdad, without tasting meat
or drink, and on the fourth day I saw a ship bound for
Bassora ; so I hired a passage in her and when we reached
Bassora, I landed and went to the market, being sore
anhungred. Presently, a man saw me, a grocer, whom I
had known aforetime, and coming up to me, embraced
me, — for he had been my friend and my father's friend
before me, — and questioned me of my case, for that he
saw me clad in those tattered clothes. So I told him all
that had befallen me, and he said, " By Allah, this is not
the fashion of a reasonable man ! But what dost thou
purpose to do, after this that hath befallen thee ? " Quoth
I, "I know not what I shall do/' and he said, "Wilt thou
abide with me and write my goings-out and comings-in,
and thou shalt have two dirhems a day, over and above
thy meat and drink ? >s I agreed to this and abode with


15

him a whole year, buying and selling, till I had gotten
a hundred dinars ; when I hired an upper chamber by
the river-side, so haply a ship should come up with mer-
chandise, that I might buy goods with the dinars and go
with them to Baghdad.

One day, there came ships with merchandise, and all
the merchants resorted to them to buy, and I with them.
[We boarded one of the ships,] and behold, there came
two men out of the hold and setting themselves chairs on
the deck, sat down thereon. The merchants accosted
them, with intent to buy, and they said to one of the crew,
" Bring the carpet." So he brought the carpet and spread
it, and another came with a pair of saddle-bags, from
which he took a budget and emptied it on the carpet ; and
our sights were dazzled with that which issued thence of
pearls and corals and jacinths and cornelians and other 'Hfctt}!
jewels of all sorts and colours. Then said one of the men uXCCfit
on the chairs, " O merchants, we will sell but this to-day,
by way of spending-money, for that we are weary." So
the merchants fell to bidding for the jewels and bid, one
against the other, till the price reached four hundred
dinars.

Now the owner of the bag was an old acquaintance of
mine, and when he saw me, he came down to me and
saluting me, said, "Why dost thou not speak and bid like
the rest of the merchants ? " (< my lord," answered I,
" the shifts of fortune have run against me and I have lost
my wealth and have but a hundred dinars left in the
world." Quoth he, " O Omani, after this vast wealth,
do but a hundred dinars remain to thee?" And I was
abashed before him and my eyes filled with tears ; where-
upon he looked at me and indeed my case was grievous to
him. So he said to the merchants, " Bear witness against
me that I sell all that is in this bag of various kinds of
jewels and precious stones to this man for a hundred


i6

dinars, albeit I know them to be worth so man)' thousand
dinars, and I make him a present of them," So saying,
he gave me the bag and the carpet, with all the jewels
thereon, for which I thanked him, and all the merchants
present praised him. Then I carried all this to the jewel-
market and sat there to sell and buy. Among the jewels
was a round amulet of the handiwork of the masters, 1
weighing half a pound. It was of bright red cornelian
and on both sides of it were graven characters and talis-
mans, like unto the tracks of ants ; but I knew not its
use.

I bought and sold a whole year, at the end of which
time I took the amulet and said to myself, "This hath
been with me a great while, and I know not what it is
nor what is its use." So I gave it to the broker, who
went round with it and returned, saying, "None of the
merchants will give more than ten dirhems for it." Quoth
I, " I will not sell it at that price." And he threw it in
my face and went away. Another day I again offered it
for sale and its price reached fifteen dirhems ; so I took
it from the broker in a pet and threw it back into the
tray. Presently, as I sat in my shop, there came up to
me a man, who bore the traces of travel, and saluting me,
said, "By thy leave, I will turn over thy wares." "It is
well," answered I, and indeed I was still wroth by reason
of the lack of demand for the amulet.

So he fell to turning over my wares, but took nought
thereof save the amulet, which when he saw, he said,
" Praised be God ! " and kissed his hand. Then said he
to me, "O my lord, wilt thou sell this?" And I said,
"Yes," being still angry. Quoth he, "What is its price?"
And I, "How much wilt thou give?" " Twenty dinars,"
answered he. I thought he was making mock of me and
said, "Go thy ways, ,? Quoth he, u I will give thee fifty
1 i.e. of those learned in occult arts.


17


dinars for it* I made him no answer, and he said, "A
thousand dinars." But I was silent, whilst he laughed
at my silence and said, " Why dost thou not return me an
answer ? " u Go thy ways/* repeated I and was like to
quarrel with him. But he bid thousand after thousand,
and I still made him no reply, till he said, "Wilt thou
sell it for twenty thousand dinars ? "

I still thought he was making mock of me ; but the
people gathered about me and all of them said to me,
" Sell to him, and if he buy not, we will all fall upon him
and beat him and put him out of the city." So I said to
him, "Wilt thou buy or dost thou jest?" Quoth he,
" Wilt thou sell or dost thou jest ? " And I said, " I will
sell if thou wilt buy." Then said he, " I will buy it foi
thirty thousand dinars : take them and strike the bargain.''
And I said to the bystanders, " Bear witness against him."
[Then to him, " I sell to thee,] but on condition that thou
acquaint me with the use and virtues of the amulet, for
which thou payest all this money." " Close the bargain,"
answered he, "and I will tell thee this." Quoth I, " I sell
to thee." And he said, " God be witness of that which
thou sayst ! "

Then he brought out the money and giving it to me,
put the amulet in his bosom ; after which he said to me,
" Art thou content ? J ' " Yes," answered I, and he said
to the people, "Bear witness against him that he hath
closed the bargain and touched the price, thirty thousand
dinars." Then he turned to me and said, " Harkye, good
man, hadst thou held back from selling, by Allah, I would
have bidden thee up to a hundred thousand dinars, nay,
even to a thousand thousand 1 " When I heard this, O
Commander of the Faithful, the blood fled from my face,
and from that day there overcame it this paleness that
thou seest.

Then said I to him, " Tell me the reason of this and

VOL. IX. 2


18

what is the use of this amulet." And he answered, sayings
" Know that the King of Hind hath a daughter, never was
8een a fairer than she, and she is possessed with a demon. 1
So the king summoned the scribes and men of science
and diviners, but none of them could ease her of this.
Now I was present in the assembly ; so I said to him,
4 O king, I know a man called Saadullah the Babylonian,
than whom there is not on the face of the earth one more
versed in these matters, and if thou see fit to send me
to him, do so.' Quoth he, £ Go to him.' And I said,
* Bring me a piece of cornelian. ' So he gave me a great
piece of cornelian and a hundred thousand dinars and a
present, with which I betook myself to the land of Babel
and seeking out Saadullah, delivered him the money and
the present, which he accepted and sending for a lapidary,
caused him fashion the cornelian, into this amulet. Then
he abode seven months in observation of the stars, till
he chose out an auspicious time for engraving it, when he
graved upon it these talismanic characters that thou seest,
Wfgt)i and I took it and returned with it to the king.
tHXtCUt. Now the princess was bound with four chains, and every
night a damsel lay with her and was found in the morning
slain. The King took the amulet and laid it upon his
daughter, whereupon she was straightway made whole.
At this he rejoiced greatly and invested me with a dress
of honour and gave alms of much money \ and he caused
set the amulet in the princess's necklace. It chanced, one
day, that she embarked with her damsels in a ship and
went apleasuring on the sea. Presently, one of her maids
put out her hand to her, to sport with her, and the neck-
lace broke asunder and fell into the sea. From that hour

1 i.e. is afflicted with epilepsy. See note, Vol. VIII. p. 179. The
Boulac and Macnaghten Editions give the princess's malady, in error, as
da a es sudaa (meagrims), instead of daa es sera (epilepsy), as in the
BreslauText


19


the princess's malady 1 returned to her, wherefore great
grief betided the king and he gave me much money,
saying, ' Go thou to Saadullah and let him make her
another amulet, in the stead of that which is lost.' So I
journeyed to Babel, but found the Sheikh dead; where-
upon I returned and told the king, who sent me and ten
others to go round about in all countries, so haply we
might find a remedy for her : and now God hath caused
me happen on it with thee." So saying, he took the
amulet and departed.

As for me, I repaired to Baghdad, carrying all my
wealth with me, and took up my abode in the house
which I had occupied aforetime. On the morrow, as soon
as it was light, I donned my clothes and betook myself to
the house of Tahir ibn el Alaa, so haply I might see her
whom I loved, for the love of her had neVer ceased to
increase upon my heart. When I came to the house, I
saw the balcony broken down and the lattice stopped up ;
so I stood awhile, pondering my case and the shifts of
time, till there came up a serving-man and I questioned
him, saying, " What hath God done with Tahir ibn el
Alaa ? " He answered, <( O my brother, he hath repented
to God the Most High [and renounced his unlawful
trade]." Quoth I, "What was the cause of his repent-
ance ? " And he said, " O my brother, in such a year
there came to him a merchant, by name Aboulhusn the
Omani, who abode with his daughter awhile, till his
money was all spent, when the old man turned him out,
broken-hearted. Now the girl loved him with an ex-
ceeding love, and when she was parted from him, she
sickened of a sore sickness and came nigh upon death.
When her father knew how it was with her, he sought for
Aboulhusn high and low, promising whoso should bring

1 Lit. the possessor^ ue. the demon by whom she was supposed to be
possessed.


20


him to him a hundred thousand dinars ; but none could
find him nor come on any trace of him ; and she is now
at death's door." "And how is it with her father?" asked
I. Quoth the servant, " He hath sold all his girls, for
stress of that which hath befallen him, and repented to
God the Most High."

Then said I, "What wouldst thou say to him who
should direct thee to Aboulhusn the Omani?" And he
answered, saying, " I conjure thee by Allah, O my brother,
that thou do this and quicken my poverty ! " 1 " Go to her
father," rejoined I, " and say to him, * Thou owest me the
reward for good news, for that Aboulhusn the Omani
standeth at the door.'" With this he set off running, as
he were a mule loosed from the mill, and presently came
back, accompanied by Tahir himself, who no sooner saw
me than he returned to his house and gave the man
a hundred thousand dinars, "With which he went away,
calling down blessings on me. Then the old man came
up to me and embraced me and wept, saying, "O my
lord, where hast thou been absent all this while ? Indeed,
my daughter is perished by reason of her separation from
thee ; but come with me into the house." So we entered
and he prostrated himself in gratitude to God the Most
High, saying, " Praised be God who hath reunited us with
thee!"

Then he went in to his daughter and said to her, " God
healeth thee of this sickness." "O my father," answered
she, " I shall never be whole of my sickness, except I look
upon the face of Aboulhusn." Quoth he, " If thou wilt
eat a morsel and go to the bath, I will bring thee in
company with him/ 5 "Is it true that thou sayest?" asked
she ; and he replied, " By the Great God, it is true ! "
"By Allah," rejoined she, "if I look upon his face, I
shall have no need of eating ! " Then said he to his
1 Likening poverty to death, in true Oriental fashion*.


21


servant, '* Bring in thy lord" So I entered, and when she
saw me, she fell down in a swoon, and presently coming
to herself, recited the following verse :

Lo, God hath deigned to reunite the separated twain, For all in very
sooth they deemed they ne'er should meet again.

Then she sat up and said, " By Allah, O my lord, I had
not thought to see thy face again, but if it were in sleep ! "
And she embraced me and wept Then said she, " O
father mine, now will I eat and drink.'* The old man
rejoiced in this and brought her meat and drink and we
ate and drank. After this, I abode with them awhile, till
she was restored to her former beauty, when her father
sent for the Cadi and the witnesses and let draw up the
contract of marriage between her and me and made a
great bride-feast ; and she is my wife to this day and this
is my son by her." So saying, he went away and re-
turned with a boy of marvellous beauty and symmetry, to
whom said he, * Kiss the earth before the Commander of
the Faithful' So he kissed the earth before the Khalif^
who marvelled at his beauty and glorified his Creator;
after which he departed with his company, saying to
the vizier, s O Jaafer, verily this is none other than a
marvellous thing, never heard I of aught more extra-
ordinary.'

When he was seated in the palace of the Khalifate,
he said to Mesrour, * Bring the year's tribute of Bassora
and Baghdad and Khorassan and lay it in this recess/
So he laid the three tributes together and they were a vast
sum of money, whose tale none might tell save God.
Then the Khalif bade draw a curtain before the recess
and said to Jaafer, ' Fetch me Aboulhusn.' € I hear and
obey/ replied Jaafer and going forth, returned presently
with the Omani, who kissed the ground before the Khalif,
fearing lest he had sent for him. because of some fault


22


that he had committed, whenas he was with him in his
house. Then said Er Reshid, ' Harkye, O OmaniP and
he replied, 4 At thy service, O Commander of the Faithful !
May God still bestow his favours upon thee ! ' Quoth
the Khalif, 4 Draw back yonder curtain,' So Aboulhusn
drew back the curtain from the recess and was confounded
at the mass of money he saw there. ' O Aboulhusn,'*
said Er Reshid, * whether is the more, this money or that
thou didst lose by the amulet 1 ? 1 And he answered, ' This
is many times the greater, O Commander of the Faithful !'
Quoth the Khalif. < Bear witness, all ye who are present,
that I give this money to this young man.' Aboulhusn
kissed the earth and was abashed and wept before the
Khalif for excess of joy.

Now, when he wept, the tears ran down upon his cheeks
and the blood returned to its „ place and his face became
as it were the moon on the night of its full. Whereupon
quoth the Khalif, 1 There is no god but God ! Glory be
to Him who decreeth change upon change and is Himself
the Everlasting One, that changeth not 1 ' So saying, he
fetched a mirror and showed Aboulhusn his face therein,
which when he saw, he prostrated himself in gratitude to
God the Most High. Then the Khalif bade transport the
money to Aboulhusn's house and charged the latter absent
not himself from him, so he might enjoy his company.
Accordingly he paid him frequent visits, till Er Reshid
was admitted to the mercy of God the Most High ; and
glory be to Him who dieth not and in whose hand is the
dominion of the Seen and the Unseen !

1 i.e. by selling it for thirty thousand dinars, when, by holding back,
lie might have got a million for it


23


IBRAHIM AND JEMILEH.

El Khesib, lord of Egypt, had a son named Ibrahim,
there was none goodlier than he, and of his fear for
him, he suffered him not to go forth, save to the Friday
prayers. One day, as he was returning from the mosque,
he happened upon an old man, with whom were many
books ; so he lighted down from his horse and seating
himself beside him, fell to turning over the books and
examining them. In [one of] them he saw the portrait
of a woman, that all but spoke, never was seen on the
earth's face a fairer than she ; and this captivated his
reason and confounded his wit. So he said to the old
man, *0 elder, sell me this picture.' And^the bookseller
kissed the earth before him and said, ' O my lord, [it is
thine,] without price.' 1 Ibrahim gave him a hundred
dinars and taking the book in which was the picture, fell
to gazing upon it and weeping night and day, abstaining
from meat and drink and sleep.

Then said he in himself, * If I ask the bookseller of the
painter of the picture, belike he will tell me ; and if the
original be on life, I will cast about to win to her ; but,
if it be an imaginary portrait, I will leave doting upon it
and torment myself no more for a thing that hath no
reality/ So, on the following Friday, he betook himself 'J^Tf^fjf
to the bookseller, who rose to receive him, and said to ifcccclui
him, { O uncle, tell me who painted this picture.' And
he answered, saying, ' O my lord, a man of the people
of Baghdad painted it, by name Aboulcasim es Sendelani j
[he dwells] in a quarter called El Kerkh ; but I know not
of whom it is the portrait. 7 So Ibrahim left him and

1 The customary formula of reply of the Oriental seller to a purchaser
-of superior rank, meaning, " I leave the price to thy generosity,"


24


return to the palace, after praying the Friday prayers,
without acquainting any of his household with his case.

Then he took a bag and filling it with gold and jewels,
to the value of thirty thousand dinars, waited till the
morning, when he went out, without telling any, and
presently overtook a caravan. Here he saw a Bedouin
and said to him, * O uncle, how far am I from Baghdad ? 7
' O my son/ replied the other, ' what hast thou to do with
Baghdad ? Verily, between thee and it is two months'
journey/ Quoth Ibrahim, £ O uncle, an thou wilt bring
me to Baghdad, I will give thee a hundred dinars and this
mare under me, that is worth other thousand/ [ 4 Agreed ! ']
answered the Bedouin. * And God be witness of what we
say ! Thou shalt not lodge this night but with me.'

Ibrahim agreed to this and passed the night with him.
At break of day, the Bedouin took him and fared on with
him in haste by a near road, In his eagerness for the
promised reward ; nor did they leave journeying till they
came to the walls of Baghdad, when he said, ' Praised be
God for safety I O my lord, this is Baghdad/ Whereat
Ibrahim rejoiced with an exceeding joy and alighting from
the mare, gave her to the Bedouin, together with the
hundred dinars. Then he took the bag and [entering the
city], walked on, enquiring for the Kerkh quarter and the
abiding-place of the merchants, till destiny led him to a
by-street, wherein were ten houses, five facing five, and at
the farther end was a [gateway with a] two-leaved door
and a ring of silver. In the porch stood two benches of
marble, spread with the finest carpets, and on one oi
them sat a man of comely and reverend aspect, clad in
sumptuous apparel and attended by five white slaves, like
moons.

When Ibrahim saw the street, he knew it by the de-
scription the bookseller had given him ; so he saluted the
man, who returned his greeting and bidding him welcome^


25


m?tde him sit down and asked him of his case. Quoth
Ibrahim, ' I am a stranger and desire of thy favour that
thou look me out a house in this street where I may take
up my abode. 1 With this the other cried out, saying,
* Ho, Ghezaleh I ' And there came forth to him a slave-
girl, who said, *At thy service, O my lord!' 'Take some
servants/ said her master, ' and go to such a house and
clean it and furnish it with all that is needful for this well-
favoured youth.'

So she went forth and did as he bade her ; whilst the
old man took the youth and showed him the house; and
he said, *G my lord, what is the rent of this house?' 'O
bright of face/ answered the other, £ I will take no rent of
thee, what while thou abidest there.' Ibrahim thanked
him for this and the old man called another slave-girl,
whereupon there came forth to him a damsel like the sun,
to whom said he, * Bring chess.' So she brought it and
one of the servants set the board ; whereupon said his
host to Ibrahim, 'Wilt thou play with me?' And he
answered, 'Yes.' So they played several games and
Ibrahim beat him, 'Well done, O youth!' exclaimed
the other. * Thou art indeed perfect in qualities. By
Allah, there is not one in Baghdad can beat me, and yet
thou hast beaten me ! '

When they had made ready the house and furnished it
with all that was needful, the old man delivered the keys
to Ibrahim and said to him, f O my lord, wilt thou not
enter my house and honour me by eating of my bread ? '
He assented and entering with him, found it a handsome
and goodly house, decorated with gold and full of all
manner pictures and furniture and other things, such as
the tongue availeth not to set out. The old man
welcomed him and called for food, whereupon they
brought a table of the make of Senaa of Yemen and
spread it with all manner rare meats, than which there


26


was nought costlier nor more delicious. So Ibrahim ate
till he was satisfied, after which he washed his hands and
proceeded to look at the house and furniture. Presently,
he turned to look for the leather bag, but found it not and
said, [in himself,] < There is no power and no virtue save
in God the Most High, the Supreme! I have eaten a
morsel worth a dirhem or two and have lost a bag wherein
is thirty thousand dinars' worth : but I seek aid of God/
And he was silent and could not speak, for the greatness
tolC ill). °f his trouble.

Presently his host brought the chess and said to him,
4 Wilt thou play with me?' And he said, 'Yes. 7 So they
played and the old man beat him. ' Well done ! ' said
Ibrahim and left playing and rose ; whereupon said his
host, * What ails thee, O youth ? ' And he answered, * I
want the bag/ So the old man rose and brought it out
to him, saying, ' Here it is, O 'my lord. Wilt thou now
return to playing with me ? ' * Yes/ replied Ibrahim. So
they played and the young man beat him. Quoth the
other, 1 When thy thought was occupied with the bag, I
beat thee : but, now I have brought it back to thee, thou
beatest me. But, tell me, O my son, what countryman art
thou/ * I am from Egypt,' answered Ibrahim. c And
what is the cause of thy coming to Baghdad ?' asked the
other; whereupon Ibrahim brought out the portrait and
said to him, * Know, O uncle, that I am the son of El
Khesib, lord of Egypt, and I saw with a bookseller this
picture, which ravished my wit. I asked him who painted
it and he said, " He who wrought it is a man, Aboulcasim
es Sendelani by name, who dwells in a street called the
Street of Saffron in the Kerkh quarter of Baghdad/' So
I took with me somewhat of money and came hither
alone, none knowing of my case ; and I desire of the
fulness of thy bounty that thou direct me to Aboulcasim,
to I may ask him of the manner of his painting this


2?


picture and whose portrait it is. And whatsoever he
desireth of me, that will I give him/

4 By Allah, O my son/ said his host, ' I am Aboulcasim
es Sendelani, and this is an extraordinary thing how fate
hath thus led thee to me 1 ' When Ibrahim heard this, he
rose to him, and embraced him and kissed his head and
hands, saying, 'God on thee, tell me whose portrait it is/
* I hear and obey/ answered the other and rising, opened
a closet and brought out a number of books, in which he
had painted the same picture. Then said he, * Know, O
my son, that the original of this portrait is the daughter
of my father's brother, whose name is Aboulleith. She
dwells in Bassora, of which city her father is governor,
and her name is Jemileh. There is not a fairer than she
on the face of the earth ; but she is averse from men and
cannot hear speak of them in her company. Now I once
repaired to my uncle, to the intent that he should marry
her to me, and was lavish of wealth to him ; but he would
not consent; and when his daughter knew of my offer,
she was enraged and sent to me to say, amongst other
things, " If thou have wit, tarry not in this city ; else wilt
thou perish and thy blood will be on thine own head.**
For she is a virago of viragoes. So I left Bassora, broken-
hearted, and limned this portrait of her in books and
scattered them abroad in various countries, so haply they
might fall into the hands of a comely youth like thyself
and he contrive to win to her and peradventure she might
fall in love with him, purposing to take a promise of him
that, when he should have gotten possession of her, he
would show her to me, though but for a moment from
afar of!/

When Ibrahim heard this, he bowed his head awhile in
thought and Es Sendelani said to him, L O my son, I have
not seen in Baghdad a comelier than thou, and meseems
that, when she sees thee, she will love thee. Art thou


28


willing, therefore, in case thou foregather with her and
get possession of her, to show her to me, if but for a
moment from afar?' 'Yes,' answered Ibrahim, and the
painter rejoined, ' This being so, abide with me till thou
set out.' 'I cannot tarry longer,' replied the youth; 'for
my heart is all afire with love of her,' * Have patience
three days,' said Es Sendelani, 6 till I fit thee out a ship,
wherein thou mayst go to Bassora.' So he waited whilst
the painter equipped him a ship and stored it with all that
he needed of meat and drink and so forth.

When the three days were past, he said to Ibrahim,
' Make ready for the voyage ; for I have equipped thee a
ship and furnished it with all thou requirest. The ship is
my property and the sailors are of my servants. In the
vessel is what will suffice thee till thy return, and I have
charged the crew to serve thee till thou come back in
safety/ So Ibrahim took leave of his host and embarking,
sailed down the river till he came to Bassora, where he
rook out a hundred dinars and offered them to the sailors;
but they said, 6 We have gotten our hire of our master/
* Take this by way of largesse/ answered he ; * and I will
not acquaint him therewith.' So they took it and blessed
him.

Then he landed and entering the town, enquired for the
merchants' lodging and was directed to a khan called the
Khan of Hemdan. So he betook himself to the market
where stood the khan in question, and all eyes were
attracted to him by reason of his exceeding beauty and
grace. He entered the khan, with one of the sailors in
his company, and enquiring for the porter, was directed to
an old man of reverend aspect. He saluted him and the
porter returned his greeting ; after which Ibrahim said to
him, 4 O uncle, hast thou a decent chamber ? ' £ Yes/
answered he and taking him and the sailor, opened to
them an elegant chamber, decorated with gold* and said.


29

*0 youth, this chamber befitteth thee.' Ibrahim pulled
out two dinars and gave them to him, saying, 'Take
these as key-money.' 1 And the porter took them and
blessed him.

Then Ibrahim sent the sailor back to the ship and
entered the chamber, where the porter abode with him
and served him, saying, ' O my lord, thy coming hath
brought us joy/ Ibrahim gave him a dinar, saying, * Buy
us bread and meat and wine and sweetmeats with this.'
So the porter went to the market and buying ten dirhems'
worth of victual, brought it back to Ibrahim and gave him
the other ten dirhems. But he said to him, 'Spend them
on thyself; ' whereat the porter rejoiced mightily. Then
he ate a cake of bread, with a little seasoning, 2 and gave
the rest to the porter, saying, 'Carry this to the people
of thy household.' So the porter carried k to his family
and said to them, 'Methinketh there is not on the face
of the earth a more generous than the young man who
is come to lodge with us this day, nor yet a pleasanter
than he. If he abide with us, we shall grow rich.'

Then he returned to Ibrahim and found him weeping;
so he sat down and began to rub 3 his feet and kiss them,
saying, 'O my lord, why weepest thou? May God not
make thee weep ! ' ' O uncle,' said Ibrahim, ' I have a
mind to drink with thee this night' And the porter
answered, 1 1 hear and obey.' So he gave him ten dinars,
saying, ' Buy us fruit and wine and dessert,* and flowers

J A gratuity given to the porter, on taking possession of a room or
house. Cf. the French denier d Dim, given to the concierge on like
occasions,

2 The Arabs apply the word udm (here translated ** seasoning in
the same sense as the Scotch word "kitchen," to anything savoury eaten
with bread or rice.

g Lit. to knead or shampoo (kebes).

4 dried fruits (as opposed to fresh) and confections*


3°


and five fat fowls and bring me a lute.' The porter went
out and buying what he had ordered, said to his wife,
'Strain this wine and cook us this food and look thou
dress it daintily, for this young man overwhelms us with
his bounties/ So she did as he bade her, to the utmost
3C(c$t of desire; and he took the victuals and carried them to
tocclb* Ibrahim. Then they ate and drank and made merry; and
Ibrahim wept and repeated the following verses:

O friend, though I should barter life for travail all in vain, And all ray
wealth and all the world and that it doth contain

And all the meads of Paradise, to boot, against one hour Of union, my
heart to buy at such a price were fain.

Then he gave a great sob and fell down in a swoon.
The porter sighed, and when he came to himself, he said
to him, ' O my lord, what is it makes thee weep and who
is she to whom thou alludest in these verses? Indeed,
she cannot be but as dust to thy feet.' Ibrahim made
him no answer, but, rising, brought out a parcel of the
richest women's clothes and said to him, ' Take this to
thy harem.' So he carried it to his wife and she returned
with him to the young man's lodging and found him
weeping, whereupon quoth the porter to him, 'Verily,
thou breakest our hearts 1 Tell us what fair one thou
desirest, and she shall be thy handmaid.' ' O uncle/
answered he, 'know that I am the son of El Khesib,
lord of Egpyt, and I am enamoured of Jemileh, daughter
of the lord Aboulleith.' * Allah I Allah ! ' exclaimed the
porter's wife. 'O my brother, leave this talk, lest any
hear of us and we perish. For there is not on the face
of the earth a more masterful than she nor may any
name to her the name of a man, for she is averse from
men. Wherefore, O my son s turn from her to other
than her/

When Ibrahim heard this, he wept sore, and the porter


31


said to him, € I have nothing save my life ; but that I will
venture for thy love and contrive thee a means of bringing
thee to thy desire.' Then they went out from him and on
the morrow, he betook himself to the bath and donned
a suit of royal raiment, after which he returned to his
lodging. Presently the porter and his wife came in to
him and said, ' Know, O my lord, that there is a hump-
backed tailor here who sews for the lady Jemileh. Go
thou to him and acquaint him with thy case ; peradventure
he will put thee in the way of attaining thy desire.'

So Ibrahim arose and betaking himself to the shop of
the humpbacked tailor, went in to him and found with
him ten white slaves, as they were moons. He saluted
them and they returned his greeting and made him sit
down ; and indeed they rejoiced in him and were amazed
at his beauty and grace. Now he had torn his pocket
with intent and he said to the hunchback, 4 1 desire that
thou sew me up my pocket/ So the tailor took a needle-
ful of silk and sewed up his pocket ; whereupon Ibrahim
gave him five dinars and returned to his lodging. Quoth
the tailor, 'What have I done for this youth, that he
should give me five dinars?' And he passed the night,
pondering his beauty and generosity.

On the morrow Ibrahim returned to the shop and
saluted the tailor, who returned his greeting and welcomed
him and made much of him. Then he sat down and said
to the hunchback, £ O uncle, sew up my pocket, for I have
torn it again.' 'On my head and eyes, O my son,'
answered the tailor and sewed it up ; whereupon Ibrahim
gave him ten dinars and he took them, amazed at his
beauty and generosity. Then said he, ' By Allah, O
youth, needs must there be a reason for this conduct of
thme, for this is no matter of sewing up a pocket. Tell
me the truth of thy case. If thou be enamoured of one
of these boys, by Allah, there is not among them a


32


comelier than thou, for they are all as the dust of thy
feet ; and beho.'d, they are all thy slaves and at thy
disposal. Or if it be other than this, tell me.' ' O uncle,'
replied Ibrahim, 'this is no place for talk, for my case
is strange and my affair extraordinary.' * If it be so/
rejoined the tailor, 'come with me to a privy place.' So
saying, he took the youth by the hand and carrying him
into a chamber behind the shop, said, ' Now tell me.'

So Ibrahim related his whole story to the tailor, who
was amazed at his speech and said, ' O my son, fear
God [and have mercy] on thyself, for she of whom thou
speakest is a virago and averse from men. Wherefore, O
my brother, do thou guard thy tongue, or thou wilt destroy
thyself/ When Ibrahim heard the hunchback's words, he
wept sore and clinging to the tailor's skirts, said, ' Help
me, O my lord, or I am a dead man ; for I have left my
kingdom and the kingdom of- my father and grandfather
and am become a stranger and lonely in the lands ; nor
can I endure without her.' When the tailor saw how it
was with him, he had compassion on him and said, 4 O my
son, I have but my life and that I will venture for thy
love, for thou makest my heart ache. [Come again] to-
morrow [and meanwhile] I will contrive thee somewhat
whereby thy heart shall be solaced.' Ibrahim called down
blessings on him and returning to the khan, told the
porter what the tailor had said, and he answered, ' Indeed,
he hath dealt kindly with thee.'

Next morning, the youth donned his richest clothes and
taking a purse of money, repaired to the tailor and saluted
him. Then he sat down and said, 'O uncle, fulfil thy
promise to me.' Quoth the hunchback, 'Arise forthright
and take three fat fowls and three ounces of sugar-candy
and two small jugs of wine and a cup. Lay all these
in a bag and to~morrow 5 after the morning-prayers, take
boat with them, bidding the boatman row thee down


33


the river below Bassora. If he say to thee, " I cannot go
farther than a parasang [from the city]," do thou answer,
" As thou wilt ; " but, when he shall have come so far,
tempt him with money to carry thee farther ; and the first
garden thou wilt see after this will be that of the lady
Jemileh. Go up to the gate and there thou wilt see two
high steps, carpeted with brocade, and seated thereon
a hunchback like unto me. Do thou complain to him
of thy case and solicit his favour : it may be he will have
compassion on thee and bring thee to the sight of her,
though but for a moment from afar. This is all I can
do for thee ; and except he be moved to pity for thee,
we are dead men, thou and L This then is my counsel,
and the matter rests with God the Most High.' Quoth
Ibrahim, ' I seek aid of God ; what He wills, is ; and there
is no power and no virtue save in Him!' „Then he re-
turned to his lodging and taking the things the tailor had
■named, laid them in a small bag.

On the morrow, as soon as it was day, he went down to
the bank of the Tigris, where he found a boatman asleep ;
so he awoke him and giving him ten dinars, bade him row
him down the river below Bassora. ' O my lord,' answered
the man, * [it must be] on condition that I go no farther
than a parasang ; for if I overpass that distance by a span,
I am a lost man, and thou too.' 'Be it as thou wilt,' said
Ibrahim. So he took him and dropped down the river
with him till he drew near the garden, when he said to
him, ' O my son, I can go no farther ; for, if I overpass
this limit, we are both dead men/ Whereupon Ibrahim
pulled out other ten dinars and gave them to him, saying,
'Take this spending-money and better thy case there-
withal' The boatman was ashamed to refuse him and
fared on with him, saying, * I commit the affair to God the jhf (o.fjJ
Most High!' When they came to the garden, the youth tfCfCflt)!,
arose 5 in his joy, whilst the boat was yet a spear's cast

VOL. IX. J


34


from the land, and springing ashore, cast himself down,
whilst the boatman turned and fled.

Then Ibrahim went up to the garden-gate, which stood
open, and saw in the porch a couch of ivory, whereon sat
a humpbacked man of pleasant favour, clad in gold-laced
clothes and bearing in his hand a mace of silver, plated
with gold. So he hastened up to him and seizing his
hand, kissed it ; whereupon quoth the hunchback, ' O my
son, who art thou and whence comest thou and who
brought thee hither?' And indeed, when he saw the
youth, he was amazed at his beauty. * O uncle/ answered
Ibrahim, ' I am an ignorant boy and a stranger ; ' and he
wept The hunchback took pity on him and taking him
up on the couch, wiped away his tears and said to him,
'No harm shall come to thee. If thou be in debt, may
God quit thy debt; and if thou^be in fear, may He appease
thy fear I ' ' O uncle,' replied Ibrahim, £ I am neither in
fear nor in debt, but have wealth in plenty, thanks to
God.' 'Then. O my son/ rejoined the other, i what is
thine occasion, that thou venturest thyself and thy beauty
to a place, wherein is destruction ? '

So he told him his story and discovered to him his case,
whereupon he bowed his head awhile, then said to him,
* Was it the humpbacked tailor who directed thee to me ? '
'Yes/ answered Ibrahim, and the keeper said, 'This is
my brother, and he is a blessed man. But, O my son,
had not the love of thee gotten hold upon my heart and
had I not taken compassion on thee, verily thou wert lost,
thou and my brother and the porter of the khan and his
wife. For know that this garden hath not its like on the
face of the earth and that it is called the Garden of the
Pearl, nor hath any entered it in all my life, except the
Sultan and myself and its mistress Jemileh ; and I have
dwelt here twenty years and never yet saw any else come
hither. Every forty days the lady Jemileh comes hither in


35


a bark and lands in the midst of her women, under a

canopy of satin, whose skirts ten damsels hold up with
hooks of gold, whilst she enters, and I see nothing of her.
Nevertheless, I have but my life and I will venture it for
thy sake,'

Ibrahim kissed his hands and the keeper said to him,
'Abide with me, till I contrive somewhat for thee.' Then
he took him by the hand and carried him into the garden,
which when he saw, he deemed it Paradise, for therein
were trees intertwining and tall palms and waters welling
and birds carolling with various voices. Presently, the
keeper brought him to a pavilion and said to him, 'This
is where the lady Jemileh sitteth.' So he examined it and
found it of the rarest of pleasure-places, full of all manner
paintings in gold and ultramarine. It had four doors, to
which one mounted by five steps, and in its midst was
a basin of water, to which led down steps of gold, set
with precious stones. Midmost the pool was a fountain
of gold, with figures, large and small, and water pouring
from their mouths ; and when, by reason of the issuing
forth of the water, they piped and whistled in various
tones, it seemed to the hearer as though he were in
Paradise. Hound the pavilion ran a channel 1 of water,
with conduits 3 of silver, and it was covered with brocade.
To the left of the pavilion was a lattice of silver, giving
upon a green park, wherein were all manner wild cattle
and gazelles and hares, and on the right hand was another
lattice, overlooking a meadow full of birds of all sorts,

1 Syn. water-wheel {sakiyeh).

8 Syn. water-pots (cawadis) belonging to a water-wheel. The whole
of this description of the pavilion and its environs is very confused and
(probably) corrupt. The story of Ibrahim and Jemileh is omitted from
the Breslau Text of the work, and I cannot therefore avail myself of
this latter for the purpose of collation and correction, as in innumerable
ether instances.


36


warbling in various voices and bewildering the hearers
with delight.

The youth was ravished at all he saw and sat down in

the doorway by the gardener, who said to him, * How
deemest thou of my garden?' Quoth Ibrahim, 'It is the
Paradise of the world.' Whereat the gardener laughed
and rising, was absent awhile and presently returned with
a tray, full of fowls and quails and sweetmeats of sugar
and other dainties, which he set before Ibrahim, saying,
' Eat thy fill/ So he ate till he had enough, whereat the
keeper rejoiced and said, ' By Allah, this is the fashion
of kings and kings' sons ! ' Then said he, * O Ibrahim,
what hast thou in yonder bag?' So he opened it before
him and the keeper said, i Take it with thee ; it will serve
thee when the lady Jemileh cometh ; for, when once she
is come, I shall not be able to bring thee food/

Then he rose and taking the youth by the hand, brought
him to a place over against the pavilion, where he made
him a bower among the trees and said to him, 'Get thee
up here, and when she comes, thou wilt see her and she
will not see thee. When she sings, drink thou to her
singing, and when she departs, God willing, thou shalt
return in safety whence thou earnest. This is the best
I can do for thee and on God be our dependence!'
Ibrahim thanked him and would have kissed his hand,
but he forbade him. Then he laid the bag in the bower
and the keeper said to him, ' O Ibrahim, walk about and
take thy pleasure in the garden and eat of its fruits, for
thy mistress's coming is appointed for to-morrow.' So he
took his pleasure in the garden and ate of its fruits ; after
which he passed the night with the keeper.

When the morning arose and gave forth its light and
shone, he prayed the morning-prayer and presently the
keeper came to him with a pale face, and said to him*
5 Rise, O my son, and go up into the bower ; for the slave-


37


girls are come, to set the place in order, and she cometh

after them ; and beware lest thou spit or sneeze or blow Jffg|)|

thy nose ; else we are dead men, thou and I.' So Ibrahim frCCCflfe^i

rose and went up into the bower, whilst the keeper went

away, saying, ' God grant thee safety, O my son ! '

Presently up came four slave-girls, whose like none ever
saw, and entering the pavilion, put off their clothes and
washed it. Then they sprinkled it with rose-water and
incensed it with ambergris and aloes-wood and spread
it with brocade. After these came other fifty damsels,
with instruments of music, and amongst them Jemileh,
within a canopy of red brocade, the skirts whereof the
slave-girls bore up with hooks of gold, till she had entered
the pavilion, so that Ibrahim saw nought of her nor of her
dress. So he said in himself, ' By Allah, all my labour is lost !
But needs must I wait to see how the case will be.' Then
the damsels brought meat and drink and the^ ate and drank
and washed their hands, after which they set her a stool
and she sat down. Then they all played on instruments of
music and sang with ravishing voices, without compare.

Presently, out came an old woman, a duenna, and
clapped her hands and danced, whilst the girls pulled
her hither and thither, till the curtain was lifted and out
came Jemileh, laughing. She was clad in [costly] robes
and ornaments, and on her head was a crown set with
pearls and jewels. About her neck she wore a necklace
of pearls and her waist was clasped with a girdle of
chrysolite bugles, with tassels 1 of rubies and pearls. The
damsels kissed the earth before her, and when Ibrahim
saw her, he took leave of his senses and his wit was dazed
and his thought confounded for amazement at the sight of
loveliness whose like is not on the face of the earth. He
fell into a swoon and coming to himself weeping-eyed 9
recited the following verses :

1 Lit, cords,


38


I see thee nor mine eyes I shut, lest for a space My lids should veil from

me the vision of thy face;
For, though with every glance I gazed on thee for e'er, Mine eyes might

not suffice thy beauties to embrace.

Then said the old woman to the girls, ' Let ten of you
arise and dance and sing.' And Ibrahim said in himself,
*I wish the lady Jemileh would dance/ When the
damsels had made an end of their dance, they came
round the princess and said to her, ' O my lady, we would
have thee dance amongst us, so the measure of our joy
may be filled, for never saw we a more delightful day than
this/ Quoth Ibrahim to himself, ' Doubtless the gates of
heaven are open and God hath granted my prayer/ 1

Then the damsels kissed her feet and said to her, * By
Allah, we never saw thee light of heart as to-day ! ' Nor ■
did they cease to importune her, till she put off her [outer]
clothes and abode in a shift of cloth of gold, broidered
with various jewels, discovering breasts that stood out like
pomegranates and unveiling a face as it were the moon
on the night of its full. Then she began to dance, and
Ibrahim beheld motions whose like he had never in his
life seen, for she showed such rare skill and wonderful
invention, that she made men forget the dancing of the
bubbles in the wine-cups and called to mind the inclining of
the turbans from the heads ; even as saith of her the poet :

As she would, she was created, after such a wise that lo, She in beauty's
mould was fashioned, perfect, neither less nor mo'.

'Tis as if she had been moulded out of water of pure pearls ; In each
member of her beauty is a very moon, I trow.

1 According to Muslim tradition, when the gates of heaven are opened
(as on the Night of Power), all prayers are granted. See note, Vol. V.
p. 314, where, by the way, the 26th night of Ramazan is (by a clerical
error, not discovered in time for correction) omitted from the list of
nights one of which is supposed to be the Night of Power*


39


And as saith another :

A dancer, like a willow-wand her shape ; her movements sweet When I

behold, for ravishment my soul is like to fleet.
Nor this nor t'other foot of her rests aye, when she doth dance ; 'Tis as

the fire within my heart were underneath her feet.

As he gazed upon her, she chanced to look up and saw
him, whereupon her face changed and she said to her
women, * Sing ye till I come back to you.' Then, taking
up a knife half a cubit long, she made towards him, saying,
c There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! '

When Ibrahim saw this, he [well-nigh] lost his wits ;
but, when she drew near him and her eyes fell upon his
face, the knife dropped from her hand, and she exclaimed,

* Glory to Him who turneth hearts!' Then said she to
him, * O youth, be of good cheer, for thou art safe from
that thou fearest 1 J Whereupon Ibrahim fell to weeping
and she to wiping away his tears with her hand and
saying, 1 youth, tell me who thou art, and what brought
thee hither.' He kissed the earth before her and clung
to her skirt ; and she said, 1 No harm shall come to thee ;
for, by Allah, no male hath ever filled mine eyes 1 but
thyself! Tell me, then, who thou art/

So he told her his story from first to last, whereat she
marvelled and said to him, ' O my lord, I conjure thee by
Allah, tell me if thou be Ibrahim ben el Khesib ? ' 'I
am,' answered he, and she threw herself upon him, saying,

* O my lord, it was thou madest me averse trom men ; for,
when I heard that there was in the land of Egypt a youth
than whom there was no goodlier on the face of the earth,
I fell in love with thee by report and my heart became
enamoured of thee, for that which was told me of thy

1 ie. none hath ever pleased me.


40


surpassing comeliness, so that I was, in respect of theej,
even as saith the poet :

My ear my eye prevented in loving him, trow I % For whiles the ear, it
chances, doth love before the eye.

So praised be God who hath shown me thy face ! But,
by Allah, had it been other than thou, I had crucified the
keeper of the garden and the porter of the khan and the
tailor and him who had recourse to them ! But how shall
I contrive for somewhat thou mayst eat } without the know-
ledge of my women ? ' Quoth Ibrahim, ' I have here what
we may eat and drink. ' And he opened the bag before
her. She took a fowl and began to feed him and he to
feed her ; which when he saw, it seemed to him that this
was a dream. Then he brought out wine and they drank,
what while the damsels sang on ; nor did they leave to do
thus from morn to noon, when she rose and said, 4 Go now
and get thee a boat and await me in such a place, till I
come to thee ; for I have no patience left to brook sepa-
ration from thee.' * O my lady,' answered he, * I have
with me a ship of my own, whose crew are in my hire, and
they await me.' 'This is as we would have it/ rejoined
"]Nf {Q$t she and returning to her women, said to them, * Come, let
ftCCCClbiU, us go back to our palace/ ' Why should we return now/
asked they, ' seeing that we used to abide here three days ? *
Quoth she, ( I feel an exceeding oppression in myself, as
I were sick, and I fear lest this increase upon me/

So they answered, * We hear and obey,' and donning
their clothes, went down to the river-bank and embarked ;
whereupon the keeper of the garden came up to Ibrahim
and said to him, knowing not what had happened, i O
Ibrahim, thou hast not had the luck to enjoy the sight
of her, and I fear lest she have seen thee, for it is her
custom to abide here three days/ 6 She saw me not nor
I her/ replied Ibrahim; £ for she came not forth of the


41


pavilion.' 'True, O my son/ rejoined the keeper; * for f
had she seen thee, we were both dead men : but tarry
with me til! she come again next week, and thou shalt see
her and take thy fill of looking on her.' * O my lord/
replied the prince, ' I have with me good and fear for it
Moreover, I left men behind me and I fear lest they take
advantage of my absence/ ' O my son/ said the keeper,
' it is grievous to me to part with thee ; ' and he embraced
him and bade him farewell.

Then Ibrahim returned to the khan where he lodged,
and foregathering with the doorkeeper, took of him his
good [that he had left with him]. Quoth the latter,
* Good news, if it be the will of God ! ' 1 But Ibrahim
said, 1 1 found no way to my desire, and now I am minded
to return to my people.' Whereupon the porter wept ;
then taking up his goods, he carried them to the ship and
bade him farewell. Ibrahim repaired to the place which
Jemileh had appointed him and awaited her there till
it grew dark, when she came up, disguised as a swash-
buckler, with a round beard and her waist bound with
a girdle. In one hand she held a bow and arrows and in
the other a drawn sword, and she said to him, s Art thou
Ibrahim, son of El Khesib, lord of Egypt?' 'I am he/
answered the prince ; and she said, f What good- for-
nought art thou, that comest to debauch kings' daughters ?
Come: speak with the Sultan/ 2

Therewith he fell down in a swoon and the sailors well-
nigh died in their skins for fear ; but, when she saw what
had betided her lover, she pulled off her beard and
throwing down her sword, unbound the girdle from her
waist, whereupon he knew her for the lady Jemileh and
said to her, ' By Allah, thou hast rent my heart in sunder ! '
Then said he to the boatmen, £ Hasten the vessel's course/

1 A questions i.e. I trust thou hast good news?

• Ordinary formula of summons before a king or magistrate.


42


So they spread the sail and putting off, fared on with all
diligence; nor was it many days before they reached
Baghdad, where they saw a ship lying by the river-bank.
When the sailors saw them, they cried out to the crew,
saying, 'Ho, such an one and such an one, we give you
joy of your safety!' Then they drove their ship against
Ibrahim's and he looked and beheld Aboulcasim es
Sendelani in the other boat.

When the latter saw them, he exclaimed, * This is what
I sought,' and he said to Ibrahim, < Praised be God for
safety! Hast thou accomplished thine errand?' 'Yes,'
answered the young man. Now Aboulcasim had a flambeau
before him ; so he brought it near unto Ibrahim's boat,*
and when Jemileh saw him, she was troubled and her colour
changed : , but, when he saw her, he said, * Go ye in God's
safe keeping. I am bound to Bassora, on an errand to
the Sultan ; but the gift is for him who is present.' 3 Then
he brought out a box of sweetmeats, wherein was henbane,
and threw it into the boat : whereupon quoth Ibrahim to
Jemileh, ' O solace of mine eyes, eat of this.' But she
wept and said, 'O Ibrahim, knowest thou who that is?'
' Yes/ answered he, ' it is such an one.' Quoth she, 4 He
is my father's brother's son and sought me aforetime in
marriage of my father; but I would not accept of him.
And now he is gone to Bassora and most like he will tell
my father of us.' *0 my lady/ rejoined Ibrahim, 'he will
not reach Bassora, till we are at Mosul.' But they knew
not what lurked for them in the secret purpose of God.

Then he ate of the sweetmeat, but hardly had it reached
his stomach --when he smote the ground with his head.
[He lay insensible till] near dawn, when he sneezed and
the henbane issued from his nostrils. With this, he
opened his eyes and found himself naked and cast out
among ruins ; so he buffeted his face and said, ' Doubtless
1 That he might see Jemileh. s A popular saying.


43


this is a trick that Es Sendelani hath played me.' And
he knew not whither he should go, for he had upon him
nothing but his trousers. However, he rose and walked
on a little, till he espied the prefect of police coming
towards him, with a company of men with swords and
staves; whereat he took fright and seeing a ruined bath,
hid himself there. Presently, his foot stumbled at some-
thing ; so he put his hand on it, and it became befouled
with blood. He wiped his hand upon his trousers, un-
knowing what had befouled it, and put it out a second
time, when, behold, it fell upon a dead body, and the
head came up in his hand. He threw it down, saying,
* There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High ! ' and took refuge in one of the cabinets of the
bath.

Presently, the prefect stopped at the door of the bath
and said, * Enter this place and search. 1 So ten of them
entered with cressets, and Ibrahim of his fear retired
behind a wall and looking upon the dead body, saw it to
be that of a young lady with a face like the full moon.
She was clad in costly raiment and her head lay on one
side and her body on the other; and when he saw this,
terror got hold upon his heart Then the prefect of police
entered and said, ' Search the corners of the bath.' So
they entered the place where Ibrahim was, and one of
them, seeing him, came up to him with a knife, half a
cubit long, in his hand. When he drew near him, he
said, ' Glory be to God, the Creator of this fair face 1 O
youth, whence art thou ?' Then he took him by the hand
and said, 4 O youth, why slewest thou this woman ? 7 ' By
Allah,' replied Ibrahim, ' I slew her not, nor know I who
slew her, and I entered not this place but in fear of you ! '
And he told him his case, saying, 1 God on thee, do me no
wrong, for I am in concern for myself I* Then he took
him and carried him to the prefect, who, seeing the marks


44


Nfaijt of blood on his hands, said, 'This needs no proof: strike
totdh", off his head/ When Ibrahim heard this, he wept sore
and recited the following verses, with the tears streaming
from ins eyes :

We tread the steps to us of destiny forewrit, For he to whom a way's

decreed must needs submit
To walk therein, and he whose death is fore-ordained To be in such a
land shall die in none but it.

Then he gave a sob and fell down in a swoon ; and the
headsman's heart was moved to pity for him and he
exclaimed, 'By Allah, this is no murderer's face!' But
the prefect said, 'Strike off his head.' So they seated him
on the carpet of blood and bound his eyes ; after which
the headsman drew his sword and asking leave of the
prefect, was about to strike off his head, whilst he cried
out, saying, ' Alas, my strangerhood ! ' when he heard a
noise of horse coming up and "one cried out, saying,
4 Leave him ! Stay thy hand, O headsman ! '

Now there was for this a rare reason and an extra-
ordinary cause; and it was thus. El Khesib, lord of
Egypt, had sent his chamberlain to the Khalif Haroun er
Reshid with presents and a letter, saying, ' My son hath
been missing this year past, and I hear that he is in
Baghdad; wherefore I crave of the bounty of the Vicar
of God that he make search for tidings of him and do his
endeavour to find him and send him back to me by the
chamberlain/ When the Khalif read the letter, he com-
manded the chief of the police to search out the truth of
the matter, and he accordingly proceeded to enquire after
Ibrahim, till it was told him that he was at Bassora,
whereupon he informed the Khalif, who wrote a letter [to
the viceroy] and giving it to the Chamberlain of Egypt,
bade him repair to Bassora and take with him a company
of the vizier's followers. So 5 of his solicitude for the
$on of his lord 9 the chamberlain set out forthright and


45


happened [by the way] upon Ibrahim, as he sat upon the

carpet of blood.

When the prefect saw the chamberlain, he alighted to
him, and the latter said, 'What young man is that and
what is his case ? ' The prefect told him how the matter
stood and the chamberlain said (and indeed he knew
him not for the son of the Sultan, for that his charms
were wasted [and his favour changed] by reason of the
much terror and affliction he had suffered), £ Verily this
young man hath no murderer's face.' And he bade loose
him and bring him to him. So they loosed him and
brought him to the chamberlain, who said to him, ' O
youth, tell me thy case and how comes this slain woman
with thee/ Ibrahim looked at him and knowing him,
said to him, * Out on thee 1 Dost thou not know me ?
Am I not Ibrahim, son of thy lord? Belike thou art
come in quest of me.'

With this the chamberlain considered him straitly and
knowing him right well, threw himself at his feet; which
when the prefect saw, his colour changed; and the
chamberlain said to him, ' Out on thee, O tyrant ! Was
it thine intent to kill the son of my master El Khesib,
lord of Egypt?' The prefect kissed his skirt, saying,
4 O my lord, how should I know him ? We found him in
this plight and saw the damsel lying slain by his side. 5
* Out on thee ! ' rejoined the chamberlaia 1 Thou art not
fit for the prefectship. This is a lad of fifteen and
he hath not killed a sparrow; so how should he be a
murderer? Why didst thou not have patience with him
and question him of his case ? '

Then the chamberlain and the prefect commanded to
make search for the young lady's murderer. So they
re-entered the bath and finding him, brought him to the
prefect, who carried him to the Khalif and acquainted
him with that which had happened. Er Reshid bade put


4 6


the murderer to death and sending for Ibrahim, smiled
in his face and said to him, ' Tell me thy story and that
which hath betided thee.' So he told him his story from
first to last, and it was grievous to the Khalif, who called
Mesrour, his swordbearer, and said to him, ' Go straight-
way and fall upon the house of Aboulcasim es Sendelani
and bring me him and the young lady.' So he went forth
at once and breaking into the house, found Jemileh bound
with her hair and nigh upon death. So he loosed her
and taking the painter, carried them both to the Khalif,
who marvelled at Jemileh's beauty. Then he turned to
Es Sendelani and said, 4 Take him and cut off his hands,
wherewith he beat this young lady ; then crucify him and
deliver his goods and possessions to Ibrahim.'

They did his bidding, and as they were thus, in came
Aboulleith, governor of Bassora, the lady Jemileh's father,
seeking aid of the Khalif against Ibrahim ben el Khesib
and complaining to him that the latter had taken his
daughter. Quoth Er Reshid, ' He hath been the means
of delivering her from torture and death.' Then he sent
for Ibrahim, and when he came, he said to Aboulleith,
4 Wilt thou not accept of this young man, son of the Sultan
of Egypt, as husband to thy daugher?' 'Hearkening
and obedience [are due] to God and to thee, O Com-
mander of the Faithful/ replied Aboulleith; whereupon
the Khalif summoned the Cadi and the witnesses and
married the young lady to Ibrahim. Moreover, he gave
him all Es Sendelani's good and equipped him for his
return to his own country, where he abode with Jemileh
in the utmost of delight and the most perfect of content-
ment, till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights
and the Sunderer of Companies ; and glory be to the
[Ever-]Living One who dieth not I


47


ABOULHUSN OF KHORASSAN.

The Khalif El Mutezid Billah 1 was a high-spirited and
noble-minded prince; he had in Baghdad six hundred
viziers and no whit of the affairs of the folk was hidden
from him. He went forth one day, he and Ibn Hemdoun, a
to divert himself with observing his subjects and hearing
the latest news of the folk, and being overtaken with the
heats of noonday, they turned aside from the main
thoroughfare into a little by-street, at the upper end
whereof they saw a handsome and high-builded house,
discoursing of its owner with the tongue of praise. They
sat down at the gate to rest, and presently out came two
servants, as they were moons on their fourteenth night.
Quoth one of them to his fellow, ' Would some guest
would seek admission ! My master will not eat but with
guests and we are come to this hour and I have seen
no one.'

The Khalif marvelled at their speech and said, ( This is
a proof of the hospitality of the master of the house ;
needs must we go in to him and note his generosity, and
this shall be a means of favour betiding him from us.'
So he said to the servant, c Ask leave of thy master for the
admission of a company 3 of strangers.' For it was the
Khalifs wont, whenas he was minded to observe his
subjects, to disguise himself in a merchant's habit. The

1 Aboulabbas el Mutezid Billah, sixteenth Khalif of the Abbaside
dynasty, A.D. 892-902.

2 Hemdan ibn Hemdoun, a well-known noble and warrior of the time,
founder of the great house of the Benou Hemdan, the chiefs of which
attained to such power and eminence under El Mutezid's successors, as
Princes of Mosul, Aleppo, etc.

8 The Khalif was apparently accompanied by other attendants, besides
Ibn Hemdoun.


4 8


servant went in and told his master, who rejoiced and
rising, came out to them in person. He was a comely
and well-favoured man, clad in a tunic of Nishapour
[silk] and a gold-laced mantle ; and he dripped with
scented waters and wore a ring of rubies on his hand.
When he saw them, he said to them, ' Welcome and fair
welcome to the lords who do us the utmost of favour by
their coming ! ' So they entered the house and found it
such as would make a man forget home and family, for
Ntfl;f)t it was as it were a piece of Paradise. Within it was a
0CCCCil. garden, full of all kinds of trees, confounding the be-
holder, and its dwelling-places were furnished with costly
furniture. They sat down and the Khalif sat looking at
the house and the furniture.

(Quoth Ibn Hemcloun), I looked at the Khalif and saw
his countenance change, and being wont to know from
his face whether he was pleased or angry, said to myself,
'I wonder what has vexed him.' Then they brought
a golden basin and we washed our hands, after which
they spread a silken cloth and set thereon a table of
bamboo. When the covers were taken off the dishes,
we saw therein meats [costly] as the flowers of Spring
in the season of their utmost scarcity, in pairs and singly,
and the host said, ' [Eat,] O my lords, in the name of God !
By Allah, hunger pricks me ; so favour me by eating of
this food, as is the fashion of the noble.'

Then he fell to tearing fowls apart and laying them
before us, laughing the while and repeating verses and
telling stories and talking gaily with quaint and pleasant
sayings such as sorted with the entertainment. We ate
and drank, then removed to another room, which con-
founded the beholder with its beauty and which reeked
with exquisite perfumes. Here they brought us a tray
of freshly -gathered fruits and delicious sweetmeats, whereat
our joys redoubled and our cares ceased. But withal the


49


Khalif ceased not to wear a frowning face and smiled not
at that which gladdened the soul, albeit it was his wont
to love mirth and merriment and the putting away of cares,
and I knew that he was free from envy and no oppressor.
So I said to myself, 'I wonder what is the cause of his
moroseness and ill-humour.*

Presently they brought the wine-tray, the uniter of
friends, and clarified wine in flagons of gold and crystal
and silver, and the host smote with a wand of bamboo
on the door of an inner chamber, whereupon it opened
and out came three damsels, high-bosomed maids, with
faces like the sun at the fourth [hour] of the day, one
a lute-player, another a harpist and the third a dancer.
Then he set before us fruits and confections and drew
between us and the damsels a curtain of brocade, with
tassels of silk and rings of gold. The KJialif paid no
heed to all this, but said to the host, who knew not who
was in his company, c Art thou noble?' * No, my lord/
answered he ; * I am but a man of the sons of the
merchants and am known among the folk as Aboulhusn
Ali, son of Ahmed of Khorassan.'

Quoth the Khalif, ' Dost thou know me, O man ? ' ' By
Allah. O my lord,' answered he, ' 1 have no knowledge of
either of your worships ! ' Then said I to him, ' O man,
this is the Commander of the Faithful El Mutezid Billah.
grandson of El Mutawekkil ala Allah.' Whereupon he
rose and kissed the ground before the Khalif, trembling
for fear of him. Then said he, 1 Commander of the
Faithful, I conjure thee by the virtue of thy pious
ancestors, if thou have seen in me any shortcoming or
lack of good manners in thy presence, do thou forgive
me ! ' * As for that which thou hast done with us of
hospitality/ replied the Khalif, A nothing could have ex-
ceeded it ; and as for that wherewith I have to reproach
thee here, if thou tell me the truth respecting it and if
VOL, ix. 4


5o


commend itself to my reason, thou shalt be saved from
me ; but, if thou tell me not the truth, I will take thee
with manifest proof and punish thee as I have never yet
punished any/

1 God forbid that I should tell thee a lie ! ' answered
the host. ' But what is it that thou reproachest to me, O
Commander of the Faithful?' Quoth the Khalif, * Since
I entered thy house and looked upon its goodliness, I
have noted the furniture and vessels therein, nay, even to
thy clothes, and behold, on all of them is the name of my
grandfather, El Mutawekkil ala Allah/ 1 ' Yes/ answered
Aboulhusn. * O Commander of the Faithful (may God
protect thee), truth is thine inner and sincerity thine outer
garment and none may speak other than truly in thy
presence.' The Khalif bade him be seated and said,
' Tell us.' So he sat down and said, 4 Know, O Com-
mander of the Faithful, whom God stablish with His aid
and encompass with His bounties, that there is not a
richer in Baghdad than am I nor than was my father : but
do thou grant me thine ears and eyes and understanding,
whilst I expound to thee the cause of that which thou
reproachest to me.' Quoth the Khalif, £ Say thy say.'

' Know then, O Commander of the Faithful,' began
Aboulhusn, ' that my father belonged to the markets of
the money-changers and druggists and linendrapers and
had in each a shop and an agent and all kinds of goods.
Moreover, behind the money-changer's shop he had an
apartment, where he might be private, appointing the
shop for buying and selling. His wealth was beyond
count and limit, but he had no child other than myself,
and he loved me and was tenderly solicitous over me.
When his last hour was at hand, he called me to him and
commended my mother to my care and charged me to fear
God the Most High. Then he died, may God have mercy
1 Tenth Khalif of the house of Abbas, A,D. 849-861.


5i


upon him and continue the Commander of the Faithful
[on life !] And I gave myself up to pleasure and eating
and drinking and took to myself friends and comrades
and boon-companions. My mother used to forbid me
from this and to blame me for it, but I would not hear a
word from her, till my money was all gone, when I sold
my lands and houses and nought was left me save the
house in which I now dwell, and it is a goodly house, O
Commander of the Faithful

So I said to my mother, " I wish to sell the house. "
" O my son," answered she, " if thou sell it, thou wilt be
dishonoured and wilt have no place wherein to take
shelter." Quoth I, " It is worth five thousand dinars, and
with one thousand thereof I will buy me another house
and trade with the rest." "Wilt thou sell it to me at that
price ?" asked she; and I replied, "Yes." Whereupon she
went to a coffer and opening it, took out a porcelain
vessel, wherein were five thousand dinars. When I saw
this, meseemed the house was all gold and she said to
me, "O my son, think not that this is of thy father's good.
By Allah, it was of my own father's money and I have
treasured it up against a time of need ; for, in thy father's
time, I had no need of it."

I took the money from her and fell again to feasting
and merry-making with my friends, without heeding my
mother's words and admonitions, till the five thousand
dinars came to an end, when I said to her, " I wish to sell
the house." " O my son," answered she, " I forbade thee
from selling it before, of my knowledge that thou hadst
need of it ; so how wilt thou sell it a second time ? "
Quoth I, " Do not multiply words upon me, for I must
and will sell it." "Then sell it to me for fifteen thousand
dinars/' said she, "on condition that I take charge of thine
affairs." So I sold her the house at that price and gave
up my affairs into her charge, whereupon she sought out


S2

ray father's factors and gave each of them a thousand

dinars, keeping the rest m her own hands and ordering
the outgoings and the incomings. Moreover she gave me
money to trade withal and said to me, " Sit thou in thy
father's shop." So I took up my abode in the chamber
behind the shop in the market of the money-changers,
and my friends came and bought of me and I sold to
them ; whereby I profited well and my wealth increased.
When my mother saw me in this fair way, she discovered
to me that which she had treasured up of jewels and pearls
and gold, and I bought back my houses and lands that
I had wasted and my wealth became great as before.
I abode thus for some time, and the factors of my father
came to me and I gave them goods, and I built me a
second chamber behind the shop.

One day, as I sat in my shop, according to my wont,
there came up to me a damsel, never saw eyes a fairer than
she of favour, and said, "Is this tlie shop of Aboulhusn Ali
ibn Ahmed el Khurasani?" " Yes," answered I. "Where
is he?" asked she. "I am he," said I, and indeed my wit
was dazed at the excess of her loveliness. She sat down
and said to me, "Bid thy servant count me out three
hundred dinars." So I bade him give her that sum and
he counted it out to her and she took it and went away,
leaving me stupefied Quoth my clerk to me, " Dost thou
know her?" And I answered, "No, by Allah !" "Then
why," asked he, " didst thou bid me give her the money ? "
" By Allah," replied I, " I knew not what I said, of my
amazement at her beauty and grace ! " Then he rose
and followed her, without my knowledge, but presently
returned, weeping and with the mark of a blow on his
face. I asked him what ailed him, and he said, " I followed
the damsel, to see whither she went; but, when she was
aware of me, she turned and dealt me this blow and all
but put out my eye."


After this, a month passed, without my seeing her, and
I abode bewildered for love of her ; but, at the end of this
time, she came again and saluted me, whereat I was like
to fly for joy. She asked me how I did and said to me,
" Belike thou saidst to thyself, 4 What manner of trickstress
is this, who hath taken my money and made off? ' " " By
Allah, my lady," answered I, " my money and my life
are all at thy service ! " With this she unveiled herself
and sat down to rest, with the jewels and ornaments
playing over her face and bosom. Presently, she said to
me, " Give me three hundred dinars.'* " I hear and obey,"
answered I and counted out to her the money. She took
it and went away and I said to my servant, " Follow her."
So he followed her, but returned mumchance, and some
time passed without my seeing her. But, as I was sitting
one day, she came up to me and after talking awhile, said
to me. " Give me five hundred dinars, for I have occasion
for them." I would have said to her, " Why should I give
thee my money ? " But excess of passion hindered me from
speaking; for, whenever I saw her, I trembled in every
limb and my colour paled and I forgot what I would have
said and became even as saith the poet ;

I may not chance to look on her on unexpected wise, But so amazed am
I, I scarce can answer, for surprise.

So I counted her out the five hundred dinars and she
took them and went away ; whereupon I arose and fol-
lowed her myself, till she came to the jewel-market, where
she stopped at a man's shop and took of him a necklace.
Then she turned and seeing me, said, " Pay [him] live
hundred dinars for me." When the jeweller saw me, he
rose to me and made much of me, and I said to him,
"Give her the necklace and be the price at my charge.''
" I hear and obey," replied he, and she took it and went If fgfif
away. I followed her, till she came to the Tigris and iK'CCChl*


54


took boat there, whereupon I signed to the ground, as
who should say, " I kiss it before thee. 7 ' She went off,
laughing, and I stood, watching her, till I saw her land
and enter a palace, which when I considered, I knew it
for the palace of the Khalif El Mutawekkil. So I turned
back, with all the trouble in the world fallen on my heart,
for she had had of me three thousand dinars, and I said
in myself, " She hath taken my money and ravished my
wit, and belike I shall lose my life for love of her."

Then I returned home and told my mother all that had
befallen me, and she said, " O my son, beware how thou
have to do with her after this, or thou art a lost man."
When I went to my shop, my factor in the drug-market,
who was a very old man, came to me and said, c< O my
lord, how is it that I see thee in ill case and with marks of
chagrin upon thee ? Tell me what ails thee." So I told
him all that had befallen me with her and he said, " O
my son, this is one ot the women of the palace of the
Commander of the Faithful and indeed she is the Khalif s
favourite : so do thou reckon the money [expended] for
the sake of God the Most High 1 and occupy thyself no
more with her. If she come again, beware lest she have
to do with thee and tell me of this, that I may contrive
thee somewhat, lest perdition betide thee." Then he went
away and left me with a flame of fire in my heart.

At the end of the month she came again and I rejoiced
in her with an exceeding joy. Quoth she, " What ailed
thee to follow me ? " And I said, ' ' Excess of passion that
is in my heart urged me to this/' and I wept before her.
She wept out of pity for me and said, u By Allah, there is
not in thy heart aught of passion, but in mine is more !
But how shall I do ? By Allah, I have no resource but to
see thee thus once a month." Then she gave me a bill,
saying, " Carry this to such an one, who is my factor, and

1 i.e. for nothing:.


55


take of him what is named therein." But I replied, £t I
have no need of money; be my money and my life thy
sacrifice ! " Quoth she, "I will assuredly contrive thee
a means of access to me, whatever trouble it cost me."
Then she took leave of me and went away ; whilst I
repaired to the old druggist and told him what had passed.
He went with me to the Khalifs palace, which I knew
for that which the "lady had entered ; and he was at a loss
for a device,

Presently he espied a tailor sitting with his journeymen
at work in his shop, opposite the lattice giving upon the
river-bank, and said to me, " Yonder is one by whom thou
shalt come to thy desire ; but first tear thy pocket and go
to him and bid him sew it up. When he hath done this,
give him ten dinars." " I hear and obey," answered I and
taking two pieces of Greek brocade, went to the tailor
and bade him make of them four suits, two with surcoats
.and two without. When he had made an end of cutting
them out and sewing them, I gave him to his hire much
more than of wont, and he put out his hand to me with
the clothes; but I said, " Take them for thyself and those
who are with thee." And I fell to sitting with him and
sitting long. Moreover, I bespoke of him other clothes
and bade him hang them out in front of his shop, that
the folk might see them and buy them. He did as I bade
him, and whoso came forth of the palace and aught of the
clothes pleased him, I made him a present thereof, even
to the doorkeeper.

One day, the tailor said to me, " O my son, I would have
thee tell me the truth of thy case ; for thou hast bespoken
of me a hundred costly suits, each worth much money,
-and hast given the most of them to the folk. This is no
merchant's fashion, for a merchant calleth an account for
[every] dirhern, and what can be the sum of thy capital
and what thy gain every year, that thou givest these gifts ?


56


Tell me then the truth of thy case, that I may further
thee to thy desire." Then, " I conjure thee by God,"
added he, "[tell me,] art thou not in love?" "Yes,"
answered I ; and he said, " With whom ? " Quoth I, " With
one of the women of the Khalifs palace." And he
exclaimed, ' ' May God put them to shame ! How long
shall they seduce the folk? Knowest thou her name?"
i( No," answered I ; and he said, " Describe her to me. w
So I described her to him and he said, " Out on it ! This
is the favourite lutanist of the Khalif El Mutawekkil.
But she hath a servant, and do thou clap up a friendship
with him ; it may be he shall be the means of thy having
access to her."

As we were talking, out came the servant in question
from the palace, as he were the moon on its fourteenth
night. Now I had before me the clothes that the tailor
had made me, and they were of brocade of all colours.
He began to look at them and examine them ; then he
came up to me and I rose and saluted him. u Who art
thou ? " asked he ; and I answered, " I am a man of the
merchants." Quoth he, "Wilt thou sell these clothes?"
" Yes," replied I. So he chose out five of them and said
to me, " How much these five ? " Quoth I, " They are a
present from me to thee, in earnest of friendship between
us." At this he rejoiced and I went home and fetching
a suit embroidered with jewels and jacinths, worth three
thousand dinars, gave it to him.

He accepted it and carrying me into a room within
the palace, said to me, " What is thy name among the
merchants?" Quoth I, " I am a man of them." 1 "Verily,"
rejoined he, "I misdoubt me of thine affair." "Why so?"
asked I. "Because," answered he, "thou hast bestowed
on me a great matter a and won my heart therewith, and

1 i.e. never mind my name.

s i.e. thou hast made me a magnificent present*


57


I doubt not but thou art Aboulhusn of Khorassan the

money-changer." With this I fell aweeping and he said
to me, " Why dost thou weep ? By Allah, she for whom
thou weepest is yet more passionately in love with thee
than thou with her I And indeed her case with thee
is notorious among all the women of the palace. But
what wouldst thou have?" Quoth I, "I would have thee
succour me in my affliction. " So he appointed me for the
morrow and I returned home.

Next morning, I betook myself to him and waited in
his chamber till he came, when he said to me, <( Know
that, when she returned to her apartment yesternight,
after having made an end of her service about the Khalifs
person, I related to her all that passed between me and
thee and she is minded to foregather with thee. So
abide thou with me till the end of the day.'' Accord-
ingly I abode with him till dark, when he brought me
a shirt of gold-inwoven stuff and a suit of the Khalifs
apparel and clothing me therein, incensed me 1 and I
became most like the Khalif. Then he brought me to
a gallery with rows of doors on each side and said to me,
"These are the lodgings of the chief of the slave-girls;
and when thou passest along the gallery, do thou lay
a bean at each door, — for it is the Khalifs wont to do this
every night, — till thou come to the second passage on thy J$f jflftj
right hand, when thou wilt see a door with a threshold of isccciiJCti.
alabaster. Touch it with thy hand ; or, if thou wilt, count
the doors, so many, and enter the one whose marks are
thus and thus. There thy mistress will see thee and take
thee in with her. As for thy coming forth, God will make
it easy to me, though I carry thee out in a chest."

Then he left me and returned, whilst I went on, count-
ing the doors and laying at each a bean. When I had

1 t,e. scented him with the fragrant smoke of burning aloes -wood or
ambergris.


58


reached the middle of the gallery, I heard a great noise
and saw the light of flambeaux coming towards me. As
the light drew near me, I looked at it and behold the
Khalif himself, surrounded by the slave-girls carrying
flambeaux, and I heard one of the women [by whose door
I had ' passed] say to another, " O my sister, have we two
Khalifs ? Verily, the Khalif hath already passed by my
chamber and laid the bean at my door, as is his wont, and
I smelt the perfumes and essences on him, and now I see
the light of his flambeaux, and here he comes with them/*
" Indeed this is a strange thing/' replied the other ; " for
none would dare disguise himself in the Khalifs habit."

Then the light drew near me, whilst I trembled in every
limb ; and up came an eunuch, crying out to the women
and saying, " Hither ! " Whereupon they turned aside to
one of the chambers and entered. Then they came out
again and went on till they came to the chamber of my
mistress and I heard the Khalif say, "Whose chamber
is this ? " They answered, " This is the chamber of Shejeret
ed Durr." And he said, " Call her." So they called her
and she came out and kissed the feet of the Khalif, who
said to her, "Wilt thou drink to-night?" Quoth she,
" But for thy presence and the looking on thy face, I would
not drink, for I have no mind to wine this night" Then
said the Khalif to the eunuch, "Bid the treasurer give
her such a necklace." And he commanded to enter her
chamber. So the torches entered before him and he
followed them into the apartment.

At the same moment, there came up to me a damsel,
the lustre of whose face outshone that of the flambeau
m her hand, and said, "Who is this?" Then she laid
hold of me and carrying me into one of the chambers,
said to me, " Who art thou ? " I kissed the earth before
her, saying, "I implore thee by Allah, O my lady, spare
my blood and have pity on me and commend thyself unto


59


God by saving my life 1 " And I wept for fear of death.
Quoth she, " Doubtless, thou art a thief." <£ No, by Allah,"
answered I, " I am no thief* Seest thou on me the signs
of thieves ? " " Tell me the truth of thy case," said she,
"and I will put thee in safety." So I said, "I am a silly,
ignorant lover, whom passion and my ignorance have
moved to do as thou seest, so that I am fallen into this
peril." Quoth she, "Abide here till I come back to thee."

Then she went out and presently returning with some
of her maids' clothes, clad me therein and bade me follow
her. So I followed her till she came to her apartment
and bade me enter. I went in and she brought me to a
couch, whereon was a splendid carpet, and said, "Sit
down here : no harm shall befall thee. Art thou not
Aboulhusn el Khurasani, the money-changer?" And I
answered, " Yes." " May God spare thy blood," rejoined
she, "an thou speak truth! If thou be a thief, thou art
a lost man, more by token that thou art dressed in the
Khalif's habit and perfumed with his scents. But, if thou
be indeed Aboulhusn, thou art safe and no hurt shall come
to thee, for that thou art the lover of Shejeret ed Durr,
who is my sister and stinteth never to name thee and
tell us how she took of thee money, yet wast thou not
chagrined, and how thou didst follow her to the river-
bank and madest as thou wouldst kiss the ground in her
honour; and her heart is yet more aflame for thee than
thine for her. But how earnest thou hither? Was it by
her order or without? [If she hath bidden thee unto
this,] she hath imperilled thy life. But what seekest thou
in foregathering with her ? "

" By Allah, O my lady," replied I, " it is I who have
ventured my own life, and my desire in foregathering with
her is but to look on her and hear her speech." And she
said, " Thou hast spoken well." " O my lady," added 2,
"God is my witness that my soul prompteth me to no


6o


transgression against her honour." Quoth she, " In this

intent may God deliver thee ! Indeed compassion for
thee hath taken hold upon my heart." Then she called
her maid and said to her, " Go to Shejeret ed Durr and say
to her, 'Thy sister salutes thee and bids thee to her; so
favour her by coming to her this night, according to thy
wont, for her breast is straitened.' " So the maid went
out and presently returning, told her mistress that Shejeret
ed Durr said, " May God bless me with thy long life and
make me thy ransom ! By Allah, hadst thou bidden me
to other than this, I had not hesitated ; but the Khalif s
meagrims constrain me and thou knowest my rank with
him." 1 But the other said to her maid, "Return to her
and say, * Nothing will serve but thou must come to my
mistress, upon a privy matter between her and thee.' "

So the maid went out again and presently returned with
the lady, whose face shone like" the full moon. Her
sister met her and embraced her ; then said she, " Ho ?
Aboulhusn, come forth to her and kiss her hands.'* Now
I was in a closet within the apartment ; so I came out ;
and when my mistress saw me, she threw herself upon me
and strained me to her bosom, saying, " How earnest thou
in the KhaliPs clothes and his ornaments and perfumes?
Tell me what hath befallen thee." So I related to her all
that had befallen me and what I had suffered for fright
and so forth ; and she said, " What thou hast endured for
my sake is grievous to me, and praised be God who hath
appointed the issue to be safety, and the fulfilment of
safety is in thy entering my lodging and that of my sister."
Then she carried me to her own apartment, saying to her
sister, " I have made a covenant with him that I will not
foregather with him unlawfully ; but, as he hath ventured
himself and incurred this great peril,, I will be even as

1 i.e. the Khalif hath a headache and I cannot leave him s and thou
knowest the rank I hold in his favour.


6i


earth for his treading and as dust to his shoes." u In this jtf{gf)t
intent may God deliver him!" replied her sister. " Thou fccttCllift
shalt see," added my mistress, " how I will do, so I may
foregather with him in the way of law, and needs must I
lavish my heart's blood to contrive this."

As we were in talk, we heard a great noise and turning,
saw the Khalif making for her lodging, of the greatness
of the store he set by her; whereupon she hid me in an
underground chamber and shut down the trap-door upon
me. Then she went out to meet the Khalif, who entered
and sat down, whilst she stood before him, to serve him,
and commanded to bring wine. Now the Khalif loved a
damsel by name Benjeh, who was the mother of El Mutezz
Billah ; 1 but they had fallen out and in the pride of her
beauty and grace, she would not [offer to] make peace
with him, nor, for the dignity of the Khalifate and the
Kingship, would he [offer to] make peace with her nor
humble himself to her, albeit his heart was aflame with
passion for her, but sought to divert his mind from her
with her mates among the slave-girls and with going in to
them in their chambers. Now he loved Shejeret ed Durr's
singing : so he bade her sing. Accordingly she took the
lute and tuning it, sang the following verses ;

I marvel at the ruthless stress of fate against us two And how it stinted,

having wrought our union to undo.
I held aloof from thee, till, *' Love he knoweth not," 'twas said And did

thee visit, till 'twas said, *' He lacks of patience due."
Add to my transport, love of her, each night, and solacement Of loves,

the Resurrection be thy day of rendezvous !
She hath a skin like very silk and a soft speech and sweet : Gracious t©

all, her words are nor too many nor too few.
Two eyes she hath, quoth God Most High, "Be," and forthright they

were : Even with the reason as doth wine, so with the hearts they da,

1 Son and third successor of El Mutawekkil and thirteenth Khaiif of
the house of Abbas, A.D 866-9,


62


When the Khalif heard these verses, he was moved
to exceeding delight, and I also was moved to delight
in my hiding-place, and but for the bounty of God the
Most High, I had cried out and we had been discovered.
Then she sang these also :

I clip Mm close and still my soul doth yearn for him full fain : Can

aught of straiter union be than clips for lovers twain ?
I kiss his mouth, to do away my heat ; but every kiss, Alack 1 doth

only aggravate the transport of my pain ;
As 'twere, indeed, until my heart our souls commingled saw, Nought

could it of its thirst for him on anywise assain.

The Khalif was delighted and said, " O Shejeret ed Durr,
ask a boon of me." " O Commander of the Faithful/ 1 '
answered she, " I ask of thee my freedom, for the sake
of the reward that is therein." 1 "Thou art free for the
love of God," said he ; whereupon she kissed the earth
before him. Quoth he, "Take ''the lute and sing me
somewhat on the subject of my slave-girl, of whom
I am enamoured : the folk seek my approof and I seek
hers." So she took the lute and sang as follows :

Lady of beauty, that hast done away my piety, 2 I cannot brook, what*

e'er betide, to live withouten thee ;
So, or with humbleness, that best befitteth love, I'll gain Thy favours,

or with might, that best befitteth kings like me.

The Khalif was charmed with these verses and said,
" Now sing me somewhat setting out my case with three
damsels, who hold the reins of my heart and hinder my
repose; and they are thyself and this froward one and
another I will not name, who hath not like her." 8 So she

1 i.e. for the sake of earning a reward from God for thy good deed.

2 i.e. my abstention from women on religious grounds.

8 Munatsireh. This clause may also perhaps be rendered, u about
whom there is no dispute" (?nuna£sereJi) 9 i.e. who is not at present in
question.


63


took the lute and playing a lively measure, sang tne
following verses :

There are three lovely maidens, the reins of me that sway : Within my

heart's high places they lord it night and day.
There's none in all creation can bow me to his will ; Yet I obey these

maidens and they my will gainsay.
This is of Love's dominion, whereby they overcome A prouder than my

empire and force it still obey.

The Khali f marvelled exceedingly at the aptness of
these verses to his case and the delight [to which they
moved him] inclined him to reconciliation with the
refractory damsel. So he went forth and made for her
lodging, whither a slave-girl forewent him and acquainted
her with the Khalifs coming. She came to meet him and
kissed the earth before him ; then she kissed his feet and
he was reconciled to her and she to him. ✓

Meanwhile Shejeret ed Durr came to me, rejoicing, smd
said, " I am become free by thy blessed coming 1 Surely
God will help me in that which I shall contrive, so I may
foregather with thee in the way of law." And I said,
"Praised be God!" As we were talking, in came her
servant, to whom we related that which had passed, and
he said, "Praised be God who hath made the affair to end
well, and we implore Plim to crown His favours with thy
safe going-out hence!* 5 Presently, in came my mistress's
sister, whose name was Fatir, and Shejeret ed Durr said
to her, '*0 my sister, how shall we do to bring him out
of the palace in safety? For God hath vouchsafed me
emancipation and by the blessing of his coming, I am
become a free woman." Quoth Fatir, "I see nothing
for it but to dress him in a woman's habit." So she
brought me a suit of women's clothes and clad me
therein ; and I went out forthwith ; but, when I came
to the midst of the palace, I found the Khalif seated
there, with the eunuchs in attendance upon him.


6 4


When he saw me, he misdoubted of me exceedingly
and said to his attendants, " Hasten and bring me yonder
damsel." So they brought me back to him and raised the
veil from my face, which when he saw, he knew me and
questioned me of my case. I told him the whole truth,
hiding nought, and when he heard my story, he bethought
himself awhile, then rose and going into Shejeret ed
Durr's chamber, said to her, " How couldst thou prefer
one of the sons of the merchants before me?" She
kissed the earth before him and told him her story from
first to last, in accordance with the truth ; wherewith he
had compassion upon her and his heart relented to her
and he excused her by reason of love and its conditions.
Then he went away and her servant came in to her and
said, u Be of good cheer; for, when thy lover came before
the Khalif, he questioned him and he told him that which
thou toldest him, word by word."'

Presently the Khalif returned and calling me before him,
said to me, u What made thee dare to violate the palace
of the Khalifate?" "O Commander of the Faithful/'
answered I, " it was my ignorance and passion and my
confidence in thy clemency and generosity that led me to
this." And I wept and kissed the earth before him. Then
said he, " I pardon you both," and bade me be seated. So I
sat down and he sent for the Cadi Ahmed ibn Abi Dawud 1
and married me to her. Then he commanded to make
over to me all that was hers and they brought her to me
in bridal procession 2 in her lodging. After three days,
I went forth and transported all her goods and gear to
my own house ; so all that thou hast seen, O Commander

1 Ahmed ibn Abi Duwad {Dawud is an error of the text), a well-
known man of letters and jurist of the time. He was Cadi of the Cadis
{i.e. 'Chancellor) under El Mutawekkil and his two immediate pre-
decessors El Mutesim and El Wat hie Billah (Vathek)*

9 ia. they celebrated our wedding.


6 5

■<©f the Faithful, in my house and whereof thou misdoubtest
is of her marriage-equipage.

After this, she said to me, one day, " Know that El
Mutawekkil is a generous man and I fear lest he bethink
mm of us, or that some one of the envious remind him
of us; wherefore I have it in mind to do somewhat that
may ensure us against this." "And what is that?" asked I.
Quoth sne, " I mean to ask his leave to go the pilgrimage
and renounce 1 singing." "This is well thought," answered
I ; but, as we were talking, in came a messenger from the
Khalif to seek her, for that El Mutawekkil loved her sing-
ing. So she went with the officer and did her service to
the Khalif, who said to her, "Sever not thyself from us." 8
And she answered, " I hear and obey."

One day, after this, she went to him, he having sent for
her, according to his wont ; but, before I knew, she came
back, with her clothes torn and her eyes full of tears. At
this I was alarmed, misdoubting me that he had com-
manded to seize upon us, and said, "We are God's and
to Him we return ! Is El Mutawekkil wroth with us ? "
" Where is El Mutawekkil ? " answered she. " Verily, El
Mutawekkil's rule is ended and his trace is blotted out I "
Quoth I, " Tell me what hath happened." And she said,
" He was seated behind the curtain, drinking, with El
Feth ben Khacan 8 and Sedekeh ben Sedekeh, when his
son El Muntesir fell upon him, with a company of the
Turks, 4 and slew him ; and mirth was turned to misery

1 Lit. repent of. The practice of music, vocal and instrumental, is
deprecated by the strict Muslim, in accordance with a tradition in which
the Prophet is said to have expressed disapproval of these arts.

3 i.e. do not absent thyself from us. The Arabic idiom is almost
exactly equivalent to our colloquial phrase, "to cut any one."

8 See note, Vol. IV. p. 289.

4 i.e. of the Turkish body-guard, first enrolled by El Mutesim, El
Mutawekkil' s father and predecessor, a corps of mercenaries to whose
disorderly and overbearing behaviour may be attributed a great part of
the troubles and dissensions which led to the ultimate fall of the Khalifate.

VOL. IX. ^


66


and fair fortune to weeping and lamentation. So I tied,
I and the maid, and God saved us." When I heard this,
O Commander of the Faithful, I arose forthright and went
down to Bassora, where the news reached me of the
falling out of war between El Muntesir and El Mustain ; 1
wherefore I was affrighted and transported my wife and
all my good to Bassora. This, then, is my story, O
Commander of the Faithful, nor have I added to nor
diminished the truth by a syllable. So all that thou seest
in my house, bearing the name of thy grandfather El
Mutawekkil, is of his bounty to us, and the source of our
fortune is from thy noble ancestors ; for indeed ye are
people of munificence and a mine of generosity.'

The Khalif marvelled at his story and rejoiced therein
with an exceeding joy : and Aboulhusn brought forth to
him the lady and the children she had borne him, and
they kissed the earth before the Khalif, who marvelled at
their beauty. Then he called for inkhorn and paper and
wrote Aboulhusn a patent of exemption from taxes on
his lands and houses for twenty years. Moreover, he
rejoiced in him and made him his boon-companion, till
time sundered them and they took up their abode in the
tombs, after having dwelt in palaces ; and glory be to
God, the Most Merciful King 1

1 Brother of El Muntesir (who died of remorse a few months after
his father's murder), and twelfth Khalif of the hous« of Abbas, a.ix


6 7


KEMEREZZEMAN AND THE JEWELLER'S WIFE.

There was once, of old time, a merchant called
Abdurrehman, whom God had blessed with a son and
daughter, and for their much beauty and grace, he named
the girl Kaukeb es Sebah 1 and the boy Kemerezzeman. 2
When he saw what God had vouchsafed them of beauty
and grace and brightness and symmetry, he feared for
them from the eyes of the beholders B and the tongues of
the envious and the craft of the crafty and the wiles of
the profligate and shut them up from the folk in a house
for the space of fourteen years, during which time none
saw them save their parents and a slave-girl who waited
on them. Now their father recited the Koran, 4 even as
God sent it down, as also did their mother, wherefore she
taught her daughter to read and recite it and he his son,
till they had both gotten it by heart. Moreover, they
both learned from their parents writing and reckoning and
all manner of knowledge and accomplishment and needed
no master.

When Kemerezzeman came to years of manhood, his
mother said to her husband, 4 How long wilt thou keep
thy son Kemerezzeman sequestered from the eyes of the
folk? Is he a boy or a girl?' And he answered, * A boy.'
'If he be a boy,' rejoined she, 4 why dost thou not carry
him to the bazaar and seat him in thy shop, that he may
know the folk and they him, to the intent that it may
become notorious among them that he is thy son, and do
thou teach him to buy and sell. Belike somewhat may
betide thee; so shall the folk know him for thy son and
he shall lay his hand on thy leavings. But, if thou die r

1 Star of the morning e s Moon of the time.

s U£« the evil eye* 4 ue, knew it by teart.


68


as the case now is, and he say to the folk, w I am the son
of the merchant Abdurrahman/' they will not believe him,
but will say, "We have never seen thee and knew not that
he had a son ; " wherefore the magistrates will take thy
goods and thy son will be despoiled. In like manner,
I mean to make my daughter known among the folk, so
haply some one of her own condition may demand her
in marriage and we will marry her to him and rejoice
in her.' Quoth he, *[I did thus] of my fear for them
ftCCCClxifcl. f t } ie eves G f t h e f ik an< 5 because I love them and love
is exceeding jealous, and well saith he who made the
following verses :

I'm jealous of myself and of my sight for thee And of thy self and place

and time and Fate's decree.
Though in mine eye for aye I set thee, ne'er, I trow, Of union strait and

close should I aweary be.
Ay, if with me thou wert united every hour Until the Judgment Day,

'twould scarce suffice to me.'

'Put thy trust in God/ said his wife, 'for no harm
betideth him whom He protecteth, and carry him with
thee this very day to the shop.'

Then she clad the boy in the richest of clothes and he
became a ravishment to all who looked on him and an
affliction to the hearts of lovers. His father took him and
carried him to the market, whilst all who saw him were
ravished with him and accosted him, kissing his hand
and saluting him. Quoth one, ' The sun hath risen in
such a place and shineth in the market,' and another,
'The place of rising of the full moon is in such a quarter;'
and a third, ' The new moon of the Festival [of the
breaking of the fast of Ramazan] hath appeared to the
creatures of God. 9 And they went on to allude to the boy
in talk and call down blessings upon him.

Abdurrehman rated the folk for following the boy>
to gaze upon him, for they crowded upon him, behind


69


and before ; and he was abashed at their talk, but could
not hinder them from talking; so he fell to reviling the
boy's mother and cursing her for that she had been the
cause of his bringing him out. Then he walked on till
he reached his shop and opening it, sat down and seated
his son before him : after which he looked out and saw
the thoroughfare blocked with people, for all the passers-
by, going and coming, stopped before the shop, to gaze
on that fair-faced one, and could not leave him and all the
men and women crowded about him, applying to them-
selves the words of him who saith :

Thou didst beauty create a temptation to us And saidst, * O my servants

fear [Me and abstain].'
Behold, Thou art lovely and loveliness lov'st : How, then, shall Thy

creatures from loving refrain ?

When Abdurrehman saw the folk thus crowding about
him and standing in rows, men and women, to gaze upon
his son, he was sore abashed and confounded and knew
not what to do ; but presently there came up from the end
of the bazaar a man of the wandering dervishes, clad in
haircloth garments, [the apparel] of the pious servants
of God and seeing Kemerezzeman sitting there as he were
a willow wand springing from a mound of saffron, wept
copiously and recited the following verses :

I saw a sapling on a sand-hill grow, As 'twere a moon at full and all

aglow.

s Thy name?' I questioned, and he said, * A pearl.' Quoth I, *Mme!
Mine 1 ' but he replied, * No I No ! ' 1

Then he fell to walking, now drawing near and now
moving away, and wiping his gray hairs with his right
hand, whilst the heart of the crowd was cloven asunder

1 This line in the original contains one of the word-jingles of which
Orientals are so fond, Le. lou-lou (pearl), Lit Lit (Mine X Mine!) and
Lai La! (No I No 1),


70


for reverence of him. When he looked upon the boy,
his eyes were dazzled and his wit confounded, and the
saying of the poet was exemplified in him :

What while yon fair-faced loveling was in a certain place And the new

moon of Shawwal 1 shone glittering from his face,
There came a reverend elder, who walked with leisure pace : His steps
a staff supported and in his looks the trace

Of abstinent devoutness was plain unto the sight.
The days he had made proof of and eke the nights essayed ; In lawful

and unlawful he had not spared to wade.
He had been love-distracted for minion and for maid And to a skewer's
likeness worn down was he and frayed ;

But wasted bones were left him, with parchment skin bedight.
A Moor 5 in this same fashion the sheikh himself did show, For by his

side a youngling was ever seen to go:
He in the love of women an Udhri 3 was, I trow; In either mode*
seductive and throughly versed, for lo,

Zeid 6 was to him as Zeyneb^to wit, and wench as wight.
Djstraught he was with passion for this and th* other fair ; He mourned

the camp, bewailing the ruins bleak and bare : 7
Of his excess of longing, thou'dst deem him, as it were, A sapling that
the zephyr still bendeth here and there.

Cold-heartedness pertaineth to stones alone aright.

* Specially bright in the eyes of the Muslim, as by its appearance
putting an end to the long fast of Ramazan.

2 Var. ii Persian " (Macnaghten). The inhabitants of Northern
Africa have always had the reputation of being debauched.

a i,e. a member of the tribe of the Benou Udhreh, see note, Vol. IL
p. 227.

* i,e. in the love of girls and boys.

e Generic name for men. 8 Ditto for women.

* i.e. he was a reciter of erotic verses, always constructed by the Arabs
after certain well-known patterns, handed down from the pras-Islamite
poets, of which the commonest and most celebrated was that which
introduces the lover halting by the ruins of the camp where his beloved
dwelt aforetime and bewailing its desertion. The invention of this form
of opening or (so to speak) poetic "gambit" is attributed to the greatest
©f the poets of the Time of Ignorance, i.e. the princely bard Imrulcaia,


7i


Yea, in the way of passion experienced was he, Sharp-witted in Love's

matters and quick indeed to see.
He'd prove Love's hard and easy, its valley and its sea, And bock an i

doe delighted to clip indiffrently ;

He burnt alike when beardless and when his beard was white. 5

Then he came up to the boy and gave him a sprig 8 of
sweet basil, whereupon his father put his hand to his
pouch and gave him some small matter of money, saying,
'Take thy portion, O dervish, and go thy ways.' He took
the money, but sat down on the bench before the shop,
opposite the lad, and fell to gazing upon him and heaving
sigh upon sigh, whilst the tears flowed like springs welling
forth. The folk began to look at him and remark upon
him, some saying, 'All dervishes are lewd fellows,' and
other some, ' Verily, this dervish's heart is set on fire for
love of this youth. 1

When Abdurrehman saw this, he said to the"boy, 'Come
O my son, let us shut the shop and go home, for it boots
not to buy and sell this day; and may God requite thy
mother that which she hath done with us, for it is she
who hath brought all this about V Then said he to the
dervish, 'Rise, that I may shut my shop/ So the dervish
rose and Abdurrehman shut his shop and taking -his son,
went away. The dervish and the folk followed them, till
they reached their dwelling, when Kemerezzeman went
in and his father, turning to the dervish, said to him,
*What wouldst thou, O dervish, and why do I see thee
weep ? ' ' O my lord/ answered he, ' I would fain be thy
guest this night, for the guest is the guest of God.' Quoth
the merchant, ' Welcome to the guest of God I Enter,

1 The foregoing Cinquains are rendered more than usually obscure
by the excessive use, in the original, of the figure of enallage, so em-
barrassing! y common in Arabic verse. Owing to this feature, it cannot
with certainty be made out whether certain passages refer to the old
man or the boy spoken of. 8 Or root [ire).


72


N*i'gf)t O dervish V But he said in himself, * If he be enamoured
&f£Ulxb* of the boy and require him of lewdness, needs must I slay
him this night and bury him secretly. But, if there be no
lewdness in him, the guest shall eat his portion/

Then he brought him into a saloon, where he left him
with Kemerezzeman, after he had said privily to the latter,
s O my son, when I am gone out, sit thou beside the
dervish and sport with him and provoke him to dalliance.
I will watch you from the window overlooking the saloon,
and if he seek of thee lewdness, I will come down to him
and slay him.' So, as soon as Kemerezzeman was alone
with the dervish, he sat down by him, and the latter began
to look upon him and sigh and weep. Whenever the lad
spoke to hirn s he answered him kindly, trembling the
while and groaning and sobbing, and thus he did till the
evening meal was brought in, when he fell to eating, with
his eyes on Kemerezzeman, but stinted not from weeping.
When a fourth part of the night was past and talk was
ended and the time of sleep come, Abdurrehman said to
the lad, 1 O my son, apply thyself to the service of thine
uncle the dervish and gainsay him not : 1 and would have
gone out ; but the dervish said to him, 4 O my lord, carry
thy son with thee or sleep with us. J 6 Nay,' answered the
merchant; 'my son shall lie with thee: peradventure thy
soul may desire somewhat, and he will do thine occasion
and wait upon thee.' Then he went out and sat down in
an adjoining room, wherein was a window giving upon the
saloon.

As soon as he had left them, the lad came up to the
dervish and began to provoke him and make advances
to him, whereupon he waxed wroth and said, ' What talk
is this, O my son ? I take refuge with God from Satan
the Stoned ! O my God, indeed this is an iniquity that
pleaseth Thee not ! Hold off from me, O my son ! 1 So
saying, he arose and sat down at a distance ; but the boy


73


followed him and threw himself upon him, saying, *0
dervish, why wilt thou deny thyself the delight of my
possession, seeing that my heart loveth thee ? ' With this
the dervish's anger redoubled and he said, 1 An thou refrain
not from me, I will call thy father and tell him of thee/
Quoth Kemerezzeman, ' My father knows my mind to thee
and it may not be that he will hinder me : so heal thou
my heart. Why dost thou hold off from me? Do I not
please thee ? ' 'By Allah, O my son,' answered the dervish,
* I will not do this, though I be hewn in pieces with sharp
swords ! ' And he repeated the saying of the poet :

My heart the fair desireth, both wench and wight ; I sigh For all I sees

yet passion leads not my wit awry.
Nay, though I still behold them morning and eventide, Nor sodomite^

believe me, nor whoremonger am I.

Then he wept and said, ' Arise, open the door, that I
may go my way, for I will lie no longer in this place. 5
Therewith he rose to his feet ; but the boy caught hold of
him, saying, ' Look at the brightness of my face and the
redness of my cheeks and the softness of my sides and the
daintiness of my lips/ Moreover he discovered to him a
leg that would put to shame wine and cupbearer 1 and
gazed on him with looks that would baffle enchantment
and enchanter ; for he was surpassing of loveliness and
full of tender blandishment, even as saith of him the poet :

I never can forget him, since of intent the fair A leg to me discovered,

as flashing pearl it were.
So marvel not if on me the flesh should rise ; for lo, the Day of

Resurrection's a day of shanks laid bare.*

1 A play upon the words saki (oblique case of sac, leg) and saki t
cupbearer.

2 The Koran (lxviii. 42) calls the Judgment Day "a day [when]

shanks shall be uncovered/ 1 i.e. a day of preparation for great stress or
travail, such as a battle or other emergency, to meet which men roll up
their long wide trousers and tuck their skirts within their girdles. The
meaning of the double-entendre in the text is sufficiently obvious


74


Then he displayed to him his bosom, saying, ' Look at
my breasts. They are goodlier than girls' breasts and my
spittle is sweeter than sugar-candy. So leave scruple and
abstinence and cast off piety and devoutness and take thy
delight of my possession and enjoy my beauty. Fear
nothing, for thou art safe from hurt, and leave this dulness,
for it is an ill habit/ And he went on to discover to him
his hidden charms, striving to turn the reins of his reason
with his [graceful] bendings, whilst the dervish averted
his face and said, ' I seek refuge with God ! Shame upon
thee, O my son ! This is a forbidden thing, and I will
not do it, no, not even in sleep.' The boy pressed upon
him, but the dervish escaped from him and turning
towards Mecca, addressed himself to prayer.

When Kemerezzeman saw him praying, he left him till
he had prayed a two-bow prayer and saluted, 1 when he
would have accosted him again"- but the dervish again
repeated the intent 1 and prayed a second two-bow prayer,
and thus he did a third and a fourth and a fifth time.
Quoth Kemerezzeman, * What prayers are these ? Art
thou minded to take flight upon the clouds? Thou lettest
slip our delight, whilst thou passest the whole night in
the prayer-niche. ? So saying, he threw himself upon the
dervish and kissed him between the eyes : and he said,
'O my son, put away from thee the devil and betake thee
to the obedience of the Compassionate One.' Quoth
Kemerezzeman, * An thou do not with me that which I
wish, I will call my father and say to him, " The dervish
is minded to do lewdness with me." Whereupon he will
come in to thee and beat thee, till thy bones be broken
upon thy flesh.'

All this while Abdurrehman was watching with his eyes

1 i.e. said, '* Peace be on us and on all the righteous servants of God V (
terminal formula of prayer.
s En niyeh ; £«. st I purpose to pray such and such prayers,"


7S


and hearkening with his ears, and he was certified that
there was no lewdness in the dervish and said in himself,
' An he were a lewd fellow, he had not stood out against
all this importunity/ The boy continued to beguile the
dervish and every time he addressed himself to prayer,
he interrupted him, till at last he waxed exceeding wroth
with him and was rough with him and beat him. Kemer-
ezzeman wept and his father came in and wiped away
his tears and comforted him. Then said he to the
dervish, ' O my brother, since thou art on this wise, why
didst thou weep and sigh, when thou sawest my son ? Is
there a reason for this?' 'Yes/ answered the dervish;
and Abdurrehman continued, 'When I saw thee weep
at sight of my son, I deemed evil of thee and bade the
boy do with thee thus, that I might try thee, purposing in
myself, if I saw thee require him of lewdness, to come
in upon thee and slay thee. But, when I s£w thy carriage
towards him, I knew thee for one of those who are
virtuous to the utmost. But, God on thee, tell me the
cause of thy weeping ! '

The dervish sighed and said, ' O my lord, fret not
a closed 1 wound.' But the merchant said, 'Nothing will
serve but thou must tell me.' ( Know, then/ began the
other, ' that I am a dervish who wander in the lands and
the countries, admonishing myself by the traces 3 of the
Creator of Night and Day. It chanced that one Friday
I entered the city of Bassora in the forenoon of the day "Ntjtt
and saw the shops open and full of all manner wares and fcCCCClxfat
goods and meat and drink ; but they were deserted and
there was in them neither man nor woman nor girl nor
boy : nor in the markets and the streets was there dog
nor cat nor yet voice heard nor creature seen. I marvelled
at this and said to myself, " I wonder whither the people
of the city are gone with their dogs and cats and what
3 Lit. quiescent [sakin). s Or works.


76


hath God done with them?" Now I was anhungred,
so I took hot bread from a baker's oven and going into
an oilman's shop, spread the bread with butter and honey
and ate. Then I entered the shop of a sherbet-seller and
drank what I would ; after which, seeing a coffee-shop
Dpen, I went in and saw the pots on the fire, full of
coffee ; but there was no one there. So I drank my fill
and said, " Verily, this is a strange thing ! It seems as
if death had stricken the people of this city and they had
all died forthright, or as if they had taken fright at some-
thing that hath befallen them and fled, without having
time to close their shops."

As I pondered this matter, I heard a sound of drums
beating ; whereat I was afraid and hid myself : then,
looking out through a crevice, I saw fourscore damsels,
like moons, come walking through the market, two by two,
with uncovered heads and faces displayed; and in their
midst a young lady, riding on a horse that could hardly
move its feet for that which was upon it of trappings and
housings. Her face was unveiled, and she was adorned
with the costliest ornaments and clad in the richest of
raiment and covered with gold and silver and jewels.
About her neck she wore a collar of gold and on her
bosom were necklaces of the same metal ; her wrists were
clasped with bracelets, that shone like stars, and her ankles
with bangles of gold set with precious stones. The slave-
girls walked before her and behind and on her right
and left and before her was a damsel girt with a great
sword, with hilts of emerald and hangers of gold, set
with jewels.

When the young lady came to where I lay hid, she
checked her horse and said, " O damsels, I hear a noise
of somewhat within yonder shop : so do ye search it, lest
there be one hidden there, with intent to look upon us s
whilst we have our faces unveiled," So they searched the


77


shop opposite that in which I lay hid, whilst I abode
in terror ; and presently I saw them come forth with a man
and heard them say to her, " O our lady, we found a man
there and here he is before thee." Quoth she to the
damsel with the sword, " Strike off his head." So she
went up to him and smote off his head and they passed
on, leaving the dead man lying on the ground. When
I saw this, I was affrighted ; but my heart was taken with
love of the young lady.

After awhile, the people reappeared and every one who
had a shop entered it ; whilst the folk began to come and
go in the markets and gathered about the slain man,
staring at him. Then I came forth from my hiding-place
by stealth, and none took note of me; but love of the
lady had gotten possession of my heart, and I began
to enquire of her privily ; but none gave me news of her.
So I left Bassora, with a heart torn with love of her ; and
when I came upon this thy son, I saw him to be the likest
of all creatures to the young lady ; wherefore he minded
me of her and his sight revived the fire of passion in me
and kindled anew in my heart the flames of love-longing
and distraction.' Then he wept passing sore and said,
' O my lord, I conjure thee by Allah, open the door to me,
so I may go my way I ' So Abdurrehman opened the door
and he went forth.

As for Kemerezzeman, when he heard the dervish's
story, his heart was taken with love of the lady and
passion got the mastery of him and longing and dis-
traction raged in him ; so, on the morrow, he said to his
father, 'All the sons of the merchants travel in the lands,
to attain their desire, nor is there one of them but his
father provideth him with merchandise, wherewith he may
travel and traffic for gain. Why, then, O my father, dost
thou not provide me with merchandise, so I may travel
with it and try my luck?' *0 my son/ answered


78


Abdurrehman, *the merchants [of whom thou speakest]
lack of money; so they send their sons abroad for the
sake of profit and gain and the getting of the goods of
the world. But I have wealth in plenty nor do I covet
[more] : so why should I exile thee [from thy native
land?] Indeed, I cannot brook to be parted from thee
an hour, more by token that thou art unique in beauty
and grace and perfection and I fear for thee/ But
Kemerezzeman said, * O my father, nothing will serve
but thou must furnish me with merchandise wherewithal
to travel ; else will I take thee at unawares and flee,
though without goods or money. So, if thou wish to
pleasure my heart, make ready for me merchandise, that I
may travel and divert myself by viewing foreign countries.'

Abdurrehman, seeing his son enamoured of travel,
acquainted his wife with this, saying, 1 Thy son would
have me provide him with merchandise, so he may travel
therewith in strange countries, albeit travel is travail'
'What is there should mislike thee in this?' answered
she. 'This is the wont of the sons of the merchants
and they ail vie with one another in glorying in travel and
gain.' Quoth he, i Most of the merchants are poor and
seek increase of good ; but I have wealth galore/ * More
of a good thing hurteth not/ replied she; 'and if thou
comply not with his wish, I will furnish him of my own
monies/ Quoth Abdurrehman, ' I fear strangerhood for
him, for it is rife in trouble. ' But she said, * There is no
harm in strangerhood, when it leads to gain; and [if we
do not according to his wish], our son will go away and
we shall seek him and find him not and be dishonoured
among the folk/ The merchant accepted his wife's
counsel and provided his son with merchandise, to the
value of fourscore and ten thousand dinars, whilst his
mother gave him a purse containing forty jewels of price,
the least of the value of one of which was five hundred


79


dinars, saying, * O my son, be careful of these jewels, ioi
they will be of service to thee.'

Kemerezzeman took the jewels and laid them in a belt,
which he buckled about his waist ; then he set out for
Bassora with his goods and stayed not till there remained Ntgtlt
but a day's journey between that city and himself; when &CCCt(xbff.
the [wild] Arabs came out upon him and stripped him
and slew his men and servants ; but he himself lay down
among the slain and smeared himself with blood, so that
the Bedouins took him for dead and left him and made
off with their booty. When they had gone their ways, he
arose, having nought left but the jewels in his girdle, and
fared on till he came to Bassora, It chanced that his
entry was on a Friday and the town was empty of folk,
even as the dervish had told him. He found the streets
deserted and the shops open and full of goods; so he ate
and drank and looked about him. Presently, he heard
drums beating and hid himself in a shop, till the slave-
girls came up, when he looked at them and seeing the
young lady riding amongst them, love and longing took
him and passion and distraction overcame him, so that he
could hardly stand. After awhile, the people reappeared
and the markets became full. Whereupon he went to the
bazaar and sold one of his jewels to a jeweller there for
a thousand dinars, with which he returned to his place and
passed the night there.

Next morning he changed his clothes and going to the
bath, came forth as he were the full moon. Then he sold
other four stones for four thousand dinars and sauntered
about the streets of Bassora, clad in the costliest of
raiment, till he came to a market, where he saw a barber's
shop. So he went in to the barber, who shaved his head s
and clapping up an acquaintance with him, said to him B
( O my father, I am a stranger in these parts and yesterday
I entered this city and found it void of inhabitants, nor


8o


was there in it any living soul, man nor genie. Then
1 saw a company of slave-girls and amongst them a young
lady riding in state.' And he went on to tell him all he
had seen. ' O my son/ said the barber, * hast thou told
any but me of this?' And he answered, *No.' 'Then,
O my son,' rejoined the barber, 'beware of mentioning
this before any but me ; for all cannot keep a secret and
thou art but a lad and I fear lest the talk travel from folk
to folk, till it reach those whom it concerns and they kill
thee. For know, O my son, that this thou hast seen, none
ever heard nor knew in other than this city. As for the
people of Bassora, they are dying of this vexation; for
every Friday forenoon they shut up the dogs and cats, to
hinder them from going about the streets, and all the
people of the city enter the mosques, where they lock the
■doors on them, and not one of them can pass about
the market nor even look out of window; nor knoweth
any the cause of this calamity. But to-night I will question
my wife of it, for she is a midwife and enters the houses of
the notables and knows all the news of the city. And if
it please God the Most High, do thou come to me to-
morrow and I will tell thee what she shall have told me.'

With this Kemerezzeman pulled out a handful of gold
and said to him, £ O my father, take this gold and give it
to thy wife, for she is become my mother/ Then he gave
him a second handful, saying 4 Take this for thyself.'
Whereupon quoth the barber, * O my son, sit thou in thy
place, till I go to my wife and ask her and bring thee news
of the true state of the case.' So saying, he left him in the
shop and going home, acquainted his wife with the young
man's case, saying, ' I would have thee tell me the truth of
this affair, so I may tell it to this young merchant, for he
hath set his heart on knowing the reason why men and
beasts are forbidden the streets every Friday forenoon;
and methinks he is in love, for he is open-handed and


8i

generous, and if we tell him [what he would know], we
shall get great good of him/ Quoth she, 'Go back and
say to him, " Come and speak with thy mother my wife,
for she salutes thee and says to thee, 'The thing is
done/"*

So he returned to the shop, where he found Kemerezze-
man sitting awaiting him and gave him his wife's message.
Then he carried him in to her and she gave him welcome
and bade him sit down; whereupon he pulled out a
hundred dinars and gave them to her, saying, ' O my
mother, tell me who this young lady is/ f Know, O my
son/ answered she, ' that there came a jewel to the Sultan
of Bassora from the King of Hind, and he was minded to
have it pierced. So he called all the jewellers together
and said to them, "I wish you to pierce me this jeweL
Whoso pierces it, I will give him whatsoever he shall ask ;
but if he break it, I will cut off his head." At this they
were afraid and said, u O king of the age, a jewel is soon
spoilt and there are few who can pierce them without
injury, for most of them have a flaw. So do not thou
impose upon us a task to which we are unable ; for we
cannot avail to pierce this jewel. However, the syndic of
our guild is more experienced than we." " And who is
your syndic?" asked the king. " Master Ubeid," answered
they. " He is more versed than we . in this art and hath
wealth galore and exceeding skill. So do thou send for
him and bid him pierce . thee this jewel/' Accordingly,
the king sent for Ubeid and bade him pierce the jewel,
imposing on him the condition aforesaid He took it and
pierced it to the liking of the king, who said to him,
u Ask a boon of me, O master ! " " O king of the age/ 1
answered he, "have patience with me till to-morrow/*

Now the reason of this was that he wished to take
counseL with his wife, who is the young lady thou sawest
riding in state ; for he loveth her with an exceeding love,
VOL ix 6


82


and of the greatness of his love for her, he doth nought
without consulting her; wherefore he put off asking till
the morrow. When he went home, he said to her, " I have
pierced the king a jewel and he hath granted me a boon ;
but I put off asking till to-morrow, that I might consult
thee. So what dost thou wish, that I may ask it ? " Quoth
she, " We have riches such as fires may not consume ; but ?
if thou love me, ask of the king that he make proclama-
tion in the streets of Bassora that all the townsfolk shall
every Friday enter the mosques, two hours before the hour
of prayer, so none, great or small, may abide in the town,
except they be in the mosques or in the houses and the
doors be locked upon them, and that all the shops of the
town be left open. Then will I ride with my women
through the city and none shall look on me from window
or lattice ; and every one, whom I. find abroad, I will kill."
■^Bf^ So he went in to the king and sought of him this boon,
taCtbcfattt* which he granted him ; but, when he caused proclamation
to be made to the effect aforesaid, the people objected
that they feared for their goods from the dogs and cats ;
wherefore he commanded to shut the latter up till the
folk should come forth from the Friday prayers. So
the jeweller's wife fell to sallying forth every Friday,
two hours before the time of prayer, and riding in state
through the city with her women ; during which time none
dares pass through the market nor look out of window or
lattice. This, then, is what thou wouldst know and I have
told thee who she is ; but, O my son, was it thy desire
[only] to have news of her or hast thou a mind to fore-
gather with her ? 1 * O my mother,' answered he, 6 it is my
wish to foregather with her.' Quoth she, * Tell me what
valuables thou hast with thee/ And he replied, * O my
mother, I have with me precious stones of four kinds, the
first worth five hundred dinars each, the second seven
hundred, the third eight hundred and the fourth a


83


tnousand.' 'Art thou willing to spend four of these?

asked she ; and he said, ' I am ready to spend them all/

'Then,' rejoined she, £ arise, O my son, and go straight
to thy lodging and take a jewel of those worth five
hundred dinars, with which do thou repair to the jewel-
market and ask for the shop of Master Ubeid, the Syndic
of the Jewellers. Thou wilt find him seated in his shop,
clad in rich clothes, with workmen under his hand. Salute
him and sit down by him ; then pull out the jewel and
give it him, saying, " O master, take this stone and fashion
it into a ring for me with gold. Make it not large, a
mithcal 1 in weight and no more ; but let the fashion of it
be excellent." Then give him twenty dinars and give each
of his journeymen a dinar. Sit with him awhile and talk
with him and if a beggar accost thee, give him a dinar, to
the intent that he may take thee into affectiop. After this,
leave him and return to thy lodging. Pass the night there
and next morning, take a hundred dinars and bring them
and give them to thy father [the barber], for he is poor.'

' Be it so/ answered Kemerezzeman and returning to his
hostelry, took a jewel worth five hundred dinars and went
with it to the jewel-bazaar. There he enquired for the
shop of Master Ubeid, Syndic of the Jewellers, and they
directed him thereto. So he went thither and saw the
syndic, a man of reverend aspect and clad in sumptuous
apparel [sitting in his shop,] with four journeymen under
his hand. He saluted him and the jeweller returned his
greeting and welcoming him, made him sit down. Then
he brought out the jewel and said to Ubeid, £ master, I
wish thee to make me this jewel into a ring with gold.
Let it be the weight of a mithcal and no more, but fashion
it curiously.' Then he pulled out twenty dinars and gave
them to him, saying, 1 This is for the chasing, over and
above the price of the ring.' And he gave each of the
1 About three pennyweights.


8 4


journeymen a dinar, wherefore they loved him, and so did
the syndic Then he sat talking with the jeweller and
whenever a beggar came up to him, he gave him a dinar
and they all marvelled at his generosity.

Now Ubeid had tools at home, like those he had in the
shop, and whenever he was minded to do any extraordinary
piece of work, it was his wont to carry it home and do it
there, that his journeymen might not learn the secrets of
his curious workmanship. His wife used to sit before
him, and when she was sitting thus and he looking upon
her, he would fashion all manner of curiously wrought
trinkets, such as were fit for none but kings. So he took
Kemerezzeman's jewel home and sat down to fashion the
ring with rare workmanship. When his wife saw him thus
engaged, she said to him, 4 What wilt thou do with this
jewel ? ' And he answered, ' I mean to make it into a ring
with gold, for it is worth five hundred dinars. 3 * For whom
wilt thou set it ? ' asked she. * For a young merchant,'
replied he, 4 who is fair of face, with eyes that wound and
cheeks that strike fire and mouth like Solomon's seal and
cheeks like blood-red anemones and lips red as coral
and neck like that of a gazelle. His complexion is white
blent with red and he is well-bred, pleasant and generous
and doth thus and thus.' And he went on to describe to
her his beauty and grace and bounty and perfection and
ceased not to vaunt his charms and the generosity of his
fashion, till he had made her in love with him ; for there
is no sillier cuckold than he who vaunts another man's
good looks and liberality to his wife.

So, when desire rose high in her, she said to him, *Is
aught of my charms found in him?' 'He hath all thy
beauties/ answered her husband ; ' and he is thy counter-
part in favour. Meseemeth his age is even as thine and
but that I fear to vex thee, I would say that he is a thousand
times handsomer than thou.' She was silent, and the


8 S


jetf eller ceased not to talk with her and set out Kemeres*
zeman's charms to her, till he had made an end of chasing
the ring ; when he gave it to her and she put it on her
finger, which it fitted exactly. ' O my lord,' said she, ' my
heart loveth this ring and I long for it to be mine and will
not take it from my finger.' < Have patience/ answered
her husband, 'The owner of it is generous and I will
seek to buy it of him, and if he will sell it to me, I will
bring it to thee. Or if he have another jewel, I will buy
it of him for thee and fashion it for thee into a ring
like this/ Kfgfit

Meanwhile, Kemerezzeman passed the night in his ifCCttlxfe
lodging and on the morrow he took a hundred dinars
and carried them to the old woman, the barber's wife, who
said to him, ' Give them to thy father/ So he gave them
to the barber, and she said, * Hast thou done as I told
thee ? ' ' Yes/ answered he, and she said, * Go now to the
jeweller and if he give thee the ring, put it on the top
of thy finger and pull it off in haste and say to him, " O
master, thou hast made a mistake; the ring is too strait."
He will say, " O merchant, shall I break it and make it
again larger?" And do thou reply, "It boots not to
break it and fashion it anew. Take it and give it to one
of thy women." Then pull out another stone worth seven
hundred dinars and say to him, " Take this stone and set
it for me, for it is handsome! than the other." Give him
thirty dinars and give each of the journeymen two, saying,
u This is for the chasing, over and above the price of the
ring." Then return to thy lodging for the night and on
the morrow bring me two hundred dinars, and I will
complete thee the rest of the device. '

So Kemerezzeman went to the jeweller, who welcomed
him and made him sit down ; and he said to him, 6 Hast
thou done my occasion ? s ' Yes/ answered Ubeid and
brought out to him the ring ; whereupon he set it on the


86


top of his finger and pulling it off in haste, said, * Thoa
hast made a mistake, O master.' And threw it to him,
saying, 'It is too strait for my finger/ 'O merchant/
asked the jeweller, "shall I make it larger?* * Not so,'
replied Kemerezzeman ; i take it as a gift and give it to one
of thy women. Its worth is trifling, some five hundred
dinars ; so it boots not to fashion it over again/ Then
he brought out to him another stone worth seven hundred
dinars and said to him, ' Set this/ Moreover, he gave
him thirty dinars and gave each of his journeymen two.
Quoth Ubeid, ' O my lord, we will take the price of the
ring, when we have made it/ But Kemerezzeman said,
' This is for the chasing, and the price of the ring remains
over/ So saying, he went away, leaving the jeweller and
his men amazed at the excess of his generosity.

Presently the jeweller returned home and said to his
wife, ' O Helimeb,' [for that was,, her name,] ' never did
I set eyes on a more generous than, this young man, and
as for thee, thy luck is good, for he hath given me the
ring without price, saying, " Give it to one of thy women." '
And he told her what had passed between himself and
Kemerezzeman, adding, 4 Methinks this youth is none of
the sons of the merchants, but that he is of the sons of the
kings and sultans/ The more he praised him, the more
she waxed in passion and longing and love-distraction for
him. So she took the ring and put it on her finger, whilst
the jeweller made another for Kemerezzeman, a little larger
than the first. When he had finished it, she put it on her
finger, under the first, and said, ' Look, O my lord, how
well the two rings show on my finger ! I wish they were
both mine/ 4 Patience/ answered he. 'It may be I shall
buy thee this second one/ Then he lay that night and on
the morrow he took the ring and went to his shop.

As for Kemerezzeman, as soon as it was day, he betook
himself to the barber's wife and gave her two hundred


87


dinars. Quoth she, ' Go to the jeweller and when he gives
thee the ring, put it on thy finger and pull it off again in
haste, saying, "Thou hast made a mistake, O master!
This ring is too large. It behoveth a master like thee,
when the like of me cometh to hira with a piece of work,
to take his measure ; and if thou hadst taken the measure
of my finger, thou hadst not erred." Then pull out
another stone worth a thousand dinars and say to him,
"Take this and set it, and give this ring to one of thy
women." Give him forty dinars and each of his men
three, saying, "This is for the chasing, and for the cost
of the ring, that stands over." And see what he will say.
Then bring three hundred dinars and give them to thy
father the barber, that he may mend his fortune withal,
for he is a poor man.' ' I hear and obey,' answered
Kemerezzeman and betook himself to the jeweller, who
welcomed him and making him sit down, gave him the ring.

He took it and put it on his finger ; then pulled it off
in haste and said, ' It behoveth a master like thee, when
the like of me brings him a piece of work, to take his
measure. Hadst thou taken the measure of my finger,
thou hadst not erred ; but take it and give it to one of thy
women.' Then he brought out to him a stone worth
a thousand dinars and said to him, 'Take this and set
it for me after the measure of my finger,' 'Good/
answered Ubeid. * Thou art in the right • ' and took his
measure, whereupon he pulled out forty dinars and gave
them to him, saying, ' This is for the chasing and the price
of the ring shall remain.' 'O my lord/ said the jeweller,
' how much hire have we taken of thee ! Verily, thy
bounty to us is great ! ' ' No harm,' answered Kemerezze-
man and sat talking with him awhile and giving a dinar
to every beggar who passed.

Then he left him and went away, whilst the jeweller
returned home and said to his wife, 'How generous is


88


this young merchant! Never did I set eyes on a more
open-handed or a comelier than he, no, nor a sweeter
of speech/ And he went on to recount to her his
charms and liberality and was loud in his praise. 1 Lack-
courtesy 1 that thou art!' said she. * Since thou notest
these attributes in him, and indeed he hath given thee two
rings of price, it behoveth thee to invite him and make
him an entertainment and entreat him friendly. When
he seeth that thou tenderest him and cometh to our house,
we shall surely get great good of him ; and if thou grudge
him this, do thou bid him and I will entertain him of my
monies.' Quoth he, ' Dost thou know me to be niggardly,
that thou sayest this?' 'Thou art no niggard/ rejoined
she; 'but thou lackest of breeding. 3 Invite him this
night and come not without him. If he refuse, conjure
him by the oath of divorce and be instant with him/
'On my head and eyes/ answered -he and wrought at the
ring till he had finished it, after which he passed the night
and went forth on the morrow to his shop and sat there.

Meanwhile, Kemerezzeman took three hundred dinars
and carrying them to the barber's wife, gave them to her
for her husband. Quoth she, 'Most like he will invite
thee to his house this night ; and if he do this and thou
lie with him, tell me in the morning what happens to thee
and bring with thee four hundred dinars and give them
to thy father [the barber]/ 'I hear and obey,' answered
he ; and as often as he ran out of money, he would sell
some of his jewels. So he repaired to the jeweller, who
received him with open arms and clapped up a friendship
with him. Then he gave him the ring, and he found it

1 A dim edh dhauc % lit. lacking in taste. The French savoir-vivre
(which can only be rendered in English, and that but imperfectly, by
some such periphrasis as "knowledge of the world") exactly expresses
the meaning of the word dhauc % as here used

2 Dhauc. See last note*


8 9


after the measure of his finger and said to the jeweller,
' God bless thee, O prince of craftsmen ! The setting is
conformable [to my wishes], but the stone is not to my
liking. I have a handsomer than it : so take the ring ixcccclx
and give it to one of thy women/ Then he gave him
a fourth stone and a hundred dinars, saying, 'Take thy
hire and pardon me the trouble I have given thee.'
'O merchant/ answered Ubeid, * all the trouble thou hast
given us thou hast requited us and hast overwhelmed us
with thy bounties : and indeed my heart is taken with love
of thee and I cannot brook parting from thee. So, God
on thee, be thou my guest this night and heal my heart*
* So be it,' replied Kemerezzeman ; ' but needs must I go
to my khan, that I may give a charge to my servants and
tell them that I shall sleep abroad to-night, so they may
not expect me.' 'Where dost thou lodge?' asked the
jeweller ; and he answered, ' In such a khan/ Quoth
Ubeid, ' I will come for thee there/ And Kemerezzeman
said, 'Good/

So the jeweller repaired to the khan before sundown,
tearing lest his wife should be wroth with him, if he
returned home without Kemerezzeman, and carrying him
to his house, seated him in a saloon that had not its match.
Helimeh saw him, as he entered, and was ravished with
him. They talked till the evening-meai came, when they
ate and drank ; after which came coffee and sherbets, and
the jeweller ceased not to entertain him with talk till
evensong, when they prayed the ordained prayers. Then
in came a handmaid with two cups of [diet-]drink, which
when they had drunk, drowsiness overcame them and they
slept. Presently in came the jewellers wife and seeing
them asleep, looked upon Kemerezzeman's face and was
confounded at his beauty. i How can he sleep who loves
the fair ? ? said she, and turning him over on his back,
bestrode his breast Then, in the rage of her passion for


90

him, she rained down kisses on his cheeks, till she left a
mark upon them and they became exceeding red and his
cheekbones shone. Moreover, she sucked his lips, till the
blood ran out into her mouth ; but with all this, her heat
was not quenched nor her thirst assuaged.

She ceased not to kiss and clip him and twine leg with
/eg, till the forehead of the day grew white and the dawn
broke forth and shone ; when she put in his pocket four
huckle-bones and went away. Then she sent her maid
with something like snuff, which she applied to their
nostrils and they sneezed and awoke. ' O my lords/ said
the girl, ' prayer is a duty ; so rise and pray the morning
prayer. 1 And she brought them basin and ewer. 1 Quoth
Kemerezzeman, 'O master, we have overslept ourselves/
1 O my friend/ answered the jeweller, ' verily the air of
this room is heavy ; for, whenever I sleep in it, this
happens to me/ ' It is well/ rejoined Kemerezzeman and
proceeded to make the ablution; but, when he put the
water to his face, his cheeks and lips burned him. c This
is a strange thing ! ' said he. ' If the air of the room be
heavy and we have been drowned in sleep, what ails my
cheeks and lips that they burn me ? ' And he said to
the jeweller, £ master, my cheeks and lips burn me.'
' Doubtless this comes of the mosquito-bites/ answered
the other. i Strange ! ' said Kemerezzeman. ' Hath this
thing happened to thee ? ' ' No/ replied Ubeid. ' But,
whenever I have a guest like thee, he complains in the
morning of the mosquito-bites, and this only happens
when he is like thee, beardless. If he be bearded, the
mosquitoes trouble him not, and nought hinders them
from me but my beard. It seems they love not bearded
men.' * True/ rejoined Kemerezzeman. Then the maid
brought them breakfast and they broke their fast and
went out

1 For the preliminary ablutiosi.


gi

Kemerezzeman betook himself to the old woman, who
€xclaimed, when she saw him, 4 1 see the marks of dalliance
on thy face: tell me what thou hast seen.' Quoth he,
' I have seen nothing. Only I supped with the master of
the house in a saloon and prayed the evening prayer, after
which we fell asleep and woke not till the morning/ She
laughed and said, ' What are those marks on thy cheeks
and lips ? ' 'It was the mosquitoes of the saloon that did
this with me/ answered he. * It is well/ rejoined she.
' But did the same thing betide the master of the house ? 7
* Nay/ replied he ; ' on the contrary, he told me that the
mosquitoes of that saloon molest not bearded men, but
bite those only who have no hair on their faces, and that,
whenever he hath to guest one who is beardless, the latter
awakes, complaining of the mosquito-bites ; but, if he
have a beard, there befalls him nothing of this.' 'Good/
said she. ' Sawest thou ought but this ? ' and he answered,
4 1 found four huckle-bones in my pocket' Quoth she,
' Show them to me/

So he gave them to her and she laughed and said,
'Thy mistress laid these in thy pocket.' ' How so ? ' asked
he ; and she replied, ' It is as if she said to thee, in the
language of signs, "An thou wert in love, thou wouldst
not sleep^ for a lover sleeps not : but thou art yet a child
and fit for nothing but to play with these huckle-bones.
So what ails thee to fall in love with the fair ? " Now she
came to thee by night and finding thee asleep, devoured
thy cheeks with kisses and left thee this sign. But this
will not suffice her of thee and she will certainly send her
husband to invite thee again to-night ; so, when thou goest
home with him, hasten not to fall asleep, and on the
morrow bring me five hundred dinars and acquaint me
with what hath passed, and I will tell thee what more thou
shalt do. * I hear and obey/ answered he and went back
to the khan.


92


Meanwhile, the jeweller's wife said to her husband, ' Is
the guest gone?' ( Yes,' answered he : 'but, O Helimeh,
the mosquitoes plagued him last night and scarified his
cheeks and lips, and indeed I was abashed before him.'
* This is the wont of the mosquitoes of our saloon,'
rejoined she ; ' for they love none but the beardless. But
do thou invite him again to-night/ So he repaired to
Kemerezzeman's lodging and bidding him, carried him
to his house, where they ate and drank and prayed the
j^tCrjK evening prayer in the saloon, after which the maid came
ElCC£C(jCXt. in and gave each of them a cup of drink, and they drank
and fell asleep. Presently, in came Helimeh and said,
' O good-for-nought, how canst thou sleep and call thyself
a lover? A lover sleepeth not.' Then she mounted on
his breast and ceased not to ply him with kisses and
caresses, biting and sucking hjs lips and so forth, till the
morning, when she put a knife in his pocket and sent her
maid to arouse them.

When Kemerezzeman awoke, his cheeks were on fire,
for excess of redness, and his lips like coral, for dint
of sucking and kissing. Quoth the jeweller, ' Did the
mosquitoes plague thee last night ? ' * No/ answered the
young man ; for, since he knew the word of the enigma,
he left complaining. Then he felt the knife in his pocket
and was silent. When he had broken his fast and drunk
coffee, he left the jeweller and going to the khan, took
five hundred dinars and carried them to the old woman,
to whom he related what had passed, saying, * I slept in
my own despite, and when I woke I found nothing but a
knife in my pocket/ ' May God protect thee from her this
next night ! ' exclaimed the old woman. ' For she saith
to thee [by this sign,] " An thou sleep again, I will cut thy
throat." Thou wilt once more be bidden to the jeweller's
house to-night, and if thou sleep, she will slay thee/

s What is to be done ? ' asked he ; and she said, * Tell


93


me what thou atest and drankest before sleeping.* Quoth
he, * We supped as usual and prayed the evening prayer,
after which there came in to us a maid, who gave each
of us a cup of [diet-]drink, which when I had drunk,
I fell asleep and awoke not till the morning.' ' The
mischief is in the cup of drink/ said the old woman.
* So, when the maid gives it thee, take it from her, but
drink not and wait till the master of the house have
drunken and fallen asleep ; then say to her, " Give me
a draught of water," and she will go to fetch thee the
gugglet Whilst she is gone, empty the cup behind the
pillow and lie down and feign sleep. So when she comes
back with the gugglet, she will deem that thou hast fallen
asleep, after having drunk off the cup, and will go away ;
and the case will appear to thee anon ; but beware of
disobeying my bidding.' *I hear and obey/ answered he
and returned to the khan.

Meanwhile the jeweller's wife said to her husband, * A
guest's due is, three nights' entertainment : so do thou
invite him a third time.' Accordingly the jeweller betook
himself to Kemerezzeman and inviting him, carried him
home and sat down with him in the saloon. When they
had supped and prayed the evening prayer, in came the
maid and gave each of them a cup. The jeweller drank
and fell asleep ; but Kemerezzeman forbore to drink,
whereupon quoth the maid, 'Wilt thou not drink, O my
lord ? ' ' I am athirst,' answered he. ' Bring me the
gugglet.' So she went to fetch it and in the meantime
-he emptied the cup behind the cushion and lay down.
When the girl returned, she saw him lying down and told
her mistress that he had drunk ofT the cup and fallen
asleep ; whereupon quoth Helimeh to herself, s Verily, his
death is better than his life,' Then, taking a sharp knife^
she went in to him, saying, * Three times, and thou notedst
not the sign, O fool ! So now I will slit thy weasand.'


94


When he saw her making for him, with the knife in her
hand, he opened his eyes and rose, laughing; whereupon,
i It was not of thine own wit/ said she, 'that thou earnest
at the meaning of the token, but by the help of some wily
cheat ; so tell me whence had thou this knowledge.'
* From an old woman,' answered he and told her all
that had passed between himself and the barber's wife.
' To-morrow,' said she, * go thou to her and say, " Hast
thou any further device in store?" And if she say, "Yes,' y
do thou rejoin, "Then do thine endeavour to bring me to
enjoy her publicly." But, if she say, " I have no means of
doing that, and this is the last of my contrivance," put her
away from thy thought, and to-morrow night my husband
will come to thee and invite thee. Do thou come with
him and tell me and I will consider what remains to be
done.' ' Good/ answered he.

Then he spent the rest of the night with her in kissing
and clipping, plying the particle of copulation in concert
and according the conjunctive with the conjoined, 1 whilst
her husband was as a cast-out nunation of construction, 2

1 Double-en tendre founded upon the rules of Arabic grammar. The
meaning is sufficiently obvious.

2 Tenwin el idsafeh. The nunation {tenwin) is the affixed n (nun) }
the sign of the indefinite noun in Arabic grammar, e.g. et taj, the crown,
tajun, a crown. (The penultimate u is the distinctive termination of the
nominative case and is dropped in ordinary talk and in prose, but
retained in poetry and in reading the Koran, in which et taj would be
pronounced et laju,) It is a rule of Arabic grammar that the first of
two nouns in construction or regimen (e.g. "the crown of the king")
loses both the prefixed article (el, the) and the nunation. Thus in
Arabic et taj (the crown) and el melik (the king) would in construction
become (not et tajul melik or iajun el melik, but) taj ul melik, (the crown
of the king), thus dropping or casting out the nunation. This explana-
tion will show what is meant by the comparison of the sleeping and
unconscious husband to the cast-out (or dropped) nunation of construc-
tion. N.B. el before t becomes et and in construction, after the nomi«
native, uL


95


till the morning, when she said to him, ' It is not a night
of thee that will content me, nor a day, no, nor yet a
month nor a year ; but it is my intent to abide with thee
the rest of my life. Wait till I play my husband a trick
that would baffle the keenest-witted and whereby we shall
come to our desires. I will cause doubt to enter into him,
so that he shall put me away, whereupon I will marry thee
and go with thee to thine own country. Moreover, I will
transport all his wealth and treasures to thy lodging and
will contrive thee the ruin of his dwelling-place and the
blotting-out of his traces. But do thou hearken to my
speech and obey me in that I shall say to thee and cross
me not' ' 1 hear and obey/ answered Kemerezzeman ;
'there is no opposition in me/

Then said she, * Go to the khan and when my husband
comes to thee and invites thee, say to him, " O my
brother, a man is apt to be burdensome, and when his
visits grow [over] frequent, both generous and niggard
loathe him. How then shall I go with thee every night
and lie with thee in the saloon? If thou be not
chagrined with me, thy harem will bear me a grudge, for
that I hinder thee from them. If, therefore, thou hast
a mind to my company, take me a house beside thine own
and we will abide thus, now I sitting with thee till the time
of sleep, and now thou with me. Then I will go to my
lodging and thou to thy harem, and this will be better-
advised than that I hinder thee from thy harem every
night." Then will he come to me and take counsel with
me, and I will advise him to turn out our neighbour, for
that the house in which he lives is ours and he rents it of
us ; and once thou art in the house, God will make the
rest of our scheme easy to us. Go now and do as I bid
thee/ i I hear and obey/ answered he ■ whereupon she
left him and went away, whilst he lay down and feigned
sleep.


y6

Presently, the maid came and aroused them ; and when
the jeweller awoke, he said to Kemerezzeman, ' O merchant,
have the mosquitoes troubled thee ? 1 * No/ answered he,
and Ubeid said, 4 Belike thou art grown used to them. '
Then they broke their fast and drank coffee, after which
they went out to their affairs, and Kemerezzeman betook
'Nfgfjt himself to the old woman, to whom he related what had
ttcttcbpcff* passed, saying, * Hast thou any farther device to bring me
to foregather with her publicly ? ' f O my son,' answered
she, * my contrivance hath gone thus far, and now I am at
the end of my devices.' So he left her and returned
to the khan, where towards eventide the jeweller came
to him and invited him. Quoth Kemerezzeman, ' I cannot
go with thee.* * Why so?' asked the merchant. *I love
thee and cannot brook separation from thee. I conjure
thee by Allah to come with me ! ' * If it be thy wish,'
replied Kemerezzeman, 'to continue our intercourse and
keep up the friendship betwixt thee and me, take me
a house beside thine own, and if thou wilt, thou shalt pass
the evening with : me and I with thee ; but, when the time
of sleep cometh, each of us shall go to his own house and
lie there.* Quoth Ubeid, ' I have a house adjoining mine,
which is my own property : so go thou with me to-night
and to-morrow I will have the house voided for thee.'

So he went with him and they supped and prayed the
evening-prayer, after which the jeweller drank the cup of
drugged liquor and fell asleep : but in Kemerezzeman 's
cup there was no drug ; so he drank it and slept not.
Then came the jeweller's wife and passed the night with
him, whilst her husband lay like a dead man. When he
awoke in the morning, he sent for the tenant of the
adjoining house and said to him, 'O man, void me the
house, for I have need of it.' 4 On my head and eyes/
answered the man and voided the house to him, whereupon
Kemerezzeman took up his abode therein and transported


97


all his goods thither. The jeweller passed that evening
with him, then went to his own house.

On the morrow, his wife sent for a cunning builder and
wrought on him with money to make her an underground
[way] from her chamber to Kemerezzeman's house, ending
in a trap-door under the earth. So, before Kemerezzeman
was ware, she came in to him with two bags of money
and he said to her, « Whence comest thou?' She showed
him the underground way and said to him, ' Take these
two bags of his money.' Then she abode with him, toying
and dallying with him, till the morning, when she said,
4 Wait for me, till I go to him and wake him, so he may
go to his shop, and return to thee.' So saying, she went
away and awoke her husband, who made the ablution and
prayed and went to his shop. As soon as he was gone,
she took four bags of money and carrying them to
Kemerezzeman, sat with him awhile, after which she
returned to her house and he betook himself to the
bazaar.

When he returned at sundown, he found in his house
ten purses and jewels and what not else. Presently the
jeweller came to him and carried him to his own house,
where they passed the evening in the saloon, till the maid
brought them to drink. The jeweller drank and fell
asleep, whilst nought betided Kemerezzeman [and he
abode awake], for that his cup was pure and there was no
drug therein. Then came Helimeh and fell to toying with
him, whilst the maid transported the jeweller's goods to
Kemerezzeman's house by the secret passage. Thus they
did till morning, when the maid awoke her master and
gave them to drink of coffee, after which they went each
his own way.

On the third day she brought out to him a knife of her
husband's, that he had chased and wrought with his own
hand. He priced it at five hundred dinars and because of
vol, ix. 7


98

the eagerness with which the folk sought it of him, he had
laid it up in a chest and could not bring himself to sell it
to any. Quoth she, 'Take this knife and stick it in thy
girdle and go to my husband and sit with him. Then pull
out the knife and say to him, " Look at this knife I bought
to-day and tell me if I made a good bargain or not." He
will know it, but will be ashamed to say to thee, "This is
my knife." So he will ask thee, " Whence didst thou buy
it and for how much ? " And do thou answer, " I saw two
Levantines disputing and one said to the other, * Where
hast thou been ? ' Quoth his companion, ' I have been
with my mistress, and whenever I foregather with her, she
gives me money ; but to-day she said to me, " I have no
money to give thee to-day, but take this knife of my
husband's." So I took it and mean to sell it.' The knife
pleased me and I said to . him, ' Wilt thou sell it to me ? '
* Buy/ answered he. So I got it "of him for three hundred
dinars and I wonder whether it was cheap or dear." And
note what he will say to thee. Then talk with him awhile
and rise and come back to me in haste. Thou wilt find me
awaiting thee at the mouth of the underground way, and
do thou give me the knife.' 1 1 hear and obey/ replied
Kemerezzeman and taking the knife, stuck it in his girdle.

Then he went to the shop of the jeweller, who saluted
him and welcomed him and made him sit down. He
spied the knife in his girdle, at which he wondered and
said in himself, ' That is my knife : who can have given
it to this merchant?' And he fell a-musing and saying
in himself, 1 1 wonder if it is my knife or one like it ! *
Presently, Kemerezzeman pulled it out of his girdle and
said to him, ' Harkye, master \ take this knife and look at
^Hg!)i it.' Ubeid took it and knew it right well, but was ashamed
tdxxuL so say, * This is my knife so he said, * Where didst thou
buy it?* Kemerezzeman replied as Helimeh had charged
him, and the jeweller said, * The knife was cheap at that


99


price, for it is worth five hundred dinars.' But fire flamed
in his heart and his hands were tied from working at his
craft.

Kemerezzeman continued to talk with him, whilst he
was drowned in the sea of solicitudes, and for fifty words
wherewith the youth bespoke him, he answered him but
one ; for his heart was in torment and his body racked and
his mind troubled and he was even as saith the poet :

I cannot speak, what time to talk with me folk have a mind, And if
they speak to me, my thought they absent from me find.

Drowned in the sea of care, that hath no bottom, 'twixt the folk I can't
distinguish, no, nor man can tell from womankind.

When Kemerezzeman saw him thus discomfited, he said
to him, ' Belike thou art busy at this present/ and leaving
him, returned to his own house, where he found Helimeh
standing at the door of the underground passage, awaiting
him. Quoth she, * Hast thou done as I bade thee ? 1
And he said, * Yes.* ' What said he to thee ? ' asked she,
and he answered, i He told me that the knife was cheap
at that price, for that it was worth five hundred dinars :
but I could see that he was troubled ; so I left him and
know not what befell him after that.' ' Give me the
knife/ said she, 4 and reck thou not of him.' Then she
took the knife and restoring it to its place, sat down.

Meanwhile, fire flamed in the jeweller's heart and
disquietude was sore upon him and he said in himself,
' Needs must I go and look for the knife and do away
doubt with certainty.' So he repaired to his house and
went in to his wife, snorting like a dragon ; and she said
to him, ' What ails thee, O my lord ? ' ' Where is my
knife?' asked he. * In the chest/ answered she and smote
upon her breast, saying, 6 Woe is me ! Belike thou hast
fallen out with some one and art come to fetch the knife
to smite him withal' € Give me the knife,' said he. 4 Let


100


me see it' But she replied, '[I will not give it thee] till
thou swear to me that thou wilt not smite any one with it.
So he swore this to her and she opened the chest and
brought out to him the knife and he fell to turning it over,
saying, i Verily, this is a strange thing 1*

Then said he to her, ' Take it and lay it back in its
place/ Quoth she, 'Tell me the meaning of all this/
And he answered, 4 1 saw a knife like this with our friend
[the merchant]/ and told her all that had passed between
himself and Kemerezzeman, adding, ' But, when I saw it
in the chest, there was an end of my doubts/ 'Belike/
said she, 'thou misdoubtedst of me and deemedst that I
was the Levantine's mistress and had given him the knife/
' Yes/ replied he ; ' I had my doubts of this ; but, when
I saw the knife, suspicion was lifted from my heart/
'O man/ rejoined she, ' there is no good in thee!' And
he fell to excusing himself to her, till he appeased herj
after which he returned to his shop.

Next day, she gave Kemerezzeman her husband's watch,
which he had wrought with his own hand and whereof
none had the like, saying, 4 Go to his shop and sit with
him and say to him, " I saw again to-day him whom
I saw yesterday. He had a watch in his hand and said
to me, ' Wilt thou buy this watch ? ' Quoth I, ' Whence
hadst thou it ? ' And he answered, saying, f I was with
my mistress and she gave me this watch/ So I bought
it of him for eight-and-fifty dinars. Look at it : is it
cheap at that price or dear ? " Note what he says to
thee ; then return to me in haste and give me the watch/
So Kemerezzeman repaired to the jeweller and did with
him as his mistress had charged him. When Ubeid saw
the watch, he said, ( This is worth seven hundred dinars ; '
and suspicion entered into him. Then Kemerezzeman
left him and returning to Helimeh, gave her back the
watch,


101

Presently, in came her husband, snorting, and said to
her, ' Where is my watch?' 'Here it is,' answered she.
And he said, ' Give it me.' So she brought it to him and
he exclaimed, ' There is no power and no virtue save in
God the Most High, the Supreme ! ' ' O man/ said she,
' there is something the matter with thee. Tell me what it
is.* 'What shall I say?' answered he. 'Verily, I am
bewildered by these [strange] chances I ' And he recited
the following verses :

By the Compassionate, I'm dazed about my case ; for lo ! Troubles and

griefs beset me sore, I know not whence they grow.
Patient I'll be, so aloes' 1 self, that I against a thing Bitt'rer than eves

aloes was endured have, may know.
Aloes itself less bitter than my patience is ; I've borne With patience

what is hotter far than coals with fire aglow.
Will o'er my case hath no command ; but unto patience fair I'm bidd'rs

of Him who orders all that is for weal or woe. 3 ^

Then he said to his wife, ' O woman, I saw, in the
hands of the merchant our friend, first my knife, which
I knew, for that its fashion was of my own invention, nor
doth its like exist; and he told me of it a story that
troubled the heart : so I came [home] and found it [here].
Again to-day I see him with the watch, whose fashion
also is of my own invention, nor is there the fellow of
it in Bassora, and of this also he told me a story that
troubled my heart. Wherefore I am bewildered in my
wit and know not what is come to me.' Quoth she, ' The
gist of thy speech is that thou suspectedst me of being
the merchant's mistress and giving him thy goods ; so
thou earnest to question me and make proof of my perfidy ;
and but that I showed thee the knife and the watch,
thou hadst been certified of my faithlessness. But, O man s

1 See note, Vol. I. p 120.

2 This line contains a play on the double meaning { i& commandment *
and " case "or iS thing ") of the word amr.


102


gince thou deemest thus of me, henceforth I will never
again break bread with thee nor drink water, for I loathe
thee with the loathing of prohibition.' 1

So he spoke her fair and excused himself to her till he
CNftQ&t appeased her and returned, repenting him of having
bttCtlxxftu bespoken her thus, to his shop, where he sat, in sore
disquiet and exceeding anxiety, between belief and dis-
belief, till eventide. Then he went home, but brought
not Kemerezzeman with him ; whereupon quoth his wife,
* Where is the merchant ? ' And he said, 'In his house.'
'Is the friendship between thee and him grown cold?*
asked she. * By Allah/ replied he, ' 1 have taken an
aversion to him, because of that which hath betided me
from him.* Quoth she, * Go and fetch him, to please me.'
So he arose and went in to Kemerezzeman in his house,
where he saw his own goods strewn about and knew them.
At this sight, fire was kindled in his heart and he fell
asighing. Quoth Kemerezzeman, < How is it that I see
thee melancholy ? ' Ubeid was ashamed to say, 1 Here
are my goods in thy house: who brought them hither?'
So he answered only, ' A vexation hath betided me ; but
come thou with me to my house, that we may divert
ourselves there.' ' Let me be in my place,' said Kemer-
ezzeman. * I will not go with thee. 5 But the jeweller
conjured him [to come] and taking him, [carried him to
his house,] where they supped and passed the evening
together, Kemerezzeman talking with the jeweller, who
was drowned in the sea of solicitude and answered him
but one word for a hundred wherewith he bespoke him.

Presently, the maid brought them two cups of drink, as
usual, and they drank ; whereupon Ubeid fell aileep, but
Kemerezzeman abode on wake, for that his cup was not
drugged. Then came Helimeh and said to her lover s
1 Le. as one loathes that which is prohibited or tabooed.


io3


'How deemest thou of yonder cuckold, who is drunken
in his heedlessness and knoweth not the wiles of women?
Needs must I cozen him into putting me away. To-
morrow, I will disguise myself as a slave-girl and follow
thee to his shop, where do thou say to him, " O master,
I went to-day into the khan of El Yesirjiyeh, where I saw
this damsel and bought her for a thousand dinars. Look
at her and tell me whether she was cheap or dear at that
price." Then uncover to him my face and breasts and
show me to him ; after which do thou carry me back to
thy house, whence I will go to my chamber by the secret
passage, so I may see the issue of our affair with him. 1

Then they passed the night in mirth and converse and
pieasance and good cheer and dalliance and delight till the
morning, when she returned to her own place and sent the
maid to arouse the two men. So they arose and prayed the
morning-prayer and broke their fast and drank coffee, after
which Ubeid repaired to his shop and Kemerezzeman be-
took himself to his own house. Presently, in came Helimeh
to him by the underground passage, in the disguise of a
slave-girl, and indeed she was a slave-girl by birth. 1 Then he
went out and she followed him, till he came to the jeweller's
shop and saluting him, sat down and said, ' O master,
I went into the khan of El Yesirjiyeh to-day, to look
about me, and saw this damsel in the broker's hands.
She pleased me ; so I bought her for a thousand dinars
and I would have thee look upon her and see if she be
cheap at that price or no.' So saying, he uncovered her
race and the jeweller saw her to be his own wife, dressed
in her richest clothes and tricked out in her finest orna-
ments and adorned with kohl and henna, even as she was
wont to adorn herself before him in the house.

He knew her but too well by her face and clothes and
a Hence, according to Muslim theory, her wicked behaviour.


104

trinkets, for that he had wrought the latter with his owr
hand, and he saw on her fingers the rings he had newly
made for Kemerezzeman, whereby he was certified that
she was indeed his wife. So he said to her, * What is
thy name, O slave-girl?' And she answered, s Helimeh/
naming to him her own name ; whereat he was amazed
and said to Kemerezzeman, ' For how much didst thou
buy her ? ' ' For a thousand dinars,' answered he. * Then/
rejoined the jeweller, * thou hast gotten her for nothing;
for her rings and clothes and trinkets are worth more than
that.' * May God rejoice thee with good news!' said
Kemerezzeman. * Since she pleases thee, I will carry her
to my house.' And Ubeid answered, 1 Do thy will/ So
he carried her to his house, whence she passed through
the secret passage to her own apartment and sat there.

Meanwhile, fire flamed in the jeweller's heart and he
said to himself, * I will go see my wife. If she be at home,
this slave-girl must be her counterpart, and glory be to
Him who [only] hath no counterpart ! But, if she be not
at home, it is she herself without a doubt/ Then he set
off, running, and coming to his house, found his wife
sitting in the same clothes and ornaments he had seen
upon her in the shop ; whereupon he beat hand upon
hand, saying, ' There is no power and no virtue but in
God the Most High, the Supreme ! 7 1 man/ said she,
* art thou mad or what aileth thee ? It is not thy wont
to do thus, and it must be that something hath befallen
thee/ ' If thou wilt have me tell thee/ answered he, * be
not vexed.' * Say on/ quoth she. So he said, * Our friend
the merchant hath bought a slave-girl, whose shape is as
thy shape and her height as thy height ; moreover, her
name is even as thine and her apparel is the like of thine
apparel Brief, she resembles thee in all her attributes,
and on her fingers are rings like thy rings and her trinkets
are like unto thy trinkets. So 9 when he showed her tc


ios

me, rnethought it was thyself and I was perplexed about
my case. Would we had never seen this merchant nor
companied with him and would he had never left his own
country and we had not known him, for he hath troubled
my life, that before was serene, causing unkindness to
succeed good faith and making doubt to enter into my
heart ! ' * Look in my face/ said she. ' Belike I am she
who was with him and he is my lover and I disguised
myself as a slave-girl and agreed with him that he should
show me to thee, so he might lay a snare for thee.' ' What
words are these ? * answered he. * Indeed, I never thought
that thou wouldst do the like of this thing.'

Now this jeweller was unversed in women's wiles" and
knew not how they do with men, nor had he heard the
saying of the poet :

A heart that is eath of moving hath carried thee off in cjiase Of the fair,

when youth hath left thee and hoariness comes apace.
Leila to me is costly and her enjoyment remote And many a foe and

peril 'twixt her and me have place.
If thou wouldst ask of women and question of their concerns, Lo, I am

versed in their fashions, a leach well skilled in their case.
When a man's head grows grizzled or for the nonce his wealth Fails

from his hand, believe me, he hath no part in their grace.

Nor that of another :

Gainsay women ; he obeyeth Allah best, who saith them nay And ht
prospers not who giveth them his bridle-rein to sway ;

For they'll hinder him from winning to perfection in his gifts, Though a
thousand years he study, seeking after wisdom's way.

And a third ;

Women are very devils, made to work us dole and death : Refuge I seek
with God Most High from all their craft and scaith.

Prime source are they of all the ills that overtake mankind, Both in the
fortunes of this world and matters of the faith.

* Here am I sitting in my chamber/ said she. So go


io6

thou to him forthright and knock at the door and make
shift to go in to him quickly. If thou see the damsel
with him, it is a slave-girl of his who resembles me, and
glory be to Him who hath no like 1 But, if thou see no
slave-girl with him, then am I myself she whom thou
sawest with him in the shop, and thine ill thought of me
will be confirmed.' * True/ answered Ubeid and went out,
whereupon she passed through the hidden way and seating
herself by Kemerezzeman, told him what had passed,
saying, 4 Open the door quickly and show me to him.'

As they were talking, there came a knocking at the
door. Quoth Kemerezzeman, c Who is at the door?*
'I, thy friend,' answered the jeweller; 'thou showedst me
thy slave-girl in the bazaar, and I rejoiced in her for thee ;
but my joy in her was not completed ; so open the door
and let me look at her again/ e So be it/ rejoined
Kemerezzeman and opened the door to him, whereupon
he saw his wife sitting by him She rose and kissed their
hands ; and he looked at her. Moreover, she talked with
him awhile and he saw her not to be distinguished from
his wife in aught and said, ' God createth what He will/
Then he went away, more perplexed than ever, and
returned to his own house, where he found his wife sitting
&tftf)t m her chamber, for she had foregone him thither by the
UCCCClxxtl. secret passage. Quoth she, 'What hast thou seen?'

* I found her with her master/ answered he ; ' and she
resembleth thee/ Then said she, i Go to thy shop and let
this suffice thee of suspicion and never again deem ill of
me.' ' So be it/ replied he ; 1 bear me not malice for what
is past' 'God pardon thee 1 7 said she; whereupon he
kissed her right and left and went back to his shop.

No sooner was he gone than she again betook herself
to Kemerezzeman through the underground passage, with
four bags of money, and said to him, ' Equip thyself for
present departure and be ready to carry off the treasure


io7


without delay, against 1 put in action foi thee the device
I have in mind.' So he went out forthright and bought
mules and loaded them and made ready a travelling litter.
Moreover he bought slaves and servants and sending the
whole without the city, returned to Helimeh and said to
her, ' I have made an end of my affairs/ Quoth she,
e And I too am ready ; for I have transported to thy house
all the rest of his money and treasures and have left him
nothing, little or much, whereof he may avail himself.
All this is of my love for thee, O darling of my heart, for
I would sacrifice to thee a thousand husbands. But now
thou must go to him and take leave of him, saying, " I
purpose to depart after three days and am come to bid
thee farewell. So do thou reckon what I owe thee for the
rent of the house, that I may send it to thee and acquit
my conscience." Note his reply and return to me and
tell me ; for I can no more. I have done my utmost,
by cozening him, to anger him with me and cause
him divorce me, but find him still infatuated with me.
So nothing will serve us but to depart to thine own
country.' ' O rare 1 ' replied he. * If but the dreams prove
true!' 1

Then he went to the jeweller's shop and sitting down
by him, said to him, * O master, I set out for home in
three days' time, and am come to take leave of thee. So
I would have thee reckon what I owe thee for the hire of
the house, that I may give it to thee and acquit my con-
science.' 1 What talk is this ? ' answered Ubeid. * Verily,
it is I who am indebted to thee. By Allah, I will take
nothing from thee for the rent of the house, for thou
hast brought down blessings upon us 1 But thou desolatest
me by thy departure, and but that it is forbidden to me,
I would certainly oppose thee and hinder thee from
returning to thy country and family/ Then he took leave
1 A proverbial saying.,


io8

of him, whilst they both wept exceeding sore, and the
jeweller shut his shop, saying in himself, ' Needs must I
bring my friend on his way. 1

So, as often as he went on an occasion, the jeweller
went with him, and when they entered Kemerezzeman's
house, they found Helimeh there, and she stood before
them and served them ; but, when Ubeid entered his own
house, he found her sitting there; nor did he cease to
see her thus in each house in turn, for the space of three
days, at the end of which time she said to Kemerezzeman,
'Now have I transported to thee all that he hath of
treasures and carpets and things of price, and there
remains with him but the slave-girl, who used to come
in to you with the night drink : but I cannot part with her,
for that she is my kinswoman and confidant and she is
dear to me. So I will [feign to]^ beat her and be wroth
with her and when my husband comes home, I will say
to him, " I will no longer put up with this slave-girl nor
abide in the house with her; take her and sell her." So
he will sell her and do thou buy her, that we may carry
her with us.' 'Good,' answered he. So she beat the
girl and when the jeweller came in, he found her weeping
and asked her why she wept. Quoth she, ' My mistress
hath beaten me. 1 So he went in to his wife and said to
her, 'What hath that accursed girl done, that thou hast
beaten her?' 'O man,' answered she, 'I have but one
word to say to thee, and it is that I can no longer brook
the sight of this girl ; so take her and sell her, or else
divorce me.' Quoth he, ' I will sell her, for I may not
cross thee in aught/ So, when he went out to go to the
shop, he took her and passed with her by Kemerezzeman.

No sooner had he gone out than his wife slipped through
the underground passage to Kemerezzeman, who placed
her in the litter, before her husband reached him. When
he came up and Kemerezzeman saw the slave-girl with


tog

him he said to him, * What girl is this ? ' * It is my slave-
girl/ answered Ubeid, ' who used to serve us with wine ;
she hath disobeyed her mistress, who is wroth with her
and hath bidden me sell her/ Quoth Kemerezzeman, ' If
her mistress have taken an aversion to her, there is no
abiding for her with her ; but sell her to me, that I may
smell your scent in her, and I will make her handmaid
to my slave Helimeh.' * Good,' answered Ubeid. ' Take
her.' 'What is her price?' asked Kemerezzeman. But
the jeweller said, ' I will take nothing from thee, for thou
hast been bountiful to us.'

So he accepted her from him and said to Helimehf
1 Kiss thy lord's hand 1 Accordingly, she came out from
the litter and kissing Ubeid's hand, remounted, whilst he
looked at her. Then said Kemerezzeman, 'I commend
thee to God, O Master Ubeid ! Acquit me of responsi-
bility/ 1 'God acquit thee/ answered the' jeweller, 4 and
bring thee in safety to thy family ! ' Then he bade him
farewell and went to his shop, weeping, and indeed it was
grievous to him to part from Kemerezzeman, for that he
had been his friend and friendship hath its claims ; yet he
rejoiced in the dispelling of the doubts that had betided
him concerning his wife, since the young man was now
gone and his suspicions had not been confirmed.

Meanwhile Helimeh said to her lover, 4 If thou wish for
safety, travel by other than the accustomed road.' ' I hear
and obey,' answered he and taking a road other than that ^ff$f)t
commonly used, fared on, without ceasing, till he reached fccacljabi
the confines of Egypt and sent his father a letter by a
runner. Now Abdurrehman was sitting in the market
among the merchants, with a heart on fire for separation
from his son, for that no news of the latter had reached

1 A common formula of leave-taking between two persons who haw
had business or other transactions with each other, meaning, *' Hold me
quit of any claims thou mayst have on me,"


no


him, since the day of his departure, when the runner came
up and said, * O my lords, which of you is called the
merchant Abdurrehman? ' * What wouldst thou with him ?'
asked they j and he said, ' I have a letter for him from his
son Kemerezzeman, whom I left at El Arish.' 1

At this Abdurrehman rejoiced and his heart was
lightened and the merchants rejoiced for him and gave
him joy of [his son's] safety. Then he opened the letter
and read as follows ; ' From Kemerezzeman to the
merchant Abdurrehman. Peace be upon thee and upon
all the merchants ! If ye ask concerning us, to God be
the praise and the thanks ! Indeed we have sold and
bought and profited and are come back in health and
wealth and safety.' Whereupon Abdurrehman opened the
chapter of rejoicing and made banquets and gave feasts
and entertainments galore, sending for instruments of
music and addressing himself to" hold high festival after
the rarest fashion When Kemerezzeman came to Es
Salehiyeh, 3 his father and all the merchants went forth to
meet him, and Abdurrehman embraced him and strained
him to his bosom and wept till he swooned away. When
he came to himself, he said, ' O my son, [this is] a
blessed day, since the Omnipotent Protector hath reunited
us with thee I ' And he repeated the following verses :

The loved one's return is the crowning of glee And the joy-cup between

us once more circles free.
So welcome, fair welcome and full to the light Of the time, the full

moon of full moons, still say we.

Then, for excess of joy, the tears flowed from his eyes
and he recited these verses also :

1 A town and fortress on the Mediterranean, close to the frontier of
Palestine, besieged and captured by Napoleon in 1 799.
3 A town about 60 miles N N. E. of Cairo.


Ill


The moon o* the time, 1 unveiling, in splendour doth appear, Whenas 4

his travels ended, to us he draweth near.
Even as the night of his absence his hair in colour is, But yet the sun's

uprising is from his collars' 2 sphere.

Then the merchants came up to Kemerezzeman and
saluting him, saw with him man)' loads and servants and
a travelling litter enclosed in a spacious canopy. So they
took him and carried him home ; and when Helimeh
came forth from the litter, his father saw her a ravishment
to all who beheld her. So they opened her an upper
chamber, as it were a treasure from which the talismans
had been loosed ; 8 and when his mother saw her, she was
ravished with her and deemed her a queen of the wives
of the kings. So she rejoiced in her and questioned her ;
and she answered, saying, ' I am thy son's wife.* 4 Since
he is married.to thee,' rejoined the other, * we must make
thee a splendid bride-feast, that we may rejoice in thee
and in my son.'

When the folk had dispersed and each had gone his
way, Abdurrehman foregathered with his son and said to
him, * O my son, what is this slave-girl thou hast brought
with thee and for how much didst thou buy her ? ' ' O
my father/ answered Kemerezzeman, 'she is no slave-
girl ; but it is she who was the cause of my going abroad.
* How so ? ' asked his father, and he said, ' It is she whom
the dervish described to us the night he lay with us ; for
indeed my hopes clove to her from that hour and I sought
not to travel but on her account. The wild Arabs came
out upon me by the way and stripped me and took my

1 i.e. Kemerezzeman.

8 Comparing his bright face, rising from his collars, to the sun issuing
from the sphere of the darkness.

8 i.e. so richly decorated that it seemed like the chamber of an
enchanted treasure, whose binding spells had been done away, so that
it was become open to sight.


112


goods, so that I entered Bassora alone and there befe&l
me there such and such things ; ' and he went on to relate
to him ail that had befallen him from beginning to end.

When he had made an end of his story, his father said
to him, ' O my son, and after all this didst thou marry
her ? ' ' No/ answered Kemerezzeman ; ' but I have
promised her marriage.' 'Is it thine intent to marry
her?' asked Abdurrehman; and he replied, 'If thou bid
me marry her, I will do so; otherwise, I will not marry
her.' Quoth his father, * If thou marry her, I am quit of
thee in this world and the next, and I shall be sore
incensed against thee. How canst thou marry her, seeing
that she hath dealt thus with her husband? For, even as
she did with him for thy sake, so will she do the like with
thee for another's sake, because she is a traitress and there
is no trusting in a traitor. Wherefore, if thou disobey rae s
I shall be wroth with thee; but, if thou give ear to my
word, I will seek thee out a girl handsomer than she, who
shall be pure and virtuous, and marry thee to her, though
I spend all my wealth upon her. Moreover, I will make
thee a wedding without equal and will glory in thee and
in her ; for it is better that folk should say, " Such an one
hath married such an one's daughter," than that they
should say, " He hath taken to wife a slave-girl without
birth or worth." ' And he went on to persuade his son to
give up marrying her, supporting his arguments by citing
saws and proofs and stories and examples and verses and
moral instances, till Kemerezzeman said, * Since the case
is thus, it boots not that I marry her.' Whereupon his
father kissed him between the eyes, saying, 4 Thou art my
true son, and as I live, O my son, I will assuredly marry
thee to a girl who hath not her equal ! '

Then he set the jeweller's wife and her maid in an upper
chamber, appointing a black slave-girl to carry them their
meat and drink. Moreover, he said to Helimehj <Y©


H3


shall abide imprisoned in this chamber, thou and thy
maid, till I find one who will buy you, when I will sell
you to him. And if ye resist, I will kill you both, for thou
art a traitress, and there is no good in thee.' ' Do thy
will/ answered she. 'I deserve all thou canst do with
me.' Then he locked the door on them and gave his
women a charge respecting them, saying, 4 Let none go up
to them nor speak with them, save the black slave-girl,
who shall give them their meat and drink through the
chamber-window.' So she abode with her maid, weeping
and repenting her of that which she had done with her
husband.

Meanwhile Abdurrehman sent out the marriage-brokers,
to look out a wife of rank and worth for his son, and they
ceased not to make search, and as often as they saw one
girl, they heard of a fairer than she, till they came to the
house of the Sheikh el Islam and saw his daughter. Now
she had no equal in Cairo for beauty and grace and
symmetry, and she was a thousand times handsomer than
the jeweller's wife. So they told Abdurrehman and he
and the notables repaired to her father and sought her in
marriage of him. Then they drew up the contract and
made her a splendid wedding. Moreover, Abdurrehman
gave bride-feasts and held open house forty days.

On the first day, he invited the doctors of the law and
they held a splendid nativity. 1 On the morrow, he invited
all the merchants, and sd on during the rest of the forty
days, making a banquet every day to one or other class of
folk, till he had bidden all the men of learning and amirs
and beys and magistrates, whilst the drums beat and the
flutes sounded and the merchant sat to receive the guests,

1 Mau/id, a religious ceremony or ** function," so called because of its
resemblance to the festivals celebrated in honour of the birth of Moham-
med and the principal saints of Islam. It consists mainly of recitations
of the Koran and the litanies of the names of God, etc.

VOL. IX. §


114


with his son by his side, that he might divert himself by
gazing on the folk, as they ate from the tables. Every
night Abdurrehman illuminated the street and the quarter
with lamps and there came all the mimes and jugglers and
mountebanks and played all manner sports ; and indeed
it was a peerless wedding. On the last day he invited the
poor and needy, far and near, and they came in troops
and ate, whilst the merchant sat, with his son by his side.

Presently, behold, Ubeid the jeweller entered, with a
company of poor folk, and he was naked and weary and
bore on his face the marks of travel. When Kemerezze-
man saw him, he knew him and said to his father, < Look,
O my father, at yonder poor man that is but now come
in.' So he looked and saw him clad in worn clothes and
on him a patched gown worth two dirhems : his face was
pale and he was covered with dust and was as he were an
offcast of the pilgrimage. 1 He was groaning as groans the
sick man and the needy, walking with a tottering gait and
swaying right and left, and indeed there was realized in
him the saying of the poet :

Lack-gold abaseth man and doth his worth away, Even as the setting

sun that pales with ended day.
He passeth 'mongst the folk and fain would hide his head ; And whea

alone, he weeps with tears that never stay.
Absent, none taketh heed to him or his concerns ; Present, he hath no

part in life or pleasance aye.
By Allah, whenas men with poverty are cursed, But strangers midst

their kin and countrymen are they 1

And that of another :

All to the poor man's contrary, & hindrance and a woe ; The whole

world shuts its doors on him, wherever he doth go.
Thou seest him in abhorrence held, though he no culprit bej He sees
hostility, the cause whereof he may not know,

1 i.e. one who from weariness or illness has broken down midway osi-
the pilgrimage and has been left behind by the caravan*


115


Even the dogs, when they behold a man of fortune, straight Do follow

him and fawn on him and wag their tails, I trow ;
But if, one day, they see a poor and miserable wight, They bark at him

incontinent and eke their teeth they show*

And yet another :

So bat a man be blessed with luck and power and sway, Calamities and

wnes still turn from him away.
The loved one to him comes without a rendezvous, Unsought, and eke

the spy the pimp for him doth play.
The folk as singing rate the rumbling of his guts And when he letteth

wind, <l He sraelleth sweet," they say.

( my son/ said the merchant, 'who is this?' And Ntgf)l
Kemerezzeman replied, ' This is Master Ubeid the jeweller, iJCCCC
husband of the woman who is imprisoned with us/ Quoth Ixxbfi
Abdurrehman, 'Is this he of whom thou boldest me?'
* Yes/ answered his son ; 4 and indeed I know him well'

Now the manner of Ubeid's coming thither was on this
wise. When he had taken leave of Kemerezzeman, he
went to his shop, where there came to him a job of work
and he wrought at it all day. At eventide he locked up
his shop and going home, laid his hand on the door,
whereupon it opened and he entered and found neither
his wife nor the slave-girl, but saw the house in the sorriest
of plights, realizing the saying of the poet :

Once was it as a beehive stocked and full of bees galore ; But, when

they left it, it became devoid of all its store. 1
It seems to-day as if it ne'er had been inhabited Or as if Death had

taken those who dwelt therein of yore.

When he saw the house empty, he turned right and left
and went round about the place, like a madman, but found
no one. Then he opened the door of his treasure-closet,
but found therein nought of his money nor his treasures j
1 See note, Vol VI. p. 37.


no


whereupon he awoke from his delusion and shook off his
infatuation and knew that it was his wife herself who had
given him the change and outwitted him with her wiles.
He wept for that which had betided, but kept his affair
secret, so none of his enemies might exult over him nor
any of his friends be troubled, knowing that, if he dis-
covered his secret, it would bring him nought but affront
and blame from the folk; wherefore he said to himself,
' O Ubeid, conceal that which hath befallen thee of trouble
and affliction ; it behoveth thee to do in accordance with
the saying of the poet :

If a man's breast be straitened with a secret he doth hide, Yet straitens
his who to the folk his secret doth confide.'

Then he locked up his house and gave his shop in
charge of one of his journeymen, to whom said he, ' My
friend the young merchant hath invited me and my wife to
accompany him to Cairo, that we may divert ourselves
with the sight of the city, and swears that he will not
depart except he carry us with him. So, O my son,
I make thee my steward in the shop, and if the king
ask for me, say thou to him, "He is gone with his wife
to the Holy House of God [at Mecca]/' ' Then he sold
some of his effects and bought mules and camels and
slaves. Moreover, he bought a slave-girl and placing her
in a litter, set out from Bassora after ten days. His friends
took leave of him and none doubted but that he'had taken
his wife and gone on the pilgrimage, and the folk rejoiced
in this, for that God had delivered them from being
shut up in the mosques and houses every Friday. Quoth
some of them, * God grant he may never return to Bassora,
so we may no more be shut up in the mosques and houses
every Friday !' For that this usage had caused the people
of Bassora exceeding vexation. Quoth another, ' Methinks
he will not return, by reason of the praying of the people


ii7


of Bassora against him.' And yet another, * If he return,
it will not be but in reversed case.'

So the folk rejoiced with an exceeding joy in the
jeweller's departure, after they had been in sore chagrin,
and even their cats and dogs were eased. When Friday
came round, however, the crier proclaimed as usual that
the people should repair to the mosques two hours before
the time of prayer or else shut themselves up in their
houses, together with their cats and dogs ; whereat their
breasts were straitened and they all assembled and
betaking themselves to the king's divan, stood before
him and said, f O king of the age, the jeweller hath taken
his wife and departed on the pilgrimage to the Holy House
of God : so the cause of our restraint hath ceased to be,
and why therefore are we now shut up ? ' Quoth the
king, 'How came this traitor to depart wjthout telling
me ? But, when he comes back from his journey, all will
be well : so go ye to your shops and sell and buy, for this
[restriction] is removed from you.'

Meanwhile the jeweller fared on ten days 1 journey, and
as he drew near Baghdad, there befell him that which had
befallen Kemerezzeman, before his entry into Bassora ;
for the wild Arabs came out upon him and stripped him
and took all he had and he only escaped by feigning
himself dead. As soon as they were gone, he rose and
fared on, naked as he was, till he came to a village, where
God inclined to him the hearts of certain charitable folk,
who covered his nakedness with some old clothes, and he
begged his way from town to town, till he reached the city
of Cairo the [God-]guarded. Being racked with hunger,
he went about begging in the markets, till one of the
townsfolk said to him, f O poor man, get thee to the house
of the wedding-festival and eat and drink ; for to-day they
hold open house for poor folk and strangers. 5 Quoth he,
6 1 know not the way thither ; 9 and the other said, ' Follow


uS

me and I will show it to thee. 1 So he followed him, till
he brought him to Ahdurrehman's house and said to him,
4 This is the house of the wedding ; enter and fear not,
for there is no doorkeeper at the door of the festival.'

So he entered and Kemerezzeman knew him and told
his father, who said, ' O my son, leave him awhile : belike
he is hungry ; so let him eat his fill and recover himself,
and after we will look to him.' So they waited till Ubeid
had eaten his nil and washed his hands and drunk coffee
and sherbets of sugar flavoured with musk and ambergris
and was about to go out, when Abdurrehman sent one
after him, who said to him, ' Come, O stranger, and speak
with the merchant Abdurrehman.' 'Who is he?' asked
Ubeid j and the man said, ' He is the master of the feast/
So the jeweller turned back, thinking that he meant to
give him largesse, and coming up, to Abdurrehman, saw
his friend Kemerezzeman and was like to lose his senses
for shame before him. But Kemerezzeman rose to him
and embracing him, saluted him and they both wept sore.
Then he seated him by his side and Abdurrehman said to
his son, * Lack-courtesy that thou art, this is no way to
receive friends I Send him first to the bath and send after
him a suit of clothes that shall befit him ; and after sit
with him and talk with him.' So he called some of his
men and bade them carry the jeweller to the bath and sent
him a suit of clothes of the choicest, worth a thousand
dinars. Accordingly they carried him to the bath, where
they washed his body and clad him in a suit, and he
became as he were Provost of the Merchants.

Meanwhile, the bystanders questioned Kemerezzeman
of him, saying, i Who is this and whence knowest thou
him ? ' Quoth he, ' This is my friend, who lodged me in
his house and to whom I am indebted for favours without
number, for that he entreated me with exceeding kindness.
He is a man of fortune and condition and by trade a


U9


)ewel!er, in which craft he hath no equal. The king of
Bassora loves him greatly and holds him in high esteem
and his word is law with him. 7 And he went on to enlarge
to them on his praises, saying, * He did with me thus and
thus and I have shame of him and know not how to
requite him his generous dealing with me.' Nor did he
leave to vaunt him, till his worth was magnified to the
bystanders and he became venerable in their eyes. So
they said, ' We will all do him homage and honour him
for thy sake. But we would fain know why he hath
departed his native land and come hither and what God
hath done with him, that he is come to this plight.' 4 O
folk/ replied Kemerezzeman, * marvel not: for a son of
Adam is still subject to Fate and destiny, and what while
he abideth in this world, he is not safe from calamities.
Indeed, he speaks truly who says :

Time still devours mankind and lies in wait on them to prey : So be not
thou of those whom rank and honours lead astray ;

Nay, but beware of slips and faults and sorrow still forswear And know
the attributes of time are ruin and decay.

How many a fortune by the least adverseness is undone ! All in itself
hath that shall cause it change and pass away.

Know that I entered Bassora in yet sorrier plight and
worse distress than this man, for that he entered Cairo
with his nakedness covered with rags ; but I came into
his town, with my nakedness uncovered, one hand before
and another behind ; and none availed me but God and
this excellent man. Now the reason of this was that the
Bedouins stripped me and took my camels and mules and
baggage and slew my men ; but I lay down among the
slain, and they thought that I was dead and went away
and left me. Then I arose and walked on, naked, till
I came to Bassora, where this man met me and clothed
me and lodged me in his house. Moreover, he furnished


120


me with money, and all I have brought back with me I
owe to God's goodness and his. When I departed, he
gave me great store of wealth and I returned home,
with a heart at ease. I left him in luck and lordship, and
belike there hath befallen him some calamity of the
calamities of fortune, that hath enforced him leave his
folk and country, and there hath happened to him by
the way the like of what happened to me* There is
nothing extraordinary in this ; but now it behoveth me
to requite him his generous dealing with me and do
according to the saying of him who saith :

Thou that of Fortune deemest hopefully, Dost thou then know what she

will do with thee ?
Whate'er thou dost, do good ; for to a man, Even as he meteth, shall

it meted be.'

As they were talking, up came Ubeid, as he were
Provost of the Merchants ; whereupon they all rose to
salute him and seated him in the place of honour. Then
said Kemerezzeman to him, 1 O my friend, verily, thy day 1
is blessed and fortunate ! There is no need to relate to
me a thing that befell me before thee. If the Bedouins
have stripped thee and robbed thee of thy wealth, verily
our money is the ransom of our lives ; so let not thy
soul be troubled ; for I entered thy city naked and thou
clothedst me and entreatedst me generously, and I owe

Wgfjt tnee many a kindness. But I will requite thee and do
tjCCCC with thee even as thou didst with me, nay, more : sc be

tabtU. of good- heart and cheerful eye/ And he went on to
soothe him and hinder him from speech, lest he should
name his wife and what she had done with him ; nor did
he cease to ply him with saws and mora] instances and
verses and conceits and stories and anecdotes and console
him, till he took the hint and kept silence concerning the
1 i,t. the day of thy coming.


121


past, diverting himself with the stories and witticisms he
heard and repeating [in himself] the following lines :

On Fortune's forehead is a script, which if on careful wise Thott ponder,
very tears of blood 'twill draw from out thine eyes.

Fortune, indeed, with its right hand salute th none that be, But with the
cup of dole and teen its left hand still him plies.

Then Kemerezzeman and his father took Ubeid and
carrying him into the saloon of the harem, shut themselves
up with him ; and Abdurrehman said to him, * We did
but hinder thee from speaking before the folk, for fear of
dishonour to thee and to us : but now we are private ; so
tell me all that hath passed between thee and thy wife
and my son.' So he told him all, from beginning to end,
and when he had made an end of his story, Abdurrehman
said to him, 'Was the fault with my son or with thy wife?'
' By Allah/ answered Ubeid, * thy son was not to blame,
for men [naturally] lust after women, and it behoveth
women to defend themselves from men. So the fault
lies with my wife, who played me false and did with me
these things.'

Then Abdurrehman arose and taking his son aside, said
to him, ' O my son, we have proved his wife and know
her to be a traitress ; and now I mean to prove him and
see if he be a man of worth and honour or a wittoL*
'How so?' asked Kemerezzeman; and Abdurrehman
said, c I mean to urge him to make peace with his wife
and if he consent and forgive her, I will smite him with
a sword and kill him and kill her after, her and her maid,
for there is no good in the life of a whore and a wittol ;
but, if he turn from her with aversion, I will marry him
to thy sister and give him more than that thou tookest
from him of wealth/

Then he went back to Ubeid and said to him, ' O
master, verily^ the commerce of women calls for patience


122


and he who loves them hath need of longanimity, for
that they order themselves ill towards men and maltreat
them, by reason of their superiority over them in beauty
and grace, wherefore they magnify themselves and belittle
men. Especially is this the case when their husbands
show them affection ; for then they requite them with
pride and coquetry and foul dealing of all kinds. But, if
a man be wroth whenever he seeth in his wife aught that
misliketh him, there can be no fellowship between them,
nor can any hit it off with them who is not magnanimous
and long-suffering; and exeept a man bear with his wife
and requite her ill-doing with forgiveness, he shall get no
good of her society. Indeed, it hath been said of women,
"Were they in the sky, the necks of men would incline
to them ; " and he who hath the power and spareth, his
reward is with God. „,

Now this woman is thy wife and thy companion
and she hath long companied with thee ; wherefore it
behoveth that there be in thee indulgence for her, for
that indulgence in fellowship is of the essentials of success.
Moreover, women lack wit and religion, and if she have
done ill, she repenteth and God willing, she will not
again return to that which she did aforetime. So it is
my counsel that thou make peace with her and I will
restore thee more than thy good [that thou hast lost];
and if it please thee to abide with me, thou art welcome,
thou and she, and ye shall know nought but what shall
rejoice you both ; but, if thou seek to return to thine own
country, I will give thee what shall content thee, and
yonder is the litter ready ; so mount thy wife and her
maid therein and journey to thine own land. For that
which falls out between a man and his wife is manifold,
and it behoves thee to be indulgent and not take the road
of rigour/

*0 my lord/ said the jeweller^ 4 and where is my wife?


1-23

'She is in yonder upper chamber/ answered Abdurrehman.
' Go up to her and be easy with her, for my sake, and
trouble her not \ for, when my son brought her hither,
he would have married her, but I forbade him from her
and shut her up in yonder chamber, saying in myself,
" Peradventure her husband will come and I will deliver
her to him ; for she is fair of favour, and when a woman
is like unto this one, it may not be that her husband will
let her go." What I counted on is come about and
praised be God the Most High for thy reunion with thy
wife ! As for my son, I have sought him another woman
in marriage and married him to her. These feasts and
rejoicings are for his wedding, and to-night I bring him
in to his wife. So here is the key of the chamber where
thy wife is. Take it and open the door and go in to her
and her maid and make merry with her. There shall be
brought you meat and drink and thou shalt not come
down from her till thou have had thy fill of her.' £ May
God requite thee for me with all good, O ■ my lord ! '
exclaimed Ubeid and taking the key, went up, rejoicing.

The merchant thought his words had pleased him and
that he assented thereto; so he took the sword and
following him, unseen, stood to see what should happen
between him and his wife. When the jeweller came to
the chamber-door, he heard his wife weeping sore for that
Kemerezzeman had married another than her, and the
maid saying to her, ' O my lady, how often have I warned
thee and said to thee, " Thou wilt get no good of this
youth: so do thou leave his company." But thou
heededst not my words and spoiledst thy husband of all
his goods and gavest them to him. Then thou forsookest
thy place, of thine infatuation for him, and earnest with
him to this country. And now he hath cast thee out from
his thought and married another and hath made the issue
<uf thine infatuation for him to be imprisonment' i Be


124


silent, accursed wench!' answered Helimeh. 4 Though
he be married to another, yet needs must I occur to his
thought some day. I cannot forget [the nights I have
spent in] his company and in any case 1 console myself
with the saying of the poet :

lords, doth it betide you to give a thought to one Unto whose thought

none other occurs save you alone ?
Now God forbid that mindless you of his case should be Whom thought
of your condition distract eth from his own I

It cannot be but he will bethink him of our loves and
ask of me ; wherefore I will not turn from loving him nor
change from passion for him, though I die in prison, for
he is my love and my physician, 1 and my hope is in him
that he will yet return to me and deal graciously with me.'

When the jeweller heard his wife's words, he went in
to her and said to her, " O traitress, thy hope in him is as
the hope of Iblis in Paradise. All these vices were in
thee and I knew not thereof ; for, had I been ware of one
of them, I had not kept thee with me an hour. But now

1 am certified of this in thee, it behoveth me to kill thee,
though they put me to death for thee, O traitress ! ' And
he seized her with both hands and repeated the following
verses :

O fair ones, ye fordid my love so warm and true With sin nor had

regard for what was right and due.
How long to you, indeed, with doting love I clave 1 But, after this my

woe, I loathe the love of you.

Then he pressed upon her windpipe and broke her
neck, whereupon her maid cried out, saying, 'Alas, my
mistress ! ' 4 O harlot,' said he, ' it is thou who art to
blame for all this, for that thou knewest this vice to be
in her and toldest me not/ Then he seized upon her and
strangled her.

1 Hebibi wa, ttbibi, a common jingling phrase*


125


When he had done this, apprehensions flocked upon
him and he feared the issue of his affair and said m
himself, ' When the merchant knows that I have killed
them in his house, he will surely slay me ; but I beseech
God that He appoint the taking of my life to be according
to the Law.' And he abode bewildered about his case
and knew not what to do ; but, as he was thus, in came
Abdurrehman, who had stood all this while, sword in hand,
without the door, looking with his eyes and hearkening
with his ears, and said to him, '[Fear not :] no harm shall
befall thee, for indeed thou deservest safety. See this
sword in my hand. I had it in mind to slay thee, hadst
thou made peace with her and taken her back into favour,
and I would have slain [her and] the maid, to boot. But,
since thou hast done this thing, welcome to thee and again
welcome! And thy reward shall be that I will marry thee
to my daughter, Kemerezzeman's sister/ Then he carried
him down and sent for the woman whose office it was
to wash the dead : whereupon it was noised abroad that
Kemerezzeman had brought with him two slave-girls from
Bassora and that they were both dead. So the people
began to condole with him, saying, ' May thy head live ! J
and, i May God compensate thee ! ' And they washed
and shrouded them and buried them, and none knew
the truth of the matter.

Then Abdurrehman sent for the Sheikh el Islam and all
the notables and said to the former, ' Draw up the contract
of marriage between my daughter Kaukeb es Sebah and
Master Ubeid the jeweller and [set down that] her dowry
liath been paid me in full/ So he drew up the contract
and Abdurrehman gave the company to drink of sherbets,
and they made one wedding festival for the two brides and
paraded them in one litter on one and the same night ;
after which they carried Kemerezzeman and Ubeid In
procession together and brought them in to their brides,


126


When the jeweller went in to Abdurrehman's daughter^
he found her handsomer than Helimeh and lovelier a
thousandfold. So he did away her maidenhead and on
the morrow, he went to the bath with Kemerezzeman.

Then he abode with them in pleasance and delight
awhile, till he bagan to yearn after his native land: so he
went in to Abdurrehman and said to him, * O uncle, I long
for my own country, for I have there estates and effects,
which I left in charge of one of my journeymen; and I
have it in mind to journey thither, that I may sell my
possessions and return to thee. So wilt thou give me
leave to go to my country to that end?' *0 my son/
answered the merchant, £ I give thee leave to do this, and
no blame to thee for these words, for that love of country
is a part of religion; and he who hath not good in his
own land hath none in other folks' land. But, peradven-
ture, if thou depart without thy wife, when thou art once
come to thy native place, it may seem good to thee to
abide there, and thou wilt be divided between returning
to thy wife and sojourning in thine own country; so it
were the better counsel that thou carry thy wife with thee ;
and after, if thou be minded to return to us, return and
welcome to you both; for we are folk who know not
divorce and no woman of us marries twice, nor do we
lightly discard a man/ Quoth Ubeid, 'O uncle, I fear
me thy daughter will not consent to depart with me to my
own country.' ' O my son,' replied Abdurrehman, £ we
have no women amongst us who gainsay their husbands
nor know we a wife who is wroth with her husband.*

* May God bless you and your women I ' exclaimed the
jeweller and going in to his wife, said to her, *I an*
minded to go to my country : what sayst thou?' Quoth
she, ' My father still had the governance of me, whilst I
was a maid, and when I married, the governance all
passed into my husband's hand, nor will I gainsay him/


12/


' May God bless thee and thy father,' rejoined Ubeid, 'and
have mercy on the womb that bore thee and the loins
that begat thee !' Then he cut his thongs and betook
himself to making ready for his journey. His father-in-
law gave him much substance and they took leave of one
another, after which Ubeid and his wife journeyed on
without ceasing, till they reached Bassora, where his
friends and kinsmen came out to meet him, doubting not
but that he had been in the Hejaz. Some rejoiced at his
return, whilst other some were vexed, and the folk said
one to another, ' Now will he straiten us again every
Friday, as before, and we shall be shut up in the mosques
and houses, even to our cats and dogs.'

When the King of Bassora heard of his return, he was
wroth with him and sending for him, chid him and said
to him, ' Why didst thou depart, without letting me know ?
Was I unable to give thee somewhat wherewith thou
mightest have succoured thyself in thy pilgrimage to the
Holy House of God ? ' < Pardon, O my lord ! ' replied the
jeweller. * By Allah, I went not on the pilgrimage ! But
there have befallen me such and such things.' And he
told him all that had befallen him with his wife and with
the merchant Abdurrehman of Cairo and how the latter
had given him his daughter to wife and he had brought
her to Bassora. ' By Allah/ said the king, < did I not fear
God the Most High, I would slay thee and marry this
noble lady after thy death, though I spent treasuries of
money on her, for that she befitteth none but kings. But
God hath appointed her of thy portion and may Ke Dless
thee in her ! So look thou use her well/ Then he
bestowed largesse on the jeweller, who went out from
before him and abode with his wife five years, after which
he was admitted to the mercy of God the Most High.

The king sought his widow in marriage ; but she
1 those of his waterskins for the journey.


128


refused, saying, 1 king, never was woman among my
kindred who married again after her husband's death ;
wherefore I will never take another husband, nor will
I marry thee, no, though thou kill me.' Then he sent
to say to her, 'Dost thou seek to go to thy native
land ? ' And she answered, ' If thou do good, thou shalt
be requited therewith.' So he collected for her all the
jeweller's possessions and added unto her of his own, after
the measure of his rank. Moreover he sent with her one
of his viziers, a man renowned for goodness and piety, and
an escort of five hundred horse, who journeyed with her,
till they brought her to her father, with whom she abode,
without marrying again, till she died and they died all.
So, if this woman would not consent to replace her dead
husband with a Sultan, how shall she be evened with one
who replaced her husband, whilst he was yet alive, with
a youth of unknown extraction land condition, more by
token that this was in lewdness and not by way of lawful
marriage? So he who deemeth all women to be alike,
there is no remedy for the disease of his madness. And
glory be to Him to whom belongeth the empire of
the Seen and the Unseen, the [Ever-]Living One, who
dieth not!


129


ABDALLAH BEN FAZIL AND HIS BROTHERS.

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid was one day examining
the tributes of the various provinces of his empire, when
he observed that the tributes of all the countries and
regions had come into the treasury, except that of
Bassora, which had not arrived that year. So he held
a Divan because of this and sending for the Vizier Jaafer,
said to him, 1 The tributes of all the provinces have come
into the treasury, save that of Bassora, no part whereof
hath arrived/ * O Commander of the Faithful/ answered
Jaafer, * belike there hath befallen the governor of Bassora
somewhat that hath diverted him from sending the tribute.'
Quoth the Khalif, ' The time of the coming of the tribute
was twenty days [ago] ; what, then, can be his excuse for
that, in this time, he hath neither sent it nor sent to
show cause for not doing so?' *0 Commander of the
Faithful/ replied Jaafer, * if it please thee, we will send
him a messenger.' * Send him Abou Ishac el Mausili, 1
the boon-companion/ rejoined the Khalif, and Jaafer said,
* Hearkening and obedience to God and to thee, O Com-
mander of the Faithful ! '

Then he returned to his house and summoning Abou
Ishac, wrote him a royal letter and said to him, * Go to
Abdallah ben Fazil, Viceroy of Bassora, and see what hath
diverted him from sending the tribute. If it be ready, do
thou receive it from him in full and bring it to me in
haste, for the Khalif hath examined the tributes of the
provinces and finds that they are all come in, except that
of Bassora : but if thou find it not ready and he make an
excuse to thee, bring him back with thee, that he may
with his own tongue acquaint the Khalif with his excuse.'
1 i.e. Ibrahim of Mosul, the celebrated musician. See ante, passim.
VOL. IX. 9


130

W I hear and obey/ answered Abou Ishac and taking with
him five thousand horse, set out for Bassora.

When Abdallah heard of his approach, he went out to
meet him with his troops and carried him to his palace,
whilst the escort encamped without the city, where he
furnished them with all of which they stood in need.
Abou Ishac entered the audience-chamber and sitting
down on the throne, seated the governor beside himself,
whilst the notables sat round him, according to their
several ranks. After the salutation, 1 Abdallah said to him,
' O my lord, is there any cause for thy coming to us ? '
'Yes/ answered Abou Ishac, 'I come to seek the tribute ;
for the Khalif enquireth of it and the time of its coming
is past.' *0 my lord/ rejoined Abdallah, * would thou
hadst not wearied thyself nor taken upon thyself the
fatigue of the journey! For the tribute is ready in full
and I had pi rposed to despatch it to-morrow. But, since
thou art come, I will deliver it to thee, after I have enter-
tained thee three days \ and on the fourth day I will bring
the tribute before thee. But now it behoveth us to offer
thee a present in part requital of thy kindness and that
of the Commander of the Faithful* 4 There is no harm
in that/ said Abou Ishac.

So Abdallah dismissed the Divan and carrying him into
a saloon, that had not its match, set a table of food before
him and his companions. They ate and drank and made
merry, after which the table was removed and there came
coffee and sherbets. They sat conversing till a third pan
of the night was past, when they spread Abou Ishac a bed
on a couch of ivory, inlaid with glittering gold. So he
lay down and the viceroy lay down beside him on another
couch ; but wakefulness possessed Abou Ishac and he fell
to meditating on the metres of verse and composing
poetry^ for that he was one of the chief of the Khalif s
1 i.e. the usual compliments,


i3i

boon-companions and was eminently skilled 1 in composing

verses and pleasant stories ; nor did he leave to lie awake

and make verses till half the night was past. Presently,

Abdallah arose, thinking Abou Ishac asleep, and girding

his middle, opened a cupboard, whence he brought out

a whip ; then, taking a lighted candle, he went forth by ^{gjt

the door of the saloon. When Abou Ishac saw this, IftCCClxxfX,

he marvelled and said, i Whither goeth Abdallah ben Fazil

with that whip? Belike he is minded to punish some one.

But needs must I follow him and see what he will do this

night.' So he arose and went out softly after him, so that

he saw him not, and presently saw him open a closet and

take thence a tray containing four dishes of meat and

bread and a gugglet of water. Then he went on, carrying

the tray and followed by Abou Ishac, till he came to

another saloon and entered, whilst Abou Ishac stood

behind the door and looking through the chink, saw a

spacious saloon, richly furnished and having in its midst

a couch of ivory plated with glittering gold, to which two

dogs were made fast with chains of gold.

Abdallah set down the tray in a corner and tucking
up his sleeves, loosed the first dog, which began to
struggle in his hands and put its muzzle to the ground, as
it would kiss the ground before him, whining the while in
a low, weak voice. Abdallah tied its paws behind its back
and throwing it on the ground, drew forth the whip and
beat it without mercy. The dog struggled, but could not
get free, and Abdallah ceased not to beat it till it left
groaning and lay without motion. Then he took it and
tied it up in its place, and unbinding the second dog, did
with him as he had done with the first; after which he
pulled out a handkerchief and fell to wiping away their
tears and comforting them, saying, ( Bear me not malice \
for, by Allahj this is not of my will, nor is it easy to me !
a Lit. he had a fine fore -arm*


132


But it may be God will grant you relief and issue from
your affliction/ And he prayed for them, what while
Abou Ishac stood hearkening with his ears and watching
with his eyes, and indeed he marvelled at this case.

Then Abdallah brought the dogs the tray of food and
fell to feeding them with his own hand, till they had
enough, when he wiped their mouths and lifting up the
gugglet, gave them to drink ; after which he took up the
tray and gugglet and candle and made for the door.
But Abou Ishac forewent him and making his way back
to his couch, lay down ; so that he saw him not neither
knew that he had followed him and watched him. Then
the governor replaced the tray and the gugglet in the
closet and returning to the saloon, opened the cupboard
and laid the whip in its place ; after which he put off his
clothes and lay down. But Abou Ishac passed the rest
of the night pondering this affair nor did sleep visit him,
for excess of wonder, and he ceased not to say in himself,
* I wonder what can be the meaning of this ! ' Nor did
he leave wondering till the morning, when they arose and
prayed the morning prayer. Then they set breakfast
before them and they ate and drank coffee, after which
they went out to the divan. Abou Ishac's thought was
occupied with this enigma all day, but he concealed the
matter and questioned not Abdallah thereof. Next night,
he again followed the governor and saw him do with the
two dogs as on the previous night, first beating them and
then making his peace with them and giving them to eat
and to drink ; and on like wise he did the third night.

On the fourth day he brought the tribute to Abou Ishac,
who took it and departed, without opening the matter
to him. He fared on, without ceasing, till he came to
Baghdad, where he delivered the tribute to the Khalif,
who questioned him of the cause of the delay. ' O Com-
mander of the Faithful/ replied he^ ' 1 found that the


133

governor of Bassora had made ready the tribute and was
about to despatch it ; and had I delayed a day, it had met
me on the road. But, O Commander of the Faithful, I
had a rare adventure with Abdallah ben Fazil ; never in
my life saw I its like/ 'And what was it, O Abou
Ishac?' asked the Khalif. So he acquainted him with
that which he had seen the governor do with the two
dogs, adding, 'On this wise I saw him do three nights
following, first beating the dogs, then making his peace
with them and comforting them and giving them to eat
and drink, what while I watched him, whereas he saw me
not' 'Didst thou question him of the cause of this?'
asked the Khalif. ' No, as thy head liveth, O Commander
of the Faithful,' answered Abou Ishac.

Then said Er Reshid, 4 O Abou Ishac^ I command
thee to return to Bassora and bring me Abdallah ben
Fazil and the two dogs/ 4 O Commander of the Faithful/
replied he, ( excuse me from this ; for indeed Abdallah
entreated me with the utmost hospitality and I chanced
upon this thing without design and acquainted thee
therewith. So how can I go back to him and bring him
to thee? Verily, if I return to him, I shall find no
countenance for shame of him ; wherefore it were meet
that thou send him another t<han myself, with a letter
under thine own hand, and he shall bring him to thee,
him and the two dogs/ Quoth the Khalif, ' If I send
him other than thyself, most like he will deny the whole
affair and say, " I have no dogs." But, if I send thee and
thou say to him, " I saw them with mine own eyes," he will
not be able to deny it. Wherefore nothing will serve but
that thou go and fetch him and the two dogs ; else will I Nigftt
put thee to death/ i I hear and obey, O Commander of &CC££ta
the Faithful/ answered Abou Ishac. 4 God is our sufficiency
and good is He in whom we trust. He spoke sooth who
said, " The calamity of man is from the tongue," and it is


134


I who sinned against myself in telling thee. But write me
a royal letter 1 and I will go to him and bring him back to
thee.' So the Khalif wrote him a royal letter and he took
it and repaired to Bassora. When he came in to the
governor, the latter said, 'God keep us from the mischief
of thy return, O Abou Ishac ! How comes it that I see
thee return in haste? Belike the tribute is deficient and
the Khalif will not accept it ? 1 ' O Amir Abdallah/
answered Abou Ishac, 'my return is not on account of
the deficiency of the tribute, for it is full measure and the
Khalif accepts it ; but I hope that thou wilt excuse me,
for that I have sinned against thee, and indeed this that
I have done was decreed of God the Most High.' 'And
what hast thou done, O Abou Ishac?' asked Abdallah.
'Tell me; for thou art my friend and I will not reproach
thee.' ' Know then,' answered Abou Ishac, ' that, when I
was with thee, I followed thee three nights in succession
and saw thee rise at midnight and beat the dogs and
return ; whereat I marvelled, but thought shame to ques-
tion thee thereof. When I came back to Baghdad, I told
the Khalif of thine affair, casually and without design,
whereupon he charged me return to thee, and here is a
letter under his hand. Had I known that the affair would
lead to this, I had not told him, but this was fore-ordained
to happen.' And he went on to excuse himself to him.

Quoth Abdallah, ' Since thou hast told him this, I will
bear thee out with him, lest he deem thee a liar, for thou
art my friend. Were it other than thou, I had denied the
affair and given him the lie. But now I will go with thee
and carry the two dogs with me, though in this be my
own ruin and the ending of my term of life/ ' God will
protect 3 thee/ rejoined Abou Ishac, 'even as thou hast

1 Lit. a noble letter {khett sheriff Turkish hatt~i-$herij\ ie* a warrant
under the seal of the Khalifa te.

2 Syn. \t\\{yestur).


135

veiled 1 my face with the Khalif!' Then Abdallah took
a present beseeming the Khalif and mounting the dogs
with him, each on a camel, bound with chains of gold,
journeyed with Abou Ishac to Baghdad, where he went
in to the Khalif and kissed the earth before him. He
bade him sit; so he sat down and brought the two dogs
before Er Reshid, who said to him, *What are these dogs,
O Amir Abdallah?' Whereupon they fell to kissing the
ground before him and wagging their tails and weeping,
as if complaining to him.

The Khalif marvelled at this and said to the governor,

* Tell me the history of these two dogs and the reason of
thy beating them and after entreating them with honour.'

* O Vicar of God/ replied Abdallah, £ these are no dogs,
but two handsome young men, endowed with grace and
shapeliness and symmetry, and they are my brothers and
the sons of my father and my mother.' 1 How is it,' asked
the Khalif, 'that they were men and are .become dogs?'
Quoth Abdallah, * If thou give me leave, O Commander
of the Faithful, I will acquaint thee with the truth of the
case.' 'Tell me,' said the Khalif, i and beware of leasing,
for it is of the fashion of the hypocrites, and look thou tell
truth, for that it is the ark of safety and the characteristic
of the virtuous.' £ Vicar of God,' rejoined Abdallah,
' when I tell thee the story of these dogs, they will both
bear witness against me.' Quoth the Khalif, 'These are
dogs; they cannot speak nor answer; so how can they
testify for thee or against thee?' So Abdallah said to
them, 4 O my brothers, if I speak an untrue word, do ye
lift your heads and stare with your eyes ; but, if I speak
truth, hang down your heads and lower your eyes.'

Then said he to the Khalif, 'Know, O Commander of
the Faun ful. that we are three brothers by one father and
mother. Our lather's name was Fazil and he was thus
1 Syn. protected {seterta)*


l 3&

named for that his mother bore two sons at one birth, one
of whom died forthright and the other remained [alive],
wherefore they named him Fazil. 1 His father brought
him up and reared him well, till he grew up, when he
married him to our mother and died. Our mother con-
ceived a first time and bore this my first brother, whom
my father named Mensour ; then- she conceived again and
bore this my second brother, whom he named Nasir ; after
which she conceived a third time and bore me, whom he
named Abdallah. My father reared us all three till we
came to man's estate, when he died, leaving us a house
and a shop full of coloured stuffs of all kinds, Indian and
Greek and Khurasani 2 and what not, besides threescore
thousand dinars. We washed him and buried him to the
mercy of his Lord, after which we builded him a splendid
monument and let pray for him prayers for the deliver-
ance of his soul from the fire and held recitations of the
Koran and gave alms on his behalf, till the forty days*
were past; at the end of which time I called together
the merchants and nobles of the folk and made them
a sumptuous entertainment.

When they had eaten, I said to them, " O merchants,
verily this world is fleeting, but the world to come is
eternal, and extolled be the perfection of Him who
endureth after His creatures have passed away I Know
ye why I have called you together this blessed day ? n
And they answered, " Extolled be the perfection of God^
who [alone] knoweth the hidden things."* Quoth I, " My
father died, leaving much good, and I fear lest any have
a claim against him for a debt or a pledge [left in his
hands] or what not else, and I desire to discharge my
father's obligations towards the folk. So whoso hath any

1 i.e. remaining over. 2 i.e. of Khorassaru

1 The usual period of Muslim mourning.

* A common roundabout way of avouching ignorance.


137


claim on him, let him say, *He oweth me so and so/
and I will satisfy it to him, that I may acquit my
father's responsibility." 1

" Abdallah," replied the merchants, " verily the goods
of this world stand not in stead of those of the world to
come, and we are no fraudful folk, but all of us know the
lawful from the unlawful and fear God the Most High and
abstain from devouring the substance of the orphan. We
know that thy father (may God have mercy on him !) still
let his good lie with the folk, 3 nor did he suffer any one's
claim on him to go unquitted, and we have often heard
him say, i I am fearful of the people's substance.' He
used always to say, when he prayed, ' O my God, Thou
art my stay and my hope ! Let me not die in debt.' And
it was of his wont that, if he owed any one aught, he
would pay it to him, without asking, and if any owed him
aught, he would not dun him, but would say to him, ' At
thy leisure.' If his debtor were poor, he would forgive
him the debt and acquit him of responsibility 3 and if he
were not poor and died [without paying], he would say,
* God forgive him what he owed me ! ' And we all testify
that he owed no one aught. M

" May God bless you ! " said L Then I turned to these
my brothers and said to them, " O my brothers, our father
owed no man aught and hath left us much money and
stuffs, besides the house and shop. Now we are three
brothers and each of us is entitled to one third part.

1 It is incumbent on a Muslim to discharge the debts of his dead
father, if it be in his power, and so save the dead from punishment on
account thereof. Quoth Mohammed, " God covers all faults except
debt ; that is to say, there will be punishment therefor." Also, " A
martyr shall be pardoned every fault but debt." If a dead man were
brought to him and he knew that he had died insolvent and leaving
undischarged debts, he was wont to refuse to pray for him.

* ix» he did not press his debtors for payment.


138


So shall we agree to forego division and abide copartners
in our property and eat together and drink together,
or shall we divide the money and the stuffs and take each
his part?" Said they, "We will divide them and take
each his share." ' Then Abdallah turned to the two dogs
and said to them, ' Did it happen thus, O my brothers ? '
And they bowed their heads and lowered their eyes, as
who should say, 'Yes/ ' So,' continued Abdallah, < I called
in a departitor from the Cadi's court and he divided
amongst us the money and the stuffs and all our father's
effects, allotting the house and shop to me in exchange
for a part of the money and stuffs to which I was entitled.
We were content with this ; so the house and shop fell to
my share, whilst my brothers took theirs in money and
stuffs. I opened the shop and stocking it with [my part
of] the stuffs, bought others with the money allotted to
me, over and above the house and 'the shop, till the latter
was full, and I sat selling and buying. As for my brothers,
they bought stuffs and chartering a ship, set out on a
voyage to foreign parts. Quoth I, " God aid them ! As
for me, my livelihood is ready to my hand and peace is
priceless."

I abode thus a whole year, during which time God
prospered me and I made great profits, till I became
possessed of the like of that which our father had left us.
One day, as I sat in my shop, with two fur pelisses on me,
one of sable and the other of miniver, for it was the
winter season and the time of the great cold, there came
up to me my two brothers, each clad in nothing but
a ragged shirt, and their lips were white with cold and
they were shivering. When I saw them in this plight,
I^TtC^t it was grievous to me and I mourned for them and my
OCCCrfxxxt reason fted from my head. So I rose and embraced them
and wept over their condition. Then I put on one of them
the pelisse of sable and on the other that of miniver and


139


cairying them to the bath, sent them thither each a suit
of apparel such as befitted a merchant worth a thousand
purses. 1 When they had washed and donned each his
suit, I carried them to my house, where, seeing them to
be sore anhungred, I set a tray of food before them and
ate with them, caressing them and comforting them.
Then he turned to the two dogs and said to them,
* Was this so, O my brothers ? ' And they bent their heads
and lowered their eyes.

* Then, O Vicar of God/ continued Abdallah, * I said
to them, "What hath befallen you and where are your
goods?" Quoth they, "We fared up the river, 2 till we
came to a city called Cufa, where we sold for ten dinars
the piece of stuff that had cost us half a dinar and that
which cost us a dinar for twenty. So we profited greatly
and bought Persian 8 stuffs at the rate of ten dinars the
piece of silk worth forty in Bassora. Thenc6 we removed
to a city called El Kerkh,* where we sold and bought and
made great profit and amassed store of wealth." And they
went on to set forth to me the places [they had visited]
and the profits [they had made]. So I said to them,
"Since ye had such good luck, how comes it that I see
you return naked ? " They sighed and answered, " O our
brother, some one must have belooked us with the evil
eye and there is no security in travel When we had
gotten together these riches and goods, we freighted a
ship therewith and set sail, intending for Bassora. We
fared- on three days and on the fourth day we saw the
water rise and fall and roar and foam and swell and rage,
whilst the waves clashed together, striking out sparks like
fire. The winds blew contrary for us and our ship struck
upon the point of a rock, where it broke up and plunged
us into the river, and all we had with us was lost in the
1 £S°°°' 2 Euphrates.

s Syn> foreign. 4 Quare the quarter of Baghdad so called.


140


water. We abode struggling on the surface a day and a
night, till God sent us another ship, whose crew picked
us up and we begged our way from town to town, suffering
sore hardships and selling our clothes piecemeal, to buy
us food, till we drew near Bassora ; nor did we win thither
till we had endured a thousand miseries. But, had we
come off in safety with that which was with us, we had
brought back riches that might vie with those of the king :
but this was ordained of God to us."

"O my brothers," said I, "let not your hearts be troubled,
for wealth is the ransom of bodies and safety is [to be
accounted] gain. Since God hath written you of the
saved, this is the end of desire, for poverty and riches are
but as it were illusions of dreams, and gifted of God is
he who saith :

So but a man may win to save his soul alive from death, But as the
paring of his nail his wealth he reckon eth.

my brothers," continued I, "we will put it that our
father died to-day and left us all this money that is with
me, for I am willing to share it with you equally." So
I fetched a departitor from the Cadi's court and brought
out to him all my money, which he divided into three
equal parts, and we each took one. Then said I to them,
"O my brothers, God blesseth a man in his livelihood,
if he be in his own country : so let each of you open a
shop and sit therein to get his living; and he to whom
ought is ordained in the secret purpose of God, 1 needs
must he get it." Accordingly, I helped each of them to
open a shop and stocked it for him with goods, saying to
them, "Sell and buy and keep your monies and spend
nought thereof, for I will furnish you with all ye need of
meat and drink and so forth."

1 continued to entreat them generously, and they fell to

1 Syn. the future (el gkaib)*


141


selling and buying by day and lay the night in my house ;
nor would I suffer them to spend aught of their own
monies. But, whenever I sat talking with them, they
would praise travel and vaunt its charms and set out the
gains they had made therein ; and they ceased not to urge
and tempt me and importune me thus till, to please them,
I agreed to travel with them/ Then he said to the dogs,
'Was this so, O my brothers?' And they confirmed his
speech by bowing their heads and lowering their eves.
* Then, O Vicar of God/ continued Abdallah, ' I entered
into a contract of partnership with them and we chartered
a ship and packing up all manner of precious stuffs and
merchandise of all kinds, freighted it therewith ; after
which we embarked therein all that we needed [of victual
and what not else for the voyage] and setting sail from
Bassora, launched out into the surging sea, swollen with
clashing billows, into which whoso entereth is lost and
from which whoso cometh forth is as a new-born child.

We sailed on till we came to a city of the cities, where
we sold and bought and made great profit. Thence we
went on to another city, and we ceased not to pass from
land to land and city to city, selling and - buying and
profiting, till we had gotten us great wealth and much
gain. Presently, we came to a mountain, 1 where the
captain cast anchor and said to us, " O passengers,
go ye ashore ; ye shall . be saved from this day, 2 and
make search; it may be ye shall find water." So we
all landed and dispersed about the island in search of
water.

As for me, I climbed to the top of the mountain, and
as I went along, I saw a white snake fleeing and a black
dragon, foul of favour and frightful to look upon, pursuing
her. Presently he overtook her and pressing straitly upon

1 i.e. a mountainous isiancL

' i.e. ye shall be spared this day's discomfort.


142


her, seized her by the head and wound his tail about hers,
whereupon she cried out and I knew that he purposed to
ravish her. So I was moved to pity for her and taking
up a flint-stone, five pounds or more in weight, threw it
at the dragon. It smote him on the head and crushed
it, and before I knew, the snake changed and became a
handsome young woman, full of grace and brightness and
symmetry, as she were the shining full moon, who came
up to me and kissing my hands, said to me, " May God
veil thee with two veils, one [to protect thee] from
reproach in this world and the other from the fire in the
world to come on the day of the great upstanding, the
day when wealth shall not avail neither children, [nor
aught] but that one come to God with a whole heart! 1
O mortal," continued she, "thou hast saved my honour
and I am beholden to thee for kindness, wherefore it
behoveth me to requite thee."

So saying, she signed with her hand to the earth, which
opened and she descended into it. Then it closed up
again over her and by this I knew that she was of the
Jinn. As for the dragon, fire was kindled in him and con-
sumed him and he became a heap of ashes. I marvelled
at this and returned to my comrades, whom I acquainted
with that which I had seen, and we passed the night [in
the island]. On the morrow the captain weighed anchor
and spread the sails and coiled the ropes and we sailed
till we lost sight of land. We fared on twenty days, with-
out seeing land or bird, till our water came to an end and
the captain said to us, "O folk, our fresh water is spent."

1 Koran xxvi. 88. Children (at least, male children) are to the
Arab as much prized an object of possession as riches, since without
them wealth is of no value to him. Mohammed, therefore, couples
wealth and children as the two things wherewith one wards off the ills
of this world ? though they are powerless against those of the world to
come,


-i
i

• i


143


Quoth we, " Let us make for land ; peradventure we shall
find water." " By Allah," answered he, " I have lost my
way and I know not what course will bring me to the
land!"

When we heard this, there betided us sore chagrin and
we wept and besought God the Most High to guide us
into the right course. We passed that night in the sorriest
case : but gifted of God is he who saith :

How many a night have I passed in dismay And in grief that might

well-nigh cause sucklings grow gray,
But no sooner broke morn than came succour from God ; Ay, and help

near at hand was vouchsafed me with day.

On the morrow, when the day arose and gave forth its
light and shone, we caught sight of a high mountain and
rejoiced therein. When we came [to the island wherein]
it [was], the captain said to us, " O folk, go ashore and
seek for water." So we all landed and sought for water,
but found none, whereat we were sore afflicted. As for me,
I climbed up to the hill-top and on the other side thereof
I saw a spacious enclosure, 1 an hour's journey or more in
breadth. So I called my companions and said to them,
" Look at yonder enclosure, behind this mountain ; for
I see therein a lofty and strong-built city, [girt about]
with walls and towers and hills and meadows, and doubt-
less it wants not for water and good things* So let us go
thither and fetch water therefrom and buy what we need
of meat and fruit and [other] victual and return." But they
said, u We fear lest the inhabitants of the city be unbelievers,
ascribing partners to God, and enemies of the faith and lay
hands on us and take us captive or else slay us ; so were
we the means of the loss of our own lives, having cast
ourselves into destruction and evil emprise. Indeed, the
presumptuous man is never praiseworthy, for that he goeth
1 Apparently a round hill-encompassed plain (daireh).


144


still in danger of calamities, even as saith of him one of
the poets :

Whilst earth is earth and sky is sky, the rash presumptuous wight, No
commendation meriteth, although he 'scape outright.

Wherefore we will not expose ourselves to peril."
u O folk," answered I, " I have no authority over you ;
so I will take my brothers and go to the city." But my
brothers said to me, " We also fear this thing and will not
go with thee." Quoth I, " I am resolved to go thither ;
and I put my trust in God and accept whatsoever He shall
decree to me. Do ye therefore await me, whilst I go
'Ntflfit tn i tner an< 3 return to you."

tiCCCC Then I left them and walked on till I came to the gate
taxtf. of the place and saw it a city rare of building and mag-
nificent of proportion, with lofty walls and strong-builded
towers and palaces soaring high into the air. Its gates
were of Chinese iron, curiously gilded and graven on such
wise as confounded the wit. I entered the gateway and
saw there a stone bench, whereon sat a man, with a chain
of brass on his arm, to which hung fourteen keys ; where-
fore I knew him to be the porter of the city and that it had
fourteen gates. So I drew near him and said to him,
" Peace be on thee ! " But he returned not my greeting
and I saluted him a second and a third time ; but he made
me no reply. So I laid my hand on his shoulder and said
to him, " O man, why dost thou not return my greeting ?
Art thou asleep or deaf or other than a Muslim, that thou
refusest to return the salutation ? " But he answered me
not neither stirred ; so I considered him and saw that he
was stone. Quoth I, " Strange ! This is a stone wroughten
in the likeness of a man and wanting nothing but speech ! "

Then I left him and entering the city, saw a man
standing in the road. I went up to him and examined
him and found him stone. Presently, I met an old woman


145

with a bundle of clothes on her head, ready for washing ,
so I went up to her and examining her, saw that she was
stone, and the bundle of clothes on her head was stone
also. Then I came to the market, where I saw a chandler,
with his scales set up and various kinds of wares before
him, such as cheese and so forth, all of stone. Moreover,
I saw all manner of tradesmen seated in their shops and
men and women and children, some standing and some
sitting; but they were all stone. Then 1 entered the
merchants' bazaar, where I saw each merchant seated in
his shop and the shops full of various kinds of mer-
chandise, all stone ; but the stuffs were like spiders 1 webs.
I amused myself with looking upon them, and as often as
I laid hold upon a piece of stuff, it fell to dust in my
hands.

Presently, I saw some chests and opening one of them,
found it full of gold in bags; so I laid hold upon the
bags, but they crumbled away in my grasp, whilst the
gold abode unchanged. I took of it what I could carry
and said to myself, "Were my brothers here, they might
take their fill of this gold and possess themselves of these
Measures that have no owner." Then I entered another
shop and found therein more than this, but could carry
no more than I had : so I left this market and went on
to another and thence to another and another, diverting
myself with the sight of all manner creatures of various
kinds, all stone, even to the cats and the dogs, till I came
to the goldsmiths' bazaar, where I saw men sitting in their
shops, with their wares about them, some in their hands
and others in trays of wicker-work. When I saw this, I
r hrew down the money and loaded myself with goldsmiths'
ware, as much as I could carry. Then I went on to the
Jewel market and saw there the jewellers, every one of
them stone, seated in their shops, each with a tray before
him, ful.l of all manner precious stones, jacinths and
VOL. IX. 10


146


diamonds and emeralds and balass rubies and so forth;
whereupon I threw away the goldsmiths' ware and took as
many jewels as I could carry, regretting that my brothers
were not with me, so they might take what they would
thereof.

Then I left the jewel market and went on till I came
to a great door, gilded and decorated after the fairest
fashion, within which were benches and in the porch sat
eunuchs and guards and horsemen and footmen and
officers of police, all clad in the richest of raiment; but
they were all stones. I touched one of them and his
clothes crumbled away from his body like cobwebs. Then
I entered and saw a palace without equal for its building
and the goodliness of its ordinance and of the curious
works that were therein. Here I found an audience-
chamber, full of grandees and viziers and officers and
amirs, seated upon chairs and every one of them stone.
Moreover, I saw a throne of red gold, inlaid with pearls
and jewels, and seated thereon a man arrayed in the most
sumptuous raiment and bearing on his head an imperial 1
crown, set with precious stones, that shed a light like the
light of the day ; but, when I came up to him, I found
him stone.

Then I went on to the gate of the harem and entering,
found myself in the queen's presence-chamber, wherein
I saw a throne of red gold, inlaid with pearls and jewels,
and the queen seated thereon. On her head she wore
a crown diademed with precious jewels, and round about
her were women like moons, seated upon chairs and
clad in the most sumptuous raiment of all colours.
There also stood eunuchs, with their hands upon their
breasts, in the attitude of service, and indeed this hall
confounded the beholder's wits with what was therein of

1 Lit. A Chosroan crown, i.e. one such as that worn by th« Cnosroes
or ancient kings of Persia.


147


gilding and rare, painting and carving and magnificent
furniture. There hung the most brilliant pendants 1 of
limpid crystal, and in every hollow 9 of the crystal was
an unique jewel, to whose price money might not avail.
So I threw down that which was with me and fell to
taking of these jewels what I could carry, bewildered as
to what I should take and what I should leave, for indeed
I saw the place as it were a treasure of the treasures of
the cities.

^Presently, I espied a little door open and within it
stairs : so I entered and mounting forty stairs, heard a
human voice reciting the Koran in a low voice. I fol-
lowed the sound till I came to a silken curtain, laced
with wires of gold, whereon were strung pearls and coral
and rubies and emeralds, that gave forth a light like
the light of the stars. The voice came irom behind
the curtain : so I raised it and discovered a gilded door,
whose beauty amazed the mind. I opened the door
and found myself in a saloon, as it were an enchanted
treasure-house upon the surface of the earth, 8 and therein
a girl as she were the shining sun amiddleward the cloud-
less sky. She was clad in the costliest of raiment and
decked with the most precious jewels, and withal she
was of surpassing beauty and grace, full of symmetry and
elegance and perfection, with slender waist and heavy
buttocks and spittle such as heals the sick and languorous
eyelids, as it were she of whom the poet would speak,
when he saith :

My salutation to the shape that through the wede doth show And to the
roses in the cheeks' full-flowering meads that blow I

It is as if the Pleiades upon, her forehead hung And all night's other
stars did deck her breast, like pearls arow.


L Or lustres. 3 Or interval,

a Enchanted treasures are generally hidden under the earth.


148


An if a wede of purest rose she donned, the leaves for sure Would from
her body's fresh-plucked fruits enforce the blood to flow; 1

And if into the salt sea's flood one day she chanced to spit, Sweeter
than honey to the taste its briny tides would grow.

If to a graybeard, leant upon a staff, she deigned her grace To grant,
a lion-tamer straight he would become, I trow.


1 Oriental writers, Indian and Persian, as well as Arab, lay great
stress upon the extreme delicacy of the skin of the fair ones celebrated
in their works, constantly attributing to their heroines bodies so sensitive
as to brook with difficulty the contact of the finest shift. Several in-
stances of this will be found in the present collection and we may fairly
assume that the skin of an Eastern beauty, under the influence of con-
stant seclusion and the unremitting use of cosmetics and the bath, would
in time attain a pitch of delicacy and sensitiveness such as would in
some measure justify the seemingly extravagant statements of their
poetical admirers, of which the following anecdote (quoted by Ibn
Khellikan from the historian Et Teberi) is a fair specimen. Ardeshir
ibn Babek (Artaxerxes I.), the first Sassanian King of Persia (a.d.
226-242), having long unsuccessfully besieged El Hedr, a strong city of
Mesopotamia belonging to the petty King Es Satiroun, at last obtained
possession of it by the treachery of the owner's daughter Nezireh and
married the latter, this having been the price stipulated by her for the
betrayal to him of the place. "It happened afterwards that, one night*
as she was unable to sleep and turned from side to side in the bed,
Ardeshir asked her what prevented her from sleeping. She replied,
* I never yet slept on a rougher bed than this ; I feel something irk me.*
He ordered the bed to be changed, but she was still unable to sleeps
Next morning, she complained of her side, and on examination, a
myrtle-leaf was found adhering to a fold of the skin, from which it had
drawn blood. Astonished at this circumstance, Ardeshir asked her if it
was this that had kept her awake and she replied in the affirmative.
1 How then,' asked he, 1 did your father bring you up ? ' She answered,
' He spread me a bed of satin and clad me in silk and fed me with
marrow and cream and the honey of virgin bees and gave me pure wine
to drink. 1 Quoth Ardeshir, 'The same return which you made your
father for his kindness would be made much more readily to me ; ' and
bade bind her by the hair to the tail of a horse, which galloped off with
her and killed her." It will be remembered that the true princess, in
the well-known German popular tale, is discovered by a similar incident
to that of the myrtle-leaf.


149


When I saw her, I fell passionately in love with her and
going straight up to her, found her seated on a high couch,
reciting from memory the Book of God, to whom belong
might and majesty. Her voice was like the sound of the
gates of Paradise, when Rizwan opens them, and the
words fell from her lips like a shower of jewels; whilst
her face was of surpassing beauty, bright and blossom-
white, even as saith the poet of the like of her :

O thou whose speech and fashions charm with their seductive grace,
Longing and wistfulness for thee increase on me apace.

Two things in thee the votaries of passion still consume, David bis tones
melodious and Joseph's lovely face.

When I heard her melodious voice reciting the sublime
Koran, my heart recited from her assassinating glances,
"Peace, a word from a compassionate Lord;" 1 but I
hesitated in my speech and could not say the salutation
aright, for my mind and sight wefe confounded and I was
become as saith the poet :

Love-longing moved me not to err in speech nor entered I The camp

but that the shedding of my blood I might aby ;
Nor do I hearken to a word spoken by our censurers, But unto her

whom I adore in words I testify.

Then I braced myself against the stress of passion and
said to her, "Peace be upon thee, O noble lady and
treasured jewel 1 May God cause the foundations of thy
fair fortune to endure and uplift the pillars of thy glory ! ,?
"And on thee from me be peace and salutation and
honour, O Abdallah, O son of Fazil ! " answered she.

1 " Indeed, those [who are destined to be the inhabitants] of Paradise
shall that day {i.e. the Judgment Day) rejoice in occupations, they and
their wives, in shade, leant upon thrones : therein shall they have fruits
and what they desire. * Peace S 3 a word from a compassionate Lord/'
—Koran xxxvi. 55-8.


ISO

w Welcome and fair welcome to thee, O my beloved and
solace of my eyes ! " " O my lady," rejoined I, " whence
knowest thou my name and who art thou and what aileth
the people of this city, that they are become stones? I
would have thee tell me the truth of the case, for indeed
I am wondered at this city and its folk and that I have
found none [alive] therein but thee. So, God on thee,
tell me the cause of all this, according to the truth ! "
Quoth she, "Sit, O Abdallah, and God willing, I will
talk with thee and acquaint thee in full with the truth of
my case and that of this city and its people; and there
is no power and no virtue save in God the Most High,
the Supreme ! "

So I sat down by her side and she said to me, " Know,
O Abdallah, (may God have mercy on thee !) that I am
the daughter of the king of this city and that it is my
father whom thou sawest seated on the high throne in the
divan, and those who are about him were the grandees of
his realm and the officers of his household. He was
a king of exceeding prowess and had under his hand a
thousand thousand and six-score thousand troopers. The
number of the amirs of his realm was four-and-twenty
thousand, all of them governors and dignitaries. He
ruled over a thousand cities, besides towns and hamlets
and fortresses and citadels and villages, and the amirs of
the [wild] Arabs under his hand were a thousand in
number, each ruling over twenty thousand horse. More-
over, he had riches and treasures and precious stones and
tffgljt jewels and things of price, such as eye never saw nor ear
&C£CC heard of. He used to conquer kings and do to death
*Ut. champions and warriors in battle and in the listed field,
so that the mighty feared him and the Chosroes 1 humbled
themselves to him. For all this, he was a misbeliever,

1 i.e. the ancient kings of Persia. The word is here (as elsewhere)
stsed to denote powerful monarchs in general.


i5i

ascribing partners to God and worshipping idols, instead
of his Lord, and his troops were all idolaters like himself

One day, as he sat on the throne of his kingship,
compassed about with the grandees of his realm, there
came in to him a man, whose face lighted up the whole
divan with its brightness. My father looked at him and
saw him clad in a green habit, tall of stature and with
hands that reached below his knees. He was of reverend
and majestic aspect and light shone from his face. Quoth
he to my father, ' O rebel, O idolater, how long wilt thou
be deluded to worship idols and leave the service of the
All-knowing King ? Say, " I testify that there is no god
but God and that Mohammed is His servant and His
apostle," and embrace Islam, thou and thy people, and
put away from you the worship of idols, for they neither
advantage nor intercede. None is worshipworth save
God alone, who raised up the heavens without pillars and
spread out the earths, in mercy to His creatures.'

'Who art thou,' asked my father, *0 man that rejectest
the worship of idols, that thou sayst thus ? Fearest thou
not that they will be wroth with thee ? ' * The idols are
stones,' answered the stranger; 'their wrath cannot hurt
me nor their favour profit me. So do thou send for thine
idol which thou worshippest and bid all thy people bring
■each his idol : and when they are all present, do ye pray
them to be wroth with me and I will pray my Lord to be
wroth with them, and ye shall see the difference between
the anger of the creature and that of the Creator. For
your idols, ye fashioned them yourselves and the devils
clad themselves therewith as with a garment, and they it
is who speak to you from within the bellies of the idols,
for your idols are made and my God is the maker, to
whom nought is impossible. If the True appear to you ?
do ye follow it, and if the False, do ye leave it. J Quoth
they, 'Give us a proof of thy god, that we may see it


152


And he answered, ' Give me proof of your gods.' So the
king bade every one who had an idol bring it, and all the
troops brought their idols to the divan.

Now I was sitting behind a curtain, whence I could
look upon my father's divan, and I had an idol of emerald,
the bigness of a man. My father demanded it, so I sent
it to the divan, where they set it up beside that of my
father, which was of jacinth, whilst the vizier's idol was
of diamond. As for those of the grandees and notables,
some were of ruby and some of cornelian, others of coral
or Comorin aloes-wood and yet others of ebony or silver
or gold; and each had his own idol, after the measure
of that which he could afford; whilst the idols of the
common soldiers and of the people were some of granite,
some of wood, some of pottery and some of mud ; and they
were all of various colours, yellow and red and green and
black and white. Then said the stranger to my father,
* Pray your idol and these idols to be wroth with me/

So they ranged the idols in a divan, 1 setting my father's
idol on a chair of gold at the upper end, with mine by
its side, and ranking the others each according to the
condition of him who owned it and worshipped it. Then
my father arose and prostrating himself to his own idol,
said to it, ' O my god, thou art the Bountiful Lord, nor is
there among the idols a greater than thou. Thou knowest
that this man cometh to me, attacking thy divinity and
making mock of thee; yea, he avoucheth that he hath
a god stronger than thou and biddeth us leave worshipping
thee and worship his god. So be thou wroth with him,
O my god ! ' And he went on to supplicate the idol ; but
it returned him no answer neither bespoke him with aught ;
whereupon quoth he, ' O my god, this is not of thy wont,
for thou usest to answer me, when I speak to thee. How

1 i.e. after the fashion of a king, with his courtiers and grandees
ranged about him in their several stations, as in a divan or court of state.


153

cometh it that I find thee silent and speaking not? Art
thou unheeding or asleep? Awake; succour me and
speak to me!' And he shook it with his hand; but it
spoke not neither stirred from its stead.

Quoth the stranger, 'What aileth thine idol that it
speaketh not?' And the king replied, 'Methinks he is
unheeding or asleep.' * O enemy of God,' exclaimed the
other, 'how canst thou worship a god that speaketh not
nor availeth unto aught and not worship my God, who is
a speedy answerer of prayer and who is ever present and
never absent, never unheeding nor sleeping, whom con-
jecture may not apprehend, who seeth and is not seen and
who is able unto all things ? Thy god is powerless and
cannot ward off hurt from itself; and indeed an accursed
devil hath clothed himself therewith as with a garment,
that he might lead thee astray and delude thee. But now
hath its devil departed ; so do thou worship God and
testify that there is no god but He and that none is
worshipful nor worshipworth save He, nor is there any
good but His good. As for thy god, he cannot ward off
hurt from himself; so how shall he ward it from thee?
See with thine own eyes his impotence.'

So saying, he went up to the idol and dealt him a buffet
on the neck, that he fell to the ground; whereupon the
king waxed wroth and said to the bystanders, ' This
heretic hath smitten my god. Slay him ! ' So they would
have arisen to smite him, but none of them could avail to
stir from his place. Then he propounded Islam to them ;
but they refused to become Muslims and he said, ( I will
show you the wrath of my Lord/ Quoth they, 'Let us
see it.' So he spread out his hands and said, ' O my God
and my Lord, Thou art my stay and my hope; answer
Thou my prayer against these fro ward folk, who eat of
Thy bounty and worship other than Thee. O Thou the
Truth* O Almighty One, O Creator of Night and Day s


154

I beseech Thee to trim these people into stones, for Thou
art omnipotent, nor is aught impossible to Thee, and Thou
art able unto all things!' And God transformed the
people of this city into stones ; but, as for me, when
I saw the manifest proof of His deity, I submitted myself
to Him and was saved from that which befell the rest.

Then the stranger drew near unto me and said to me,
'Felicity 1 was fore-ordained to thee of God and He had
a purpose in this.' And he went on to instruct me and
I took unto him the oath and covenant. 3 I was then
seven years of age and am now thirty years old. Then
said I to him, * O my lord, all that is in the city and all
its folk are become stones, by thine effectual prayer, and
I am saved, for that I embraced Islam at thy hands.
Wherefore thou art become my sheikh ; 8 so do thou tell
-me thy name and extend to me thy succour and provide
me with that whereon I may subsist.' Quoth he, c My
name is Aboulabbas el Khizr;'* and he planted me a
pomegranate-tree, which grew up forthright and putting
out leaf, flowered and fruited and bore one pomegranate ;
whereupon quoth he, * Eat of that wherewith God the
Most High provideth thee and worship Him with the
worship that is His due.'

Then he taught me the tenets of Islam and the canons
of prayer and the way of worship, together with the recital
of the Koran, and I have now worshipped God in this
place three-and-twenty years. Each day the tree yields
me a pomegranate and I eat it and am sustained thereby
from day to day. Moreover, every Friday, El Khizr
(on whom be peace !) comes to me and it is he who
acquainted me with thy name and gave me the glad

1 Or salvation.

2 ie. the oath of initiation taken by a novice on his admission into &
religious sect, such as one of the orders of dervishes, etc.

§ master or teacher. 4 See note, Vol. V. p. 135-


155

tidings of thy coming hither, saying to me, 'When he

cometh, entreat him with honour and give ear unto his
commandment and gainsay him not ; but be thou his wife
and he shall be thy husband, and go with him whither he
will/ So, when I saw thee, I knew thee, and this is
the story of this city an|l of its people, and peace be
on thee ! " Then she sr&wed me the pomegranate-tree,
whereon was one pomegranate, which she took and eating
one-half thereof herself, gave me the other to eat, and
never did I taste aught sweeter or more delicious than
this pomegranate or more satisfying.

After this, I said to her, "Art thou content, as the
Sheikh el Khizr charged thee, to be my wife and go with
me to my own country and abide with me in the city of
Bassora?" "Yes/ 5 answered she, "if it please God the
Most High. I hearken to thy word and obey thy com-
mandment, without gainsaying." Then I made a binding
covenant with her and she carried me into her father's
treasury, whence we took what we could carry and going
forth the city, fared on till we came to my brothers, whom
I found searching for me, " Where hast thou been ? "
asked they. " Indeed thou hast tarried long from us, and
our hearts were troubled for thee." And the captain of
the ship said to me, " O merchant Abdallah, the wind has
been fair for us this great while, and thou hast hindered
us from setting sail." " There is no harm in that,"
answered I. " Assuredly delay 1 is good and my absence
hath wrought us nothing but profit ; for indeed, there hath
betided me therein the attainment of [our] hopes and
gifted of God is he who saith :

When to a land I fare in quest of good, perdie, I know not of the twain,

which fortune mine shall be ;
Whether 'twill prove the good whereafter I do seek Or else the evil hap

that seeketh after me."

& Or acting with deliberation, lit. postponement {takhir).


156

Then said I to them, " See what hath fallen to me in
my absence." And I showed them that which was with
me of things of price and told them what I had seen in
the City of Stone, adding, " If ye had hearkened to me
^fiQjsjt and gone with me, ye had gotten great good thereby."
fcCCCC But they said, " By Allah, had we gone, we had not dared
iXXXlb. to go in to the king of the city ! "

Then I said to my brothers, " No harm shall befall you;
for that which I have will suffice us all and I will share
it with you." 1 So saying, I divided my booty into four
parts and gave one to each of my brothers and to the
captain, taking the fourth for myself, [after setting aside]
somewhat [which] I gave to the servants and sailors, who
rejoiced and blessed me : and all were content with what
I gave them, save my brothers, who changed countenance
and rolled their eyes. I perceived that covetise had
gotten possession of them; so I said to them, "O my
brothers, methinketh what I have given you doth not con-
tent you \ but we are brothers and there is no difference
between us. My good and yours are one [and the same]
thing, and if I die, none will inherit of me but you*" And
I went on to soothe them.

Then I carried the lady on board the ship and lodged
her in the cabin, where I sent her somewhat to eat and
we sat talking, I and my brothers. " O our brother," said
they, " what wilt thou do with yonder damsel of surpassing
beauty?" And I answered, "I mean to marry her, as
soon as I reach Bassora, and make a splendid wedding
and go in to her there." "O my brother," said one of
them, " verily, this young lady excelleth in beauty and
grace and the love of her is fallen on my heart ; wherefore
I desire that thou give her to me and I will marry her/'
* s I too desire this," said the other. u Give her to me.
that 1 may marry her." "O my brothers/* answered 1 9
1 Lit, this is our portion*


157


"she took of me an oath and a covenant that I would
marry her myself ; so, if I give her to one of you, I shall
be false to my oath and to the covenant between her and
me, and belike she will be broken-hearted, for she came
not with me but on condition that I should marry her,
So how can I give her to wife to other than myself? As
for your loving her, I love her more than you, for she is
my treasure-trove, and as for my giving her to one of you,
that is a thing that may not be. But, if we reach Bassora
in safety, I will look you out two girls of the best of the
damsels of Bassora and demand them for you in marriage
and pay the dower of my own monies and make one
wedding and we will all three go in to our brides on one
[and the same] night But leave this damsel, for she is
of my portion."

They held their peace and I thought they were content
with that which I had said. Then we fared -on towards
Bassora, and every day I sent meat and drink to the lady,
who came not forth of the cabin, whilst I lay with my
brothers on the deck We sailed thus forty days, till we
sighted the city of Bassora and rejoiced in that we were
come near thereunto. Now I trusted in my brothers and
was at my ease with them, for none knoweth the hidden
things save God the Most High ; so I lay down to sleep
that night; but as I abode drowned in slumber, I found
myself caught up by my brothers, one seizing me by the
legs and^t4fe other by the arms, for they had taken counsel
together to drown me in the sea, because of the damsel.
When I saw myself in this case, I said to them, " O my
brothers, why do ye this with me?" And they answered,
saying, "Lack-courtesy that thou art, wilt thou barter
our aproof for a girl? We mean to cast thee into
the sea, because of this," So sayings they threw me over-
board/

Here Abdallah turned to the two dogs and said to them*


158


*0 my brothers, is this that I have said true or not?*
And they bowed their heads and fell a-whining, as if
confirming his speech ; whereat the Khalif wondered.
<0 Commander of the Faithful/ continued Abdallah,
' 1 sank to the bottom of the sea ; but the water bore me
up again to the surface, and before I could think, a great
bird, the bigness of a man, swooped down upon me and
snatching me up, flew up with me into the height of the
air. [I swooned away and] when I opened my eyes, I found
myself in a strong and high-builded palace, adorned with
magnificent paintings and pendants of jewels of all shapes
and colours. Therein were damsels standing with their
hands on their breasts and in their midst was a lady seated
on a throne of red gold, set with pearls and jewels, and
clad in apparel whereon no mortal might open his eyes,
for the lustre of the jewels with which they were decked.
About her waist she wore a girdle of jewels beyond price,
and on her head a triple crown, amazing thought and wit
and dazzling heart and sight.

Then the bird that had carried me thither shook and
became a young lady, as she were the shining sun. I fixed
my eyes on her and behold, it was she whom I had seen
on the mountain in the guise of a snake and had rescued
from the dragon. Then said to her the lady who sat upon
the throne, "Why hast thou brought this mortal hither ? n
" O my mother," answered she, "this is he who was the
means of veiling my honour 1 among the maidens of the
Jinn." Then said she to me, " Knowest thou who I am?"
And I answered, " No." Quoth she, " I am she who was
on such a mountain, where the black dragon strove with
me and would have forced my honour, but thou slewest
him." And I said, " I saw but a white snake with the
dragon." "It is I who was the white snake," answered
she ; "but I am the Red King's daughter of the Jinn and
1 ije. of saving me from shame.


159


my name is Saideh. She who sits there is my mother and
her name is Mubarekeh, wife of the Red King, The
black dragon who would have done away my honour was
the Black King's Vizier, Derfil by name, and he was foul
of favour. It chanced that he saw me and fell in love
with me ; so he sought me in marriage of my father, who
sent to him to say, * Who art thou, O scum of viziers, that
thou shouldst wed with kings' daughters? 1 Whereupon
he was wroth and swore an oath that he would assuredly
do away my honour, to spite my father.

Then he fell to tracking my steps and following me
whithersoever I went, designing to ravish me ; wherefore
there befell between him and my father fierce wars and sore
troubles, but my father could not prevail against him, for
that he was a mighty man of war and a crafty cheat, and
as often as my father pressed hard upon him, he would
escape from him, till my father was at his wits' end.
Every day I was forced to take some new shape; for, as
often as I assumed a shape, he would assume its contrary,
and to whatsoever land I fled, he would snuff my scent and
pursue me thither, so that I suffered sore affliction of him.
At last I took the form of a snake and betook myself
to the mountain where thou sawest me ; whereupon he
took the shape of a dragon and pursued me, till I fell into
his hands, when he strove with me and I with him, till he
wearied me and overrode me, meaning to do his will of
me : but thou earnest and smotest him with the stone and
slewest him. Then I returned to my own shape and
showed myself to thee, saying, ' I am beholden to thee
for a service such as is not lost save with the base-born.'
So, when I saw thy brothers do with thee this treachery
and cast thee into the sea, I hastened to thee and saved
thee from destruction, and now it behoveth my father and
mother to do thee honour."

Then she said to the Queen, t( O my mother, do thou


i6o

honour him as he deserveth who saved my honour." So
the queen said to me, "Welcome, O mortal! Indeed
thou hast done us a service that meriteth honour." Then
she ordered me a treasure-suit, 1 worth much money, and
store of jewels and precious stones, and said, "Take him
and carry him in to the king." So they carried me in to
the king in his divan, where I found him seated on his
throne, with his Marids and guards before him - y and when
I saw him, my eyes were dazzled for that which was upon
him of jewels ; but when he saw me, he rose to his feet
and all his officers rose also, to do him worship. Then
he saluted me and bade me welcome, entreating me with
the utmost honour, and gave me of that which was with
him of good things ; after which he said to some of his
followers, " Take him and carry him back to my daughter,
that she may restore him to the place whence she brought
, him" So they carried me back t6 the princess Sai'deh,
who took me up and flew away with me and my treasures.

Meanwhile, the captain of the galleon, being aroused by
the splash [of my fall], when my brothers threw me into
the sea, said, " What is that which hath fallen overboard ? "
Whereupon my brothers fell to weeping and beating their
breasts and answered, (t Alas, for our brother's loss! He
thought to do an occasion in the ship's side and fell into
the water!" Then they laid their hands on my good,
but there befell strife between them because of the lady,
each saying, "None shall have her but I." And they
abode disputing with one another and remembered not
their brother nor his drowning and their mourning for
him ceased. As they were thus, behold, Sai'deh alighted
Nu$t w * tn me * n the midst of the galleon ; and when my
htttt brothers saw me, they embraced me and rejoiced in me,
IxXXbo saying, <€ O our brother, how hast thou fared in that which

1 i.d. sudi a suit as is fabled to be laid up in the enchanted treasures
called kunou*.


i6i

befell thee? Indeed our hearts have been occupied with
thee," Quoth Saideh, " Had ye any bowels for him or
had ye loved him, ye had not cast him into the sea ; but
choose now what death ye will die."

Then she seized on them and would have slain them ;
but they cried out, saying, ["We throw ourselves] on thy
mercy, O our brother ! " And I said to her, u I beseech
thee, kill not my brothers." Quoth she, " Needs must
I slay them, for they are traitors/' But I ceased not
to speak her fair and intercede with her, till she said,
" To content thee, I will not kill them, but I will enchant
them." So saying, she brought out a cup and rilling k
with sea-water, pronounced over it words that might not
be understood; then she sprinkled them with the water,
saying, " Quit this human shape for that of a dog ; " and
immediately they became dogs, as thou seest £hem, O Vicar
of God.' Then he turned to the dogs and said to them,
* Have I spoken the truth, O my brothers ? ' And they
bowed their heads, as who should say, * Thou hast spoken
truly.*

* Then,' continued he, * she said to those who were
in the galleon, " Know ye that Abdallah ben Fazil here
present is become my brother and I shall visit him once
or twice every day: so, whoso of you thwarteth him or
gainsayeth his commandment or doth him hurt with hand
or tongue, I will do with him like as I have done with
these two traitors and turn him into a dog, and he shall
end his days in that shape, nor shall he find deliverance."
And they all said to her, " O our lady, we are all his slaves
and his servants and will not gainsay him in aught."
Moreover, she said to me, "When thou comest to Bassora,
examine all thy property and if there lack aught thereof,
tell me and I will bring it thee, in whose hands and
wheresoever it may be, and will change him who took it
Into a dog. When thou hast laid up thy goods, clap a collar

VOL. IXo fl


1 62

of iron on the neck of each of these two traitors and tie
them to the leg of a couch and shut them up by them-
selves. Moreover, every night, at midnight, do thou go
down to them and beat each of them till he swoon away \
and if thou suffer a single night to pass, without beating
them, I will come to thee and swinge thee soundly, after
which I will beat them." And I answered, " I hear and
obey." Then said she, " Tie them up with ropes till thou
come into Bassora." So I tied a rope about each dog's
neck and bound them to the mast, and she went her way.

On the morrow we entered Bassora and the merchants
came out to meet me and saluted me, and none enquired
of my brothers. But they looked at the dogs and said to
me, "What wilt thou do with these two dogs thou hast
brought with thee?" Quoth I, "I reared them on the
voyage and have brought them home with me." And they
laughed at them, knowing not that they were my brothers.
When I reached my house, I put the dogs in a closet and
busied myself with the unpacking and disposition of the
bales of stuffs and jewels I had with me. Moreover, the
merchants were with me, because of salutation ; wherefore
I was occupied with them and forgot to beat the dogs
or chain them up. Then I lay down to sleep, but hardly
had I done so, when there came to me the Red King's
daughter Saideh and said to me, " Did I not bid thee clap
chains on their necks and give each of them a beating?"
So saying, she seized me and pulling out a whip, beat me
till I swooned away, after which she went to the place
where my brothers were and beat them till they came nigh
upon death.

Then said she to me, "Beat each of them thus every
night, and if thou let a night pass without doing this,
I will beat thee ; 17 and I answered, "O my lady, to-morrow
I will put chains on their necks, and next night I will beat
them nor will I leave them one night unbeaten. J> And


163


sne charged me straitly to beat them [and disappeared].
When the day came, it being grievous to me to put fetters
of iron on their necks, I went to a goldsmith and bade
him make them collars and chains of gold. He did this
and I put the collars on their necks and chained them up,
as she bade me ; and next night I beat them in mine own
despite. This befell in the Khalifate of El Mehdi, 1 third
of the sons of Abbas, and I ingratiated myself with him
by sending him presents, wherefore he invested me with
the government and made me viceroy of Bassora.

On this wise I abode some time and after awhile, I said
in myself, " It may be her wrath is grown cool ; " and left
them a night unbeaten, whereupon she came to me and
gave me a beating the pain whereof I shall never forget-
so long as I live. So, from that time to this, I have never
left them a single night unbeaten ; and when El Mehdi
died and thou earnest to the throne, thou sentest to me s
confirming me in the government of Bassora. These
twelve years past have I beaten them every night, against
my will, and after I have beaten them, I excuse myself
to them and comfort them and give them to eat and drink ;
and they have remained shut up, nor did any of the
creatures of God know of them, till thou sentest Abou
Ishac the boon-companion to me, on account of the
tribute, and he discovered my secret and returning to thee ?
acquainted thee therewith. Then thou sentest him back
to fetch me and them ; so I answered with " hearkening
and obedience " and brought them before thee, whereupon
thou questionedst me and I told thee the truth of the
case ; and this is my history.'

The Khalif marvelled at the case of the two dogs and
aid to Abdallah, * Hast thou now forgiven thy two

others the wrong they did thee, ay or no ? 7 1 O my.

rd,' answered he, 'may God forgive them and acquit them
* Father of Haroun er Reshid (a.d. 775 785).


164


of guilt in this world and the next ! Indeed, it is I who
stand in need of their forgiveness, for that these twelve
years past I have beaten them grievously every night 1 '
f O Abdallah/ rejoined the Khalif, 'God willing, I will
endeavour for their release and that they may become
men again, as they were before, and I will make peace
between thee and them } so shall you live the rest of your
lives as loving brothers ; and like as thou hast forgiven
them, so shall they forgive thee. But now take them and
go down with them to thy lodging and this night beat
them not, and to-morrow all shall be well.' 6 O my lord/
answered Abdallah, 'as thy head liveth, if I leave them
one night unbeaten, Saideh will come to me and beat me,
and I have no body to brook beating. 1 ' Fear not/ quoth
the Khalif ; 'for I will give thee a writing under my hand.
If she come to thee, do thou give her the scroll and if,
when she has read it, she spare thee, the favour will be
hers; but, if she obey not my commandment, commit
thine affair to God and let her beat thee and suppose that
thou hast forgotten to beat them for one night and that
she beats thee because of that : and if it fall out thus and
she gainsay me, as sure as I am Commander of the
Faithful, I will be even with her.'

Then he wrote her a letter on a piece of paper, two
fingers broad, and sealing it, gave it to Abdallah, saying,
' O Abdallah, if she come, say to her, " The Khalif, king
of mankind, hath commanded me to leave beating them
and hath written me this letter for thee ; and he saluteth
thee." Then give her the warrant and fear no hurt.' And
he took of him a solemn pledge that he would not beat
them. So he took the dogs and carried them to his
lodging, saying in himself, ' I wonder what the Khalif will
do with the King's daughter of the Jinn, if she disobey
him and beat me to-night ! But I will run the risk of a
beating for once and leave my brothers at peace this nighty


16$

though I suffer torture for their sake.' Then he bethought
himself awhile, and his reason said to him, 1 Did not the
Khalif rely on some great support, he had not forbidden
me from beating them/ So he entered his lodging and
did off the collars from the dogs' necks, saying, f I put my
trust in God,' and fell to comforting them and saying,
* No harm shall befall you ; for the Khalif, fifth of the sons
of Abbas, hath undertaken for your deliverance and I have
forgiven you. If it please God the Most High, the time
is come and ye shall be delivered this blessed night; so
rejoice ye in the prospect of peace and happiness.'

When they heard his words, they fell awhining, after
the fashion of dogs, and rubbed their jowls against his UCgfjtf
feet, as if praying for him and humbling themselves before htttt
him. He mourned over them and fell to stroking their IxXlbi
backs till supper time; and when they set on the evening
meal, he bade the dogs sit. So they sat down and ate
from the tray, whilst his officers stood gaping and mar-
velling at his eating with dogs and saying, £ Is he mad or
are his wits deranged ? How can the Viceroy of Bassora,
he who is greater than a vizier, eat with dogs ? Knoweth
he not that the dog is unclean?' And they stared at the
dogs, as they ate with him on decorous wise, knowing not
that they were his brothers; nor did they leave staring at
them, till they had made an end of eating, when Abdallah
washed his hands and the dogs also put out their paws and
washed ; whereupon all who were present fell alaughing
at them and saying, one to another, ' Never in our lives
saw we dogs eat and after wash their paws ! '

Then the dogs sat down on the divans beside Abdallah^
nor dared any question him of this ; and thus the case
abode till midnight, when he dismissed the attendants
and lay down to sleep and the dogs with him, each on
a couch ; whereupon the servants said to each other 5
€ Verily, he hath lain down to sleep and the dogs with


1 66

him/ Quoth another, 'Since he hath eaten with the dogs
from the [same] tray, there is no harm in their sleeping
with him ; and this is nought but the fashion of madmen/
Moreover, they ate not anydele of the food that remained
in the tray, saying, * How shall we eat of dogs' leavings ? '
And they took the tray, with what was therein, and threw
it away, saying, ' It is unclean/

As for Abdallah, ere he could think, the earth clove
in sunder and out came Saideh, who said to him, £ O
Abdallah, why hast thou not beaten them this night and
why hast thou done off the collars from their necks ?
Hast thou done this to thwart me and in mockery of my
commandment? But now I will beat thee and change
thee into a dog like unto them/ * O my lady/ answered
he, ' I conjure thee by the graving upon the ring of
Solomon, son of David (on whom be peace !), have
patience with me till I tell thee tlie reason [of this] and
after do with me what thou wilt/ 'Say on/ quoth she;
and he said, 'The king of mankind, the Commander of
the Faithful, the Khalif Haroun er Reshid, commanded
me not to beat them this night and took of me oaths and
covenants to that effect ; and he saluteth thee and hath
committed to me a mandate under his own hand, which
he bade me give thee. So I obeyed his commandment,
for it is obligatory to obey the Commander of the Faithful ;
and here is the mandate. Take it and read it and after
do thy will/

So he gave her the letter and she opened it and read

as follows, 'In the name of God the Compassionate, the
Merciful ! From the king of mankind, Haroun er Reshid,
to Saideh, daughter of the Red King!' Then, after the
usual salutations, ' Verily, this man hath forgiven his
brothers and hath let drop his claim against them, and
we have enjoined them to reconciliation. Now, when
reconciliation cometh about, punishment is remitted, and


167

if you [of the Jinn] thwart us in our commandments, we
will thwart you in yours and traverse your ordinances ;
but, if ye obey our bidding and execute our command-
ments, we will do the like with yours. Wherefore I bid
thee do them no hurt, and if thou believe in God and in
His Apostle, it behoveth thee to obey him to whom the
commandment is committed. So, if thou spare them,
I will requite thee with that whereunto my Lord shall
enable me; and the token of obedience is that thou
remove thine enchantment from these two men, so they
may come before me to-morrow, free. But, if thou release
them not, I will release them in thy despite, by the aid
of God the Most High/

When she had read the letter, she said, *0 Abdallah,
I will do nought till I go to my father and show him the
mandate of the king of mankind and return to thee in
haste.' So saying, she signed to the earth, which opened,
and she disappeared therein, whilst Abdallah's heart was
transported for joy and he said, * God advance the Com-
mander of the Faithful ! ' As for Saideh, she went in
to her father and acquainting him with that which had
passed, gave him the Khalifs letter, which he kissed and
laid on his head. Then he read it and said, ' O my
daughter, verily, the ordinance of the king of mankind
hath course with us and his commandments are executory
amongst us, nor can we gainsay him: so go thou and
release the two men forthwith and say to them, " Ye are
[free] by the intercession of the king of mankind." For,
should he be wroth with us, he would destroy us to the
last of us : so do not thou impose on us that whereto we
are unable.'

' O my father,' said she, * if the king of mankind were
wroth with us, what could he do with us?' Quoth he,
*He hath power over us for several reasons. In the first
place, he is a man and hath thus pre-eminence over


i68

es ; 1 secondly, he is the Vicar of God ; and thirdly, he is
constant in praying the two-bow prayer of the foredawn ;
wherefore, if all the tribes of the Jinn assembled together
against him from the seven worlds, they could do him no
hurt But he, should he be wroth with us, he would pray
the two-bow prayer of the foredawn and cry out upon us
one cry, whereupon we should all present ourselves before
him obediently and be before him as sheep before the
butcher. If he would, he could command us to depart
our abiding-places to a desert country wherein we might
not sojourn ; and if he desired to destroy us, he would bid
us destroy ourselves, whereupon we should destroy one
another. Wherefore we may not disobey his command-
ment, for, if we did this, he would consume us, nor could
we flee from before him. Thus is it with every true
believer who is diligent in praying the two-bow prayer
of the foredawn ; his command m ent is effectual over us :
so be not thou the means of our destruction, because
of two mortals, but go forthright and release them, ere
the anger of the Commander of the Faithful fall upon us.'

So she returned to Abdallah and acquainted him with
her father's words, saying, 'Kiss me the hands of the
Commander of the Faithful and seek his approof for us/
Then she brought out the cup and filling it with water,
conjured over it and spoke words that might not be under-
stood ; after which she sprinkled the dogs with the water,
saying, ' Quit the form of dogs and return to that of men 1 '
Whereupon they became men as before and the spell of
the enchantment was dissolved from them. Quoth they,
6 1 testify that there is no god but God and that Mohammed
is the Apostle of God 1 ' And fell on their brother's feet
and hands, kissing them and beseeching his forgiveness :
but he said, 6 Do ye forgive me.' Then they both repented
with a sincere repentance, sayings £ Verily s Satan th©
1 See notes, Vol. VII. pp. 119, 159.


169


Accursed tempted us and covetise deluded us : but ow
Lord hath requited us after our deserts, and forgiveness
is of the fashion of the generous. 7 And they went on to
supplicate their brother and weep and profess repentance
for that which they had done.

Then said he to them, * What did ye with my wife whom
I brought from the City of Stone ? ' Quoth they, < When
Satan tempted us and we cast thee into the sea, there
befell strife between us, each saying, " I will have her to
wife." Which when she heard, she came up from the
cabin and said to us, u Contend not because of me, for
I will not belong to either of you. My husband is gone
into the sea and I will follow him." So saying, she cast
herself overboard and died/ 1 Verily,' exclaimed Abdallah,
6 she died a martyr 1 1 But there is no power and no virtue
save in God the Most High, the Supreme T Then he
wept sore for her and said to his brothers, * It was not well
of you to do this thing and bereave me of my wife ! *
And they answered, 4 Indeed, we have sinned, but our
Lord hath requited us our deed and this was a thing that
God decreed unto us, ere He created us.' And he accepted
their excuse ; but Saideh said to him, * Have they done all
these things to thee and wilt thou forgive them?' *0 my
sister,' answered he, * whoso hath power 3 and spareth,
his reward is with God.' Then said she, 4 Be on thy guard
against them, for they are traitors.' And she took leave of
him and went away, jNTfc^Jt

Abdallah and his brothers passed the rest of the night IttCCC
in eating and drinking and merriment and good cheer, IXXXbtl
and on the morrow, he sent them to the bath and clad

1 A person who dies by drowning, according to Muslim theology,
becomes one of " the noble army of martyrs," whose souls dwell, till
the Judgment Day f in the crops of green birds that feed upon the fruits

of Paradise.

* uc, is able to avenge him sell


170


each of them, on his coming forth, in a suit worth much
money. Then he called for the tray of food and they set
it before him and he ate, he and his brothers. When his
attendants saw the latter and knew them for his brothers,
they saluted them and said to him, * O our lordj may God
give thee joy of thy reunion with thy dear brothers I
Where have they been this while ? ' Quoth he, 1 It was
they whom ye saw in the guise of dogs ; praised be
God who hath delivered them from prison and grievous
torment ! '

Then he carried them to the Khalif s Divan and kissing
the earth before the prince, wished him continuance of
honour and fortune and cease of evil and enmity. £ Wel-
come, O Amir Abdallah ! ' said the Khalif. ' Tell me what
hath befallen thee.' ' O Commander of the Faithful
(whose power God increase!),' replied he, 'when I
carried my brothers home to "my lodging, my heart
was at rest concerning them, for that thou hadst pledged
thyself to their release and I said in myself, " Kings
fail not of aught for which they endeavour, for the
divine favour aideth them." So I did off the collars
from their necks, putting my trust in God, and ate with
them from the [same] tray, which when my attendants
saw, they made light of my wit and said to each other,
" He is surely mad ! How can the governor of Bassora,
who is greater than the vizier, eat with dogs?" Then
they threw away what was in the tray, saying, "We will
not eat the dogs' leavings." And they went on to im-
peach my reason, whilst I heard what they said, but made
them no answer, because of their ignorance that the dogs
were my brothers. When the hour of sleep came, I sent
them away and addressed myself to sleep ; but, ere I could
think, the earth clave in sunder and out came Sa'ideh, the
Red King's daughter, enraged against me, with eyes like
fire. 5 And he went on to relate to the Khalif what had


i7i


passed between him and her and her father and how she
had restored his brothers to human form, adding, 'And
here they are before thee, O Commander of the Faithful ! '

The Khalif looked at them and seeing two young men
like moons, said, * God requite thee for me with good, O
Abdallah, for that thou hast acquainted me with an ad-
vantage 1 whereof I knew not! Henceforth, God willing,
I will never leave to pray these two inclinations before the
breaking of the dawn, what while I abide on life.' Then
he reproved Abdallah's brothers for that wherein they had
sinned against him of time past and they excused them-"
selves before the Khalif, who said, 'Join hands 3 and
forgive one another and God pardon what is past ! ' After
which he turned to Abdallah and said to him, * O Abdallah,
make thy brothers thine assistants and be careful of them.'
Then he charged them to be obedient to their brother and
bade them return to Bassora, after he had bestowed on
them abundant largesse. So they went down from the
divan, whilst the Khalif rejoiced in this advantage that he
had gotten by the fashion aforesaid, to wit, his assiduity
in praying two inclinations before dawn, and said, ' He
spoke truth who said, "The misfortunes of some folk
profit others." ' 8

Abdallah and his brothers departed from Eaghdad in all
honour and worship and increase of dignity, and fared on
till they drew near Bassora, when the notables and chief
men of the place came out to meet them and brought
them into the city in state that had not its match. More-
over, they adorned the city in their honour and all the

1 *.<?. the power acquired by the regular praying of the foredawn
prayer.

s 14 The Arab fashion {musafiheh) of shaking hands. They apply the
palms of the right hands close to one another, without squeezing the
fingers, and then raise the hand to the forehead/ 1 — Burton' } s Pilgrimage

8 Le, it is an ill wind that blows nobody good.


IJ2


folk shouted out blessings on Abdallah, whilst he scattered
gold and silver amongst them. But none took heed to
his brothers; wherefore jealousy and envy entered their
hearts, for all he tendered them as one tenders an ailing
eye ■ but the more he cherished them, the more they
redoubled in hatred and envy of him : and indeed it is
said on the subject :

I seek to win me the good will of all folk, small and great, But hardlj

him who envieth me I may conciliate.
How shall a man conciliate him who envieth him a good, Since but the

ceasing of that good will satisfy his hate ?

Then he gave each of them a concubine, that had not
her like, and slaves and servants, black and white and
male and female, forty of each kind. Moreover, he gave
each of them fifty thoroughbred horses and they got them
guards and followers. And he assigned to them revenues
and appointed them stipends and allowances and made
them his assistants, saying to them, *0 my brothers, you
*Ni$!}t an( 2 I are equal and there is no distinction between us,
tJCCCC and after God and the Khalif, the commandment is mine
IvxxbtU* and yours. So rule you in Bassora in my absence and in
my presence, and your commandments shall be executory ;
but look that ye fear God in your ordinances and beware
of oppression, for oppression, if it endure, ruineth [a
country] ; and apply yourselves unto justice, for justice,
if it endure, maketh [a country] to flourish. Oppress not
the believers, or they will curse you and your report will
come to the ears of the Khalif, wherefore dishonour
will betide both you and me. Go not therefore about to
oppress any, but whatsoever ye covet of the goods of the
folk, take it from my goods, over and above that whereof
ye have need ; for it is not unknown to you what is handed
down of unequivocal verses [of the Koran] on the subject
of oppression, and gifted of God is he who saith :


173


Oppression in man's soul doth latent sit And nought but lack of pow«y
concealeth it

A man of sense do business undertakes, Until he sees the time therefor
is fit

The wise man's tongue is in his heart, but in His mouth the heart ot

him who lacketh wit
He who's not greater than his wit is slain Of the least stress that unto

hirn is writ.

Men may their lineage hide, but it appears Still in the things they do
and they omit

Whoso in origin is aught but good, No word of good his lips shall e'er
emit

He is his peer in folly, to a fool Who doth the ordering of his deeds
commit ;

A nd who reveals his secret to the folk His enemies awakens unto it
With his own business be a man content Nor mell with what concemeth
him no whit.'

And he went on to admonish his brothers and enjoin
them to justice and forbid them from oppression, doubting
not but they would love him the better for bis lavish-
ment of good counsel upon them, and he trusted in them
and entreated them with the utmost honour ; but, for all
his generosity to them, they only waxed in hatred and
envy of him, till, one day, the two being together [alone],
Nasir said to Mensour, f O my brother, how long shall we
be subject to our brother Abdallah, and he in this estate
of lordship and commandment ? After being a merchant,
he is become an Amir, and from being little, he is grown
great : but we, we grow not great nor is there aught of
rank or worth left us ; for, behold, he laugheth at us and
maketh us his assistants i What is the meaning of this ?
Is it not that we are his servants and under his command-
ment? But, what while he abideth on life, our rank will
never be raised nor shall we be of any account ; wherefore
we shall not attain to our wish, except we slay him and
take his good, nor will it be possible to take his good, save


174


after his death. So, when we have killed him, we shall
become lords and will take all that is in his treasuries of
jewels and [other] things of price and divide them between
us. Then will we send the Khalif a present and demand of
him the government of Cufa, and thou shalt be governor
of Bassora and I of Cufa, or thou shalt be governor of
Cufa and I of Bassora. On this wise each of us shall
nave a rank and a condition, but we shall never compass
this, except we do away with him,'

* Thou sayest sooth/ answered Mensour ; ( but how shall
we do to kill him? 1 Quoth Nasir, ' We will make an
entertainment in the house of one of us and bid him
thereto and serve him with the utmost assiduity. Then
will we watch the night with him in converse and tell him
stories' and jests and anecdotes, till his heart is dissolved
with watching, when we will spread him a bed, that he
may lie down to sleep. When he is asleep, we will kneel
upon him and strangle him and cast him into the river ;
and on the morrow, we will say, " His sister the Jinniyeh
came to him, as he sat talking with us, and said to him,
' O scum of mankind, who art thou that thou shouldst
complain of me to the Commander of the Faithful?
Deemest thou that we are afraid of him? If he be a
king, we too are kings, and if he mend not his manners
with us, we will kill him by the foulest of deaths. But
meantime I will kill thee, that we may see what the
Commander of the Faithful can do.' So saying, she
caught him up and the earth opened and she disappeared
with him ; which when we saw, we swooned away. Then
we came to ourselves and we know not what is become
of him." Then will we send to the Khalif and tell him
of this and he will invest us with the government in his
room. After awhile, we will send him a rich present and
seek of him the goverment of Cufa, and one of us shall
abide in Bassora and the other in Cufa. So shall the


175


land be pleasant to us and we will subdue the people
and attain our desire.' ' Thou counsellest well, O my
brother,' answered Mensour and they agreed upon this
thing.

So Nasir made an entertainment and said to Abdallah,

* O my brother, verily I am thy brother, and I would have
thee and my brother Mensour heal my heart and eat of
my guest-meal in my house, so I may glory in thee and
that it may be said, "The Amir Abdallah hath eaten of
his brother Nasir's guest-meal ; " whereby my heart will be
solaced/ 'So be it, O my brother/ answered Abdallah.

* There is no distinction between me and thee, and my
house is thy house ; but since thou biddest me, none
refuseth hospitality save the churl' Then he turned to
Mensour and said to him, 1 Wilt thou go with me to thy
brother Nasir's house and eat of his guest-meal and ease
his heart ? ' ' As thy head liveth, O my brother/ replied
Mensour, * I will not go with thee, except thou swear to
me that, after thou comest forth of my brother Nasir's
house, thou wilt enter my house and eat of my banquet !
Is Nasir thy brother and am not I thy brother ? So, even
as thou healest his heart do thou heal mine.' 'With all
my heart/ answered Abdallah. ' When I come out from
Nasir's house, I will enter thine, for thou art my brother
even as he.' So Nasir kissed his hand and going forth
of the divan, made ready his banquet.

On the morrow, Abdallah took horse and repaired, with
his brother Mensour and a company of his officers, to
Nasir's house, where they sat down, he and Mensour and
his company. Then Nasir set the tabie of food before
them and bade them welcome ; so they ate and drank ;
after which the tray and the platters were removed and
they washed their hands. They passed the day in eating
and drinking and merry-making and good cheer till night-
fall, when they supped and prayed the prayers of sundown


176


and evensong. Then they sat carousing, and Nasir and
Mensour fell to telling stories, first one and then the
other, whilst Abdallah hearkened Now they three were
alone in a pavilion, the rest of the company being in
another place, and they ceased not to tell tales and jests
and pleasant traits and anecdotes, till Abdallah's heart was

Nlgl)t dissolved within him for watching and sleep overcame
itt£Ct him. So they spread him a bed and he put off his clothes

IxXXtX* an d i a y down.

They lay down beside him on another couch and waited
till they saw that he was drowned in sleep, when they
arose and knelt upon him : whereupon he awoke and
seeing them kneeling on his breast, said to them, 'What
is this, O my brothers ? * ' We are no brothers of thine/
answered they, 'nor do we know thee, lack-courtesy that
thou art ! Thy death is become better than thy life,'
Then they gripped him by the throat and throttled him,
till he lost his senses and abode without motion, so that
they deemed him dead. Now the pavilion in which they
were overlooked the river ; so they cast him therein ; but,
when he fell, God sent to his aid a dolphin, which was
wont to come under the pavilion, for that the kitchen had
a window that gave upon the water, and as often as they
killed any beast there, it was their wont to throw the offal
into the river and the dolphin came and picked it up from
the surface of the water ; wherefore it still resorted to the
place. That day they had cast out much offal, by reason
of the banquet ; so the dolphin ate more than of wont and
gained strength. When it heard the splash of Abdallah's
fall, it hastened to the spot, where it saw a man, and God
guided it, so that it took him on its back and crossing the
river, made with him for the other bank, where it cast him
ashore.

Now the place where the dolphin cast him up was
a beaten way, and presently up came a caravan and finding


177


him lying on the river-bank, said, ' Here is a drowned
man, whom the river hath cast up.' Now the chief of the
caravan was a man of worth and sound judgment, skilled
in all sciences and versed in the art of medicine : so he
said to them, 4 O folk, what is to do ? ' And they answered,
saying, 1 Here is a drowned man.' Whereupon he went
up to Abdallah and examining him, said to them, * O folk,
there is yet life in this young man, who is a person of
condition and a nursling of honour and fortune, and God
willing, there is still hope in him.* Then he took him
and clothing him in warm apparel, nursed him and tended
him three days' journey, till he revived ; but he was
exceeding weak, by reason of the shock, and the chief
of the caravan proceeded to medicine him with such
simples as he knew, what while they fared on, without
ceasing, till they had travelled thirty days' journey from
Bassora and came to a city in the land of the Persians, by
name Auj. Here they alighted at a khan and spread
Abdallah a bed, where he lay groaning all night and
disturbing the folk with his groans.

On the morrow the porter of the khan came to the
chief of the caravan and said to him, ' What is this sick
man thou hast with thee? Verily, he disturbeth us.'
Quoth the chief, 'I found him by the way, shipwrecked
and cast up by the river, and have tended him, but to no
effect, for he recovereth not/ 'Show him to the Sheikheh 1
Rajiheh/ said the porter. ' Who is she ? ' asked the chief
of the caravan, and the porter answered, saying, ' There
is with us a holy woman, a comely and clean maid, called
Rajiheh, to whom they carry whoso hath any ailment ; and
he lies the night in her house and awakes on the morrow,
whole and ailing nothing.' Quoth the chief, ' Direct me
to her;' and the porter said, 'Take up thy sick man.
So he took up Abdallah and the porter forewent him s til)

k Fem. of Sheikh, i.e. a holy woman.
VOL. IX. 12


i 7 8


he came to a hermitage, where he saw folk entering with
votive offerings and other folk coming forth, rejoicing.
The porter went in, till he came to the curtain, 1 and said,
* Permission, O Sheikheh Rajiheh ! Take this sick man/
Quoth she, ' Bring him within the curtain.' And the
porter said to Abdallah, 1 Enter.'

So he entered and looking upon the holy woman, saw
her to be his very wife whom he had brought from the
City of Stone. She also knew him and saluted him and
he her. Then said he, ' Who brought thee hither ? '
And she answered, 'When I saw that thy brothers had
cast thee overboard and were contending concerning me,
I threw myself into the sea ; but my sheikh El Khizr took
me up and brought me to this hermitage, where he gave
me leave to heal the sick and made proclamation in the
city, saying, " Whoso hath any, ailment, let him repair to
the Sheikheh Rajiheh." Moreover he said to me, " Abide
in this hermitage till the time be accomplished, and thy
husband shall come to thee here." So all the sick used
to come to me and I rubbed them and kneaded them
and they awoke on the morrow, whole and well. On this
wise the report of me became noised abroad among the
folk, and they brought me votive gifts, so that I have with
me good galore. Moreover, I live here in all honour and
worship, and all the people of these parts seek my prayers/

Then she rubbed him and by the ordinance of God the
Most High he became whole. Now El Khizr used to
come to her every Friday night, and it chanced that the
day of Abdallah's coming was a Friday. So, when the
night darkened, they made the evening meal of the
richest meats, he and she, and sat awaiting the coming
of El Khizr, who made his appearance anon and carrying
them forth of the hermitage, set them down in Abdallah's

1 The hermitage probably consisted of but one room, divided in tw®
Dy means of a curtain.


179


palace at Bassora, where he left them and went his way.
As soon as it was day, Abdallah examined the palace and
knew it for his own ; then, hearing the folk in clamour
[without], he looked forth of the window and saw his
brothers crucified, each on his own cross.

Now the reason of this was as follows. When they had
thrown him into the Tigris, they arose on the morrow,
weeping and saying, < The Jinniyeh hath carried off our
brother 1 ' Then they made ready a present and sent it to
the Khalif, acquainting him with these tidings and seek-
ing of him the government of Bassora. He sent for
them and questioned them and they told him the story
aforesaid, 1 whereupon he was exceeding wroth [with
Said eh]. So that night he prayed a two- bow prayer
before daybreak, as of his wont, and called upon the tribes
of the Jinn, who came before him obediently, and he
questioned them of Abdallah ; but they swore to him that
none of them had done him aught of hurt and said,
* We know not what is come of him/ Then came Saideh,
daughter of the Red King, and acquainted the Khalif
with the truth of Abdallah's case, and he dismissed
the Jinn.

On the morrow, he caused beat Nasir and Mensour,
till they confessed, one against the other : whereupon the
Khalif was enraged with them and bade carry them to
Bassora and crucify them there before Abdallah's palace.
As for the latter, when he saw his brothers crucified, he
commanded to bury them, then took horse and repairing
to Baghdad, acquainted the Khalif with that which his
brothers had done with him, from first to last [and told
him how he had recovered his wife] ; whereat Er Reshid
marvelled and summoning the Cadi and the witnesses, let
draw up the contract of marriage between Abdallah and
the damsel whom he had brought from the City of Stone.
1 ia, that which they had concerted.


i8o

So he went in to her and abode with her at Bassora,
till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and
Sunderer of Companies ; and extolled be the perfection
of the [Ever-]Living One, who dieth not I

MAROUF THE COBBLER AND HIS WIFE
FATIMEH.

There dwelt once in the city of Cairo the [God-]
guarded a cobbler, [who lived by] mending old shoes. 1
His name was Marouf and he had a wife called Fatimeh,
whom the folk had nicknamed 'The Shrew/ 2 for that she
was a worthless, ill-conditioned wretch, little of shame
and a sore mischief-maker. She ruled her husband and
used to revile him and curse him^a thousand times a day ;
and he feared her malice and dreaded her mischief; for
that he was a man of sense and careful of his repute, but
poor of estate. When he earnt much, he spent it on her,
and when he earnt little, she revenged herself on his body
that night, leaving him no peace and making his night
like her book ; fi for she was even as saith the poet of [the
like of] her :

How many a night have I spent with my wife In the sorrier of plight*

for contention and strife I
Would God I had given her poison the eight Of our wedding and m

made an end of her life I

One day she said to him, 'O Marouf, I wish thee to

1 Zerabin (pi. of zerboun) r lit. slaves' shoes or sandals (as Vol. III.
p. 211, 1. 21) ; but the word is here evidently used in its modern sense
of stout shoes or boots.

a Lit. dung {urreh). The meaning "shrew" is modern and tropical.

8 i,e. black, like the book in which her actions were recorded and
which would be presented to her on the Day of Judgment, See ante,
Vol. VIII. p. 94, note 2.


i8i

bring me this night vermicelli dressed with bees' honey.'
*So God the Most High vouchsafe 1 me its price/ answered
he, * I will bring it thee. By Allah, I have no money
to-day, but our Lord will provide.' 1 'I have nothing to Ktgt}t
do with that/ rejoined she. 4 Whether He provide 1 or not, tiCCCCXk
look thou come not to me save with the vermicelli and
bees' honey thereon ; else will I make thy night like unto
thy fortune* whenas thou marriedst me and fellest into
my hand.* Quoth he, 'God is bountiful!' and went out,
full of trouble. 8 He prayed the morning prayer and opened
his shop, saying, *I beseech thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe
me the price of the vermicelli and save me from the
mischief of yonder wicked woman this night ! *

He sat in the shop till midday, but no work came to
him and his fear of his wife redoubled. So he arose and
shutting his shop, went out, knowing not hoW he should do
in the matter of the vermicelli, for that he had not [even]
wherewithal to buy bread. Presently he came to the shop of
the vermicelli-seller and stood before it, perplexed, whilst
his eyes filled with tears. The cook glanced at him and
said, ' O Master Marouf, why dost thou weep ? Tell me what
ails thee?' So he acquainted him with his case, saying,

* My wife is a curst shrew and would have me bring her
vermicelli ; but I have sat in my shop half the day and
have gotten nought, not even the price of bread ; where-
fore I am in fear of her.' The cook laughed and said, ' No
harm shall come to thee. How many pounds wilt thou
have ? ' * Five pounds/ answered Marouf. So the cook
weighed him out five pounds of vermicelli and said to hiiri^

* I have butter, but no bees' honey. Here is drip-honey, €

1 Lit. make easy. 3 i.e. black.

% Lit. with trouble scattering itself abroad from his body,
1 i,e* the sweet yellow syrup which exudes from ripe dates 9 whe&
hung up. This is the ordinary meaning of " drip -honey " ; but in the
present case it appears to mean treacle, as it is afterwards spoken of as
"cane-honey/*


182


fiowever, which is better than bees' honey ; and where will
be the harm, if it be with drip-honey ? '

Marouf was ashamed to object, because the cook was
to have patience with him for the price, and said, * Give
it me with drip-honey/ So he fried it for him with butter
and drenched it with drip-honey, till it was fit to present
to kings. Then he said to him, ' Dost thou want bread
and cheese?' And Marouf answered, i Yes.' So he gave
him four paras' worth of bread and one of cheese, and
the vermicelli was ten paras. Then said he, ' Know, O
Marouf, that thou owest me fifteen paras, so go to thy
wife and make merry and take this para for the bath ; and
thou shalt have credit for a day or two or three till God
provide thee. And straiten not thy wife, for I will have
patience with thee till such time as thou shalt have money
to spare.' So Marouf took the vermicelli and bread and
cheese and went away, with a heart at ease, blessing the
cook and saying, 'Extolled be Thy perfection, O my
Lord ! How bountiful art Thou ! '

When he came home, his wife said to him, c Hast thou
brought the vermicelli ?' 'Yes,' answered he and set it
before her. She looked at it and seeing that it was
dressed with cane-honey, 1 said to him, ' Did I not bid thee
bring it with bees' honey ? Wilt thou do contrary to my
wish and have it dressed with cane-honey?' He excused
himself to her, saying, 1 I bought it not save on credit \ '
but she answered, ' This talk is idle \ I will not eat it, save
with bees' honey.' And she was wroth with it and threw
it in his face, saying, ' Begone, thou cuckold, and bring
me other than this ! ' Then she dealt him a buffet on the
chops and knocked out one of his teeth. The blood ran
down upon his breast and for stress of anger he smote her
one slight blow on the head ; whereupon she clutched his
1 See foregoing note.


i«3


beard and fell to crying out and saying, '[Help,]
Muslims ! *

So the neighbours came in and freed his beard from het
clutch and beset her with blame and reproved her, saying,
'We are all content to eat vermicelli with cane-honey.
Why, then, wilt thou oppress this poor man thus ? Verily,
this is disgraceful in thee ! ' And they went on to soothe
her till they made peace between him and her. But,
when the folk were gone, she swore that she would not
eat of the vermicelli, and Marouf, being consumed with
hunger, said in himself, £ She swears that she will not eat ;
so I will eat.' Then he ate, and when she saw him
eating, she said, ' If it be the will of God, may the eating
of it be poison to destroy some one's 1 body ! ' Quoth he,
* It shall not be as thou sayest,' and went on eating,
laughing and saying, ' Thou swearest that, thou wilt not
eat of this ; but God is bountiful, and to-morrow night,
if it be His will, I will bring thee vermicelli dressed
with bees' honey, and thou shalt eat it alone.' And he
addressed himself to appease her, whilst she called down
curses upon him ; and she ceased not to rail at him and
revile him till the morning, when she bared her arm to
beat him. Quoth he, 'Give me time and I will bring thee
other vermicelli.'

Then he went out to the mosque and prayed ; after
which he betook himself to his shop and opening it, sat
down ; but hardly had he done this when up came two
officers from the Cadi's court and said to him, 'Come,

1 The Arabs consider it a breach of manners, in telling a story,
textually to repeat an imprecation, lest some person present apply it to
himself, and therefore commonly substitute " the remote one M (el baicf)
for the pronoun or name of the person cursed, an expession equivalent
to our vulgar '* present company excepted." I have substituted the
similar English expression " some one," which sufficiently renders the
Arabic idiom.


1 84

speak with the Cadi, for thy wife hath complained of thee
to him and her favour is thus and thus.' He knew her
[by their description] and saying, « May God the Most
High torment her!' accompanied them to the Cadi's
presence, where he found Fatimeh standing, weeping and
wiping away her tears, with her arm bound up and her
face-veil besmeared with blood. * Harkye, sirrah,' said
the Cadi, ' hast thou no fear of God the Most High ?
Why hast thou beaten this good woman and broken her
arm and knocked out her tooth and entreated her thus?'

* If I beat her or put out her tooth/ answered Marouf,

* sentence me to what thou wilt ; but in truth the case was
thus and thus and the neighbours made peace between me
and her/ And he told him the story from first to last.

Now this Cadi was a benevolent man ; so he brought
out to him a quarter dinar, saying, 4 O man, take this and
get her vermicelli with bees' honey and do ye make peace,
thou and she/ Quoth Marouf, 'Give it to her.' So she
took it and the Cadi made peace between them, saying,

* O wife, obey thy husband, and thou, O man, deal kindly
with her.' Then they left the court, reconciled at the
Cadi's hands, and she went one way, whilst her husband
returned by another way to his shop and sat there, when,
behold, the [two] Serjeants came up to him and said,
1 Give us our fee/ Quoth he, ' The Cadi took not of me
aught : on the contrary, he gave me a quarter dinar/ But
they answered, saying, ' It is none of our concern whether
the Cadi took of thee or gave to thee, and if thou give
us not our fee, we will take it in despite of thee.' And
they fell to dragging him about the market. So he sold
his tools and gave them half a dinar, whereupon they let
him go and went away, whilst he put his hand to his cheek
and sat sorrowful, for that he had no tools to work withal

Presently, up came two ill-looking fellows and said to
him, 1 Come, O man, and speak with the Cadi; for thy


1 85


wife hath complained of thee to him.' Quoth he, 6 He
made peace between us [but now].' But they answered,
'We come from another Cadi, and thy wife hath com-
plained of thee to our Cadi.' So he arose and went with
them to the [second] Cadi, calling on God for succour
against her; and when he saw her, he said to her, * Did
ve not make peace, good woman ? ' But she said, * There
abideth no peace between thee and me.' So he came
forward and told the Cadi his story, adding, ' And indeed
the Cadi such an one made peace between us but now. 5
Whereupon the Cadi said to her, 1 O strumpet, since ye
have made peace with each other, why comest thou to
me complaining? ' Quoth she, 'He beat me after that'
But the Cadi said, ' Make peace with one another, and
thou, [O man] beat her not again, and she will cross
thee no more.' So they made peace and the Cadi said
to Marouf, ' Give the Serjeants their fee.' So he gave
them their fee and going back to his shop, opened it and
sat down, as he were a drunken man for excess of chagrin.

Presently, a man came up to him and said, * O Marouf,
hide thyself, for thy wife hath complained of thee to the
High Court and the men of violence 1 are after thee.' So
he shut his shop and fled towards the Gate of Victory. 3
He had five paras left of the price of the lasts and gear ;
so he bought four paras' worth of bread and one of cheese,
as he fled from her. Now it was the winter season and
the hour of afternoon-prayer; so, when he came out
among the rubbish-heaps, the rain descended upon him,
as [from] the mouth of water-skins, and his clothes were
drenched. So he entered the Aadiliyeh, 3 where he saw
a ruined place and therein a deserted cell, without a door^

1 i.e. the police : see note, VoL VI. p. 2*

s Bab en Nesr, eastern gate of Cairo.

• A mosque so called, situate without the Bab er> Nem


1 86

and took shelter there from the rain. The tears streamed
from his eyes and he fell to complaining of what had
befallen him and saying, 'Whither shall I flee from this
vile woman ? I beseech Thee, O Lord, to vouchsafe me
one who shall bring me to a far country, where she shall
not know the way to me I '

As he sat weeping, behold, the wall opened and there
came forth to him therefrom one of tall stature, whose
aspect caused the flesh to creep, and said to him, ' O man,
what aileth thee that thou disturbest me this night ? These
two hundred years have I dwelt here and have never seen
any enter this place and do as thou dost. Tell me what
thou wishest and I will accomplish thy need, for compassion
for thee hath gotten hold upon my heart. 5 Quoth Marouf,
'Who and what art thou?' And he answered, 'I am the
haunter of this place.' So Marouf told him all that had
befallen him with his wife and he said, ' Wilt thou have
me carry thee to a country, wfiere thy wife shall know no
way to thee?' * Yes/ answered Marouf; and the genie
said, £ Then mount my back.' So he mounted on his
back and he flew with him from nightfall till daybreak,
-Nffgljt wnen ^ e set him down on the top of a high mountain and
JlCCCCXCL sa ^ t0 mm ? ' O mortal, descend this mountain and thou
wilt see the gate of a city. Enter it, for thy wife cannot
come at thee there/ So saying, he left him and went his
way, whilst Marouf abode in amazement and perplexity
till the sun rose, when he said in himself, ' I will arise
and go down into the city, for there is no profit in my
abiding here/

So he descended to the mountain-foot and saw a high-
walled city, full of lofty palaces and richly-decorated
buildings, a delight to those who looked upon it. He
entered in at the gate and found it a city such as lightened
the grieving heart ; but, as he walked through the streets,
the townsfolk stared at him and gathered about him s mar-


i87


veiling at his dress, for it was unlike theirs. Presently,
one of them said to him, *0 man, art thou a stranger? 1
And he answered, 'Yes/ 'What countryman art thou?'
asked the other; and Marouf said, *I am from the city
of Cairo the Happy.* Quoth the townsman, ' And when
didst thou leave Cairo ? 1 1 1 left it yesterday,' answered
Marouf, 'at the hour of afternoon-prayer.' Whereupon
the man laughed at him and cried out, saying, ( Come
hither, O folk, and look at this man and hear what he
says ! ' Quoth they, ' What does he say ? * 4 He pretends/
replied the other, 'that he comes from Cairo and left it
yesterday at the hour of afternoon-prayer ! ' At this they
all laughed and gathering round Marouf, said to him,
'O man, art thou mad to talk thus? How canst thou
pretend that thou leftest Cairo at mid-afternoon yesterday
and foundest thyself this morning here, seeing that be-
tween our city and Cairo is a full year's journey ? ' Quoth
he, * None is mad but you. As for me, I speak sooth, for
here is bread that I brought with me from Cairo, and see,
it is yet fresh.' Then he showed them the bread and they
stared at it and marvelled at it, for it was unlike their
country bread.

The crowd increased about him and they said to each
other, ' This is Cairo bread : look at it.' So he became
a gazing stock in the city and some believed him, whilst
others gave him the lie and made mock of him. Presently,
up came a merchant, riding on a mule and followed by
two black slaves, and pressed through the people, saying,
'O folk, are ye not ashamed to mob this foreigner and
make mock of him and laugh at him ? ' And he went on
to rate them, till he drove them away from Marouf, and
none could make him any answer. Then he said to
Marouf, 1 Come, O my brother. No harm shall betide
thee from these folk. Verily they have no shame.' So
he took him and carrying him to a spacious aud richly-


188


decorated house, seated him in a guest-chamber fit for
a king, whilst he gave an order to his slaves, who opened
a chest and brought out to him a dress such as might be
worn by a merchant worth a thousand purses. He clad
him therein and Marouf, being a well-favoured man, be-
came as he were provost of the merchants.

Then his host called for food and they set before them
a tray of all manner rich meats. They ate and drank and
the merchant said to Marouf, * O my brother, what is thy
name ? ' * My name is Marouf/ answered he, ' and I am
a cobbler by trade and mend old shoes. 1 * What country-
man art thou ? ' asked the merchant, and the cobbler said,
'I am from Cairo.' 'What quarter?* asked the other.
Quoth Marouf, 'Dost thou know Cairo?' And the mer-
chant replied, ' I am of its children. 5 1 So Marouf said,
' I come from the Red Street/ ' A.nd whom dost thou
know in the Red Street ? ' asked his host. ' I know such
an one and such an one,' answered Marouf and named
several people to him. Quoth the other, £ Knowest thou
Gaffer Ahmed the druggist ?' £ He was my next neighbour,
wall for wall/ replied the cobbler, * Is he well?' asked
the merchant and Marouf said, ' Yes.' 1 How many sons
hath he ? * asked the merchant. ' Three/ replied Marouf,
' Mustafa, Mohammed and AIL 5 Quoth the other, ' And
what hath God done with them ? ? 1 As for Mustafa,'
answered Marouf, 4 he is well and he is a learned man,
a professor. 8 Mohammed is a druggist and opened him
a shop beside that of his father, after he had married, and
his wife hath borne him a son named Hassan/ f God
gladden thee with good news ! ' 8 said the merchant.

£ As for Ali/ continued Marouf, 4 he was my friend,
when we were boys, and I still played with him. We

1 Le. I am a Cairene.

2 />. in a collegiate mosque.

§ i.e. like as thou hast gladdened me therewith


1 89

used to go in the guise of the children of the Nazarenes
and enter the church and steal the books of the Nazarenes
and sell them and buy food with the price. It chanced
once that the Christians caught us with a book; where-
upon they complained of us to our folk and said to All's
father, " An thou hinder not thy son from troubling us, we
will complain of thee to the king," So he appeased them
and gave Ali a drubbing; wherefore he ran away none
knew whither and he hath now been absent twenty years
and none hath brought news of him.' Quoth the host,
'I am that very Ali, son of Gaffer Ahmed the druggist,
and thou art my playmate Marouf.' So they saluted each
other and Ali said, *Tell me why thou earnest from Cairo
to this city/

So Marouf told him all that had befallen him with his
wife Fatimeh the Shrew and said, * So, when her mischief
waxed on me, I fled from her towards the Gate of Victory
[and went forth the city]. Presently, the rain descended
on me ; so I entered a ruined cell in the Aadiliyeh and
sat there, weeping ; whereupon there came forth to me
the haunter of the place, to wit, an Afrit of the Jinn, and
questioned me. I acquainted him with my case and he
took me on his back and flew with me all night between
heaven and earth, till he set me down on yonder mountain
and gave me to know of the [neighbourhood of this] city.
So I came down from the mountain and entered the city,
whereupon the people crowded about me and questioned
me. I told them that I had left Cairo yesterday, but they
believed me not, and presently thou earnest up and driving
the folk away from me, carriedst me to this house. This,
then, is how I came to leave Cairo ; and thou, how earnest
thou hither ? '

Quoth Ali, 6 Restlessness 1 got hold upon me, when 1
was seven years old, from wWh time I wandered from
1 Or giddiness (taish).


190


land to land and city to city, till I came to this city, the
name whereof is Ikhtiyan el Khuten. 1 I found its people
kindly and hospitable folk, trusting in the poor man and
giving him credit and believing all that he said. So I
said to them, "I am a merchant and have foregone my
baggage and I need a place wherein to bestow it." And
they believed me and assigned me a lodging. Then
I said to them, " Is there any of you will lend me a
thousand dinars, till my baggage arrives, when I will repay
it to him? For I am in want of certain things, ere my
goods come." They gave me what I asked and I went
to the merchants' bazaar, where, seeing goods, I bought
them and sold them next day at a profit of fifty dinars and
bought others. Moreover, I consorted with the folk and
entreated them liberally, so that . they loved me, and I
continued to buy and sell, till I grew rich. And know,
O my brother, that the proverb says, " The world is made
up of ostentation and trickery : and the land where none
knoweth thee, there do whatsoever thou wilt." If thou
say to all who ask thee, " I am a poor man, a cobbler by
trade, and fled from my wife and left Cairo yesterday,"
they will not believe thee and thou wilt be a laughing-
stock among them as long as thou abidest in the city;
whilst, if thou say, " An Afrit brought me hither," they
will take fright at thee and none will come near thee ; for
they will say, " This man is possessed of an Afrit and
harm will betide whoso approacheth him." And this
report will be dishonouring both to thee and to me, for
that they know I come from Cairo/

' How then shall I do ? ' asked Marouf. * I will tell thee
how thou shalt do/ answered Ali, ' so it please God the
Most High. To-morrow I will give thee a thousand dinars
and a mule to ride and a black slave, who shall go before
thee and bring thee to the gate of the merchants' bazaar - f
1 Name of a district in Tartary.


I9i


and do thou go in to them. I will be there sitting amongst
them, and when I see thee, I will rise to thee and salute
thee and kiss thy hand and make much of thee. When-
ever I ask thee of any kind of stuff, saying, " Hast thou
brought with thee aught of such a kind ? " do thou answer,
" Abundance." And if they question me of thee, I will
praise thee and magnify thee in their eyes and say to them,
"Get him a store-house and a shop." Moreover, I will
give thee out for a man of great wealth and generosity ;
and if a beggar come to thee, give him what thou mayst ;
so will they put faith in what I say and believe in thy
greatness and generosity and love thee. Then will I bid
thee to an entertainment and bid all the merchants on
thine account and bring thee and them together, so they
may all know thee and thou them and thou shalt buy and Iftljfjt
sell and give and take with them ; nor will it be long IJCCCCXClf
ere thou become a man of wealth.'

So on the morrow he gave him a thousand dinars and
a suit of clothes and a black slave and mounting him
on a mule, said to him, * God give thee quittance of all
this : 1 for thou art my friend and it behoves me to deal
generously with thee. Have no care ; but put away from
thee the thought of thy wife and name her not to any. 1
6 May God requite thee with good ! ' answered Marouf and
rode on, preceded by the black slave, till the latter brought
him to the gate of the merchants' bazaar, where they were
all seated, and Ali amongst them. When the latter saw
him, he rose and threw himself upon him, saying, [' This
is indeed] a blessed day, O merchant Marouf, O man of
good works and kindness ! ' 2 And he kissed his hand
before the merchants and said to them, ' O my brothers,
I commend to you the merchant Marouf.' So they saluted
him, and Ali signed to them to make much of him, where-
fore he was magnified in their eyes.

1 *•& I make thee gift of all tins. * marcmf.


192


Then Ali helped him to dismount and saluted him;
after which he took the merchants apart, one after another,
and vaunted Marouf to them. * Is this man a merchant ? '
asked they. 'Yes/ answered he; 'and indeed he is the
chiefest of merchants, there lives not a wealthier than
he; for his wealth and that of his father and forefathers
are notorious among the merchants of Cairo. He hath
partners in Hind and Sind and Yemen and is high in
repute for generosity. So know ye his rank and make
much of him and do him service, and know also that his
coming hither is not for the sake of traffic, but to divert
himself with the sight of foreign countries ; for he hath
no need to travel for the sake of gain and profit, having
wealth that fires cannot consume, and I am one of his
servants.' And he went on to extol him, till they set him
above their heads and began to tell one another of his
qualities.

Then they came round about him and offered him
pastry 1 and sherbets, and even the Provost of the Mer-
chants came to him and saluted him ; whilst Ali proceeded
to say to him, in the presence of the merchants, * O my
lord, belike thou hast brought with thee somewhat of such
and such a stuff?' And Marouf answered, 'Abundance. 1
Now Ali had that day shown him various kinds of costly
stuffs and had taught him the names of the different stuffs,
cheap and dear. Then said one of the merchants, ' O my
lord, hast thou brought with thee yellow cloth?' And
Marouf said, * Abundance/ c And gazelles' blood red?'
asked the other. ' Abundance/ replied the cobbler ; and
as often as he asked him of aught, he made him the same
answer. So the other said, *0 merchant Ali, [methinks]

1 &*tourat, lit. a sort of fritters or (Fr.) gdteaux feuilhtis^ commonly
\isea by the inhabitants of Cairo and other Oriental cities ior the
slight meal called fetmr or breakfast, here probably meaning pastry m
general*


*93


if thy countryman had a mind to transport & thousand
loads of costly stuffs, he could do so.' 4 He would take
them from one of his store-houses/ answered Ali, 'and
miss nought thereof/

Presently, up came a beggar and went the round of the
merchants. One gave him a para and another a doit, but
most of them gave him nothing, till he came to Marouf,
who pulled out a handful of gold and gave it to him,
whereupon he blessed him and went away. The merchants
marvelled at this and said, * Verily, this is a king's giving,
for he gave the beggar gold without count; and except
he were a man of vast wealth, he had not given a beggar
a handful of gold/ After awhile, there came to him a
poor woman and he gave her a handful of gold ; where-
upon she went away, blessing him, and told the other
beggars, who came to him ; one after another, and he gave
them each a handful of gold, till he had made an end of
the thousand dinars.

Then he smote hand upon hand and said, 4 God is our
sufficiency and excellent is He in whom we trust V Quoth
the Provost, 4 What ails thee, O merchant Marouf?' And
he answered, 'It seems that the most part of the people
of this city are poor and miserable : had I known this.
I would have brought with me a large sum of money in
my saddle-bags and given alms thereof to the poor. I
fear me I may be long abroad 1 and it is not in my nature
to refuse a beggar ; and I have no money left : so, if a
poor man come to me, what shall I say to him ? ' * Say,
" God provide thee ! " ' 3 said the Provost ; but Marouf
replied, i That is not of my wont and I am vexed because
of this. Would I had other thousand dinars, wherewith

1 There seems some mistake here in the text. The story-teller pro-
bably meant to say, " I fear lest my baggage be long in coming."

2 Formula of refusal, equivalent to the Spanish "Perdon&ne usted
por amor de Dios s hermanol*'

VOL. IX. Ig


194


to give alms till my baggage arrive ! ' ' Have no care for
that,' said the Provost and sending one of his men for
a thousand dinars, gave them to Marouf, who went on
giving them to every beggar who passed till the call to
midday prayer.

Then they entered the mosque and prayed the noonday
prayers, and what was left him of the thousand dinars he
scattered on the heads of the worshippers. This drew
the people's attention to him and they called down
blessings upon him, whilst the merchants marvelled at
the abundance of his generosity and openhandedness.
Then he turned to another merchant and borrowing of him
other thousand dinars, gave these also away, whilst Ali
looked on at what he did, but could not speak. He ceased
not to do thus till the call to afternoon -prayer, when he
entered the mosque and prayed and distributed the rest
of the money. On this wise, by the time they shut the
gate of the bazaar, he had borrowed five thousand dinars
and given them away, saying to every one of whom he
took aught, 'Wait till my baggage arrives, when, if thou
desire gold, I will give thee gold, and if thou desire stuffs,
thou shalt have stuffs ; for I have great plenty.'

At eventide Ali invited Marouf and the rest of the
merchants to an entertainment and seated him in the
place of honour, where he talked of nothing but stuffs
and jewels, and whenever they made mention to him of
aught, he said, ' I have abundance of it ' Next day, he
again repaired to the bazaar, where he improved his
acquaintance with the merchants and borrowed of them
more money, which he gave to the poor : nor did he leave
to do thus twenty days, till he had borrowed threescore
thousand dinars, and still there came no baggage, no, nor
a burning plague [to rid the people of him]. 1 At last the
folk began to clamour for their money and say f ' The
1 A proverbial expression.


1

1

1


1

1


J


i 9 5


merchant Maroufs baggage cometh not How long will
he take people's monies and give them tc the poor?*
And one of them said, 'Methinks we should do well to
speak to his countryman Ali/ So they went to the latter
and said to him, 'O Ali, the merchant Maroufs baggage
cometh not.' * Have patience/ answered he ; ' A cannot
fail to come soon.'

Then he took Marouf aside and said to him, ( O Marouf,
what fashion is this ? Did I bid thee toast the bread or
burn it? 1 The merchants clamour for their money and
tell me that thou owest them threescore thousand dinars s>
which thou hast borrowed and given away to the poor.
How wilt thou satisfy the folk, seeing that thou neither
buyest nor sellest?' 'What matters it?' answered Marouf:.
'And what are threescore thousand dinars? When my
baggage comes, I will pay them in stuffs or In gold and
silver, as they will.' ' God is most great I ' replied Ah\
4 Hast thou then any baggage ? ' And he said, ' Abundance/
* God and the saints requite thee thine impudence ! ' cried
AIL * Did I teach thee this saying, that thou shouldst
repeat it to me? But I will acquaint the folk with thee/
4 Begone and prate not/ answered Marouf. * Am I a poor
man ? I have abundance in my baggage and as soon as it
comes, they shall have their money's worth, two for one ;
I have no need of them/

At this Ali waxed wroth and said, * Unmannerly churl
that thou art, I will teach thee to lie to me and be not
ashamed ! ' ' Do thy worst/ rejoined Marouf. ' They
must wait till my baggage comes, when they shall have
their due and more/ So Ali left him and went away,
saying in himself, £ I praised him before and if I blame
him now, I make myself out a liar and become of those
of whom it is said, " He who praises and [then] blames-
lies twice," 91 And he knew not what to da Presently,,
1 A proverbial expression.


ig6

the merchants came to him and said, '0 Ali, hast thou
spoken to him?* ( folk,' answered he, * I am ashamed
to speak to him, though he owes me a thousand dinars,
Ye consulted me not, when ye lent him your money ; so
ye have no claim on me. Dun him yourselves, and if he
pay you not, complain of him to the king of the city,
saying, " He is an impostor, who hath imposed upon us."
And he will quit you of him.'

So they repaired to the king and told him what had
passed, saying, *0 king of the age, we are perplexed con-
cerning this merchant, whose generosity is excessive ; for
he doth thus and thus, and all he borrows, he gives away
to the poor by handsful. Were he a man of nought, his
heart would not suffer him to lavish gold thus ; and were
he a man of wealth, his good faith had been made mani-
fest to us by the coming of his baggage ; but we see none
of his baggage, albeit he avoucheth that he hath a
baggage-train and hath foregone it; and whenever we
name this or that kind of stuff to him, he answereth, " I
have great plenty of it." Now some time hath past, but
there appeareth no sign of his baggage-train, and he
oweth us threescore thousand dinars, all of which he hath
given away in alms.' And they went on to praise him and
extol his generosity.

Now this king was a very covetous man, more covetous
than Ashab; 1 and when he heard tell of Maroufs gene-
rosity and openhandedness, covetise got the better of him
and he said to his vizier, * Were not this merchant a man
of immense wealth, he had not shown all this munificence.
His baggage-train will assuredly come, whereupon these
merchants will flock to him and he will lavish unto them
wealth galore. Now I have more right to this than they ;
wherefore I have a mind to make friends with him and

1 Proverbial saying. Ashab was an Arab of the Time of Ignorances
whose covetousness became a byword.


197


profess love for him, so that, when his baggage comes, 1
shall get of him what the merchants would have had ; and
I will give him my daughter to wife and join his wealth
to mine.' 'O king of the age/ answered the vizier,
*methinks he is nought but an impostor, and it is the
impostor who ruins the house of the covetous/ ' O vizier/ jbf(gl)t
rejoined the king, 'I will prove him and know if he be an tfCCCOCOr*
impostor or a man of good faith and whether he be a
nursling of fortune or not.' *And how wilt thou prove
him?' asked the vizier. Quoth the king, * I will send for
him and make much of him and give him a jewel which I
have. If he know it and know its price, he is a man
of worth and fortune; but, if he know it not, he is an
impostor and an upstart and I will slay him after the
foulest fashion/

So he sent for Marouf, who came and saluted hira
The king returned his salutation and seating him besid®
himself, said to him, 'Art thou the merchant Marouf?*
'Yes/ answered he. Quoth the king, 'The merchants
pretend that thou owest them threescore thousand dinars.
Is this true?' And Marouf said 'Yes/ 'Then why dost
thou not give them their money ? ' asked the king. 4 Let
them wait till my baggage comes/ replied Marouf, 'and
I will repay them two for one. If they wish for gold, they
shall have gold ; and if they wish for silver, they shall have
silver; or if they prefer merchandise, I will give them
merchandise. Moreover, him to whom I owe a thousand
I will give two thousand in requital of that wherewith
he hath veiled my face before the poor: for I have
abundance/

Then said the king, *0 merchant, take this and look
what is its kind and value/ And he gave him a jewel the
bigness of a hazel-nutj by which he set great store, for
that he had bought it for a thousand dinars and had not
another, Marouf took it and pressing it between his


198

forefinger and thumb, broke it, for it was brittle and would
not brook [pressure]. Quoth the king, 'Why hast thou
broken the jewel? 1 And Marouf laughed and said, 'O
king of the age, this is no jewel. This is but a piece of
stone worth a thousand dinars ; why dost thou style it a
jewel? A jewel, save the mark, is such as is worth
threescore and ten thousand dinars, and this is called but
a piece of stone. A jewel that is not of the bigness of
a walnut hath no value in my eyes and I take no account
thereof. How comes it, then, that thou, who art a king,
stylest this a jewel, when it is but a piece of stone worth
a thousand dinars? But ye are excusable, for that ye are
poor and have not in your possession things of price/ i O
merchant/ said the king, ' hast thou jewels such as those
whereof thou speakest?' And he answered, * Abundance.'
Whereupon covetise overcame the king and he said, 4 Wilt
thou give me real jewels?' 'When my baggage-train
comes,' replied Marouf, ' I will give thee jewels galore ;
and all that thou canst desire I have in plenty and will
give thee, without price/

At this the king rejoiced and said to the merchants,
' Go your ways and have patience with him, till his baggage
arrives, when do ye come to me and receive your monies
from me/ So they went away and the king turned to his
vizier and said to him, ' Caress the merchant Marouf and
give and take with him in talk and bespeak him of my
daughter, that he may marry her and so we gain these
xiches of his/ 'O king of the age/ answered the vizier,
4 this man's fashion liketh me not and methinks he is an
impostor and a liar : so do thou leave this whereof thou
speakest, lest thou lose thy daughter for nought/

Now this vizier had urged the king aforetime to give
him his daughter to wife and he was willing to do so 9
but she consented not to marry him. So the king said to
himj *0 traitor, thou desirest no good for me, for that


199


aforetime thou soughtest my daughter in marriage, but
she would none of thee; so now thou wouldst stop the
way of her marriage and wouldst have her lie fallow, that
thou mayst take her; but hear from me this word, once
for all. Thou hast no concern with this matter. How
can he be an impostor and a liar, seeing that he knew the
price of the jewel, even that for which I bought it, and
broke it, for that it pleased him not? He hath jewels
galore, and when he goes in to my daughter and sees her
to be fair, she will captivate his reason and he will love
her and give her jewels and things of price : but, as for
thee, thou wouldst forbid my daughter and myself these
good things. 1

The vizier was silent, for fear of the king's anger,
and said to himself, 'Set the dogs on the oxen!' 1 Then
he betook himself to Marouf and said to him, ' His high-
ness the king loveth thee and hath a daughter, a fair and
lovesome lady, to whom he is minded to marry thee.
What sayst thou?' ' I will well/ answered Marouf; 'but
let him wait till my baggage comes, for the dowry of
kings' daughters is large and their rank demandeth that
they be not endowed save with a dowry befitting their
station. At present I have no money with me till the
coming of my baggage, for I have wealth galore and
needs must I make her marriage-portion five thousand
purses. Then I shall need a thousand purses to distribute
amongst the poor and needy, on my wedding-night, and
other thousand to give to those who walk in the bridal
procession and yet other .thousand wherewith to provide
victual for the troops and others. Moreover, I shall want
a hundred jewels to give to the princess on the wedding
morning 8 and other hundred to distribute among the

1 i.e. show a covetous man money — and hold him back, if you can.

2 i.e. the morning after the wedding. The Arab day is the evening
and the morning, not (as with us) the morning and the evening.


200


slave-girls and eunuchs, for I must give each of them
& jewel in honour of the bride ; besides wherewithal to
clothe a thousand naked poor folk, and alms too must be
given. All this cannot be done till my baggage comes ;
but I have abundance, and once it is here, I shall make
no account of all this expense.'

The vizier returned to the king and told him what
Marouf said, whereupon quoth he, 1 Since this is his wish,
how canst thou style him an impostor and a liar ? ' ' And
I cease not to say this/ replied the vizier. But the
king chid him angrily and berated him, saying, 'As my
head liveth, if thou leave not this talk, I will slay thee !
Go back to him and fetch him to me and I will settle with
him myself.' So the vizier returned to Marouf and said
to him, ' Come and speak with the king.' ' I hear and
obey/ replied Marouf and went in^to the king, who said
to him, 'Thou shalt not put me off with these excuses,
for my treasury is full ; so take the keys and spend all
thou needest and give what thou wilt and clothe the poor
and do thy desire and have no care for the girl and the
waiting-women. When thy baggage comes, do what thou
wilt with thy wife, by way of generosity, and we will have
patience with thee for the marriage-portion till then, for
there is no manner of difference betwixt me and thee/

Then he sent for the Sheikh el Islam and bade him
draw up the contract of marriage between his daughter
and the merchant Marouf, and he did so; after which
the king gave the signal for the commencement of the
wedding festivities and commanded to decorate the city.
The drums beat and the tables were spread with meats of
all kinds and there came mimes and mountebanks and
players, Marouf sat upon a throne in a gallery and the
mimes and mountebanks and jugglers and dancing-men
and posture -makers and acrobats came before him, whilst
he called out to the treasurer and said to him, ' Bring gold


201


and silver.' So he brought gold and silver and Marouf
went round among the merrymakers and gave to each
performer by the handful Moreover, he gave alms to the
poor and needy and clad the naked and it was a clamorous
festival. The treasurer could not bring money fast enough
from the treasury, and the vizier's heart was like to burst
for rage ; but he dared not say a word, whilst Ali marvelled
at this waste of wealth and said to Marouf, * God and the
saints [visit this] upon thy head ! Doth it not suffice
thee to squander the merchants' money, but thou must
squander that of the king to boot ? ' ' It is none of thy
concern,' replied Marouf ; * when my baggage comes, I
will requite the king manifold.' And he went on lavishing
money and saying in himself, ' A burning plague ! What
will happen will happen and there is no escape from that
which is decreed/

The festivities ceased not for the space of forty days,
and on the one-and- fortieth day, they made the bride's
procession and all the amirs and troops walked before 1
her. When they brought her in before Marouf, he fell
to scattering gold on the people's heads, and they made
her a magnificent procession, whilst Marouf expended in
her honour vast sums of money. Then they brought him
in to her and he sat down on the high divan ; after which
they let fall the curtains and shut the doors and withdrew,
leaving him alone with his bride ; whereupon he smote
hand upon hand and sat awhile sorrowful and saying,
* There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! ' Till the princess said to him, ' O
my lord, God preserve thee! What ails thee, that thou
art troubled?' Quoth he, *And how should I be other
than troubled, seeing that thy father hath embarrassed me
and done with me that which is like the burning of green
corn?* 'And what hath my father done with thee ? ;
asked she. 6 Tell me.' And he answered, * He hath


202


brought me in to thee before the coming of my baggage,
and I wanted at least a hundred jewels to distribute among
thy women, to each a jewel, so she might rejoice therein
and say, "My lord gave me a jewel on the night of his
going in to my lady." This would I have done in honour
of thy station and for the increase of thy dignity; and
I have no need to stint myself in lavishing jewels, for I
have great plenty of them.' ' Be not concerned for that/
rejoined she. ' Trouble not thyself about me, for I will
have patience with thee till thy baggage comes, and as
for my women, have no care for them. Rise, put off
thy clothes and take thine ease; and when the baggage
comes, we shall get the jewels and the rest 1

So he arose and putting off his clothes, sat down on the
bed and sought dalliance and they fell to toying with each
other. He laid his hand on her knee and she sat down
in his lap and thrust her lip into his mouth, and that hour
was such as maketh man forget father and mother. So
he took her in his arms and strained her fast to his breast
and sucked her lip, till the honey ran out into his mouth ;
and he laid his hand under her left armpit, whereupon
his bowels and hers yearned unto coition. Then he
clapped her between the breasts and his hand slid down
between her thighs and she girdled [him] with her legs,
whereupon he made proof of the two members and crying
out, ' O father of the chin-veils !' applied the priming and
kindling the linstock, set it to the touch-hole and gave fire
and breached the citadel of the four buttresses ; so there
befell the event concerning which there is no asking and
jWtgT)t she cried the cry that needs must be cried
tolCXUb. So he did away her maidenhead and that night was one
not to be reckoned among lives for that which it com-
prised of the enjoyment of the fair, clipping and dallying
and sucking [of lips] and clicketing till the morning, when
he arose and entered the bath, whence, after donning a suit


203


of royal apparel, he betook himself to the king f s divan,
All who were there rose to him and received him with
honour and worship, giving him joy and calling down
blessings upon him ; and he sat down by the king's side
and said, * Where is the treasurer?' 'Here he is, before
thee/ answered they, and he said to him, 'Bring dresses
of honour for all the viziers and amirs and dignitaries
and clothe them therewith/ The treasurer brought him
all he sought and he sat giving to all who came to him and
handselling every man, according to his station.

On this wise he abode twenty days, whilst no baggage
appeared for him nor aught else, till the treasurer was
straitened by him to utterance 1 and going in to the king,
as he sat alone with the vizier in MarouPs absence, kissed
the earth before him and said, f O king of the age, needs
must I tell thee somewhat, lest thou blame -me for that
I acquainted thee not therewith. Know that the treasury
is [well-nigh] exhausted; there is but a little money left
in it and in ten days more we shall shut it upon empti
ness.' Quoth the king to the vizier, 'O vizier, verily
my son-in-law's baggage-train tarrieth long and there
appeareth no news thereof.' The vizier laughed and
said, ' God be gracious to thee, O king of the age !
Verily, thou hast dealt but heedlessly with respect to this
lying impostor. As thy head liveth, there is no baggage
for him, no, nor a plague to rid us of him ! Nay, he hath
but imposed on thee without cease, so that he hath wasted
thy treasures and married thy daughter for nought. How
long therefore wilt thou be heedless of this liar ? ' 2

Then said the king, 4 O vizier, how shall we do to learn
the truth of his case?' 'O king of the age/ answered
the vizier, ' none may come at a man's secret but his wife ;
so send for thy daughter and let her come behind the

1 i.e. found the utmost difficulty in satisfying his demands.
a how long wilt thou be blind to his real character?


204


curtain, that I may question her of the truth of his estate,
to the intent that she may make proof of him and acquaint
us with his case/ Quoth the king, 4 There is no harm in
that ; and as my head liveth, if it appear that he is a liar
and an impostor, I will slay him by the foulest of deaths ! *
Then he carried the vizier into the sitting-chamber and
sent for his daughter, who came behind the curtain, her
husband being absent, and said, 'What wouldst thou,
O my father ? ' Quoth he, c Speak with the vizier.'

So she said, 'What is thy will, O vizier?' 'O my
lady,' said he, 'thou must know that thy husband hath
squandered thy father's substance and married thee with-
out a dower ; and he ceases not to promise us and fail of
the fulfilment of his promises, nor comes there any tidings
of his baggage ; wherefore we would have thee inform us
concerning him.' 1 ' Indeed,' answered she, 'his words
are many, and he still comes and promises me jewels and
things of price and costly stuffs ; but I see nothing.' ' O
my lady/ said the vizier, 'canst thou this night give and
take with him in talk and say to him, " Tell me the truth
and fear nothing from me, for thou art become my
husband and I will not transgress against thee. So ac-
quaint me with the truth of the matter and I will contrive
thee a device whereby thou shalt be set at rest." And
do thou play fast and loose with him and profess love to
him and win him to confess and after tell us the true state
of his case/ And she answered, ' O father mine, I know
how I will make proof of him/

Then she went away and after nightfall, her husband
came in to her, according to his wont, whereupon she
rose to him and took him under the armpit and wheedled
him full featly, for women are never at a loss for wiles,
whenas they would aught of men. She ceased not to
caress him and beguile him with speech sweeter than
z.£. tell us what thou knowest of Mb&,


205


honey till she stole his reason; and when she saw that he
altogether inclined to her, she said to him, * O my beloved,
O solace of my eyes and fruit of my entrails, may God not
bereave [me] of thee nor Time sunder us twain ! Indeed,
the love of thee hath taken up its abode in my entrails
and my heart is consumed with the fire of passion ; never
will I forsake thee nor transgress against thee : but I
would have thee tell me the truth, for that the devices of
falsehood profit not, nor do they gain credit at all seasons.
How long wilt thou impose upon ray father and lie to
him? Indeed, I fear lest thine affair be discovered to
him, ere we can contrive a device thereunto, and he lay
violent hands upon thee* So tell me the truth of the case
and fear not aught of harm, for nought shall betide thee
save that which shall rejoice thee. How much longer
wilt thou pretend that thou art a merchant and a man of
wealth and hast a baggage-train? This long while past
thou sayest, " My baggage I my baggage ! " but there
appeareth no sign of thy baggage, and anxiety on this
account is visible in thy face. So, if there be no truth in
thy words, tell me and I will devise thee a means whereby,
God willing, thou shalt come off safe.'

*0 my lady/ answered he, £ l will tell thee the truths
and do thou whatever thou wilt.' 'Speak,' rejoined she,
c and look thou speak truly ; for truth is the ark of safety,
and beware of falsehood, for it dishonoured him who
speaketh it, and gifted of God is he who saith :

Truth-speaking on thee is incumbent, although It hiring thee to bum on

the brazier of woe.
Seek God's favour: who angers the Lord and contents The slave is the

silliest of mortals, I trow.'

' Know, then, O my lady/ said he, 'that I am no mer-
chant and have no baggage, no 9 nor a burning plague]
nay, I was but a cobbler in my own country and had
a wife called Fatimeh the Shrew, with whom there befell


206


me this and that.' And he told her his story from
beginning to end ; whereat she laughed and said, ' Verily,
thou art skilled in the practice of lying and imposture 1 '
And he answered, saying, ' O my lady, may God the Most
High preserve thee to veil faults and dispel troubles ! '

'Know/ rejoined she, 'that thou imposedst upon my
father and deceivedst him by thy much boasting and
ostentation, so that of his covetousness he married me
to thee. Then thou squanderedst his wealth and the vizier
bears thee a grudge for this. How many a time hath he
spoken against thee to my father, saying, " Indeed he is
an impostor and a liar!" But my father hearkened not to
his speech, for that he sought me aforetime in marriage
and I consented not to be his wife. However, the time
grew long upon my father and he became straitened 1 and
said to me, " Make him confess," So I have made thee
confess and that which was covered is discovered. Now
my father purposes thee mischief, because of this; but
thou art become my husband and I will never abandon
thee nor transgress against thee. If I told my father what
I have learnt from thee, he would be certified of thy false-
hood and imposture and that thou imposest upon kings'
daughters and squanderest their wealth : so would thine
offence find no pardon with him and he would slay thee
without recourse: wherefore it would be noised among
the folk that I had married a man who was a liar and an
impostor and this would dishonour me. Moreover, if he
kill thee, most like he will require to marry me to another,
and to that I will never consent, no, not though I die.

So rise now and don a slave's habit and take these fifty
thousand dinars of my monies, and mount a swift charger
and get thee to a land over which my father hath no
dominion. Then do thou set up for a merchant and send
me a letter by a courier, who shall bring it me privily, that
1 In purse or breast or both*


20/


I may know where thou art, so I may send thee all I can

lay my hand on. Thus shall thy wealth wax great and if
my father die, I will send for thee, and thou shalt return
in honour and worship ; and if we die, thou or I [and
depart] to the mercy of God the Most High, the Resur
rection will unite us. This, then, is the right counsel :
and what while we both abide [alive and] well, I will not
leave to send thee letters and monies. Arise, ere the day
break upon thee and thou be confounded and perdition
encompass thee/

' O my lady,' said he, i I beseech thee of thy favour
to bid me farewell with thine embracement.' And she
answered, 'I will welL' So he swived her and made the
[complete] ablution ; then, donning a slave's habit, he
bade the grooms saddle him a thoroughbred horse. So
they saddled him a courser and he mounted and taking
leave of his wife, rode forth the city at the last of the
night, whilst all who saw him deemed him one of the
Sultan's slaves going abroad on an errand.

Next morning, the king and his vizier repaired to the
sitting-chamber and sent for the princess, who came
behind the curtain ; and her father said to her, f O my
daughter, what sayst thou?' Quoth she, 'I say, may God
blacken thy vizier's face, for that he would have blackened
my face in my husband's eyes I ' i How so ? ' asked the
king; and she said, ' He came in to me yesterday; but,
before I could name the matter to him, in came Ferej the
eunuch, with a letter in his hand, and said, "Ten white
slaves stand under the window and have given me this
letter, saying, £ Kiss for us the hands of our lord the
merchant Marouf and give him this letter, for we are of
his servants with the baggage, and it is told us that he
hath married the king's daughter, wherefore we are come
to acquaint him with that which befell us by the way.'"
So I took the letter and read as follows : " From the five


208


hundred slaves to his highness our lord the merchant
Marouf. To proceed. We give thee to know that, after
thou quittedst us, the Arabs came out upon us and attacked
us. They were two thousand horse and we five hundred
servants and there befell a sore battle between us and
them. They took from us of the baggage two hundred
loads of stuffs and slew of us fifty men. Moreover, they
tfcCftn*)! hindered us from the road thirty days and this is the cause
UCCCCXCu* of our tarrying from thee/'

When my husband heard this, " God disappoint them P
quoth he. " What ailed them to wage war with the
Arabs for the sake of two hundred loads of merchandise?
What are two hundred loads? It behoved them not
to tarry on that account, for the value of the two hundred
loads is but some seven thousand dinars. But needs must
I go to them and hasten them. As for that which the
Arabs have taken, it will not be missed from the baggage,
nor doth it concern me a jot, for I reckon it as if I had
given them an alms thereof." Then he went down from
me, laughing and taking no concern for the loss of his
goods nor the slaughter of his slaves. As soon as he was
gone, I looked out from the lattice and saw the ten slaves
who had brought him the letter, as they were moons, each
clad in a suit worth two thousand dinars, there is not with
my father a slave to match one of them. He went forth
with them to bring up his baggage and praised be God
who hindered me from saying to him aught of that thou
badest me, for he would have made mock of me and thee,
and belike he would have looked on me with the eye of
disparagement and hated me. But the fault is all with thy
vizier, who speaketh against my husband words that be-
seem him not.' £ my daughter,' replied the king, 'thy
husband's wealth is indeed immense and he recks not of
it ; for, from the day he entered our city, he hath done
nought but give alms to the poor. God willing, he will


209


speedily return with the baggage, and great good shall
betide us from him.' And he went on to appease her and
chide the vizier, being duped by her device.

Meanwhile Marouf fared on into the open country, per-
plexed and knowing not to what land he should betake
himself ; and for the anguish of parting and the pangs of
passion and love-longing, he lamented and recited the
following verses :

Fortune hath played our union false and rent our loves in twain ; My

heart's dissolved and all on fire for separation's pain.
Mine eyes with many a tear-drop rain for my beloved's loss ; This, then,

is severance ; ah, when shall meeting be again ?
O shining full-moon face, I'm he whose entrails for thy love Thou leftest

torn with waste desire, a love-distracted swain.
Would I had never met with thee, since, after the delight Of thy pos-
session, needs the cup of misery I must drain !
Marouf will never cease to be for Dunya's 1 love distraught : Still may

she live, though he should die, of very passion slain \
thou whose visage radiant is as the resplendent sun, Succour his heart

that's all consumed with love-longing in vain.
Will Fate, I wonder, e'er reknit our separated loves And shall we ever

of the days union and gladness gain ?
Shall my love's mansion reunite us two in joy and I The sapling of the

sands 3 once more in my embraces strain ?
Bright visage of the moon at full, ne'er may thy countenance, The sun

of me thy lover, leave with charms to shine amain 1
With passion and its cares content am I, since happiness In love's the

butt whereat ill-fate to shoot its shafts is fain.

Then he wept sore, for indeed the ways were blocked
up in his sight and death seemed to him better than life,

1 Apparently the name of the princess. Dunya (the world, or the
fortune of the world) Is not an infrequent name for an Arab beauty
See ante, passim.

3 A common similitude for a slender and graceful youth of either scse.
The allusion is to the slenderness of the upper part of the body, spring-
ing as it were) from the heavy buttocks, as a sapling springs from a
mound of sand.

VOL. IX. 14


2IO


and he fared on, like a drunken man for excess of per-
plexity, and stayed not till noontide, when he came to-
a little town and saw a husbandman hard by, ploughing
with a yoke of bulls. Now hunger was sore upon him ;
so he went up to the ploughman and said to him, * Peace
be on thee ! ' The peasant returned his salutation and
said to him, ' Welcome, O my lord ! Art thou one of the-
Sultan's officers ? ' * Yes,' answered Marouf; and the other
said, 1 Alight with me, that I may entertain thee.' Where-
upon Marouf knew him to be a liberal man and said to
him, ' O my brother, I see with thee nought wherewith
thou mayst feed me ; how is it, then, that thou invitest
me?' 'Omy lord,' answered the peasant, 'good is at
hand. Alight here : the town is near at hand and I will-
go [thither] and fetch thee the noon-meal and fodder for
thy horse.' ' Since the town is near at hand,' rejoined
Marouf, ' I can go thither as quickly as thou and buy me
what I have a mind to in the market and eat* 'O my
lord,' answered the peasant, * the place is b it a little
village and there is no market there, neither selling nor
buying. So, I conjure thee by Allah, alight here with me
and heal my heart, and I will go thither and return to thee
in haste.'

So he alighted and the peasant left him and went
off to the village, to fetch him the noonday meal, whilst
Marouf abode awaiting him. Presently he said to himself,.
4 1 have diverted this poor man from his work ; but I will
arise and plough in his stead, till he come back, to make
up for having hindered him from his work/ So he took
the plough and starting the bulls, ploughed a little, till
the share struck against something and the beasts stopped
He urged them on, but they could not move the plough ;
so he looked at the share and finding it caught in a ring,
of gold, cleared away the soil therefrom and saw that it
was set amiddleward an alabaster flag, the bigness of the


nether millstone. He strove at the stone till he pulled
it from its place, when there appeared beneath it an
underground stair. So he descended the stair and came
to a place like a bath, with four raised recesses, the first
full of gold, from floor to roof, the second full of emeralds
and pearls and coral, the third of jacinths and rubies and
turquoises and the fourth of diamonds and all manner
other precious stones. At the upper end of the place
stood a coffer of pure crystal, full of unique jewels, each
the size of a walnut, and thereon lay a casket of gold, the
bigness of a lemon.

When he saw this, he marvelled and rejoiced with an
exceeding joy and said in himself, ' I wonder what is in
this casket ? ' So he opened it and found therein a seal-
ring of gold, whereon were graven names and talismans,
as they were ant-tracks. He rubbed the ring and im-
mediately a voice said, ' Here am I, at thy service, O my
lord! Ask and it shall be given unto thee. Wilt thou
build a town or lay waste a city or kill a king or dig a
river or aught of the kind ? Whatsoever thou seekest,
it shall come to pass, by leave of the Omnipotent King,
Creator of night and day.' ' O creature of my Lord,'
asked Marouf, * who and what art thou ? ' Quoth the
other, * I am the servant of the ring, abiding in the service
of him who possesseth it. Whatsoever he seeketh, that
accomplish I unto him, and I have no excuse in that he
biddeth me do ; for that I am Sultan over two-and-seventy
tribes of the Jinn, each two-and-seventy thousand in
number, every one of whom ruleth over a thousand Marids,
each Marid over a thousand Afrits, each Afrit over a
thousand Satans and each Satan over a thousand Jinn :
and they are all under my commandment and may not
gainsay me. As for me, I am enspelled to this seal-ring
and may not gainsay him who possesseth it. Now, behold ?
hou hast gotten possession of it and I am become thy


212


servant; so ask wij.it thou wilt, for I hearken to thy word
and obey thy commandment; and if thou have need of me
at any time, by land or by sea, rub the ring and thou wilt
find me with thee. But beware of rubbing it twice in
succession, or thou wilt consume me with the fire of the
names [graven thereon] ; so wouldst thou lose me and
after regret me. Now have I acquainted thee with my
case and peace be on thee ! '
5CtC$t £ What is thy name ? ' asked Marouf, and the genie
OlfXCXCut. answered, ' Aboussaadat/ 4 O Aboussaadat,' said Marouf,
* what is this place and who enchanted thee in this casket ?*
' O my lord,' replied he, ' this is a treasure called the
Treasure of Sheddad son of Aad, him who builded Irem
of the Columns, the like whereof was not made in the
lands,* I was his servant in his lifetime and this is his
seal-ring, which he laid up in his treasure; but it is thy
lot.' Quoth Marouf, ' Canst thou transport that which
is in the treasure to the surface of the earth ? ' ' Yes/
answered the genie. * Nothing easier.' 'Then,' said
Marouf, 1 bring it forth and leave nothing.' So the genie
signed with his hand to the ground, which clove asunder,
and he descended and was absent a little while. Presently,
there came forth young and graceful boys, with fair faces,
bearing golden baskets full of gold, which they emptied
out and going away, returned with more : nor did they
cease to transport the gold and jewels, till, in a little, they
said, < There is nought left in the treasure/ Whereupon
out came Aboussaadat and said to Marouf, * O my lord,
thou seest that we have brought forth all that was in the
treasure/

* Who are these beautiful boys ? ' asked Marouf, and the
genie answered, ' They are my sons. This affair merited
not that I should call together the Marids for it, wherefore
mj sons have done thine occasion and are honoured by

1 Koran lxxxix. 6, 7.


L


213


serving thee. So ask what thou wilt beside this.' Quoth
Marouf, ( Canst thou bring me mules and chests and fill
the chests with the treasure and load them on the mules ? '

* Nothing easier/ answered Aboussaadat and gave a great
cry ; whereupon his sons presented themselves before
him, to the number of eight hundred, and he said to them,

* Let some of you take the form of mules and others of
muleteers and servants and handsome white slaves, the like
of the least of whom is not found with any of the kings.'
So seven hundred of them changed themselves into pack
mules and other hundred took the form of servants. Then
Aboussaadat called upon his Marids, who presented them-
selves before him, and he commanded some of them to
assume the semblance of horses saddled with saddles of
gold set with jewels. [They did as he bade them], which
when Marouf saw, he said, ' Where are the chests ? ' They
brought them before him and he said, ' Pack the gold and
the jewels, each kind by itself So they packed them and
loaded three hundred mules with them.

Then said Marouf, *0 Aboussaadat, canst thou bring
me some loads of costly stuffs ? ' Quoth the genie, ( Wilt
thou have Egyptian stuffs or Syrian or Persian or Indian
or Greek?' ' Bring me a hundred loads of each kind/
answered Marouf, ' on five hundred mules/ * O my lord/
said Aboussaadat, * grant me time that I may dispose my
Marids for this and send a company of them to each
country to fetch a hundred loads of its stuffs and then
take the form of mules and return, carrying the stuffs/
' What time dost thou want ? ' asked Marouf. f The time
of the blackness of the night/ answered Aboussaadat,
( and day shall not dawn ere thou have all thou seekest/

* I grant thee this time/ said Marouf and bade them pitch
him a tent. So they pitched him a tent and he sat down
therein and they brought him a table of food. Then said
Aboussaadat to him, € O my lord s abide thou in this tent


214


and these my sons shall guard thee : so fear thou nothing ;
for I go to assemble my Marids and send them to do thy
desire.' So saying, he departed, leaving Marouf seated
in the tent, with the table before him and the genie's
sons in attendance upon him, in the guise of slaves and
servants.

Presently up came the husbandman, with a great platter
of lentils and a nose-bag full of barley, and seeing the tent
pitched and the slaves standing, with their hands upon
their breasts, thought that the Sultan was come and had
halted there. So he stood confounded and said in him-
self, ' Would I had killed a pair of chickens and fried
them with butter for the Sultan ! ' And he would have
turned back to kill the chickens, to regale the Sultan
withal ; but Marouf saw him and cried out to him and
said to the slaves, ' Bring him hither.' So they brought
him and his load before Marouf, who said to him, ' What
is this ? ' 'This is thy noon meal and thy horse's fodder,'
replied the peasant. 1 Excuse me, for I thought not that
the Sultan would come hither; and had I known this,
I would have killed a pair of chickens and entertained
him handsomely/ Quoth Marouf, ' The Sultan is not
come, I am his son-in-law and I was vexed with him.
However, he hath sent his officers to make his peace with
me, and now I am minded to return to the city. But thou
hast made me this guest-meal, without knowing me, and
I accept it from thee, lentils though it be, and will not eat
save of thy cheer.'

So he bade him set the platter midmost the table and
ate of it till he had enough, whilst the husbandman filled
his belly with those rich meats. Then Marouf washed his
hands and gave the servants leave to eat. So they fell
upon the remains of the meal and ate ; and when the
platter was empty, he filled it with gold and gave it to
the peasant, saying, * Carry this to thy dwelling and come


215


to me in the city, and I will entreat thee with honour/
So he took the platter full of gold and returned to the
village, driving the bulls before him and deeming himself
kin to the king. Meanwhile, they brought Marouf girls
of the brides of the treasure, 1 who smote on instruments
of music and danced before him, and he passed the night
in joyance and delight, a night not to be reckoned among
lives.

Hardly had the day dawned when there arose a great
cloud of dust, which, presently lifting, discovered seven
hundred mules laden with stuffs and attended by muleteers
and baggage-tenders and linkmen. With them came
Aboussaadat, riding on a mule, in the guise of a caravan-
leader, and before him was a travelling-litter, with four
volutes of glittering red gold, set with jewels. When
Aboussaadat came up to the tent, he dismounted and
kissing the earth, said to Marouf, * O my lord, thine
occasion hath been accomplished in full, and in the litter
is a treasure-suit that hath not its match among kings'
raiment: so do thou don it and mount the litter and
command us what thou wilt.* Aboussaadat,' said

Marouf, *I wish thee to go to the city of Ikhtiyan el
Khuten and carry a letter, which I will write thee, to my
father-in-law the king; and go thou not in to him but
in the guise of a mortal courier/ And he answered, 'I
hear and obey.'

So Marouf wrote the letter and sealed it and Abous-
rsaadat took it and set out to deliver it to the king. When
he arrived, he found the king saying, ' O vizier, indeed my
-heart is concerned for my son-in-law and I fear lest the
Arabs slay him. Would he had told me whither he was
bound, that I might have followed him with the troops ! '
6 May God have mercy on this thy heedlessness ! ' answered
•the vizier. 6 As thy head liveth, the fellow saw that we
1 See note, Vol. VI. p. 237.


2l6


were awake to him and feared exposure and fled, for he
is nothing but a lying impostor ! ' At this moment in
came the courier and kissing the earth before the king,
wished him abiding glory and prosperity and length of
life. Quoth the king, 'Who art thou and what is thy
business ? ' 'I am a courier,' answered the genie, ' whom
thy son-in-law sendeth to thee with a letter, and he is
come with the baggage.' So he took the letter and read
therein these words, ' Peace to the utterest upon our father-
in-law the glorious king ! Know that I am at hand with
the baggage-train : so come thou forth to meet me with
the troops. '

Quoth the king, £ God blacken thy face, O vizier i
How often wilt thou asperse my son-in-law's honour and
call him a liar and an impostor? Behold, he is come
with the baggage-train and thou art but a traitor.' The
vizier hung his head in shame and confusion and said, 'Q
king of the age, I said this but because of the long delay
of the baggage and because I feared the loss of the wealth
he hath spent.' * O traitor/ answered the king, ' what
matter my riches, now that his baggage is come? For
he will give me great plenty in their stead.' Then he
bade decorate the city and going in to his daughter, said
to her, * Good news for thee i Thy husband will be here
anon with his baggage; for he hath sent me a letter to
that effect and I am now going forth to meet him. 5 The
princess marvelled at this and said to herself, 'This is a
strange thing 1 Was he laughing at me and making mock
of me, or had he a mind to try me, when he told me that
he was a poor man? . But praised be God for that I failed
not of my duty to him ! '

Meanwhile, Ali the Cairene saw the decoration of the
city and asked the cause thereof, when they said to him,
< The baggage-train of the merchant Marouf, the king's
son-in-law, is come.' £ God is most great!' cried he*


217


What a calamity is this man He came to me, fleeing
from his wife, and he was a poor man. Whence then
should he get a baggage-train? But belike this is a
device that the king's daughter hath contrived him, for
fear of disgrace, and kings can do anything. May God
the Most High screen him and not expose him ! ' And Ntgf)t
all the merchants rejoiced and were glad for that they llCCCCXCtjfi
would >get their money. Then the king assembled his
troops and rode forth, whilst Aboussaadat returned to
Marouf and acquainted him with the accomplishment of
nis errand. Quoth Marouf, 1 Bind on the loads.' So they
bound them on and he mounted the litter and donning
the treasure-suit, became a thousand times greater and
more majestic than the king.

Then he set forward ; but, when he had gone half-way,
the king met him with the troops, and seeing him riding
in the litter and clad in the dress aforesaid, threw himself
upon him and saluted him and greeted him with the greet-
ing of peace. Moreover, all the grandees of the realm
saluted him and it was made manifest that he had spoken
the truth and that there was no falsehood in him. Then
he entered the city in such state as would have caused
the gall-bladder of the lion to burst 8 and the merchants
pressed up to him and kissed his hands, whilst Ali said to
him, ' Thou hast played off this trick and it has prospered
to thy hand, O Sheikh of impostors 1 But thou deservest
it, and may God the Most High increase thee of His
bounty ! '

Marouf laughed and entering the palace, sat down on
the throne and said, 'Carry the loads of gold into the
treasury of my uncle the king and bring me the bales of
stuffs.' So they brought him the bales and opened them

1 i.e. what a clever fellow is this, what a calamity to his enemies S
s For awe. I think it very probable that, by a clerical or typogra*
g>hical error, the word a&d (lion) has been substituted for hasid (envious).


218


before him, bale after bale, till they had opened the seven
hundred loads ; whereupon he chose out the best and said,
* Carry these to the princess, that she may distribute them
among her women; and carry her also this coffer of
jewels, that she may distribute them among her women
and eunuchs.' Then he proceeded to give the merchants
to whom he was indebted stuffs in payment for their debts,
giving him, whose due was a thousand, stuffs worth two
thousand or more ; after which he fell to distributing to
the poor and needy, whilst the king looked on and could
not hinder him ; nor did he leave giving till he had made
an end of the seven hundred loads, when he turned to
the troops and proceeded to distribute amongst them
emeralds and rubies and pearls and coral and other
jewels by handsful, without count, till the king said to
him, 'Enough of this giving, O my son 1 There is but little
left of the baggage.' Quoth Marouf, * I have abundance ; '
and indeed, his good faith was become manifest and none
could belie him more ; and he had come to reck not of
giving, for that the servant of the ring brought him what-
soever he sought.

Presently, the treasurer came in to the king and said,
' O king of the age, the treasury is full and will not hold
the rest of the loads. Where shall we lay that which is
■left of the gold and jewels?' And he assigned to him
another place. As for the princess, when she saw this,
her joy redoubled and she marvelled and said in herself,
'How came he by all this wealth? 7 In like manner the
merchants rejoiced in that which he had given them and
■blessed him ; whilst Ali wondered and said in himself,
■' How hath he lied and swindled, that he hath gotten him
all these treasures? But how excellent is the saying of
him who saith :

Whenas the King of Kings presents, Forbear to question why or whence.
God gives to whom He will j so keep Within the bounds of reverence/


219


The king also marvelled passing measuie at that which
he saw of Maroufs generosity and openhandedness in
the lavishment of wealth. Then he went in to his wife,
who met him, smiling and joyful, and kissed his hand,
saying, * Didst thou mock me or hadst thou a mind to try
me with thy saying, "I am a poor man and a fugitive from
my wife?" Praised be God for that I failed not of my
duty to thee ! For thou art my beloved and there is none
dearer to me than thou, whether thou be rich or poor.
But I would have thee tell me what thou soughtest by
these words.' * I wished to try thee/ answered Marouf,
'and see whether thy love were sincere or for the sake
of wealth and the lust of worldly good. But now it is
become manifest to me that thy love is sincere, so welcome
to thee ! I know thy worth.'

Then he went apart into a place by himself and rubbed
the ring, whereupon Aboussaadat presented himself and
said to him, ' Here am I, at thy service ! Ask what thou
wilt.' Quoth Marouf, C I want a treasure-suit and treasure-
trinkets for my wife, including a necklace of forty unique
jewels.' * I hear and obey,' answered the genie and
brought him what he sought, whereupon Marouf dis-
missed him and carrying the dress and ornaments in to
his wife, laid them before her and said, ' Take these and
put them on and welcome ! ' When she saw this, her
reason fled for joy, and she found among the ornaments
a pair of anklets of gold, set with jewels, of the handiwork
of the magicians, and bracelets and earrings and a girdle
such as no money could buy. So she donned the dress
and ornaments and said to Marouf, 'O my lord, I will
treasure these up for state occasions and festivals. 1 But
he answered, 'Wear them always, for I have others in
plenty/ And when she put them on and her women
beheld her, they rejoiced and kissed his hands.

Then he left them and going apart by himself, rubbed


220


the ring, whereupon the genie appeared and he said to
him, ' Bring me a hundred suits of apparel, with their
ornaments of gold. ' 4 1 hear and obey/ answered Abous-
saadat and brought him the hundred suits, each with its
ornaments within it. Marouf took them and called the
slave-girls, who came to him, and he gave them each
a suit. They donned them and became like unto the
black-eyed girls of Paradise, whilst the princess shone
amongst them as the moon among the stars. One of
them told the king of this and he came in to his daughter
and saw her and her women [thus splendidly arrayed
and] dazzling all who beheld them ; whereat he wondered
exceedingly.

Then he went out and calling his vizier, said to him,
* O vizier, such and such things have happened ; what
sayst thou [now] of this affair? ' 'O king of the age/
answered he, * this is no merchant's fashion ; for a mer-
chant keepeth a piece of linen by him for years and
selleth it not but at a profit. How should a merchant
have such generosity as this and whence should he get the
like of these riches and jewels, whereof but a small matter
is found with kings? So how should loads thereof be
found with merchants ? Needs must there be a cause for
this; but, if thou wilt hearken to me) I will make the
truth of the case manifest to thee/ 6 O vizier,' answered
the king, 'I will do thy bidding/ 'Then,' rejoined the
vizier, 'do thou foregather with thy son-in-law and make
a show of love to him and talk with him and say, " O my
son-in-law, I have a mind to go, thou and I and the vizier,
no more, to a garden, that we may take our pleasure
there." When we come to the garden, we will set on the
table of wine, and I will ply him therewith and make him
drink, will he, nill he; for, when he shall have drunker^
he will lose his reason and his judgment will forsake him.
Then will we question him of the truth of his case and he


221


will discover to us his secrets, for wine is a trailer and
gifted of God is he who saith :

When we had drunken of the wine awhile and it crept near The stead
of secrets, "Hold," quoth I thereunto, of my fear

Lest its disordering influence should overcome my wit And to my boon-
companions so my secrets should appear.

When he hath told us the truth, we shall know his case
and may do with him as we will ; for I fear for thee the
issues of this his now fashion, for it may be he will covet
the kingship and win over the troops by generosity and
the lavishment of money and so depose thee and take the
kingdom from thee,' 'True,' answered the king, and they
passed the night on this agreement. T^tgfyt

On the morrow the king went forth and sat in the tiCCCC
guest-chamber, 1 when behold the grooms and serving-men xcbtit
came in to him in dismay. Quoth he, ' Whajt hath befallen
you?' And they answered, 'O king of the age, the
grooms curried the horses and foddered them and the
mules that brought the baggage \ but, when we arose in
the morning, we found that [thy son-in-law's] servants
had stolen the horses and mules [and made off with
them]. We searched the stables, but found neither horse
nor mule ; so we entered the servants' lodging and saw
none therein, nor know we how they fled.' The king
marvelled at this, knowing not that the mules and horses
and servants were all Afrits, the subjects of the servant
of the spell, and said to the grooms, * O accursed ones,
how could a thousand beasts and five hundred slaves and
servants, to boot, flee, without your knowledge ? ' ' We
know not how it happened,' answered they ; and he said,
'Go, and when your lord comes forth of the harem, tell
him the case,'

So they went out from before the king and abode
bewildered, till Marouf came out and seeing them troubled,

1 Ahead: see note, Vol. III. p. 299.


222


said to them, ' What is to do ? 7 They told him what had
happened and he said, 1 What is their worth that ye should
be concerned for them? Go your ways.' And he sat
laughing and was neither angry nor troubled concerning
the matter ; whereupon the king looked in the vizier's face
and said to him, 'What manner of man is this, with whom
wealth is of no account? Needs must there be a reason
for this.' Then they talked with him awhile and the king
said to him, ' O my son-in-law, I have a mind to go, thou
and I and the vizier, to a garden, where we may divert
ourselves.' ' I will well/ said Marouf. So they went
forth to a garden, .wherein were two kinds of every sort of
fruit, and it was full of running waters and tall trees and
carolling birds. There they entered a pavilion, whose
sight did away sorrow from the heart, and sat talking,
whilst the vizier entertained them with rare stories and
merry jests and mirth-provoking" sayings and Marouf
listened, till the time of the noon-meal came, when they
set on a tray of meats and a pitcher of wine.

When they had eaten and washed their hands, the vizier
filled the cup and gave it to the king, who drank it off - then:
he filled a second and gave it to Marouf, saying, * Take the
cup of the drink to which the reason bows its neck in
reverence.' 'What is this, O vizier? ' asked Marouf. Quoth
he, ' This is the hoary 1 virgin and the old maid long kept in
the house, 2 the giver of joy to hearts, whereof saith the poet :

The feet of the sturdy renegades 3 went trampling it of yore, And so of

the Arabs 1 heads its wreak it taketh evermore.
Let one of the sons of the infidels, a moon o* the dark, whose looks To

disobedience still invite, the grape-juice to thee pour,

1 Sembh an allusion to the froth of the wine, when first poured out,,
or, perhaps, simply to its age.

3 i.e. old wine long kept in cask or bottle.

B Aalaj, pi. of lit. a sturdy foreign unbeliever. The true believes
may not assist in the making of wine, Mohammed having cursed its
presser, its drinker, its carrier, its seller and its buyer.


223


And gifted of God is he who saith :

Tis as if wine and he, indeed, who doth the goblet bear, When to the

boon-companions all he doth display it, 1 were
The dancing morning sun, whose face the full moon of the dark Had

handselled 3 with the Gemini,* that shining starry pair.
So clear and eke so subtle is its essence that, as 'twere The life itself*

through every vein and member it doth fare.

And how excellent is the saying of the poet :

The moon of the full of beauty lay the night in my embrace And the
sun in the sphere of the cups was not eclipsed a moment's space ;

And still I gazed on the fire, whereto the Magians them prostrate, As
from the flagon it did prostrate itself before my face.

And that of another :

Through all the joints it runneth, as in one, Who hath been sick, the
tides of healing run.

And yet another :

I marvel at those who first pressed it and tried, How they left us the

water of life and yet died !

And yet goodlier is the saying of Abou Nuwas :

Have done and leave to blame me, for blame but angers me, And give

me that, for med'cine, that caused my malady ;
A yellow one, 4 whose precincts nor grief nor sorrow haunt, And if &

stone but touch her, 'tis straightway moved to glee.
She cometh in her flagon, midmost the darksome night, And by her

light the dwelling illumined straight we see.
From a kaze-owner take it, 6 attired as if she had A yard ; * two lovers,

wencher and sodomite, hath she ; —

1 As if it were a bride. - See Vol. VII. p. 333, notes 3 and 5.

3 See notes, Vol. VIII- pp. 65, 74.
8 i.e. the cupbearer's eyes.

4 i.e. light-coloured wine.
B ie. the cup.

n It was common with debauchees of the type of Abou Nuwas t©
employ girls dressed as boys (and known from that circumstance m
gkulamiyeh or she-boys) as cupbearers at their carouses.


224


She goeth round midst younglings, to whom Fate bows, submtss, And
none with aught betideth, save that he hath in gree ;

And say to who pretendeth to excellence in love, *' One thing thou'st
learnt, but many are still concealed from thee."

But best of all is the saying of Ibn El Mutezz i 1

God water the tree-shaded island 3 and the convent Abdoun 8 that hight
With a constant dropping of rain-clouds, that cease not, day or
night !

How oft for the draught of the morning awakened me there of yore, In

the forefront of dawn, when the swallow had not yet taken to flight,
The voice of the monks of the convent, indeed, and the sound of their

chant, As they crooned o'er their prayers in the gloaming, with

their tunics of black bedight !
How many a loveling among them, eye-painted with languor,* abode,

Whose eyelids on eyes shut that glittered with lustrous black and

white,

1 Abdallah ibn el Mutezz, a prince of the house of Abbas, son of El
Mutezz Billah, the 13th Khalif of that dynasty, and great-great-grandson
of Haroun er Reshid. He was one of the most renowned poets of the
third century of the Hegira and died A.D. 908, being strangled by the
partisans of his youthful nephew El Muctedi Billah, 1 8th Khalif of the
Abbaside dynasty, against whose authority he had revolted, at the in-
stigation of the powerful and turbulent house of the Benou Hemdan
(see ante, note, p, 47). As the nominee of the latter, he was proclaimed
Khalif, under the title of El Murteza Billah, but only enjoyed the
dignity for twenty-four hours, at the end of which time El Muctedi
was reinstated by his supporters.

3 Jeziret ibn Omar, an island and town on the Tigris, about a hundred
and fifty miles north of Mosul. Some versions of the poem, from which
these verses are quoted, substitute El Mutireh, a village near Samara (a
town on the Tigris, 60 miles north of Baghdad), for El Jezireh, *>.
Jeziret ibn Omar.

8 The convent of Abdoun (long since disappeared) was situate on the
east bank of the Tigris, whose waters alone separated it from the island.
It was so called from a celebrated statesman of the same name, who
caused it to be erected and whose favourite place of recreation it was.

4 Lit. koholed with languor or voluptuous grace {ghunj\ i.e. naturally
possessing that liquid, languorous softness^ which it is the aim of the use
of kohl to simulate


225


Who came forth to Tisit me, shrouding himself in the cloak of the night.
And hastened his steps, as he wended, for caution and fear and
affright !

Then rose I and laid in his pathway my cheek, as a carpet it were, For
abjection, and trailed o'er my traces my skirts, to efface them from
sight

But, lo, the new moon rose and shone, like a nailparing cleft from the
nail, And all but discovered our loves with the gleam of her meddle-
some light ;

And then there betideth between us what I'll not discover, i* faith ; So
question no more of the matter and deem not of ill or unright.

And gifted of God is he who saith :

The richest of mortals ami; In gladness rejoiceth my souL

Liquid gold 1 without stint I possess, And I measure it out by the bowL

And how goodly is the saying of the poet :

By Allah, there's no alchemy, except in this it be, And all is false that

they avouch of other alchemy 1
Upon a hundredweight of woe a carat 2 pour of wine And straight it is

transformed and changed to gladness and to glee.

And that of another :

The glasses, when we'er empty, are heavy ; but forthright When with
pure wine we fill them, unblent, they grow as light

As air and eke for transport they're like to fly away ; And bodies in
like manner are lightened by the spright

And yet another ;

Wine and the cup to worship have claims more than can be said, Nor

is it right in us to leave their claims unhonoured.
Whenas I die, beside a vine I prithee bury me, So of its veins I still

may drink, e'en after I am dead ;
Yea, in the desert waterless, I charge you, lay me not. For sore after my

death to taste no more of wine I dread.'

And he ceased not to incite him to drink, naming to


1 i.e. gold-coloured wine.
VOL. IX.


s i.e» three grains.


226


him such of the virtues of wine as he thought well and
repeating to him what occurred to him of verses and
pleasant anecdotes on the subject, till Marouf addressed
himself to sucking the Hps of the cup and cared no longer
for aught else. The vizier ceased not to fill for him and
he to drink and enjoy himself and make merry, till he lost
his reason and could not distinguish right from wrong.
When the vizier saw that drunkenness had attained in him
to utterance and overpassed the limit, he said to him, ' By
Allah, O merchant Marouf, it wonders me whence thou
gottest these jewels whose like the kings of the Chosroes
possess not ! In all our lives never saw we a merchant
possessed of riches like unto thine or more generous than
thou, for thy fashion is the fashion of kings and not the
fashion of merchants. So, God on thee, do thou acquaint
me with this, that I may know thy rank and condition,'
And he went on to ply him with questions and cajole him,
till Marouf, being bereft of reason, said to him, ( 1 am
neither merchant nor king/ and told him his whole story
from first to last

Then said the vizier, 'I conjure thee by Allah, O
my lord Marouf, show us the ring, that we may see its
fashion.' So, in his drunkenness, he pulled off the ring
and said, 'Take it and look upon it.' The vizier took
it and turning it over, said, £ If I rub it, will the genie
appear?' 'Yes/ replied Marouf. 'Rub it and he will
appear to thee, and do thou divert thyself with the sight
of him.' So the vizier rubbed the ring and immediately
the genie appeared and said, ' Here am I, at thy service,
my lord! Ask and it shall be given to thee. Wilt
thou lay waste a town or build a city or slay a king?
Whatsoever thou seekest, I will do for thee, without fail.'
The vizier pointed to Marouf and said, 4 Take up yonder
knave and cast him down in the most desolate of desert
lands, where he shall find nothing to eat nor drink, so he


227


may die oi hunger and perish miserably, and none know
of him.'

So the genie snatched him up and flew up with him
betwixt heaven and earth, which when Marouf saw, he
gave himself up for lost and wept and said, 'O Abous-
saadat, whither goest thou with me?' 'Dolt that thou
art/ replied the genie, * I go to cast thee down in the
desert quarter of the world. Shall one have the like of
this talisman and give it to the folk to look upon ? Verily,
thou deservest that which hath befallen thee; and but
that I fear God, I would let thee fall from a height of a
thousand fathoms, nor shouldst thou reach the earth, till
the winds had torn thee in pieces.' Marouf was silent and
did not again bespeak him till he reached the desert
quarter of the world and casting him down there, went
away and left him in that horrible place. ^ ^TtgtH

Meanwhile, the vizier said to the king, ' How deemest frctCCXCtX,
thou now ? Did I not tell thee that this fellow was a liar
and an impostor, but thou wouldst not credit me?' 'Thou
wast in the right, O my vizier/ replied the king. 'God
grant thee health ! But give me the ring, that I may look
upon it.' The vizier looked at him angrily and spat in
his face, saying, 'O dullard, how shall I give it to thee
and abide thy servant, after I am become thy master?
But I will spare thee no more.' Then he rubbed the ring
and said to the genie, * Take up this churl and cast him
down by his son-in-law the impostor.' So the genie took
him up and flew off with him, whereupon quoth the king
to him, ' O creature of my Lord, what is my crime ? } 'I
know not/ answered Aboussaadat; 'but my lord hath
commanded me unto this and I cannot disobey him who
possesseth the enchanted ring/ Then he flew on with
him, till he came to the desert quarter and casting him
down whereas he had cast Marouf, returned and left him.
The king, hearing Marouf weeping, went up to him and


228


acquainted him with his case ; and they sat weeping over
that which had befallen them and found neither meat
nor drink.

As for the vizier, he went forth from the garden and
summoning all the troops, held a court and told them what
he had done with the king and Marouf and acquainted
them with the affair of the ring, adding, 'Except ye make
me Sultan over you, I will bid the servant of the ring take
you all up and cast you down in the desert quarter of the
world, where you shall die of hunger and thirst' ' Do us
no hurt,' answered they; 'for we accept thee to Sultan
over us and will not any wise gainsay thy commandment.'
So they agreed, in their own despite, to his being Sultan
over them, and he bestowed on them robes of honour,
seeking all he had a mind to of Aboussaadat, who brought
it to him forthright. Then he Sat down on the throne
and the troops made submission to him ; and he sent to
the king's daughter, saying, ' Make thee ready, for I mean
to come in to thee this night, because I long for thee/

When she heard this, she wept, for [the loss of] her
husband and father was grievous to her, and sent to him,
saying, 'Have patience with me till my days of widow-
hood 1 are accomplished : then draw up thy contract of
marriage with me and go in to me according to law.'
But he sent back to say to her, ' I know neither days of
widowhood nor delay, and I need not a contract nor know
I lawful from unlawful ; but needs must I go in to thee
this night.' So she answered him, saying, € So be it, then,
and welcome to thee ! ' But this was a trick on her
part. When the answer reached the vizier, he rejoiced
and his heart was gladdened, for that he was passionately
enamoured of hen So he bade set food before all the
folk, saying, ' Eat ; this is my bride-feast ; for I purpose

1 i.e. the four months that must elapse before she could legally marry
again.


229


to go in to the princess this night' Quoth the Skeikh el
Islam, 'It is not lawful for thee to go in to her till her
days of widowhood be accomplished and thou have drawn
up thy contract of marriage with her.' But he answered,
* I know neither days of widowhood nor delay ; so multiply
not words on me.' So the Sheikh was silent, fearing his
mischief, and said to the troops, 'Verily, this man is m
infidel and hath neither faith nor religion.'

As soon as it was night, he went in to her and found her
clad in her richest raiment and decked with her goodliest
ornaments. When she saw him, she came to meet him,
laughing, and said, ' [This is] a blessed night ! But, hadst
thou slain my father and my husband, it had been better
to my mind.' And he said, 'Needs must I slay them.'
Then she made him sit down aad began to jest with him
and make a show of love to him, caressing him and
smiling in his face, whereupon his reason fl6d; but she
did but cajole him on this wise that she might get posses-
sion of the ring and change his joy into calamity on his
head ; nor did she deal thus with him but after the counsel
of him who saith :

Indeed, I have won by my sleight What swords had not compassed nor
might,

And with spoil I retain, whose plucked fruits Are sweet to the taste and
the sight.

When he saw her caress him and smile upon him, desire
stirred in him and he besought her of dalliance; but,
when he drew near her, she started back from him, saying,
'O my lord, seest thou not the man looking at us? I
conjure thee by Allah, screen me from his eyes ! How
canst thou have to do with me what while he looketh on
us ? ' When he heard this, he was angry and said, * Where
is the man?' * There he is s in the beazel of the ring/
answered she, 1 putting out his head and looking at us. 5
He thought that the genie was looking at them and said^


230

laughing, 'Fear not; this is the servant of the ring, and
he is at ray commandment.' Quoth she, * I am afraid of
Afrits; pull it off and throw it afar from me.' So he
pulled it off and laying it on the cushion, drew near to
her, but she dealt him a kick in the stomach and he fell
over on his back, senseless : whereupon she cried out to
her attendants, who came to her in haste, and said to
them, 4 Lay hold on him.'

So forty slave-girls seized him, whilst she snatched up
the ring from the cushion and rubbed it ; whereupon
Aboussaadat presented himself, saying, ' Here am I, at thy
service, O my mistress.' 'Take up yonder infidel/ said
she, 'and clap him in prison and shackle him heavily.'
So he took him and laying him in strait prison, 1 returned
and told her. Quoth she, ' Whither wentest thou with my
father and my husband ? J And he answered, ' I cast them
down in the desert quarter of the world.' Then said she,
' I command thee to fetch them to me forthwith.' ' I hear
and obey,' replied he and taking flight at once, stayed
not till he reached the desert quarter, where he lighted
down upon them and found them sitting weeping and
complaining to each other. Quoth he, 'Fear not, for
relief is come to you. 7 And he told them what the vizier
had done, adding, * Indeed I imprisoned him with my own
hand, in obedience to her commandment, and she hath
bidden me carry you back/ And they rejoiced in his
news. Then he took them up and flew back with them ;
nor was it more than an hour before he brought them
in to the princess, who rose and saluted them. Then she
made them sit down and brought them food and sweet-
meats, and they passed the rest of the night [with her].

On the morrow, she clad them in rich apparel and said
to the king, ' O my father, sit thou on thy throne and be
king as before and make my husband thy Vizier of th@

1 Lit in the prison of anger.


231


flight and acquaint thy troops with that which hath
happened. Then send for the vizier out of prison and
slay him and after burn him, for that he is an infidel and
would have gone in to me in the way of lewdness, without
marriage-rites, and he hath testified against himself that
he is an infidel and believeth in no religion. And do
thou tender thy son-in law, whom thou makest thy Vizier
of the Right.' ' I hear and obey, O my daughter/
answered he. 'But give me the ring or give it to thy
husband/ Quoth she, 'It behoveth not that either thou
or he have it. I will keep it myself, and belike I shall
be more careful of it than you. Whatsoever ye want ; seek
it of me and I will demand it for you of the servant of
the ring. So fear no harm so long as I live, and after
my death, do as ye will with the ring.' ' This is well seen,
O my daughter/ rejoined the king and taking Marouf,
went forth to the divan.

Now the troops had passed the night in sore concern
for the princess and that which the vizier had done with
her, in going in to her after the way of lewdness, without
rite of marriage, and for his ill-usage of the king and
Marouf, and they feared lest the law of Islam be dis-
honoured, because it was manifest to them that he was
an infidel So they assembled in the divan and fell to
reproaching the Sheikh el Islam, saying, * Why didst thou
not forbid him from going in to the princess in the way of
lewdness?' 'O folk/ answered he, *the man is an infidel
and hath gotten possession of the ring and you and I can
avail nothing against him. But God the Most High will
requite him his deed, and be ye silent, lest he slay you.' Jff^
As they were thus engaged, in came the king and Marouf, pi,
and when the troops saw the former, they rejoiced in his
return and rising to their feet, kissed the earth before
him. He sat down on his throne and told them what had
passed, whereupon their chagrin ceased from them.


232

Then he commanded to decorate the city and sent to
fetch the vizier from the prison. [So they brought him],
and as he passed by the troops, they cursed him and
reviled him and upbraided him, till he came to the king,
who commanded to put him to the vilest of deaths. So
they slew him and after burned his body, and he went to
Hell, after the sorriest of fashions; and right well quoth
one of him :

God to the tomb wherein his bones are laid no mercy show And Munker
and Kekir therein be present evermo* 1

The king made Marouf his Vizier of the Right and the
times were pleasant to them and their joys untroubled.
They abode thus five years, till, in the sixth year, the king
died and the princess made Marouf Sultan in her father's
stead, but gave him not the ring. ^During this time she
had conceived by him and borne him a boy of surpassing
loveliness, excelling in beauty and perfection, who was
reared in the laps of the nurses till he reached the age
of five, when his mother fell ill of a mortal sickness and
calling her husband to her, said to him, ' I am ilL ' Quoth
he, ( May God preserve thee, O beloved of my heart ! '
' Belike/ said she, * I shall die and thou needest not that
I commend thy son to thy care : wherefore I charge thee
but be careful of the ring, for thine own and the boy's
sake.' And he answered, * No harm shall befall him whom
God preserveth ! 1 Then she pulled off the ring and gave
it to him, and on the morrow she was admitted to the
mercy of God the Most High, whilst Marouf abode in
possession of the kingship and applied himself to the
governance.

One day, he shook the handkerchief and [dismissed the

divan, whereupon] the troops withdrew to their • places
and he betook himself to the sitting-chamber, where he
sat till the day departed and the night came with the


233


darkness. Then came in to him his boon-companions
of the notables [of the kingdom], according to their
wont, and sat with him, by way of solace and diversion,
till midnight, when they craved leave to withdraw. He
gave them leave and they retired to their houses; after
which there came in to him a slave-girl affected to the
service of his bed, who spread him the mattress and
doing off his apparel, clad him in his sleeping-gown.
Then he lay down and she kneaded his feet, till he fell
asleep; whereupon she withdrew to her own chamber
and slept.

Presently, he felt something beside him in the bed and
starting up in alarm, said, 'I seek refuge with God from
Satan the Stoned ! ' Then he opened his eyes and seeing
by his side a woman foul of favour, said to her, 'Who
art thou? 1 'Fear not/ answered she. 'I am thy wife
Fatimeh.' Whereupon he looked in her fate and knew
her by her misshapen form and the length of her dog-
teeth : so he said to her, ' Whence earnest thou in to me
and who brought thee to this country ? ' Quoth she, 1 In
what country art thou at this present ? ' And he said, ' In
the city of Ikhtiyan el Khuten. But thou, when didst thou
leave Cairo ? ' * But now/ answered she. ' How can that
be?' asked he. * Know/ said she 'that, when I fell out
with thee and Satan prompted me to do thee a mischief,
so that I complained of thee to the magistrates, they
sought for thee and the Cadis enquired of thee, but found
thee not. When two days were past, repentance gat hold
upon me and I knew that the fault was with me ; but
repentance availed me not, and I abode awhile weeping
for thy loss, till what was in my hand failed and needs
must I beg my bread. So I fell to begging of all, rich
and poor, and since thou leftest me, I have eaten of the
humiliation of beggary and have been in the sorriest of
plights. Every night I sat weeping for thy loss and for


234


that which I suffered, since thy departure, of contempt
and humiliation and abjection and misery.'

And she went on to tell him what had befallen her,
whilst he stared at her in amazement, till she said, ' Yester-
day, I went about all day, begging, but none gave me
aught ; and as often as I accosted any one and begged of
him a morsel of bread, he reviled me and gave me nought.
When night came, I went to bed supperless, and hunger
consumed me and sore on me was that which I suffered,
and I sat weeping. Presently, one appeared to me and
said, " O woman, why weepest thou ? " Quoth I, " I had
a husband who used to provide for me and fulfil my
wishes ; but he is lost to me and I know not whither he
is gone and have been in sore straits since he left me."
"What is thy husband's name?" asked he, and I answered,
"His name is Marouf." "I know him," said he. "Know
that thy husband is now Sultan" in a certain city, and if
thou wilt, I will carry thee to him." Quoth I, "I conjure
thee of thy bounty to bring me to him ! " So he took me
up and flew with me between heaven and earth, till he
brought me to this pavilion and said to me, "Enter
yonder chamber, and thou wilt see thy husband asleep on
the couch." So I entered and found thee in this estate
of lordship. Indeed, I thought not that thou wouldst
forsake me, who am thy mate, and praised be God who
hath united me with thee ! '

Quoth Marouf, ' Did I forsake thee or thou me ? Thou
complained st of me from Cadi to Cadi and endedst by
denouncing me to the Supreme Court and bringing down
on me the men of violence from the citadel : so I fled in
my own despite/ And he went on to tell her all that had
befallen him and how he was become Sultan and had
married the king's daughter and how the latter had died*
leaving him a son, who was then seven years old. Quoth
she, That which happened was fore-ordained of God the


235


Most High; but I repent me and cast myself on thy
generosity, beseeching thee not to forsake me, but suffer
me eat bread with thee by way of alms.'

And she ceased not to humble herself to him and sup-
plicate him till his heart relented towards her and he said
to her, 4 Repent from mischief and abide with me, and
nought shall betide thee save what shall pleasure thee :
but, if thou do any wickedness, I will slay thee and fear
no one. And think not that thou canst complain of me
to the Supreme Court and that the men of violence will
come down on me from the citadel; for I am become
Sultan and the folk fear me : but I fear none save God
the Most High, for that I have an enchanted ring, which
when I rub, the servant of the ring appeareth to me. His
name is Aboussaadat, and whatsoever I demand of him he
bringeth to me. So, if thou desire to return to thine own
country, I will give thee what shall suffice th£e all thy life
and will send thee thither speedily ; but, if thou desire to
abide with me, I will assign thee a palace and furnish it
with the choicest of silks and appoint - thee twenty slave-
girls to serve thee and provide thee with dainty food and
sumptuous apparel, and thou shalt be a queen and live in
all delight, till thou or I die. What sayst thou of this ? '
' I wish to abide with thee,' answered she and kissed his
hand and made profession of repentance from wickedness.
So he assigned her a palace for her sole use and gave her
slave-girls and eunuchs, and she became a queen.

The young prince used to visit her, even as he visited
his father ; but she hated him for that he was not her son ;
and when the boy saw that she looked on him with the
eye of despite and hatred, he shunned her and took an
aversion to her. As for Marouf, he occupied himself with
the love of fair slave-girls and bethought him not of his
wife Fatimeh, for that she was grown a grizzled old
woman, foul of favour and bald-headed, loathlier than the


236


speckled snake, the more that she had beyond measure
evil entreated him aforetime ; and as saith the adage,
* Ill-usage rooteth up desire and soweth hatred in the soil
of hearts ; ' and gifted of God is he who saith :

Be careful not to hurt men's hearts nor work them aught of dole, For
hard it is to bring again a once estranged soul ;

And hearts, the love whereof hath ta'en alarm and fled away, Are like
a broken glass, whose breach may never be made whole.

And indeed he had not given her shelter by reason of
any praiseworthy quality in her, but he dealt with her thus
Nfgf)t generously only of desire for the approval of God the
Most High ; wherefore he occupied not himself with her
by way of marriage. When she saw that he held aloof
from her bed and occupied himself with others, she
hated him and jealousy gat the mastery of her and Satan
prompted her to take the ring from him and kill him and
make herself queen in his stead. So she went forth one
night from her pavilion, intending for that in which was
her husband the king ; and it chanced, by the ordinance
of fate and written destiny, that Marouf lay that night
with one of his favourites, a damsel endowed with beauty
and grace and symmetry.

Now it was his wont, of the excellence of his piety,
that, when he was minded to have to do with a woman,
He would put off the enchanted ring from his finger, in
reverence to the holy names engraved thereon, and lay
it on the pillow, nor would he don it again till he had
purified himself [according to the law]. Moreover, when
he had lain with a woman, he was used to bid her go
forth from him [before daybreak], of his fear for the
ring; and when he went forth to the bath, he locked
the door of the pavilion till his return, when he put on
the ring, and after this, all were free to enter as of wont
Fatimeh knew of all this and went not forth from her


237


place till she had certified herself that the case was as
we have said. So she sallied out, purposing to go in to
him, whilst he was drowned in sleep, and steal the ring,
unseen of him.

Now it chanced at this time that the king's son had
gone out, without light, to the draught-house, to do an
occasion, and sat down on the jakes in the dark, leaving
the door open. Presently, he saw Fatimeh come forth
of her pavilion and make stealthily for that of his father
and said in himself, 'What ails this witch to leave her
lodging in the dead of the night and make for my father's
pavilion? Needs must there be some reason for this. 1
So he went out after her and followed in her steps unseen
of her. Now he had a short sword of watered steel, which
he held dear, so that he went not to his father's divan,
except he were girt therewith ; and his ^father used to
laugh at him and say, ' What God will ! 1 This is a fine
sword of thine, O my son ! But thou hast not gone down
with it to battle nor cut off a head therewith.' Whereupon
the boy would reply, ' 1 will not fail to cut off with it some
head worth 3 the cutting.' And Marouf would laugh at
his words.

So he drew the sword from its sheath and followed her
till she came to his father's pavilion and entered, whilst
he stood and watched her from the door. He saw her
searching about and heard her say [to herself], 'Where
hath he laid the ring ? * Whereby he knew that she was
looking for the ring and waited till she found it and said,
' Here it is.' Then she picked it up and turned to go
out ; but he hid behind the door. As she came forth, she
looked at the ring and turning it about in her hand, was

1 Mashallahi The old English exclamation "Cock's 'ill !" {i.e. God's
will, thus corrupted for the purpose of evading the statute of 3 Jac, L
against profane swearing) exactly corresponds to the Arabic*

8 Or deserving*


2 3 8


about to rub it, when he raised his hand wnn the sword
and smote her on the neck; and she gave one ciy and
fell down dead.

With this Marouf awoke and seeing his wife lying on
the ground, with her blood flowing, and his son standing
with the drawn sword in his hand, said to him, 'What
is this, O my son ? ' * O my father,' answered the prince,
'how often hast thou said to me, "Thou hast a fine
sword ; but thou hast not gone down with it to battle nor
cut off a head." And I have answered thee, saying, "I
will not fail to cut off with it a head worth the cutting."
And now, behold, I have cut off for thee therewith a head
worth the cutting ! ' And he told him what had passed
Marouf sought for the ring, but found it not; so he
searched the dead woman's body till he saw her hand
closed upon it ; whereupon he took it from her hand and
said to the boy, i Thou art indeed my very son, without
doubt ; may God ease thee in this world and the next,
even as thou hast eased me of this vile woman ! Her
endeavour led but to her own destruction, and gifted of
God is he who saith :

When God His aid unto a man vouchsafes, good hap is his And still

his wish of everything he doth fulfil, ywis 5
But, if the Almighty's countenance to any be denied, The first to sin

against the' wight his own endeavour is.'

Then he called to some of his attendants, who came
in haste, and he told them what his wife Fatimeh had
done and bade them take her and lay her in a place
till the morning. They did as he bade them and [on
the morrow] he gave her in charge to a number of
eunuchs, who washed her and shrouded her and made
her a tomb and buried her. Thus her coming from
Cairo was but to her grave, and gifted of God is ha
who saith ;


239


We tread the steps to us of destiny forewrit ; For he to whom a way «

decreed must needs submit
To walk therein, and he whose death is fore-ordained To be in such

a land shall die in none but it

And how excellent is the saying of the poet :

When to a land I fare in quest of good, perdie, I know not, of the

twain, which fortune mine shall be ;
Whether the good 'twill prove, whereafter I do seek, Or else the evil

hap that seeketh after me.

After this, he sent for the husbandman, whose guest
he had been, when he was a fugitive, and made him his
Vizier of the Right and his chief counsellor. Then,
learning that he had a daughter of surpassing beauty and
grace, of noble parts and high of worth and birth, he took
her to wife ; and in due time he married his son. So they
abode awhile in all delight and solace of life and their
days were serene and their joys untroubled, till there came
to them the Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of
Companies, he who layeth waste flourishing houses and
orphaneth sons and daughters. And glory be to the
[Ever-] Living One who dieth not and in whose hand are
the keys of the Seen and the Unseen i "


Now, during this time, Shehrzad had borne the King
three male children : so, when she had made an end of
the story of Marouf, she rose to her feet and kissing the
earth before him, said, "O king of the age and unique
pearl of the time and the day, I am thine handmaid and
these thousand nights and one have I entertained thee
with stories of foregone peoples and admonitory instances
of the ancients. May I then make bold to crave a boon
of Thy Majesty ? " a Ask ? O Shehrzad," answered he, " and


240

it shall be given unto thee." Whereupon she cried out
co the nurses and the eunuchs, saying, " Bring me my
children." So they brought them to her in haste, and
they were three male children, one walking, one crawling
and one sucking [at the breast]. She took them and
setting them before the King, kissed the ground and said,
" O king of the age, these are thy children and I crave
that thou release me from the doom of death, for the sake
of these infants ; for, if thou slay me, they will become
motherless and will find none among women to rear them
•aright"

When the King heard this, he wept and straining the
children to his bosom, said, " By Allah, O Shehrzad, I
pardoned thee before the coming of these children, for
that I found thee chaste, pure, noble and pious ! May
•God bless thee and thy father and thy mother and thy
root and thy branch ! I take God to witness against me
that I exempt thee from aught that can harm thee." So
she kissed his hands and feet and rejoiced with an ex-
ceeding joy, saying, "May God make thy life long and
increase thee in reverence and majesty 1 " Therewith joy-
spread throughout the palace of the King and the good
news was bruited abroad in the city; it was a night not
to be counted among lives and its colour was whiter than
the face of day.

On the morrow, the King arose, full of joy and content-
ment, and summoning all his troops, bestowed on his
vizier, Shehrzad's father, a rich and splendid robe of
honour and said to him, " God protect thee, for that thou
gavest me to wife thy noble daughter, who hath been the
means of my repentance from slaying the daughters of
the people. Indeed, I have found her noble, pure, chaste
and virtuous, and God hath vouchsafed me three male
children by her; wherefore praised be He for this ex-
ceeding bounty 1 n Then he bestowed dresses of honour


241

upon all his viziers and amirs and the grandees of his
realm and bade decorate the city thirty days ; nor did he
put one of the townsfolk to aught of charge on account
thereof, but the whole of the expenditure was from the
King's treasury. So they decorated the city in splendid
fashion, never before was seen the like thereof, and the
drums beat and the pipes sounded, whilst all the mimes
and mountebanks and players plied their various arts and
the King lavished on them gifts and largesse. Moreover,
he gave alms to the poor and needy and extended his
bounty to all his subjects and the people of his realm.
And he and they abode in pleasance and delight and
happiness and contentment, till there came to them the
Destroyer of Delights and the Sunderer of Companies,
So glory be to Him whom the vicissitudes of time waste
not away nor doth aught of change betide Him, whom
one case diverteth not from other and who is unique in the
attributes of perfection ! And blessing and peace upon
the High Priest of His Majesty and His Elect among His
creatures, our lord Mohammed, the chief of mankind,
through whom we beseech Him for a goodly end I


VOL. EK.


■6


INDEX TO THE TALES.


INDEX TO THE TALES,


N.B. — The Roman numerals denote the volume, the Arabic S&e p&$&

Aalsheh, Musab ben ez Zubeir and his wife, iv. 219*

Abdallah the Fisherman and Abdallah the Merman, viii 33G*
Abdallah ben Fazil and his brothers, ix, 145.

Abdallah ben Maamer with the Man of Bassoraand his slave-girt ta= 8£&

Abdurrehman the Moor's story of the Roc, iv. 26 1.

Abou Hassan ez Ziyadi and the Man from Khorassan, iv, ta%-

Abou Isa and Curret el Ain, The Loves of, iv. 281.

Abou Jaafer the Leper, Aboulhusn ed Durraj and, v. 4$,

Aboukir the Dyer and Abousir the Barber, viii. 29? . „

Aboulaswed and his squinting slave-girl, iv. 220.

Aboulhusn and his slave-girl Taweddud, iv. 324.

Aboulhusn ed Durraj and Abou Jaafer the Leper, v, 4$,

Aboulhusn of Khorassan, ix. 47.

Abou Mohammed the Lazy, iv. 10.

Abou Nuwas, Haroun er Reshid with the damsel and* iv. i&ZL
Abou Nuwas and the Three Boys, iv. 205.
Abousir the Barber, Aboukir the Dyer and, viii. 297,.
Abou Suweid and the handsome old woman, iv. 299.
Abou Yousuf with Haroun er Reshid and his Vizier Jaafe?, The
Imam, iv. !„

Abou Yousuf with Er Reshid and Zuheideh, The Imam, iv,
Adam, The Birds and Beasts and the Son of, Hi. I.
Adi ben Zeid and the Princess Hind, iv. 264.
Afrit's Mistress, The King's Son and the, v. 333,
Agib, The History of Gherib and his brother, vL 48*
Alaeddin Abou esh Shamat, iii. 25 1 .

Alexandria (The Sharper of) and the Master of Police, iv. 1 14,


246

Ali ben Beklcar and Shemsennehar, Hi. 49.
.Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of Quicksilver, vi. 264,
Ali Noureddin and the Frank King's Daughter, viii. 63.
Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper, iiL 367.
Ali Shar and Zumurrud, iv. 36.
Ali ben Tahir and the girl Mounis, iv. 299.
Almsgiving, The Woman whose hands were cut off for, iv. 126.
Amtn (El) and his uncle Ibrahim ben el Mehdi, iv. 288.
Anoushirwan, The Righteousness of King, v. 8.
Anoushirwan, Kisra, and the village damsel, iv. 227.
Angel of Death and the King of the Children of Israel, The, v. 5,
Angel of Death with the Proud King and the Devout Man, The, v. 8
Angel of Death and the Rich King, The, v. 3.
A.pe, The King's Daughter and the, iv. 141.
Apples of Paradise, The, iv. 276.
Apples, The Three, i. 165.
Arab girl, Haroun er Reshid and the, vi. fgg.
Arab youth, The Khali f Hisham and the, iiL 32s.
Ardeshir and Heyat en Nufous, vi. 304.
Asmai (El) and the three girls of Bassora, vi. 201.
Ass, The Ox and the, i. 10.
Ass, The Wild, The Fox and, viii. 201.
Aziz and Azizeh, ii. 222.
Azizeh, Aziz and, ii. 222.
Baghdad, The Haunted House in, iv. 301.
Baghdad, Khelifeh the Fisherman of, vii, 265.
:Baghdad, The Porter and the Three Ladies of, i. 69.
Baghdad (The ruined man of) and his slave-girl, viii. 17^
Baghdad, The Scavenger and the noble Laciy of, iii. 345.
.Bakoun's Story of the Hashish- Eater, ii. 349.
Barber's Story, The, i. 285.
Barber's First Brother, Story of the, i. 287.
Barbers Second Brother, Story of the, i. 292.
Barber's Third Brother, Story of the, L 296.
barber's Fourth Brother, Story of the, i. 300.


247


Barber's Fifth Brother, Story of the, i. 303.
Barber's Sixth Brother, Story of the, i. 311.
Barber, Aboukir the Dyer and Abousir the, viii. 297.
Barber-Surgeon, Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the, iii. 324,
Barmecide, Jaafer the, and the old Bedouin, iv. 238,
Bassora (the man of) and his slave-girl, Abdallah ben Maamer with
iv. 210.

Bassora, EI Asmal and the three girls of, vL 201.

Bassora (Hassan ot) and the King's daughter of the Jinn, vit 53SX.

Bassora, The Lovers of, vi 220

Bath, Haroun er Reshid and Zubeideh in the, iv. 216.
Bathkeeper's Wife, The Vizier's Son and the, v. 283.
Beanseller, Jaafer the Barmecide and the, iv. 8.

Bear, Werdanthe Butcher's adventure with the Lady and the* iv. ij^ <;

Beasts and the Son of Adam, The Birds and, iii. 1.

Bediya el Jemal, Seif el Mulouk and, vii. 55.

Bedouin, Jaafer the Barmecide and the old, iv. 238.

Bedouin, Omar ben Khettab and the young, iv. 239.

Bedouin and his wife, The, vi. 215.

Bedr Basim of Persia, Julnar of the Sea and her son King, viL 1+

Bedreddin Hassan, Noureddin Ali of Cairo and his son, i, 173,

Behram, Prince of Persia, and the Princess Ed Detma, v. 318.

Bekhit, Story of the Eunuch, i. 367.

Beloukiya, The Adventures of, v, 57.

Belvedere, The House with the, v. 323.

Benou Tai, The Lovers of the, iv. 273.

Benou Udhreh, The Lovers of the, iv. 211 ; vi. 20&

Birds and Beasts and the Son of Adam, The, iii Z.

Birds, The Falcon and the, iii. 41.

Birds (the Speech of), The page who feigned to know, v. 303.
Black Slave, The pious, v. 16.

Blacksmith who could handle fire without hurt, The, v. 2$,
Blind Man and the Cripple, The, viii. 222.
Boulac Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 118.
Boys, Abou Nuwas and the Three, iv. 205.


24$

Boy and Girl at School, The Loves of the, iv- 2fj.
Boy and the Thieves, The, viii. 252.

Boy (The woman who had to lover a) and the other who had to lover a

man, iv. 300.
Brass, The City of, v. 219.
Broker's Story, The Christian, i. 233.
Budour and Jubeir ben Umeir, The Loves of, iv. 75.
Budour, Kemerezzeman and, iii. 100.

Butcher's adventure with the Lady and the Bear, Werdan the, iv. 1 3?,

Butter, the Fakir and his pot of, viii. 193.

Cadi, The Jewish, and his pious wife, v. 9.

Cairo (New) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 1 16.

Cairo (Old) Police, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 1 ig.

Cairo, The Adventures of Quicksilver AH of, vi. 264.

Calender's Story, The First, i. 90.

Calender's Story, The Second, i. 97.

Calender's Story, The Third, i. izu

Cashmere Singing-girl, The Goldsmith and the e v, 289,

Cat and the Crow, The, iii. 36.

Cat and the Mouse, The, viii. 188.

Champion (The Muslim) and the Christian Lady, v. 33,

Chaste Wife, The Lover's Trick against the, v. 267,

Christian Broker's Story, The, i. 233,

City of Brass, The, v. 219.

Cloud (The saint to whom God gave a) to serve him, v. 2&»
Cobbler (Marouf the) and his wife Fatimeh, ix, iSo.
Controller's Story, The, i, 249.

Cous Police and the Sharper, The Chief of the ¥ iv. sss.

Crab, The Fishes and the, viii. 197.

Cripple, The Blind Man and the, viii. 22&*

Crow, The Fox and the, iii, 37.

Crow and the Serpent, The, viii. 199.

Crow, The Cat and the, iii. 36.

Crows and the Hawk, The, viii. 207.

Curret el Ain^ The loves of Abou Isa and? iv, iSl,


249


Death (The Angel of) and the King of the Children of Israel, v. 5.

Death (The Angel of) with the Proud King and the Devout Man, v. 1

Death (The Angel of) and the Rich King, v. 3.

Debauchee and the Three-year-old Child, The, v. 341,

Delileh the Crafty and her daughter Zeyneb the Trickstress, The

Rogueries of, vi. 234.
Desert (The old woman who dwelt in the) and the pilgrim, iv. 222,
Detma (The Princess Ed), Prince Behram of Persia and, v. 318.
Device (The wife's) to cheat her husband, v. 285.
Devil, Ibrahim of Mosul and the, vi. 205.
Devil, Isaac of Mosul and his mistress and the, vi
Devout Israelite, The, iv. 128,
Devout Platter-maker and his wife, The, v. 19,
Devout Prince, The, iv. 249.

Devout woman and the two wicked elders, The, iv. 23$*
Dibil el Khuza'i and Muslim ben el Welid, iv. 265.
Dish of Gold, The man who stole the Dog's, iv. in. - "
Doctor (The strange) and the Khalif El Mamoun, iv. 34.
Dog's Dish of Gold, The man who stole the, iv. in.
Douban, The Physician, i. 37.

Dream, The ruined man who became rich through a, iv. 134*

Drop of Honey, The, v. 275.

Dunya, Taj el Mulouk and the Princess, ii. 207.

Durraj (Aboulhusn ed) and Abou Jaafer the Leper, v. 49.

Dust, The Woman who made her husband sift, v. 276.

Dyer, Abousir the Barber and Aboukir the, viii. 297.

Eagle, The Sparrow and the, iii. 42.

Egypt (The man of Upper) and his Frank wife, viii. 169*

Elders, The devout woman and the two wicked, iv. 236s

Eldest Lady's Story, The, u 143.

Enchanted Horse, The, iv. 143.

Enchanted Springs, The, v. 278.

Enchanted Youth, The, i. 58.

Enis.el Jelis ? Noureddin AH and the Damsel^ i. 319*
Envied, The Envier and the ? i. 1070


2$0


Envier and the Envied, The, i. 107.

Eunuch Bekhit, Story of the, i. 367.

Eunuch Kafour, Story of the, i. 368.

Fakir and his pot of butter, The, viii. 193.

Falcon and the Birds, The, iii. 41.

Falcon, King Sindbad and his, i. 41.

Fatimeh, Ma'rouf the Cobbler and his wife, ix. 18a

Ferryman of the Nile and the Hermit, The, v. 42.

Feth ben Khacan (El) and El Mutawekkil, iv. 289.

Fisherman, Abdallah the Merman and Abdallah the, viii 3^

Fisherman of Baghdad, Khelifeh the, vii. 265.

Fisherman, The Foolish, viii. 250.

Fisherman and the Genie, The, i. 30.

Fisherman, Khusrau and Shirin and the, iv. 23a

Pushes and the Crab, The, viii- 197.

Five Suitors, The Lady and her, v. 306.

Flea, The Mouse and the, iii, 38. ^

Folk, The Fox and the, v. 345.

Forger, Yehya ben Khalid and the, iv. 3a

Fox and the Crow, The, iii. 37.

Fox and the Folk, The, v. 345.

Fox and the Wild Ass, The, viii. 201.

Fox, The Wolf and the, iii. 1 9.

Foxes and the Wolf, The, viii. 260.

Frank King's Daughter, Ali Noureddin and the, viii. 63.

Frank wife, The man of Upper Egypt and his, viii. 169*

Fuller and his son, The, v. 267.

Girl, Haroun er Reshid and the Arab, vi. 199.

-Girl at School, The Loves of the Boy and, iv. 213.

Girls of Bassora, El Asmal and the three, vi. 201.

Girls, Haroun er Reshid and the three, iv. 221,

Girls, Haroun er Reshid and the two, iv. 22 J.

Generous friend, The poor man and his, iv. 133,

Genie, The Fisherman and the, i. 30.

Genie, The Merchant and 'the* L 17.


251

Ghanim ben Eyoub the Slave of Love, i. 363.

Gherib and his brother Agib, The History of, vi. 48.

Goldsmith and the Cashmere Singing-Girl, The, v. 289.

Goldsmith's wife, The water-carrier and the, iv. 229,

Hakim (The Khalif El) and the Merchant, iv. 226.

Haroun er Reshid and the Arab girl, vi. 199.

Haroun er Reshid with the Damsel and Abou Nuwas, iv. 106,

Haroun er Reshid and the three girls, iv- 221.

Haroun er Reshid and the three poets, iv. 217.

Haroun er Reshid and the two girls, iv. 221.

Haroun er Reshid and Zubeideh in the Bath, iv. 216.

Hashish-Eater, Bakoun's Story of the, ii. 349.

Hassan of Bassora and the King's daughter of the Jinn, vii. 121.

Hassan, King Mohammed ben Sebaik and the Merchant, vii. 49.

Hatim et Tai: his generosity after death, iii. 316.

Haunted House in Baghdad, The, iv. 301.

Hawk, The Crows and the, viii. 207. ,

Hawk and the Partridge, The, iii. 26.

Heathcock and the Tortoises, The, viii. 271.

Hedgehog and the Pigeons, The, iii. 43.

Hejjaj (El), Hind daughter of En Numan and, vi. 186.

Hejjaj (El) and the pious man, v. 23.

Hemmad the Bedouin's Story, ii. 362.

Hermit, The Ferryman of the Nile and the, v. 42.

Hermits, The, iii. 12.

Heyat en Nufous, Ardeshir and, vi. 304.

Hind, Adi ben Zeid and the Princess, iv. 264,

Hind daughter of En Numan and El Hejjaj, vi. 186.

Hind (King Jelyaad of) and his Vizier Shimas, viii. 18$.

Hisham and the Arab Youth, The Khalif, iii. 322.

Honey, The Drop of, v. 275.

Horse, the Enchanted, iv. 143.

Hunchback, Story of the, i. 226.

Ibn el Caribi, Mesrour and, iv. 247.

Ibrahim el Khawwas and the Christian King's Daughter, v. 37.


2$2


Ibrahim ben el Khesib and Jemileh, ix. 23.

Ibrahim of Mosul and the Devil, vi. 205.

Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and El Amin, iv. 288.

Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Barber-Surgeon, Hi. 324,

Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Merchant's Sister, iv. 122,

Ignorant man who set up for a schoolmaster, The, iv. 258.

Ikrimeh el Feyyaz, Khuzeimeh ben Bishr and, vi. 189.

Imam Abou Yousuf with Haroun er Reshid and Jaafer, The, iv. I,

Imam Abou Yousuf with Er Reshid and Zubeideh, The, iv. 225.

Irem, The City of, iii. 334.

Isaac of Mosul's Story of Khedijeh and the Khalif Mamoun, Hi, 339.

Isaac of Mosul and the Merchant, iv. 268.

Isaac of Mosul and his mistress and the Devil, vi, 226.

Island, The King of the, v. 44.

Iskender Dhoulkernein and a certain tribe of poor folk, v« 6,

Israelite, The Devout, iv. 128.

Jaafer the Barmecide and the Beanseller^iv. 8.

Jaafer the Barmecide and the old Bedouin, iv. 238.

Jaafer ben el Hadi, Mohammed el Amin and, iv. 233.

Janshah, The Story of, v. 82.

Jelyaad of Hind and his Vizier Shimas, King, viii. 185*
Jemileh, Ibrahim ben el Khesib and, ix. 23.
Jeweller's Wife, Kemerezzeman and the, ix. 67*
Jewish Cadi and his pious wife, The, v. 9.
Jewish Physician's Story, The, i. 259*
Jouder and his brothers, vi. I.

Jubeir ben Umeir and Budour, The Loves of, iv. 75.

Julnar of the Sea and her son King Bedr Basim of Persia, vii S

Justice of Providence, The, v. 40.

Kafour, Story of the Eunuch, i. 368.

Kemerezzeman and Budour, iii. 100.

Kemerezzeman and the Jeweller's Wife, ix. 6f.

Khalif, The Mock, iii. 350.

Khawwas (Ibrahim el) and the Christian King's Daughter,

Khedijeh and the Khalif Mamoun P Isaac of Mosul's Story of ? iii. 339,


253


Khelif the Fisherman of Baghdad (Breslau Version), vit 307.

Khelifeh the Fisherman of Baghdad, vii. 265.

Khorassan, Abou Hassan ez Ziyadi and the man from, iv. 129.

Khorassan, Aboulhusn of, ix. 47.

Khusrau and Shirin and the Fisherman, iv. 230.

Khuzeimeh ben Bishr and Ikrimeh el Feyyaz, vi. 189.

King of the Island, The, v. 44.

King and the Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust, viii 204.

King and the virtuous wife, The, iv. 260.

King and his Vizier's Wife, The, v. 263.

King's Daughter and the Ape, The, iv. 141.

King's Son and the Afrit's Mistress, The, v. 333.

King's Son and the Merchant's wife, The, v. 301.

King's Son and the Ogress, The, i. 43 ; v. 272.

Kings, The two, viii. 22a

Kisra Anoushirwan and the Village damsel, iv. 227.

Kurd Sharper, Ali the Persian and the, Hi 367. ^

Lady of Baghdad, The Scavenger and the noble, iii. 345.

Lady's Story, The Eldest, i. 143.

Lady and her five suitors, The, v. 306.

Lady and her two Lovers, The, v. 270.

Ladies of Baghdad, the Porter and the Three, i 69,

Laughed again, The man who never, v. 293.

Lazy, Abou Mohammed the, iv. IO,

Lebtait, The City of, iii. 320.

Leper, Aboulhusn ed Durraj and Abou Jaafer the, v. 4^
Loaves of Bread, The Niggard and the, v. 269.
Lover, The Mad, iv, 274.

Lover who feigned himself a thief to save his mistress's honour, The,
iv. 4-

L over's trick against the chaste wife, The, v. 267.

Lovers of Bassora, The, vi. 2 20.

Lovers of the Benou Tai, The, iv. 273.

Lovers of the Benou Udhreh, The, iv. 211; vi, goS:

Trovers, The Lady and her two, v. 270.


254


Lovers of Medina, The, vi. 229.

Lovers, The Three unfortunate, iv. 272.

Loves of the Boy and Girl at School, The, iv. 213.

Maan ben Zaldeh and the Bedouin, iii. 318.

Maan ben Zaideh and the Three Girls, iii. 317.

Mad Lover, The, iv. 274.

Malice of Women, The, v, 260.

Mamoun, Isaac of Mosul's Story of Khedijeh and the Khalif, iii. 339;
Maraoun (El) and the Pyramids of Egypt, iv. 244.
Mamoun and the strange Doctor, The Khalif, iv. 34.
Man who never laughed again, The, v. 293.

Man (The Woman who had to lover a) and the other who had to loves

a boy, iv. 300.
Marouf the Cobbler and his wife Fatimeh, ix. 180.
Medina, The Lovers of, vi. 229.

Mehboubeh, El Mutawekkil and his favourite, iv. 135,
Melik en Nasir (E!) and the three Masters of Police, iv, 1 16.
Melik en Nasir (El) and his Vizier, vi 233.
Mensour, Yehya ben Khalid and, iv. 27.

Merman and Abdallah the Fisherman, Abdallah the, viii. 330-

Meryem, Ali Noureddin and, viii. 63.

Merchant and the Genie, The, i 17.

Merchant of Oman, The, ix. 1.

Merchant and the Thieves, The, viii. 257.

Merchant and the Two Sharpers, The, iii. 45.

Merchant's Sister, Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the, iv. 122*

Merchant's wife, The King's son and the, v. 301.

Merchant's wife and the Parrot, The, v. 265.

Mesrour and Ibn el Caribi, iv. 247.

Mesrour and Zein el Mewasif, viii. I.

Miller and his wife, The, iv. 222.

Mock Khalif, The, iii. 350.

Mohammed el Amin and Jaafer ben el Hadi, iv. 233.
Mohammed ben Sebaik and the Merchant Hassan, King, vii. 49*.
Money-changer, The Thief and the, iv. 120.


Mdnleey, The Thief and his, Hi. 46.

Mounis, Ali ben Tahir and the girl, iv. 299,

Mouse, The Cat and the, viii. 188.

Mouse and the Flea, The, iii. 38.

Mouse and the Weasel, The, iii. 34.

Musab ben ez Zubeir and Aaisheh his wife, iv. 219.

Muslim Champion and the Christian Lady, The, v. $g r

Muslim ben el Welid and Dibil el Khuza'i, iv. 265,

Mutawekkil (El) and Ei Feth ben Khacan, iv. 289.

Mutawekkil (El) and his favourite Mehboubeh, iv. 135,

Mutelemmis (El) and his wife Umeimeh, iv. 215.

Necklace, The Stolen, v. 316.

Niggard and the Loaves of Bread, The, v. 269.

Night of Power, The man who saw the, v. 314.

Nile (The Ferryman of the) and the Hermit, v. 42,

Nimeh ben er Rebya and Num his Slave-girl, iii. 223.

Noureddin Ali and the Damsel Enis el Jelis, i. 319.

Noureddin Ali of Cairo and his son Bedreddin Hassan, t 1 73.

Num, Nimeh ben er Rebya and his Slave-girl, iii. 223*

Ogress, The King's Son and the, i. 43 ; v. 272.

Old Man's Story, The First, L 2a

Old Man's Story, The Second, L 24.

Old Man's Story, The Third, i. 28.

Old Woman, Abou Suweid and the handsome, iv. 299.

Omar ben Ennuman and his Sons Sherkan and Zoulmekan, The History
of King, ii. I.

Omar ben Khettab and the young Bedouin, iv. 239.

Oman, The Merchant of, be. I.

Otbeh and Reyya, vL 1 8 1.

Ox and the Ass, The, i. IO.

Page who feigned to know the speech of birds, The, t.

Paradise, The Apples of, iv. 276.

Parrot, The Merchant's wife and the, v. 265.

Partridge, The Hawk and the, iii. 26.

Peacock, The Sparrow and the, iii. 4^,


2$6

Persian and the Kurd Sharper, AU the, iii. 367.
Physician Douban, The, i. 37.
Physician's Story, The Jewish, i. 259.

Pilgrim and the old woman who dwelt in the desert, The, iv. 32a,

Pilgrim Prince, The Unjust King and the, viiL 204.

Pious black Slave, The, v. 16.

Pigeons, The Hedgehog and the, iii. 43,

Pigeons, The Two, v. 317.

Platter-maker and his wife, The devout, v. 19.

Poets, Haroun er Reshid and the Three, iv. 217.

Police of Boulac, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 118.

Police of Cous and the Sharper, The Chief of the, iv. 121.

Police of New Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 1 16.

Police of Old Cairo, Story of the Chief of the, iv. 119.

Police (The Three Masters of), El Melik en Nasir and, iv, u&

Poor man and his generous friend, The, iv. 133.

Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad, The, i. 69.

Portress, The Story of the, i. 1 53.

Power, The Man who saw the Night of, v. 314.

Prince, The Devout, iv. 249.

Prince (the Pilgrim), The Unjust King and, viii. 204.
Providence, The Justice of, v. 40.
Purse, The Stolen, v. 342.

Pyramids of Egypt, El Mamoun and the, iv. 244.
Queen of the Serpents, The, v. 52.
Quicksilver Ali of Cairo, The Adventures of, vL 264,
Reyya, Otbeh and, vi. 181.

Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty and her daughter Zeyneb the Tricks*

tress, The, vi. 234.
Roc, Abdurrehman the Moor's Story of the, iv. 261.
Rose-in-bud, Uns el Wujoud and the Vizier's Daughter, iv. 174,
Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-girl, The, viii. 175.
Ruined Man who became rich again through a dream, The f iv, 134,
Said ben Salim and the Barmecides, iv. 234.
Saint to whom God gave a cloud to serve him„ The> ^» 2$,


257


Sandalwood Merchant and the Sharpers, The, v. 386.
Scavenger and the noble Lady of Baghdad, The, iii. 345.
School, The Loves of the Boy and Girl at, iv. 213.
Schoolmaster who fell in love by report, The, iv. 255.
Schoolmaster, The Foolish, iv. 257.

Schoolmaster, The ignorant man who set up for a, iv. 258L

Seif el Mulouk and Bediya el Jemal, vii 55.

Serpent, The Crow and the, viii. 199.

Serpent-Charmer and his Wife, The, viii. 21a

Serpents, The Queen of the, v. 52.

Sexes, Relative excellence of the, iv. 290.

Sharper of Alexandria and the Master of Police, The, iv, IS4*

Sharper, AH the Persian and the Kurd, iii. 367.

Sharper, The Chief of the Cous Police and the, iv. 12 S.

Sharper, The Simpleton and the, iv. 223.

Sharpers, The Merchant and the Two, iii. 45.

Sharpers, The Sandalwood Merchant and the, v. 336^

Shehriyar and his brother, King, (Introduction), i. I.

Shemsennehar, Ali ben Bekkar and, iii. 49.

Shepherd and the Thief, The, viii. 264.

Sherkan and Zoulmekan, The History of King Omar ben Ennaman and

his Sons, ii. I.
Shimas, King Jelyaad of Hind and his Vizier, viii. 185,
Shirin and the Fisherman, Khusrau and, iv. 23a
Shipwrecked Woman and her child, The, v. 13,
Simpleton and the Sharper, The, iv. 223.
Sindbad and his Falcon, King, L 41.
Sindbad the Sailor and Sindbad the Porter, v. 149.
Sindbad the Sailor, First Voyage of, v. 152.
Sindbad the Sailor, Second Voyage of, v. 161.
Sindbad the Sailor, Third Voyage of, v. 169.
Sindbad the Sailor, Fourth Voyage of, v. 18a
Sindbad the Sailor, Fifth Voyage of, v. 193.
Sindbad ihz Sailor, Sixth Voyage of, v. 202.
Sindbad the Sailor, Seventh Voyage of, v. 2 l©b

VOX*, IX. IJ


258


Singing-girl, The Goldsmith and the Cashmere, v. 289.
Six Slave-girls, The man of Yemen and his, iv. 92.
Slave, The pious black, v. 16.

Slave-girl, The ruined man of Baghdad and his, viii. 175,

Slave-girls, The man of Yemen and his six, iy. 92.

Sparrow and the Eagle, The, iii. 42.

Sparrow and the Peacock, The, iii. 47,

Spider and the Wind, The, viii. 213.

Springs, The Enchanted, v. 278.

Squinting slave-girl, Aboulaswed and his, iv. 220.

Stolen Necklace, The, v. 316,

Stolen Purse, The, v. 342.

Suitors, The Lady and her five, v. 306.

Tailor's Story, The, i. 268.

Taj el Mulouk and the princess Dunya, ii.

Taweddud, Aboulhusn and his slave-girl, iv. 324.

Thief, The Lover who feigned himself a^iv. 4,

Thief and the Money-changer, The, iv. 120.

Thief and his Monkey, The, iii. 46.

Thief, The Shepherd and the, viii. 264.

Thief turned merchant and the other Thief, The, iv. 24^,

Thieves, The boy and the, viii. 252.

Thieves, The Merchant and the, viii. 257.

Thieves, The two, iv. 246.

Three-year-old child, The Debauchee and the, v. 341,,
Tortoise, The Waterfowl and the, iii. 16.
Tortoises, The Heathcock and the, viii. 271.
Trick (The Lover's) against the chaste wife, v. 267,
Trick (The Wife's) against her husband, iv. 236.
Two Kings, The, viii. 220.

Umeirneh, El Mutelemmis and his wife, iv. 215,

Unfortunate Lovers, The Three, iv. 272.

Unjust King and the Pilgrim Prince, The, viii. 204.

Uns el Wujoud and the Vbier's Daughter Rose-in-bud, iv, 174.

Upper Egypt (The man of) and his Frank wife, viii. 169,


259


Vizier, El Melik en Nasir and his, vi. 233.
Vizier of Yemen and his young brother, The, iv. 212.
Vizier's Son and the Bathkeeper's Wife, The, v. 283.
Vizier's Wife, The King and his, v. 263.
Water-carrier and the goldsmith's wife, The, iv. 229.
Waterfowl and the Tortoise, The, iii. 16.
Weasel, The Mouse and the, iii. 34.
Weaver, The Foolish, iii. 46.

Welid ben Sehl, Younus the Scribe and the Khalif, vi. 194,
Werdan the Butcher's adventure with the Lady and the Bear,
iv. 137.

Wife, The Bedouin and his, vi. 215.

Wife (the Chaste), The Lover's Trick against, v. 267.

Wife, The King and his Vizier's, v. 263.

Wife, The Man and his wilful, viii. 255.

Wife (The Merchant's) and the Parrot, v. 265.

Wife (The virtuous) and the King, iv. 260. „,

Wife's device to cheat her husband, The, v, 283.

Wife's trick against her husband, The, iv. 236.

Wild Ass, The Fox and the, viii. 201.

Wilful Wife, The Man and his, viii. 255.

Wind, The Spider and the, viii. 213.

Wird Khan (King) and his Women and Viziers, viii. 246.

Wolf and the Fox, The, iii. 19.

Wolf, The Foxes and the, viii. 260.

Woman (The shipwrecked) and her child, v. 13.

Woman who made her husband sift dust, The, v. 276.

Woman whose hands were cut off for Almsgiving, The, iv. £2$,

Women, The Malice of, v. 260.

Women, The two, iv. 300.

Yemen (The Man of) and his six slave-girls, iv. 92.
Yemen (The Vizier of) and his young brother, iv. 22S.
Yehya ben Khalid and the Forger, iv. 30.
Yehya ben Khalid and Mensour, iv. 27.
Yehya ben Khalid and the poor man, iv. 232*


26o


ITomras the Scribe and the Khalif Welid ben Sehl, vi 194.

Youth, The Enchanted, i. 58.

Zein el Mewasif, Mesrour and, viii. S,

Zeyneb the Trickstress, The Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty and her
daughter, vi. 234,

Zoulmekan, The History of King Omar ben Ennuman and his Sons

Sherkan and, ii. r.
Zubeideh in the Bath, Haroun er Reshid and, iv» 2I&
Zumurrud^ Mi Sh&z aco, f^.


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: ITS
HISTORY AND CHARACTER.


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT: ITS HISTORY AND
CHARACTER*

I.

It is now a hundred and eighty years since M. Antoine
Galland first introduced to the notice of European readers
the most popular collection of narrative fiction in existence,
by his translation, published in the year 1704, of an Arabic
manuscript alleged to have been procured by him from
Syria, which contained something less than a quarter
of the tales that compose the work known as " The Book
of the Thousand Nights and One Night" M. Galland
was aware of the imperfection of the MS. used by him,
and (unable to obtain a more perfect copy) he seems to
have endeavoured to supply the place of the missing
portions by incorporating in his translation a number of
Persian, Turkish and Arabic tales, which had no con-
nection with his original and for which it is generally
supposed that he probably had recourse to various
Oriental MSS. (as yet unidentified) contained in the
Royal Libraries of Paris. These interpolated tales occupy
more than a third part of the entire work known as the
"Arabian Nights' Entertainments" and comprise some oi
the most popular portions of the work, as will be seen
from the following list of them.


264


s. The History of Prince Zeyn Alasnam and the King of
the Genii.

2. The History of Codadad and the Princess of Deryabar.

3. The Story of the Sleeper Awakened.

4. Aladdin or the Wonderful Lamp.

5. The Story of the Blind Man Baba Abdalla.

6. The Story of Sidi Nouman.

7. The Story of Cogia Hassan Alhabbal.

8. Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.

9. Ali Cogia, the Merchant of Baghdad.

10. Prince Ahmed and the Fairy Pari-Banou.

xi. The Sisters who envied their younger Sister.

Of these, the Story of the Sleeper Awakened is the
only one which has been traced to an Arabic original,
existing either separately or in connection with the
Thousand Nights and One Night, and is found in the
Breslau edition of the complete work, printed by Dr.
Habicht from a manuscript of Tunisian origin, apparently
of much later date than the other known copies. It also
occurs in a MS. copy in the British Museum and will be
found translated among the stories from printed texts
of the Thousand Nights and One Night (not contained in
my standard text or in the Boulac edition) which it m
proposed to issue as a supplement to the present work.
Galland himself cautions us that the stories of Zeyn
Alasnam and Codadad do not belong to the Thousand
and One Nights and were published (how he does not
explain) without his authority ; and the concluding portion
of his MS., presumably containing the larger half of Camar-
alzaman, the whole of Ganem and the Enchanted Horse,
as well as all the intercalated tales (that is to say, nearly


265


one-half of the French translation), 1 being unfortunately
lost, it appears impossible to ascertain the precise source
from which he drew the latter. Opinions differ upon this
point, some Orientalists holding (with De Sacy) that the
originals of the added tales were found by Galland in the
public libraries of Paris (whence, however, no researches
have as yet availed to unearth them), and others (with the
late Mr. Chenery) that he procured them from the recita-
tion of story-tellers in the bazaars of Smyrna and other
towns in the Levant, during his travels there.* It was

a Galland's MS. consisted (as he himself tells as In his dedication) of
(our volumes, three only of which are extant, bringing down the work
to the 282nd Night, towards the middle of the story of Camaralzaman.
Taking the lost volume as equal in size to the three others (which con-
tain about 140 pages each), the remainder of Camaralzaman and the
stories of Ganem and the Enchanted Horse, together with one-fifth
part of the added tales, would account for the whole of its contents,
leaving four-fifths of the interpolations or three-tenths of the '* Arabian
Nights' Entertainments" unaccounted for, allowance made for the
Voyages of Sindbad, which do not belong to the original work and
Galland's copy of which is extant in a separate form, divided into
voyages only, the French translator being responsible for the arbitrary
division into (twenty-one) nights. It may be observed that, in the
Breslau edition, which corresponds more nearly with the MS. used by
Galland than any other of the printed texts, the story of the Enchanted
Horse immediately succeeds that of Camaralzaman (Kemerezzeman and
Budour) and is itself followed, after an interval of some fifty nights, by
the story of Ganem.

2 Galland may be presumed to have come by the MS. of Sindbad
during his long residence in Asia Minor, but that of the Thousand and
One Nights he himself tells us, in his dedicatory epistle to the Marquise
d*0, he did not procure from the East (* e il a fallu le faire venir de
Syne") till after his return to France^ when he first became aware of
the existence of the work.


266


stated by the late Professor Palmer that he found the
story of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves current, in a
slightly different form, among the Bedouins of Sinai;
but, although the names of the personages of the story
(Ali, Abdallah, Mustafa, Morgiana {Afer;anch)> Cassim,
Hussein) are purely Arabic, the use of the Persian
titles Baba and Cogia (see post) seems to point to a
Turkish or Persian origin, and it will be noted that the
scene is laid in " a city of Persia " and that the story
differs widely in style and character from any known to
belong to the genuine text Mr. Palmer also expressed
a doubt whether the most popular story of the old
book, Aladdin, was an Eastern story at all; but the
only evidence we possess upon the subject, that of
the tale itself, does not appear "to offer any reasonable
confirmation of his scepticism. The names (Mustafa,
Alaeddin, Bedrulbudour, Fatimeh, etc.) are without ex-
ception Arab, and the story follows the familiar lines of
Arabic fiction, of which, in particular, the introduction
of the African (or Persian) magician, the finding of
the enchanted treasure and ring, the marriage of the
finder with the King's daughter, the magical building
of the palace, the discovery of the unknown by geo-
mancy, the loss of the talisman through the heedlessness
of a third party and its recovery by stratagem, the
disgrace of the hero at the instance of the envious
vizier, the drugging of the magician and the assumption
of the disguise of a devotee for the vilest purposes, are
all familiar incidents and find their counterparts in many
genuine stories of the Thousand aud One Nights, whilst


26/


the manners and customs described, allowing for the
extreme licence and looseness of Galland's version, do
not seem essentially to differ from those pourtrayed in
tales of unquestioned authenticity, such as Camaralzaman
or Beder. It may also be observed that there is a con-
siderable resemblance between the plan and details of
the story, as given by Galland, and those of Jouder and
his brothers (Vol. VL) and Marouf (in the present
volume) and that Scott's meagre abstract (published in
1811) of a few of the unknown tales contained in the
Wortley Montague MS. of the Thousand Nights and
One Night includes the skeleton of a story ("The
Fisherman's Son"), which bears some resemblance to
Aladdin and a still greater one to the well-known German
Mahrchen of the White Stone; but, in my opinion, this
story is a modern fabrication and has no connection
with the original work. The Wortley Montague MS.,
indeed, appears to be, as a whole, of doubtful authenti-
city, if we may judge from Scott's translations from it
and the detailed account given (in Ouseley's Oriental
Collections) of its contents by the translator himself, who
states that it bears at end a note to the effect that it
was written (or transcribed) in the year 11 78 of the
Hegira (a.d. 1766 l ) by Omar es Sufti (Sufta). Sufta
(popularly Sofia) signifies, in Turkish, a divinity student,
and this, together with the evidently modern style of
the copy, the incoherent jumble of adventure of which
the stories (as rendered by Scott) appear to consist and
which is much more characteristic of modern Turkish

1 A.D. 1764?


268


fiction than of the more artistic kind peculiar to the
Arabs, and the frequent correspondence of the incidents
with German and other popular stories, (a correspond-
ence which, only in the most rudimentary form, is found
in the genuine work), appear to stamp this MS. as
being, at least as far as the latter portion (which differs
greatly from any other copy known to myself) is con-
cerned, as a modern Turkish rifacimento.

Of the remaining six interpolations, the tenth and
eleventh (Prince Ahmed and the Fairy Pari-Banou 1 and
The Three Sisters) are evidently Persian and compara-
tively modern (as a Yankee would say) "at that." The
use of the Persian prefix, "Cogia" (Khwajeh, master or
lord, Arabic equivalent ustadh or muallifti), improperly
applied to a ropemaker and a merchant of Baghdad,
would also point to a Persian or Turkish origin of
Nos. 7 and 9 (Cogia Hassan Alhabbal and Ali Cogia), as
also the title "Baba" (GarTer, Daddy, Arabic equivalent
Sheikh) given to the blind man Abdalla[h] in No. 5,
and the general tone of these three stories, as well as
that of Sidi Nouman (No. 6), testifies to the probability
of their having been composed, at a comparatively recent
period, by a person not an inhabitant of Baghdad, in
imitation of the legends of Haroun er Reshid and other
well-known tales of the original work. It is possible
that an exhaustive examination of the various MS. copies
of the Thousand and One Nights known to exist in
the public libraries of Europe might yet cast some light

1 The tautological rendering of this latter name is another instance oi
Galland's carelessness : Peri-bariou means " fairy lady " or " she-fairy/


269


upon the question of the origin of the interpolated tales \
but, in view of the strong presumption afforded by in-
ternal evidence that they are of modern composition and
form no part of the authentic text, it can hardly be ex-
pected, where the result and the value of that result are
alike so doubtful, that any competent person will be
found to undertake so heavy a task, except as incidental
to some more general enquiry. The only one of the
eleven, which seems to me to bear any trace of possible
connection with the Book of the Thousand Nights and
One Night, is Aladdin, and it may be that an examina-
tion of the MS. copies of the original work within my
reach will yet enable me to trace the origin of this
favourite story.

Having at his command the earlier portion only of
the collection, Galland was in some measure compelled
to invent a denouement, in which he represents the
Sultan as pardoning Sheherazade, in consideration of the
pleasure her story-telling talents had afforded him. If
we turn to the authentic text, we find a totally different
version. It appears that Sheherazade had (somewhat
irreconcileably) during the progress of the story-telling
(extending over nearly three years) borne the Sultan
three male children; and in concluding the story of the
thousand and first night, she presents these latter to him,
begging him to spare her life and not leave her infants
motherless. To this he consents in the most gracious
fashion, telling her that he had, before their birth, re-
sofved to spare her, in consideration of the great qualities
of virtue, wisdom and nobility of mind he had discovered


2JO

in her (an assertion, by the way, completely borne out
by the record of Night cxlviii, 1 in which he is represented
as informing Sheherazade that she has by her wise saws
and moral instances put him out of conceit with his
kingdom and made him repent of having killed so many
women and girls), and concludes by bestowing high
honours on her father the Vizier, for having given him
a wife of such worth and intelligence, and ordering
the city to be decorated and general rejoicings to be
celebrated. A rather amusing trait in this conclusion is
the emphasis with which the author insists upon the
gratifying fact that the whole cost of the rejoicings was
defrayed from the royal treasury, and that not a penny
came out of the pockets of the Sultan's subjects ; no
doubt a sufficiently remarkable exception to the practice
of Oriental despots like his hero Haroun er Reshid, who
was generally careful to make some unfortunate or other
provide the money which he lavished upon his favourites
or flung away on the caprices, sometimes laudable, but
more often extravagant and senseless, that have won him
his most ill-deserved reputation.

It is much to be regretted that the French translator,
in accordance with the literary licence of an age in which
the principles of the art of translation were perhaps less
generally understood than at any known literary epoch,
should have thought himself entitled to deal with the
original text in a manner which in the present day, more
strict upon the question of fidelity and local colouring 9
would certainly have been visited with the severest repro
s See Vol. III. p. 16.


271


bation. Both in abridgment and amplification of the
original, his sins of omission and commission are in-
numerable ; and he permits himself not unfrequently the
most inexplicable and apparently wilful perversions, as
in the story of the Merchant and the Genie, where he
makes the former thro^v away the shell, instead of the
stone, of the date (which of course has no shell), and
in that of Bedreddin Hassan, where he substitutes a
cream-tart for the true corpus delicti, a mess of pome-
granate-seed (a dish repeatedly mentioned in the Nights),
and represents the hero as going to bed in his trousers,
going out of his way solemnly to assure us, in a special
footnote, that the Eastern nations invariably sleep in those
garments, although it is distinctly stated in the text that
Bedreddin, before getting into bed, took off his trousers,
wrapped up in them the purse of a thousand dinars he
had received of the Jew and placed them under the
pillow of the couch, retaining only one garment, a shirt
of fine silk. These are a fair specimen of the many
inexcusable alterations he permits himself, and in ad-
dition to this he did not scruple to correct and adorn
what doubtless seemed to him the frequently repulsive
artlessness and crude simplicity of the original, expand-
ing, abridging, amplifying and substituting in the most
wholesale and uncompromising manner. To give only
one example, where I might cite many, of the liberties
he allowed himself in this kind, there is perhaps no
passage in the old version more generally admired than
the description of Egypt contained in the story of the
Jewish Physician, I quote the passage as it stands in


the old translation of Galland's version, edited 1 by
Scott :

" My father joined in opinion with those of his brothers
who had spoken in favour of Egypt; which rilled me
with joy. Say what you will, said he, the man that has
not seen Egypt has not seen the greatest rarity in the
world. All the land there is golden; I mean, it is so
fertile, that it enriches its inhabitants. All the women
of that country charm you by their beauty and their
agreeable carriage. If you speak of the Nile, where
is there a more wonderful river? What water was ever
lighter or more delicious? The very slime it carries
along, in its overflowing, fattens the fields, which pro-
duce a thousand times more than other countries that
are cultivated with the greatest" labour. Observe what
a poet said of the Egyptians, when he was obliged
to depart from Egypt: 'Your Nile loads you with
blessings every day ; it is for you only that it runs from
such a distance. Alas! in removing from you, my tears
will flow as abundantly as its waters ; you are to continue
in the enjoyment of its sweetness, while I am con-
demned to deprive myself of them against my will.' If
you look, added my father, towards the island that is
formed by the two greatest branches of the Nile, what
variety of verdure ! What enamel of all sorts of flowers 1
What a prodigious number of cities, villages, canals, and

1 Scott claimed to have revised and corrected Galland's version ; but
I cannot find tliat he has done so in any one instance, and Forster'i
translation from the French is equa% faulty s although this translator
also if I remember aright) professes to have revised the work.


273


& thousand other agreeable objects! If you turn your
eyes on the other side, up towards Ethiopia, how many
other subjects of admiration 1 I cannot compare the
verdure of so many plains, watered by the different canals
of the island, better than to brilliant emeralds set in
silver. Is not Grand Cairo the largest, the most popu-
lous, and the richest city in the world ? What a number
of magnificent edifices, both public and private ! If you
view the pyramids, you will be filled with astonishment
at the sight of the masses of stone of an enormous
thickness, which rear their heads to the skies! You
will be obliged to confess, that the Pharaohs, who em-
ployed such riches, and so many men in building them,
must have surpassed in magnificence and invention all
the monarchs who have appeared since, * not only in
Egypt, but in all the world, for having left monuments
so worthy of their memory : monuments so ancient, that
the learned cannot agree upon the date of their erection ;
yet such as will last to the end of time. I pass over in
silence the maritime cities of the kingdom of Egypt,
such as Damietta, Rosetta, and Alexandria, where nations
come for various sorts of grain, cloth, and an infinite
number of commodities calculated for accommodation
and delight. I speak of what I know ; for I spent some
years there in my youth, which I shall always reckon
the most agreeable part of my life"

The reader, who is not acquainted with the original
Arabic, will doubtless be surprised to hear that this
eloquent passage is almost entirely due to the fluent pen
of the French translator. Here is the plain and un-

VOL, IX- 1 8


274


adorned foundation upon which he reared so extensive
an edifice of imaginative description. I translate from
the Breslau text, which appears, due allowance being
made for errors of transcription, etc, to be almost
identical with that of Galland's MS. and in which I
have corrected several mistakes, clerical or typographical
The version of the Macnaghten and Boulac Editions is
(as will be seen by reference to Vol. I. pp. 260-1) yet
more concise and to my mind more effective.

" Quoth my father, 1 Who hath not seen Cairo hath
not seen the world : its dust is gold and its women
puppets ; 1 its Nile is a wonder, its waters light and
sweet and its mud a commodity and a medicine, as saith
of it one in verse, " The waxing of your Nile profiteth
you to-day, And to you alone „ it cometh with profit.*
The Nile is nought but my tears after [separation from]
you : Yours is fair fortune and none is forlorn but L"
And if your eyes saw its earth and the adornment thereof
with flowers and the embroidery of it with all manner
blossoms and the island [s] of the Nile and how much
is therein of wide 8 prospect, and if ye turned the sight
to the Birket el Hebesh, 4 your eyes would not revert
free from astonishment nor would ye see [a match] for
that goodly prospect, and indeed the arms of the Nile

1 t,€. perfectly made and handsome, or, as we should say &
" pictures."

8 Or benefit. 8 Or goodly.

* ue. the Lake of Abyssinia or the Abyssinian, a piece of water on
the southern side of Cairo. Gailand has here made an absurd mistake
in supposing that Abyssinia itself is meant,


275

encompass 1 its verdure, as it were chrysolites set in
filagrees of silver. 3 And what is there to compare with
the Observatory* and its beauties, whereof saith the be-
holder, whenas he draweth near and looketh, "Verily
this comprehendeth all manner goodliness ! " And if
thou speak of the Night of the Waxing [of the Nile]/
give the bow, take it 8 and distribute the water to its
channels; and if thou sawest the Garden 6 in the even-
ings and the shadow sloping over it, thou wouldst behold'
a marvel and wouldst be cheered by the like thereof,
and wert thou by the river-side of Cairo, 7 when the sun
is going down and the river dons hauberk and coat of
mail 8 to its vestments, its gentle breeze would quicken
thee and its bland and copious shade.' "

Again, it cannot be denied that, either out of a mistaken
deference to the literary tastes and prejudices of his age
or from a want of sufficient acquaintance with Oriental

1 As the white encompasses the black of the eye,

3 I omit a rather long piece of verse about a day spent on the Birket
el Hebesh, Galland having taken no notice of it,

* Er Resd.

4 i.e. the night on which the Nile rises to the statute- height of sixteen
cubits.

6 This appears to refer to the ceremony of cutting the dam of the
canal,

s i.e. Er Rauzeh, the well-known island so called.

7 Galland has here mistaken the meaning of sakil Mitr, the river-side
of Cairo (to which town the whole description is confined) and supposing
it to mean the sea-coast of Egypt, has introduced a digression about
Damietta, Rosetta and other sea-side towns.

8 This metaphor, based upon the appearance produced by the level:
rays of the setting sun. is a favourite one with Arab writers.


276

manners and literature (a somewhat improbable defect
in the case of one who was a well-known scholar and
had made three voyages to the Levant), M. Galland to
a certain extent failed in producing a fair transcript of
the original, so far as the exact detail of the manners
and customs of the people whose life it describes is
concerned, as will be evident (to give one instance out
of many) from the way in which he makes the Jewish
physician, in the story above quoted^ express surprise at
the presentation to him by the young man of Mosul of
his left hand, not for the true reason, as stated in the
original, Le. the want of good breeding evinced in offer-
ing the left hand (which, being used for certain ablutions,
is considered among Mohammedans unclean or unworthy),
but because " This, thinks I, is a -gross piece of ignorance
that he does not know that people present their right
hand and not their left to a physician. "

Nevertheless, in spite of the defects I have cited and
numerous others of various kinds, it cannot but be evident
to the impartial reader, who does not look at Oriental
literature solely from the narrow scholastic point of view,
that in M. Galland's translation, fragmentary as it is,
he is in presence of a monumental literary work and
one that is destined to live from its intrinsic artistic
value, whatever the future may bring forth in the way
of more perfect and more conscientious reproduction of
the original it professed to represent. Numerous as are
the mistakes and inaccuracies, wilful and involuntary,
that deface it, there lives in it, if not the letter, emphati-
cally the true spirit of Oriental romance, as seen by


277


European observers through the intervening media of
distance and difference; and the translator's charming
style, the fine flower of the literary manner of the
eighteenth century, partaking at once of Voltaire and
Diderot, of Manon Lescaut and Les Bijoux Indiscrets,
uniting in itself simplicity and boldness, strength and
grace, equally capable of expressing naivete' without
vulgarity and of rising to the pathetic and the majestic
without undue emphasis, atones for many an error and
covers, with the seduction of its bright and perfect move-
ment, many an omission and many an audacious dis-
tortion of fact and intention. Indeed, it seems to me
that this first effort, imperfect as it was, to transplant
into European gardens the magic flowers of Oriental
imagination, can never entirely be superseded and that
other workers in the same field can only hope to sup-
plement and not to efface it. The value of Galland's
achievement was at once recognised by the public, not-
withstanding the obbligato sneers of his brother savants
and the doubts cast by critics and men of letters upon
the authenticity of the work, and his book was almost
immediately translated into most European languages.
Nine years after the first publication of the French
version, we find the fourth English edition already
reached ; and since then its popularity has continued to
increase, until it has become one of the few standard
works dear to all, young and old, and whose editions,
becoming year by year more numerous, can only be
numbered by hundreds, if not by thousands,

Considering the immense vogue thus obtained by this


2/8


€rst imperfect version and the interest it has naturally
excited in the original work, it is a curious and some-
what inexplicable fact that, during the lapse of nearly
two centuries, so little should have been discovered
concerning the origin and history of the collection whose
outlines are so well known to all. It has never yet even
;been ascertained who was its author or compiler, nor
has the date to which its composition may be referred
been fixed with any degree of certitude. The origin of
the work has, indeed, been the subject of much surmise
and research, although to no great result; and the first
half of the present century witnessed an animated and
.somewhat acrimonious discussion upon the subject
between the two greatest Orientalists of France and
Germany. From the first it had been a favourite theory,
founded chiefly on the prevalence of Persian names
among the personages of the Introduction, that the Book
of the Thousand Nights and One Night was merely
a translation into Arabic of a work supposed to have
been originally written in ancient Persian or Pehlevi,
and this theory Baron von Hammer-Purgstail adopted
and improved, bringing forward in support arguments
-of considerable weight and plausibility, founded upon
passages in the works of Arabic and Persian authors of
■repute, such as the magnum opus of the celebrated
Baghdad! geographer and historian, Ali Aboulhusn el
Mesoudi, the Murouj edh dheheb or Golden Meadows, pub-
lished at Bassora in the middle of the tenth century, and
the great Arabic compendium, the Fihrist of Aboulferej
,Abou Ishac en Nedim, about forty years later. In the.


279

work above mentioned, Mesoudi states, in a passage that
is a mainstay of Von Hammer's theory, that there existed
in his time a book of Persian stories, called Hezar Efsan
or The Thousand Romances, being the history of an
Indian King, his Vizier, the Vizier's daughter Shirzad
and her nurse or duenna Dunyazad, and adds that the
book in question had been translated into Arabic and
was called in that language The Thousand Tales or
(more commonly) The Thousand Nights. He also
mentions, as similar Persian or Indian collections, the
story of Jelkand (Jelyaad) and Shimas, or the Indian
King and his Ten Viziers, and Sindibad, and allows us
to suppose that the Hezar Efsan was translated into
Arabic by order of EL Mensour (grandfather of Er Reshid
and second Khalif of the Abbaside dynasty), who reigned
from A.D. 754 to a.d. 775. It would appear also, from
a preface to the great epic poem of Persia, the Shah
nam eh of Firdausi, and from other sources, that the
original authorship of the Hezar Efsan was attributed
to a Persian litterateur in the service of one of the early
sovereigns of Persia, for whom he composed it, a semi-
mythical personage by name Queen Humai, daughter
of Ardeshir Behman (Artaxerxes Longimanus, B.C. 465-
425) and mother of Darab (Darius) II. (b.c. 423) and
that the prose original was in the eleventh century
versified (or perhaps only rearranged) by a certain Rasti,
court poet to the Ghaznevide Sultan Mehmoud of Persia.
The passage from the Fihrist which Von Hammer after-
wards brought forward, in confirmation of his citation
from Mesoudi, is (briefly) to the following effect "The


28o


first who composed tales and made books of them were
the ancient Persians. The Arabs translated them and
the learned took them and embellished them and composed
others like them} The first book of the kind made was
that called Hezar Efsan (or Efsaneh), and the manner
thereof was on this wise. One of the kings of the
Persians was wont, whenas he took a woman to wife
and had lain one night with her, to put her to death on
the morrow. Now he married a girl endowed with wit
and knowledge, by name Shehrzad, 2 and she fell to
telling him tales and used to join the story, at the end
of the night, with what should induce the king to spare
her alive and question her next night of the ending
thereof, till a thousand nights had passed over her.
Meanwhile he lay with her, till he was vouchsafed a
child by her, when she discovered to. him the device
she had practised upon him. Her wit pleased him and
he inclined to her and spared her life. And the king
had a duenna named Dinarzad (or Dunyazad) who was
of accord with her concerning this. The book com-
prises a thousand nights, but less than two hundred
stories, for a story is often told in a number of nights."

These passages suffice to establish, beyond reasonable
doubt, the fact that the first idea of the work was taken
from the Hezar Efsan, to which it owes the scheme of
the introduction and external thread of story and the

1 The italics are my own.

2 Surname of Queen Humai. It is probable, as suggested by Mr,
Lane, that this identity of name was the cause of the composition of the
Hezar Efsan being attributed to her instance.


28l


system of nights which serves as a frame for the various
stories told by Shehrzad, and it will be noted that the
names of the personages of the introduction and the
general skeleton of the story appear to have been pre-
served almost without alteration, standing out in sharp
contrast to the rest of the work. Even the number of
the stories contained in the Thousand and One Nights
in some measure corresponds with Aboulferej's account of
the Hezar Efsan, being (if we leave out of the question
the numerous incidental tales) less than two hundred
in all, and had Hammer-Purgstall contented himself
with stating the legitimate consequences of the evidence
he adduced, his position would have been unassailable;
but, as is not unusual with German scholars, he went to
an extravagant length in the deductions he drew from
the passages above cited, insisting that the Book of the
Thousand Nights and One Night, in its original form,
was identical with the Thousand Tales or Nights men-
tioned by Mesoudi, i.e. was a mere translation from the
Persian, and that its foundation was no other than the
wild and fascinating Persian tales which appear to have
been popular in Arabia proper, at the time of Mohammed,
and to have, by the seduction of their brilliant and pic-
turesque imagery, become so serious a stumbling-block
in the Prophet's way that, not content with having
evidently assimilated part of them for his own purposes,
he thought it necessary to caution his followers against
their dangerous attractions and to exhort them to be
satisfied with the delightful tales that God had told them
in the Koran, To this original nucleus or foundation


282


afforded by the old Arabic version of the Hezar Efsan,
Von Hammer was of opinion that the Arabs added the
anecdotes of the Ommiade and Abbaside Khalifs, of such
frequent occurrence in the collection, as well as certain
tales of evidently later origin, and that the work grew
by additon after addition . till it assumed its present
dimensions ; that it was finally rearranged and (so to
speak) edited by a native of Egypt and that its definitive
production in its present form cannot be referred to an
earlier period than the end of the thirteenth or the
beginning of the fourteenth century, since one of the
tales mentions the Egyptian Khalif Hakim bi-amrillah,
a.d. 1 26 1. 1 Unfortunately both prose and rhymed ver-
sions of the Hezar Efsan appear to be irrecoverably lost
and we have no traces of them save what may exist in
the Thousand and One Nights, wherein it is at least a
singular fact that not a single reference to the ancient
romantic heroes of Persia (Sam Neriman, Feridoun,
Rustem, Zal Zer, Isfendiyar, etc.) nor to such fabulous
monsters of Iranian romance as the Simurgh (griffin),
Anca (phoenix), etc., occurs, as would certainly not have

1 In this latter part of his theory, Von Hammer was right in the con-
clusion to which he came, but mistaken in the premisses on which he
based it. The Hakim bi-amrillah, who is twice mentioned in the iooi
Nights (see Vol. IV. pp. 140 and 226), is, as is manifest from internal
-evidence, not the faineant Abbaside who held the spiritual headship or
Imamate (the only relic of the once proud empire of the Khalifs left
him), from A.D. 1261 to a.d. 1301, but the celebrated Fatimite of the
same name (a.d. 995-1021), the founder of the Druse religion. No
reference of any kind to any of the Abbaside Khalifs of Egypt is to be
found in the work,


283


Deen the case, were Von Hammer's theory true. Had
the book " Sindibad," mentioned by Mesoudi in the
passage cited above, been the well-known Voyages of
Sindbad (as erroneously assumed by Von Hammer), its
existence in Persian would have been a powerful argument
in support of his theory. But this is not the case. The
book is mentioned by Mesoudi as "Sindibad" only, and
is stated to be similar to the story of the Indian King
and his Ten Viziers, to which nothing can be more unlike
than the Voyages of Sindbad, a work purely Arab in form,
although doubtless containing many incidents derived
from Greek, Indian, Persian and perhaps even European
sources, and it has now been definitely shown that the
work referred to was one which is known in perhaps
more numerous versions than any other popular fiction,
i.e. " The Story of a King, his Seven Viziers, his Son and
his Favourite," written by one Sindibad, 1 said to have
been chief of the Brahmans under Korech, third King
of Northern India after Porus, the celebrated adversary
of Alexander the Great

Von Hammer's theory, as soon as advanced, was dis-
puted by the still greater French Orientalist, Silvestre
de Sacy, who (whilst allowing the possibility and even
probability of the original Arabic compiler having used
a slight thread of connecting narrative adapted from the
external scheme of the Hezar Efsan, on which to string

1 See Vol. V. p. 260, where it will be seen that Es Sindibad is given
-as the name of the sage who plays a principal part in the external fable
of " The Malice of Women," the Arabic version of the aforesaid {< Story
erf a King, his Seven Viziers, his Son and his Favourite."


284


the immense succession of fictions provided by himself
and his successors) definitely establishes the fact that
no trace whatever exists of any considerable body of pra&-
Mohammedan or non-Arabic fiction in the extant texts of
the Thousand and One Nights. He points out that the
language of the collection is in no respect classical, con-
taining many words in common and modern (as opposed
to literary) use, that it is generally of a character to be
referred to the decadence of Arabic literature and that
all the tales, even when dealing with events supposed to
have occurred and persons to have dwelt in Persia, India
and other non- Arabic countries and in prse-Mohammedan
epochs, invariably, with the naivest anachronism, confine
themselves to depicting the inhabitants, manners and
customs of such cities as Baghdad and Cairo and are
throughout impregnated with the strongest and most
zealous spirit of Mohammedanism, and especially that the
men and manners described are almost exclusively those
of the epoch of the Abbaside Khalifs. Galland himself,
in his preface, attributes the work to an unknown Arabic
author ; and the Sheikh Ahmed Shirwani, editor of the
unfinished Calcutta edition of 1 8 14-18, states in his intro-
duction his belief that the author was a Syrian Arab, who
wrote in a simple conversational style, which was not of
the purest Von Hammer himself allows that the first
complete version could not have been finished till the
beginning of the eleventh century, and it therefore could
not have been known either to Mesoudi or the author of
the Fihrist. Relying upon these and other arguments of
equal weight, M. de Sacy concludes that the book was


28s

originally written in Syria, about five centuries ago, in the
vulgar Arabic tongue; that it was left unfinished by the
author or (more probably) authors, who had possibly
adopted the framework of exterior or connecting narrative
suggested by the Hezar Efsan in the same manner as
the scheme of the old Indian work of " Sindibad," already
mentioned, was adopted by the authors of "The Seven
Wise Masters," " Dolopathos," "Syntipas," etc., etc., as
an excuse for the composition of works to all practical
intent completely original; that the work was finished
by other hands, probably copyists, who completed it by
adding stories of foreign origin, such as Jelyaad and
Shimas and the Malice of Women ; that several persons
undertook the task in company, each supplying tales of
his own composition or transcription ; and finally, in view
of the general resemblance of the style to the modern
Egyptian dialect and to the prevalence throughout of
descriptions of modern Egyptian manners, that the work
received its final revision at the hands of some Egyptian
or Egyptians of the fifteenth century, the absence of any
mention of firearms, tobacco and coffee forbidding to
ascribe it to any more recent period. 1 M. de Sacy's
opinion has now, I believe, been generally adopted by the
Oriental scholars of Europe. The late eminent English

1 This is a mistake of De Sacy's ; tobacco is mentioned once and
coffee and firearms several times. Some scholars hold that the passages
in which this occurs have been interpolated by copyists ; but it appears
to me that this supposition is negatived (except in one instance) by the
general character of the stories in question, which bnar manifest signs ol
-a comparatively modem origin.


286


Orientalist, Mr. Lane, whose death has been so grievous
a loss to Arabic lexicography, at first seemed inclined
to side with Von Hammer, but afterwards with certain
reservations adopted De Sacy's views and declared that
the Thousand and One Nights can only be said to be
borrowed from the Hezar Efsan, in the same sense as
that in which the ^Eneid is said to be borrowed from
the Odyssey, suggesting (with great probability) that the
actual name, "The Thousand and One Nights," was
deliberately adopted, partly for the purpose of differ-
entiating the work from the Arabic translation of the
Hezar Efsan, which, as we learn from Mesoudi, was
known as 'The Thousand Tales or Nights,' and partly
to avoid the use of even numbers, always considered
unlucky by the Arabs, or perhaps" to constitute a specially
auspicious title by the addition of the primary number
one to the cabalistic number iooo.

The principal points upon which Mr. Lane differed
from De Sacy were (i) the question whether the original
work was the composition of one or of several persons,
(2) the date and (3) the locale of the composition itself
and of the definitive compilation or redaction to which
it is generally agreed that it owes its present form. Mr.
Lane was of opinion that the whole work was the com-
position of one person, who had re-written the old tales
comprised in the collection and completed it by the
addition of new stories composed or arranged by himself
for the purpose. I believe I am correct in stating that
Mr. Lane stood alone in holding this opinion and for
my own part, I cannot understand how any one can


28/


peruse the Arabic text of the work and fail to come to
the conclusion that we are in presence, not of the homo-
geneous work of a single writer, but of a collection of
separate stories, written in widely differing styles and
bearing manifest signs of having been composed by
many different authors at various times and under various
circumstances. The difference of the language employed
in the various parts of the collection, some tales or sets
of tales, for instance, abounding in Persian, Turkish and
other foreign or provincial words, whilst others are com-
paratively free from them, and the variety of the formulas
and style, apparent to the observant reader, would alone,
it seems to me, suffice to negative Mr. Lane's theory, to
say nothing of the almost equally material fact that the
various extant copies, both MS. and printed, of the work
differ widely both in the outline and the detail of their
contents. Again, Mr. Lane held that the composition
of the work, in its earliest complete form, must be re-
ferred to a much later date than that attributed to it by
De Sacy, to wit, the middle of the sixteenth century, and
upon this point much is to be said. De Sacy abstained
from setting out in detail his reasons for believing the
work to have been composed in the fourteenth century,
contenting himself with adducing, as his principal argu-
ment, the nature of the language or dialect in which it
appears to be mainly written and certain peculiarities
of diction which characterize the general style; but, as
this (though possibly sufficient evidence in the case of
a limited and thoroughly sifted subject such as Greek
or Roman literature) can hardly be held to suffice, in


288


the absence of corroborative proof, when the question
in dispute ranges over so wide an area as the boundless
and comparatively unexplored fields of Oriental philology,
it may be well, by way of endeavouring, in some measure,
to ascertain the reasons unparticularized or but lightly
hinted at by the great French scholar and without as-
suming definitely to pronounce upon the matter, to touch
upon the principal points for and against his theory which
have been raised by modern scholars or have occurred
to myself in the course of my labours upon the foregoing
translation.

As a first step towards any enquiry into the age and
land of origin of the Thousand and One Nights, it is
evident that we must endeavour to ascertain of what the
original nucleus or primitive body of tales, upon which
the complete work was built by aggregation and which,
for the sake of convenience, I shall hereafter call "the
original work," consisted ; and to this end, our manifest
course is to enquire which of the tales comprised in the
complete collection are common to every copy known.
Proceeding thus, we find that the following exist (with
such unimportant differences only of general style and
detail as warrant us in treating them as copies from one
common original, owing their variations to the differing
ages and nationalities of their respective transcribers), in
the four printed editions, Le, the two of Calcutta (1814-1$
and 1S39— 42), that of Boulac and that of Breslau and
(according to Caussin de Perceval, Gauttier, Habicht,
Scott, Hammer-Purgstall, De Sacy and other scholars) in
at least a dozen MS. copies^ complete or fragmentary^


289


of the work, including that used by Galland. (In these
copies, both printed and MS., the other portions of the
•collection differ widely, both in the number and nature
of the tales contained in each and in the detail of the
stories common to all, as will appear from a comparison
of {e.g.) the Boulac Edition with that of Breslau and the
Wortley-Montague MS. now in the Bodleian Library.)

1. Introduction (Story of King Shehriyar and his brother)

and the incidental story (The Ox and the Ass).

2. The Merchant and the Genie and the three incidental

stories.

3. The Fisherman and the Genie and the four incidental

stones.

4. The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad and the

six incidental stories.

5. The Three Apples.

6. Bedreddin Hassan.

7. The Hunchback and the eleven incidental stories,

8. Noureddin and Enis el Jelis.

9. Ali ben Bekkar and Shemsennehar.

These form about an eighth part of the whole collection,
and if we add the stories of Ghanim ben Eyoub, Kemerez-
zeman and Budour, The Enchanted Horse and Julnar, which
occur, in substantially identical form, in all the editions
-and MSS. mentioned above, except the unfinished Calcutta
edition of 1814-18 (from which, however, we see no reason
to suppose that they would have been excluded, had the
publication been completed), and we get what is evidently
the nucleus or original of the work, comprising (roughly)
® fifth part of the whole. The stories contained in this
vol. ix. 19


290


portion, though bearing evident traces of the work of
different authors, offer such general similarity in style
and diction as to warrant us in supposing them to have
been composed or arranged and adapted to the frame-
work of the external fable by several persons of the same
nationality acting in concert and at one and the same
time. It is practically useless to enquire what portion
of this original is a survival of the Hezar Efsan, as it
is at once evident that such features of the old Pehlevi
work as might possibly have been borrowed by the
authors of the Thousand and One Nights must have
been so disfeatured by the radical process of adaptation
and remodelment to which they appear to have subjected
all foreign material employed by them, as to defy identifi-
cation : even in the Introduction, which is certainly (with
the exception, perhaps, of the Enchanted Horse 1 ) the
oldest portion of the original, the remains of the old
Persian cadre are evidently confined to the names of the
principal personages (Shehriyar, Shahzeman, Shehrzad
or Shirzad, Dunyazad or Dinarzad), the period (the reign

1 The Enchanted Horse is probably the oldest story in the collection
that cannot be traced to a separate origin : it appears to be of Persian
extraction and may perhaps be a survival from the Hezar Efsan, in
which connection it is worth while to note that, to the best of my know-
ledge, it is the only story in the whole work in which (except in the case
of " There is no power and no virtue but in God ! " and " I crave help
from God the Supreme ! " which occur once each only and which are
probably interpolations) the common Muslim formulas, such as <£ There
is no god but God," (< We are God's and to Him we return," " I take
refuge with God," etc., etc., which so abound in Arabic fiction proper,
are conspicuous by their absence.


291


of a king of the Benou Sasan or Sassanians 1 ), the localities
(the islands, i.e. peninsulas, of India and China and the
kingdom of Samarcand) and of the merest thread of
incident whereon to string a fable wholly Muslim in
colour and circumstance. The same remarks apply to
the first story, that of the Merchant and the Genie,
which is probably contemporary (or nearly so) with the
Introduction, but contains no trace of prae-Mohammedan
colour.

In enquiring into the age of this nucleus or original of

the work, we are at once confronted by two dates, between
which we must fix the period of its composition. In
the Tailor's Story,* a speech of the meddlesome barber
identifies the day of his adventure with the^ unfortunate
young man of Baghdad as the ioth of the month Sefer s
a.h. 653 {i.e. the 25th March, a.d. 1255), that is to say,,
in the 14th year of the reign of El Mustazim Billah, the
last Khalif of the house of Abbas, and only three years
before the storm of Baghdad by Hulagou and the ex-
tinction of the Khalifate. This date is that given by-
three texts, i.e. those of Calcutta (1839-42) and Breslatt
and Galland's MS., which agree in making the barber, by
way of confirmation, date his own story 3 in the reign
of the penultimate Khalif of the Abbaside dynasty, El
Mustensir Billah (father of El Mustazim), a.h. 623-640

1 Queen Humai belonged to the earlier dynasty of the Kayanians %
but her father (and husband) Behman was know a as Abou Sasan or
father of Sasan, he having a son of that name. Hence perhaps the
confusion of dynastic names.

2 Vol I. p. 273, 8 Vol. L p. 285.


292


{a.d. 1225-1242), and state that, after his expulsion from
Baghdad by the latter, he did not return till he heard he
was dead and another Khalif (i.e. El Mustazim) come to
the throne. The Calcutta Edition of 1814-18 is silent as
to both date and reign, whilst the Boulac Edition gives
the former as a.h. 763 (a.d. 1362), a time when both
Baghdad and Bassora, the two cities in which the scene
of the tale is laid, were in possession of the successors
of Genghiz Khan, and makes the latter the (six months')
reign of the parricide El Muntesir Billah, a.h. 247—8 (a,d.
861—2). The first is an evident error, as the barber is
described in the sequel of the Tailor's Story as an old
man past his ninetieth year and he speaks of himself in
his own story as already an old man at the time of his
adventure with the Khalif in question ; so that, even if we
suppose him to have been then sixty years old, this would
only bring us back (after making some necessary allowance
for the space which must have elapsed between the flight
of the lame youth from Baghdad and his encounter with his
persecutor at Bassora 1 ) to (say) the year of the Hegira 743
(a.d. 1343), at earliest, or nearly a hundred years after the
fall of the Khalifate. The second date is also a manifest
error, as, putting aside the fact that the time covered by
the story of the barber must be estimated at (at least)

1 The barber says (Vol. I. p. 316}, "I left Baghdad on his account and
wandered in many countries till I came to this city and happened on
him with you." It may be well to mention here that the city in question
is called " Bassora" in the Calcutta (unfinished) Edition and that of
Breslau, but by Galland's MS- and the Boulac and Macnaghten Editions
either a city of China or of Kashghar*


293


some years, the Khalif who banished the barber is
described by the latter as a prince "who loved the poor
and needy and companied with the learned and the
pious," a description which, though exactly tallying with
the character of the good and wise El Mustensir, as
given by Arab historians, is in no way applicable to the
melancholy madman El Muntesir. 1 It may, therefore, be
safely assumed that the date (a.d. 1255) given by Galland's
MS. and by the Breslau and Macnaghten Editions is the
correct one. For the reasons above stated, the Hunch-
back's adventure can hardly be dated earlier than ten
years later, i.e. A-D. 1265, or seven years after the fall of
Baghdad, 8 and in view of the fact (inexplicable, if we
suppose the story to have been written at or soon after
this date) of the absence of any reference t6 the terrible
event of the sack of the capital by the Tartars and of
the occupation, in immediate succession, of Bassora and
the other towns of Irak Arabi and Mesopotamia, events
which must for a time, at least, have agitated the whole
Muslim world, we may fairly suppose some half century
or more to have intervened before the composition of
the story. This brings us to the second decade of the
fourteenth century as the earliest period at which the

1 The mistake probably arose from the similarity of the two names,
which in the Arabic character might easily be read or written, one for
the other, by a careless copyist.

2 The words (which the Breslau edition and Galland's MS. put into
the mouth of the barber), "the Khalif was then in Baghdad/' would
seem to imply that the story was written after the fall of die Khalifats ;
but this is the only vestige of an allusion to the fact


294


Hunchback^ story, and therefore the rest of the original
part of the work, (of which it may be taken as a
fair specimen,) could have existed in its present form,
and Galland's MS., which is stated by a note appended
thereto to have been read by a Christian scribe of Tripoli
or Syria (who wishes long life to its possessor), 1 in the
year 1548, supplies us with the second date above
mentioned, i.e. that of the latest period at which it could
have been written or rearranged. I have said that I
consider the story of the Hunchback fairly representative
of the original work, so far as age is concerned, and
it would not be difficult approximately to prove, from
internal evidence, that the other stories are practically
contemporary with it. For instance, the introduction, in
the Story of the Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad,
of the Three Calenders (CarendeltyeJi), an order of religious
mendicants, so called after their founder, the Sheikh
Carendel, 2 not instituted (or at least not known under that
name) until the early part of the thirteenth century, and
the absence of any explanation of the name (such as
would probably have been volunteered by the story-teller,
had the order been, at the date of writing, of recent
institution), assign the composition of this story to the
same date at earliest as that of the Hunchback, as does
also the mention in the same tale- of Sultani peaches >
t\e. peaches from Sultaniyeh in Persian Irak, a town not
founded till the middle of the thirteenth century ; and in

1 Not its author, as erroneously stated by Caussin de Perceval, who
-draws from this misreading the inference that the work was composed
£a the eaiiy half of the x6th century. 3 A corruption of Khalender ?


295


Bedreddin Hassan the mention of a cannon 1 {midfaa), by
way of metaphor, warrants us in drawing a like conclusion
as to the age of this latter story. On the other hand,
the absence from the stories of the original work of
all mention of coffee (which, according to Abdulcadir el
Ansari, was first drunk in Arabia early in the fifteenth
century and the use of which spread all over the East
within the next hundred years 2 ) would prove that it
must have been composed before a.d. 1500, at latest.
Again (except in the story of Bedreddin Hassan, where,
as before mentioned, the passage in question is not im-
probably apocryphal), firearms are nowhere named or
alluded to in the original work, although cannon are
several times referred to in the later stories of the collec-
tion. Cannon were first used in Europe at the battle of
Crecy in 1346, but the researches of modern scholars
have proved that their use was known to the Arabs nearly
a century and a half earlier and was perhaps learnt from
them by the Crusaders. 8 Gunpowder is believed to have

1 This mention of cannon does not, however, occur in three out of
the five texts upon which my remarks are founded, and may, therefore,
very possibly be the interpolation of a later copyist, but the general
style of the story of Bedreddin prohibits us from ascribing to it an
earlier origin than that of the rest of the original work. See post as to
the date of introduction of firearms into the East.

a According to a Turkish writer (the author of the Jihan Numa or
World -demonstrator) coffee was discovered in A.H. 656 (a.d. 1258) by
a holy man of Mocha and used as a remedy for the itch.

8 Edward III. is said to have adopted the use of cannon on the report
of the Earls of Derby and Salisbury, who were present at the siege of
Algesiras in 1342, when the Arabs repelled the beleaguering army of
Alfonso XL by means of cr,nnon s which wrought immense havoc among
the besiegers.


2g6


been known to the Chinese (and probably also to the
Indians) from time immemorial, though they did not
employ it for warlike purposes, except by way of mines
and war-rockets or fusees, which latter the Arabs (who
under the early Khalifs were in constant communication
with both China and India l ) appear to have early adopted
from them and (in all probability) used at the destructive
sieges of Mecca in the years a.d. 683 and 69i~2. a The
Greek fire, mentioned by Joinville and other Christian
historians of the Crusades and described as exploding
in mid-air with a terrible noise, may be reasonably
supposed to have been rather some war-rocket of this
kind than the (incendiary) composition of naphtha, etc.,
known by the name. According to Arab chroniclers,
bombards or wooden cannon were used at the siege of
a town in Africa as early as A.D. 1205, and Ibn Khaldoun
and other historians testify that the use of firearms became
general among the Moors of Northern Africa and Spain by

1 Sind and Chinese Tartary formed part of the empire of the
Ommiade Khalifs and after the conquest, in the first century of the
Hegira, of Turkestan, regular commercial communication was estab-
lished with China by the overland caravan route from Aleppo through
SamarcancL Diplomatic relations, also, were early established between
the successsors of Mohammed and the sovereigns of Cathay, and the
Khalif el Mensour (second of the Abbaside dynasty) was on such terms
of alliance with the Emperor Sou-Tsong (a prince of the great Thang
dynasty, whose reign was glorified by the most famous of Chinese poets,
Li-tai-p6, the Hafiz of the Flowery Land) as to despatch to his aid
against a rebel a succour of four thousand Arab troops, who afterwards
settled in China, where their descendants are, it is said, still to be traced,

s See note, Vol. III. p. 194.


297

the end of the 13th century. The " perfervidum ingenium *
of the subtle and keen-witted Arab, quickened inta
abnormal productivity by the religious and political
system of Islam, so well suited to the character of the
race, carried him, as regarded the arts and sciences, far
in advance of his European contemporaries, and if the
inhabitants of the metropolitan provinces 1 of the Khalifate
did not perhaps altogether keep pace, in re militari, at
least with their more adventurous Spanish and African
brethren, there can be little doubt that they became
acquainted with the use of firearms long before it was
known in Europe ; but, even if we suppose the introduc-
tion of the new weapons to have been simultaneous in
the two continents, the absence of all authentic mention
of them would limit the most recent date to which it is
possible to ascribe the definitive composition of the
original work to the middle of the fourteenth century.

Among other arguments that have been put forward
in support of the theory referring the composition of the
original to a later date, it has been conjectured that the
colours of the fish in the story of the Enchanted Youth
were suggested by the yellow, blue and red turbans worn
by the Jews, Christians and Samaritans of Egypt, in
obedience to an edict, issued early in the fourteenth
century, of the Memlouk Sultan Mohammed ibn Kelaoun
and that the story-teller appropriated the colour red to
the fish into which the Magian inhabitants of the City
of the Black Islands had been transformed, because the
Samaritan religion (as described by an Arab writer) was
1 Irak Arabi, Irak Farsi, Mesopotamia, Syria, etc


298


£ mixture of Judaism and Magism ; but the theorist forgot
that the enforced wearing of distinctive colours by the
non-Muslim subjects of the Mohammedan empire dates
from the taking of Jerusalem in a.d. 636 by the Khalif
Omar ben el Khettab, whose ordinance nearly two cen-
turies later Haroun er Reshid revived, commanding the
Jews to wear a yellow, the Christians a blue and the
Magians a black galloon on their surcoats, and the red
colour given by the story-teller to the fishy representa-
tives of the latter sect was probably suggested by that
of the fire worshipped by them, the colour white being
that of the Ommiade dynasty and having been from time
immemorial appropriated to the true-believer. It has also
been argued that the occurrence in Bedreddin Hassan of
the word sahib (lit. friend or comrade, but colloquially
equivalent to our " Sir as applied to the Vizier Shems-
eddin, and the use of the word midfaa (cannon), said not
to have been employed in that sense in Egypt until the
year 1383, prove this tale to have been composed after
the end of the fourteenth century, at which time the
aforesaid title is asserted to have been first applied to
viziers; but both these objections are also founded upon
error, as it appears from the historians Mirkhond and
Ibn el Athir that the title Sahib was given to Ismail ibn
Ebbad, the great and good Vizier of the Buyide Prince
Fekhreddauleh, who died a.d. 995, and the word midfaa^
used in the contested sense, is found in a recipe for the
preparation of gunpowder given by an Arabic MS. of
the thirteenth century (discovered by M. Reinaud in the
Royal Library of St Petersburg), in which the text is


299

explained and confirmed by an illustration showing the
gunner firing a ball from the midfaa or hand-cannon,
by means of a flame applied to the touch-hole. Another
objection is founded upon the anachronism alleged to
be committed in most of the stories of the original in
the application of the title of Sultan, which is stated not
to have come into use as applied to sovereign princes
until after the twelfth century; but this argument in its
turn appears to be groundless, as the title was first as-
sumed 1 by the Ghaznevide prince Mehmoud ben Sebekti-
gin (as also by a Buyide prince) early in the eleventh
century, and repeated instances of this use of the word
Sultan occur in the ancient Arab historians, e.g. Et Teberi,
who lived in the ninth century and who not unfrequently
applies the title (which properly belongs to "a viceroy or
sovereign prince invested with the temporal power only,
to the exclusion of the spiritual) to the various Khalifs,
as also does another ancient writer, cited by Ibn Khelli-
kan. Yet another argument, put forward as tending to
prove that the collection dates from the end of the
fifteenth century at earliest, is the fact that the women
figuring in the stories, even those of high rank and
repute, are frequently represented as uncovering their
faces before strange men and otherwise behaving with
more licence and immodesty than is recorded of Muslim
females of an earlier age and that Es Suyouti, a writer
who flourished at the period above named, expressly
complains of the loose and immodest carriage of the
(Egyptian) women of his time. Complaints of this
1 According to the historian Khundemir.


300

kind, however, are found in earlier historians than Es
Suyouti, e.g. Ibn el Athir before quoted, who flourished
at the end of the twelfth and the beginning of the
thirteenth centuries, and who mentions the (to the Muslim
Puritan) shameful custom of going abroad with unveiled
faces, that prevailed among the women of Northern
Africa (even to those belonging to the royal house-
hold), under the rule of the Almoravides, in the early
part of the eleventh century. The above are the more
cogent of the arguments that have been advanced in
support of the theory of the late date of composition
of the original work : others are founded mainly upon,
doubtful particularities of manners and customs and dis-
crepancies of reckoning and description (almost certainly
attributable to the carelessness or ignorance of transcribers
or of the persons from whose dictation they wrote), and
seem to me to carry little weight, especially when allow-
ance is made for the close similarity (conceded by the
advocates of the theory in question) of the manners and
customs of the metropolitan countries of the Muslim
empire (and particularly of Irak Arabi, under the Khalifs
of Baghdad), to those of Cairo, under the faineant princes
of the second Abbaside dynasty, and the well-known
tendency of successive copyists gradually to corrupt a
work handed down in MS. by the introduction, conscious
or unconscious, of names and details belonging to the
language, manners and customs of their own time; 1 suffice

1 A comparison of the Boulac and Macnaghten Editions with that of
Breslau (admittedly, with the exception of the Wortley- Mont ague MS.,
the latest of the known texts of the complete work) f will show how far
this gradual invasion of corruption and alteration can extend*


30i


it to say that it seems to me, in the highest degree, im-
probable that the stories should (as is contended) have
been composed by an Egyptian of the sixteenth century,
(i,e, after the Turkish conquest in 15 17), and that yet no
mention, direct or indirect, should be found in them of
Any of the Memlouk Sultans or faineant Khalifs or indeed
of any sovereign of Egypt (Khalif or Sultan) later than the
Eyoubite Saladin at the end of the twelfth century.

As for the contrary theory of the remote origin of the
work, it is, I think, now pretty generally allowed that De
Sacy satisfactorily disposed of Von Hammer's arguments ;
but, since the date of the controversy, • fresh evidence has
been adduced in its support. This consists of a passage
from the great work of the Arab historian of Spain,
Aboulabbas Ahmed ben Mohammed el Meccari, entitled
" Windwafts of Perfume from the branches of Andalusia
(Spain) the Blooming" (a.d. 1628-9), to the following
effect. I translate directly from the Arabic text as edited
by the greatest (since De Sacy) of modern Arabic scholars^
the late M. Dozy.

" Ibn Said (may God have mercy on him !) sets forth in
his book El Muhella bi-s-shaar, 1 quoting from El Curtubi,
the story of the building of the Houdej a in the Garden 8
of Cairo, the which was of the magnificent pleasaunces of
the Fatimite Khalifs, the rare of ordinance and surpassing,

1 This title is wrongly cited by El Meccari or perhaps disfigured by
gome copyist. See post.

2 Houdej means * ' camel-litter," and this name was probably given to
the palace in question in compliment to the Bedouin favourite for whom
it was built.

1 i^e* the island Et Rauzeh.


302


to wit, that the Khalif El Aamir bi-ahkham-illah let build
it for a Bedouin woman, the love of whom had gotten
the mastery of him, in the neighbourhood of the Chosen
Garden 1 and used to resort often thereto and was slain,
as he went thither ; and it ceased not to be a pleasuring-
place for the Khalifs after him. The folk abound in
stories of the Bedouin maid and Ibn Meyyah of the sons
of her uncle 8 and what hangs thereby of the mention of
El Aamir, so that the tales told of them on this account
became like unto the story of El Bettal 8 and the Thousand
Nights and One Night and what resembleth them."

Aboulhusn Ali Ibn Said ben Mousa el Ghernati/ a
celebrated Spanish historian, poet and (especially) topo-
grapher, was born at Ghernateh (pranada) A.D. 1218 and
died at Tunis a.d. 1286. He had travelled in Egypt and
lived at Cairo in the middle of the thirteenth century,
and the above passage, which occurs in a description of
the latter city, is quoted by El Meccari from a work of his
which is not now extant, 6 so that it is impossible to verify
the citation. The surname El Curtubi 8 was common to
several Spanish-Arabic authors, but the one from whom
Ibn Said in his turn quotes is apparently Abou Jaafer ibn
Abdulhecc el Khezraji, 7 author of a history of the Khalifs.
He flourished in the middle of the twelfth century, but
no work of his is, to the best of my knowledge, extant

1 Apparently a royal pleasure-garden situate on the island.
3 i.e. her kinsmen.

8 See Vol. VIII. p. 137, note I. 4 The Granadan.

8 Hajji Khejfeh makes no mention of it
• The Cordovan

f As to whom and whose works Hajji Khelfeh is silent


303

for reference. On the strength of this passage, it is
argued that the collection existed, as a well-known work,
in the middle of the twelfth century, and this argument is
supported by the statement that the same quotation (from
Ibn Said) occurs in the Khitet of El Mecrizi, the Egyptian
historian and topographer, who died a.d. 1444 ; but the
evidence adduced is deprived of much (if not all) of its
value by the fact that the passage in the Khitet relates
(as I find by reference to a MS. copy of that work in
the British Museum) to the Thousand Nights, not the
Thousand and One Nights. The following is a translation
of the passage in question :

"The Khalif El Aamir bi-ahkam-illah set apart, in the
neighbourhood of the Chosen Garden of tt*e island Er
Rauzeh, a place for his beloved the Bedouin maid
[Aaliyeh 1 ], which he named El Houdej. Quoth Ibn
Said, in the book El Muhella bi-l-ashar, 2 from the
History of El Curtubi, concerning the traditions of the
folk of the story of the Bedouin maid and Ibn Menah
[Meyyah 1 ] of the sons of her uncle and what hangs
thereby of the mention of the Khalif El Aamir bi-ahkam-
illah, so that their traditions [or tales] upon the garden
became like unto El Bettal and the Thousand Nights and
what resembleth them."

El Aamir bi-ahkam-illah (a.d. i 101-29) was the seventh
Fatimite Khalif of Egypt, and had El Mecrizi mentioned
the Thousand Nights and One Night, as he mentions the
Thousand Nights, this would have been pretty conclusive
proof of the existence of the former collection in the

1 So called in a later passage. 1 U€. the adorned with verses.


304


thirteenth, if not in the twelfth century; but, as the
passage stands, the work referred to appears to be the
lost Arabic version of the lost Hezar Efsan. El Mecrizi,
who lived but a hundred and fifty years after Ibn Said,
is much less likely than El Meccari, whom more than
twice that time separated from the age of the Granadan
historian, to have erred in citing from the latter's work,
and the reasons before stated in support of the theory
that the Thousand and One Nights were originally com-
posed in the fourteenth century appear to me to preclude
the possibility that the discrepancy in the two passages
quoted is owing to an error on the part of the author or
copyist of the Khitet and that the work referred to in
the latter as the Thousand Nights could have been the
extant collection. The fact that Hajji Khelfeh, in his
great Bibliographical Dictionary, composed at the end
of the seventeenth century, names (and only names) the
Thousand Nights and makes no mention of , the Thousand
and One, which has been adduced as an argument in
favour of the probability of the identity of the two works,
seems to me rather to tell against the theory, as it is
evident, from the note appended to Galland's MS. and
from El Meccari's history, that the collection known as
the Thousand and One Nights bore that name long before
Hajji Khelfeh's time, whilst the latter, with the proverbial
contempt of the Oriental (and too often, indeed, of the
European) savant for romantic literature, would have
been almost certain to discard the comparatively modem
Thousand and One Nights as a mere collection of "silly
-stories " (to quote the words of the author of the Fihrist


305


apropos of the Hezar Efsan), whilst conceding to the
sheer antiquity of the Thousand Nights the barren honour
of a bare mention in his learned pages.

The third question, to wit, the nationality of the person
or persons to whom the original work is due, appears to
me to have been generally confounded by the opponents
of De Sacy's theory with that of the supposed reviser
or editor of the completed collection, who is pretty
generally allowed to have been an Egyptian, as suggested
by the great French Orientalist, and no considerable
objection appears to have been raised to the latter's
conclusion that the original work was written in Syria;
but from internal evidence it seems probable that one
or more of its authors belonged to Irak Ajabi or Meso-
potamia and especially to Mosul, of the peculiar dialect
of which place (as well as of Aleppo) the composition,
in the opinion of competent judges, bears considerable
trace, and the very objections raised, as before stated,
to De Sacy's theory of the age of the original, on the
ground that it is characterized by the employment of
names and titles which were not in use in Egypt until
a later period than that assigned by internal evidence to
the work, but which appear to have been early employed
in the disputed sense in the metropolitan or home
provinces of the Khalifate, seem to me to tell strongly
in favour of this latter hypothesis.

After its original composition, which (as I have said)
1 believe De Sacy to have been justified in assigning
to the 14th century, the work appears to have been
gradually swollen to its present bulk by the addition.


3o6


at various times and by various hands, of tales and
anecdotes of all kinds and drawn from a variety of
sources, some having been expressly composed or re-
written for the purpose, whilst others are in whole or
in part borrowed or adapted from independent works.
Some of these additions, such as The Malice of Women
(almost the only survival in which story of the old
Book of Sindibad appears to be the framework, the short
stories for the introduction of which it serves as an
excuse being, with occasional exceptions, purely Arabic
in character and bearing signs of a comparatively modern
redaction, subject, of course, to the limitation implied
in the absence of any mention of firearms or coffee),
Jelyaad and Shimas (apparently an old Indian story which
has undergone comparatively little" alteration) and Seif el
Mulouk are proved to have existed in an independent
form before the middle of the eleventh century. The
Queen of the Serpents is also, in all probability, a very
old story of Persian origin, largely altered (especially in
the two incidental tales, the Adventures of Beloukiya'
and the Story of Janshah) by the Arab author or authors
in the process of adaptation to Muslim manners and
customs, and the History of Gherib and his brother
Agib is, to all appearance, a rearrangement of some old
Bedouin romance, 3 notwithstanding the mention 8 therein

1 Taken, so far at least as the main incidents extend, bodily from the
Annals of Et Teberi.

2 The frequent occurrence of Persian names (e.g. Kundemir^ King of
Cufa, Merdas, Chief of the Benou Kehtan, the Arabs par excellence^.
Jawamerd and Courejan^ vizier and son of Julned ben Ktrker, King of
Yemen, etc.) may perhaps be taken to indicate a Persian Muslim as th@
composer or arranger of the story, 8 Vol. VI. pp. 150-1,


307

of arquebuses, by which word, in deference to lexico*
graphic authority, I have rendered the modern Arabic
bundukiyat) although it is not improbable that it was
inserted by some modern copyist in the place of benadic
or kisiy el benadic^ pellet-bows, as opposed to quarrel-bows
(khetatif). 1 The word bundukiyeh (sing, of bundukiyat)
means literally an implement for throwing pellets (bunduc)
of clay or lead, and (although I cannot find any example
of its use in any sense other than that of "gun") was
doubtless originally synonymous with cans el bunduc (sing,
of kisiy el benadic), a stone or pellet bow, as was the
earlier name of the hand-gun, bunduc^ so used metonymi-
cally for caus el bunduc. The names of the old amies de
jet were, on the introduction of firearms, transferred to
the new weapons, e.g. midfaa, a cannon, lit. a pushing
implement, hence a spring and (by metonymy) the tube
in which the spring worked, a spring-gun, even as the
word arquebuse itself appears to have been originally
applied to the arbalest or pellet-bow, arcubalista, from
which latter word or the Italian arcibugio (bow-hole or
tube) it is much more probable that it had its deriva-
tion than from the German haken-biichse or the Dutch
haekbus? The Voyages of Sindbad the Sailor, though
forming part of almost all known copies of the complete

The word khetatif usually means "hooks" ; but the context shows
that it is here applied, by a common figure of synecdoche, to the quarrel
or hook -bow.

a A curious confirmation of this reading is found in De Sacy*s
Chrestomathie Arabe, where, in quoting from a poem composed m
honour of the Buyide prince Seifeddauleh by the great Cufan poet
El Mutenebbi (a.D. 915-965), he renders the words kisiy el benadit


3o8


collection, are, as I have before observed, an independent
work and are so treated by the Editor of the (unfinished)
Calcutta edition of 1814-18, who inserts them at the end
of his two hundredth (and last) night, dividing them,
not into nights, but into seven tales or voyages, as in
Galland's MS. Some Oriental scholars are of opinion
that this tale is of Persian extraction and describes the
voyages (attributed, as is often the case in popular tales,
to a single person) of a colony of Persians, who are
known to have of old settled on the East Coast of Africa,
to Ceylon, Sumatra and other islands of the Indian Sea;
but, whatever may have been the primitive derivation
of the incidents described in the work known to us as
the Voyages of Sindbad, it appears almost certain that
it was suggested by and mainly composed of extracts
and adaptations from the writings of well-known Arab
geographers and cosmographers, such as El Edrisi, Ei
Cazwini and Ibn el Werdi, who flourished respectively
in the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries, and it may, there-
fore, in all likelihood, be attributed to an Arab author
of (at earliest) the beginning of the fifteenth century.
The History of King Omar ben Ennuman and his sons
Sherkan and Zoulmekan, with the exception of the in-
terpolated story of Taj el Mulouk and that (probably
Egyptian) of Aziz and Azizeh, may probably be attributed

(pellet-bows) '* arquebuses," thus showing that he considered the two
meanings synonymous. The verse in which the words occur runs thus
(the poet is speaking of the military skill of his hero), "The great
mangonels in his hand attain minute objects {Lt. marks) such as baflla
the pellet-bows,"


309

to a native of Syria, where the memories of the Ommiade
Khalifs (with anecdotes of whom, to the exclusion of
their rivals and successors of the house of Abbas, the
story abounds), long tenaciously survived, and appears
to have been written before the introduction of firearms,
although the gross anachronisms 1 with which it swarms
would seem to point to a later date. Uns el Wujoud
affords internal evidence of Egyptian and comparatively
modern origin and is one of the stories that are known
to exist in an independent form. The same may be said
of The Rogueries of Delileh and the Adventures of
Quicksilver Ali (practically one and the same tale), in
which the constant employment of Egyptian words, such
as kaak (gimblet-cakes), khelbous (buffoon), ??iehre?neh (for
mendil, handkerchief), etc, etc., is especially notable. The
mention of the firing of cannon, as a signal or salute,
by the Genoese Corsair-captain 3 in Alaeddin Abou esh
Shamat brings the date of this story down to the
fifteenth century, whilst the anachronisms (e.g. the making
the tomb of the dervish-saint Abdulcadir el Jinani, who
died in the latter part of the twelfth century, exist at
Baghdad in the time of Haroun er Reshid), which
characterize it, point to its having been composed at a
comparatively recent period, when the memories of the
time of which it treats had become confused, and the
author would appear, from internal evidence, to have
been a foreigner to Baghdad, probably an inhabitant of

1 e.g. the mention, as a well-known text-book, oi the Simples of Ib&
Beitar, who died a.d. 1245.
• Vol. III. p. 306,


3io

Cairo. Ardeshir and Hey at en Nufous, as well as its

apparent prototype Taj el Mulouk, would seem to be a
story of Persian origin, composed or remodelled shortly
after the date of the original work by an Arab of
the metropolitan provinces, and the same remark applies
to Hassan of Bassora, which is apparently (in part
at least) an adaptation of Janshah. Ali Shar and
Zumurrud may perhaps also be referred to a like date
and origin, but Taweddud is probably the work of
some Egyptian savant of the Shafiy school, who used a
conventional cadre of story, with the obbligato laying of
scene in the court and time of Er Reshid, to exhibit his
learning, the comparatively advanced views of anatomy,
medicine, astronomy and other sciences pointing to a
modern origin and the extracts (inter alia) from Coptic
almanacks 1 demonstrating, beyond reasonable doubt, the
Egyptian nationality of the author. The City of Brass
is in part a transcript or adaptation from Et Teberi and
other Arabic historians and topographers, and the gross
anachronisms which occur in it, (such, for instance, as
the making the prse-Islamitic poet En Nabigheh edh
Dhubyani a contemporay of the Ommiade Khalif Ab-
dulmelik ben Merwan (a.d. 685-705) and attributing to
the same time the discovery of an ancient tablet 3 deploring
the fate of " him who dwelt in Ten j eh (Tangters)
whilere," i.e. the last Edriside sovereign of Northern
Africa, who was, early in the tenth century, dethroned
.and put to death, with all the members of his family,


1 Vol. IV. pp. 364-6.


2 Vol V. p. 243.


3u

by the soi-disant Mehdi, Ubeidallah, founder of the
Fatimite dynasty), point to its having been composed
by a foreigner, probably a native of Spain or Northern
Africa, at a comparatively late period. The mention,
in Jouder and his Brothers, Kemerezzeman and the
Jeweller's Wife and Marouf, of the Sheikh el Islam, an
office said to have been first instituted by Mohammed II.
in the fifteenth century, after the taking of Constantinople
by the Turks in 1453, brings the date of the composition
■of these stories down to the early part of the sixteenth
century, after the establishment of the Turkish power in
Egypt, and the second (Kemerezzeman and the Jeweller's
• Wife) is probably the latest of the three, coffee being
mentioned in it with a frequency which shows that it
-had, at the time of the composition of the tale, been
long in common use. In this latter story also occurs 1
the only mention in the Nights of a watch and this may
perhaps be taken as corroborative evidence of the com-
parative modernity of the tale, although the inference by
no means follows as a matter of course. According to
Beckmann, 3 the first known mention of a watch occurs
in a sonnet of the Italian poet Visconti in the last decade
of the fifteenth century, but, as the Arabs early brought
vthe clepsydra or water-clock 8 to perfection (teste that said
to have been presented by Er Reshid to Charlemagne and
•others yet more elaborate mentioned in Oriental works),
and are known to have used weight-clocks striking the

1 Vol. IX. p. 180. 2 History of Inventions.

s Of which, by the way, it is remarkable that no mention is made in
■the Nights,


hours, at least as early as the twelfth century, 1 whereas
such clocks were, as far as can be ascertained, not
introduced into Europe till nearly two centuries later, 2
to say nothing of the probability (supported by no
despicable arguments) of their having been the first to
apply the principle of the pendulum to horology, 8 it
seems only reasonable to suppose that they invented
watches (or portable clocks) at a proportionately early
period, say at the end of the thirteenth or the beginning
of the fourteenth century. Abdallah ben Fazil and his
Brothers (apparently a modern and greatly improved
version or adaptation of the Eldest Lady's Story in
Vol I.) is also a story of non-Chaldsean authorship, as
is manifest from mistakes such as the supposing El
Kerkh (the well-known principal quarter of Baghdad)
to be a city on the Euphrates, and the use of Egyptian
words (such as derfil for dukhes, dolphin) stamps it as
of Egyptian origin, whilst the mention of coffee estab-
lishes its comparative modernity. The same remarks
apply to Ali Noureddin and the Frank King's daughter
and the Haunted House in Baghdad, in both of which

1 By the early part of the thirteenth century they had brought weight-
clocks to great perfection, as is evident from (inter alia) the account
given by Trithemius of the elaborate astronomical ' ' horologe " pre-
sented by the Eyoubite Sultan El Melik el Kamil of Egypt to the
Emperor Frederick II. in the year 1232, and which not only struck
the hours and told the day, month and year, but (like the Strasburg
machine) showed the phases of the sun and moon and the revolutions
of the other planets.

3 It seems doubtful whether the statement that a clock was m 128S
erected at Westminster can be received as authentic.

8 This invention is generally ascribed to Richard Harris, a.d. 164s.


coffee 1 is introduced, whilst the mention 8 of tobacco
(which was introduced into Europe by Jean Nicot in
1560 and the use of which did not probably become
common in the East until (at earliest) the next century),
stamps the (Egyptian) story of Aboukir and Abousir as
the most modern of the whole collection. Zein el
Mewasif is also an undoubtedly Egyptian and modern
story, as well as the story of the Two Abdallahs, though
the former appears to be somewhat less recent than the
latter in date, whilst the Merchant of Oman, Ibrahim
and Jemileh 8 and Aboulhusn of Khorassan, all three of
which are free from the gross anachronisms and historical
and topographical errors that characterize so many of the
stories whose scene is laid in Baghdad in the reign of
Er Reshid and his immediate successors, may there-
fore, in the absence of any distinctive sign of foreign
origin, be supposed to have been written by a native of
one of the metropolitan provinces of the Khalifate, soon
after the composition of the original work.

Many of the short stories and anecdotes of historical
places and persons, Khalifs, Sultans, princes, princesses

1 I may as well mention here that the word cahweh (coffee) occurs in
several other places in the Nights, of which I have taken no notice, as
it is evident, from the context, that the word is either a copyist's inter-
polation or is to be taken in the old Arabic sense of "wine. 1 ' The
word {cahweh) appears to have been one of the most ancient of the
Arabic names of wine and is found, in that sense, in many early poets,
such as Abou Nuwas and others ; taken literally, it means u an excitant "
or "appetizer," and in this sense the name was, on the introduction of
coffee, transferred from wine to the new stimulant.

3 The only one in the Nights.

8 These first two storiesappear to be the composition of the same author.


3M

and men of letters and poets, appear to have been
transcribed or adapted from the works of well-known
historians and geographers and from such famous col-
lections as the Helbeit el Kumeit and the Kitab el
Aghani. For instance, the story of Yehya ben Khalid
and the Forger (Vol. IV.) is found (in almost exactly the
same terms) in Fekhreddin Razi, the anecdote of Omar
ben el Khettab and the poor woman (Vol II. pp. 88 and
89) as well as the story of the Muslim Champion (Vol. V.)
and others in Et Teberi, The City of Irem (Vol. III.) in
El Mesoudi, The City of Lebtait (Vol. III.) in a Spanish-
Arabic historian, The Khalif El Mamoun and the Pyramids
(Vol. IV.) and The Justice of Providence (Vol. V.) as well
as certain parts of the Voyages of Sindbad and Seif el
Mulouk, in El Cazwini, Younus the Scribe (Vol. VI.),
Musab ben ez Zubeir (Vol. IV.) and The Lovers of the
Benou Udhreh (Vol. VI. p. 208) in the Kitab el Aghani,
Ibrahim of Mosul and the Devil (Vol. VI.) in the Helbeit
el Kumeit, The Devout Prince (Vol. IV.) in Ibn el Jauzi,
Ibrahim ben el Mehdi and the Barber Surgeon (Vol. III.)
in the Spanish historian Ibrahim el Andalousi, The Imam
Abou Yousuf with Er Reshid and Jaafer (Vol. IV.) in the
Mirat el Jenan, Abdurrehman the Moor's Story of the Roc
<Voh IV.) in Ibn el Werdi, etc., etc. To conclude this
cursory sketch, I have but to mention that the fables and
apologues, which form another considerable feature of the
work, have apparently been added to the collection from
time to time and appear to be mostly derived from Greek,
Persian and Indian sources, such as the Hitopadesa, the
Fables of ^Esop and Kelileh wa Dimneh.


315


IL

I have already cited Mr. Lane's opinion that the
Thousand and One Nights can only be said to be borrowed
from the Hezar Efsan in the sense in which the JEneid
is said to be borrowed from the Odyssey ; but even this
comparison does not seem to me to do justice to the
originality of the Arabic work, as there is certainly no
trace in it of an influence exerted by any Persian writer
in a similar manner to that exercised by Homer over
Virgil ; and putting aside the purely Arabic element, the
foreign portion of the work appears to have been taken
quite as freely from other sources, such as Greek, Indian
and (perhaps) even Chinese and Japanese, as from Persian.
Of this, well-known instances exist in the evident affinity
of the incident of the cannibal giant in the Third Voyage
of Sindbad and in Seif el Mulouk with the story of
Ulysses and Polyphemus, and of the Arabian traveller's
escape from the underground burial-place with the
similar passage in Pausanias, relating the deliverance of
the Messenian leader Aristomenes; in the stories of the
Barber's Fifth Brother, the Prince and the Afrit's Mistress,
the Merchant's Wife and the Parrot, the Fakir and the
Pot of Butter, etc., which have been traced back to the
Hitopadesa, Panchatantra, Kathasaritsagara, eta, in the
apologue of the Hedgehog and the Pigeons, which has
its apparent prototype in stories common to the Sanscrit,
Chinese and Japanese languages, in the version of the
legend of Susannah and the Elders, evidently borrowed
from the Apocryphal Book of Daniel, in the fables of


3i6


the Sparrow and the Eagle, the Cat and the Crow, the
Falcon and the Birds, etc., apparently derived from ^Esop
(with whom, by the way, the celebrated Oriental fabulist
Lucman or Lokman, quoted in the Koran, is supposed to
be identical, though by some Arabic authors he is stated
to have been a black slave, living in the time of David,
and by others an Arab of the time of Job and a kinsman
of that patriarch), and in numerous other fables, parables
and legends of saints and hermits, evidently referable to
Christian, Jewish, Brahman or Buddhist sources.

Nevertheless, numerous as are the instances in which
the authors of the Thousand and One Nights have drawn
upon foreign sources, the general tone of the work is
distinctly and almost exclusively Arabic, and Arabic of
Syria, Egypt and Chaldsea (of Irak-Arabi) ; whether the
scene is laid in Persia., India, Anatolia, Armenia, Arabia,
Greece, France, Genoa, Ceylon, Tartary, China or' any
other actually existing country or in such fantastic and
imaginary portions of the ideal world as Jinnistan, the
Mountain Caf, the White, Blue, Black or Green Countries,
the Camphor, the Ebony, the Khalidan or the Wac-Wac
Islands, and whether the persons who figure in the stones
are men or Jinn, Afrits or Angels, Indians or Chinese,
Christians or Jews, Magians or Idolaters, the scenery
and manners described, the persons, things and way of
thought and action are distinctly those of such cities
as Baghdad, Bassora, Mosul and Cairo. Even in tales
like the Queen of the Serpents, whose Persian origin is
unmistakable and whose scene is laid in a remote prae-
Mohammedan age, the Arab author has apparently most


carefully everywhere substituted, for the traces of Zendic
or Sabaean formulas and doctrines that may be supposed
to have existed in the original, the distinctive legends
and catchwords of the Muslim faith and cosmogony,
whilst avoiding a too obvious exposure to the charge of
anachronism by such expedients as the substitution of
Solomon and Abraham for the greater prophet whose
name is so constantly in the mouth of the personages
of Arab fiction. And this adaptation of the scenes and
persons of foreign countries to the illustration and glorifi-
cation of Arab thought and Arab personality is still more
accentuated by the fact that the men and manners repre-
sented are for the most part limited to those of the period
of the early Baghdadi Khalifs of the house of Abbas,
commencing with the second of that dynasty^ Abou Jaafer
el Mensour (a.d. 754) and practically ending with the
sixteenth, his great-grandson's great-grandson Aboulabbas
el Mutezid Billah, a.d. 89 2-92 2. 1 Of this period far the
most brilliant portion is that comprised between the years
786 and 809 and wholly occupied by the reign of the
fifth Khalif of the house of Abbas, the celebrated Haroun
er Reshid Billah, Aaron the Orthodox (or Well-advised 2 )
in or by God, not the Just, as in most versions. (The

1 The only later Khali fs mentioned in the Nights are the thirty-sixth
(of the house of Abbas) El Musten^ir (a.d. 1225-1242) and (by impli-
cation) the thirty-seventh and last, El Mustesim Billah (a.d 1242-1258),
in whose reigns the scene of the Barber's Story and that of the Tailor
(see VoL I.) is laid, the intervening three centuries and a quarter being
wholly unrepresented in the work, so far as the Khaliiate of Baghdad is
•concerned.

s Lit, He who follows in the right way.


3i8

first four successors of Mohammed, Aboubekr, Omar^
Othman and Ali, are known as el Khulfaa er rashidoun?
i.e. "the orthodox Khalifs.") This title was not, as is
commonly supposed, adjudged to Haroun by his sub-
jects in recognition of his qualities, as in the case of
Louis XIII. of France, dabbed (wildly enough) "le
Juste," but was conferred on him by his father El Mehdi y
four years before his coming to the throne, on the occa-
sion of his formal nomination as heir-presumptive (his
brother El Hadi being heir-apparent) to the Khalifat e,
in conformity with the habit of the Khalifs, the ecclesi-
astical nature of whose dignity is peculiarly apparent in
the hieratic titles assumed by them and answering to the
agno??iina bestowed (with the title of Ccesar) by the Roman
Emperors upon their successors-elect. Haroun, at all
events, justified his title, for, if anything but just, he
certainly was orthodox? at least in outward appearance,
being a strict observer (in public at least) of the burden-
some ritual of Muslim prayer and visiting offences against
orthodoxy with the utmost rigour. He made eight or
more pilgrimages to Mecca and Medina (all of which
he is said to have performed on foot\ attended by a
splendid suite, and defrayed, on a princely scale, the
expenses of some hundreds of pilgrims of the flower
of the learned and orthodox of his time, in the years
when he himself refrained from accomplishing the rite.

1 PL of rashid, dialectic variant oireshid.

3 The other reading " well-advised 5 ' is equally applicable, for his
advisers and ministers were the greatest and wisest that ever governed
an Eastern empire


319

He lavished money and gifts upon the inhabitants of
the Holy Cities and expended infinite pains and wealth
in assuring the pilgrim-track against the Bedouins. (His
wife Zubeideh also was prodigal in her expenditure upon
pilgrimages and the improvement and embellishment of
Mecca and Medina, the great aqueduct that supplies the
former with water having been built by her at an enormous
cost.) In private, Er Reshid was a voluptuary, whom the
prohibitions of religion availed not to restrain from the
indulgence of his every passion : his physicians attributed
his last illness and premature death to immoderate sexual
commerce and there seems no doubt that he was an
habitual wine-bibber, that is to say, a drinker to intoxica-
tion (after the manner of the Easterns, who conceive no
other aim in the consumption of intoxicants than in-
toxication and have therefore always preferred spirits of
various kinds, such as seker or date-brandy, etc., to wine)
of strong drinks, and not, as pretended by his apologists,
of the harmless nebiz, a very slightly fermented infusion
of raisins, whose use is sanctioned by the example of
Mohammed. The historian Shemseddin Yousuf Ibn el
Jauzi (author of the great Chronicle. Mirat ez Zeman, the
Mirror of Time) naively pleads, by way of excuse for
Haroun's offending in this respect, that he never got
drunk except behind a curtain, a trait which, if true, is
sufficiently characteristic of the hypocritical nature of the
Khalif. '

This prince is undoubtedly the hero of "The Thousand
and One Nights"; no other name occurs with a quarter
of the same frequency and upon no other character is


320


bestowed such wholesale laudation; indeed, we may well
suspect, from the prominence that is given to him and
the frequency with which anecdotes of his reign recur,
that a portion of the collection was taken bodily from
notes or compilations prepared at his especial instance,
by the celebrated poets and musicians (for the two
offices were frequently combined) who illustrated his
court. Never was reputation so ill-deserved as that of
the "good" Haroun er Reshid, who seems to have
been a happy compound of the worst characteristics of
such despots as Philip II. of Spain, Francis I. and
Henry VIII., combining, with the superstitious bigotry
of the first, the insatiable rapacity of the second and the
ferocious sensuality of the third, a bloodthirsty savagery,
peculiarly his own and only to *be equalled by a king of
Dahomey, and the almost hysterical sensitiveness to music,
poetry and wit that distinguishes the Arab and has so
often been found to exist side by side with the most
complete lack of moral consciousness and the most
refined excesses of unrelenting barbarity. This artistic
sensibility he appears to have shared with the majority
of his subjects (for there is no point in which there
is such general consent in Arabic literature as the
seemingly universal facility with which prince and
peasant, merchant and Bedouin, courtier and water-
carrier, alike appear to have at their command the
resources of music and poetry, the poorest fisherman
spontaneously reciting or composing the most elegant
verses in moments of emotion or emergency and showing
as exquisite a sensitiveness to the exercise of the two arts


321


in others as the best educated and most refined noble)
and to have carried to such an excess that the apposite
repetition of a witty story or of a harmonious piece of
verse, either remembered or extempore, frequently sufficed
to secure for the astute reciter the highest honours at
the Khalifs disposal or to save the greatest criminal or
the most hated enemy from the consequences of the
furious outbursts of passionate frenzy to which the
monarch was subject. This characteristic it was which led
him to encourage the arts and to select as his intimate
companions the best-known poets and musicians of the
time, (of whom two or three were always in attendance
upon him at all hours of the day and night,) upon whom he
lavished, with reckless prodigality, the immense sums 1 he
wrung from his subjects and from whose venal praises later
historians drew the false data on which they moulded the
imaginary character of the great and good Khalif of the
Sl golden prime" of Islam, a character as fabulous as
that of the Cid, whom modern research has proved to
have been a sort of Schinderhannes-Dalgetty, a brutal
and venal swashbuckler, " fighting for his own hand,"
under Arab or Spaniard, king or condottiere, as it
paid him best, and solacing his leisures with the inno-
cent pastimes of Jew-roasting and captive-baiting. 2 Like

1 His gifts were, however, always liable to be resumed with interest
at the donor's caprice.

5 He is said to have been in the habit of roasting his Jewish prisoners
over a slow fire, to make them disgorge, and to have, on more than one
occasion, caused his captives, old men, women and children, to be tons
'to pieces by his dogs,

vol. ix. m


322


Louis XIV., one of the most contemptible princes that
ever sat on the throne of France, his memory is glorified
by the borrowed lustre of the many men of genius and
distinction who flourished in his reign. Quoth a MS.
history cited by Dr. Weil, "Grave and pleasant people
gathered to Er Reshid as to none other ; the Barmecides
the noblest men of the world, were his viziers; Abou
Yousuf was his Cadi ; Merwan Ibn Abi Hefseh, who
in his century stood as high as earlier Jerir, 1 was his
poet ; Ibrahim el Mausili, unique in his time, his singer ;
Zulzul and Bersoum his musicians."

Haroun's reign was indeed rich in great men ; in addition
to those named above and to the distinguished statesmen,
generals and men of learning who surrounded him, the
poets En Nemri 7 Er Recashi, Dfbil el Khuzai, Salih ben
Tarif, El Asmai, Abou Nuwas, El Ettahi, Muslim ibn el
Welid, Aboulatahiyeh, Abou Ubeideh and many others
and the famous musician Isaac of Mosul, Ibn Jami and
Mukharik adorned his court, and Baghdad swarmed with
jurisconsults and legists of the highest distinction, who
officiated as judges and to whose wise and impartial
administration of the laws h$ owed his reputation for
justice. He was the last Khalif who held, undiminished
(with the exception of Spain, which was conquered a.d.
756 by the Ommiade 2 Abdurrehman, who there founded

1 See note, Vol II. p. 284.

8 The vast empire held by the Ommiade Khalifs comprised (in Asia)
Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Irak Arabi, Palestine, parts of Anatolia,
Karamania and Armenia, Persia, Turkestan, Beloochistan, Afghanistan
and Sind, (in Africa) Egypt, Fez, Tripoli, Tunis s Algiers and Morocco^


323

the independent Khalifate of Cordova), the empire won
by the early successors of Mohammed and the Benou
Umeyyeh ; even in his reign, the dominions of the
Khalifate were curtailed by the defection of his governor
of Africa, Ibrahim ibn Aghleb, and the revolt of the
Alide Edris and the consequent foundation of independent
kingdoms in Sicily and Northern Africa ; under his suc-
cessors province after province fell away, till the dominion
of the last Abbaside Khalifs was practically limited to
the city of Baghdad j hence his reign is not unnaturally
chosen by the Muslim historian to represent the golden
age of the Khalifate. Again, he was lavish in the
decoration and enrichment of Baghdad (which under him
attained its highest point of glory and prosperity), at the
expense of the provinces, which were disaffected to him
and continually in revolt against him; and these reasons,
combined with the acts and character of the able ministers
by whom the empire was ruled during the greater part of
his reign and the fact that, like many other cruel and
unscrupulous despots, he affected especially to cherish and
be accessible to his humbler subjects, amply suffice to
account for the most unmerited halo that has so long
clung about his name.

As an instance of the enormous sums which Er Reshid
lavished upon his favourites, during the heyday of their
prosperity, a historian states that, in the accounts of
the royal expenciiture for one year alo?ie, the sum of

and (in Europe) Spain and nearly half ot France, Sicily, Sardinia,.
Corsica, Malta and other Mediterranean islands and certain districts of
Italy, that is to say, the greater part of the then known world.


324


thirty millions of dirhems 1 is entered as the aggregate
amount bestowed, in money and goods, on Jaafer
the Barmecide, and Fekhreddin Razi mentions (on the
authority of the historian El Amrani), as occurring in
a similar lisr^, shortly before Jaafer's death, the almost
incredible item, "Four hundred thousand dinars* for a
dress of honour 8 for the Vizier Jaafer ben Yehya," to be
shortly followed by the entry, tragic in its terrible contrast,
"Ten carats 4 for naphtha and reeds for burning the body
of Jaafer the Barmecide. " Again, at the instance of his
great vizier, he gave Abdulmelik es Salih a sum of four
millions of dirhems ; 6 nor was he less lavish in his
gifts to the poets, musicians and literati who tickled his
intellectual palate with apropos recitals, songs, stories and
pleasantries, as well as to the men of learning and chicane
who extricated him by their ready wit from some dilemma
of conscience or by a legal quibble enabled him to
conciliate orthodoxy with the enjoyment of some pro-
hibited pleasure. His wife Zubeideh was equally prodigal,
especially in matters religious, having (according to Ibn
el Jauzi) spent three millions of dinars, 6 in the course of
a single pilgrimage, in expenses, gifts to the learned men
of Mecca and Medina and public works.

1 About j£75o,ooo. 8 About ^200,000.

* A khilaah or dress of honour (lit. that which one takes off from
one's own person to bestow upon a messenger of good tidings or any
one else whom it is desired specially to honour) included, however, a
horse, a sword, a girdle and other articles, according to the rank of the
recipient and might more aptly be termed a complete equipment of
honour.

§ About five shillings. § About £ ! 00,000. 6 About /"1,500,00a,


325

Notwithstanding his apparent liberality, Er Reshid was
greedy and rapacious and procured the money for his
prodigalities by a system of the most unscrupulous
robbery and extortion. The legitimate income of the
Khalifate is said to have been about twenty-six million
dinars, 1 yet so far did the treasures he accumulated, by
fair means or foul, under the mask of extravagant
liberality, exceed the wealth he flung away upon his
caprices that he is said to have left nearly a thousand
millions of dinars, 3 besides a fabulous quantity of precious
stones and other effects (among the rest, thirty thousand
beasts of burden, a hundred camel-loads of jewels and
twenty thousand male slaves) representing, in ail pro-
bability, a much larger sum; and these enormous riches
it is evident from the accounts of Arabian * chroniclers
that he amassed by the vilest and most oppressive means.
"He overwhelmed the people," says a modern historian,
"with taxes and imposts and not unfrequently despoiled
his generals and governors of the wealth they had gained
in his service/' Abdulmelik es Salih, mentioned above,
whom, at Jaafer's prompting, he had appointed governor
of Egypt and married to his daughter, he shortly after-
ward, on pretence of his intention to aspire to the
Khalifate, stripped of all his property and cast into
prison, where he remained till the death of the tyrant,
when the latter's successor, El Amin, released him and
made him governor of Syria, thus manifesting the utter
groundlessness of the accusation. Mohammed ben

1 About j£i 3,000,000.

s About half a milliard sterling or £500,000,000,


326


Suleiman ben AH, a distant cousin of the Kbalif, died
leaving property worth sixty millions of dirhems, 1 ap
parently inherited from his father, and Haroun seized
upon the whole estate, though near relatives came forward
to claim it, justifying his high-handed dealing with the
futile pretext that he had proof of the deceased's in-
tention to revolt against his authority and was therefore
entitled to confiscate his property. Again, the Viceroy
of Khorassan, Ali ben Isa el Mahani, had, by oppression
and extortion, wrung immense sums from his subjects,
which coming to the ears of the Khalif, he summoned
the offending governor before himself, but, instead of
compelling him to make restitution, he compounded with
him for the payment of a heavy bribe and continued him
in his government. This criminal transaction he several
times renewed, till, at last, finding probably that Ibn
Mahan became more and more difficult to squeeze, he
seized on his person by treachery and made himself
master of his wealth (said to have amounted to eighty
millions of dirhems 2 in gold and plate alone, besides
fifteen hundred camel-loads of precious stuffs) , all of
which, instead of restoring to its lawful owners, he
applied to his own uses. These are a few instances
only of the greed and rapacity with which his left hand
still took back all and more than his right had given
and of the criminal meanness by which he too often
filled his treasuries, and so notorious, indeed, were the
extortion and tyranny to which he owed his riches, that


- About ,£1,500,000. a About j£2,ooo,ooa


327

the celebrated ascetic Fuzail ibn Iyaz refused, though at
the risk of his head, to accept a gift that the Khalif
wished to bestow on him, alleging, as the ground of his
refusal, that the giver's wealth had not been honestly
come by.

The instances of his cruelty and treachery, that con-
front us in Muslim records, are no less numerous and
flagrant; and the words of Sismondi, in his unsparing
condemnation of the monster Alexander Borgia, we are
warranted by historical evidence in applying to Er Reshid,
who seems indeed to have been "a man whom no good
faith bound in his engagements, no sentiment of justice
checked in his policy, no compassion moderated in his
vengeance." Every means was good to him to destroy
his enemies, whether personal or political, .and he thought
nothing of violating the most solemn oaths, when he
desired to rid himself of a hated or suspected person,
hated and suspected often upon grounds that owed their
existence to his own jaundiced imagination. He began
his reign by putting to death the Amir Abou Isma, one
of his brother's counsellors, nominally because he was
one of those who had persuaded El Hadi to proclaim
his own son Jaafer heir-apparent to the Khalifate, to the
exclusion of himself and in contravention of the will
of their father El Mehdi, but really from one of the
pettiest motives of personal spite, because the unlucky
Abou Isma had, on one occasion, given Jaafer the pre-
cedence over Haroun, when the two princes were about
to pass over a bridge. There can be little doubt that
he was an accessory to the murder of his brother El Hadi


328

by the contrivance of their mother Kheizuran ; but this
latter crime may be said to have been committed in
self-defence and therefore to some extent excusable, as
El Hadi had resolved upon the assassination of Haroun,
to remove him from his son's path. Another of the
earliest acts by which he signalized his accession was
to procure the poisoning of the Alide Edris ben Abdallah,
who, after the failure of his kinsman Hussein ben Air's
attempt to seize the Khalifate at Medina and the death
of the latter at the battle of Fakh (a.d. 786), fled to
North-western Africa and there founded the Edriside
kingdom of Mughreb or Morocco; and not content with
the success of his murderous plot, he caused put to
death an Egyptian postmaster, Wezih by name, who
had sheltered the fugitive and furthered his escape to
Morocco, rewarding the poisoner, Shemmekh, with the
latter's post. The Alide Mousa ben Jaafer, one of the
most venerated elders of the Shiah sect, he cast into
prison and caused to be secretly murdered, because, on
a certain occasion, when both were visiting the Prophet's
tomb at Medina, after Er Reshid had greeted Mohammed
with " Peace be on thee, O cousin ! " 1 Mousa followed
suit with "Peace be on thee, O father I" as was indeed
his right, 2 and his treatment of Yehya ben Abdallah,
another descendant of Ali, was yet more dastardly and
barbarous. Yehya, who was the uncle of Hussein ben

1 Mohammed was the nephew of Abbas, the founder of the family o£
that name, and Haroun was therefore his cousin, many times removed

2 As a lineal descendant of Ali and Fatimeh, the Prophet's daughter^
he was the son, ue. grandson, many times removed^ of Mohammed.


3^9


Ali above mentioned and fought by his side at the dis-
astrous battle of Fakh, fled, after the loss of that day,
to Media, where he established himself so strongly and
became so formidable that Er Reshid despatched against
him El Fezl the Barmecide, who, with his usual politic
mansuetude, succeeded in inducing the rebel to renounce
his pretensions in favour of the regnant prince, on
promise of fair treatment by the latter. A formal treaty,
embodying the terms of compromise, being entered into
and solemnly ratified by Er Reshid, Yehya proceeded to
Baghdad and surrendered himself to the Khalif, who
received him with all the external signs of distinguished
honour, but shortly after, on pretext of some formal flaw
in the contract, discovered by the crown lawyers (from
whom the declaration is said to have been, extorted by
main force), cast the unlucky Alide into prison, com-
mitting him to the custody of Jaafer. The generous
Barmecide, revolted at his master's signal ill faith, took
pity on the prisoner and connived at his escape; but Er
Reshid afterwards recaptured him and again cast him
into prison, where he caused him to be secretly murdered,
He put to death Abou Hureireh, Viceroy of Mesopotamia,,
because he had suffered defeat at the hands of the Khari-
jites, and caused the Khuramiyeh heretics, followers of
the Persian socialist Mezdek, on the suppression of their
revolt in Azerbijan by Abdallah ibn Malik, to be put to
the sword and their women and children sold as slaves;
nor was it without extreme difficulty that the sanguinary
monarch was prevented from exterminating the inhabi-
tants of Mosul and razing that great city to the ground^


330


after the putting down of a popular rising led by Etta!
ben Sufyan. During his last illness, having captured
Beshr ibn Leith, brother of the rebel Refia ben Leith,
who had established himself in Transoxania, he caused
him to be dissected alive by a butcher, whom he
summoned for that purpose, and bidding his attendants
lay before him the fourteen pieces into which the un-
fortunate prisoner had been divided, gloated over them
till he fell into a swoon. This was the last public act
of the " good " Haroun er Reshid, who expired three
days later, after having, almost with his latest breath,
ordered the execution, upon some trifling occasion of
offence, of his physician the Christian Jebril (Gabriel)
ibn Bekhtiyeshou. Jebril was however saved from his
threatened doom by the death of his ferocious master
in the night.

These are some of the enormities committed by the
u good " Khalif, and these, although they sink into
insignificance compared with the fiendish barbarity and
ingratitude of his treatment of the Barmecides (an account
of which I reserve for another page), suffice to show
that he can lay no claim to the attributes of goodness,
generosity and justice with which popular tradition has so
persistently credited him, and I confess that, for my own
part, I cannot discover any reason why he should be
gratified with the name of "Great," except upon the
principle in accordance with which that title is awarded
to the contemptible Louis XIV., whose only *laim to
greatness lay in the fact that great men lived and worked
(and often starved) whilst he ate &nd drank and dallied


33*

with his titled harlots. 1 In reality, he appears to have
been a morose and fantastic despot, pursued, like Philip
II. of Spain, by the spectres of his own crimes, tormented
at once by superstitious remorse and jealous suspicion,
which, while oppressing his waking hours and troubling
his natural rest with the tortures of gloomy and foreboding
thought, again and again impelled him to commit anew
the misdeeds whose recollection embittered his existence
and to deprive himself, at their malignant instance, of the
only men about him on whom he could reckon for fidelity
and ability combined. His fits of gloomy depression and
his chronic restlessness by night and day are constantly
referred to in "The Thousand and One Nights," and it
was in endeavouring to shake off these haunting miseries
that he seems to have met with the many adventures that
are recorded of him and of which a considerable portion
may fairly be supposed to have been invented and arranged
for him by the distinguished poets who were his constant
associates.

1 Er Reshid's apologists claim for him that he was generous and a
patron of art (claims of which my readers are qualified to judge, without
further remark on my part) and that his (alleged) intercourse with
Charlemagne proves him to have been superior in enlightenment to his
contemporaries of the Muslim world. The legend of the diplomatic
rapprochement between the two monarchs is of exceedingly doubtful
authenticity ; but, supposing it to be in every respect founded upon fact,
it is evident to a student of Muslim history that Harouns overtures to
the Western Emperor were dictated by no motives of policy more
enlightened than the desire to embarrass his hated enemy Nicephorus s
Emperor of Constantinople, against whom he seems to have cherished
a peculiar spite.


332


One of the latter, Abou Nuwas ibn Hani, is a curious
figure in the history of literature. A debauchee of the
most debased and sensual order, he, nevertheless, in
addition to his undoubtedly high poetical genius, too
often prostituted to the vilest purposes, seems to have
been remarkably free from the servility that generally
distinguishes the courtly poet and to have cherished a
rude but real love of independence and a sense of the
beauties of freedom which led him to prefer the rough
licence of the wine-shop and the pleasure-garden to all
the luxurious allurements of the Court ; and we find the
Khalif, who set on his society a value equivalent to the
difficulty he found in procuring it, often reduced to all
sorts of expedients to drag him from his favourite haunts.
Like the great anacreontic poet oi early mediaeval China,
Li-tai-pe' (with whom he was nearly contemporary), 1 the
messengers of his royal master were frequently compelled
to force him from the taverns, where he revelled with his
low associates, for the purpose of amusing the Khalif in
his fits of depression or of advising him upon state and
general matters ; and long before Walter de Mapes or
Hafiz, he declared his intention of ending his days in the-
exclusive worship of the divinities of wine and pleasure,
rhyming in Arabian verse his version of "Mihi est pro~
positum in taberna morL" Nor in this avowed devotion
to the forbidden delights of conviviality was he alone
among the denizens of the court of the Khalifs. Baghdad s
in the reign of Er Reshid, seems to have been preeminently

1 He was born in a.d. 753, ten years before Li-tai-pe^s death. Some
accounts, however, date his birth nine years later.


333


& city of pleasure. Thither flocked from all parts of
the Oriental world the most noted and capable poets,
musicians and artificers of the time ; and the first thought
of the Arabian or Persian craftsman who had completed
some specially curious or attractive specimen of his art
was to repair to the capital of the Muslim world, to submit
it to the Commander of the Faithful, from whom he rarely
failed to receive a rich reward for his labours. Surrounded
by pleasure-gardens and groves of orange, tamarisk and
myrtle, refreshed by an unfailing luxuriance of running
streams, supplied either by art or nature, the great city
on the Tigris is the theme of many an admiring ode or
laudatory ghazel; and the poets of the time all agree in
describing it as being, under the rule of the great Khalif,
a sort of terrestrial paradise of idlesse anoV luxury, where,
to use their own expressions, the ground was irrigated
with rose-water and the dust of the roads was musk, where
flowers and verdure overhung the ways and the air was
perpetually sweet with the many-voiced song of birds,
and where the chirp of lutes, the dulcet warble of flutes
and the silver sound of singing houris rose and fell in
harmonious cadence from every corner of the streets of
palaces that stood in vast succession in the midst of their
gardens and orchards, 1 gifted with perpetual verdure by

1 The garden of an Eastern mansion is usually situate within the
interior court of the building ; but the palaces of Baghdad, in the time
of the Kbalifs, appear (so far, at least, as concerned those in the suburbs,
such as Rusafeh on the eastern bank of the Tigris, which consisted
almost entirely of the pleasure-houses of the nobility) to have been
surrounded by pleasaunces and plantations,, in addition to those thef
enclosed.


334


the silver abundance of the Tigris, as it sped its arrowy
flight through the thrice-blest town.

Baghdad, indeed, was in many respects emphatically
a " citta cortigiana," a sort of Vienna or Bucharest of the
olden time, carried to the higher evolution correspondent
with the more sensuous influences of the luxuriant East :
and the state of public morality there was naturally of
the laxest Especially was this the case with the higher
classes. Drunkenness and debauchery of the most un-
compromising kind prevailed amongst them in despite
of the precepts of the Koran; and men and women
seemed to vie with each other in refinements of luxury
and dissipation. 1 As was the case in a period that offers
no small analogy to that of which I speak, the epoch of
the Roman decadence, the women'' of the upper classes,
to whom was apparently allowed an amount of liberty,
or rather licence, curiously at variance with our Western
ideas of Eastern domestic polity, appear to have been
especially corrupt ; and many are the tales of their
licentious habits and adventures found in the Thousand
and One Nights, reminding us of the Memoirs of Casa-
nova, although almost always redeemed by touches of
pathos, poetry or romance, which are wanting to the
latter's dry and unattractive records of common-place
galanterie. The Story of the Porter and the Three
Ladies of Baghdad, that of the Barber's Second Brother

1 It is curious to note that (according to modern travellers) the intro-
duction of coffee and tobacco seems to have resulted in the extinction of
drunkenness, even in Egypt, always the most debauched pari of the
Muslim world, thus insensibly effecting a reform which no rigour ol
prohibition, no severity of punishment, had availed to bring about


335


and several others contained in the old version, give some
idea of the licence of the time, and examples are still more
abundant and circumstantial in the tales that compose the
comparatively unknown portion of the collection.

As may well be supposed, under these circumstances,
the upper classes of the time were not characterised by
any especial fervour of religious devotion. Notwith-
standing the fanatical orthodoxy of the Khalif and of
his chief wife and cousin, Zubeideh, a woman as super-
stitious, as cruel and as cultivated as himself, 1 the general
religious sentiment of the Court of Baghdad appears to
have been a sort of refined atheism, borrowed from
Persia and having in all probability some affinity with
Sourl quietism, which, whilst conforming in outward
matters to Muslim observances, was yet, in the spirit
of the Persian usage expressed by the word ketman
(concealment), perfectly well understood and recognised.
This tendency had apparently its origin with the illus-
trious Barmecide (properly Bermeki) family; and their
opinions, whilst not interfering with . a professed con-
formity to the tenets of Islam, appear to have been shared
by most of the great officers and nobles of the kingdom,
in the same manner as the religious doctrine known as
Babism is said at the present day to underlie the higher
ranks of modern Persian society. Nevertheless, the lower

1 She is reported to have owned a hundred slave-girls, each of whom
knew the Koran by heart and had the task of repeating a tenth part
thereof daily, so that her palace resounded with a perpetual humming,
iike that of bees. It is said that the report of this princess's piety and
munificence still lingers among the Bedouins, by whom her name is even
now held in reverence as that of a saint


336


-and middle classes of the people were still profoundly
and fanatically attached to the Faith of the Unity of
God ; nor were examples of Mohammedan fervour and
zealotry wanting that would not have misbeseemed the
strictest epochs of religious enthusiasm. Er Reshid
himself was completely under ecclesiastical control, es-
pecially that of the Chief Imam of his reign, the Sheikh
Abou Yousuf, who seems to have been more of a courtier
than a priest and to have ingratiated himself with the
Khalif by his audacious adroitness (of which at least
one instance finds mention in The Thousand and One
Nights) in twisting the interminable subtleties of Mo-
hammedan ritual and dogma to suit the monarch's
varying caprices and inclinations; and one of the most
salient examples of ascetic devotion that mark the history
of Islam is recorded in the person of the Khalif s own
son, who, no doubt impelled by disgust at his father's
cruelty and rapacity, as well as at the licence of his
luxurious court, became a hermit, saint or "friend of
God" (as the Muslims have it), under the circumstances
detailed in the story of The Devout Prince.

Under Haroun er Reshid, Baghdad was undoubtedly
the metropolis of Muslim civilisation. 1 It is said to
have been as populous as modern Paris, 3 and the rapid

1 Cordova and Grenada, which the brilliant culture of the Khalifs of
Spain afterwards raised to the first place, were as yet in their infancy.

3 According to some historians, the Tartar conqueror Hulagou slew no
less than eighteen hundred thousand of the inhabitants on the capture of
the city in 1258. This number is possibly exaggerated, but no chronicler
,puts the number of the victims at less than eight hundred thousand.


337


growth of its manufactures and the immense trade
attracted from all parts of the world by the presence
of a brilliant and prodigal court, early resulted in making
the great body of its population well-to-do and contented.
It was one of the most orderly and well-governed cities
in the world of its day, and such was the comparative
quiet and security for life and property that reigned
within its walls, (thanks to the astute administration of
the Barmecide Viziers, who anticipated Fourier's doctrine
of the "passionel" treatment of criminal inclinations,
carrying out the theory of " set a thief to catch a thief "
with the greatest success and effectually keeping under
roguery and crime by employing certain selected rascals
of high capacity, such as Ahmed ed Denef, Hassan
Shouman and Ali Zibec, mentioned in the Thousand
and One Nights, as subordinate prefects of police to
coerce and checkmate their former comrades,) that the
city was generally known by the sobriquet of Dar es
Selam 1 or Abode of Peace.

It was, indeed, to the great statesmen of the house
of Bermek that the reigns of the early Abbaside Khaiifs
owed almost the whole of the prosperity and brilliancy
that distinguished them. Of an ancient and noble

1 Opinion, however, differs as to the origin of this name, which
is said by some authorities to refer to the sacred character of the
city, as the seat of the Imam or spiritual head of the Faith, and by
others to have been given to the capital as a sort of talisman in memory
of one of the seven " gardens "of the Muslim Paradise. It may also
have been a mystic or hieratic name, as Valeria was that of ancient
Rome.

VOL. IX. %2


338


Persian family,* Khalid ben Bermek, the first of the
house that appears upon the scene of Arabian history,
became Vizier and Minister of Finance to the founder
of the Abbaside dynasty, Aboulabbas the Blood-shedder,
and after serving his successor El Mensour in a like
capacity, was appointed to the government of Mosul and
Azerbijan, which post he held till his death. Aboul
abbas was the first to institute the office of Vizier and
Khalid was the earliest of the great ministers who ruled-
the immense dominions of the Khalifs with almost regal
power. During his long tenure of office he practically
governed the empire, the Khalifs of the house of Abbas
taking little personal part in the burdensome task of
administration. He appears to have shown the highest
talents for government and was,, particularly successful
in consolidating and setting in order the finances. It-
was under his direction that the city of Baghdad waa
built in the reign of El Mensour, when that prince
elected to abandon the former capital of the Khalifs,

1 Bermek, the father of Khalid, was a Magian of Khorassan and the
officiating minister of the great fire-temple, the Noubehar, at Balkh,
where his ancestors had long held the same office. (It is even stated by
El Mesoudi that Bermek was the title, not the name, of the high-priest
of the fire, but this statement does not appear to be supported.) As
tenders of the sacred fire and guardians of the temple, the family ranked
among the chief grandees of the realm, and according to one author
(the poet Mohammed ben Munadhir), who speaks of the Barmecides as
" the descendants of the kings of the house of Bermek," it could lay
claim to royal descent Bermek is said to have had dealings with the
later Ommiade Khalifs and to have stood high in their favour, but the
£rst of the family to come into unequivocal prominence is his son Khalid*


339


Damascus, for a spot less impregnated with the memories
of the fallen dynasty, and it is to his wise, just and
liberal rule that the rapid prosperity of the new capital
must be ascribed According to El Mesoudi, Khalid
surpassed, in prudence, bravery, learning, generosity and
noble qualities and accomplishments, even his more
celebrated descendants.

His son Yehya we first meet with as governor of
Armenia under El Mensour. Under the latter's suc-
cessor, El Mehdi, he became Secretary of State and
was entrusted by the Khalif with the charge of his
son Haroun's education. Yehya was the foster-father
of this prince, who was born nearly at the same time
as his own son El Fezl, and an exchange of infants for
some reason took place between the mothers, Kheizuran
suckling Fezl and Zubeideh (Yehya's wife) Haroun. The
two boys thus became foster-brothers (a quasi-refat'ion
which, though merely nominal in Europe, is invested by
Mohammedan law with rights and obligations nearly
akin to those of actual brotherhood), and in consequence
of this and of the semi-paternal authority exercised over
him by Yehya, in his capacity of governor, Haroun was
wont to call the latter father. It was to the prudence
and boldness with which, during the short and stormy
reign of the crackbrained tyrant El Hadi, Yehya played
the difficult and dangerous part of governor and adviser
of the heir presumptive (a role to which he clave with
extraordinary fidelity and magnanimity, under the most
discouraging circumstances), that the latter owed his
throne and indeed his life, and the Barmecide came neas


340


to paying dear for his loyalty to the youth whom his
royal father had committed to his care, El Hadi, ex-
asperated by the courage and skill with which he opposed
' his scheme for substituting his own son Jaafer for Haroun
in the succession, having cast him into prison, where
he would certainly have perished, but for the opportune
intervention of Kheizuran, whose favourite he was and
who procured the timely assassination of the Khalif.
Immediately after El Hadi's death, Yehya was released
and at once applied himself to securing the accession
of his pupil, whom he succeeded in seating on the
throne, without serious opposition. Haroun, thus become
Khalif, hastened to acknowledge his obligations to Yehya
and without delay appointed him his Chief Vizier, hand-
ing him (in token of investment with the executive power)
his signet-ring, with the words, " My dear father, it is
owing to the blessings and good fortune that attend you
and to your excellent management that I am now seated
on this throne, wherefore I confide to you the direction of
affairs." Yeyha was the wisest statesman, the most
benevolent and magnanimous man of his time. Quoth
Ibn Khellikan, " He was perfect in talent, judgment and
noble qualities, highly distinguished for wisdom, noble-
ness of mind and elegance of language." He is called
by a contemporary man of letters "the president of the
Divan (or Board) of generous actions," and Oriental
writers agree in ascribing to him all noble qualities that
can combine in a man to compel the love and reverence
of his kind. From the time of Haroun's accession to
that of the horrible catastrophe which extinguished the


34*


house of Bermek (i.e., — with an insignificant interregnum,
durihg which, for some unexplained cause, El Fezl ben
Rebya, the bitter and unscrupulous foe of the Barmecides,
was entrusted with the Vizierate, — from a.d. 786 to
a.d. 803), Yehya and his sons Fezl and Jaafer wielded,
with practically uncontrolled authority, the sovereignty
of the East, Er Reshid (who seems from the moment of
his sudden elevation to the throne to have devoted
himself well-nigh exclusively to the curious mixture of
debauchery and religious observances by which he en-
deavoured to conciliate his passion for all kinds of
pleasure with the superstitious regard for the external
appearances of orthodoxy that was no less pronounced
a feature of his character and to have concerned himself
little with the business of government), entirely devolving
on them the executive power and endorsing all their
acts and orders with a servility of which some singular
instances are given in Muslim records. By his wise and
high-minded administration, the great Vizier completely
reorganized the vast empire of the Khalifs, still somewhat
shattered by the intestine disorders that had troubled the
last years of the Ommiade princes and the reigns of
their immediate successors and raised it to a height of
general prosperity which was the wonder of the world.
He regulated the incidence of the taxes on a principle
that, whilst benefiting the treasury by the increased return
it occasioned, alleviated the burdens of the poorer classes,
established a complete system of posts all over the empire,
expended a great part of the revenue upon all sorts of
magnificent public works 8 making roads and building


342


mosques, caravanserais, bridges, etc, etc, on every side*
improved and perfected the organization of the police,
encouraged agriculture and industry, procuring the in-
troduction and cultivation of new arts and dividing the
various crafts into guilds or syndicates, charged with the
office of regularizing trade and the prevention of fraud,
and by proper regulations immensely augmented the
yield of the mines and other sources of natural wealth,
organized public education on a liberal basis, founding
schools, colleges and libraries in profusion and extending
the most lavish encouragement to scholars, literati and
men of science, native and foreign, continuing and foster-
ing the splendid civilisation of the Persians and Grseco-
Latins and revivifying its partial effeteness with the
quickening energy of the Arab genius ; in short, he
established and set in working order all the various and
elaborate machinery of government that is necessary to
the political and social economy of a great and hetero-
geneous empire, and founding law, order and justice
everywhere, brought the dominions of the Khalifate to
a pitch of civilisation and prosperity, moral and material,
which Europe did not even begin to emulate till many
centuries later and of which no country of that time,
with the exception, perhaps, of China, then in the full
flower of its civilisation, under the great dynasty of the
Thangs, could offer even a partial example.

Yehya's four sons, Fezl, Jaafer, Mohammed and Mousa,
were renowned for the same qualities and virtues as their
illustrious father and all ordered their lives and actions
in the spirit of his magnanimous saying, "This life is


343


a series of vicissitudes and wealth is but a loan ; let us,
then, follow the models offered by our predecessors and
leave a good example to those who come after." The
Khalif el Mamoun 1 is reported to have said, " Yehya ben
Khalid and his sons had none [to equal them] in ability,
in culture, in liberality and in bravery: it was well said by
a poet, £ The sons of Yehya are four in number, like the
elements : when put to the test, they will be found the
elements of beneficence. 5 Quoth the poet Merwan ibn
Abi Hefseh, 'The power of doing good is in the hands
■of princes ; but the noble Barmecides did good and
harmed not.' i Their hands, 7 says Mohammed ibn
Munadhir, * were created for nought but deeds of bene-
ficence and their feet for the boards of the pulpit;'
and quoth El Atawi, ' The generous Barmecides learned
beneficence and taught it to the human race; when they
planted, they watered, and they never let the edifice they
founded fail into ruin ; when they conferred favours on
mankind, they clothed their bounties, in a raiment that
■endured for ever.'" The romantic generosity of the
Barmecides it would, indeed, be difficult ' to exaggerate.
Incredible as the instances of their liberality given in the
Thousand and One Nights may appear, they are but one or
two of hundreds of similar and well-authenticated anecdotes
of the munificence of this truly princely house, and it is
hardly too much to say that the history of the world

1 He was brought up by Jaafer, whom Haroun appointed his governor,
whilst his other son El Ainin was in like manner committed to Fezl'g
charge.


344


makes no mention of a family every member of which was
distinguished by so extraordinary a combination of the
noblest qualities of heart and head. No contemporary
historian or poet can name them without breaking out
into passionate praise of their nobleness and as passionate
lament for their unmerited fate. "Alas for the sons of
Bermek," cries Salih ben Tarif, "and the happy days of
their power ! With them the world was as a bride ; but
now it is widowed and bereft of its children." "The
Barmecides," says Fekhreddin Razi, "were to their time
as a plume to the brow, as a crown to the head. The
world was requickened under their administration and the
empire carried to the highest pinnacle of splendour. They
were the refuge of the afflicted, the providence of the
unfortunate/* And all who speak pf them echo the same
strain. Each of the four sons was distinguished by some
special quality, in addition to the virtues which were the
general appanage of the family, and the only weak point
in their character appears to have been the noble fault
they shared with Julius Caesar 1 and Napoleon III. and

x Nunquam nocere sustulit, says Suetonius $ **he could never beai
to do harm." No feeling is more continually excited by the study of
history, ancient and modem, than one of poignant regret that so many
great and beneficent rulers should altogether have lacked that power of
salutary severity, that (alas 1 in the interests of humanity, involved in
the first condition of government, the summary suppression of "leg
coquins et les laches," too often) necessary brutality, which carries men
of far inferior genius, such as Bismarck, triumphantly over all opposi-
tion and enables a Narvaez to die peaceably in his bed, happy iss
the comfortable assurance that he has no enemies to forgive^ having
industriously shot them alL


345


to which they, like their compeers of the West, in all
probability owed their ruin, i.e. the generous magnanimity
and high-souled mansuetude, which led them to regard
with heroic indifference the miserable plots of the enviers
and calumniators, the assassins and intrigants, the " fishers
in troubled water," the Fezl ben Rebyas and Mohammed
ibn Abi Leiths, the Cassii and Cascse, the Gambettas and
Rocheforts, the professional seditionists and Bulgarian-
Atrocity-mongers of their time, and forbade them to crush,
by severe but just and necessary measures of repression,
which, timely employed, might probably have preserved
them for the general benefit of humanity, the dastardly
intrigues which resulted in their destruction. 1

Uniformly gifted as were the four sons of Yehya, Jaafer
appears to have surpassed his brothers in mental power
and accomplishments, whilst in no way yielding to them
in all the virtues and nobilities for which they were

1 The following are a few of the sayings of the Barmecides, as culled
from contemporary historians. "The joy of him who is promised a
favour is not equal to mine in granting one." " As for the man to
whom I have done no good, I have still the choice before me [whether
to favour him or no] ; but him whom I have obliged, I am for ever
engaged to serve." " Spend, when fortune inclineth to thee, — for her
bounty cannot then be exhausted, — and when she turneth away, for she
will not abide with thee." " The benefactor who remind eth of a service
rendered alloyeth the value thereof, and he who forgetteth a favour
received is guilty of ingratitude and neglect of duty." ** When a man's
conduct towards his brethren is changed on obtaining authority, we
know that authority is greater than he " {i.e. that he is too small for
his dignity). "Injustice is disgraceful ; an unwholesome pasture-ground
is that of injusticeo"


346

conspicuous, and to have been distinguished, in particu-
lar, by a sweetness of temper and a chivalrous courtesy
of demeanour, which Fezl, eminently good and noble
as he was, lacked, of his own confession, he having a
certain abruptness of manner that made him, though
more in appearance than in reality, savour somewhat
of the Burbero Benefico (the beneficent curmudgeon) of
■Goldoni.

Jaafer was indeed a remarkable and attractive figure
in the history of the time. To the virtues of liberality,
beneficence and hospitality that distinguished almost to
excess all the members of his illustrious house, he added
accomplishments and qualities which were peculiarly his
own and which make him by far the most loveable and
attractive character of the many that live for us in The
Thousand and One Nights. " In the high rank which he
-attained," says Ibn Khellikan, a and the great power which
he wielded, in loftiness of spirit and in the esteem and
favour shown him by the Khalif, he stood without a rival
His disposition was generous, his looks encouraging, his
demeanour kind ; his liberality and munificence, the rich-
ness and prodigality of his donations are too well known
to require mention." He had been educated with Er
Reshid, and for some years after the latter's accession,
served him as secretary of petitions, an arduous office
(especially in the case of a monarch whose peculiar pre-
tension it was to be always accessible to any of his
subjects who had a request to make or a grievance to
state), which he seems to have filled with the utmost
brilliancy, showing, in particular^ an intimate acquaintance


347


c with the bewildering subtleties of Mohammedan law and
jurisprudence. He was a man of exquisite culture and
was accounted the best stylist of his day. He seems,
indeed, to have been possessed, in a remarkable degree,
of all the accomplishments of his time ; and in particular,
his knowledge of and power of composition in classical
Arabic was so extensive and so elegant that amateurs of
the pure literary style are said to have purchased, for their
weight in gold, the scraps of parchment on which, as
secretary of petitions, he had been wont to inscribe his
decisions. His knowledge of law and jurisprudence was
phenomenal and in these branches of learning he had
been the favourite pupil of the celebrated Abou Yousuf,
the first legist of his time. "He expressed his thoughts
with great elegance and was remarkable fox his eloquence
and command of language; it is recorded that one
night he wrote, in presence of Er Reshid, upwards
of a thousand decisions on as many memorials that
had been presented to the Khalif and that not one of
these deviated in the least from what was warranted by
the law."

Universally gifted, he put down, by fair means, the
troublesome tribal war in Syria, and as viceroy of all
the provinces of the East, restored peace and good
government to the sorely mismanaged African provinces,
•whilst his brother Fezl performed the like office tor
Khorassan and the Western provinces of the empire.
He educated the young prince El . Mamoun, who never
forgot his wise and noble teachings and lived to
honour them by proving the best and most high-minded


348

monarch of the house of Abbas, 1 and being, on the death
of the queen-mother Kheizuran, appointed chief Vizier,
continued during the remainder of his life to exercise the
functions of that high office with as much wisdom, justice,
generosity and benefit to the kingdom as his father,
brother and grandfather. Compassionate and forgiving
almost to excess, no trait is recorded of him that shows
any bitterness against personal enemies, nor does he ever
appear to have availed himself of his immense power to
punish the attempts that were perpetually made to injure
him by men jealous of his character and position. On
the contrary, such was his mansuetude and sweetness of
nature, that he was always ready to intercede for the
culprits, in cases where they had exposed themselves to
the Khalif s displeasure. His strength of mind and moral
courage were no less remarkable than his patience; the
innate nobility of the man shines out in every act and
every word; and he was always ready, often at the
imminent risk of his own life, to intervene between the
royal tiger whom he served and the unfortunate people
under his control Kindly, generous and charitable to
excess and at the same time a firm, just and far-sighted

x To this prince, much more aptly than to his capricious and un-
principled father, might the epithets of "Good'* and " Great" be
applied ; beside his many virtues, he had a much more real love and
a deeper apprehension of the liberal arts and sciences than Er Reshid
and did infinitely more than the latter to encourage and reward culture
and learning ; and this may probably be in great part attributed to
the beneficent influence exercised over him by the teachings of his
governor T aafer„


349


administrator, he was passionately beloved by the peopk
of Baghdad, whose miseries he spared no pains to alleviate
and whose general prosperity may, in no small degree, be
attributed to the untiring courage and self-sacrifice with
which he was always ready to shield them, to the utmost
of his power, from the ferocity and rapacity of his royal
master.

Fezl, as the foster-brother of Er Reshid, was originally
his most intimate friend and the companion of his private
pleasures, being his constant associate in the carouses
in which the Khalif passed his evenings, in the midst
of his favourite women and musicians. For some un-
explained reason, he appears to have become converted
to the renunciation of such enjoyments as^ wine-bibbing
and listening to music and tale-telling (forbidden to the
strict Muslim) and to have abruptly withdrawn from the
intimacy of the Khalif and forsworn association in his
pleasures. This conduct on Fezl's part being probably
construed by the umbrageous monarch as an implied
censure on himself, he transferred his especial favour
to Jaafer, a man of more savoir-vivre and easier com-
position than his austerer brother and more richly gifted
with those social qualities of wit and gay and gallant
humour so highly prized by Eastern princes in the com-
panions of their pleasures ; and he presently further
emphasized his displeasure with Fezl by transferring the
seals of government from him to Jaafer, as soon as the
death of his mother Kheizuran, whose favourite Fezl was,
left him at liberty to do so, appointing the deposed
minister, whose services were too necessary to the empire


3SO


to be altogether dispensed with, to the most important-
extra-metropolitan post at his disposal, i.e. the govern-
ment of Khorassan, an office involving the administration:
of nearly one-half of the dominions of the Khalifate.
The manner in which this transfer of power was re-
ceived by the Barmecides, as told by Ibn Khellikan, is
strikingly illustrative of the magnanimity of the members
of that illustrious house and their invincible attachment
to one another. According to the famous biographei,
Er Reshid said to Yehya, " Dear father, I wish to transfer
to Jaafer the signet now held by my brother FezL I am
ashamed to write that order to Fezl : do it for me,"
Yehya accordingly wrote to Fezl, saying, " The Com-
mander of the Faithful commands that the signet be
passed from thy right hand to th$r left ; " to which Fezl
made answer in these words : " I hear and obey the
word of the Commander of the Faithful concerning my
brother. No favour is lost to me, which goes from me
to Jaafer, and no rank is taken from me, when he receives
it." On hearing this reply, Jaafer exclaimed, "What an
admirable being is my brother ! How noble is his soul ! "

Naturally enough, Jaafer and his brilliant kinsmen
were the objects of the bitterest jealousy and hatred to
the courtiers and ecclesiastics of the day, — to the former
especially for their Persian origin and for their commanding
talents and popularity, and to the latter more particularly
for their tolerance and their well-known, or at least
shrewdly-suspected, adherence to some form of Persian
Rationalism, — and many were the efforts, supported by
lies and calumnies of the most unscrupulous character^


3Si


made by the enemies of the Bermekis to induce Er Reshid
to withdraw his favour from them. These were long
unsuccessful and would doubtless have continued to
prove so (for, morose and passionate despot as he
was, Er Reshid seems to have cherished a real affection
for the brave and brilliant companion of his youth and
to have estimated, at his real value to himself, the
just, wise and gentle counsellor of his mature years),
but for a circumstance that quickened the smouldering
distrust and jealousy of the tyrant into an irrepressible
outburst of fury and caused him to commit an act of
which he afterwards bitterly repented, when (in Arabic
phrase) repentance might no longer profit him. The
circumstance in question was of a curious character.
Jaafer appears to have, by the brilliancy of his con-
versational and other accomplishments, rendered himself
so indispensable to the Khalif as a companion, as well
as a minister, that the latter could not bear to be an
hour without his company and for the purpose of having
him always within call, insisted upon his occupying
apartments within the private portion or serai of the
palace; but, as royal etiquette, to which Er Reshid was
devoutly attached, forbade the extension of this favour
to any but actual members of the royal family, he con-
ceived the plan of marrying Jaafer, pro forma, to his
favourite sister, the Princess Abbaseh. 1 The marriage

1 Abbaseh was Haroun's elder sister and owed her great favour
with him to the manner in which, during El Hadi's lifetime, she had
exerted her influence over the latter to secure her younger brother's life
and liberty.


352


was concluded, but the Khalif, with the unreasonable
pride of an Eastern despot, forbade the parties to cohabit,
an injunction which Jaafer himself made no effort to dis-
obey. Abbaseh, however, was an exceedingly beautiful
woman and she and Jaafer (who was then in the prime
of manhood and one of the handsomest men of his day)
fell passionately in love with each other, nor was it long
before mutual desire prevailed to overleap the prohibited
bounds. The most probable account of the way in which
this came about seems that of Jafei (the author of the
Mirat el Jenan), who represents the princess as having
prevailed, by mingled threats and persuasions, upon
Jaafer's mother Ettabeh to present her to him, whilst
under the influence of wine, in the guise of the female
slave of whom it was her habit to make her son a gift
every Friday. This was accordingly done, and Abbaseh,
after having passed some time in Jaafer's company, dis-
covered herself to him, whereupon alarm dispelled the
fumes of the wine and he sought out his mother and
said to her, " Mother, thou hast ruined me." His words
were prophetic. Abbaseh proved with child and gave
birth to twins, 1 who were at once despatched to Mecca
and there reared in secret by two devoted female atten-
dants. The secret was kept from Er Reshid for about
a twelvemonth, but was at last discovered to him in
consequence of an incident peculiarly characteristic of
the East. Abbaseh, with the unreflecting passion of
Eastern ladies of high rank, beat one of her women
with whom she was vexed, and the girl, in her spite,
* Some accounts mention one child only, but most say two.


353


revealed the fatal secret to. Zubeideh, who seized an early
opportunity of gratifying her rancour against both her
husband's favourite sister and the Barmecides (especially
Yehya, who, as intendant of the palace, enforced the rules
of harem discipline with a strictness that was far from
pleasing to the imperious Sultana), by repeating it to
Er Reshid. Haroun's mind would already appear to
have been poisoned against the Barmecides, not only by
the inherent jealousy of a mean nature against the
overwhelming superiority of the family in all qualities
that confer distinction on their possessors, but by the
enormous popularity which their good deeds had won
them and the venomous insinuations of those miserable
reptiles that thrive by calumny and treachery, whose role
has always been so considerable in Oriental, even more
than in European, courts, and by whose reports he was
(or feigned to be) persuaded that Yehya and his sons
aspired to oust himself from the Khalifate, an accusation
for which no shadow of reason appears. Other subjects
of displeasure are mentioned by historians as probable
reasons for his treatment of the Barmecides, such as the
conduct of Fezl above mentioned and that of Jaafer in
releasing the unhappy betrayed Alide Yehya; but there
can be no doubt that Haroun's chief and indeed only
reason was his jealousy of the great family to whom he
owed life, kingdom and renown. As to this, contemporary
authorities are unanimous ; according to Ibn Khellikan,
Said ben Salim (a well-known grammarian and tradi
tionist of the time 1 ), when asked what crime the
1 See Vol, IV. p. 234.

vox* ix* 23


354


Barmecides had committed, answered, "Of a truth, they
did nothing to warrant Er Reshid's conduct towards them ;
but their day had been long and that which continues
long becomes irksome. There were persons of the best
of men, who were fatigued with the length of the reign
of the Khalif Omar [ibn el Khettab], though its like was
never seen for justice, security, wealth and victories;
they also bore with impatience the sway of Othman,
and both were murdered. Besides, Er Reshid saw that
generosity was become their wont, that the people were
loud in their praise and that men's hopes were fixed on
them and not on himself. Less than this suffices to
excite the jealousy of princes; so Er Reshid conceived
ill will against them, wreaked his vengeance on them and
tried to find out faults. Besides this, a certain degree
of presumption was sometimes visible in the conduct of
Jaafer and Fezl, although Yehya was exempt from this ;
for he had more solid experience than his sons and better
skill in affairs. This induced some of their enemies,
such as Fezl ben Rebya, [Mohammed ibn Abi Leith] and
others, to have recourse to Er Reshid, from whom they
concealed the good done by the Barmecides and only
told him of their faults, till they brought about what took
place."

That the discovery of the disobedience of his orders by
Jaafer and Abbaseh was not (as is contended by some
historians) the real cause of Er Reshid's rage against the
Barmecides, but only an additional element of exasperation
and perhaps indeed a mere pretext, is evident from the
deliberation with which he set about the ruin of the


3SS


bouse, the time which he allowed to elapse between his
discovery of the fatal secret and the execution of his
vengeance and the sudden and treacherous manner in
which he carried out his sanguinary purpose. Nearly a
year 1 would appear to have intervened between Zubeideh's
malicious denunciation and the Khalifs return from
Mecca, whither he had betaken himself, under pretence
of pilgrimage, for the express purpose of verifying her
disclosures. Here he found out Abbaseh's children and
convinced by their resemblance to both parents of the
truth of the story, caused them to be secretly conveyed to
Irak, without letting any one know of the matter. Witfo
the Barmecides, meanwhile, he dissembled, showing them s .
if possible, more than his usual favour, till his return s .
when he halted at a place near Ambar, on the Euphrates,
and after bestowing rich dresses of honour on the brothers
and treacherously lulling to sleep any suspicions that
Jaafer might have conceived 2 by insisting upon his giving
himself up to conviviality in his own tent, what while he
himself indulged in wine and mirth in the royal pavilion*
suddenly, in the dead of the night, summoned one of his
pages, Yasir 8 by name, and commanded him to go at
once and bring him Jaafer's head Yasir, greatly shocked,.

1 Arabic historians are far from precise on this point.

s Jaafer appears to have had some presentiment of approaching
danger, which depressed his spirits and made him reluctant to engage
in the carouse to which the Khali f urged him.

s Some authorities name Mesrour, but Yasir was certainly the
executioner, though Mesrour might have been present as his superior
officer and chief " Sword of the Khalifs Vengeance."


356


exclaimed, " Would I had died before this hour ! " but
dared not disobey and repaired to Jaafer's tent, where he
found him carousing and acquainted him with his dreadful
errand. Jaafer prevailed upon the messenger, who, like
all the world, was indebted to him for many a favour, to
return to the Khalif and tell him that he had put him
to death. "If he expresses regret," said the Vizier, "I
shall owe you my life ; and if not, God's will be done."
Yasir accordingly returned, leaving Jaafer without the
tent, to Er Reshid, who said to him, "Well?" Where-
upon he told him what had passed between himself and
the Vizier. "Vile wretch/' cried the Khalif, making use
of the foulest imprecation known to the Arabs, " if thou
answer me another word, I will send thee before him to
the next world I " The page accordingly went out and
striking off Jaafer's head, carried it to Er Reshid, who
looked at it awhile, then bade him fetch two persons
whom he named and whom, on their appearance, he
commanded to strike off Yasir's head, alleging, with
characteristic hypocrisy, that he could not bear the sight
of Jaafer's murderer. 1

Before giving the order for Jaafer's execution, Er
Reshid had despatched an express to his chief of the
police at Baghdad, bidding him seize Yehya and Fezl,
before the news got wind, and cast them into the Hebs
ez Zenadikeh % at Baghdad, and after secure the persons
of their brothers, sons, grandchildren and all their other
relatives and connections, even to their clerks. The

1 Jaafer was thirty-seven years old at the time of his deatk,
8 i.e. the prison of the Zeiiadikeh or atheists ; see post.


357

order reached the Master of police in the middle of the
night and he at once proceeded to execute it, securing
the persons of the whole of the Barmecide family, as
well as of their agents and dependents. According to
Et Teberi, not a single person who had ever been con-
nected with them was allowed to escape: every member
of the family (with three exceptions) was put to death,
even to their infant children, to the number, it is said,
of over a thousand persons, and it need hardly be added
that the "good" Harpun er Reshid confiscated to his
own use the whole of their immense possessions. The
race was absolutely exterminated, Yehya, Fezl and a
brother of the former, Mohammed ben Khalid by name,
being the only persons who appear to have survived
this frightful massacre. The latter languished in prison
during Er Reshid's life and was liberated by his successor.
Some historians cast doubt upon this wholesale slaughter,
but it is sufficient to ask, if it did not take place, how
comes it that so numerous and notorious a family should
all at once have so completely disappeared from the face
of the earth as to leave no trace behind them ?

The only members of the family whose fate is circum-
stantially related are Yehya and Fezl. With the former
the sanguinary tyrant appears to have played as a cat
with a mouse, hypocritically offering him his liberty ; to
which he replied that he preferred to remain with his
son, with whom he was imprisoned, under circumstances
of the greatest rigour, till his death, which occurred
(a.d. 805) at the age of 74, after two years' imprison-
ment His foster-brother Fezl Er Reshid caused to be


358


beaten till he was well-nigh dead, to wring from him
a confession that he had secreted property beyond the
immense amount that the Khalif had confiscated, but to
no avail. Fezl was healed of the frightful wounds caused
by this horrible treatment 1 by a doctor, to whom, on
his recovery, he sent twenty thousand dirhems 2 that he
had borrowed from a friend ; but the doctor, though
poor and in great distress, with rare magnanimity refused
the money, saying, " I cannot accept payment for curing
the greatest of the generous." In this wretched plight
the two unfortunate survivors of the great Persian house
displayed all the magnanimity for which they had been
renowned in the days of their prosperity, supporting
with high-souled patience and the noblest philosophy the
miseries inflicted on them by "the base rancour of the
despot they had so faithfully served. The following
touching anecdote will give some idea of the magnani-
mous spirit of the younger prisoner and Yehya yielded
nothing to his son in the heroic long-suffering with which
he bore his most unmerited woes. Fezl's love for his
father was extreme : when in prison in winter they
could not get warm water, which was necessary for
Yehya, an old man over seventy, Fezl would take the
copper ewer and apply it to his own stomach, so as in
some measure to take off the chill for his father's use.
He survived the latter three years and died in prison in

1 He had received two hundred lashes, inflicted with such unsparing
brutality that the doctor who tended him supposed from the state of
his back that he had suffered at least a thousand strokes.

s About £500.


359


November 8o8, four months only before the death of
Er Reshid. 1

The mock repentance shown by the latter, as evinced
in his unreasoning anger against the innocent minister
of his vengeance upon Jaafer, did not prevent him from
offering the last indignities to the great Vizier's remains.
His head he caused to be hung up at one and his trunk
at the other end of the bridge over the Tigris, opposite
the part where the Serat, the canal on which Baghdad
was originally built, joins that river. 2 Here they remained
for some months, till Er Reshid, being about to leave
Baghdad, caused them to be taken down and burnt like
those of the vilest criminal, the greatest indignity that
could be offered to a Muslim, whose religion attaches
the utmost importance to due burial and inculcates the
necessity of appearing before God whole as at birth.

Authorities differ as to what became of Abbaseh, the
hapless cause of this horrible tragedy ; but, according to
the most credible accounts, she was shut up in a chest
and thrown into a pit, which her terrible brother caused
to be then and there dug under the floor of her apart-
ment Then he sent for her children, who (says the old

1 He is said to have frequently repeated the following verses of a
contemporary poet in prison: "We address our complaints to God
in our sufferings, for it is His hand which removeth pain and affliction.
We have quitted the world and yet we still exist therein ; we are not
of the living, neither are we of the dead. When the gaoler chances
to enter our cell, we wonder and exclaim, * This man has come from
the world.' "

3 i.e. Kern es Serat {i.e. the fork or place of junction of the Sera;),,
see ante, pp. I et seq-


3^0

chronicler) showed like two pearls, looked upon them
pitifully and with tears in his eyes and commanded them
to be cast alive into the pit, which he then caused to be
closed up, weeping crocodile-tears the while. Thus a
MS. history, whose writer is unknown, but other authori-
ties state that he had the children burnt alive. Ibn el
Jauzi relates that Yehya's wife Zubeideh, Haroun's foster-
mother, after with great difficulty forcing her way into
his presence, showed him his milk teeth and the curls
of hair that she had kept from his childhood and con-
jured him by these tokens of her claim upon him for
fosterage (one of those most sacred to a Muslim) to
spare her husband and son. The mean-minded Khalif
was not to be moved, but offered to buy the relics
of her; whereupon she, in her indignation, threw them
down at his feet, saying, " I make thee a present of
them." It is related by Mohammed ibn er Rehman, a
contemporary aalim or man of learning and a member
of the Khalif's family (the Hashimis), that he once saw
at his mother's a woman of reverend mien, but poorly
clad, who was introduced to him as the mother of Jaafer
the Barmecide and said to him, " There was a time when
four hundred female slaves stood awaiting my orders and
yet I thought that my son did not provide for me in
a manner adequate to my rank; but now my only wish
is to have two sheepskins, one for a bed and the other
for a covering." Mohammed gave her five hundred
dirhems, 1 and she well-nigh died for excess of joy.

Among the various pretexts put forward by Er Reshid
1 About £12 iOfo


3<5i


to cover the real reason of his rancorous spite against the
Barmecides, he caused it to be bruited abroad that they
were, though Muslims in outward show, fire-worshippers,
like their ancestors, at heart ; but the futility of this
accusation is evident from the single fact that Fezl, when
governor of Khorassan, pulled down the ancient temple
{i.e. the Noubehar before mentioned) of the Fire, of
which his forefathers had been the officiating priests, and
built a magnificent mosque, exceeding in splendour the
Temple at Mecca, in its stead. A more probable accusa-
tion is that they were at heart Zen dies or Mundanists,
a sect of Epicurean freethinkers, whose opinions, after a
more primitive and practical fashion, followed in much
the same Positivist track as those of the disciples of
Auguste Comte in the present day and to which many
of the most distinguished and ablest men of the day
belonged. It is, therefore, not impossible or improbable
that the Barmecides belonged to this sect ; but it is fair
to state that no shadow of proof exists of this. On the
contrary, although they did not carry out the observances
of Muslim ritual with the same mechanical exactitude as
the hypocritical and superstitious tyrant their master, who
is said to have prayed a hundred inclinations (rekaat)
a day, they seem to have in no way offended against
the tenets of Mohammedanism and to have fulfilled its
external requirements with the moderate strictness of men
of the world who made no pretension to pietism. Haroun
attempted to give substance to this accusation by ordering
Yehya and Fezl (as has been before mentioned) to the
prison of the Zendics {Hebs ez Zenadikeh).


362


The horror and discontent excited in Baghdad by the
miserable fate of the much and justly loved family was
extreme and neither the sanguinary edict issued by the
tyrant, to the effect that all who mourned the Barmecides
should share their fate, nor the executions that followed
it, availed to silence the popular grief and indignation.
Elegies were composed by hundreds upon the fallen
house and all the poets of the time (even those attached
to the court) mourned them. " It was a heavy blow for
me," cries Er Recashi, one of Er Reshid's " boon com-
panions," " to lose those princely stars by whose generous
showers we were watered, when the skies withheld their
rain. Let beneficence and the world say adieu to the
glory of the Barmecides. By Allah, O son of Yehya, but
for fear of spies and of the Khajif 's eye, which sleeps not,
we should compass thy gibbet [like the Kaabeh] and kiss
it as men kiss the Sacred Stone ! " " On seeing the sword
fall on Jaafer," says Dibil el Khuza'f, "and hearing the
Khalif's crier proclaim vengeance on Yehya, I wept for
the world and felt how true it is that the goal of man's
life is the quitting it." And indeed it would be hard to
name a poet of the day who did not tune his lyre to the
same sorrowful strain.

The following anecdotes will give some idea of the
violence of the popular mourning for the Barmecides.
The Khalif, hearing that, despite his prohibition, an old
man named Mundir used every day to take his station
before one of their ruined houses and harangue the
passers-by on the great and noble deeds of the fallen
family, sent for him and sentenced him to death; but


3<53

Mundir, obtaining leave to speak, drew so affecting a
picture of the beneficence by which the Barmecides had
rescued him from ruin and misery, that Haroun, moved
to momentary repentance, not only pardoned him, but
made him a present of a plate of gold, which the in-
corrigible old man received without a word of thanks,
remarking only, "Yet another benefit that I owe to the
Barmecides ! " Abou Zekkar, a blind singer of Baghdad
attached to Jaafer's household, who was present when
Mesrour (or Yasir) cut off the latter's head, was instant
with the executioner to slay him also and spare^ him (as
he said) the misery of surviving his noble benefactor;
which, being told to Haroun, he was touched by his
fidelity and ordered him to be attached to his own suite,
at the same salary as that allowed him by Jaafer. Ibrahim
Ibn Othman ibn Nuheik was not so fortunate. Haroun,
having heard of his lamentation for the Barmecides,
invited him to the palace and after plying him freely
with wine, drew from him, by hypocritical professions
of regret for Jaafer's death, the avowal that he could
not approve of his sovereign's treatment of so excellent
a man and his opinion that it would be difficult to replace
him; whereupon the treacherous tyrant threw off the mask
and saying, " God damn thee ! " ordered him to immediate
execution.

After endeavouring in vain, by measures of the utmost
rigour, to suppress the public manifestations of regret
and love for the Barmecides, Er Reshid was ultimately
compelled to desist and allow the people to give vent to
their feelings as they pleased ; but the popular indignation


3^4

and disaffection rose to such a pitch that he thought
it well to leave Baghdad (whither he never returned)
and take up his residence at Rekkeh, a city on the
Euphrates, 115 miles E. of Aleppo. He soon felt the
void left by the loss of his great ministers and gave way
to bitter and unavailing remorse, in which, however,
repentance had no part, it being merely sorrow for the
results of the sin and not for the sin itself. "It is
observed," says Price in his History of Mohammedanism,
"that, on the extermination of the Barmecides, the affairs
of Haroun fell into immediate and irretrievable confusion.
Treason, revolt and rebellion assailed him in different
parts of the empire [especially in Khorassan, where
Fezl's beneficent government had not been forgotten
and which was the native country "of the family]. He
felt himself from disease [and natural incapacity] unequal
to the cares of government and expiated, by a tardy and
unavailing regret, his unfeeling cruelty to the lamented
race of Bermek." Fezl ben Rebya, whose treacherous
malice had been largely instrumental in procuring the
fall of the Barmecides, succeeded to their honours, but
proved utterly unable to supply their place, and of this
Er Reshid himself soon became conscious, as is shown
by the following anecdote, related by El Jihshyari in his
History of the Viziers. "Er Reshid," says he, "repented
of his conduct to the Barmecides and deeply regretted the
manner in which he had treated them. He said, before
some of his brothers, that, were he but assured of the
fidelity [that is to say, of the forgiveness] of Yehya and
Fezl, he would reinstate them in their offices. He used


365

also to say [alluding evidently to Fezl ben Rebya], " Some
people prompted us to punish our ablest and most
faithful advisers and made us believe that themselves
were capable of replacing them ; but, when we did their
will, they were not of the least use to us." And he recited
the following line :

God curse your ancestors 1 Spare us your calumnies or fill their place.

The royal murderer appears never to have recovered
his peace of mind; it is said that he never knew refresh-
ing sleep after Jaafer's death and his confession is re-
corded that he would have given his whole realm to have
called him back to life. According to Ibn Bedroun, his
sister Uleiyeh once said to him, " My lord, I have not
seen you enjoy a day of perfect happiness-, since you put
Jaafer to death. Why did you so ? " To which Er Reshid
replied, " If I thought my shirt knew the reason, I would
tear it in pieces." When, after he had become convinced
of the irreparableness of his loss, any blamed the Barme-
cides in his presence, he would say, " Perdition to your
fathers! Cease to blame them or fill the void they have
left" After the death of Jaafer and the imprisonment of
Yehya and Fezl, he had no one in whom he could trust,
having committed the fatal error of dividing his kingdom
beiween his sons in his lifetime, and went in continual
apprehension of being poisoned by the latter, fearing
even to confide the knowledge of the lingering disease
by which he died to his physicians, whom he suspected
(not, it would seem, without cause) of being his sons'
creatures, and it is said that even his old servant Mesrour?


366


whom he had overwhelmed with bounties, but who was
in the pay of El Amin, brought him during his last
journey a bad {i.e. a hard-trotting camel), to the intent
that his ailment might be aggravated thereby. When
(in 805) his old and faithful servant and foster-father
Yehya died in his prison, there was found in his pocket
a paper on which he had written these words, "The
accuser is gone before and the accused will soon follow :
the Cadi will be that equitable judge who is never unjust
and who hath no need of evidence." This paper was
sent to Er Reshid, who wept the rest of the day, and
his face for some days after bore striking marks of sorrow.
In November, 808, the noble Fezl was also, at the age
of forty-six, released by death from his sufferings and
the Khalif, on hearing of his decease, said, " My term
is near unto his." His presentiments did not deceive
him, for he survived the foster-brother and friend, to
whom he was so deeply indebted and whom he had so
cruelly wronged, but four months. His last act was to
sentence to death, on some fancied slight, his physician
Jebril ibn Bekhtiyeshou, 1 but, having respited him till the

1 Another account of this matter is to the effect that, when he found
himself dying, he upbraided his physician for failing to cure him, to
which the latter replied that, if he had taken his advice and abstained
from immoderate indulgence in women, he would not have come to such
extremity, but that he was now beyond the reach of art, at which Er
Reshid was so exasperated that he clapped him in prison and bade
put him to death. The Khalif s chamberlain, who was his friend,
took upon himself to respite Jebril, and meanwhile Haroun died
Jebril (who was El Amin's creature) was suspected of poisoning him •


367


morrow, he himself died in the night of the 23rd March,
809, at Tous in Khorassan, where the rapid progress of
his disease had compelled him to suspend his campaign
against the Transoxanian insurgents. He was forty-seven
years of. age and had reigned upwards of twenty-three.
Such was the miserable end of the " great " Khalif.

III.

The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night
contains two hundred and sixty-four stories of all lengths,
from an anecdote of half a page to a " history " of several
hundred pages. The stories are very unequally distributed
over the different Nights, which again vary greatly in
length, the first fifty or sixty being nearly three times the
average length of those in the remaining portion of the
work. The stories may be roughly divided into five
principal categories, as follows :

(1) " Histories " or long romances, founded or pro-
fessing to be founded upon historical data and containing
references to events which actually happened, such as the
conquest of Syria and Persia by the Arabs and the wars
between the Khalifs and the Emperors of Custentiniyeh
or Constantinople. These are of comparatively rare
occurrence, but comprise the longest stories in the col-
lection, such as the history of King Omar ben Ennuman

El Amin took him into his service on his father's death, and when El
Mamoun succeeded to the Khalifate, he imprisoned the physician on
that suspicion. El Amin is said to have feared that his father would
deprive him of the succession in favour of the more deserving, though
less favoured, Mamoun.


3^3


and his sons Sherkan and Zoulmekan (which alone
occupies nearly an eighth part of the entire work and in
which occur incidentally the subordinate stories of Taj el
Mulouk and Aziz and Azizeh), and that of Gherib and his
brother Agio, a romance of apparently Bedouin origin,
much resembling such stories as Antar and Abou Zeid.

(2) Anecdotes and short stories dealing with historical
personages and with incidents and adventures belonging
to the actual every-day life of the periods to which they
refer. These are very numerous and relate for the most
part to the epoch of the Abbaside Khalifs. To this
category belong the many stories and anecdotes in which
Er Reshid, his wife Zubeideh, his sons El Amin, El
Mamoun and Abou Isa, his brother Ibrahim ben el Mehdi,
the poets and musicians Isaac ✓of Mosul and his father
Ibrahim, El Asmai, Abou Nuwas, etc., the Imam Abou
Yousuf, the Barmecide princes Yehya, Fezl and Jaafer,
and the various officers, governors and notables of the
Khalifate, besides the Khosroes or ancient kings of Persia,
Alexander the Great (Iskender the Two-horned, as the
Orientals call him), and the Khalifs Omar ben el Khettab,
Muawiyeh, Merwan, Abdulmelik, Suleiman, Omar ben
Abdulaziz, Hisham and Welid ben Sehl (all of the house
of Umeyyeh), the Abbaside Khalifs El Mensour, El Muta-
wekkil, El Mutezid and El Mustensir, the Fatimite Khalif
El Hakim bi-amrillah, the Eyoubite Sultan El Melik en
Nasir Selaheddin of Egypt (Saladin) and other historical
personages figure. To this category also belong the
stories (so common among the Arabs and Persians) cele-
brating the extravagant generosity and hospitality of such


3^9


typical personages as Hatim Tai, Maan ben Zaideh and
the princes of the house of Berraek, and short isolated
fragments of description, dealing, from a curiously dis-
torted and mythical point of view, with historical or
quasi-historical events. Of these latter singular examples
are the story of the Khalif El Mamoun and the Pyramids
of Egypt and the very curious version of the legend of
Don Rodrigo (the last Gothic King of Spain) and the
Tower of Hercules, called the City of Lebtait 1 and con-
taining a description (evidently mythical) of the wonderful
treasures and rarities (among others the enchanted table
of Suleiman ben Daoud) found by the Arab conquerors in
the city. The town in question is of course intended for
Toledo, but it is always somewhat difficult to .identify the
European cities and places referred to in Arabic fiction,
or indeed history, as the Muslim conquerors were not
content with Arabicizing the Spanish names, but actually
(apparently moved by a sort of nostalgic impulse) applied
to such cities as Seville, Granada, Jaen, Xeres, Murcia,
Malaga, etc., the designations of towns and provinces in
Egypt, Syria and other Mohammedan countries, such as
Hems, Damascus, Kinesrin, Arden, Palestine, Misr (Egypt),
Fustat (old Cairo), etc.

(3) Romances and romantic fictions, comprising three
different kinds of tales. The first subdivision includes
purely romantic stories of considerable length, referring
to no particular historical epoch and generally making
free use of supernatural persons and agencies; such as
the stories of Kemerezzeman and Budour ? Aziz and Azizeh,

1 Var. Lubteh.
VOL. I3£* »4


370


Uns el Wujoud and the Vizier's Daughter Rosebud, The
Enchanted Horse, the Queen of the Serpents, Hassan of
Bassora and the King's Daughter of the Jinn, Jouder
and his Brothers, Seif el Mulouk and Bediya el Jemal*
Marouf, etc., etc. Under the second head may be classed
stories apparently purely fictitious, but whose scene is laid
in some definite historical epoch, in which are introduced
historical personages and whose incidents and descriptions-
reproduce the manners and local circumstance of such
cities as Baghdad, Bassora, Mosul, Damascus and Cairo
and such periods as those of the Khalifs of the Abbaside
dynasty or the Eyoubite Sultans of Egypt. These also are
for the most part of considerable length and comprise
such tales as the Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad,
Noureddin and the Fair Persian, Ali ben Bekkar and
Shemsennehar, Ghanim ben Eyoub, Alaeddin Abou esh
Shamat, The Voyages of Sindbad, Abdallah ben Fazil
and his brothers, Ali Noureddin and the King's Daughter
of the Franks, etc., etc. In this subdivision must also
be included the stories or nouvelles 1 detailing the doings

1 In many of the stories of this class (and indeed in the Nights
generally, whenever roguery of any kind is in question) the crafty,
perfidious old woman (such as Dhat ed Dewahi or Delileh) who assumes
the character of a devotee and avails herself of this disguise to strip,
rob, kidnap and murder her dupes or her enemies, is a familiar figure.
Women are indeed generally presented in the work as creatures entirely
governed by their sensual instincts, sectaries of the God Wunsch r
lacking reason and religion, although, on the other hand, instances
are not wanting in which female characters {e.g. Abrizeh) are painted
in the most heroic colours, or (as Azizeh) hallowed to all time with
the tenderest haloes of sentiment smd sacrifice, and the introduction


37i


of the rogues, sharpers and impostors of the time of the
Khalifs and their encounters with the police of Baghdad
and Cairo (who, by the by, appear like Vidocq and others,
to have been drawn almost exclusively from the criminal
classes and to have held their grades as the prizes of
proved eminence in successful roguery), a class of fiction
much favoured in the East, of which certain examples,
e.g. the stories of the Barber and his Brothers, the
Rogueries of Delileh the Crafty and her Daughter Zeyneb
the Trickstress and the Adventures of Quicksilver Ali of
Cairo (all in the Thousand and One Nights,) forcibly
remind one of such " picaresque " novels of Lesage,
Quevedo, Aleman and others, as Guzman de Alfarache,
Lazarillo de Tormes, El Gran Tacano, Gil Bias, etc.,
and from which indeed it is probable thaf these latter
had in some respects an almost direct origin. The third
subdivision embraces the most numerous section of the
work, ue. such altogether fictitious short stories and
legends, romantic or sentimental, as may conveniently be
classed under the general heading of contes fantastiques.
To this class belong the stories of miracles and saints,
in which Muslim literature is so rich, such as The Apples

of such figures as the learned slave-girl Taweddud and the female
preacher in the dissertation upon the relative excellence of the sexes
(Vol. IV.) proves the readiness of the Arabs to recognize moral and
inteileci-ual excellence in the weaker sex, whilst, as a compensation
for the repulsive portrait of the hypocritical trickstress, so common
in their pages, the authors not unfrequently present us with instances
of sincere devotion and effectual piety on the part of their heroines,
as well as of female saints, whose purity and zeal have gained them
the power of working miracles.


372


of Paradise, The Pious Black Slave, The Blacksmith who
could handle fire without hurt, The Ferryman and the
Hermit, etc., etc. ; the equally favourite class of stories
of unfortunate lovers, such as Otbeh and Reyya and The
Mad Lover, and such purely fantastic tales as Abou Mo-
hammed the Lazy, The Man who never laughed again,
The Enchanted Springs, The House with the Belvedere,
The City of Irera, the three stories of the Angel of
Death, etc., etc.; and lastly, such "merry gestes" and
Boccaccio-like " inventions " as Ali the Persian and the
Kurd Sharper, The Man of Yemen and his Six Slave-girls,
The Man who saw the Night of Power, The Simpleton
and the Sharper, the three stones of foolish School-
masters, The Lady and her Five Suitors (one of many
stories of trickery practised by women upon their husbands
or lovers), and most of the series of short tales known
as " The Malice of Women." It is into this latter portion
of the collection that European authors appear to have
dipped most freely, many of the incidents in works of
the Decameron and Heptameron kind and in such bodies
of popular fiction as those collected or expanded by
Grimm, Asbjornsen, Andersen, etc., etc., bearing unmis-
takable traces of affinity, immediate or derivative, with the
Thousand and One Nights.

(4) Fables and apologues or short moral stories, such
as The Cat and the Crow, The Birds and Beasts and the
Son of Adam and the parables and moral instances of
which the (Indian) story of Jelyaad and Shimas in great
part consists.

(5) Tales, so called, such as Taweddud, the examination


373


ofNuzhet ez Zeman before Sherkan (Vol. II. pp. 80-96),
of Wird Khan before his father (Vol. VIII. pp. 217-243)
and the pietistic exercitalions of Dhat ed Dewahi and her
damsels before Omar ben Ehnuman (Vol. II. pp. 120-134),
in which the slightest thread of story serves as an excuse
for the display of the heterogeneous " learning " (as the
Arabs understood the word) of the author and for endless
dissertations upon all things human and divine and sundry
others. This class of story, though undeniably curious
from the student's point of view, has little or no interest
for the general reader, who will probably be inclined to
agree with De Sacy that, if, in a certain light, edifying,
it is "rien moins qu'amusant."

Perhaps the most salient characteristic of the Book of
the Thousand Nights and One Night is "the extreme
simplicity of its style. Nothing can be more unlike the
idea of barbaric splendour, of excessive and heterogeneous
ornament, that we are accustomed to associate with the
name, than the majority of the tales that compose the
collection. The life described in it is mainly that of the
people, those Arabs so essentially brave, sober, hospitable
and kindly, almost hysterically sensitive to emotions of
love and pity, as well as to artistic impressions, yet sus-
ceptible of being roused to strange excesses of ferocity
and brutality, to be soon followed by bitter and unavailing
repentance — a people whom extreme sensibility of the
nervous tissue inclines to excess of sensuous enjoyment,
yet who are capable of enduring^ without a murmur the
severest hardships and of suffering patiently the most
cruel vicissitudes of fortune, without other complaint


374


than that implied in the utterance of the Koranic formula
(pronouncing which the Prophet has promised that no
true believer shall be confounded), " There is no power
and no virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme ! n
Especially in that portion which deals with the life and
manners of the Arabs of Syria and Chaldaea, under the
Khalifate of the house of Abbas, are there to be found
stories that, in their bright simplicity or poignant pathos,
remind one more of an old Mahrchen than of what is
generally known as Eastern fiction.

The Thousand and One Nights, composed, to all ap-
pearance, mainly of stories written from dictation and
probably originally invented, in a quasi-extempore fashion,
for public recitation, are necessarily for the most part
confined to a purely conversational and so-called vulgar
style. The crabbedness of classical Arabic, as exempli-
fied in the Koran, with its abrupt abridgments and its
mysterious hiatuses, is happily in general absent from
its pages, nor are they often defaced by the still more
terrible refinements of the ornate manner (el bediya, as
it is technically called), of which a favourable specimen
is the celebrated Mecamat of El Heriri and driven to
extremity by the ingenious perversions of whose apostles, a
savant cited by the learned author of the " Prolegomena "
asserts it to be the dearest wish of his heart to see the
Euphuists, who cultivated the science of ornaments in
prose and verse, well flogged in public, whilst a crier
proclaimed aloud their misdeeds, for the edification of
the literary classes. Mr. Lane, indeed, in the notes to
his version, gives us the sinister intelligence that certain


375

Egyptian rhetoricians,, dissatisfied with what they con*
,-sidered the crude and vulgar style of the collection, had
intimated their intention of revising and remodelling it ;
and I confess that to me such an undertaking seems as
great a profanation as would be the remodelling of the
Canterbury Tales or the Mort d' Arthur.

The splendour of description, the showers of barbaric
pearl and gold, that are generally attributed to the work,
exist but in isolated instances. The descriptions are usually
of an extreme naive and sometimes almost childish kind
and constantly involve repetitions and amplifications such
as characterise a story told to a child. They run generally
in the same grooves and have a sort of gamut of standard
comparisons, out of which they rarely stray. A beautiful
youth is always a full moon, a slender and graceful girl a
willow-wand or a thirsty gazelle ; a mole on the cheek is
a globule of ambergris, the eyebrows are a bended bow,
the nose a curved sabre, the lips coral or Solomon's seal ;
the forehead is the new moon rising from the night of the
hair, the eyes are lakes of jet or narcissus, the cheeks
roses or blood-red anemones, the browlocks scorpions,
the ringlets chains of ambergris, upholding the lamp of
the face, the shape a lance or a flowering cane set in
& hill of sand, the breasts half pomegranates or caskets
of ivory and the teeth a necklace of pearls, a spray of
camomile petals or the glittering seeds of the pomegranate
set in their ruby pulp ; and emotions and sentiments are
rendered in much the same kind of figurative shorthand.
Nevertheless, the constant recurrence of the same elements
of description does not produce monotony. Even as in


376


music the multiform progressions of the various keys
inform the unity of the unchanging gamut with limitless
variations of combination and effect, so the play of
sentiment and circumstance in the Arabian tales perpetu-
ally induces in the rigid scale of their ornaments fresh
permutations of shifting colour and new harmonies of
phantasy and expression.

The grace of pathos that hallows so many of its pages
constitutes perhaps the chief charm of the collection,
although the other features whose presence should con-
tribute to the unity of a great romantic work are no less
conspicuous, when the occasion calls for their display*
What can be more poignant in its sad simplicity than
The Mad Lover or The Lovers of the Benou Udhreh,*
more dramatic in its almost tragic intensity than The
Scavenger and the Noble Lady of Baghdad, more engaging,
in its homely pathos, than the story of the forlorn royal
children in Jerusalem and their adventures with the rascal
Bedouin and the kind simple-souled stoker? 2 Where
shall we find a more fervid conte bleu of devotion than The
Apples of Paradise 3 or The Devout Prince or "legendes
dore'es " more instinct with the austere poetry of asceticism
than The Pious Black Slave, 4 The Ferryman and the

1 Vol. VI. p. 208. a Vol. II. pp. 57-73.

3 Cf. the mediaeval legend of St. Dorothy.

4 Remarkable as affording the only instance of a black being favour-
ably mentioned in the work. The African slave is commonly held up
to execration in Arabian fiction as a monster of brutality and perfidy,
lustfulness and ingratitude, and examples of this view of the negro
character abound in the Thousand and One Nights,


377

Hermit, 1 or Abou Durraj and the Leper? For sustained
romantic exultation, it would be hard to surpass The City
of Brass or the legend of Many-columned Irem, and few
languages can produce such masterpieces of melancholy
beauty as The Blacksmith who could handle fire without
hurt or The Man who never laughed again, strains that
linger in the thought like the tones of that "alte, ernste
Weise " which haunts the hearing of the dying Tristan in
the greatest of musical dramas. Nor is the power of
effective poetical portraiture lacking, when required, teste
the vivid picture of the Khalifs pleasure garden at
Baghdad 2 and the exquisitely imaginative description of
the lute in Ali Noureddin and the Frank King's Daughter; 8
and when the movement of the story calls for the exercise
of an austerer faculty, as in the battle-scenes of Omar ben
Ennuman or Gherib, the text quickens into a stern and
nervous energy, a vivid and unfaltering concision, that
could hardly be excelled by Homer or Dante. Equally
remarkable is the wealth of humour and wit that charac-
terizes the work, whether (as in Ali the Persian and the
Kurd Sharper) it bring to mind the headlong horseplay
of Rabelais or (as in the episode of the Stoker,* of the
Hashish-Eater in Ali Shar, 5 or of Jaafer and the old
Bedouin) the rough but effective burlesque of John
Heywood and the mediaeval farce-writers, whether (as in
the anecdotes of Abou Nuwas) it recall the cynical humour

1 A story of distinctly Christian origin, possibly suggested by some
vague reminiscence of the hermits of the Theba'id.

2 Vol. I. p. 341. s Vol VIIL p. 8a
11 Vol. II. p. 305. § Vol. IV.


378

of Bcccaccio, or (as in Kafour 1 and Khelifeh) the cudgel-
strokes of drollery, half naive, half caustic, of Sancho or
Sganarelle, or (as in the Man of Yemen and his Six
Slave-girls) the deliberate wit of the Moyen de Parvenir,
it is always apt and always effective, in utrumque paratus,
equally at home with the rough and ready weapons of
popular repartee and the more keenly attempered arms
of satire and word-fence. The whole Oriental world of
the Khalifate re-lives for us in these enchanted pages,
from which nothing is rejected, nothing excluded as
common or unclean, and in which all classes cf the
Muslim world are represented, king and slave, courtier
and countryman, pietist and freethinker, learned and
ignorant, wise and foolish, moralist and debauchee. Satire
and sentiment, love and lewdness, wit and wisdom, holi-
ness and hypocrisy, chase each other through the shifting
scenes of this magic lantern of the East, in which the
pure and self-sacrificing tenderness of an Azizeh " sticks
fiery off indeed " from the selfish sensuality of her rivals,
and the strains of exalted morality and passionate devout-
ness, the traits of heroic faith and unwearying mag-
nanimity, that jostle with the satyr-orgies of an Abou
Nuwas and the fiendish treachery of an Aboukir, show
but the goodlier for the blackness of the baseness that
encompasses them.

One of the chief stumbling-blocks in the path of a
translator of the Thousand and One Nights is the
peculiar shapelessness of Arabic prose. Without stops,
capitals or other indications of breach of continuity and
1 Vol. I. p. 368.


379


practically undivided into clauses or paragraphs, the text,
if unbroken by verse, runs on in one long sentence,
trailing after it a cumbrous train of accumulated " ands "
and "thens," heedless of symmetry of phrase or clear-
ness of expression and little careful to order the succes-
sion of the words in accordance with that of the sense,
so that it is not uncommon to find some important
member of a previous phrase cast up high and dry in
the midst of a strange clause several lines in advance,
for the Arab author, after he has apparently finished
with one division of a subject and well entered another,
thinks nothing of pulling short up and trying back
for the purpose of making some addition of real or
fancied necessity to the foregone passage of description
or enumeration. To this most irritating peculiarity must
be added a constant recurrence of useless repetitions
and an all-pervading tautology, together with a habit of
aggravating the (to the European ear) inherent in-
coherence of Eastern composition by a perpetual readi-
ness to sacrifice directness and clarity of expression, if
an outre' turn of speech, a jingle of words or a trifling
play of meanings can be secured by the employment
of an obscure trope or a far-fetched synonym. One of
the especial ornaments of Arabic prose (an excrescence
born of the excessive facilities for rhyme afforded by
a language whose every speaker is a versifier and the
extravagant sensibility of Eastern peoples to antithesis
of all kinds, whether of sound or thought) is the use
of what is called se/a or rhyming prose, with whose
jingling tags it is the summit of every Arab author's


38o


ambition to deck or disfigure (les deux se disent) his
pages, and rare indeed is the virtue of the writer who
carries self-denial so far as to neglect an opportunity of
dragging in this figure, too often at the expense of sense
and coherence. The Koran, which in the eyes of every
true believer is impeccable and the model of all ex-
cellence, from the literary, as well as from the moral
and religious point of view, is almost entirely written
in this style, and as all post-Mohammedan literature, so
far, at least, as the rules of composition are concerned,
is modelled upon this all-sufficing volume, the use of
the seja has, like a noxious water-weed that checks the
current of a stream, overrun the native vigour of Arab
prose and has by the sectaries of the style fieuri been
carried to such an excess that its^ abuse has given rise
to the irreverent dictum, es seja fe/a, rhyming prose is
vexation of spirit. Happily, however, the Book of the
Thousand Nights and One Night is written in a so-
called vulgar style and is therefore, though not free
from the excrescence in question, less universally dis-
figured by it than works of more pretension to literary
merit.

In presence of these difficulties, absolute literality is
impossible to the translator who has any regard for style,
and he is, therefore, compelled in some sort to remodel
his original, phrase by phrase and even page by page, if,
with all possible respect for fidelity to word and sense,
he desire to spare his reader the weariness of wading
through a jungle of phrases and sentences, in which the
eye of the scholar alone can discern form and coherence,


38*

The following passage, selected almost at random from
the text of the Thousand and One Nights, will give some
idea of the literal style of the original. Many more
flagrant specimens might have been chosen and it would
not be difficult to quote passages in which the faults of
the composition envelope the meaning in a confusion
well-nigh inextricable, especially where (as in the case
of the beleaguerment of Constantinople by the Muslims 1 )
the resource of comparison and collation with other texts
of the story is wanting, the History of King Omar ben
Ennuman being omitted from the Breslau Edition ; but I
prefer to cite one which offers no extravagant example of
the defects of which I have spoken.

When the morning morrowed, he anointed the feet of him with the
water the which they two had taken it from the herb and descended to
the sea and went walking in it days and nights and he wondering at
the horrors of the sea and the marvels of it and the rarities of it and
he ceased not going upon the face of the water till he came to an
island as indeed it [were] Paradise so Beloukiya went up to that
island and became wondering at it and at the beauty of it and
wandered in it and saw it a great island the dust of it saffron and
the gravel of it of cornelian and precious stones and the hedges of
it jessamine and the vegetation of it of the goodliest of the trees and
the brightest of the sweet-scented herbs and the sweetest of them
and in it springs running and the brushwood of it of the Comorin
aloes and the Sumatra aloes and the reeds of it sugar-cane and around
k the rose and the narcissus and the amaranth and the gilly-flower and
the camomile and the lily and the violet and all that in it [were]
kinds and colours and the birds of it warbled upon those trees and
it was fair of attributes spacious of sides abundant of good things
indeed it comprised all of beauty and charms and the warbling ol

* Vol. II. p. 18c


382


the birds of it [was] pleasanter than the tones [of the chanters] of the
Koran 1 and the trees of it tall and the birds of it speaking and the
streams of it flowing and the springs of it running and the waters of
it sweet and in it the gazelles frisked and the wild cattle came and
went and the birds warbled on those branches and consoled the lover
the love-afflicted.

A comparison of the above literal rendering with my
previous translation (Vol. V. p. 66) of the passage will-
show that I have confined myself to arranging the disjecta
membra of the original in their natural order, following
the original wording as closely as is consistent with English
idiom and the necessity of breaking up the endless phrases
of the Arabic into convenient sentences and purging them
from the excrescences of tautology and repetition that
deface the text. Upon this principle I have throughout
proceeded, endeavouring as far as possible to conciliate
the claims of literality and fidelity to the characteristic
idioms of the original with the genius of English prose
and the exigencies of style. If, in this respect, some
discrepancies should appear between the earlier and the
latter parts of the translation, they must be attributed to
the natural gradual change of method consequent on the
experience gained in the course of the long labour of love
which has occupied the leisure hours of seven years of a
professional life and which I have now brought to an end^
if not (in view of the enormous difficulties which the work
of translation presents) with entire satisfaction to myself,.

1 Rennat d methani. An obscure meaning of methani is " the second
(or other than the first) strings of lutes," and the clause may therefore,
perhaps, be meant to read " the tones of the lute " : but it is quite in?
Arab character to compare a sweet sound to Koran-reading.


383


at least, with the feeling that it is not for want of painn
that I have, in many instances of which I am but too
sensible, fallen short of my ideal.

The following is a specimen of the rhyming prose
above mentioned, rendered in the jingle of the original.
It is evident that it would have been by no means difficult
to keep up the imitation throughout, but, upon considera-
tion, I came, rightly or wrongly, to the conclusion that it
was undesirable to do so, as it seemed to me that the
seja-ioxm was utterly foreign to the genius of English
prose and that its preservation would be fatal to all vigour
and harmony of style.

This letter is from him whom passion wastes away and whom desire
doth slay and misery destroys him and dismay, him who^of life despairs
and looks for nought but death to end his cares, none is there to his
mourning heart comfort or succour will impart, nor for his wakeful eye
'gainst care is helper nigh ; his day is past in fire, his night in torment
dire ; his body for emaciation's wasted sore, and there comes to him
no messenger from her he doth adore.

The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night
contains a very large quantity of verse, unequally dis-
tributed throughout the various tales, 1 and before pro-
ceeding to speak of this feature of the work, it may
interest my readers if I give a brief outline of the general

1 Some of the stories, such as the Queen of the Serpents, The
Enchanted Horse, Jelyaad and Shimas and others, mainly of Persian
or Indian origin, contain little or none, whilst in others page after page
is occupied by verse, which, for instance, forms nearly a fifth part of
the (Egyptian) stories of Zein el Mewasif and AH Noureddin and the
Frank King's Daughter,


3»4


principles upon which the prosody of the Arabs is founded
The invariable unit, upon which Arabic (and Persian)
verse is built, is the beit or line (usually but improperly
rendered " couplet The word beit signifies literally
"a house/' 1 but by analogy "a tent" (and from this we
may fairly conclude at least this fundamenral part o£
Arabic prosody to have originated with the Bedouins or
Arabs of the desert, as it is only they who would be likely
to call a tent a house) 2 the verse being whimsically
regarded by the Arabs as an erection; and this simile
is carried out in the nomenclature of the different parts
of the line, one foot being called a "tent-pole," another
a "tent-peg" and the two hemistichs of the verse being
known as the folds or leaves of the double door of the
tent. Each beit is divided into fwo hemistichs of equal
length, each containing three or four feet of two, three,
four or five syllables, and the whole verse is known as a
hexameter or octameter, according as it contains six or
eight feet, or from sixteen to thirty-two syllables. A
peculiarity of Arabic verse is the excess of long syllables
over short and the absence of the dactyl and dibrach,
the swiftest feet in use among Europeans, a characteristic
which produces a graver and more stately movement of
the rhythm than is common in European poetry. I should
perhaps, however, observe that the qualifications "long"
and " short " are somewhat empirically applied to the

1 In its rudimentary form, it means *'a night-place."

2 This is yet more evident, if we consider the full name of the verse,
ie. beit skar, *' a line of verse/' syn. <( a house of hair," that is to say s
the tent made of camel's hair cloth used by the Bedouins.


385


syllables of Arabic feet, as their quantities appear to be
•hardly appreciable by an European ear, the "long," in
particular, being of a shifting character, so much so,
indeed, that certain readers of the Koran are said to
liave been known to make use of no less than seven
varieties of this quantity. This being the case, it has
been suggested by the eminent French orientalist, M.
Stanislas Guiraud, that musical notation should be applied
to the determining of the Arabic rhythms, but, notwith-
standing the ingenuity and ability of his treatise on the
■subject, his tentatives do not as yet appear to have
brought about any very definite result Several Arabists
of distinction, German and English, have indeed en-
deavoured, by the use of quantitative signs, to reproduce
in their own languages the precise -rhythm' and accent of
Arabic verse ; but I confess that to myself, notwithstand-
ing the ability and ingenuity displayed by the translators
{who indeed have been the first to acknowledge the ill-
•success of their experiments and to pronounce against
the feasibility of representing the Oriental metres by a
similar arrangement of feet and accents in European
verse), the result seems still more unsatisfactory and
inartistic than that of the many unsuccessful attempts
to introduce Greek and Latin rhythms into English
metre. The genius of the two languages (Arabic and
English) belonging, as they do, to opposite groups of
.speech-form, presents no point of union; and it seems to
me, therefore, that the only satisfactory way of rendering
Arabic poetry in English verse is to content oneself
generally with observing the exterior form of the stanza^
VOL IX. 2%


386


the movement of the rhyme and (as far as possible) the
identity in number of the syllables composing the beits.

The principal Arabic metres are sixteen in number,
each subdivided by numerous variations; and it may,
perhaps, be interesting to note here the somewhat
whimsical names by which they are known in the East
The generic name given to them is behr, literally "sea,"
but, by analogy, the space comprised within the walls of
a tent, thus continuing the metaphor before mentioned,
and they are distinguished individually as the long, the
extended, the open, the ccpious, the perfect, the trilling,
the tremulous, the running, the swift, the flowing, the
light, the analogous, the improvised, the curtailed, the
approximative and the consecutive. The English reader
will naturally suppose that these- names are in some way
descriptive and will doubtless be surprised to hear (and
this fact alone will amply suffice to show how toto ccelo
the genius of Oriental prosody differs from that of the
West) that, in the opinion of those scholars who have
most radically studied the question, they have no analogy
whatever with the character of the various metres, but
were (as far, at least, as concerns the thirteen primitive
metres) manufactured by the inventor, as a mere memoria
technica, after the model (t,e. the grammatical measure) of
the fundamental feet upon which the respective "circles"
or groups of metres are based. I should perhaps mention
here that the system of Arabic prosody is said to have
been invented by one Khelil, a grammarian, and to have
been suggested to him by the strokes of a blacksmith's
hammer upon an anvil . not the most promising combina-


3^7

tion of circumstance for the birth of so important z
branch of art.

The principal form used in Arabic poetry (and that
which most frequently occurs in the Thousand and One
Nights) is the Kesidth or Purpose-poem; practically
identical with the better-known (Persian) form of the
Ghazel or love-song par excellence, with the exception
that the latter is limited to eighteen beits or verses and
must contain the name of the poet in the last beit. The
Kesideh may be composed in any one of the sixteen
metres and is built upon a single rhyme, the two hemi-
stichs of the first beit rhyming with each other and with
the second hemistich of each succeeding beit to the end
of the poem, however long it may be. It is a curious
fact that the same prohibition of enjambement, or the
carrying on of the sense from one verse (or pair of
hemistichs) to another, obtains in Arabic as in French
classic verse, it being considered a fault not to complete
the sense in the one verse. It is allowable to repeat the
same rhyming word, but (according to the strict laws of
prosody) not unless seven verses intervene. However,
this and the preceding rule are constantly violated by
Arab poets, who appear to have little scruple in repeating
the rhyming word whenever it suits them, and in Persian
verse (whose laws are essentially the same as those of
Arabic prosody) the licence is still greater, the same
word in the same sense being allowed to form the rhyme
throughout a whole ghazel. The Kitah or Fragment,
which is also of frequent occurrence in the work, is only
a portion of a Kesideh, other than the metla, first or


388


double-rhyme verses The Rubai or quatrain is also a
common form. It consists of four hemistichs rhyming
with each other. The only other verse- form that occurs
with any frequency is the Mukhemmes or Cinquain, a
succession of stanzas, each formed of two beits and
a hemistich, the five hemistichs of the first stanza having,
the same rhyme, whilst the first four of each succeeding
stanza take a new rhyme and the fifth rhymes with the
first stanza to the end of the poem. Another form of
the Mukhemmes differs only from the first in that the
last hemistichs of the stanzas rhyme with each other
only, independently of the other hemistichs of the first
stanza. The Murebbes or foursome song occurs once only
in the Nights 1 and consists of a series of two-beit stanzas^
the first three hemistichs of each" of which rhyme with
each other only, independently of the rest of the poem,
and the fourth with that of every other stanza.

The Muweshshih or Ballad is another form which occurs
once only in the Thousand and One Nights. 3 It is,
perhaps, the most elaborate verse-form in the language
and is said to have been invented by the Muslim poets
of Spain, shortly after the Conquest, and to have been
adopted from them by their brethren of Egypt and Syria,
It consists of a succession of three-line stanzas, in the
first of which all six hemistichs end with the same rhyme.
In the second and succeeding stanzas, the first line and
the first hemistich of the second line take a new rhyme ;
but the second hemistich of the second line resumes the
rhyme of the first stanza and is followed by the third line
» VoL I. p> H s Vol. VIII. p. 145.


389

*>f the latter, serving as a refrain to each stanza of the
poem, which is often of considerable length. Other forms
of the Muweshshih exist, but the above is the only one
found in the Thousand and One Nights. Single lines are
of frequent occurrence, which are apparently "blank"
(that is to say, the two hemistichs of which do not rhyme
with each other), but this is only apparent, as the verses
b question are nothing more than an extract from a
Kesideh, blank verse having no existence in Arab poetry.

One of the chief characteristics of Arabic verse is
ingenuity and it is indeed from the Muslim poets of Spain
and Portugal that the Cavalier Marino, Gongora and our
own Euphuists seem, more or less directly, to have
borrowed the concetti and agudezas with which their
pages bristle. The Arab poet appears too often to aim
at making his verse a sort of logogriph, susceptible of
more than one meaning, and this peculiarity, combined
with a passion for obscure synonyms and doubtful
metaphors and an excessive use of syntactical and
rhetorical figures (particularly those of ellipsis, enallage,
anacoluthon, hyperbaton, metonymy, synecdoche and
paronomasia) and the national tendency to imitate the
incoherent abruptness of the Koran, too often renders
Arabic verse a tangled skein, to unravel which demands
an amount of labour and consideration hardly to be
estimated by the result, as it appears in the form of
translation. Add to this the mechanical difficulty of the
transfer of idiom and metrical form from one language
to another having no point in common with it and the
special crux established by the indispensable condition


39°

of the monorhyme (often carried to an extraordinary
length, as in Vol. VIII. pp. 25-27, where one unlucky
assonance must furnish forth no less than forty-eight
rhymes), and it will be evident that the labour of render-
ing into isometrical English the vast body of verse con-
tained in the Thousand and One Nights is one of no
common hardship and that the translator who has, with
perhaps too rash a confidence, undertaken so exacting a
task, may fairly ask for no common indulgence towards
the shortcomings of which he is himself abundantly
conscious.

The Thousand and One Nights, apart from its attrac-
tion as the most comprehensive compendium of national
romance in existence, is remarkable as presenting a
singularly copious anthology of -Arab verse. Almost all
the great poets of the Khalifate, as well as many of those
who preceded or were contemporaneous with the Prophet,
are represented in its pages. Among the immense mass
of metrical quotation contained in the various tales, I have
been able, currente calamo, to identify selections from the
works of no less than thirty-four of the chief poets
of Islam, namely, Imrulcais, Elcameh ibn Abadeh, Antar,
Adi ben Zeid, En Nabigheh edh Dhubyani, Amr ben
Madi Kerib, Kab ben Zuheir, Jemil, Jerir, Uteiyeh, Abou
Nuwas, Abou Temmam, El Asmal, El Mutenebbi, El
Heriri, Eehaeddin Zuheir, Beshr ibn Burd, Er Recashi,
Abou Musab, El Buhturi, Es Senefi, En Naweji (author
or compiler of the famous anacreontic collection, the
Helbeit el Kumeit or Race Course of the Bay Horse), 1 Dibil
1 One of the many tropical names of wine*


39i

el Khuzai, Muslim ben .el Welid el Ansari, En Nemri, El
Hajiri, El Menazi, Ibn Ebbad, Aboulnras el Hemdani,
El Muhellebi, Ibn Jami, Et Tughrai, Ibn Abdoun el
Andalousi and Ibn el Mutezz, and a more minute examina-
tion would no doubt largely add to the above list. As far
as I can judge, from a cursory inspection, the Egyptian
and Spanish Arabic poets are less fully represented in the
collection than their brethren of Irak, Syria and Arabia,
and it is, by the way, a notable fact, and one which tells
strongly against Von Hammer's theory of the Persian
origin of the work, that no single extract or translation
from Persian verse is, to the best of my belief, known to
. exist in it.

The verse in the Thousand and One Nights is of the
most various quality, ranging from high beauty to the
utmost baldness. It rarely answers to our idea of that
usually inserted in narrative fiction and contains little
that can be described as songs- Its quality is often
rhetorical rather than lyrical, and it appears frequently
to have been inserted somewnat in the same way as we
should use engravings or woodcuts, to illustrate and
explain the prose text, or as music is employed in
melodrama. It is often made use of to express a sudden
emotion or exaltation of sentiment on the part of the per-
sonages introduced, much as the prose in Shakespeare's
and other plays of the Elizabethan era rises occasionally
into blank or rhymed verse, under stress of increased
elevation or intensity of thought and feeling. As may
be expected from a list of contributors which includes so
many of the most renowned singers of Muslim civilisation,


392


we are often presented with poetry worthy of the
name, whilst, on the other hand, many of the pieces 1 are
mere rhymed amplifications of the prose text and seem
to have been composed for the purpose by the compilers
or the various copyists through whose hands the work
must have passed. Again, (as in Uns el Wujoud) the
verse in some of the tales has evidently been written
expressly for their illustration and (though naturally of
very unequal value) is often by no means lacking in
poetic beauty and vigour, 3 thus proving that among the
anonymous authors of the various parts of the work were
poets of no mean ability.

1 Vol V pp. 27 and 41. * eg* VoL IV. p,


THE ENt*.
