The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night, Vol. 6 (Anonymous (trans. John Payne), 1883)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1883 Villon Society edition (https://archive.org/details/JohnPayneVolume6.AlfLaylahWaLaylah.TheBookOfTheThousandNights). The first complete English translation (1882-84), from the Calcutta Arabic edition.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i !

I


: i

i


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND
NIGHTS AND ONE NIGHT: now

FIRST COMPLETELY DONE INTO ENGLISH
PROSE AND VERSE, FROM THE ORIGINAL
ARABIC, BY JOHN PA YNE (A UTHOR
OF 11 THE MASQUE OF SHADOWS," " IN-
TAGLIOS," " SONGS OF LIFE AND DEATH,"
"LAUTREC," 11 THE POEMS OF MASTER
FRANCIS VILLON OF PARIS," "NEW
POEMS;' ETC. ETC). IN NINE VOLUMES:

VOLUME THE SIXTH.


LONDON-
PRINTED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

1QOI


KIRMAN EDITION
Limited to Five Hundred Copies
N0 + ,S32


n


! !


CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH VOLUME.


PAGE

1. JOUDER AND HIS BROTHERS I

2. THE HISTORY OF GHERIB AND HIS BROTHER

AGIB .48

3. OTBEH AND REYYA 181

4. HIND DAUGHTER OF EN NUMAN AND EL

HEJJAJ 186

5. KHUZEIMEH BEN BISHR AND IKRIMEH EL

FEYYAZ 189

6. YOUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE KHALIF WELID

BEN SEHL 194

7. HAROUN ER RESHID AND THE ARAB GIRL . 199

8. EL ASMAI AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORA 201

9. IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL . . 205

10. THE LOVERS OF THE BENOU UDHREH . . 208

11. THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE . . . .215

12. THE LOVERS OF BASSORA ..... 220

13. ISAAC OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND

THE DEVIL ........ 226


Vlll


PAGE

14. THE LOVERS OF MEDINA . . . . \ - 229

15. EL MELIK EN NASIR AND HIS VIZIER . . 233

16. THE ROGUERIES OF DELILEH THE CRAFTY

AND HER DAUGHTER ZEYNEBTHE TRICKS-
TRESS 234

17. THE ADVENTURES OF QUICKSILVER A LI OF

CAIRO: being a sequel to THE ROGUERIES

OF DELILEH THE CRAFTY 264

18. ARDESHIR AND HEYAT EN NUFOUS . . .304


THE BOOK OF THE THOUSAND NIGHTS
AND ONE NIGHT.


JOUDER AND HIS BROTHERS.

There was once a merchant named Omar and he had
tftree sons, the eldest of whom was called Salim, the
second Selim and the third Jouder. He reared them all
till they came to man's estate, but the youngest he loved
more than his brothers, who, seeing this, waxed jealous
of Jouder and hated him. Now their father was a man
stricken in years, and when he saw that his two eldest
sons hated their brother, he feared lest trouble should
befall him from them after his death. So he assembled
a company of his kinsfolk, together with divers men of
learning and assessors of the Cadi's court, and letting
bring all his money and stuff, said to them, 'O folk,
divide ye this money and stuff into four parts, according
to the law.' They did so, and he gave one part to each
of his sons and kept the fourth himself, saying, 'This
was my good and I have divided it among them ; and now
they have no farther claim upon me nor upon each other j
so, when I die, no difference shall arise between them,
seeing that I have parted the inheritance among them
in my lifetime ; and this that I have kept shall be for my
wife, their mother, wherewithal to provide for her sub-
sistence [after my death].'

A little while after this he died, and neither of the two Jjcbff,

VOL. VI. i


2


elder brothers was content with his share, but sought more
of Jouder,- saying, ' Our father's good is in thy hands.'
So he appealed to the judges and those who had been
present at the partition came and bore witness of that
which they knew, wherefore the judge forbade them from
each other ; but Jouder and his brothers spent much
money in bribes to him. After this, they left him awhile,
but presently they began again to torment him and he
again appealed to the magistrate, [who again gave judg-
ment in his favour;] but all three once more lost much
money in bribes. Nevertheless Salim and Selim forbore
not to seek his hurt [and to carry the case] from court to
court, losing, he and they, till they had given all their
good for food to the oppressors 1 and they became poor,
all three. Then the two elder brothers went to their
mother and took her money and beat her and laughed at
her and drove her away. So she betook herself to her son
Jouder and told him how his brothers had dealt with her
and fell to cursing them. ' O my mother,' said he, ' do
not curse them, for God will requite each of them his
deed. See, I am become poor, and so are my brethren,
for contention begetteth loss of good, and we have con-
tended amain, I and they, before the judges, and it hath
profited us nothing : nay, we have wasted all our father
left us and are disgraced among the folk by reason of our
testimony, [one against the other]. Shall I then contend
with them anew on thine account and shall we appeal
to the judges ? This may not be ; rather do thou take up
thine abode with me, and the cake of bread I eat I will
share with thee. Do thou pray for me and God will give
me the means of thy support. Leave them to receive of
Him the recompense of their deedg and console thyself
with the saying of the poet ;

1 Sz zulmeh, a popular name for the officers of the civil power, as
opposed to the religious., alone acknowledged by all Muslims*


3


If a lewd fellow should transgress against thee, let him be, And wait

till God shall punish him who doth iniquity ;
Neither oppress, for if a mount another should oppress, The evil-doer

would be crushed therefore, assuredly.

And he comforted her till she consented and took up her
dwelling with him. Then he got him a net and went
a-fishing every day in the river or the lakes or some other
place in which there was water ; and one day he would
earn ten paras, another twenty and another thirty, which
he spent upon his mother and himself, and they ate and
drank well. But, as for his brothers, they plied no craft
and sold not neither bought ; misery and ruin and over-
whelming calamity overtook them and they wasted that
which they had taken from their mother and became
wretched naked beggars. Bytimes they would come to
their mother, humbling themselves to her exceedingly and
complaining of hunger; and she, a mother's heart being
pitiful, would give them some mouldy bread ; or, if there
were any cooked meat of the day before, she would say
to them, 'Eat it quickly and go, before your brother
comes ; for it would be grievous to him and he would
harden his heart against me, and ye would disgrace me
with him/ So they would eat in haste and go.

One day they came in to their mother, and she set
cooked meat and bread before them. As they were eating,
in came their brother Jouder, at whose sight their mother
hung her head in shame and confusion, fearing lest he
should be wroth with her. But he smiled in their faces,
saying, ' Welcome, O my brothers ! This is indeed a blessed
day. How comes it that ye visit me this blessed day ? '
Then he embraced them and entreated them lovingly,
saying to them, ' I thought not that ye would have deserted
me nor that ye would have forborne to visit me and your
mother/ £ By Allah, O my brother,' said they, £ we longed
sore for thee and nought withheld us but shamefastness


4


because of what befell between us and thee ; but indeed
we have repented amain. It was Satan's doing, the curse
of God the Most High be upon him ! And now we have
Nfjjftt no blessing but thee and our mother.' c And 1/ rejoined
focbut. Jouder, ' I have no blessing but you twain.' And his
mother exclaimed, ' God whiten thy face, O my son, and
increase thy prosperity, for thou art the best of us all I *
Then he said to his brothers, ' Welcome to you both 1
Abide with me ; for God is bountiful and good aboundeth
with me.' So he made peace with them and they ate the
evening meal and passed the night with him.

Next morning, after they had broken their fast, Jouder
shouldered his net and went out, trusting in [God] the
Opener [of the gates of sustenance,] whilst the two others
also went forth and were absent till noon, when they re-
turned and their mother set the midday meal before them.
At nightfall, Jouder came home, bearing meat and vege-
tables, and they abode thus a month's space, Jouder
catching fish and spending their price on his mother and
his brothers, and the latter eating and amusing themselves,
till, one day, he went down to the river-bank and casting
his net, brought it up empty. He cast it a second time,
but again it came up empty and he said to himself, 4 There
are no fish in this place.' So he removed to another place
and cast the net there, but with no better success. And he
ceased not to remove from place to place till nightfall, but
caught not a single gudgeon and said to himself, ' Strange !
Is the river drained of fish or what ? ' Then he shouldered
the net and made for home, chagrined and concerned for
his mother and brothers and knowing not how he should
feed them that night.

Presently he came to a baker's oven and saw the folk
crowding for bread, with money in their hands, whilst the
baker took no note of them. So he stood there, sighing,
and the baker said to him, * Welcome, O Jouder ! Dost


5


thou want bread ? ' But he was silent and the baker con-
tinued, ' If thou hast no money, take thy sufficiency and
thou shalt have credit.' So Jouder said, 'Give me ten
paras' worth of bread and take this net in pledge.' ' Nay,
good fellow,' rejoined the baker, 'the net is thy means of
earning thy livelihood, and if I take it of thee, I shall close
up against thee the door of thy subsistence. Take ten
paras' worth of bread and take these other ten paras, and
to-morrow bring me fish for the twenty.' ' On my head
and eyes be it,' answered Jouder and took the bread and
money, saying, ' To-morrow God will provide me the
means of acquittance.' Then he bought meat and vege-
tables and carried them home to his mother, who cooked
them, and they supped and went to bed.

Next morning he arose at daybreak and took the net,
and his mother said to him, ' Sit down and break thy fast.'
But he said, * Do thou and my brothers breakfast,' and
went down to the river, where he ceased not to cast and
shift about all day, without aught falling to him, till the
hour of afternoon-prayer, when he shouldered his net and
went away, sore dejected. His way led him perforce by
the shop of the baker, who, when he saw him, counted
out to him the loaves and the money, saying, 'Come,
take it and go ; if it be not for to-day, it will be for to-
morrow.' Jouder would have excused himself, but the
baker said to him, ' There needs no excuse ; if thou hadst
caught aught, it would be with thee ; so, when I saw
thee empty-handed, I knew thou hadst gotten nought ;
and if to-morrow thou have no better luck, come and take
bread and be not ashamed, for I will give thee credit'
So Jouder took the bread and money and went home.
Next day he sallied forth and fished from lake to lake
until the time of afternoon-prayer, but caught nothing;
so he went to the baker and took the bread and silver as
usual.


6


Thus he did seven days running, till he became dis-
heartened and said in himself, ' To-day I will go to Lake
Caroun.' So he went thither and was about to cast his
net, when there came up to him unawares a Moor clad in
a splendid habit and riding a mule with trappings em-
broidered with gold and on her back a pair of saddle-bags
of the same stuff. The Moor alighted and said to him,
4 Peace be upon thee, O Jouder, son of Omar ! ' ' And on
thee, O my lord the pilgrim I ' 1 replied the fisherman.
Quoth the Moor, 'O Jouder, I have need of thee and if
thou obey me, thou shalt get great good and shalt be my
companion and do my occasions for me.' 'Q my lord, '
replied Jouder, 'Tell me what is in thy mind and I will
obey thee, without demur.' Quoth the Moor, 'Repeat the
First Chapter of the Koran.' 2 So he recited it with him
and the Moor, bringing out a silken cord, said to Jouder,
Bind my hands fast behind me with this cord and cast
me into the lake ; then wait awhile and if thou see my
hands appear above the water, cast thy net over me and
draw me out in haste ; but if I come up, feet foremost,
then know that I am dead ; in which case do thou leave
me and take the mule and saddle-bags and carry them
to the merchants' bazaar, where thou wilt find a Jew, by
name Shemaiah. Deliver him the mule and he will give
thee a hundred dinars, which do thou take and go thy
ways and keep the matter secret' So Jouder bound his
hands behind his back and he kept saying, 'Tighter.'
Then said he, ' Push me into the lake.' So he pushed
him in and he sank.

Jouder stood waiting some time, till, at last, the Moor's
feet appeared above the water, whereupon he knew that
he was dead. So he left him and drove the mule to the

1 It need hardly be remarked that " pilgrim" [i.e. one who has made
the pilgrimage to Mecca] is a title of honour among the Muslims,
A customary practice in confirmation of an agreement.,


bazaar, where he found the Jew seated on a stool at the
door of his storehouse. When the latter saw the muiej
he said, " The man hath perished and nought undid him
but covetise.' Then he took the mule from Jouder and
gave him a hundred dinars, charging him keep the matter
secret. So Jouder went to the baker and giving him a
dinar, took what bread he needed. The baker reckoned ^"{i
up what was due to him and said, ' I still owe thee two frfi
days' bread.' 'Good,' answered Jouder and went on to
the butcher, to whom he gave a dinar and took meat
saying, 'Keep the rest of the dinar on account.' Then
he bought vegetables and going home, found his brothers
importuning their mother for food, whilst she said, ' Have,
patience till your brother comes home, for I have nothing/
So he went in to them and said, ' Take and eat ; ' and thej
fell on the victual like ghouls. Then he gave his mother
the rest of the dinars, bidding her, if his brothers came
to her, give them wherewithal to buy food and eat in his
absence.

Next morning he took his net and going down to Lake
Caroun, was about to cast his net, when there came up to
him a second Moor, riding on a mule, more handsomely
accoutred than he of the day before and having with him
a pair of saddle-bags, in each pocket of which was a
casket. * Peace be on thee, O Jouder ! ' said the Moor,
* And on thee be peace, O my lord the pilgrim ! ' replied
Jouder. Quoth the Moor, 4 Did there come to thee yester-
day a Moor riding on a mule like this of mine ? ' At this
Jouder was alarmed and replied, ' I saw none,' fearing lest
the other should say, ' Whither went he ? ' and if he an-
swered, ' He was drowned in the lake, 5 that he should
charge him with having drowned him ; wherefore he could
not but deny. ' Harkye, good fellow,' rejoined the Moor 9
1 this was my brother, who is gone before me/ Quoth
Jouder, 4 1 know nothing of him.' Then said the Moor„


8


4 Didst thou not bind his hands behind him and throw him
into the lake, and did he not say to thee, " If my hands
appear above the water first, cast thy net over me and pull
me out in haste ; but, if my feet appear first, know that
I am dead and carry the mule to the Jew Shemaiah, who
will give thee a hundred dinars ? " And did not his feet
appear first and didst thou not carry the mule to the Jew
and take of him the hundred dinars ? ' 4 Since thou knowest
all this,' replied Jouder, ' why dost thou question me ? '
Quoth the Moor, ' I would have thee do with me as thou
didst with my brother.' Then he gave him a silken cord,
saying, ' Bind my hands behind me and throw me in, and
if I fare as did my brother, take the mule to the Jew and
he will give thee other hundred dinars.' Quoth Jouder,
1 Come.' So he came and he bound him and pushed him
into the lake, where he sank.

After awhile, his feet appeared above the water and
Jouder said, ' He is dead and damned I So God will, may
Moors come to me every day, and I will bind them and
push them in and they shall die ; and I will be content with
a hundred dinars for each dead man. 5 Then he took the
mule to the Jew, who exclaimed, on seeing him, 'The other
is dead ? ' ' May thy head live ! ' answered Jouder, and the
Jew said, ' This is the reward of the covetous.' Then he
took the mule and gave Jouder a hundred dinars, with
which he returned to his mother. ' O my son,' said she,
' whence hast thou this money ? ' So he told her and she
said, ' Go not again to Lake Caroun, for I fear for thee
from the Moors.' ' O my mother,' answered he, 'I do
but cast them in by their own wish, and what am I to do?
This craft brings me in a hundred dinars a day and I
return speedily ; wherefore, by Allah s I will not leave
going to Lake Caroun, till the trace of the Moors is cut off
and not one of them is left'

So, on the morrow, he went down to the lake and stood


g


there, till there came up a third Moor, riding on a mule
and still more richly accoutred than the first two, who
said to him, ' Peace be on thee, O Jouder, O son of
Omar ! ' And the fisherman returned his salute, saying
in himself, ' How comes it that they all know me ? '
Quoth the Moor, 'Have any Moors passed by here?'
* Two,' answered Jouder. * Whither went they ? ' asked
the Moor, and Jouder said, ' I bound their hands behind
them and cast them into the lake, where they were
drowned, and the same fate is in store for thee.' The
Moor laughed and rejoined, saying, ' O good fellow, every
living soul hath its appointed term. 5 Then he alighted
and gave the fisherman the silken cord, saying, < Do with
me as thou didst with them.' ' Put thy hands behind
thy back,' said Jouder, * that I may pinion thee, for I am
in haste, and time flies.' So he put his hands behind him
and Jouder bound him and cast him in. Then he waited
awhile, till presently the Moor thrust his hands forth of
the water and called out to him, saying, ' Ho, good fellow !
Cast out thy net ! ' So Jouder cast the net over him and
drew him ashore, and behold, in each hand he held a fish
as red as coral. Quoth the Moor, 'Bring me the two
caskets [that are in the saddle-bags].' So Jouder brought
them and opened them to him, and he laid in each casket
a fish and shut them up.

Then he pressed Jouder to his bosom and kissed him on
the right cheek and the left, saying, ' God save thee from
all stress ! By Allah, hadst thou not cast the net over me
and pulled me out, I should have kept my grip of the two
fish till I sank and was drowned, for I could not get ashore
[of myself].' 1 O my lord the pilgrim,' quoth Jouder, ' I
conjure thee by Allah, tell me the true history of the two t&Ctgfjt
drowned men and the fishes and the Jew.' 1 Know, O
Jouder/ replied the Moor, ' that these that were drowned
were my two brothers, by name Abdusselam and Abdulahed,


so


My own name is Abdussemed, and the Jew also is our
brother : his name is Abdurrehim and he is no Jew, but a
true believer of the Maliki school. 1 Our father, whose name
was Abdulwedoud, taught us magic and the art of solving
mysteries and bringing to light hidden treasures, and we
applied ourselves thereto, till we compelled the Afrits and
Marids of the Jinn to do us service. By-and-by, our father
died and left us much wealth, and we divided amongst
us his treasures and talismans, till we came to the books,
when we fell out over a book called " The Fables of the
Ancients/' whose like is not in the world, nor can its price
be paid of any nor its value made good with gold and jewels ;
for in it are particulars of all the hidden treasures of the
earth and the solution of all mysteries. Our father was
wont to make use of this book, of which we had some small
matter by heart, and each of us desired to possess it, that
he might come at what was therein.

Now there was in our company an old man, by name
the Diviner El Abten, who had reared our father and
taught him divination and magic, and he said to us,
" Bring me the book." So we gave it him and he said,
" Ye are my son's sons, and it may not be that I should
wrong any of you. So whoso is minded to have the book,
let him address himself to achieve the treasure of Es
Shemerdel and bring me the celestial planisphere and the
kohl-pot and the seal-ring and the sword. For the ring
hath a Marid that serves it called Er Raad el Casif. And
whoso hath possession thereof, neither King nor Sultan
may prevail against him ; and if he will, he may therewith
make himself master of the earth, in all its length and
breadth. As for the sword, if its bearer draw it and
brandish it against an army, the army will be put to the
rout, and if he say the while, £ Slay yonder host/ there will
come forth of the sword lightning and fire, that will slay
1 See note s Vol. II. p. 127.


II


the whole host. As for the planisphere, its possessor has
only to turn its face toward any country with whose sight
he hath a mind to divert himself, and therein he will see
that country and its people, as they were before him, and
he sitting in his place ; and if he be wroth with a city and
have a mind to burn it, he has but to turn the face of the
planisphere towards the sun's disc, saying, ' Let such a
city be burnt,' and that city will be consumed with fire.
As for the kohl-pot, whoso anointeth his eyes therefrom,
he shall see all the treasures of the earth. And I make
this condition with you that none but he who achieves the
treasure and brings me the four precious things that be
therein shall have any claim to this book."

We all agreed to this, and he continued, saying, " Q my
sons, know that the treasure of Es Shemerdel is under the
governance of the sons of the Red King, 1 and your father
told me that he had himself essayed to open the treasure,
but could not achieve it ; for the sons of the Red King fled
from him into the land of Egypt and took refuge in a lake
there, called Lake Caroun, whither he pursued them, but
could not prevail over them, by reason of their stealing ^{gfjf
into that lake, which was guarded by a spell So he re- tifXU
turned, empty-handed, and complained to me of his ill-
success, whereupon I made him an astrological calculation
and found that the treasure could only be achieved by
means of a young fisherman of Cairo, by name Jouder ben
Omar, the place of foregathering with whom was at Lake
Caroun, for that he should be the means of the taking the
sons of the Red King and that the charm should not be
dissolved, save if he should bind the hands of the seeker
of the treasure behind him and cast him into the lake,
there to do battle with the sons of the Red King. An he
were he to whom the adventure was reserved, he should
lay hands upon them ; but, if it were not destined to himg
1 One of the chief of the Kings of the Jinn.


12


fee should perish and his feet appear above the water. As
for him who was successful, his hands would appear first
above the water, whereupon it behoved that Jouder should
cast the net over him and draw him ashore."

Quoth my brothers Abdusselam and Abdulahed, "We
will essay the adventure, though we perish ; " and I said,
" And I also will go ; " but my brother Abdurrehim (he
whom thou hast seen in the habit of a Jew) said, " I have
no mind [to this]." So we agreed with him that he should
repair to Cairo in the disguise of a Jewish merchant, so
that, if one of us perished in the lake, he might take his
mule and saddle-bags and give the bearer a hundred
dinars. The first that came to thee the sons of the Red
King slew, and so did they with the second ; but against
me they could not prevail and I laid hands on them.'
Quoth Jouder, ' And where are they ? ' 4 Didst thou not
see me shut them in the caskets ? ' asked the Moor.
' Those were fish,' said Jouder. ' Nay,' answered the
Moor, c they are Afrits in the guise of fish. But, O
Jouder,' continued he, ' thou must know that the treasure
can only be achieved by thy means : so wilt thou do my
bidding and go with me to the towns of Fez and Mequinez
and open the treasure? And after I will give thee what
thou wilt and thou shalt ever be my brother in the bond
of God and return to thy family with a joyful heart.' ' O
my lord the pilgrim,' said Jouder, 'I have on my hands
^T{g|)t a mother and two brothers^ whose provider I am ; and if
tSCXtL I go with thee, who shall give them bread to eat ? ' ' This
is an idle excuse,' replied the Moor ; ' if it be but a matter
of spending-money, I will give thee a thousand dinars for
thy mother, wherewith she may provide herself till thou come
back ; and indeed thou shalt return before four months/

When Jouder heard mention of the thousand dinars, he
consented and the Moor, pulling out the money, gave it to
him s whereupon he carried it to his mother and told het


13


what had passed, saying, ' Take these thousand dinars and
provide thyself and my brothers withal, whilst I journey
to Morocco with the Moor, for I shall be absent four
months, and great good will betide me ; so pray for me, O
my mother ! ' ' O my son,' answered she, ' thou desolatest
me and I fear for thee.' f O my mother,' rejoined he, 'no
harm can befall him who is in God's keeping, and the Moor
is a man of worth.' And he went on to praise his fashion
to her. ' May God incline his heart to thee ! ' said she.
* Go with him, my son : peradventure, he will give thee
somewhat.' So he took leave of her and rejoined the Moor
Abdussemed, who said to him, £ Hast thou consulted thy
mother?' ' Yes,' answered Jouder ; 'and she blessed me.'
' Then mount behind me,' said the Moor.

So Jouder mounted behind him on the mule, and they
rode on from noon till the time of afternoon-prayer, when
the fisherman was anhungred, but seeing no victual with
the Moor, said to him, ' O my lord the pilgrim, belike thou
hast forgotten to bring aught to eat by the way ? ' ' Art
thou hungry ? ' asked the Moor. * Yes,' answered Jouder.
So Abdussemed alighted and made Jouder alight and take
down the saddle-bags ; then he said to him, ' O my brother,
what wilt thou have?' ' Anything,' replied Jouder. 'God
on thee,' rejoined the Moor, ' tell me what thou hast a mind
to.' 'Bread and cheese,' said Jouder; and the other, 'O
good fellow, bread and cheese befit thee not; wish for
something good.' ' Just now,' replied Jouder, ' everything
is good to me.' Quoth the Moor, ' Dost thou like fricasseed
fowl ? ' ' Yes,' answered Jouder. £ Dost thou like rice and
honey?' asked he, and Jouder said, 'Yes.' And the Moor
went on to ask him if he liked this dish and that, till he
had named four-and-twenty kinds of meats ; and Jouder
thought to himself, 6 He must be mad. Where are all these
dishes to come from, seeing he hath neither cook nor
kitchen ? ' And he said to him, ' Enough : thou makest


me long for all these meats, and I see nothing.* Quoth
the Moor, ' Thou art welcome, O Jouder ! ' and putting his
hand into the saddle-bags, pulled out a dish of gold, con-
taining two hot fricasseed fowls. Then he put in his hand
a second time and pulled out a golden dish, full of
kabobs ; 1 nor did he give over taking out dishes from the
saddle-bags, till he had brought forth the whole of the four-
and-twenty he had named, whilst Jouder looked on in
amazement.

Then said the Moor, 'Eat, good fellow.' And Jouder
said to him, ' O my lord, meseems thou earnest in yonder
saddle-bags a kitchen and cooking-folk ! ' The Moor
laughed and replied, 'These are enchanted saddle-bags
and have a servant, who would bring us a thousand dishes
an hour, if we called for them.' Quoth Jouder, ' By Allah,
this is indeed a fine pair of saddle-bags ! ' Then they ate
their fill and threw away what was left; after which the
Moor replaced the empty dishes in the saddle-bags and
putting in his hand, drew out an ewer. They drank and
making the ablutions, prayed the afternoon-prayer 5 after
which Abdussemed replaced the ewer and the two caskets
in the saddle-bags and throwing them over the mule's
back, mounted and took Jouder up behind him. Then
said he, i O Jouder, knowest thou how far we have come,
since we left Cairo ? ' ' Not I, by Allah,' replied he s and
Abdussemed, 'We have come a whole month's journey.*
'And how is that?' asked Jouder. 'Know, O Jouder,'
replied the Moor, ' that this mule under us is a Marid of
the Jinn, that every day performs a year's journey; but, for
thy sake, she hath gone at her leisure.'

Then they set out again and fared on westward till
nightfall s when they halted and the Moor brought out the
evening meal from the saddle-bags, and In like manner, in
the morning, he took forth wherewithal to break their fast.
1 Rissoled mutton.


*5

So they rode on four days, alighting at midnight and
sleeping till the morning, when they fared on again ; and
all that Jouder had a mind to, he sought of the Moor,
who brought it out of the saddle-bags. On the fifth day,
they arrived at Fez and Mequinez and entered the city,
where all who met the Moor saluted him and kissed his
hands ; and he rode through the streets, till he came to
a certain door, at which he knocked, whereupon it opened
and out came a girl like the moon, to whom said he, ' O
Rehmeh, O my daughter, open us the upper chamber.'
4 On my head and eyes, O my father! 5 replied she and
went in, swaying to and fro with a graceful and voluptuous
gait, that ravished Jouder's reason, and he said, 'This is
none other than a King's daughter.' So she opened the
upper chamber and the Moor, taking the saddle-bags from
the mule's back, said, ' Go, and God bless thee ! ' When
behold, the earth opened and swallowing the mule, closed
up again as before. And Jouder said, ' O Protector !
praised be God who hath kept us in safety on her back ! '
4 Marvel not, O Jouder,' quoth the Moor ; £ I told thee that
the mule was an Afrit; but come with us into the upper
chamber/

So they went up into the upper chamber, and Jouder
was amazed at the profusion of rich furniture and pendants
of gold and silver and jewels and other rare and precious
things that he saw there. As soon as they were seated,
the Moor bade Rehmeh bring him a certain bale and
opening it, took out a dress worth a thousand dinars, which
he gave to Jouder, saying, ' Don this dress, O Jouder ! and
welcome to thee !' So Jouder put it on and became as he
were one of the Kings of the West. Then the Moor laid
the saddle-bags before him, and putting in his hand,
pulled out dish after dish, till they had before them a
tray of forty kinds of meat, when he said to Jouder, ' Come,
O my lord, eat and excuse us, for that we know not what


^jftClbt meats thou wouldest have ; but tell us what thou hast a
fctxTu. mind to, and we will set it before thee without delay.'
' By Allah, O my lord the pilgrim,' replied Jouder, £ I love
all kinds of meat and mislike none; so ask me not of
aught, but bring all that cometh to thy thought, for I have
nought to do but to eat'

He abode twenty days with the Moor, who clad him in
a new dress every day, and all this time they ate from the
saddle-bags ; for the Moor bought neither meat nor bread
nor aught else nor cooked, but brought everything out of
the bags, even to various kinds of fruit. On the twenty-
first day, he said to Jouder, 'Come, this is the day
appointed for opening the treasure of ShemerdeL' So he
rose and they went afoot without the city, where they found
two slaves, each holding a mule. The Moor mounted one
mule and Jouder the other, and they rode on till noon,
when they came to a stream of running water, on whose
banks they alighted and Abdussemed signed with his hand
to the slaves and said, ' To it ! ' So they took the mules
and going each his own way, were absent awhile, after
which they returned, bearing, one a tent, which he pitched,
and the other carpets, which he spread in the tent and laid
cushions thereabout. Then they brought the saddle-bags
and the caskets containing the two fish ; whereupon the
Moor arose and said, 4 Come, O Jouder 1 ' So Jouder fol-
lowed him into the tent and sat down beside him ; and he
brought out dishes of meat from the saddle-bags and they
ate the morning meal.

Then the Moor took the two caskets and conjured over
them, whereupon there came from within voices that said,
* Here are we, at thy service, O diviner of the world 1
Have mercy on us ! ' But he ceased not to repeat con-
jurations and they to call for help, till the two caskets flew
In sunder and there came forth two men, with their hands
bound behind them, saying, ' Pardon, O diviner of the


I


17


world! What wilt thou with us? ' Quoth he, 1 1 will
burn you with fire, except ye make a covenant with me, to
open to me the treasure of Es Shemerdel' ' We promise
this to thee,' answered they, 'and we will open the treasure
to thee, so thou produce to us Jouder ben Omar, the
fisherman, for it may not be opened but by his means, nor
can any enter therein but he.' ' He of whom ye speak, 5
answered the Moor, 'I have brought, and he is here,
listening to you and looking at you.' Thereupon they
covenanted with him to open the treasure to him, and he
released them.

Then he brought out a hollow wand and tablets of red
cornelian and laid the latter on the former ; after which
he took a chafing-dish and laying charcoal thereon, blew
one breath into it and it kindled forthwith. Then said
he to Jouder, 'O Jouder, I am now about to begin the
necessary conjurations and fumigations, and when I have
once begun, I may not speak, or the conjuration will be
naught ; so I will tell thee first what thou must do.'
'Say on,' replied Jouder. 'Know then,' said the Moor,
' that, when I have recited the charm and thrown on the
perfumes, the water will dry up from the river's bed and
discover to thee a door of gold, the bigness of the city-
gate, with two rings of metal thereon ; whereupon do thou
go down to the door and knock lightly and wait awhile ;
then knock a second time more loudly than the first and
wait another while ; after which give three knocks, one
after another, and thou wilt hear a voice say, " Who knocks
at the door of the treasure, unknowing how to solve the
mysteries?" Do thou answer, "I am Jouder ben Omar,
the fisherman ; " and the door will open and there will
come forth one with a sword in his hand and say to thee,
" If thou be that man, stretch forth thy neck, that I may
strike off thy head." Then do thou stretch forth thy neck
md fear not ; for, when he lifts his hand and smites thee?
vol. vl a


IS


he will fall down before thee, and in a little thou wilt see
him a body without a soul ; and the blow shall not irk
thee nor shall any harm befall thee ; but, if thou gainsay
him, he will slay thee. When thou hast undone his en-
chantment by obedience, enter and go on till thou seest
another door, at which do thou knock, and there will come
forth to thee a horseman with a lance on his shoulder and
say to thee, " What brings thee hither, where neither man
nor genie may enter ? " And he will shake his spear at
thee. Bare thy breast to him and he will smite thee and
fall down forthright and thou shalt see him a body without
a soul ; but if thou cross him, he will slay thee.

Then go on to the third door, whence there will come
forth to thee a man with a bow and arrows in his hand and
take aim at thee. Bare thy breast to him and he will shoot
at thee and fall down before thee, a body without a soul ;
$t but if thou cross him, he will kill thee. Then go on to
b. the fourth door and knock, and there will come forth to
thee a huge lion, which will rush upon thee, opening his
mouth as if he had a mind to devour thee. Have no fear
of him, neither flee from him ; but, when he cometh to
thee, give him thy hand and he will bite at it and fall down
straightway, nor shall aught [of hurt] betide thee. Then
enter the fifth door, where thou shalt find a black slave, who
will say to thee, " Who art thou ? " Say, "I am Jouder,"
and he will answer, "If thou be that man, open the sixth
door." Then do thou go up to the door and say, " O
Jesus, tell Moses to open the door ; " whereupon the door
will fly open and thou wilt see two dragons, one on the
left hand and another on the right, which will open their
mouths and fly at thee, both at once. Do thou put forth
to them thy hands and they will bite each a hand [and fall
down dead ;] but if thou resist them, they will kill thee.

Then go on to the seventh door and knock, whereupon
there will come forth to thee thy mother and say, "Welcomes


19


O my son ! Come, that I may greet thee 1 " But do thou
say to her, "Hold off from me and put off thy clothes. n
And she will make answer, "O my son, I am thy mother
that suckled thee and brought thee up : how then wouldst
thou strip me naked ? " Then do thou say, " Except thou
put off thy clothes, I will kill thee ! " and look to thy right,
where thou wilt see a sword hanging up. Take it and draw
it upon her, saying, " Strip ! " whereupon she will wheedle
thee and humble herself to thee ; but have thou no pity on
her nor be beguiled, and as often as she puts off aught, say
to her, " Off with the rest ! " nor do thou cease to threaten
her with death, till she put off all that is upon her and fall
down, when the enchantment will be dissolved and the
charms undone, and thou wilt be safe.

Then enter the hall of the treasure, where thou wilt see
the gold lying in heaps ; but pay no heed to aught thereof
and go on to the upper end of the hall, where thou wilt
' find a niche, with a curtain drawn before it. Draw back
the curtain and thou wilt see the enchanter Es Shemerdel
lying upon a couch of gold, with something at his head,
round and shining like the moon, which is the celestial
planisphere. He is girt with the sword; on his finger is
the ring and about his neck is a chain, to which hangs the
kohl-pot. Bring me the four talismans, and look thou
forget not aught of that which I have told thee, or thou
wilt repent and be put to fear.' And he repeated his
directions to Jouder a second and a third and a fourth
time, till he said, 4 1 have them by heart : but who may
face all these enchantments that thou namest and endure
against these mighty terrors ? ' ' O Jouder,' replied the
Moor, 5 fear not, for they are semblances without life;'
and he went on to hearten him, till he said, 'I put my
trust in God.'

Then Abdussemed threw perfumes on the chafing-dish,
and addressed himself to reciting conjurations. Presently


20


the water disappeared and discovered the bed of the river
and the door of the treasure, whereupon Jouder went down
to the door and knocked. Therewith he heard a voice
saying, 'Who knocks at the door of the treasure, un-
knowing how to solve the mysteries ? ' Quoth he, ' I am
Jouder, son of Omar ; ' whereupon the door opened and
there came forth one with a drawn sword, who said to
him, ' Stretch forth thy neck.' So he stretched forth his
neck and the figure smote him and fell down, lifeless.
Then he went on to the second door and did the like, nor
did he cease to do thus, till he had undone the enchant-
ments of the first six doors and came to the seventh door,
from which there issued forth to him his mother, saying,
' Greeting, O my son ! ' ' What art thou ? ' said he ; and
she answered saying, ' O my son, I am thy mother who
bore thee nine months [in my womb] and gave thee suck
and reared thee.' Quoth he, 4 Put off thy clothes.' 'Thou
art my son,' said she, ' how wouldst thou strip me naked ? '
But he said, ' Strip, or I will strike off thy head with this
sword ; ' and he put out his hand to it and drew it upon
her, saying, 'Except thou strip, I will slay thee.' Then
the strife became long between them and as often as he
redoubled on her his menaces, she put off somewhat of
her clothes and he said to her, ' Put off the rest,' whilst
she kept saying, 'O my son, thou hast disappointed my
fosterage of thee,' till she had nothing left but her trousers.
Then said she, ' O my son, is thy heart stone ? Wilt thou
dishonour me by discovering my nakedness. Indeed, this
is unlawful, O my son ! ' And he answered, ' Thou sayst
sooth ; it behoves not that thou put off thy trousers.'

No sooner had he uttered these words, than she cried
out and said, ' He hath made default : beat him ! ' Where-
upon there fell upon him blows like rain and the servants
of the treasure flocked to him and dealt him a beating
that he forgot not in all his life ; after which they thrust


21


him forth and cast him down without the treasure and the
doors shut of themselves as before, whilst the waters of
the river returned to their bed. When the Moor saw this, tNTfgfii
he took Jouder up in haste and repeated conjurations over ftcxb.
him, till he came to his senses, when he said to him,
'What hast thou done, O dolt?' 'O my brother,' an-
swered Jouder, 4 1 undid all the enchantments, till I came
to my mother and there befell between her and myself
a long contention. But I made her put off her clothes,
till but her trousers remained upon her and she said to
me, " Do not dishonour me ; for to discover one's naked-
ness is forbidden." So I left her her trousers out of pity,
and behold, she cried out and said, " He hath made de-
fault : beat him ! " Whereupon there came out upon me
folk, whence I know not, and beating me till I was nigh
upon death, thrust me out ; nor do I know what befell me
after this.' Quoth the Moor, ' Did I not warn thee not to
swerve from my directions ? Verily, thou hast done ill by
me and by thyself : for if thou hadst made her take off her
trousers, we had attained our desire ; but now thou must
abide with me till this day next year.'

Then he cried out to the two slaves, who struck the tent
forthright and loaded it [on muleback;] then they were
absent awhile and presently returned with the two mules j
and they mounted and rode back to the city of Fez, where
Jouder abode with the Moor, eating and drinking well and
donning a rich dress every day, till the appointed day
arrived, when the Moor said to him, ' Come with me, for
this is the appointed day.' And Jouder said, ' It is well.'
So the Moor carried him without the city, where they
found the two slaves with the mules, and mounting, rode
on till they came to the river. Here the slaves pitched the
tent and furnished it and the Moor brought forth the tray
of food and they ate the morning meal ; after which Ah"
dussemed brought out the wand and the tablets as before


and kindling the fire in the chafing-dish, made ready the
perfumes. Then said he to Jouder, ' O Jouder, I wish to
renew my injunctions to thee.' ' O my lord the pilgrim,'
answered he, ' if I have forgotten the beating, I have for-
gotten the injunctions.' ' Dost thou indeed remember
them,' asked the Moor, and he said, ' Yes.' Quoth the
Moor, ' Keep thy wits, and think not that the woman is
thy very mother ; nay, she is but an enchantment in her
semblance, whose purpose is to catch thee tripping. Thou
earnest off alive the first, time, but, if thou make default
this time, they will kill thee.' ' If I slip this time,' replied
Jouder, ' I deserve to be burnt of them.'

Then Abdussemed cast in the perfumes and recited the
conjurations, till the river dried up ; whereupon Jouder de-
scended and knocked at the door. It opened and he
entered and undid the several enchantments, till he came
to the seventh door and the semblance of his mother
appeared before him, saying, * Welcome, O my son ! ' But
he said to her, ' How am I thy son, O accursed one ?
Strip!' And she began to wheedle him and put off gar-
ment after garment, till but her trousers remained ; and he
said to her, ' Strip, O accursed one ! ' So she put off her
trousers and became a body without a soul. Then he
entered the hall of the treasure, where he saw gold lying
in heaps, but paid no heed to it and passed on to the niche
at the upper end, where he saw the enchanter Es Shemerdel
lying on a couch of gold, girt with the sword, with the
ring on his finger, the kohl-pot on his breast and the
celestial planisphere over his head. So he unbuckled
the sword and taking the ring, the kohl-pot and the plani-
sphere, went forth, when, behold, music sounded for him
and the servants of the treasure cried out s saying, 4 Mayst
thou enjoy that which thou hast gained; O Jouder !' Nor
did the music leave sounding, till he came forth of the
treasure to the Moor, who gave over his conjurations and


23


rising, embraced him and saluted him. Then Jouder gave
him the four talismans, and he took them and cried out to
the slaves, who carried away the tent and brought the mules.

So they mounted and returned to the city of Fez, where
the Moor fetched the saddle-bags and brought forth dish
after dish of meat, till the tray was full, aad said to Jouder,
' Eat, O Jouder, O my brother ! ' So he ate till he was
satisfied, when the Moor emptied what remained of the
meats into other dishes and returned the empty platters
to the saddle-bags. Then he said to Jouder, ' O Jouder,
thou hast left thy native land on our account and hast
accomplished our need ; wherefore thou hast a right to
a reward of us. Seek, therefore, what thou wilt ; it is God
the Most High that giveth unto thee by our means. Ask
thy will and be not ashamed, for thou art deserving.' 'O
my lord,' answered Jouder, 'I ask first of God the Most
High and then of thee, that thou give me yonder saddle-
bags.' So the Moor called for them and gave them to
him, saying, 'Take them, for they are thy due, and if thou
hadst asked of me aught else, I had given it thee. Eat
from them, thou and thy family, and know that the manner
of their usance is on this wise; put thy hand therein and
say, " O servant of these saddle-bags, I conjure thee by
the virtue of the mighty names that have power over
thee, bring me such a dish 1 " And he will bring thee
whatsoever thou askest, though thou shouldst call for a
thousand different dishes a day. But, O good fellow,
these will not profit thee, save by way of victual, and
thou hast wearied thyself with us and we promised thee
to send thee home, rejoicing; so we will join to these
other saddle-bags, full of gold and jewels, and bring thee
back to thy native land, where thou shalt become a mer-
chant and clothe thyself and thy family ; nor shalt thou
want for spending-money.'

So saying, he filled him a pair of saddle-bags, half with


24


gold and half with jewels and precious stones, and sending
for a slave and a mule, said to him, ' Mount this mule, and
the slave shall go before thee and guide thee in the way,
till thou come to the door of thy house, where do thou take
the two pairs of saddle-bags and give him the mule, that
he may bring it back. But let none into thy secret ; and
so we commend thee to God.' 'May God increase thy
good ! ' replied Jouder and laying the two pairs of saddle-
bags on the mule's back, mounted and set forth. The
slave went on before him and the mule followed him all
that day and night, and on the morrow he entered Cairo
by the Gate of Victory, where he saw his mother seated,
saying, ' Charity, for the love of God ! * At this sight he
well-nigh lost his wits and alighting, threw himself upon
her : and when she saw him, she wept. Then he mounted
her on the mule and walked by her stirrup, till they came
to the house, where he set her down and taking the saddle-
bags, left the mule to the slave, who took her and returned
with her to his master, for that both slave and mule were
Afrits.

As for Jouder, it was grievous to him that his mother
should beg \ so, when they were in the house, he said to
her, £ O my mother, are my brothers well ? ' And she
replied, ' They are both well' Quoth he, ' Why dost thou
beg by the wayside ? ' ' Because I am hungry, O my son,'
answered she ; and he, ' Before I went away I gave thee a
hundred dinars one day, the like the next and a thousand
on the day of my departure.' 'O my son,' replied she,
' they cheated me and took the money from me, saying,
" We will buy goods with it." Then they drove me away,
and I fell to begging by the wayside, for stress of hunger.'
4 O my mother/ said Jouder, 4 no harm shall befall thee,
now I am come; so have no concern, for these saddle-
bags are full of gold and jewels and good aboundeth [with
me].' Quoth she, 6 Verily, thou art blessed, O my soe I


25


May God accept of thee and increase thee of His bounties I
Go, O my son, fetch us some victual, for I slept not last
night for stress of hunger, having gone to bed supperless.'

He laughed and said, 'Welcome to thee, O my mother!
Call for what thou wilt to eat, and I will set it before thee
forthright ; for I have no occasion to buy from the market,
nor need I any to cook.' 4 O my son,' replied she, ' I see
nought with thee.' And he said, 1 1 have with me in these
saddle-bags all manner of meats.' 'O my son,' rejoined
she, ' whatever is ready will serve to stay hunger.' ' True,'
answered he, 'when there is no choice, men are content
with the least thing ; but where there is plenty, they like
to eat what is good : and I have plenty ; so call for what
thou hast a mind to.' 'O my son,' said she, 'give me
some hot bread and a piece of cheese : f but he answered^
saying, 'O my mother, this befits not thy condition.'
'Then give me to eat of that which befits my condition,'
quoth she; 'for thou knowest it' 'O my mother,' re-
joined he, ' what befits thy condition is rissoled meat and
fricasseed fowls and savoury rice and sausages and stuffed
cucumbers and stuffed lamb and stuffed ribs [of mutton]
and vermicelli with pounded almonds and nuts and honey
and sugar and fritters and almond patties.' But she
thought he was laughing at her and making mock of her j
so she said to him, ' Alas ! Alas ! what is come to thee ?
Dost thou dream or art thou mad ? ' 4 Why deemest thou
that I am mad ? ' asked he, and she replied, ' Because thou
namest to me all manner rich meats ; who can avail unto
their price, and who knows how to dress them ? ' Quoth
he, ' As I live, thou shalt eat of all that I have named to
thee, and that forthright/ And she said, 'I see nothing,*
Then said he, 1 Bring me the saddle-bags/

So she fetched them and feeling them, found them
empty. However, she laid them before him and he thrust
ia his hand and pulled out dish after dish, till he had set


26


before her all he had named. Whereupon, { O ray son/
said she, 'the saddle-bags are small and moreover they
were empty 5 yet hast thou taken thereout all these dishes.
Where then were they all?' 'O my mother,' answered
he, 'know that these are enchanted saddle-bags, which
the Moor gave me, and they have a servant, whom, if one
desire aught, he has but to adjure by the names [which
have power over him,] saying, " O servant of the saddle-
bags, bring me such a dish ! " and he will bring it. f
Quoth his mother, ' And may I put out my hand and ask
of him ? ' ' Do so,' replied he. So she put out her hand
and said, ' O servant of the saddle-bags, [I conjure thee,]
by the virtue of the names that have power over thee,
bring me stuffed ribs [of mutton].' Then she thrust in
her hand and found a dish containing delicate stuffed
ribs of lamb. So she took it out, and called for bread
and what else she had a mind to ; after which Jouder said
to her, * O my mother, when thou hast made an end of
eating, empty what is left of the food into platters other
than these and restore the empty dishes to the saddle-
bags, for the charm is upon this condition, and keep the
saddle-bags carefully.' So she arose and laid them up in a
safe place. ' And look that thou keep this secret,' added
he j ' and whenever thou hast a mind to aught, take it forth
of the saddle-bags and give alms and feed my brothers,
whether I be absent or present'

Then he fell to eating with her, and while they were
thus engaged, in came his two brothers, whom a man of
the quarter had apprised of his return, saying, 'Your
brother is come back, riding on a mule, with a slave before
him, and wearing a dress that hath not its like/ So they
said to each other, ' Would we had not ill-treated our
mother S She will surely tell him how we did by her, and
then how sore will be our disgrace with him ! ' But one of
them said, ' Our mother is tender-hearted, and if she tell


27


him, our brother is yet tenderer over us than she 5 and if
we excuse ourselves to him, he will accept our excuse.' So
they went in to him and he rose to them and saluting them
after the friendliest manner, bade them sit and eat. So
they ate till they were satisfied, for they were weak with
hunger ; after which Jouder said to them, ' O my brothers,
take what is left and distribute it to the poor/ ' O brother/
replied they, Met us keep it to sup withal.' But he said,
* When supper-time comes, ye shall have more than this.'
So they took the rest of the victual and going out, gave of
it to every poor man who passed by them, saying, ' Take
and eat,' till there was nothing left. Then they brought
back the dishes and Jouder said to his mother, ' Put them
in the saddle-bags.' Nfgjjt
When it was night, he entered the saloon and took forth btX\)t.
of the saddle-bags a table of forty dishes ; after which he
went up [to the upper chamber] and sitting down between
his brothers, said to his mother, ' Bring the supper.' So
she went down to the saloon and finding there the dishes
ready, laid the tray and brought up the forty dishes, one
after another. Then they ate the evening meal, and when
they had done, Jouder said to his brothers, ' Take and
feed the poor and needy.' So they took what was left and
gave alms thereof, and presently he brought forth to them
sweetmeats, whereof they ate, and what was left he bade
them give to the neighbours. On the morrow, they broke
their fast after the same fashion, and thus they fared ten
days, at the end of which time quoth Salim to Selim, ' How
comes it that our brother sets before us a banquet in the
morning and another at noon and a third at sundown,
besides sweetmeats at night, and all that is left he gives to
the poor ? Verily, this is the fashion of Sultans. Yet we
never see him buy aught, and he hath neither cook nor
kitchen, nor doth he light a fire. Whence hath he this
great plenty ? Hast thou not a mind to enquire the cause


28


of all this ? ' 'By Allah, I know not,' replied Selim. 1 But
knowest thou any who will tell us the truth of the case ?
And Salim said, ' None will tell us but our mother.'

So they laid a plot and going in to their mother one day,
in Jouder's absence, said to her, ' O our mother, we are
hungry.' 'Rejoice,' answered she ; '[for ye shall presently
be satisfied ;] ' and going into the saloon, sought of the
servant of the saddle-bags hot meats, which she took out
and set before her sons. ' O our mother,' said they, ' this
meat is hot ; yet hast thou not cooked, neither kindled a
fire.' Quoth she, 4 It comes from the saddle-bags;' and
they, 'What manner of thing are these saddle-bags?'
' They are enchanted,' replied she and told them their
virtue, enjoining them to secrecy. Quoth they, 'O our
mother, the secret shall be kept ; but teach us the manner
of this.' So she taught them the fashion thereof and they
fell to putting their hands into the saddle-bags and taking
forth whatever they had a mind to.

Then quoth Salim [privily] to Selim, ' O my brother,
how long shall we abide with Jouder servant-wise and
eat of his charity ? Shall we not cast about to get the
saddle-bags from him and make off with them?' 'And
how shall we make shift to do this ? ' asked Selim. ' We
will sell him to the galleys,' replied Salim ; and Selim said,
' How shall we do that ? ' Quoth Salim, ' We will go to
the Captain [of the galleys] of the Sea of Suez and bid
him to an entertainment, with two of his company. What
I say to Jouder do thou confirm, and at the end of the
night I will show thee what I will do.'

So they agreed upon this and going to the captain's
lodging, said to him, ' O captain, we have come to thee
on an errand that will content thee.' 'Good,' answered
he • and they, ' We two are brethren, and we have a third
brother, a lewd, good-for-nothing fellow. When our father
died, he left us some money, which we shared amongst


29


us, and he took his part and wasted it in lewdness and
debauchery, till he was reduced to beggary, when he came
upon us and cited us before the magistrates, avouching
that we had taken his good and that of his father, and we
disputed the matter before the judges and lost the money.
Then he waited awhile and attacked us a second time, till
he brought us to poverty ; nor will he desist from us, and
we have no peace for him ; wherefore we would have thee
buy him of us.' Quoth the captain, ' Can ye go about
with him and make shift to bring him to me here? If
so, I will pack him off to sea forthright' 'We cannot
avail to bring him here,' answered they ; ' but be thou our
guest [this night] and bring with thee two of thy men, no
more ; and when he is asleep, we will fall upon him, we
five, and gag him. Then shalt thou carry him forth the
house, under cover of the night, and do with him as thou
wilt.' ' So be it,' rejoined the captain. 4 Will ye sell him
for forty dinars ? ' ' Yes,' said they. * Come to such a
street, by such a mosque, after nightfall, and thou shalt
find one of us awaiting thee.'

Then they repaired to Jouder and waited awhile, after
which Salim went up to him and kissed his hand. Quoth
Jouder, 'What ails thee, O my brother?' And he made
answer, saying, ' Know that I have a friend, who hath many
a time bidden me to his house in thine absence and hath
ever hospitably entreated me, and I owe him a thousand
kindnesses, as my brother here knoweth. I met him to-
day and he invited me to his house, but I said to him, " I
cannot leave my brother [Jouder]." Quoth he, " Bring
him with thee ; " and I answered, saying, " He will not
consent to that ; but if ye will be my guests, thou and thy
brothers ...... 3 " for his brothers were sitting with him,

and I invited them, thinking that they would refuse. But
he accepted my invitation, saying, "Look for me at the
gate of the Mosque, and I will come to thee, I and my


30


brothers." And now I fear they will come and am ashamed
before thee. So wilt thou set my heart at rest and enter-
tain them this night, for thy good is abundant, O my
brother? Or if thou consent not, give me leave to take
them into the neighbours' house.' 'Why shouldst thou
carry them into the neighbours' house?' replied Jouder.
' Is our house then so strait or have we not wherewithal to
give them to sup ? Shame on thee to consult me ! Thou
hast but to call for what thou needest and have rich meats
and sweetmeats and to spare. Whenever thou bringest
home folk in my absence, ask thy mother, and she will
set before thee victual more than enough. Go and fetch
them ; blessings have descended upon us.' 1

So Salim kissed his hand and going forth, sat at the gate
of the mosque till after sundown, when the Captain and his
men came up to him, and he carried them to the house.
When Jouder saw them, he bade them welcome and made
them sit and entreated them friendly, knowing not what he
was to suffer at their hands. Then he called to his mother
for supper, and she fell to taking dishes out of the saddle-
bags, whilst he said, ' Bring such and such meats,' till she
had set forty different dishes before them. So they ate till
they were satisfied and the tray was taken away, the sailors
thinking the while that this liberal entertainment came
from Salim. When a third part of the night was past,
Jouder set sweetmeats before them and Salim served them,
whilst his two brothers sat with the guests, till they sought
to sleep. So Jouder laid down and the others with him,
who waited till he was asleep, when they fell upon him and
gagging and binding him, before he was awake, carried
him forth of the house, under cover of the night. Then
jNTtfiflt they packed him off to Suez, where they shackled him and
taWL set him to work as a [galley] slave ; and he ceased not to
serve thus in silence a whole year.

1 i.e. we look upon their visit as a blessing.


As for his brothers, they went in next morning to his
mother and said to her, * O mother, our brother Jouder is
not awake.' Quoth she, 1 Do ye wake him.' 'Where
lieth he ? ' asked they, and she replied, ' With the guests.'
' Peradventure,' rejoined they, ' he went away with them
whilst we slept It would seem that he had tasted of
foreign travel and yearned to find hidden treasures; for
we heard him talk with the Moors, and they said to him,
" We will take thee with us and open the treasure to thee." '
s Hath he then been in company with Moors ? ' asked she ,
and they answered, saying, 'Were they not our guests
yesternight ? ' 4 Most like he hath gone with them,' said
she ; ' but God will direct him aright ; for there is a
blessing upon him and he will surely come back with
great good.' And she wept, for it was grievous to her
to be parted from her son.

Then said they to her, ' O accursed woman, dost thou
love Jouder with all this love, whilst as for us, whether
we be absent or present, thou neither joy est in us nor
sorrowest for us? Are we not thy sons, even as Jouder
is thy son ? ' ' Ye are indeed my sons,' answered she ; ' but
ye are reprobates who deserve no favour of me, for I have
never had any satisfaction of you since your father's death ;
whilst, as for Jouder, I have had abundant good of him
and he has comforted my heart and entreated me with
honour ; wherefore it behoves me to weep for him, because
of his goodness to me and to you.'

When they heard this, they reviled her and beat her";
after which they sought for the saddle-bags, till they found
the two pairs and took the enchanted one and all the gold
and jewels from the other, saying, 1 This was our father's
good.' ' Not so, by Allah ! ' said their mother. ' It be-
longs to your brother Jouder, who brought it from the
land of the Moors.' ( Thou liest,' answered theyj i it
was our father's property ; and we will dispose of it,'


3 2


Then they divided the gold and jewels between them;
but a dispute arose between them concerning the en-
chanted saddle-bags, each "saying, * I will have them j '
and they came to high words over this. Then said she,
' O my sons, ye have divided the gold and the jewels, but
this may not be divided, nor can its value be made up
in money ; and if it be cut in twain, its virtue will be
annulled ; so leave it with me and I will give you to eat
from it at all times and be content to take a morsel with
you. If ye give me aught to clothe me, it will be of your
favour, and each of you shall traffic with the folk for
himself. Ye are my sons and I am your mother ; where-
fore let us abide as we are, lest your brother come back
and we be disgraced.' But they hearkened not to her
words and passed the night, wrangling with one another.

Now it chanced that a sergeant of the King's guards was
a guest in the adjoining house and heard them through
the open window. So he looked out and listening, heard
all that passed between them. Next morning, he presented
himself before the. King of Egypt, whose name was Shems
ed Dauleh, and told him all he had heard, whereupon he
sent for Jouder's brothers and put them to the torture, till
they confessed ; and he took the two pairs of saddle-bags
from them and clapped them in prison, appointing a suffi-
cient daily allowance to their mother.

Meanwhile, Jouder abode a whole year in service at
Suez, till, one day, being in a ship bound on a voyage over
the sea, a wind arose against them and cast the vessel
upon a rock, where she broke up and all on board were
drowned, "save Jouder. He got ashore in safety and fared
on inland, till he reached an encampment of Bedouins,
who questioned him of his case, and he told them what
had befallen him. Now there was amongst them a mer-
chrntj a native of Jiddah,i who took pity on him and said
& The port of Mecca.


33


to Him, ' O Egyptian, wilt thou take service with me and
I will clothe thee and carry thee with me to Jiddah ? ' So
Jouder took service with him and followed him to Jiddah s
where he showed him much favour. After awhile, the
merchant set out on a pilgrimage to Mecca, taking Jouder
with him, and when they reached the city, the latter re-
paired to the temple, to make the round of the Kaabeh.
As he was making the prescribed circuits, he saw his friend ^|'g|)t
Abdussemed the Moor doing the like ; and when the latter btxbtti
caught sight of him, he saluted him and asked him how
he did ; whereupon Jouder wept and told him all that had
befallen him.

The Moor carried him to his lodging and entreated him
with honour, clothing him in a dress of unmatched rich-
ness and saying to him, 'Thou hast seen the end of thine
ills, O Jouder.' Then he levelled a tablet of sand and
drew a geomantic figure, by which he discovered what had
befallen Salim and Selim and said to Jouder, < Such and
such things have befallen thy brothers and they are now in
the King of Egypt's prison ; but do thou abide with me
and accomplish thy religious duties at thine ease, and all
shall be well.' ' O my lord,' replied Jouder, 1 let me go and
take leave of the merchant with whom I am and after I will
come back to thee.' 'Dost thou owe money?' asked the
Moor, and he answered, 'No.' 'Go,' said Abdussemed,
' and take leave of him and come back forthright, for men of
hono&r owe a duty to those whose bread they have eaten.'

So Jouder returned to the merchant and took leave of
him, saying, ' I have fallen in with my brother.' ' Bring
him here,' said the merchant, ' and we will make him an
entertainment.' But Jouder answered, saying, ' He has no
need of that ; for he is a man of wealth and hath many
servants.' Then the merchant gave Jouder twenty dinars,
saying s 'Acquit me of responsibility ; ' and he bade him
farewell and went forth from him. As he went along, he
VOL. VI. . 3


34


saw a poor man, so he gave him the twenty dinars and
returned to the Moor, with whom he abode till they had
accomplished the rites of the pilgrimage, when Abdussemed
gave him the ring, that he had taken from the treasure of
Es ShemerdeL saying, 'This ring will bring thee to thy
desire, for it is enchanted and hath a servant, by name Er
B.aad el Casif; so whatever thou hast a mind to of the
things of this world, rub this ring and its servant will
appear and do all thou biddest him/

Then he rubbed the ring^ before him, whereupon the
genie appeared, saying, ' Here I am, O my lord ! Ask
what thou wilt and it shall be given thee. Hast thou a
mind to people a ruined city or lay waste a flourishing
one or slay a king or put an army to the rout ? ' ' O Raad/
said Abdussemed, ' this is become thy lord ; do thou serve
him faithfully.' Then he dismissed him and said to Jouder,
' Rub the ring and the genie will appear ; and do thou
command him to do whatever thou desirest, for he will
not gainsay thee. Now go to thine own country and take
care of the ring, for it will enable thee to baffle thine
enemies.' *0 my lord,' answered Jouder, 'with thy leave,
I will set out homeward.' Quoth the Moor, ' Summon the
genie and mount upon his back ; and if thou say to him,
" Bring me to my native city this very day," he will not
gainsay thy commandment.'

So he took leave of the Moor and rubbed the ring,
whereupon Er Raad presented himself, saying, ' Here am
I ; ask and it shall be given to thee.' ' Carry me to Cairo
this day,' said Jouder. 'Thy commandment shall be done,'
answered the genie and taking him on his back, flew with
him from noon till midnight, when he set him down in the
courtyard of his mother's house and disappeared. Jouder
went in to his mother, who rose at sight of him and
greeted him, weeping. Then she told him how the king
had beaten his brothers and cast them into prison and


35


taken the two pairs of saddle-bags ; which when he heard,
it was grievous to him and he said to her, 'Grieve not
for this ; I will show thee what I can do and bring my
brothers hither forthright.' So he rubbed the ring, where-
upon the genie appeared, saying, 'At thy service! Ask
and thou shalt have.' Quoth Jouder, ' Bring me my two
brothers from the prison.'

So the genie sank into the earth and came not up but in
the midst of the gaol where Salim and Selim lay in piteous
plight and sore affliction, for the misery of prison, so that
they wished for death and one of them said to the other,
* By Allah, O my brother, affliction is long upon us ! How
long shall we abide in this prison ? Death would be relief.*
As he spoke, the earth clove in sunder and out came Er
Raad, who took them up and plunged with them into the
earth. They swooned away for excess of fear, and when
they recovered, they found themselves in their mother's
house and saw her seated, with Jouder by her side. Quoth
he, £ I salute you, O my brothers I I rejoice to see you.'
And they bowed their heads and fell a-weeping. Then
said he, 'Weep not, for it was the devil and covetise that
led you to do thus. How could you sell me? But I
comfort myself with the thought of Joseph, whose brothers
did with him worse than ye with me, when they cast him
into the pit. Repent unto God and crave pardon of Him, $ffg|)$
and He will forgive you, for He is the Most Forgiving, the ftrjclx*
Merciful. As for me, I pardon you and bid you welcome :
no harm shall befall you.' Then he comforted them and
set their hearts at ease and related to them all he had
suffered, till he fell in with Abdussemed, and told them
also of the ring that the latter had given him. 'Oour
brother,' said they, ' forgive us this time ; and if we return
to our old ways, do with us as thou wilt.' Quoth he, 4 No
harm shall befall you ; but tell me what the king did with
you/ * He beat us and threatened us, ? answered they, ' and


$6


took the two pairs of saddle-bags from us. 9 'He shall
answer for this/ said Jouder and rubbed the ring, whereupon
Er Raad appeared.

When his brothers saw the genie, they were affrighted
and thought Jouder would bid him slay them ; so they fled
to their mother, saying, ' O our mother, we throw ourselves
on thy mercy : do thou intercede for us ! ' And she said
to them, ' Fear nothing, O my sons ! ' Then said Jouder
to the genie, £ I command thee to bring me all that is in
the king's treasury, together with the two pairs of saddle-
bags he took from my brothers, and look thou leave
nothing.' ' I hear and obey,' replied Er Raad and disap-
pearing, straightway returned with the two pairs of saddle-
bags and all else that was in the treasury and laid them
before Jouder, saying, ' O my lord, I have left nothing in the
treasury.' Jouder gave the treasure to his mother to keep
and laying the enchanted saddle-bags before him, said to
the genie, ' I command thee to build me this night a lofty
palace and overlay it with liquid gold and furnish it magni-
ficently : and let not the day dawn, ere thou be quit of the
whole work/ s Thy commands shall be obeyed/ replied the
genie and sank into the earth. Then Jouder brought forth
food and they ate and took their ease and lay down to sleep.

Meanwhile, Er Raad summoned his attendant Jinn and
commanded them to build the palace. So some of them
fell to hewing stones and some to building, whilst others
plastered and painted and furnished ; nor did the day dawn
before the ordinance of the palace was complete ; where-
upon Er Raad came to Jouder and said to him, ' O my
lord, the palace is ready, if it please thee to come and look
on it/ So Jouder went forth with his mother and brothers
and saw a palace, whose like there was not in the whole
world. It stood upon the marge of the highway and con-
founded all minds with the goodliness of its ordinance;
and withal it had cost him nothing. Then he said to his


37


mother, 'Wilt thou take up thine abode in this palace?*
' I will well, O my son,' answered she and called down
blessings upon him.

Then he rubbed the ring and bade the genie fetch him
forty handsome white slave-girls and forty male white
slaves, besides the like number of black slaves, male and
female. ' Thy will shall be done/ answered Er Raad and
betaking himself, with forty of his attendant Jinn, to Hind
and Sind and Persia, carried off every handsome girl and
boy they saw, till they had made up the required number.
Moreover, he sent other fourscore, who fetched handsome
black slaves, male and female, forty of either sex, and
carried them all to Jouder's house, which they filled. Then
he showed them to Jouder, who was pleased with them
and bade him bring a suit of the richest raiment for each
of them and dresses to boot for himself and his mother
and brothers. So the genie brought all that was needed
and clad the female slaves, saying to them, 5 This is your
mistress : kiss her hands and cross her not, but serve her,
white and black.' The male slaves also clad themselves
and kissed Jouder's hands ; and he and his brothers arrayed
themselves in the robes the genie had brought them and
became, Jouder as he were a king and his brothers as
viziers. Now his house was spacious ; so he lodged Salim
and his slave-girls in one part thereof and Selim and his
slave-girls in another, whilst he and his mother took up
their abode in the new palace j and each in his own place
was like the Sultan.

Meanwhile, the king's treasurer, thinking to take some-
thing from the treasury, went in and found it altogether
empty, even as saith the poet :

Once was it as a beehive stocked and full of bees galore f But when
they left it 8 it became devoid of ail its store. 1

a The point of this verse is an untranslatable play upon the doubls
meaning of the word kheliyeh, which signifies " beehive'' and is also the
feminine of the word kheliy " empty.."


38


And he gave a great cry and fell down in a swoon.
When he came to himself, he left the door open and
going in to the king, said to him, * O Commander of the
Faithful, I have to tell thee that the treasury hath become
empty during the night' Quoth the king, £ What hast
thou done with my treasures that were therein ? ' ' By
Allah,' replied the treasurer, 'I have not done aught with
them nor know I what is come of them ! I visited the
place yesterday and saw it full ; but, when I went in to day,
I found it altogether empty, albeit the doors were locked
and [the walls] unpierced and the locks unbroken, nor hath
a thief entered it.' ' Are the two pairs of saddle-bags
gone ? ' asked the king. ' Yes,' replied the treasurer ;
^tgfjt whereupon the king's reason fled from his head and he
1JCXX. rose to his feet, saying, 'Go thou before me.' So the
treasurer forewent him to the treasury and he found
nothing there, whereat he was sore enraged and said,
'Who hath dared to violate my treasury, fearing not my
wrath ? '

Then he went forth and held a Divan, to which he
summoned all his chief officers, who came, thinking each
that the king was wroth with him ; and he said to them ?
* Know that my treasury hath been plundered during the
night, and I know not who has done this thing and dared
thus to outrage me, without fear of my wrath/ 4 How so ? '
asked they. Quoth he, ' Ask the treasurer.' So they asked
him, and he replied, saying, ' I visited the treasury yester-
day and it was full, but when I entered it this morning, I
found it empty, though the doors were unpierced and the
locks unbroken.' They all marvelled at this and could
make the king no answer, when in came the sergeant, who
had denounced Salim and Selim, and said to Shems ed
Dauleh, « O King of the age, all this night I have not slept
for that which I saw, 5 And the king said, 8 And what didst
'thou see?' 4 Know, O King of the age/ answered the


39


sergeant, 'that all night long I have been amusing myself
with watching builders at work, and when it was day, I saw
a palace ready built, whose like is not in the world. So I
asked about it and was told that Jouder had come back
with great wealth and slaves and servants and that he had
freed his brothers from prison and built this palace, wherein
he is as a Sultan. Quoth the king, 4 Go, look in the prison.'
So they went thither and finding Salim and Selim gone, re-
turned and told the king, who said, * It is plain now who is
the robber ; he who took Salim and Selim out of prison it
is who hath stolen my treasures.' 'O my lord,' said the
Vizier, ' and who is he ? ' 5 Their brother Jouder;' replied
the king, 4 and he hath taken the two pairs of saddle-bags ;
but, O Vizier, do thou send him an Amir with fifty men to
seal up his goods and lay hands on him and his brothers
and bring them to me, that I may hang them.' And he
was sore enraged and said, ' Quick, fetch them to me, that
I may put them to death.'

But the Vizier said to him, ' Be thou clement, for God is
clement and hasteth not to punish His servants, when they
transgress against Him. Moreover, he who can build a
palace in one night, as these say, none in the world can
vie with him ; and I fear lest the Amir catch a mischief of
Jouder. Have patience, therefore, whilst I devise for thee
some means of getting at the truth of the case, and so shalt
thou come to thy desire, O King of the age.' Quoth the
king, ( Counsel me how I shall do, O Vizier.' And the
Vizier said, ' Send him an Amir, to bid him to an enter-
tainment, and I will make much of him for thee and make
a show of affection for him and ask him of his estate ; after
which we will see. If we find him stout of heart, we will
use craft with him, and if weak, then do thou seize him
and do with him thy will.' The King agreed to this and
despatched one of his Amirs, by name Othman, to invite
Jouder and say to him, * The K ; ng bids thee to an entei


4©


tainment;* and the King said to him, 'Return not bat
with him.'

Now this Othman was a proud conceited fool ; so he
went forth upon his errand, and when he came to Jouder's
palace, he saw at the door an eunuch seated upon a chair
of gold, who rose not at his approach, but sat as if none
were near, though there were with the Amir fifty men.
Now this eunuch was none other than Er Raad el Casif,
the servant of the ring, whom Jouder had commanded to
put on the guise of an eunuch and sit at the gate of the
palace. So the Amir rode up to him and said to him, 6 O
slave, where is thy lord ? ' 'In the palace/ answered he,
without stirring from his leaning posture ; whereupon Oth-
man waxed wroth and said to him, ' O pestilent slave, art
thou not ashamed, when I speak to thee, to answer me,
sprawling at thy length like a good-for-nought ? ' 4 Be-
gone,' answered the eunuch, c arid do not multiply words.'
When Othman heard this, he was filled with rage and
drawing his mace, would have smitten the eunuch, knowing
not that he was a devil ; but the latter leapt upon him and
taking the mace from him, dealt him four blows with it.
When the fifty men saw their lord beaten, it was grievous
to them j so they drew their swords and ran at the slave,
thinking to kill him ; but he said, 1 Do ye draw swords on
m, O dogs?' And fell upon them with the mace, and
every one whom he smote, he broke iiis bones and drowned
him in his blood. So they gave back? before him and fled in
confusion, whilst he followed them, beating them, till he had
driven them far from the palace ; after which he returned

l^fgtjt an< 3 sat down on his chair at the gate, caring for no one.

&t£Xf« Meanwhile the Amir and his company returned, beaten
and discomfited, to Shems ed Dauleh, and Othman said,
' O King of the age, when I came to the palace gate, I saw
an eunuch seated there in a chair of gold and he was
passing arrogant ; for s when he saw me coming, he lay


4i


back in his chair and entreated me contemptuously, neither
offered to rise to me. So I began to speak to him and he
answered me without stirring, at which passion got the
better of me and I drew the mace upon him, thinking to
smite him. But he snatched it from me and beat me and
my men therewith and overthrew us. So we fled from him
and could not prevail against him." At this, the King was
wroth and said, 'Let a hundred men go down to him.'
So the hundred men went down to him, but he fell upon
them with the mace and smote upon them till he put them
to the rout ; whereupon they returned to the King and told
him what had passed, saying, ' O King of the age, he beat
us and we fled for fear of him.' Then the King sent two
hundred men against him, but these also he put to the
rout, and Shems ed Dauleh said to his Vizier, ' O Vizier,
I charge thee take five hundred men and bring this eunuch
in haste, and with him his master Jouder and his brothers.'
8 O King of the age,' replied the Vizier, 1 1 need no soldiers,
but will go down to him alone and unarmed.' ' Go,' said
the King, 'and do as thou seest fit'

So the Vizier laid down his arms and donning a white
habit, took a rosary in his hand and set out alone and
afoot. When he came to the palace gate, he saw the
eunuch sitting there ; so he went up to him and seating
himself courteously by his side, said to him, ' Peace be on
thee ! ' ' And on thee be peace, O mortal ! ' answered the
slave. 'What wilt thou?' When the Vizier heard him
say ' O mortal,' he knew him to be of the Jinn and quaked
for fear; then he said to him, ' Q my lord, is thy master
Jouder here ? 5 ' Yes,' answered the eunuch, ' he is in the
palace.' ' O my lord,' said the Vizier, 'go thou to him and
say to him, " King Shems ed Dauleh salutes thee and bids
thee honour his dwelling [with thy presence] and eat of a
banquet he hath made for thee/' ' And the eunuch saidj
6 Abide here, whilst I consult him, 8


42


So the Vizier stood in a respectful attitude, whilst the
Marid went up into the palace and said to Jouder, ' Know,
O my lord, that the King sent to thee an Amir and fifty
men, and I beat them and drove them away. Then he
sent a hundred men and I beat them also ; then two
hundred, and these also I put to the rout. And now he
hath sent thee the Vizier, unarmed, bidding thee to visit
him and eat of his banquet. 'What sayst thou?* 'Go,*
answered Jouder ; * bring the Vizier hither.' So the Marid
went down and said to him, £ O Vizier, come speak with
my lord.' ' On my head be it/ replied he and going in to
Jouder, found him seated, in greater state than the King,
upon a carpet, the like of which the King could not
spread, and was amazed at the goodliness of the palace
and the magnificence of its furniture and decoration, which
made him seem as he were but a beggar in comparison.

So he kissed the earth before Jouder and called down
blessings on him } and Jouder said to him, ' What is thy
business, O Vizier? ' ' O my lord,' answered he, £ thy friend
King Shems ed Dauleh salutes thee and longs to look upon
thy face ; wherefore he hath made thee an entertainment.
So wilt thou heal his heart [and eat of his banquet] ? '
Quoth Jouder, ' If he be indeed my friend, salute him and
bid him come to me.' ' On my head be it,' replied the Vizier.
Then Jouder rubbed the ring and bade the genie bring him
a dress of the best, which he gave to the Vizier, saying, ' Don
this dress and go tell the King what I say/ So the Vizier
donned the dress, the like of which he had never worn, and
returning to the King, told him what had passed and praised
the palace and that which was therein, saying, * Jouder bids
thee to him,' So the King called for his charger and
mounting with all his guards, set out for Jouder's palace.

Meanwhile Jouder summoned the Marid and said to
him, •' It is my will that thou bring me some of the Afrits
at thy command in the guise of guards and station them


43


before the palace, that the King may see them and be
awed by them ; so shall his heart tremble and he shall
know that my power is greater than his.' So Er Raad
brought him two hundred Afrits of great stature and
strength, in the guise of guards, magnificently armed and
equipped, and when the King came and saw these tall
and stout troops, his heart feared them. Then he entered
the palace, and found Jouder sitting in such state as neither
King nor Sultan could match. So he saluted him and
made his obeisance to him ; yet Jouder rose not to him
nor did him honour neither bade him be seated, but left ^NTtgftt
him standing, so that fear entered into him and he could &tXXlt
neither sit nor go away and said in himself, ' If he feared
me, he would not leave me thus unheeded ; belike he will
do me a mischief, because of that which I did with his
brothers.' Then said Jouder, ' O King of the age, it be-
seems not the like of thee to wrong the folk and take away
their goods.' ' O my lord/ replied the King, 4 be not
wroth with me, for- covetise impelled me to this and the
fulfilment of fore-ordained fate ; and were there no offence,
there would be no forgiving.' And he went on to excuse
himself and sue to him for pardon and indulgence, reciting
amongst other things the following verses :

O thou of noble sires and nature frank and free, Reproach me not for

what I've done to anger thee.
An thou have wrought unright, God pardon thee, quoth I ; And if I've

sinned, do thou on like wise pardon me !

And he ceased not to humble himself before him, till he
said, ' God pardon thee ! ' and bade him sit. So he sat
down and Jouder invested him with the garments of pardon
and bade his brothers spread the table. When they had
eaten, he clad the King's company in robes of honour and
gave them largesse ; after which he bade the King depart.
So he went forth and thereafter came every day to visit
Jouder and held not his Divan save in his house : where-


44


fore friendship and usance waxed great between them, and
they abode thus awhile, till one day the King, being alone
with his Vizier, said to him, ' O Vizier, I fear lest Jouder
kill me and take the kingdom from me.' ' O King of the
age,' replied the Vizier, ' as for his taking the kingdom
from thee, have no fear of that, for his present estate is
greater than that of the King, and to take the kingdom
would be a lowering of his rank ; but, if thou fear that he
kill thee, thou hast a daughter : give her to him to wife
and thou and he will be of one condition/

s O Vizier,' said the King, c be thou intermediary between
us and him.' And the Vizier said, ' Do thou bid him to an
entertainment and pass the night with him in one of thy
saloons. Then command thy daughter to don her richest
clothes and ornaments and pass by the door of the saloon.
When he sees her, he will fall in love with her, and when
we know this, I will turn to him and tell him that she is
thy daughter and engage him in converse and lead him on,
so that thou shalt [seem to] know nothing of the matter,
till he asks her of thee in marriage. When thou hast mar-
ried him to the girl, thou and he will be as one thing and
thou wilt be safe from him ; and if he die, thou wilt inherit
all he hath, both great and small' ' Thou sayst sooth, O
my Vizier,' replied the King and made a banquet and invited
Jouder thereto. So he came to the King's palace and they
sat in the saloon in great good cheer till the end of the day.
Now the King had commanded his wife to array the girl
in her richest clothes and . ornaments and carry her by the
door of the saloon. She did as he bade her, and when
Jouder saw the princess, who had not her match for beauty
and grace, he looked fixedly at her and said, ' Alas ! ' And
his joints were loosened for love and passion and desire
were sore upon him; transport and love-liking gat hold
upon him and he turned pale. Quoth the Vizier, ' May no
hurt betide thee ? O my lord ! Why do I see thee pale and


45


undone?' 'O Vizier/ asked Jouder, 'whose daughter is
yonder damsel ? . Verily, she hath captived me and ravished
my reason.' ' She is the daughter of thy friend the King,*
replied the Vizier; 'and since she pleases thee, I will
speak to him that he marry thee to her.' 'Do so, O
Vizier,' quoth Jouder, ' and as I live, I will bestow on thee
what thou wilt and will give the King whatsoever he shall
ask to her dowry ; and we will become friends and kinsfolk, 8
And the Vizier said, ' It shall go hard but thy desire be
accomplished.' Then he turned to the King and said to
him, 4 O King of the age, thy friend Jouder seeks alliance
with thee and will have me ask of thee for him the hand of
thy daughter, the princess Asiyeh ; so disappoint me not, but
accept my intercession, and what dowry soever thou askest
he will give thee.' Quoth the King, ' The dowry I have
already received, and as for the girl, she is his handmaid ;
I give her to him to wife and he doth me favour in ac-
cepting her.' Kt'gSt
They spent the rest of the night together and on the toxui
morrow the King held a court, to which he summoned
great and small, together with the Sheikh el Islam. Then
Jouder demanded the princess in marriage and the King
said, 1 The dowry I have received.' So they drew up the
contract of marriage and Jouder sent for the saddle-bags
containing the jewels and gave them to the King as his
daughter's dowry. Then the drums beat and the pipes
sounded and they held high festival, whilst Jouder went
in to the girl. Thenceforward he and the King were as
one and they abode thus awhile, till Shems ed Dauleh
died ; whereupon the troops proclaimed Jouder Sultan, and
he retired ; but they importuned him, till he consented and
became King in his father-in-law's stead. Then he bade
build a congregational mosque over the latter's tomb in the
Bundecaniyeh quarter and endowed it. Now the quarter
in which he dwelt was called the Yemaniyeh quarter ; but


46


when he became Sultan, he built therein a congregational
mosque and other buildings, wherefore the quarter was
named after him and was called the Jouderiyeh quarter.

Moreover, he made his brother Salim his Vizier of the
right and his brother Selim his Vizier of the left hand ;
and thus they abode a year and no more ; for, at the end
of that time, Salim said to Selim, ' O my brother, how long
is this to last ? Shall we pass our whole lives in service
to our brother Jouder ? We shall never enjoy lordship or
fortune whilst he lives : so how shall we do to kill him
and take the ring and the saddle-bags ? ' ' Thou art craftier
than I,' answered Selim ; ' do thou contrive us a device,
whereby we may kill him.' ' If I do this,' said Salim, ' wilt
thou agree that I be Sultan and have the ring and that
thou be my right-hand Vizier and have the saddle-bags?'
4 1 consent to this,' replied Selim, and they agreed to kill
their brother for love of the world and of dominion.

So they laid a snare for Jouder and said to him, ' O our
brother, we have a mind to glory in thee and would fain
have thee enter our houses and eat of our victual and
solace our hearts.' ' So be it,' replied Jouder. ' In whose
house shall the banquet be ? ' 'In mine,' said Salim, ' and
after thou hast eaten of my victual, thou shalt be the guest
of my brother.' 'It is well,' answered Jouder and went
with him to his house, where he set before him poisoned
food, of which when he had eaten, his flesh rotted from
his bones [and he fell down dead]. Then Salim came up
to him and would have drawn the ring from his finger, but
it resisted him ; so he cut off the finger with a knife. Then
he rubbed the ring and the Marid presented himself,
saying, ' At thy service. Ask what thou wilt.' Quoth Salim,
s Put my brother Selim to death and take the two bodies,
the poisoned man and the slaughtered, and cast them down
before the troops. 3 So the Marid took Selim and slew him ;
then, carrying the two bodies forth s he cast them down


47


before the chief officers of the army, who were sitting &t
meat in the verandah of the house. When they saw Jouder
and Seiim slain, they held their hands from the food and
fear gat hold of them and they said to the Marid, 1 Who
hath dealt thus with the Sultan and the Vizier?' 'Their
brother Salim,' answered the Marid. And behold Salirn
came in to them and said, ' O soldiers, eat and make merry 9
for Jouder is dead and I have taken to me the seal-ring 8
of which the Marid before you is the servant ; and I bade
him kill my brother Selira, lest he dispute the kingdom
with me, for he was a traitor and I feared lest he should
deal traitorously with me. So now I am become Sultan
over you ; will ye accept of me ? If not, I will rub the
ring and bid the Marid slay you all, great and small.'
Quoth they, ' We accept thee to King and Sultan.' 2Ct$fjt
Then he summoned the Divan and bade bury his fccntfo.
brothers ; and some of the folk followed the funeral,
whilst others went before him in state procession to the
palace, where he sat down upon the throne and they pro-
claimed him king ; after which he said, 1 It is my will to
marry my brother Jouder's wife.' Quoth they, 'Wait till
the days of widowhood are accomplished.' But he answered,
saying, ' I know not days of widowhood nor aught else. As
my head liveth, I will go in to her this very night.' So they
drew up the marriage contract and sent to tell the princess
Asiyeh, who replied, ' Bid him enter.' Accordingly, he
went in to her and she received him with a show of joy
and welcome ; but by and by she gave him poison in water
and made an end of him. Then she took the ring and
broke it, that none might possess it thenceforward, and rent
the saddle-bags j after which she sent to the Sheikh el
Islam and other the great officers of state, telling them
what had passed and saying to them s 5 Choose you out a
king to rule over you, 8 And this is all that hath come
down to us of the story of Jouder and his brothers.


4 8


THE HISTORY OF GHERIB AND HIS
BROTHER AGIB.

There was once of old time a mighty king called
Kundemir, who had been a brave and doughty man of
war in his day, but was grown very old and decrepit. It
pleased God to vouchsafe him, in his extreme old age, a
son, whom he named Agib, 1 because of his beauty and
grace, and committed to the midwives and nurses and
handmaids and serving-women, and they reared him till
he was seven years old, when his father gave him in charge
to a priest of his own people and faith. The priest taught
the boy the laws and tenets of their infidel faith and
instructed him in philosophy and all manner of other
knowledge, and it needed but three full-told years be-
fore he was proficient therein and his resolve waxed
strong and his judgment sound ; yea, and he became
learned, eloquent and accomplished, consorting with the
wise and disputing with the doctors of the law. When his
father saw this of him, it pleased him and he taught him
to ride and thrust with spears and smite with swords, till
by the end of his twentieth year he was an accomplished
cavalier, versed in all martial exercises and surpassing in
all things all the folk of his day. But he grew up a
stubborn tyrant and an arrogant devil, using to ride forth
to the chase with a thousand horse and make raids upon
the neighbouring lands, waylaying caravans and carrying
off the daughters of kings and nobles ; wherefore many
were the complaints against him to his father, who cried
out to live of his servants, saying, 'Seize me yonder dog
and beat him 1 ! So they seized the prince and binding his
hands behind him s beat him till he lost his senses ; aftei
& i>e. wonderful,


49


which the king imprisoned him in a chamber, where one
might not know heaven from earth or length from breadth;'
and there he abode two days and a night. Then the Amirs
went in to the King and kissing the earth before him, inter-
ceded with him for the prince, and he released him.

Agib dissembled with his father for ten days, at the end
of which time he went in to him by night and smote off
his head, as he slept. When the day rose, he mounted
the throne and bade his men arm themselves in complete
steel and stand before him and on his either hand with
drawn swords. By and by, the Amirs and captains entered
and finding their king slain and his son Agib seated on
the throne, were confounded and knew not what to do.
But Agib said to them, ' O folk, ye see what hath befallen
your king. Whoso obeyeth me, I will entreat him with
munificence, and whoso gainsayeth me, I will do with him
even as I did with my father. 5 When they heard this, they
feared .lest he should do them a mischief; so they replied,
* Thou art our king and the son of our king ; ' and kissed
the earth before him ; whereupon he thanked them and re-
joiced in them. Then he let bring money and apparel and
clad them in sumptuous dresses of honour and showered
largesse upon them, wherefore they loved him and obeyed
him. In like manner he dealt with the governors of the
provinces and the Sheikhs of the Bedouins, both tributary
and independent, so that all the kingdom submitted to
him and the folk obeyed him and he reigned and com-
manded and forbade.

He abode thus five months, till, one night, he had a
vision in sleep and awoke trembling, nor did sleep visit
him again till the morning. As soon as it was day, he
mounted his throne and his officers stood before him,
right and left Then he called the astrologers and ex-
pounders of dreams and said to them s As I slept last
1 By reason of its darkness,
TOL= Vlo 4


So ■ '

night, my father appeared to me, with his yard uncovered,
and there came forth of it a thing the bigness of a bee,
which grew till it became as a mighty lion, with claws like
daggers. As I lay, wondering and alarmed at this, behold,
it ran upon me and smiting me with its claws, rent my
belly in sunder; whereupon I awoke, affrighted and
trembling. Expound to me the meaning of this dream/
The interpreters looked at one another and answered,
after consideration, ' O mighty King, this dream points
to a child born of thy father, between whom and thee
shall be . strife, and he shall get the better of thee : so be
thou ware of him, by reason of this thy dream/ When
Agib heard their words, he said, ' I have no brother whom
I should fear ; so this your speech is a lying one.' 1 We
tell thee but what we know/ answered they ; but he was
wroth with them and beat them.

Then he rose and going in to his father's palace,
examined his concubines and found one of them seven
months gone with child; whereupon he bade two of his
slaves carry her to the sea-shore and drown her. So they
took her forth to the sea-shore and were about to drown
her, when they looked at her and seeing her to be of
surpassing beauty and grace, said to each other, ' Why
should we drown this damsel? Let us rather carry her
to the forest and live with her there in rare dalliance/
So they took her and fared on with her nights and days,
till they brought her to a distant forest, abounding in fruit
trees and streams, where they thought to take their will of
her ; but each said, ' I will lie with her first. ' And they
fell out one with the other concerning this. As they were
thus engaged, a company of blacks fell upon them, and
they drew their swords and defended themselves ; but the
blacks slew them both in less than the twinkling of an
eye. So the damsel abode alone and wandered about the
forest, eating of its fruits and drinking of its waters, till in


Si

due time she gave birth to a boy, brown but clean-limbed
and comely, whom she named Gherib, 1 by reason of her
strangerhood. Then she cut his navel and wrapping him
in some of her own clothes, gave him suck, mournful at
heart and sorrowing for the fair estate she had lost and
full of fear for her loneliness. tNTfgftt
One day, there came horsemen and footmen into the ftHXfe.
forest, with hounds and hawks and horses laden with
storks and cranes and herons and young ostriches and
divers and other waterfowl and hares and gazelles and wild
oxen and lynxes and wolves and lions. Presently, they
came upon the damsel, sitting suckling her child, and said
to her, ' Art thou a mortal or a genie ? ' 'I am a mortal,
O chief of the Arabs,' answered she. So they told their
chief, whose name was Merdas, prince of the Benou
Kehtan, and who had come forth to hunt that day with
five hundred of his kinsmen and the nobles of his tribes
and he bade them bring her before him. They did so and
she related to him her story, at which he marvelled. Then
they took her and returned, hunting by the way, to their
encampment, where the Amir appointed her a separate
dwelling-place and five damsels to serve her j and he loved
her with an exceeding love and went in to her and lay
with her. She straightway conceived by him, and when
her months were accomplished, she bore a male child
and named him Sehim el Leil. He grew up with his
brother Gherib among the nurses and throve and waxed
upon the lap of the Amir Merdas ; and the latter in due
time committed the two boys to a doctor of the law, who
instructed them in the things of their faith 3 after which he
gave them in charge to a valiant cavalier of the Arabs, who
taught them to smite with swords and thrust with spears
and shoot with bows s till, by the time they reached the age
of fifteen, they knew all that they needed and surpassed all

1 i.e. stranger.


$2

the warriors of their tribe ; for each of them would under-
take a thousand horse.

Now Merdas had many enemies, and the men of his
tribe were the bravest of all the Arabs, being all doughty-
cavaliers, none might warm himself at their fire. 1 Amongst
his neighbours was an Amir, by name Hissan ben Thabit,
who was his friend ; and he took to wife a noble lady of
his tribe and bade all his friends to the wedding, amongst
them Merdas, prince of the Benou Kehtan, who accepted
his invitation and came with three hundred horsemen of his
tribe, leaving other four hundred to guard the women.
Hissan received him with honour and seated him in the
highest room. Then came all the cavaliers to the bridal
and he made them bride feasts and held high festival by
reason of the marriage, after which the guests departed to
their dwelling-places. When Merdas came in sight of his
camps he saw dead men lying and birds hovering over
them right and left and his heart sank within him at the
sight. Then he entered the camp and was met by Gherib,
clad in complete mail, who gave him joy of his safe return.
Quoth Merdas, 'What meanest this, O Gherib?' And
Gherib answered, ' El Hemel ben Majid attacked us with
five hundred horse. 5

Now the reason of this was that the Amir Merdas had a
daughter called Mehdiyeh, never saw eyes a fairer than
she, and El Hemel, prince of the Benou Nebhan, heard ol
her charms ; whereupon he took horse with five hundred
of his men and rode to Merdas to demand her hand ; but
he refused and sent him away disappointed. So he abode
his time, till Merdas was absent on his visit to Hissan,
when he fell upon the camp of the Benou Kehtan with
his braves and slew a number of their warriors, and the
rest fled to the mountains. Now Gherib and his brother
had ridden forth a-hunting with a hundred horse sad
& See note, Vol. II. p. l»


returned not till midday, when they found that El Hem el
had sacked the campj and carried off the women and
children captives, and Mehdiyeh among them. When
Gherib saw this, he lost his wits for rage and cried out
to Sehim, saying, ' They have plundered our camp and
carried off our women and children ! Up and at the
enemy, that we may deliver the captives ! ' So Gherib
and Sehim and their hundred horse rushed upon the foe,
and Gherib's wrath redoubled, and he reaped a harvest of
heads, giving the warriors to drink of the cup of death,
till he won to El Hemel and saw Mehdiyeh among the
captives. Then he drove at the prince of the Benoti
Nebhan and transfixing him with his lance, hurled him
from the saddle ; nor was the time of the afternoon-prayer
come before he had slain the most part of the foe and put
the rest to the rout and rescued the captives ; whereupon he
returned to the camp in triumph, bearing El Hemel's head
on the point of his lance and reciting the following verses ;

I'm he whose might is known upon the battle-day : Earth's Jinn do

quake to see my shadow in the way.
1 have a sword, which when my right hand shakes on high, Death

hastens from my left to plunge into the fray j
And eke a spear I have, whereon if any look, Like to the crescent moos

they see its steel point ray.
Gherib I'm called, that am the champion of my tribe: What if my men

be few 1 My heart knows not dismay.

Hardly had he made an end of this when up came
Merdas, to whom he related all that had passed in his
absence. So Merdas alighted and entered his pavilion,
and the men stood about him. Then all the people of
the tribe fell to praising Gherib and saying, 4 But for
Gherib, O our lord, not one of the tribe had been saved ! '
So Merdas thanked him and said, ' Thou hast well requited
our pains in rearing thee, O Gherib ! s

Now, when Gherib delivered Mehdiyeh from El Hemel 8
she smote him with the arrows of her glances and he fell


54


into the toils of her love, wherefore his heart could not
forget her and he became drowned in passion and love-
longing. Sleep forsook him and he had no delight of
meat or drink, but would spur his horse up to the
mountain-tops, where he would spend the day in reciting
verses and return at nightfall ; and indeed the signs of
love-liking and distraction were manifest upon him. He
discovered his secret to one of his companions and it
became noised abroad in the camp, till it reached the ears
of Merdas, who thundered and lightened and rose and sat
down and puffed and snorted and reviled the sun and
the moon, saying, 'This is the reward of him who rears
bastards ! Except I kill Gherib, I shall be put to shame.'

Then he opened out his mind to one of the elders of his
tribe and took counsel with him of killing Gherib. ' O
Amir,' replied he, 1 it was but yesterday that he freed thy
daughter from captivity. If thou must needs kill him, let
it be by the hand of another than thyself, so the folk may
not misdoubt of thee/ Quoth Merdas, 'Advise me how I
may compass his death, for I look to none but thee for
this/ 'Q Amir,' answered the other, 'wait till he goes
forth to hunt, when do thou take a hundred horse and lie
in wait for him in the caves, till he passes ; then take him
off his guard and fall upon him and cut him in pieces, so
shalt thou be quit of his reproach.' 'This should serve,'
said Merdas and chose out a hundred and fifty of his
stoutest horsemen, whom he lessoned to his will. Then
he watched Gherib till, one day, he went forth to hunt and
rode far away amongst the hills and valleys ; whereupon
Merdas followed him with his men and lay in wait for him
by the way against he should return from the chase ; but,
as they lay in ambush among the trees, there fell upon
them five hundred Amalekites, who slew of them three-
score and made fourscore and ten prisoners and pinioned
Merdas.


55


Now the reason of this was that when Gherib put El
Hemel and his men to the sword, the rest fled to their
lord's brother and told him what had happened, whereat
his gorge rose and he gathered together his Amalekites
and choosing out five hundred cavaliers, each fifty cubits
high, 1 set out with them in quest of revenge for his brother.
By the way he fell in with Merdas and his company and
there happened between them what happened ; after which
he bade his men alight and rest, saying, ' folk, the idols
have given us an easy revenge ; so guard ye Merdas and
his men, till I carry them away and put them to death on
the foulest wise.' When Merdas found himself a prisoner
he repented of what he had done and said, ' This is the
reward of tyranny.' Then they lay down to sleep, and the
enemy passed the night, rejoicing in their victory, whilst
Merdas and his men despaired of life and made sure of
death.

Meanwhile, Sehim el Leil, who had been wounded in
the fight with El Hemel, went in to his sister Mehdiyeh
and she rose to him and kissed his hands, saying, < May thy
hand never wither nor thine enemies have occasion to
rejoice I But for thee and Gherib, we had not escaped
captivity. But know, O my brother,' continued she, £ that
thy father hath ridden forth with a hundred and fifty horse,
purposing to kill Gherib ; and thou knowest it would be
foul wrong to kill him, for that it was he who saved your
honour and rescued your goods.' When Sehim heard this,
the light in his eyes became darkness and he donned his
battle-harness and mounting, rode in quest of Gherib.
He presently came up with him and found that he had
taken great plenty of game ; so he saluted him and said
to him, ' O my brother, why didst thou go forth, without

1 This is a poetical exaggeration, not intended to be taken literally s
and means merely tall strong men or "Amalekites," which latter name
is often given by the Arabs to a doughty and large-limbed raan of war.


$6

telling me ? ' 'By Allah,' replied Gherib, ' it was but that
I saw thee wounded and thought to give thee rest.' Then
said Sehim, ' O my brother, beware of my father ! ' and told
him how Merdas was abroad with a hundred and fifty men,
seeking to kill him. Quoth Gherib, ' Allah will make his
treason to return on his own head.'

Then they set out, to return to the camp, but the night
overtook them by the way and they rode on in the dark-
ness, till they drew near the valley where the enemy lay
and heard the neighing of horses ; whereupon said Sehim,
' O my brother, my father and his men are ambushed
in yonder valley ; let us flee from it' But Gherib dis-
mounted and throwing his bridle to his brother, said to
him, ' Stay here till I come back to thee.* Then he went
on till he came in sight of the folk, when he saw that they
were not of his tribe and heard them name Merdas and
say, ' We will not kill him save in his own land. 5 Where-
fore he knew that Merdas was their prisoner and said, ' As
Mehdiyeh liveth, I will not depart hence till I have de-
livered her father, that she may not be troubled ! ' Then he
sought till he came upon Merdas and found him bound with
cords ; so he sat down by his side and said to him, ( God
deliver thee, O uncle, from these bonds and humiliation ! '
When Merdas saw Gherib, his reason fled and he said to
him, ' O my son, I am at thy mercy : deliver me in right
of my fosterage of thee ! ' Quoth Gherib, 8 If I deliver
thee, wilt thou give me Mehdiyeh ? 3 ' O my son,' an-
swered the Amir, 1 by all that is sacred to me, she is thine
to all time ! ' So he loosed him, saying, ' Make for the
horses, for thy son Sehim is there : ' and Merdas crept
along till he came to his son, who rejoiced in him and
gave him joy of his escape.

Meanwhile, Gherib unbound one after another of the
prisoners, till he had freed the whole ninety and they were
all far from the enemy. Then he sent them their arms


57


and horses, saying to them s 'Scatter yourselves round
about the enemy and cry out, "O sons of Kehtan !" And
when they awake, do ye remove from them and encircle
them/ So he waited till the last watch of the night, when
he cried out, ' O sons of Kehtan ! ' and his men answered,
saying, ' O sons of Kehtan ! ' as with one voice ; and the
mountains echoed their crying, so that it seemed to the
enemy as though the whole tribe [of the Benou Kehtan]
were upon them; wherefore they all snatched up their
arms and fell upon one another with slaughter. Gherib !Mtgi)i
and his men held aloof, and they fought with one another tttXXfeif
till daybreak, when Merdas and Gherib and their ninety
warriors fell in upon them and killed some of them and
put the rest to flight. Then they took the arms and
horses of the dead and the fugitives and returned tcT'the
camp, whilst Merdas could hardly credit his .deliverance.

When they reached the encampment, the folk all came
forth to meet them and rejoiced in their safe return. Then
they alighted and betook them to their tents ; and all the
youths of the tribe flocked to Gherib's tent and great and
small saluted him and did him honour. When Merdas
saw this s he was more jealous of Gherib than before and
said to his kinsfolk, 'Verily, hatred of Gherib grows on
my heart, and why but because I see these flocking about
him ! And to-morrow he will demand Mehdiyeh of me.'
Quoth his confidant, 'O Amir, ask of him somewhat he
cannot avail unto.' This pleased Merdas, and on the
morrow, as he sat on his divan, with the Arabs about him,
Gherib entered, followed by his men and surrounded by
the youth of the tribe, and kissed the earth before Merdas ?
who rose to do him honour, making a show of joy in him
and seating him beside himself.

Then said Gherib s ' O uncle, thou rnadest me a promise ;
do thou fulfil it' 5 O my son,' answered the Amir, 'she Is
thine to all time ; but thou lackest good.' ' O uncle/ said


S g

Gherib, 'ask of me what thou wilt, and I will fall upon the
Amirs of the Arabs in their dwellings and on the kings in
their cities and bring thee wealth enough to cover the land
from East to West' 1 ' O my son,' rejoined Merdas, ' I
have sworn by all the idols that I would give Mehdiyeh to
none but him who should take my wreak [of mine enemy]
and do away my reproach.' 'O uncle,' said Gherib, 'tell
me with which of the kings thou hast a feud, that I may
go to him and break his throne over his head.' £ O my
son,' replied Merdas, 'know that I once had a son, a
champion of the champions, and he went forth one day to
hunt with a hundred horse. They fared on from valley
to valley, till they had wandered far away into the moun-
tains and came to the Valley of Flowers and the Castle of
Ham ben Shith ben Sheddad ben Kheled. 2

Now in this place dwells a black giant, seventy cubits
high, who uses to pluck up trees by the roots and fight
with them ; and he came out upon my son and his men
and slew them all, save three, who escaped and bore me
the news. So I assembled my braves and went forth to
fight the giant, but could not avail against him ; wherefore
I was baulked of my revenge and swore that I would not
give my daughter in marriage but to him who should
avenge me of my son.' ' O uncle/ said Gherib, * I will go
to the giant and avenge thy son on him with the help of
God the Most High.' And Merdas answered, saying, ' O
Gherib, if thou get the victory over him, thou wilt gain of
him such booty of wealth and treasures as fires may not
devour.' Quoth Gherib, 'Swear to me [before witnesses]
that thou wilt give me Mehdiyeh to wife, that I may go to
seek my fortune with a heart at ease. 5 So Merdas swore
this to him and took the elders of the tribe to witness *

1 It is hardly necessary to remind the reader that the Bedouin idea
of wealth is limited to flocks and cattle. Hence the figure used.

2 Qucere Aad. See post,


59


whereupon Gherib went away, rejoicing in the [anticipated]
fulfilment of his hopes, and went in to his mother, to whom
he related what had passed. 4 O my son,' said she, ' know
that Merdas hates thee and doth but send thee to this
mountain, to bereave me of thee; so take me with thee
and let us depart the tents of this tyrant.' But he an-
swered, saying, ' O my mother, I will not depart hence till
I have compassed my desire and overcome my enemy.'

Then he slept, till the morning arose with its light and
shone, and hardly had he mounted his charger when his
friends, the young men, came up to him, two hundred
stout cavaliers, and cried out to him, saying, ' Take us with
thee; we will help thee and keep thee company by the way.'
And he rejoiced in them and said, ' God requite you for
us with good 1 Come, my friends, let us go.' So they set
out and fared on for two days, till the evening of the
second day, when they halted at the foot of a high scarped
hill and unbridled their horses. As for Gherib, he left the
rest and fared on into the mountain, till he came to a cave,
whence issued a light. So he entered and found, at the
upper end of the cave, an old man, three hundred and
forty years old, whose eyebrows hung down over his eyes
and whose moustaches hid his mouth. His aspect filled
Gherib with awe and veneration, and the hermit said to
him, ' my son, methinks thou art of the idolaters that
worship stones in the stead of the All-powerful King, the
Creator of Night and Day and the revolving sphere. 5
When Gherib heard his words, his nerves quivered and
he said, ' O elder, where is this lord of whom thou speakest,
that I may worship him and take my fill of his sight ? ' ' O
my son,' replied the old man, ' this is the Supreme Lord. s
none in the world may look upon Him ; He seeth and is
not seen. He is the Most High of aspect and is present
everywhere in His works. He it is who maketh all things
to be and ordereth the march of time ; He is the Creator


6o


of men and Jinn and sendeth the prophets to guide His
creatures into the right way. Whoso obeyeth Him, He
bringeth into Paradise, and whoso disobeyeth Him, He
casteth into the fire.'

' And how, Q uncle,' asked Gherib, 4 doth he say who
worships this mighty Lord who hath power over all?*
s O my son,' answered the old man, ' I am of the tribe of
Aad, which were transgressors in the land and believed not
in God. So He sent unto them a prophet named Houd,
but they believed not in him and he destroyed them by
means of a deadly wind ; but I believed, I and some of my
tribe, and we were saved from destruction. Moreover, I
was present with the tribe of Themoud and saw what befeil
them with their prophet Salih. After Salih, God the Most
High sent a prophet called Abraham the Friend to Nimrod
son of Canaan, and there befell what befell between them.
Then my companions died and I continued in this cave to
serve God the Most High, Who provideth me without my
taking thought.' ' O uncle,' quoth Gherib, ' what shall I say,
that I may become of the servants of this mighty Lord ?
* Say,' replied the old man, ' " There is no god but God and
Abraham is the Friend of God." '

So Gherib embraced the faith of submission 1 with heart
and tongue and the old man said to him, ' May the sweet-
ness of submission and belief be stablished in thy heart I'
Then he taught him somewhat of the ordinances and
scriptures of Islam and said to him, 'What is thy name?'
And he answered, ' My name is Gherib.' ' O Gherib,'
said the old man, ' whither art thou bound?' So he told
him all his history, till he came to the mention of the
Wfl;!)t Ghoul of the Mountain, whereupon quoth the other, * O
tW'VXbttlc Gherib, art thou mad that thou goest forth against the
Ghoul of the Mountain alone?' s O my lord/ replied
Gherib,, 6 1 have with me two hundred horse.' 6 O Gherib/
1 Islam.


6i

rejoined the hermit, ' hadst thou ten thousand, yet shouldest
thou not prevail against him, for his name is The-Ghoul-
who - eats-men -we- pray - God-for- safety, and he is of the
children of Ham. His father's name was Hindi, who
peopled Hind and named it, and he left this son after him 3
whom he called Saadan the Ghoul. Now, even in his
father's lifetime he was a cruel tyrant and an arrogant
devil and had no other food than men's flesh. His father
forbade him from this s but he would not be forbidden and
redoubled in his frowardness, till Hindi banished him
and drove him forth of Hind, after battle and sore travail.
Then he came to this country and fortified himself therein,
making his dwelling in this place, whence he uses to sally
forth and waylay all that come and go. Moreover, he hath
begotten five stout and warlike sons, each one of whom
will do battle with a thousand braves, and he hath rilled
the valley with his booty of horses and camels and oxen
and sheep, besides other treasure and goods. Wherefore
I fear for thee from him ; so do thou implore God the
Most High to succour thee against him by the word of
Unity, 1 and when thou drivest at the infidels, say, " God is
Most Great!" for this saying confoundeth those who
misbelieve.'

Then he gave him a mace of steel, a hundred pounds in
weight, with ten rings, which clashed like thunder s when
the wielder brandished it, and a sword forged of ^ thunder-
bolt, three cubits long and three spans broad, wherewith if
one smote a rock, it would cleave it in sunder. Moreover,
he gave him a hauberk and target and a book [of the law]
and said to him, 'Return to thy people and expound
Islam to them." So Gherib left him, rejoicing in his newly-
gained faith, and returned to his companions, who saluted
him, saying, 5 What made thee tarry thus ? 5 Whereupon
h@ told them all that had befallen him and expounded
1 %jg. There is no god, etc.


62


to them Islam, and they all embraced the faith of sub-
mission.

Next morning, Gherib mounted and rode to the hermit
to bid him farewell, after which he set out to return to his
camp. On his way, there met him a horseman armed
cap-a-pie, so that only his eyes appeared, who made at
him, saying, ' Put off what is on thee, O dog of the Arabs \
or I will slay thee ! ' Therewith Gherib drove at him and
there befell between them a battle such as would make
a new-born child turn gray and melt the flinty rock with
its terror ; but presently the stranger did off his face-veil,
and behold, it was Gherib's half-brother Sehim el LeiL

Now the manner of his coming thither was on this wise.
When Gherib set out in quest of the Ghoul of the Moun-
tain, Sehim was absent and on his return, not seeing his
brother, he went in to his mother, whom he found weeping.
So he asked the reason and she told him what had hap-
pened, whereupon, without allowing himself aught of rest,
he donned his harness of war and mounting, pricked after
Gherib, till he overtook him and there befell between them
what befell. When, therefore, he discovered his face,
Gherib knew him and saluted him, saying, ' What moved
thee to do this ? ' Quoth Sehim, ' I had a mind to measure
myself with thee in the field and make trial of my force in
cutting and thrusting.' Then they rode on, till they drew
near the valley, and on the way Gherib expounded Islam
to Sehim, who embraced the faith.

Meanwhile, the Ghoul espied the dust of their horses'
feet and said to his sons, 1 O my sons, mount and fetch me
yonder booty.' So the five took horse and made for the
party. When Gherib saw the five giants approaching, he
spurred towards them and cried out, saying, ' Who and
what are ye and what do ye want?' Whereupon Felhoun,
the eldest of the five, came out and said, £ Dismount and
bind one another and we will drive you to our father, that


63


he may roast some of you and boil other, for it is long
since he hath tasted human flesh.' When Gherib heard
this, he drove at Felhoun, shaking his mace, so that the
rings resounded like the pealing thunder and the giant was
confounded. Then he smote him a light blow with the
mace between the shoulders, and he fell to the ground like
a great palm-tree ; whereupon Sehim and some of his men
fell upon him and bound him ; then, putting a rope about
his neck, they haled him along like a cow.

When his brothers saw him a prisoner, they rushed
upon Gherib, who took three of them captive and the
fifth fled back to his father, who said to him, 1 What is
behind thee and where are thy brothers ? ' Quoth he,
'A beardless youth, forty cubits high, hath taken them
prisoner.' ' May the sun pour no blessing on you ! ' re-
plied Saadan and going down from his hold, tore up a
huge tree, with which he went in quest of* Gherib and
his folk on foot, for that no horse might carry him,
because of the bigness of his body. His son followed
him and they went on till they came up with Gherib and
his company, when the Ghoul fell upon them, without
word said, and killed five men with his club. Then he
made at Sehim and struck at him with his club, but Sehim
avoided the blow and it fell harmless ; whereat Saadan
was wroth and throwing down the weapon, sprang upoa
Sehim and caught him up as the merlin catches up the
sparrow.

When Gherib saw his brother in the Ghoul's clutches,
he cried out, saying, 4 God is most Great ! By the favour
of Abraham the Friend, whom God bless and preserve ! '
And spurred his charger at Saadan, shaking his mace, till
the rings resounded. Then he cried out again, i God is fotx%UC«
most Great ! ' and smote the Ghoul full on the ribs with
his mace, whereupon he fell to the ground, insensible,
and loosed his hold of Sehim ; nor did he come to him-


64


self befors he was bound and shackled. When his son
saw this, he turned and fled ; but Gherib drove after him
and smiting him with his mace between the shoulders,
unhorsed him. So they bound him with his father and
brothers and haltering them with ropes, haled them all
six along like camels, till they reached the Ghoul's castle,
which they found full of goods and treasures and things of
price ; and there they found also twelve hundred Persians,,
bound and shackled.

Gherib sat down on Saadan's chair, which had aforetime
belonged to Sasa ben Shith ben Sheddad ben Aad, with
Sehim on his right and his companions standing on his
either hand, and sending for the Ghoul of the Mountain,
said to him, ' How findest thoo thyself, O accursed one ? '
4 O my lord/ answered Saadan, ' in the sorriest of plights
for abasement and mortification; my sons and I, we are
bound with ropes like camels.* ' Quoth Gherib, * It is my
will that you enter my faith, that is, the faith of Islam,
and acknowledge the Unity of the All-knowing King,
Creator of light and darkness and of all things, — there
is no God but He, the Requiting King, — and confess the
prophethood of Abraham the Friend, on whom be peace ! '
So the Ghoul and his sons made profession of Islam after
the goodliest fashion, and Gherib bade loose their bonds,
whereupon Saadan wept and would have kissed his feet,
he and his sons ; but Gherib forbade them and they stood
with the rest

Then said Gherib, ' Harkye, Saadan ! ' 'At thy service*
O my lord ! ' answered he. Quoth Gherib, 1 What are these
captives ? 5 ' O my lord/ replied the Ghoul, ' these are my
booty from the land of the Persians and are not the only

ones.' ' And who is with them ? ' asked Gherib. ' O my
lord/ answered Saadan, 6 there is with them the princess
Fekhr Taj, daughter of King Sabour of Persia, and a
hundred damsels like moons/ When Gherib heard this, he


6s

marvelled and said, 1 How came ye by these ? * ' O Amir/
replied Saadan, 4 1 went forth one day with my sons and
five of my slaves in quest of booty, but finding no spoil in
our way, we dispersed over deserts and plains and fared on,
so haply we might happen on somewhat of prey and not
return empty-handed, till we found ourselves in the land of
the Persians. Presently, we espied a cloud of dust in the
distance and sent one of our slaves to reconnoitre, who
returned after awhile and said, " O my lord, this is the
princess Fekhr Taj, daughter of Sabour, King of the
Persians and Medes and Turcomans, who is on a journey,
attended hy two thousand horse." Quoth I, " Mayst thou
be gladdened with good news ! We could have no finer
purchase than this." Then I and my sons fell upon the
Persians and slew of them three hundred men and took
the princess and twelve hundred cavaliers prisoners, to-
gether with all that was with her of treasure and riches,
and brought them hither.'

Quoth Gherib, ' Hast thou offered any violence to the
princess Fekhr Taj ? ' ' Not 1/ replied Saadan, ' as thy
head liveth, and by the virtue of the faith I have [but now]
embraced ! ' 'It was well done of thee, O Saadan,' said
Gherib ; * for her father is king of the world and he will
surely despatch troops in quest of her and lay waste the
dwellings of those who took her. And whoso looks not
to the issue of events, Fate is no friend to him. But
where is the damsel ? ' And Saadan, ' I have set apart a
pavilion for her and her damsels.' Quoth Gherib, 4 Show
me her lodging,' and Saadan answered, ' I hear and obey.'
So he carried him to the pavilion, where he found the
princess mournful and cast down, weeping for her former
estate of honour and delight. When Gherib saw her, he
thought the moon was near him and magnified God the
All-hearing and seeing. The princess also looked at him
and saw him a princely cavalier, with valour shining from
vol. vi. 5


66


between his eyes and testifying for him and not against
him ; so she rose and kissed his hands, then threw herself
at his feet, saying, 'O hero of the age, I cast myself on
thy mercy ; protect me from this Ghoul, for I fear lest he
do away my maidenhead and after devour me. So take
me to serve thine handmaids.' Quoth Gherib, 4 Thou shalt
be restored in safety to thy father and the seat of thy
worship.' Whereupon she prayed that he might live long
and have advancement in rank.

Then he caused unbind the Persians and turning to the
princess, said to her, ' What brought thee forth of thy
palace to the deserts and wastes, so that the highway-
robbers made prize of thee ? ' ' O my lord/ answered she,
4 my father and all the people of his realm are Magians,
who worship the fire, and not the All-powerful King.
Now in our country is a monastery called the Monastery
of the Fire, whither every year the daughters of the
Magians and worshippers of the Fire resort at the time
of their festival, after which they return to their houses.
So I and my damsels set out, as of wont, attended by two
thousand horse, whom my father sent with me to guard
me ; but by the way this Ghoul fell upon us and killed
some of us and taking the rest captive, imprisoned us in
this hold This, then, is what befell me, O valiant cham-
pion, whom God guard against the shifts of fortune ! '
And Gherib said, 'Fear not; for I will bring thee to thy
palace and the seat of thy worship.' Wherefore she
blessed him and kissed his hands and feet.

Then he went out from her, after having commanded to
treat her with honour, and slept till morning, when he
made the ablution and prayed a two-bow prayer, after the
rite of our father Abraham the Friend (on whom be peace),
whilst the Ghoul and his sons and Gherib's company did
the like after him. Then he turned to the Ghoul and said
to him, ' O Saadan, wilt thou not show me the Valley ol


67


Flowers?' 8 1 will well, O my lord,' answered he. So
Gherib and his company and Fekhr Taj all rose and went
forth, whilst Saadan commanded his slaves and slave-girls,
(of whom he had a hundred and fifty female and a thousand
male slaves, to pasture his sheep and oxen and camels) to
slaughter and cook and make ready the morning-meal and
bring it to them among the trees.

When they came to the valley, they found it beautiful
passing measure, full of trees growing singly and in
clusters and birds warbling on the branches. There sang
the mocking-bird, trilling out her melodious notes, and the
cushat filling with her warble the mansions of God's crea-
tion, and the nightingale, with her voice like that of a 'Mtgi)!
man, and the merle, that the tongue fails to describe, and toll,
the turtle, whose plaining maddens men for love, and the
ringdove and the popinjay answering her, with fluent
tongue. There also were trees laden with all manner
of fruits, of each two kinds, the pomegranate, sweet and
sour, the almond-apricot, 1 the camphor-apricot 2 and the
almond of Khorassan and the plum, with whose branches
entwine the boughs of the myrobalan, and the orange, as it
were a flaming cresset, and the shaddock, weighing down
its branches, and the lemon, that cures lack of appetite,
and the citron, sovereign against the jaundice, and the
date, red and yellow, the [especial] handiwork of God
the Most High. Of the like of this place saith the poet
ElWelhan:

When its birds sing in the dawn o'er its limpid lake, El Welhan yeams

for its sight ere morning break.
Foi as it were Paradise 'tis with its fragrant gales And its fruits and its
streams that run through its shady brake.
Gherib marvelled at the beauty of the place and bade

1 So called because it is the result of a graft upon an almond -tree.
Its kernel is sweet and it has a special delicacy of flavour, attributed by
the Arabs to the graft. See Russell's Natural History of Aleppo, p. 21.

2 So called from the flavour of its kernel.


68


them set up there the pavilion of Fekhr Taj, daughter of
the Chosroesj so they pitched it among the trees and spread
it with rich carpets. Then he sat down and the slaves
brought food and they ate till they were satisfied ; after which
quoth Gherib, 4 Harkye, Saadan ! ' 6 At thy service, O my
lord,' answered the Ghoul. ' Hast thou any wine ? ' asked
Gherib, and Saadan replied, ' Yes, I have a cistern full of
old wine.' ' Then,' said Gherib, ' bring us some of it.' So
Saadan sent ten slaves, who returned with great plenty of
wine, and they ate and drank and made merry. And Gherib
bethought him of Mehdiyeh and recited the following
verses :

I mind me of the happy days of union and delight, And all my heart's

on fire with love and longing for thy sight.
By God, I did not leave thy side of my unfettered will, But by the

strange and evil chance of Fate in my despite !
Peace be upon thee, O my love, a thousand times be peace ! Whilst I s

afar from thee, remain a sad and weary wight.

They abode there three days, eating and drinking and
taking their pleasure in the valley, at the end of which
time they returned to the castle. Then Gherib called
Sehim and said to him, 'Take a hundred horse and go to
thy father and mother and thy people, the Benou Kehtan,
and bring them all to this place, here to pass the rest of
their days, whilst I carry the Princess of Persia back to her
father. As for thee, O Saadan,' continued Gherib, address-
ing the Ghoul, ' abide thou here with thy sons, till I return
to thee.' ' And why,' asked Saadan, 4 wilt thou not carry
me with thee to the land of the Persians ? ' * Because,'
answered Gherib, 'thou stolest away King Sabour's daughter
and if his eye fall on thee he will eat thy flesh and drink
thy blood.' When the Ghoul heard this, he laughed a
great laugh, as It were the pealing thunder, and said, 8 O
my lord, if the Persians and the Medes united against me,
I would make them quaff the cup of death/ * Doubtless it


69


is as thou sayest,' rejoined Gherib; 'but abide thou her©
till I return to thee.' And the Ghoul answered, C I hear
and obey.' Then Sehim departed with his comrades of
the Benou Kehtan for the dwelling-places of their tribes
and Gherib set out with Fekhr Taj and her company,
intending for the cities of Sabour, King of the Persians.

Meanwhilej King Sabour abode awaiting his daughter's
return from the Monastery of the Fire, and when the ap-
pointed time passed by and she came not, fires raged in
his heart. Now he had forty viziers, whereof the wisest
and chiefest was called Daidan: so he said to him, e O
vizier, the day of my daughter's return is past and I have
no news of her ; so do thou send a courier to the Monastery
of the Fire to learn what is come of her.' 1 1 hear and
obey,' replied Daidan, and summoning the chief of the
couriers, despatched him forthright to the Monastery.
When he reached it, he asked the monks of the princes^
and they said, 4 We have not seen her this year/ So tha
courier returned to the city of Isbanir 1 and told the vizier,
who went in to the king and told him. When Sabour
heard this, he was sore concerned and casting his crown
on the ground, tore his beard and fell down in a swoon.
They sprinkled water upon him, and presently he came to
himself, weeping-eyed and mournful-hearted, and repeated
the words of the poet :

When in thine absence to mine aid patience and tears I call, Teass
come obedient to my word, but patience not at all.

What if the days have parted us ? Indeed, 'tis of their wont ; For unto
Fortune perfidy, alas ! is natural.

Then he called ten of his captains and bade them take

1 Apparently Ctesiphon, the ancient dual capital of the Chosroes a

situate on the Tigris below Baghdad. The place is elsewhere spokea
of as " The Cities/' a circumstance which confirms this supposition^.
Medaln or Medaln Kisra (the cities of Chosroe's) being the Arabia
name of Ctesiphoo,


each a thousand horse and ride in different directions, in
quest of his daughter. So they mounted forthright and
departed; whilst the princess's mother clad herself and
her women in black and strewed ashes and sat weeping
^fftrht and lamenting.

tonf. Meanwhile Gherib and the princess journeyed on ten days,
and on the eleventh day, a cloud of dust appeared in the
distance and rose to the confines of the sky ; whereupon
Gherib called the Amir of the Persians and bade him go
and learn the cause thereof. 'I hear and obey,' replied
he and pricked his charger, till he came within the cloud
of dust, where he saw folk and enquired of them. Quoth
they, 'We are of the Benou Hettal and are questing for
plunder ; our Amir is Semsam ben Jirah and we are five
thousand horse.' The Persian returned in haste and told
Gherib, who cried out to his men and to the Persians,
saying, ' Don your arms ! ' They did as he bade them and
presently up came the Arabs, shouting, 'Booty! Booty!'
Quoth Gherib, ' God confound you, O dogs of Arabs !'
Then he set spurs to his horse and drove at them in
valiant wise, shouting, ' God is most great ! Ho for
the faith of Abraham the Friend, on whom be peace ! '
And there befell between them a sore battle and great
was the clash of arms and the din of the mellay ; nor did
they leave fighting, till the day fled and the darkness
came, when they drew off from one another.

Then Gherib numbered his men and found that five of
the Benou Kehtan had fallen and three-and-seventy of the
Persians; but of the Benou Hettal they had slain more
than five hundred horse. As for Semsam, he alighted and
sought neither food nor sleep, but said, ' In all my life I
never met such a fighter as this youth ! Anon he fights
with the sword and anon with the mace : but to-morrow
1 will go forth and defy him to single combat and cut
off these Arabs.' Now, when Gherib returned to his


7i


camp, the princess met him, weeping and affrighted for
the terror of that which had befallen, and kissed his foot
in the stirrup, saying, 6 May thy hands never wither nor
thine enemies rejoice, O champion of the age ! Praised
be God Who hath saved thee alive this day ! Verily, I am
in fear for thee from yonder Arabs.' When Gherib heard
this, he smiled in her face and comforted her, saying, ' Fear
not, O princess ! Were this desert full of the enemy, yet
would I scatter them, by the might of God the Most High. 9
She thanked him and prayed that he might be given the
victory over his enemies ; after which she returned to her
women and Gherib went to his tent, where he cleansed
himself of the blood of the infidels, and they lay on their
arms that night.

Next morning, the two hosts mounted and sought the
field. The first to prick into the plain was Gherib, who
spurred his charger till he was near the infidels and cried
out, 'Who is for jousting? Let no sluggard or weakling
come out to me ! ' Whereupon there came out a buirdly
giant of the lineage of the tribe of Aad, armed with an,
iron mace, twenty pounds in weight, and drove at Gherib s
saying, * O scum of the Arabs, take what cometh to thee
and know that thy last hour is at hand 1 ' So saying, he
aimed a blow at Gherib, but he avoided it and the mace
sank a cubit into the ground. Now the Bedouin was bent
in twain with the blow ; so Gherib smote him with his mace
and clove his forehead in sunder ; and he fell down dead
and God hurried his soul to the fire. Then Gherib made
his horse wheel and curvet before the foe and offered
battle. So there came out to him a second and a third
and a fourth and so on, till ten had come forth to him and
he slew them all

When the infidels saw his swashing blows and the
slaughter he made, they hung back and forbore to go
forth to him, whereupon Semsam looked at them and saidg


72

* May God not bless you ! I will go forth to him/ So he
donned his battle-harness and spurring his charger into
the midst of the field, cried out to Gherib, saying, 4 Out on
thee, O dog of the Arabs ! what art thou that thou shouldst
defy me in the open field and slay my men ? ' And Gherib
answered, ' Up and take thy wreak for the slaughter of thy
braves ! ' So Semsam ran at Gherib, who awaited him with
a dilated breast and a heart well pleased, and they hewed
at one another with maces, till the two hosts marvelled and
every eye was fixed on them. Then they wheeled about
[and fetching a compass] in the field, [met] and struck at
each other; but Gherib avoided Semsam's stroke and dealt
him a buffet that beat in his breast and cast him to the
ground, dead ; whereupon all his host set upon Gherib as
one man, and he ran at them, crying out, * God is most
Great ! He giveth help and victory [to His servants] and
forsaketh those who reject the faith of Abraham the Friend,
2ClgI)t <> n whom be peace !'

$£HX& When the infidels heard the name of the All-powerful
King, the One, the Victorious, whom the sights compre-
hend not, but He comprehendeth all sights, 1 they looked
at one another and said, ' What is this saying that makes
us tremble in every nerve and weakens our resolution and
causes the life to fail in us ? Never in our lives heard we
aught goodlier than this saying ! Let us leave fighting, that
we may ask its meaning.' So they held their hands from
the battle and dismounted ; and their chiefs assembled and
held counsel together, seeking to go to Gherib and saying,
'Let ten of us go to him !' So they chose out ten of their
best, who set out for Gherib's camp. Now he and his
people had alighted and returned to their tents, marvelling
at the withdrawal of the infidels from the fight. Presently,
the ten elders came up and seeking speech of Gherib,
kissed the earth before him and wished him glory and
1 Koran vL 103.


73


long life. Quoth he to them, 4 What made you leave
fighting? 5 £ my lord,' answered they, 'thou didst
affright us with the words thou shoutedst out at us. 5
Then said Gherib, ' What calamity do ye worship ? ' 4 We
worship Wedd and Souwaa and Yeghouth,' answered they,
'lords of the tribe of Noah;' and Gherib, 'We serve
none but God the Most High, Maker of all things and
Provider of every living creature He it is who created
the heavens and the earth and stablished the mountains,
who maketh water to well from the rocks and the trees to
grow and feedeth the wild beasts in the deserts ; for He is
God, the One, the All-powerful'

When they heard this, their bosoms expanded to the
words of the faith of Unity and they said, ' Verily, this
God is a great lord, compassionate and merciful. What
shall we say, to become of those that submit themselves to
Him ? ' Quoth Gherib, ' Say, " There is ho god but God
and Abraham is the Friend of God."* So the ten made
sincere profession of the true faith and Gherib said to
them, ' If the sweetness of Islam be indeed stablished in
your hearts, go to your people and expound the faith to
them; and if they profess, they shall be saved, but if they
refuse, we will burn them with fire.' So they returned and
expounded Islam to their people and set forth to them the
way of truth and righteousness, and they embraced the faith
of submission with heart and tongue.

Then they repaired on foot to Gherib's tent and kissing
the earth before him, wished him power and advancement,
saying, '. O our lord, we are become thy slaves ; command
us what thou wilt, for we hearken to thee and obey thee
and will never leave thee, for God hath guided us into the
right way at thy hands.' ' May God abundantly requite
you S ' answered he. 6 Return to your dwellings and take
your goods and your children and forego me to the Valley
of Flowers and the castle of Sasa ben Shith, whilst I carry


74


the princess Fekhr Taj, daughter of Sabour, King of the
Persians, back to her father and return to you.' ' We hear
and obey,' said they and straightway returned to their en-
campment, rejoicing in Islam, and expounding the faith to
their wives and children, who became true believers. Then
they dismantled their dwellings and set forth, with their
goods and cattle, for the Valley of Flowers. Now Gherib
had charged them, saying, ' If the Ghoul of the Mountain
come out to you and offer to attack you, do ye call upon
the name of God, the Creator of all things, and he will
leave his hostile intent and receive you hospitably.' So,
when they came in sight of the castle of Shith, Saadan and
his sons sallied forth to them and would have fallen upon
them ; but they called aloud upon the name of God the
Most High, and straightway he received them kindly and
asked them of their case. They told him all that had
passed between Gherib and themselves, whereupon he re-
joiced in them and lodged them with him and loaded them
with kindnesses.

Meanwhile, Gherib and his company fared on five days'
journey towards the city of Isbanir, and on the sixth day,
they saw in the distance a cloud of dust. So Gherib sent
one of the Persians to learn the meaning of this and he
went and returned, swiftlier than a bird in its flight, saying,
' O my lord, these be a thousand horse of our comrades,
whom the King hath sent in quest of his daughter.' When
Gherib heard this, he commanded his men to halt and
pitch the tents. So they halted and waited till the new
comers reached them, when they went to meet them and.
told Touman, their captain, that the princess was with
them ; whereupon he went in to Gherib and kissing the
earth before him, enquired for her. Gherib sent him to
her tent, and he entered and kissed her hands and feet and
acquainted her with what had befallen her father and
mother. She told him in return all that had befallen he?


7%


and how Gherib- had delivered her from the Ghoul of the ^*igf)f
Mountain, who would else have eaten her, adding, ' And ijcnxffi
indeed, it behoves my father to give him the half of his
kingdom.' Then Touman returned to Gherib and kissed
his hands and feet and thanked him for his good dealing,
saying, ' With thy leave, O my lord, I will return to Isbanir
and acquaint the King with the good news of his daughter's
approach.' s Go/ answered Gherib, ' and take of him the
gift for glad tidings.'

So Touman returned with all diligence to Isbanir and
entering the palace, kissed the earth before the King, who
said to him, ' What is the news, O bringer of glad tidings ? s
Quoth Touman, ' I will not speak, till thou give me the
reward for good news.' ' Tell me thy good news,' answered
the King, ' and I will content thee. 5 So Touman said, i O
King, I bring thee the glad tidings of the return of the
princess Fekhr Taj.' When Sabour heard his daughter's
name, he fell down in a swoon and they sprinkled rose-
water on him, till he recovered and said to Touman, 1 Draw
near to me and tell me all.' So he came forward and
acquainted him with all that had befallen the princess j
and Sabour beat hand upon hand, saying, ' Alas, unhappy
Fekhr Taj !' And he bade give Touman ten thousand
dinars and conferred on him the government of the city
of Ispahan. Then he cried out to his Amirs, saying,
'Mount, all of you, and go forth to meet the princess
Fekhr Taj !' Whilst the chief eunuch went in to the
queen-mother and told her and all the harem the good
news, whereat she rejoiced and gave him a dress of honour
and a thousand dinars. Moreover, the people of the city
heard of this and decorated the streets and houses.

Then the King and Touman took horse and rode till
they fell in with Gherib, when Sabour dismounted and
made some steps towards Gherib, who also dismounted
and advanced to meet him j and they embraced and


j6

saluted each other, and Sabour bent over Gherib's hand
and kissed it and thanked him for his favours. They
pitched their tents in face of one another and Sabour
went in to his daughter, who rose and embracing him,
told him all that had befallen her and how Gherib had
rescued her from the clutches of the Ghoul of the Moun-
tain. ' By thy life, O princess of fair ones,' said the King,
s I will overwhelm him with gifts ! ' ' O my father,' rejoined
she, * make him thy son-in-law, that he may be to thee a
help against thine enemies, for he is passing valiant 9
This she said because her heart was enamoured of Gherib.
' O my daughter,' answered her father, * knowst thou not
that King Khired Shah seeks thee in marriage and that he
hath cast the brocade 1 and given a hundred thousand
dinars [to dowry], and he is King of Shiraz and its depen-
dencies and is lord of empire and hprsemen and footmen? 3
£ O my father,' said the princess, c I desire not that whereof
thou speakest, and if thou constrain me to that I have no
mind to, I will kill myself.' So Sabour left her and went
in to Gherib, with whom he sat awhile and could not take
his fill of looking upon him ; and he said in himself, ' By
Allah, my daughter is excusable if she love this Bedouin ! '
Then he called for food and they ate and passed the night,
together.

On the morrow, they took horse and rode till they
arrived at the city of Isbanir and entered, stirrup to
stirrup, and it was a great day for them. Fekhr Taj
repaired to her palace and the abiding-place of her rank,
where her mother and her women received her with cries
of joy. As for King Sabour, he sat down on his throne
and seated Gherib on his right hand, whilst the princes
and viceroys and chamberlains and viziers and officers
stood on either hand and gave him joy of the recovery of
his daughter. Quoth Sabour, 1 Whoso ioveth me let him
1 Qjmre, another form of " throwing the handkerchief."


77


bestow a robe of honour on Gherib,' and there fell dresses
of honour on him like rain. Then Gherib abode the
King's guest ten days, at the end of which time he would
have departed, but Sabour clad him in a dress of honour
and swore by his faith that he should not depart for a
month. Quoth Gherib, ' O King, I am plighted to one
of the girls of the Arabs and I desire to go in to her.'
' Whether is the fairer,' asked the King, 4 thy betrothed
or Fekhr Taj ? ' 4 O King of the age/ replied Gherib^
" what is the slave beside the lord?' And Sabour said,
' Fekhr Taj is become thy handmaid, for that thou didst
rescue her from the clutches of the Ghoul, and she shall
have none other husband than thee.'

Thereupon Gherib rose and kissed the earth, saying, * O
King of the age, thou art a king and I am but a poor man,
and belike thou wilt ask a heavy dowry.' * O my son,'
replied the King, * know that Khired Shah, lord of Shiraz,
seeks her in marriage and hath appointed a hundred
thousand dinars to her dower ; but I have chosen thee
before all men, that I may make thee the shield of my
kingship and the sword of my vengeance.' Then he
turned to his chief officers and said to them, ' Bear witness
against me that I give my daughter Fekhr Taj in marriage tNTtCjfjt
to my son Gherib.' With that he joined hands with him &£XXX&«
and she became his wife. Then said Gherib, * Appoint me
a dower and I will bring it to thee, for I have in the Castle
of Sasa wealth and treasures beyond count' * O my son,'
answered Sabour, 4 I want of thee neither gold nor treasure
and I will take nothing for her dower save the head of
J ?mrcan, King of Desht and the city of Ahwaz.' 4 O King
of the age,' rejoined Gherib, 4 I will fetch my people and
go to thine enemy and lay waste his realm.,' Quoth Sabour,
'• May God requite thee with good J ' and dismissed the
assembly, thinking that s if Gherib went forth against
Jemrcan, he would never return


7%

Next morning, the King mounted with Gherib and all
his troops and rode forth to the tilting-ground, where he
said to his men, 1 Do ye tilt with spears and gladden my
heart' So the Persian cavaliers tilted, one against the
other, and Gherib said, ' O King of the age, I have a
mind to tilt with the horsemen of the Persians, but on
one condition.' ' What is that ? ' asked the King. ' It is,'
answered Gherib, ' that I shall don a light tunic and take
a headless spear, with a pennon dipped in saffron, whilst
the Persians tilt against me with sharp spears. If any
conquer me, I will give myself to hira; but, if I conquer
him, I will mark him on the breast and he shall leave the
lists.' Then the King cried to the commander of the
troops to bring forward the champions of the Persians ;
so he chose out twelve hundred of his stoutest champions,
and the King said to them, in the Persian tongue, ' Whoso
slayeth this Bedouin may ask of me what he will.' So they
strove with each other for the precedence and advanced
upon Gherib and truth was distinguished from falsehood
and jest from earnest. Quoth Gherib, ' I put my trust in
God, the God of Abraham the Friend, Who hath power
over all and from whom nothing is hidden, the One, the
Almighty, whom the sight comprehendeth not 1'

Then a giant of the Persian champions pricked out to
him, but Gherib let him not stand long before him ere
he marked him and filled his breast with saffron, and as he
turned away, he smote him on the nape with [the butt of]
his spear, and he fell to the ground and his pages carried
him forth of the lists. Then a second champion came
forth against him and he overcame him and marked him
on the breast ; and thus did he with champion after cham-
pion, till he had overcome them all and marked them on
the breast ; for God the Most High gave him the victory
over them and they went forth of the lists. Then the
servants set food before them and they ate and drank till


79


Gherib's wits were dazed. By and by, he went out upon
an occasion and would have returned, but lost his way and
entered the palace of Fekhr Taj. When she saw him, her
reason fled and she cried out to her women, saying, ' Go to
your own places ! ' So they withdrew and she rose and kissed
Gherib's hand, saying, 4 Welcome to my lord, who de-
livered me from the Ghoul 1 Indeed I am thine handmaid
for ever.' Then she drew him to her bed and embraced
him, whereupon desire was hot upon him and he broke
her seal and lay with her till the morning. Now the King
thought that he had departed ; but on the morrow he went
in to him and Sabour rose to him and made him sit by
his side.

Then entered the [tributary] kings and kissing the earth,
stood on either hand and fell to talking of Gherib's valour
and saying, ' Extolled be He who gave him such prowess,
and he so young in years !' As they were thus engaged,
the King espied from the palace-windows the dust of horse
approaching and cried out to his scouts, saying, ' Out on
you ! Go and bring me news of yonder dust ! ' So one of
them took horse and riding off, returned after awhile and
said, ' O King, this is the dust of a hundred horse, and
the name of their chief is Sehim el LeiL' Quoth Gherib,
' O my lord, this is my brother, whom I had sent on an
errand, and I will go forth to meet him.' So saying, he
mounted, with his hundred men of the Benou Kehtan and
a thousand Persians, and rode forth to meet his brother in
great state, [that is to say if greatness may be attributed
to the creature] for [real] greatness belongeth to God
alone. When they came up with each other, they dis-
mounted and embraced, and Gherib said to Sehim, ( my
brother, hast thou brought our tribe to the Castle of the
Ghoul of the Mountain and the V alley of Flowers ? s 4 O
my brother/ answered Sehim, 1 when the perfidious dog
Merdas heard that thou hadst mastered the Ghoul of the


8o


Mountain and his stronghold, he was sore chagrined and
said, " Except I depart hence, Gherib will come and take
my daughter Mehdiyeh without dower." So he took his
daughter and his goods and set out with his tribe for Irak,
where he entered the city of Cufa and put himself under
the protection of King Agib, seeking to give him his
daughter to wife.' When Gherib heard his brother's story,
he well-nigh gave up the ghost for rage and said, 4 By the
virtue of the faith of submission, the faith of Abraham the
Friendj and by the Supreme Lord, I will assuredly go to
the land of Irak and make fierce war upon it'

Then they returned to the city and going in to the King s
kissed the earth before him. He rose to Gherib and
saluted Sehim ; after which the former told him what had
happened and he put ten captains at his command, under
each one's hand ten thousand horse of the stoutest of the
Persians and the Arabs, who equipped themselves and
were ready to depart at the end of three days. Then
Gherib set out and journeyed till he reached the Castle of
Sasa, where the Ghoul and his sons came forth to meet
him and dismounting, kissed his feet in the stirrups. He
told them all that had passed and the Ghoul said, * O my
lord, do thou abide in this castle, whilst I repair to Irak
with my sons and servants and lay waste town and hamlet
and bring thee all its defenders bound hand and foot'
But Gherib thanked him and said, ' O Saadan, we will all
go.' So they all made ready and set out for Irak, leaving
a thousand horse to guard the castle.

Meanwhile, Merdas arrived at the city of Cufa and going
in to Agib, kissed the earth before him and wished him
what is usually wished to kings. Then he made him a
handsome present, saying, 1 my lord, I come to throw
"Ml 1 1 m y se ^ on protection. ' c Tell me who hath wronged
fctmb tnee ?' answered Agib, 6 that I may protect thee against him,
* though it were Sabour, King of the Persians and Turco


8i


mans and Medes.' 'O King,' replied Merdas, 'he who
hath wronged me is none other than a youth whom I
reared in my bosom. I found him in his mother's lap in
a certain valley and took her to wife. She brought me a
son, whom I named Sehim el Leil, and her own son, whose
name was Gherib, grew up on my knees and became a
consuming lightning and a great calamity, 1 for he slew El
Hemel, prince of the Benou Nebhan, and routed footmen
and overcame horsemen. - Now I have a daughter, who
befits thee alone s and he sought her of me ; so I required
of him the head of the Ghoul of the Mountain [to her
dowry ;] wherefore he went to him and engaging him in
single combat, made him prisoner and took the castle of
Sasa ben Shith ben Sheddad ben Aad, wherein are the
treasures of the ancients and the moderns, and the Ghoul
is become one of his liegemen. Moreover, I hear that he
is become a Muslim and goeth about, summoning the folk
to his faith. He is now gone to carry the princess of
Persia, whom he delivered from the Ghoul, back to her
father, King Sabour, and will not return but with the
treasures of the Persians.'

When Agib heard Merdas's story, he changed colour
and was in ill case and made sure of destruction ; then
he said to Merdas, ' Is his mother with thee or with him ? '
'She is with me,' answered Merdas; 'in my tents.' Quoth
Agib, ' What is her name ? ' and Merdas said, ' Her name
is Nusreh.' ' It is indeed she,' rejoined Agib and sent for
her. When she came before him, he looked on her and
knew her and said to her, ' O accursed woman, where are
the two slaves I sent with thee ? ' ' They slew each other
on my account,' replied she ; whereupon he drew his
sword and smote her and cut her in twain. Then they
took her up and cast her out ; but trouble entered into
Agib's heart and he said to Merdas, 6 Give me thy daughter
1 i.e. a mighty man of war,
¥OL» VI. 6


82


to wife.' ' She is one of thine handmaids,' answered he %
' I give her to thee to wife, and I am thy slave.' Quoth
Agib, ' I desire to look upon this whoreson, Gherib, that
I may make an end of him and cause him taste all manner
of torments.' Then he bade give Merdas, to his daughter's
dowry, thirty thousand dinars and a hundred pieces of silk
fringed and brocaded with gold and a hundred pieces of
bordered stuffs and handkerchiefs and collars of gold. So
he went forth with this splendid dowry and set himself to
equip Mehdiyeh with all diligence.

Meanwhile, Gherib fared on till he came to El Jezireh,
which is the first town of Irak and is a walled and fortified
city, and here he called a halt. When the people of the
city saw his army encamp before it, they shut the gates
and manned the walls, then went to the king of the city,
who was called Damigh 1 for that he used to brain the
champions in the open field, and told him. So he looked
forth from the battlements of the palace and seeing . an
immense army of Persians encamped before the city, said
to the citizens, 'O folk, what do yonder Persians want?'
'We know not,' answered they.

Now Damigh had among his officers a man called Sebul-
kifar, keen of wit and subtle as he were a flame of fire ; so
he called him and bade him go to the stranger host and
find out who they were and what they wanted and return
quickly. Accordingly, he sped like the wind to the Persian
camp, where a company of Arabs met him and said to him,
'Who art thou and what dost thou want?' Quoth he, 'I
am a messenger and an ambassador from the lord of the
city to your chief.' So they took him and carried him
through the lines of tents and standards, till they came to
Gherib's pavilion and told him of the envoy. He bade
them bring him in and they did so, whereupon he kissed
the earth before Gherib and wished him length of days
1 i,e. the Brainer.


83


and honour. Quoth Gherib, ' What is thine errand ? ' and
Sebulkifar answered, saying, ' I am an envoy from the lord
of the city of Jezireh, Damigh, brother of King Kundemir,
lord of the city of Cufa and the land of Irak.' When Gherib
heard his father's name, the tears ran from his eyes and he
looked at the messenger and said, 'What is thy name?'
* My name is Sebulkifar,' answered he. ' O Sebulkifar,'
said Gherib, 'return to thy master and tell him that the
commander of this host is called Gherib, son of Kundemir,
King of Cufa, whom his son Agib slew, and he is come to
avenge his father on the perfidious dog Agib.'

So Sebulkifar returned to the city, rejoicing, and told
Damigh all he had heard. The latter thought himself in
a dream and said to the messenger, ' O Sebulkifar, is this
thou tellest me true ? ' 'As thy head liveth,' replied Sebul-
kifar, ' it is true.' Then Damigh took horse forthright with
his chief officers and rode out to the camp,' where Gherib
met him and they embraced and saluted one another j
after which Gherib carried him to his pavilion and they
sat down on beds of estate. And Damigh rejoiced in
Gherib, his brother's son, and turning to him, said, ' I
also have yearned to avenge thy father, but could not
avail against the dog thy brother ; for that his troops are
many and mine few.' ' O uncle,' replied Gherib, ' I am
come to avenge my father and blot out our reproach and
rid the realm of Agib.' Quoth Damigh, 'O son of my
brother, thou hast two wreaks to take, that of thy father
and that of thy mother.' 'And what ails my mother?'
asked Gherib. ' Thy brother Agib hath slain her,' replied Ht(rj)t
Damigh and told him what had befallen, whereupon toxxbt«
Gherib's reason fled and he swooned away and came
nigh upon death. No sooner did he come to himself
than he cried out to the troops, saying, ' To horse ! "
Bui Damigh said to him, ! O son of my brother, wait till
1 make ready mine estate and mount with my men and


84


fare with thee and at thy stirrup.' 'O uncle,' replied
Gherib, ' I have no patience to wait ; do thou equip thy
troops and join me at Cufa.'

So Gherib mounted with his troops and rode, till he
came to the town of Babel, whose folk took fright at him.
Now there was in this town a king called Jemek, under
whose hand were twenty thousand horsemen, and there
gathered themselves together to him from the villages
[round about] other fifty thousand horse, who pitched their
tents under the walls of the city. Then Gherib wrote a letter
and sent it to King Jemek by a messenger, who came up
to the city-gate and cried out, saying, ' I am a messenger ; '
whereupon the keeper of the gate went in and told Jemek,
who said, ' Bring him to me.' So the messenger entered
and kissing the earth before the King, gave him the letter.
Jemek opened it and read as follows : 4 Praise be to God,
the Lord of the Worlds and of all things, Who provideth
all creatures and hath power over all I These from Gherib s
son of Kundemir, lord of Irak and Cufa, to Jemek. As
soon as this letter reaches thee, let not thy reply be other
than to break thine idols and confess the unity of the
All-knowing King, Creator of light and darkness and of all
things, the All-powerful ; and except thou do as I bid thee,
I will make this day the blackest of thy days. Peace be on
those who follow in the way of righteousness, fearing the
issues of frowardness, and obey the Most High King, Lord
of this world and the next, Him who saith to a thing, " Be
and it is.'

When Jemek read this letter, his eyes rolled and his
colour changed and he cried out to the messenger, saying,
4 Go to thy lord and say to him, " To-morrow, at daybreak
there shall be battle and conflict and it shall appear who is
the master."' So he returned and told Gheribj, who bade
his men make ready for battle, whilst Jemek pitched his
tents in face of Gherib's camp and his troops poured forth


85


like the swollen sea and passed the night in expectation of
battle. As soon as it was day, the two hosts mounted and
drew up in battle array and beat their drums and spurred
their swift horses, filling the plains; and the champions
came out.

The first who sallied forth to the field was the Ghoul of
the Mountain, bearing on his shoulder a terrible big tree,
and he cried out between the two hosts, saying, ' I am
Saadan the Ghoul : who is for fighting, who is for jousting?
Let no sluggard or weakling come forth to me.' And he
called out to his slaves, saying, ' Out on you ! Bring me
firewood and fire, for I am hungry.' So the slaves brought
firewood and kindled a fire midmost the lists. Then there
came out to him a man of the infidels, an Amalekite of the
unbelieving Amalekites, bearing on his shoulder a mace as
it were the mast of a ship, and drove at the Ghoul, saying,
' Woe to thee, O Saadan ! ' When the Ghoul heard this,
he was angered and raising his club, aimed at the infidel
a blow, that whistled through the air. The other met the
stroke with his mace, but it beat down his guard and
descending with its own weight and that of the mace upon
his head, beat in his brain-pan, and he fell like a great
palm-tree ; whereupon Saadan cried to his slaves, saying,
'Take this fat calf and roast him quickly.' So they
hastened to skin the infidel and roasted him and brought
him to the Ghoul, who ate his flesh and crunched his
bones.

When the infidels saw how Saadan did with their fellow,
their skins quaked and their colour changed and their
hearts died within them and they said to one another,
'Whoso goeth out against this Ghoul, he eats him and
cracks his bones and maketh him to lack the wind of the
world.' Wherefore they quailed for fear of the Ghoul and
his sons and turned to fly, making for the town; but
Gherib cried out to his troops, saying, 'Up and after


86


them ! ' So the Persians and the Arabs drove after the
King of Babel and his host and smote them with the
sword, till they slew of them twenty thousand or more.
Moreover, the fugitives crowded together in the gate of
the city and there they slew of them much people; and
they could not win to shut the gate. So the Persians and
the Arabs entered with them, fighting, and Saadan, taking
a mace from one of the slain, fought his way through the
foe and broke into the King's palace, where he met with
Jemek and smote him with the mace, that he fell senseless
to the ground. Then he fell upon those who were in the
palace and pounded them into fragments, till those who
2$ff(rf)t were left cried out for quarter and Saadan said to them,
toXXtltt. ' Bind your king.' So they bound Jemek and took him up,
and Saadan drove them before him like sheep and brought
them before Gherib, after the most part of the people of
the city had perished by the swords of the latter's host.

When Jemek came to himself, he found himself bound
and heard Saadan say, ' I will sup to-night off this king
Jemek;' whereupon he turned to Gherib and said to him,
'I throw myself on thy mercy.' 'Become a Muslim,'
replied Gherib, 'and thou shalt be safe from the Ghoul
and from the vengeance of the Living [God] who ceaseth
not' So Jemek professed Islam with heart and tongue
and Gherib commanded his bonds to be loosed. Then he
expounded the faith to his people and they all became
Muslims; after which Jemek returned to the city and
despatched thence meat and drink to the camp before
Babel, where they passed the night. On the morrow,
Gherib gave the signal for departure and they fared on
till they came to Meyya Farikin, which they found empty,
for its people had heard what had befallen Babel and had
fled to Cufa and told Agib. When the latter heard the
news, his gorge rose and he assembled his righting men
and bade them make ready to do battle with his brother's


87


host ; after which he numbered them and found them
thirty thousand horse and ten thousand foot. So he levied
other fifty thousand horse and foot and taking horse with
a mighty host, rode forward five days, till he came upon
his brother's army encamped before Mosul and pitched
his tent in face of theirs.

Then Gherib wrote a letter and said to his officers,
4 Which of you will carry this letter to Agib ? ' Whereupon
up sprang Sehim and said, ' O King of the age, I will carry
thy letter and bring thee back an answer/ So Gherib gave
him the letter and he repaired to the pavilion of Agib, who
bade admit him and said to him, ' Whence comest thou ? s
' From the King of the Arabs and the Persians/ answered
Sehim, 'son-in-law of Chosroes, King of the world, who
sendeth thee a letter ; so do thou return him an answer/
' Give me the letter,' said Agib. So Sehim gave him the
letter and he tore it open and read as follows: 'In the
name of God the Compassionate, the Merciful ! Peace be
on Abraham the Friend ! As soon as this letter comes to
thy hands, do thou confess the unity of the Bountiful
King, Causer of causes and Mover of the clouds, and leave
worshipping idols. If thou do this thing, thou art my
brother and ruler over us and I will pardon thee the deaths
of my father and mother, nor will I reproach thee with
what thou hast done. But if thou obey not my com-
mandment, behold, I will hasten to thee and cut off thy
head and lay waste thy dominions. Verily, I give thee
good counsel, and peace be on those who follow in the
way of righteousness and obey the Most High King ! '

When Agib read these words and knew the threat they
contained, his eyes sank into his head and he gnashed
his teeth for rage. Then he tore the letter in pieces and
threw it away, which vexed Sehim and he cried out upon
Agib, saying, 'God wither thy hand for that thou hast
done ! ' With this Agib cried out to his men, saying,


88


4 Seize yonder dog and cut him in pieces with your swords.'
So they ran at Sehim ; but he drew his sword and fell
upon them and killed more than fifty of them ; after which
he cut his way out and won back, covered with blood, to
Gherib, who said, ' What is this, O Sehim ? ' And he told
him what had passed, whereat he grew livid for rage and
crying, ' God is most great ! ' bade the drums beat to battle.
So the fighting-men donned their hauberks and coats of
strait-woven mail and girt themselves with their swords;
the footmen drew out in battle-array, whilst the horsemen
mounted and set their long lances in the rest and the
champions pricked into the field. Agib and his men also
took horse and the two hosts charged down upon each
other. Then ruled the Judge of Battle, in whose ordinance
is no unright, for a seal is on his lips and he speaketh not,
Iffgfjt and the blood ran down in streams and laced the earth
taxbut with curious broidery ; heads grew gray [for terror] and
the battle raged ever hotter and fiercer. Feet slipped and
the valiant stood firm and pushed forward, whilst the faint-
heart turned and fled, nor did they leave fighting till the
day waned and the night came with the darkness. Then
the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart
and returned to their tents, where they passed the night.

Next morning, as soon as it was day, the drums beat
to battle, and the warriors donned their harness of war
and girt on their fair swords and mounting their stout
horses, couched their brown lances and cried out 3 saying,
* Let there be no budging to-day ! ' And the two hosts
drew out in battle-array, like the swollen sea. The first to
open the chapter of war was Sehim, who spurred his charger
between the two hosts and played with swords and spears
and plied all manner of martial exercises, till the choicest
wits were confounded. Then he cried out, saying, 'Who
is for fighting? Who is for jousting? Let no sluggard
or weakling come out ! 5 Whereupon there pricked out


89


to him a horseman of the infidels, as he were a flame of
fire ; but it was not long before Sehim pierced him with
his lance and overthrew him. Then a second came forth
and he slew him also, and a third and he rent him in
sunder, and a fourth, and he did him to death ; nor did
they leave to come out to him and he to slay them, till
he had done to death two hundred fighting-men. Then
Agib cried to his men to charge, and the two hosts met
with a mighty shock and great was the clash of arms and
the roar of the battle. The shining swords rang out
and the blood ran in streams and men's skulls were as
shoes to the horses' feet, nor did they cease from sore
smiting till the day waned and the night came with the
darkness, when they drew apart and returning to their
tents, passed the night there.

As soon as it was day, the two hosts, mounted and
sought the field ; and the Muslims looked for Gherib to
mount and ride behind the standards as was his wont,
but he came not. So Sehim sent a servant to his brother's
pavilion, who, finding him not, questioned the tent-
keepers, but they answered, 'We know nothing of him.'
Whereat he was greatly concerned and went forth and
told the troops, who refused to give battle, saying, 'If
Gherib be absent from us, his enemy will destroy us.'
Now there was for Gherib's absence a cause that we will
set out in due order, and it was thus. When Agib re-
turned to his camp on the preceding night, he called one
of his officers by name Siyyar and said to him, * O Siyyar,
I have kept thee in reserve for a day like this ; and now
I bid thee go to Gherib's camp and show thy skill by
bringing Gherib himself to me.' And Siyyar said, 'I
hear and obey.' So he repaired to the enemy's camp and
stealing into Gherib's pavilion, in the darkness of the
night, when all the men had gone to rest, passed himself
off for a servant and stood to serve Gherib, who presently,


90


being athirst, called to him for water. So he brought
him a flagon of water, drugged with henbane, whereof no
sooner had Gherib drunk, than he fell down head fore-
most; whereupon Siyyar wrapped him in his cloak and
carrying him to Agib's tent, threw him down at his feet.
Quoth Agib, 'O Siyyar, what is this?' 'This is thy
brother Gherib,' answered he ; whereat Agib rejoiced and
said, * The blessing of the idols light upon thee ! Loose
him and wake him.'

So they made him smell to vinegar and he came to
himself and opened his eyes ; then, finding himself bound
and in a tent other than his own, said, ' There is no power
and no virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme ! '
Then Agib cried out at him, saying, 'O dog, dost thou
draw on me and seek to slay me and take on me thy wreak
of thy father and mother? This very day I will send thee
to them and rid the world of thee.' ' O dog of the infidels,'
replied Gherib, 'thou shalt see against whom the wheels
of fate shall revolve and who shall be overthrown of the
Almighty King, Who knoweth what is in the hearts and
Who shall leave thee in hell, tormented and confounded !
Have pity on thyself and say with me, " There is no god
but God and Abraham is the Friend of God ! " ' When Agib
heard Gherib's words, he puffed and snorted and railed
at his god of stone and called for the headsman and the
carpet of blood ; but his vizier, who was at heart a Muslim,
though outwardly an infidel, rose and kissing the earth
before him, said, 'O King, deal not hastily, but wait till
we know the conquered from the conqueror. If we prove
the victors, we shall be free to kill him, and if we be beaten,
his being alive in our hands will be a strength to us.' And
the Amirs said, 1 The vizier says sooth.' So Agib bade lay
4 Gherib in irons and chain him up in his own tent and
appointed a thousand stout warriors to guard him.

Meanwhile Gherib's host, when they awoke and found


9i


not their chief, were as sheep without a shepherd ; but
Saadan the Ghoul cried out to them, saying, ' O folk, don
your harness and trust to your Lord to defend you 1 ' So
the Arabs and the Persians donned their hauberks of iron
and their strait-knit shirts of mail and mounting their
horses, sallied forth to the field, with the chiefs and the
ensigns in the van. Then pricked out the Ghoul of the
Mountain, with a mace on his shoulder, two hundred
pounds in weight, and advanced and retreated, saying,
' Ho, worshippers of idols, come ye out to-day, for it is a
day of battle ! Whoso knoweth me hath enough of my
mischief and whoso knoweth me not, I will make myself
known to him. I am Saadan, servant of King Gherib,
Who is for jousting? Who is for fighting? Let no faint-
heart or weakling come forth to me to-day.' And there
came forth to him a champion of the infidels, as he were a
flame of fire, and drove at him, but Saadan met him and
dealt him a blow with his mace, which beat in his ribs
and cast him lifeless to the earth. Then he called out to
his sons and slaves, saying, ' Light the fire, and whoso falls
of the infidels, do ye roast him well with fire and bring
him to me, that I may make the morning meal of him.'
So they kindled a fire amiddleward the field and laid the
slain man therein, till he was cooked, when they brought
him to Saadan, who gnawed his flesh and crunched his
bones.

When the infidels saw this, they were sore affrighted,
but Agib cried out to his men, saying, ' Out on you ! Fall
upon him and cut him in pieces with your swords I ' So
twenty thousand men ran at Saadan, whilst the footmen
circled round him and rained darts and arrows upon him,
so that he was wounded in four-and-twenty places and his
blood ran down upon the earth, and he was alone. Then
the host of the Muslims drove at the idolaters, calling for
help upon the Lord of the Worlds, and they ceased not


92


from the battle till the day came to an end, when they
drew apart. But the infidels had made Saadan prisoner,
as he were a drunken man for loss of blood ; and they
bound him fast and set him by Gherib. When the latter
saw the Ghoul a prisoner, he said, ' There is no force and
no virtue but in God the Most High, the Supreme ! O
Saadan, what is this ? ' 'O my lord,' answered Saadan,
' it is God (exalted and glorified be He !) Who ordaineth
misfortune and deliverance, and needs must this and that
betide.' And Gherib said, 4 Thou sayst sooth, O Saadan 1 '
But Agib and his host passed the night in joy, and he said
to his men, ' To-morrow, we will fall upon the Muslims
and leave not one of them alive.'

Meanwhile, the Muslims passed the night, dejected and
weeping for their King and for Saadan ; but Sehim said to
them, ' O folk, be not concerned ; for the relief of God the
Most High is near.' Then he waited till midnight, when
he disguised himself in the habit of a tent-keeper and
repairing to Agib's camp, made his way between the tents,
till he came to the King's pavilion, where he saw him
seated on his throne, in the midst of his princes. So he
entered and going up to the candles that burnt in the tent,
snuffed them and sprinkled powdered henbane on the wicks ;
after which he withdrew and waited without the tent, till
the smoke of the burning henbane reached Agib and his
princes and they fell to the earth like dead men. Then
he left them and went to the prison-tent, where he found
Gherib and Saadan, guarded by a thousand men, who were
drowsed with sleep. So he cried out at the guards, saying,
' Out on you ! Sleep not ; but watch your prisoners and
light the cressets.'

Then he filled s cresset with firewood, on which he
strewed henbane, and lighting it, went round about the
tent with it, till the smoke of the henbane entered the
nostrils of the guards, and they all fell asleep ; when he


93


entered the tent and finding Gherib and Saadan insensible
for the smoke of the henbane, which had been wafted
in upon them, aroused them by making them smell to
a sponge full of vinegar he had with him. Then he
loosed their bonds, and when they saw him, they blessed
him and rejoiced in him. Then they went forth and took
all the guards' arms, and Sehim bade them go to their
own camp; after which he re-entered Agio's camp, and
wrapping him in his cloak, lifted him up and made for
the Muslim camp. And the Merciful Lord protected
him, so that he reached Gherib's tent in safety and un-
rolled the mantle before him. Gherib looked and seeing
Agib bound, cried out, ' God is Most Great ! He giveth
aid and victory I ' And he blessed Sehim and bade him
arouse Agib. So he made him smell to vinegar, mixed
with frankincense, and he opened his eyes and finding
himself bound and shackled, hung down his head. ' O
accursed one,' quoth Sehim, 'lift thy headl* So he
raised his eyes and found himself amongst Arabs and
Persians and saw his brother seated on the throne of his
state and the place of his power, wherefore he was silent
and spake not. Then Gherib cried out and said, 'Strip
me this dog ! ' So they stripped him and beat him with
whips, till his body was weakened and his pride subdued,
after which Gherib set over him a guard of a hundred
cavaliers.

Presently, they heard shouts of ' There is no god but
God ! ' and 4 God is Most Great 1 ' from the infidel camp.
Now the reason of this was that King Damigh, Gherib's
uncle, had set out from El Jezireh, with twenty thousand
horse, ten days after his nephew, and on nearing the field
of battle, had despatched one of his riders to get news.
The scout was absent a whole day s after which he returned
and told Damigh all that had passed. So he waited till
the night, when he fell upon the infidels, crying out, i God


94


is Most Great ! ' and put them to the edge of the sword
When Gherib heard the crying aforesaid, he said to Sehim,
' Go and find out the cause of these shouts.' So Sehim
repaired to the field of battle and questioned the camp
followers, who told him that King Damigh had come up
with twenty thousand men and fallen upon the idolaters
by night, saying, ' By the virtue of Abraham the friend,
I will not forsake my brother's son, but will do a brave
man's part and beat back the infidels and please the
Omnipotent King ! '

So Sehim returned and told Gherib, who cried out to his
men, saying, ' Don your arms and mount your horses and
let us succour my uncle ! ' So they mounted and fell upon
the infidels with the sharp sword. By the morning, they
had killed nigh fifty thousand of them and made other
thirty thousand prisoners, and the rest of Agib's army
dispersed over the length and breadth of the land. Then
the Muslims returned in triumph and Gherib rode out to
meet his uncle, whom he saluted and thanked for his help,
Quoth Damigh, ' I wonder if that dog Agib fell in this day's
battle.' ' O uncle,' replied Gherib, ' have no care for him ;
know that he is with me in chains.' When Damigh heard
this, he rejoiced mightily and the two kings dismounted
and entered the pavilion, but found no Agib there ; where-
upon Gherib exclaimed, ' O glory of Abraham the Friend !
What an evil end is this to a glorious day ! ' and he cried
out to the tent-keepers, saying, ' Out on you ! Where is
my enemy ? ' Quoth they, ' When thou mountedst and we
went with thee, thou didst not bid us guard him ; ' and
Gherib exclaimed, ' There is no power and no virtue but
in God the Most High, the Supreme ! ' But Damigh said
to him, 4 Hasten not nor be concerned, for where can he
go, and we in pursuit of him ? '

Now the manner of Agib's escape was on this wise. His
man Siyyar, being in the camp in disguise s saw Gherib


95


mount and ride forth, leaving Agib unguarded, and could
hardly credit his eyes ; so he waited awhile and presently
crept to the tent and taking Agib, who was senseless for
the pain of the beating, on his back, made off with him
into the open country and fared on at the top of his speed
all that night and next day, till he came to a spring of
water, under an apple-tree. There he set Agib down and
washed his face, whereupon he opened his eyes and seeing
Siyyar, said to him, ' O Siyyar, carry me to Cufa, that I may
recover there and levy horsemen and soldiers, wherewith
to overcome mine enemy : and know, O Siyyar, that I am
anhungred.' So Siyyar went out to the desert and caught
an ostrich-poult and brought it to his lord. Then he
gathered firewood and striking a light, kindled a fire, by
which he roasted the bird and fed Agib with its flesh and
gave him to drink of the water of the spring, till his
strength returned to him ; after which he went to one of
the Bedouin encampments, and stealing a horse thence,
mounted Agib upon it and journeyed on with him till they
drew near the city of Cufa. The governor of the city came
out to meet and salute the King, whom he found weak with
the beating his brother had inflicted on him ; and Agib
entered the city and calling his physicians, bade them heal
him in less than than ten days' time. 1 We hear and obey/
answered they and tended him till he became whole of
the sickness that was upon him and of the beating. Then
he commanded his viziers to write letters to all his vassal^
and he wrote one-and-twenty letters and despatched them
to the different governors, who assembled their troops and tWtgfit
set out for Cufa by forced marches. tlCXU.

Meanwhile, Gherib, being troubled for Agib's escape, de-
spatched a thousand horse in quest of him, who dispersed
on all sides and sought him a day and a night, but found
no trace of him ; so they returned and told Gherib. who
called for his brother Sehim, but found him not ; whereat


96


he was sore concerned, fearing for him from the vicissitudes
of fortune. However, presently, Sehim entered and kissed
the earth before Gherib, who, rose, when he saw him, and
said, 'Where hast thou been, O Sehim?' 'O King,'
answered he, ' I have been to Cufa and find that the dog
Agib hath made his way thither and is cured of his wounds.
Moreover, he hath written letters to his vassals, who have
brought him troops.' When Gherib heard this, he gave
command to depart ; so they struck the tents and marched
for Cufa. When they came in sight of the city, they found
it compassed about with a host like the swollen ocean,
having neither beginning nor end. So Gherib encamped
with his troops in face of the infidels and set up his
standards, and the dark fell down upon the two hosts,
whereupon they lighted fires and kept watch till daybreak.
Then Gherib rose and making the ablution, prayed two
inclinations, according to the rite ' of our father Abraham ;
after which he commanded the drums to sound the point
of war. Accordingly, the drums beat to battle and the
standards waved, whilst the fighting-men armed and
mounted and sought the lists.

The first to open the chapter of war was King Damigh,
who spurred his charger between the two armies and dis-
played himself and played with swords and spears, till
both hosts were confounded and marvelled at him ; after
which he cried out, saying, ' Who is for jousting ? Let no
sluggard or weakling come out to me ; for I am King
Damigh, brother of King Kundemir.' Then there came
forth a horseman of the infidels, as he were a flame of
fire, and drove at Damigh, without word said ; but the
King received him with a lance-thrust in the breast, that
the point issued from between his shoulders and God
hurried his soul to the fire, and ill was the abiding-place
[to which he went]. Then came forth a second and he
slew him also, and a third, and they ceased not to come


97


out to him and he to slay them, till he had made an end
of six-and-seventy fighting-men.

Therewith the infidels hung back and would not en-
counter him ; but Agib cried out to his men and said, ' Out
on you, O folk ! If ye all go forth against him, one after
another, he will not leave one of you, sitting or standing.
Charge on them, all at once, and sweep the earth clean of
them and make their heads a pavement for your horses'
hoofs ! ' So they waved the awe-striking standard and host
fell upon host ; the blood rained in streams upon the earth
and the Judge of battle ruled, in whose ordinance is no
unright. The valiant stood firm on his feet in the stead
of war, whilst the faint-heart gave back and fled, thinking
the day would never come to an end nor the night draw
the curtains of the dusk ; and they ceased not to battle
and smite with swords, till the day waned and the night
darkened with the shadows. Then the drum's of the in-
fidels beat the retreat, but Gherib, refusing to stay his
arms, drove at the idolaters, and the believers in the unity
of God followed him. How many heads and hands they
sundered, how many necks and sinews they shore, how
many knees and spines they crushed and how many grown
men and youths they did to death ! With the first peep of
dawn the infidels broke and fled, and the Muslims followed
them till noon and took over twenty thousand of them,
whom they brought back bound.

Then Gherib sat down before the gate of Cufa and
commanded a herald to proclaim pardon and safety to all
who should leave the worship of idols and acknowledge
the One All-knowing God, the Creator of mankind and of
light and darkness. So proclamation was made as he bade
in the streets of Cufa, and all that were therein embraced
the true faith, great and small. Moreover, they all issued
forth and made good their submission before King Gherib,
who rejoiced in them with an exceeding joy and his breast

VOL. VI. |


9 8


expanded and he was glad. Then he enquired of Merdas
and his daughter Mehdiyeh, and being told that he had
taken up his abode behind the Red Mountain, called Sehim
and said to him, ' Find out for me what is come of thy
father. 5 Sehim tarried not, but mounting, set his brown
spear in the rest and fared on till he reached the Red
Mountain, where he sought for his father, but found no
trace of him nor of his tribe ; but in their stead he saw an
elder of the Arabs, a very old man, broken with excess of
years, and asked him of the folk and whither they were
gone. 'Q my son,' replied he, 'when Merdas heard of
Gherib's descent upon Cufa, he was smitten with great fear
and taking his daughter, set out with his slaves, male and
female, and all his tribe, into the deserts, and I know not
whither he is gone.' So Sehim returned to Gherib and
told him what he had learnt, whereat he was greatly con-
cerned. Then he sat down on his father's throne and
opening his treasuries, distributed largesse to his braves.
And he took up his abode in Cufa and sent out spies, to get
news of Agib. Moreover, he summoned the grandees of
the realm, who came and did him homage ; as also did the
townsfolk, and he bestowed on them sumptuous dresses of
honour and commended the people to their care.
!Wfg?)t ^ ne ^ a y» ^ e went out t0 hunt, with a hundred horse,
Ijjxlff, and fared on till he came to a valley, abounding in trees
and fruits and streams and birds. It was a pasturing-
place for antelopes and gazelles, delightsome to the spirit,
and the fragrance of its flowers brought repose from the
languor of strife. It was a brilliant day ; so they encamped
in the valley and passed the night there. On the morrow,
Gherib made the ablution and prayed the morning prayers,
offering up praise and thanks to God the Most High ;
when, behold, there arose a great clamour and tumult in
the meadows, and he bade Sehim go and see what was the
matter. So Sehim mounted and rode till he saw horsemen


99


carrying off women and children, captive and crying out,
and plundered goods and haltered horses ; whereupon he
questioned the shepherds and they said, * This is the harem
of Merdas, Chief of the Benou Kehtan, and his goods and
those of his tribe ; for yesterday Jemrcan slew Merdas and
made prize of his women and children and household stuff
and those of his tribe. It is his wont to go a-raidirig and
waylay travellers, and he is a mighty man of war ; neither
Arabs nor kings can avail against him and he is the scourge
of the land.'

When Sehim heard this, he returned to Gherib and told
him the case, wherefore fire was added to his fire and his
blood boiled to avenge himself and wipe out his reproach.
So he rode after the robbers, till he overtook them and
fell upon them, crying out and saying, ' God is Most Great !
Down with the covetous oppressors, who deny Him!'
And he slew in one onset one-and-twenty fighting men.
Then he halted in mid-field, with no coward's heart, and
cried out, saying, 1 Where is Jemrcan ? Let him come out
to me, that I may make him quaff the cup of humiliation
and rid the earth of him ! ' Hardly had he made an end
of speaking, when out came Jemrcan, — a huge tall Amale-
kite, as he were a calamity of calamities or a piece of a
mountain, cased in steel, and bearing a passing heavy
club of China steel, wherewith if he smote a mountain, he
crushed it, — and drove at Gherib like a fierce tyrant, with-
out speech or salutation. Gherib met him like a hungry
lion, and the brigand aimed a blow at his head with his
club ; but he evaded it and the club smote the earth and
sank therein half a cubit deep. Then Gherib took his
mace and smiting Jemrcan on the wrist, crushed his
fingers and the club dropped from his grasp ; whereupon
Gherib bent down from his saddle and snatching it up,
swiftlier than the blinding lightning, smote him therewith
full on the ribs, and he fell to the earth like a huge palm-


I'OO


tree. So Sehim took him and binding him, haled him off
with a rope, and Gherib's men fell on those of Jemrcan
and slew fifty of them and put the rest to flight ; nor did
they draw bridle till they reached their camp and raised
their voices in clamour ; whereupon all who were in the
stronghold came out to meet, them and they told them what
had passed, and when they heard that their chief was a
prisoner, they set out for the valley, vying with each other
in their haste to deliver him.

Meanwhile King Gherib dismounted and called for
Jemrcan, who humbled himself before him, saying, 'I
throw myself on thy mercy, O champion of the age!'
' O dog of the Arabs,' replied Gherib, 4 dost thou waylay the
servants of God the Most High and fearest not the Lord
of the Worlds?' 'O my lord,' said Jemrcan, 'and who
is the Lord of the Worlds?' '0,dog/ rejoined Gherib,
' and what calamity dost thou worship ? ' ' O my lord,'
answered the brigand, * I worship a god made of dates
kneaded with butter and honey, and whiles I eat him and
make me another.' When Gherib heard this, he laughed,
till he fell backward, and said, ' O unhappy wretch, there
is none worship-worth save God the Most High, who
created thee and all things and provideth all creatures,
from whom nothing is hidden and who hath power over
all.' Quoth Jemrcan, 'And where is this mighty god,
that I may worship him ? ' ' O fellow,' answered Gherib,
' know that this god's name is Allah, and it is He who
created the heavens and the earth and maketh the trees
to grow and the waters to run. He created beasts and
birds and Paradise and Hell-fire and secludeth Himself
from all eyes, seeing and being seen of none. Extolled
be His perfection ! There is no god but He ! ' When
Jemrcan heard these words, the ears of his heart were
opened and his skin shuddered and he said, ' O my lord,
what shall I say that I may become one of you and that


IOI

this mighty Lord may accept of me?' 'Say,' replied
Gherib, ' "There is no god but God and Abraham the Friend
is the Apostle of God ! " ' So he repeated the profession of
the faith and was written of the people of felicity. Then
said Gherib, 'Hast thou tasted the sweetness of Islam?'
'Yes,' answered the other; and Gherib said, 'Loose his
bonds.' So they unbound him and he kissed the earth
before Gherib and his feet

At this moment they espied a great cloud of dust that !bffgf)t
spread tilled it walled the world, and Gherib bade Sehim go uXxUli
and see what it was. So he went off, like a bird in full
flight, and presently returning, said, 'O King of the age,
it is the Benou Aamir, the comrades of Jemrcan.' Where-
upon quoth Gherib to the latter, ' Ride out to thy people
and expound to them Islam, and if they profess, they shall
be saved ; but, if they refuse, we will put them to the
sword.' So Jemrcan mounted and spurring towards his
tribesmeiij cried out to them ; and they knew him and dis-
mounting, came up to him on foot and said, ' We rejoice
in thy safety, O our lord 1 ' ' O folk,' said he, ' whoso
obeyeth me shall be saved ; but whoso gainsayeth me, I
will cut him in twain with this sabre.' And they made
answer, saying, ' Command us what thou wilt, for we will
not gainsay thy commandment.' Quoth he, 'Then say
with me, " There is no god but God and Abraham is the
Friend of God ! " ' ' O our lord,' asked they, * whence hast
thou these words ? ' And he told them what had befallen
him, adding, ' O folk, know ye not that I am your chief and
foremost among you in the field and stead of war, and yet
a single man took me prisoner and made me quaff the cup
of humiliation ? '

When they heard his speech s they spoke the word of
Unity, and Jemrcan led them to Gherib, at whose hands
they affirmed their profession and wished him glory and
victory, after they had kissed the earth before him. Gherib


102


rejoiced in them and bade them return to their people and
expound Islam to them ; but they said, 'O our lord, we
will never leave thee, whilst we live ; but we will go and
fetch our families and return to thee.' And Gherib said,
' Go, and join me at the city of Cufa.' So Jemrcan and his
comrades returned to their camp and expounded Islam to
their women and children, who all to a soul embraced
the true faith, after which they dismantled their houses
and struck their tents and set out for Cufa, driving before
them their horses and sheep and camels.

Meanwhile Gherib returned to Cufa, where the horsemen
met him and carried him into the city in state. He entered
his palace and sat down on his throne, with his officers
standing on either hand. Then the spies entered and
informed him that his brother Agib had made his escape
and taken refuge with Julned ben Kerker, the lord of the
city of Oman and land of Yemen ; whereupon Gherib bade
his troops make ready to set out in three days' time. Then
he expounded Islam to the thirty thousand men he had
taken in the first battle and exhorted them to profess and
take service with him. Twenty thousand embraced the
faith, but the rest refused and he slew them. Then came
Jemrcan and his tribe and kissed the earth before Gherib,
who bestowed on him a splendid dress of honour and made
him captain of his vanguard, saying, ' O Jemrcan, mount
with the chiefs of thy kinsmen and twenty thousand horse
and fare on before us to the land of Julned ben Kerker.'
8 1 hear and obey,' answered Jemrcan and set forward with
his men, leaving the women and children of the tribe in
Cufa.

Then Gherib passed in review the harem of Merdas and
his eye lit upon Mehdiyeh, who was among the women,
whereupon he fell down in a swoon. They sprinkled rose-
water on his face, till he came to himself, when he
embraced Mehdiyeh and carried her into a privy chamber^


103

where he sat with her ; and they lay together that night
without lewdness. Next morning, he went out and sitting
down on the throne of his kingship, invested his uncle
Damigh with a dress of honour and appointed him his
viceroy over all Irak, commending Mehdiyeh to his care,
till he should return from his expedition against Agib ;
after which he set out for the land of Yemen with twenty
thousand horse and ten thousand foot.

Now, when Agib and his defeated army came in sight
of Oman, King Julned saw the dust of their approach and
sent scouts to find out its meaning, who returned and told
him that this was the dust of Agib, lord of Irak. And
Julned wondered at his coming and said to his officersj
'Go forth and meet him.' So they went forth and met
him and pitched tents for him at the gate of the city ; and
Agib sent in to julned, weeping and mournful-hearted.
Now Julned's wife was the daughter of Agib's father's
brother, and he had children by her. So, when he saw
his kinsman in this plight, he asked what ailed him and
Agib told him all that had befallen him, saying, ' O King,
Gherib comraandeth the folk to worship the Lord of the
Heavens and forbiddeth them from the service of idols
and other gods.' When Julned heard this, he was mightily
enraged and said, 1 By the virtue of the light-giving sun,
I will not leave one of thy brother's folk on life ! But
where didst thou leave them and how many men are
they?' 'I left them in Cufa/ answered Agib; 'and they
are fifty thousand horse/ Whereupon Julned called his
Vizier Jawamerd, saying, ' Take seventy thousand horse
and go to Cufa and bring me the Muslims alive, that
i may torture them with all manner of tortures.'

So Jawamerd departed with his host and fared on seven
days 5 journey towards Cufa, till he came to a valley
abounding in trees and streams and fruits, where he called tBffgflf
a halt and they rested till the middle of the night, when tscx!&»


104

the Vizier gave the signal for departure and mountings
rode on before them till hard upon daybreak. A little
before the dawn, he descended into a well-wooded valley,
whose flowers were fragrant and whose birds warbled on
the branches, as they swayed gracefully to and fro, and
Satan blew into his sides [and puffed him up with pride]
and he recited the following verses :

I put my battle-harness on and don my dreadful arms, And here and

there on every side I drive through the mellay ;
I and my troops, we plunge into the seething sea of war And of my

prowess and my might the captives lead away.
The doughtiest horsemen of the world do know me for a fear, A scourge

and terror to my foes, my kinsmen's help and stay.
JLo, upon Gherib will I seize and drag him forth in chains ! Then, with

a joyful heart and proud, I'll homeward wend my way.

Hardly had he made an end of his verses when there
came out upon him from among the trees a horseman
of noble presence, clad in complete steel, who cried out to
him, saying, ' Stand, O brigand of the Arabs 1 Put off thy
clothes and lay down thine arms and dismount and be-
gone ! ' When Jawamerd heard this, the light in his eyes
became darkness and he drew his sabre and drove at
Jemrcan, [for he it was,] saying, £ thief of the Arabs,
wilt thou play the highwayman with me, who am captain
of the host of Julned ben Kerker and am come to bring
Gherib and his men bound ? ' When Jemrcan heard these
words, he said, 4 How grateful is this to my heart ! ' And
made at Jawamerd, reciting the following verses :

I am the cavalier renowned for valour in the field : The foemen every-
where do dread my sabre and my spear.

I'm Jemrcan, whose whole delight is in the press of war, And all the
champions of the world my lance-thrust know and fear.

Gherib my lord and sultan is, the high-priest of my faith, That is the
lion of the fight, when hosts to strife draw near S

Devout and full of pious dread, a doughty chief is he j Midmost the
tented field he slays his enemies like deer.

Despite the gods of unbelief, verses he chants and bids The folk to
Abraham his faith s with clarion voice and clear.


10$


Now Jemrcan had fared on with his men ten days' journey
from Cufa and called a halt on the eleventh day till mid-
night, when he bade depart and rode on in advance, till
he came to the valley aforesaid and heard Jawamerd re-
citing his braggart verses. So he drove at him, as he were
a ravening lion, and smiting him with his sword, clove
him in twain and waited till his captains came up, when
he told them what had passed and said to them, 4 Let each
of you take five thousand men and disperse round about
the valley, whilst I and the Benou Aamir fall upon the
enemy's van, crying out and saying, " God is Most Great ! "
When ye hear our shouts, do ye charge them with the same
cry and smite them with the sword.' ' We hear and obey,'
answered they and turning back to their men, spread them-
selves about the sides of the valley in the fore-dawn twilight.

Presently up came the army of Yemen, like a flock of
sheep, filling mountain and plain, and Jemrcan and the
Benou Aamir fell upon them, shouting, 'God is Most Great! 5
Whereupon the Muslims in ambush in the valley cried out
in answer and the hills and mountains echoed the cry and
all things, green and dry, answered, saying, ' God is Most
Great ! He giveth aid and victory and forsaketh those
who deny Him ! ' And the infidels were confounded and
smote one another with the keen sabre, whilst the true
believers fell upon them like flames of fire and nothing
was seen but heads flying and blood spouting and faint-
hearts giving back in dismay. By the time they could see
each other's faces, two-thirds of the infidels had perished
and God hastened their souls to the fire and ill was the
abiding-place [to which they went]. The rest took to
flight and dispersed about the deserts, whilst the Muslims
pursued them, slaying and taking captive till midday, when
they returned in triumph with seven thousand prisoners;
and but six-and-twenty thousand of the infidels escaped
and the most of thern wounded.


ic6

Then the Muslims collected the arms and horses and
tents and baggage of the enemy and despatched them to
5Cfgf)t ^ufa with an escort of a thousand horse ; whilst Jemrcan
tolbe an d rest of his force dismounted and expounded Islam
to the prisoners, who made profession of the faith with
heart and tongue ; whereupon they released them and em-
braced them and rejoiced in them. Then Jemrcan made
his troops rest a day and a night and set out with the dawn,
intending for the city of Oman ; whilst the thousand horse
fared back to Cufa with the booty. When they reached
the city, they went in to Gherib and told him what had
passed, whereat he rejoiced and said to the Ghoul of the
Mountain, 'Take horse and follow Jemrcan with twenty
thousand men.' So Saadan and his sons mounted and set
out for Oman with twenty thousand horse.

Meanwhile, the remains of the .defeated army reached
Oman and went in to Julned, weeping and crying, ' Woe !'
and ' Ruin ! ' whereat he was amazed and said to them,
'What hath befallen you?" So they told him what had
happened and he said, ' Out on you ! How many men
were they ? ' ' O King,' answered they, 4 there were twenty
standards, under each a thousand men.' When Julned
heard this, he said, ' May the sun pour no blessing on
you ! Out on you ! Shall twenty thousand overcome you s
and you seventy thousand horse and Jawamerd equal to
three thousand in the open field ! ' Then, in the excess of
his rage and mortification, he drew his sword and cried
out to those who were present, saying, 'Fall on them!'
So the courtiers drew their swords upon the fugitives and
slew them to the last man and cast them to the dogs.
Then Julned cried out to his son (whose name was
Courejan and than whom there was no doughtier cavalier
in the army of his father, for he was wont to undertake
three thousand horse, single-handed), saying, ' Take a
hundred thousand horse and go to Irak and lay it waste


altogether.* So Courejan and his host made haste to
equip themselves and set out in battle array, with the
prince at their head, glorying in himself and reciting the
following verses :

I'm El Courejan, the first-born of renown S I vanquish the dwellers in
desert and town.

How many a champion I've slain with my sword 1 Like an os s to the

earth I have stricken him down.
How many a host have I scattered abroad And their heads made like

balls roll o'er desert and down S
Now for Irak I'm bound, for the enemies' land, Where my foes in the

sea of their blood I will drown.
I will lead away Gherib in chains with his chiefs, So their fate to the

wise for a warning be known !

They fared on twelve days' journey, till a great cloud of
dust arose before them and covered the horizon and the
country, and Courejan sent out scouts to reconnoitre, who
returned and said to him, ' O King, this is the dust of the
Muslims.', Whereat he was glad and said, ' Did ye count
them ? ' And they answered, saying, ' W e counted the
standards, and they were twenty in number.' ' By my
faith/ quoth the prince, ' I will not send one man-at-arms
against them, but will go forth to them alone and strew
their heads under the hoofs of the horses ! '

Now this was the army of Jemrcan, who, espying the host
of the infidels and seeing them as the swollen sea, called
a halt ; so his troops pitched the tents and set up the
standards, calling upon the name of the All-wise Creator
of light and darkness, Lord of all creatures, who seeth and
is not seen, blessed and exalted be He ! There is no god
but He ! The infidels also halted and pitched their tents,
and Courejan said to them, 'Sleep upon your arms, for in
the last watch of the night we will mount and trample
yonder handful under our feet ! ' Now one of Jemrcan's
spies was standing by and heard what Courejan purposed ;
so he returned and told his chief, who said to his men,


io8

* Arm yourselves and as soon it is dark, bring me all the
camels and mules and hang all the bells and bangles and
rattles ye have about their necks.' And they had with
them more than twenty thousand camels and mules.

So they waited till the infidels were asleep, when
Jemrcan commanded them to mount, and they took
horse, committing themselves to God and seeking aid
of the Lord of the Worlds. Then said Jemrcan, ' Goad
the mules and camels with the points of your spears and
drive them to the infidels' camp.' They did as he bade
and the beasts rushed upon the enemy's camp, whilst the
bells and bangles and rattles jangled and the Muslims
followed at their heels, shouting, ' God is Most Great ! '
till all the hills and mountains resounded with the name
of the Most High God, to whom belong glory and majesty I
The cattle, hearing this terrible din, took fright and rushed

JsFfgfyt upon the tents and trampled the folk, as they lay asleep ;

talbt* whereupon the idolaters started up in confusion and
snatching up their arms, fell upon one another with smiting,
till the most part of them were slain.

When the day broke, they looked at each other and
found no Muslims slain, but saw them all on horseback,
armed ; wherefore they knew that this was a trick that had
been played them, and Courejan cried out to the remnant
of his folk, saying, ' O sons of whores, what we had a mind
to do with them, that have they done with us and their
craft hath gotten the better of ours.' And they were about
to charge, when, behold, a cloud of dust appeared and the
wind smote it, so that it rose and hung vaulted in the air
and there appeared beneath it the glint of helmets and
gleam of hauberks and splendid warriors, armed with tem-
pered swords and supple spears. When the infidels saw
this, they held back from the battle and each army sent out
scouts, to know the meaning of this dust, who returned with
the news that it was an army of Muslims.


109

Now this was the host of the Ghoul of the Mountain,
whom Gherib had despatched to Jemrcan's aid, and Saadan
himself rode in their van. So the two hosts of the true
believers joined company and rushing upon the infidels,
like a flame of fire, plied them with the keen sword and the
straight and quivering spear, whilst the day was darkened
and eyes blinded for the much dust. The valiant stood
fast and the coward fled and sought the deserts, whilst the
blood flowed like a tide over the earth ; nor did they cease
from the battle till the day departed and the night came
with the darkness. Then the Muslims drew apart from the
infidels and returned to their tents, where they ate and
slept, till the darkness fled and gave place to the smiling
morn ; when they prayed the morning-prayer and mounted
to battle.

Now, when Courejan found the most part of his men
wounded, for indeed two-thirds of their- number had
perished by sword and spear, he said to them, { To-morrow,
I will go forth into the open field and play the champion
in the stead of war.' So, as soon as the day broke and
the morning appeared with its light and shone, the two
hosts mounted and unsheathed their swords and couched
their brown lances and cried out lustily and drew out in
order of battle. The first to open the chapter of war was
Courejan, who cried out, saying, 'Let no weakling come
out to me to-day ! ' Whereupon there ran at him a captain
of the Benou Aamir and the two drove at each other
awhile, like two rams butting. Presently Courejan seized
the Muslim by his coat of arms and tearing him from his
saddle, threw him to the ground ; where the infidels laid
hands on him and bound him and bore him off to their
tents ; whilst Courejan wheeled about and curvetted and
offered battle, till another captain came out, whom also he
took prisoner ; nor did he leave to do thus till he had
made prize of seven captains before midday. Then Jemrcan


no


gave such a cry, that the whole field resounded thereto and
both armies heard it, and ran at Courejan with a heart on
fire with anger, reciting the following verses :

Harkye s I'm Jemrcan, the champion stout and wight 5 The terror of

my stroke is feared of every knight.
I take the strengths by storm and leave the fortress-walls To mourn the

loss of those that held them in their might.
Wherefore, O Courejan, quit thou the erring path | Tom from the

froward ways and tread the road of right ;
Confess to the one true God, who spread the heavens above, Who

made the streams to flow and hills to stand upright ;
For, if the slave embrace the true, the only faith, Hell's anguish shall

he 'scape and win to heaven's delight.

When Courejan heard these words, he puffed and snorted
and railed at. the sun and the moon and drove at Jemrcan,
repeating these verses :

I'm Courejan, the chief and champion of .the age ! Es Shera's 1 lions

fiee my shadow in affright !
I take the forts by storm and snare the beasts of prey, And all the

horsemen fear to meet me in the fight.
Wherefore, O Jemrcan, if thou believe me not, Up to the middle field

and try with me thy might S

Jemrcan met him with a stout heart and they hewed at
each other with swords and thrust with spears, till the
two hosts lamented for them and great was the clamour
between them : nor did they leave fighting till the time of
afternoon-prayer was passed and the day began to wane.
Then Jemrcan drove at Courejan and smiting him on the
breast with his mace, cast him to the ground, as he were
the trunk of a palm-tree ; and the Muslims bound him and
haled him away with ropes like a camel.

When the idolaters saw their prince captive, a blind fury
seized on them and they bore down upon the Muslims,
thinking to rescue him 5 but the Muslim champions met
them and left [many of] them prostrate on the earth s

1 Ms Shera s a mountainous tract in Arabia, infested with lions.


Ill

whilst the rest turned and sought safety in flight, with
the sword clanking at their backs. The Muslims pursued
them till they had scattered them over mountain and desert,
when they returned to the spoil, good luck to it for a spoil 1
great store was there of horses and tents and so forth.
Then Jemrcan went in to Courejan and expounded Islam
to him, threatening him with death, except he embraced
the faith ; but he refused ; so they cut off his head and
sticking it on a spear, fared on towards Oman.

Meanwhile, the survivors of the routed host returned to
Julned and made known to him the death of his son and
the destruction of his army, whereupon he cast his crown
to the earth and buffeting his face, till the blood spouted
from his nostrils, fell down in a swoon. They sprinkled
rose-water on his face, till he came to himself and cried
to his Vizier, saying, 'Write letters to all my governors
and bid them leave not a smiter with the sword nor a
thruster with the spear nor a bender of the bow, but bring
them all to me.' So he wrote letters and despatched them
by runners to the governors, who levied their power and
joined the King with an immense army, whose number
was ninescore thousand men. Then they made ready tents
and camels and swift horses and were about to depart,
when up came Jemrcan and Saadan the Ghoul, with
seventy thousand horse, as they were fierce lions, all clad
in complete steel ; which when Julned saw, he rejoiced
and said, ' By the virtue of the light-giving Sun, I will not
leave one of mine enemies alive, no, not one to carry the
news, and I will lay waste the land of Irak, that I may
take my wreak for my son, the havoc-making champion;
nor shall my fire be quenched ! '

Then he turned to Agib and said to him., S Q dog of
Irak, it was thou that broughtest this calamity on us!
But by the virtue of that which I worship, except I avenge
me of mine enemy, I will put thee to death after the


112


foulest fashion!' When Agib heard this, he was sore
troubled and blamed himself ; but he waited till nightfall,
when he took those who were left to him of his suite
apart from the camp and said to them, * O my kinsmen,
know that Julned and I are sore dismayed at the coming
of the Muslims, and I know that he will not avail to pro-
tect me from my brother nor from any other ; so meseems
we should do well to make our escape, whilst all men
sleep, and flee to King Yaarub ben Kehtan, for that he
hath more soldiers and is stronger of kingship.' They
fell in with his proposal and he bade them kindle fires
at the doors of their tents and set out under cover of the
night So they did his bidding and departing, by day-
break were far away.

As soon as it was morning, the drums beat a point of war,
and Julned mounted with two hundred and sixty thousand
fighting-men, clad cap-a-pie in hauberks and cuirasses and
strait-knit coats of mail, and drew out in order of battle.
Then Jemrcan and Saadan rode out with forty thousand
stalwart fighting-men, under each standard a thousand
cavaliers, doughty champions, foremost in the fight. The
two hosts drew out in battalia and bared their swords and
couched their limber lances, for the drinking of the cup of
death. The first to open the chapter of battle was Saadan,
as he were a mountain of flint or a Marid of the Jinn.
Then pricked out to him a champion of the infidels, and
he slew him and casting him to the earth, cried out to his
sons and servants, saying, ' Light the fire and roast me this
dead man.' They did as he bade and brought him the roast,
and he ate it and crunched the bones, whilst the infidels
stood looking on from afar; and they cried out, saying,
' O light- giving Sun ! ' and were affrighted at Saadan

Then Julned cried out to his men, saying, £ Slay me
yonder foul beast ! ' Whereupon another captain of bis
host drove at the Ghoul ; but he slew him, and he ceased


"3

not to slay horseman after horseman, till he had made an
end of thirty men. With this the vile infidels held back
and feared to face him, saying, 'Who shall cope with
Jinn and Ghouls ? ' But Julned cried out, saying, ' Let a
hundred horse charge him and bring him to me, alive or
dead.' So a hundred horse ran at Saadan with swords and
spears, and he met them with a heart firmer than flint,
proclaiming the unity of the Requiting King, whom no
one thing diverteth from another. Then he set on them,
crying, 4 God is Most Great !' and smote them with his
sword and made their heads fly. In one onset he slew of
them four-and-seventy and put the rest to flight.

Then Julned cried out to ten of his captains, having each
a thousand men under his hand, and said to them, ' Shoot
his horse with arrows, till it fall under him, and then lay
hands on him.' So ten thousand horse drove at Saadan,
who met them with a stout heart; and Jemrcan, seeing
this, bore down upon the infidels with his Muslims, crying
out, ' God is Most Great I ' Before they could win to the
Ghoul, the enemy had slain his horse and taken him
prisoner ; but they ceased not to charge the infidels,
though they were amongst them as a white patch on a IjCfgfjt
black bull, till the day grew dark [for dust] and eyes were OTXlfjfi
blinded, and the sharp sword clanged, whilst the valiant
stood firm and destruction overtook the faint-heart ; nor did
they stint from the mellay till the dark fell down, when they
drew apart, after there had been slain of the infidels men
without number.

Then Jemrcan and his men returned to their tents, in
great grief for Saadan, so that neither meat nor sleep was
sweet to them, and they counted their host and found that
less than a thousand of them had fallen. And Jemrcan
saidj 1 O folk s to-morrow I will go forth into the lists and
slay their champions and make prize of them and their
families and ransom Saadan therewith, if it please the
VOL. vi. §


H4


Requiting King, whom no one thing distracteth from
another ! ' Wherefore their hearts were comforted and they
separated to their tents, rejoicing.

Meanwhile, Julned entered his pavilion and sitting down
on his bed of estate, with his grandees about him, called
for Saadan and said to him, 4 O raging dog and least of the
Arabs and carrier of firewood, who was it slew my son
Courejan, the champion of the age, slayer of heroes and
caster down of warriors ? ' Quoth the Ghoul, 4 Jemrcan
slew him, captain cf the host of King Gherib, prince of
cavaliers, and I roasted and ate him, for I was anhungred.'
When Julned heard this, his eyes started from his head for
rage and he bade his swordbearer strike off Saadan's head.
So he came forward in that intent, but Saadan stretched
himself mightily and bursting his bonds, snatched the
sword from the headsman and cut off his head. Then he
made at Julned ; but he cast himself down from the throne
and fled; whilst Saadan fell on the bystanders and slew
twenty of the King's chief officers, and the rest fled.
Therewith great was the crying in the camp of the infidels
and the Ghoul sallied forth of the pavilion and falling upon
the troops, smote them with the sword, till they opened
and left a lane for him to pass ; nor did he cease to press
forward, cutting at them right and left, till he won free of
the tents and made for the Muslim camp. As soon as he
was gone, the infidels and their King returned to their
tents and Julned said to them, ' O folk, by the virtue of the
light-giving sun and by the darkness of the night and the
light of the day and the wandering stars, I thought not to
have escaped death this day ; for, had I fallen into yonder
fellow's hands, he had eaten me, as I were a grain of wheat
or a barley-corn,' 6 O King,' answered they, ' never saw we
any do the like of this Ghoul.' And he said. c To-morrow
do ye all don your arms and mount and trample them under
your horses' feet.'


ii5

Meanwhile the Muslims heard the shouts of the infidels
and said to each other, ' Haply, some succour hath reached
them ; 1 but, as they stood wondering, up came Saadan,
So they all rejoiced in him and gave him joy of his escape,
and the gladdest of them all was Jemrcan, who said to
them, ' To-morrow, I will show you my fashion and what
behoveth the like of me, for, by the virtue of Abraham the
Friend, I will slay them on the foulest wise and smite
them with the edge of the sword, till all who have under-
standing are confounded at them. But I mean to attack
[both] the right and left wings ; so, when ye see me drive
at the King under the standards, do ye charge resolutely
behind me, and with God is it to decree what shall
betide ! '

So the two hosts lay upon their arms till the day
broke and the sun appeared to sight, when they mounted
swiftlier than the twinkling of the eye. The raven of
ill-omen croaked and the two hosts drew out in battalia
and looked at each other with the evil eye. The first to
open the- chapter of war was Jemrcan, who wheeled and
curvetted and offered battle ; and Julned and his men
were about to charge, when, behold a cloud of dust arose
and spread till it covered the plains and obscured the
day. Then the four winds smote it and it dispersed and
there appeared beneath it cavaliers, black and white, and
princely champions 3 with keen swords and piercing lances,
and footmen who knew not fear, as they were lions. At
this sight both armies left fighting and sent out scouts,
who disappeared within the cloud of dust and returned
after awhile with the news that the approaching host was
one of Muslims, under the command of King Gherib.
When the Muslims heard of the coming of their King,
they rejoiced and spurring out to meet him, dismounted
and kissed the earth before him and saluted him, whilst MlgfJ!
he welcomed them and rejoiced in their safety^ Then tlCXltslit


II©


they escorted him to their camp and pitched pavilions for
him and set up standards; and Gherib sat down on his
couch of estate, with his grandees about him, and they
related to him all that had befallen.

Meanwhile, the infidels sought for Agib and finding him
not among them nor in their tents, told Julned of this,
whereat his gorge rose and he bit his fingers, saying, ' By
the light-giving sun, he is a perfidious dog and hath fled
into the deserts with his crew of rascals ! But nought save
hard fighting will serve us to repel these enemies ; so
fortify your resolves and harden your hearts and beware of
the Muslims.' And Gherib also said to the Muslims,
' Fortify your hearts and strengthen your courage and seek
aid of your Lord, beseeching Him to vouchsafe you the
victory over your enemies.' ' O King,' answered they,
4 thou shalt see what we will do in the field and the stead
of war.'

So the two hosts slept till the day arose with its light and
the sun shone out upon hill and plain, when Gherib prayed
two inclinations, after the rite of Abraham the Friend (on
whom be peace) and wrote a letter, which he despatched
by his brother Sehim to the King of the infidels. When
Sehim reached the enemies' camp, the guards asked him
what he wanted and he replied, 'I want your ruler.' Quoth
they, ' Wait till we consult him ; ' and he waited, whilst
they went in to their King and told him of the coming of
a messenger, and he said, 1 Bring him to me.' So they
brought Sehim before Julned, who said to him, ' Who hath
sent thee ? ' Quoth he, ' King • Gherib sends me, whom
God hath made ruler over the Arabs and Persians ; take
his letter and return an answer thereto.' So Julned took
the letter and opening it, read as follows : 6 In the name
of God the Compassionate, the Merciful, the Immemorial
Lord, the Supreme, the One, the All-knowing, the Lord of
Noah and Salih and Houd and Abraham and of all things I


H7


Peace be on him who followeth in the way of righteousness
and feareth the issues of frowardness, who obeyeth the
Almighty King and preferreth the next world to the present !

Julned, none is worthy of worship save God alone, the
One, the Victorious, Creator of night and day and the re-
volving sphere, who sendeth the holy prophets and maketh
the streams to flow and the trees to grow, who vaulted the
heavens and spread out the earth like a carpet and feedeth
the birds in their nests and the wild beasts in the deserts - }
for He is the All-powerful God, the Forgiving, the Long-
suffering, the Protector, whom no eye comprehendeth and
who maketh the night to return upon the day, He who sent
down the apostles and the Scripture. Know, O Julned,
that there is no faith but the faith of Abraham the Friend ;
so do thou embrace the faith of submission and send me
the dog Agib, that I may take my wreak of my father and
mother. So shalt thou be saved from the sharp sword in
this world and from the fiery torment in the world to come.
But, if thou refuse, look for destruction and the wasting of
thy realm and the cutting off of thy traces.'

When Julned had read this letter, he said to Sehim,
* Tell thy Lord that Agib hath fled, he and his people, and

1 know not whither he is gone ; but, as for Julned, he
will not forswear his faith, and to-morrow, there shall be
battle between us and the Sun shall give us the victory.'
So Sehim returned to his brother with this answer and
on the morrow the Muslims donned their arms and be-
strode their stout horses, calling aloud on the name of
the All- conquering King, Creator of bodies and souls,
and magnifying Him. The drums beat to battle, till the
earth trembled, and all the lordly warriors and doughty
champions sought the field.

The first to open the chapter of battle was Jemrcan, who
spurred his charger into the mid-field and played with
sword and javelin, till the understanding were amazed j


n8

after which he cried out, saying, 1 Who is for jousting, who
is for fighting? Let no sluggard nor weakling come out
to me to-day! I am he who slew Courejan ben Julned;
who will come forth to avenge him ? ' When Julned heard
the name of his son/ he cried out to his men, saying, 'O
sons of whores, bring me yonder horseman who slew my
son, that I may eat his flesh and drink his blood.' So
a hundred fighting men ran at Jemrcan ; but he slew the
most part of them and put their chief to flight; which
when Julned saw, he cried out to his men, saying, £ Charge
upon him, all at once.' So the two hosts drove at one
another and met in the mid-field, like two seas clashing
together. The Yemen sword and spear wrought havoc
and breasts and bellies were cloven, whilst the two armies
saw the angel of death face to face and the dust of the
battle rose up to the confines of the sky. Ears were deaf
and tongues mute and death came on from every side,
whilst the valiant stood fast and the faint-heart turned to
flee ; and they ceased not from the battle till ended day,
when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew
apart and returned, each to its tent.
3Cf(rf)t Then Gherib sat down on the throne of his kingship and
SKOCuX. the place of his dominion, whilst his chief officers ranged
themselves about him, and said, 'I am sore troubled for
the flight of the dog Agib and I know not whither he is
gone. Except I overtake him and take my wreak of him,
I shall die of despite.' Whereupon Sehim came forward
and kissing the earth before him, said, ' O King, I will go
to the army of the infidels and find out what is come of
the perfidious dog Agib.' 4 Go,' answered Gherib, ' and
learn the truth regarding the hog,' So Sehim disguised
himself in the habit of the infidels and became as he were
of them ; then, making for the enemy's camp, he found
them all asleep, drunken with war and battle, and only the
guards awake. Presently he came to the King's pavilion f


H9


where he found julned asleep and unattended ; so he made
him smell to powdered henbane, and he became as one
dead. Then Sehim went out and took a mule and wrapping
the King in the coverlet of his bed, laid him on her back ;
after which he threw a mat over him and led the mule to
the Muslim camp.

When he came to Gherib's pavilion and would have
entered, the guards knew him not and forbade him entrance,
saying, ' Who art thou ? ? He laughed and uncovered his
face, and they knew him and admitted him. When Gherib
saw him, he said, 4 What hast thou there, O Sehim ? ' 6 O
King,' answered he s 'this is Julned ben Kerker.' Thea he
uncovered him, and Gherib knew him and said, 'Arouse
him, O Sehim.' So he made him smell to vinegar and
frankincense ; and he cast the henbane from his nostrils
and opening his eyes, found himself among .the Muslims j
whereupon, ' What is this foul dream ?' quoth he and closing
his eyes again, would have slept ; but Sehim dealt him z
buffet, saying, ' Open thine eyes, O accursed one ! ' So
he opened them and said, ' Where am I ? ! Quoth Sehim s
' Thou art in the presence of Gherib ben Kundemir, King
of Irak' When Julned heard this, he said, 'O King, I
am at thy mercy. Know that I am not at fault, but that
he who made us come forth to fight thee was thy brother,
who embroiled us with thee and fled.' ' Knowest thou
whither he is gone?' asked Gherib. 4 No, by the light-
giving sun,' replied Julned, ' I know not'

Then Gherib bade lay him in bonds and set guards over
him, whilst each captain returned to his own tent, and
amongst the rest Jemrcan, who said to his men, * O sons
of my uncle, I purpose this night to do a deed wherewith I
may whiten my face with King Gherib/ 8 Do what pleases
thee/ answered they ; * we hearken and obey thy command-
ment. s Quoth he, 'Arm yourselves and disperse about the
infidels' camp, muffling your steps, so that the very ante


120


shall not be ware of you ; and when you hear me magnify
God, do ye the like and cry out, saying, " God is Most
Great ! " and hold back and make for the gate of the city ;
and we seek aid from God the Most High.' So the folk
armed themselves cap-a-pie and waited till midnight, when
they dispersed about the enemy's camp and waited till
Jemrcan smote his target with his sword and shouted,
* God is Most Great ! ' Whereupon they all cried out the
like, till valley and mountain and hill and sands and ruins
rang again with the noise. The infidels awoke in dismay
and fell upon one another, and the sword went round
amongst them ; but the Muslims held aloof and made for
the gate of the city, where they slew the warders and
entering, made themselves masters of the town, with all
that was therein of treasure and women and children.

Meanwhile, Gherib, hearing the noise and clamour of
4 God is Most Great ! ' mounted with all his troops and sent
Sehim on in advance. When the latter came near the
field of battle, he saw that Jemrcan had fallen upon the
infidels with the Benou Aamir by night and made them
drink the cup of death. So he returned and told his
brother, who called down blessings on Jemrcan. And the
infidels ceased not to smite each other mightily with the
sharp sword, till the day rose and lighted up the land,
when Gherib cried out to his men, saying, ' Charge, O ye
noble, and win the favour of the All-knowing King ! ' So
the true believers fell upon the idolaters and plied them
with the keen sword and the quivering spear, till they
sought to take refuge in the city ; but Jemrcan came forth
upon them with his tribesmen. So they hemmed them in,
as between two mountain-ranges, and slew an innumerable
Iflij!)! nos£ or ~ them, and the rest fled into the deserts j nor did
the Muslims give over pursuing them with the sword., till
they had scattered them abroad in the plains and stony
wastes. Then they returned to the city of Oman and


121


Gherib entered the palace of the King and sitting down
on the throne of his kingship, with his lords and officers
on his either hand, sent for Julned. They brought him
in haste and Gherib expounded to him Islam ; but he
refused to embrace the faith ; wherefore Gherib let crucify
him on the gate of the city, and they shot at him with
arrows, till he was like unto a hedgehog. Then Gherib
bestowed a dress of honour upon Jemrcan and said to
him, 'Thou shalt be lord and ruler over this city, and
thine be it to loose and to bind therein, for it was thou
didst conquer it with thy sword and thy men.' And
Jemrcan kissed the King's feet and wished him abiding
victory and glory and fair fortune. Moreover, Gherib
opened Julned's treasuries and saw what was therein and
gave largesse to his captains and standard-bearers and
fighting-men, yea, even to the women and, children ; and
thus did he ten days long.

After this, one night he dreamt an ill dream and awoke,
troubled and affrighted So he aroused his brother Sehim
and said to him, ' I dreamt that we were in a wide valley,
when there swooped down on us two birds of prey, with
legs like lances, never in my life saw I greater than they,
and we were in fear of them.' f O King,' answered Sehim,
' this portends some great enemy ; be on thy guard, there-
fore, against him.' Gherib slept not the rest of the night
and when the day broke, he called for his courser and
mounted. Quoth Sehim, ' Whither goest thou, my brother ?'
and Gherib answered, saying, 'I am heavy at heart this
morning j so I mean to ride abroad ten days and lighten
my breast.' Said Sehim, 'Take with thee a thousand
men;' but Gherib replied, M will not go forth but with
thee alone.' So the two brothers mounted and seeking
the open country, fared on from valley to valley and from
meadow to meadow, till they came to a valley abounding
in sweet-smelling flowers and streams and trees laden with


122


all manner eatable fruits, two of each kind. On the
branches were birds warbling their . various songs ; the
mocking-bird trilled out her sweet notes and the turtle
filled the place with her voice. There sang the nightingale,
whose chant arouses the sleeper, and the merle with its
note like the human voice and the cushat and the ring-
dove, whilst the popinjay answered them with its fluent
tongue.

The valley pleased them and they ate of its fruits and
drank of its waters, after which they sat under the shadow
of the trees, till drowsiness overcame them and they slept,
glory be to Him who sleepeth not ! As they lay asleep ?
two fierce Marids swooped down on them and taking each
one on his shoulders, flew up with them into the air, till
they were above the clouds. Presently, Gherib and Sehim
awoke and found themselves betwixt heaven and earth; so
they looked at those who bore, them and saw that they
were two Marids, each as big as a great palm-tree, with
hair like horses' tails and claws like lions' claws ; the head
of the one was as that of a dog and that of the other as
that of an ape. When they saw this, they exclaimed,
'There is no power and no virtue save in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! *

Now the reason of this was that a certain king of the
kings of the Jinn, Muraash by name, had a son called
Saaic, who loved a damsel of the Jinn, named Nejmeh ;
and the twain used to foregather in the valley, in the
guise of birds. Gherib and Sehim saw them thus and
deeming them birds, shot at them with arrows and
wounded Saaic, whose blood flowed. Nejmeh mourned
over him, then, fearing lest the like should befall herself,
caught up her lover and flew with him to his father's
palace, where she cast him down at the gate. The
warders bore him in and laid him before the King, whc s
seeing the arrow sticking in his side, exclaimed, J Alas 5


123


my son I Who hath done with thee this thing, that I may
lay waste his abiding-place and hasten his destruction,
though he were the greatest of the kings of the Jinn?*
Thereupon Saai'c opened his eyes and said, * O my father,
it was a mortal that slew me in the Valley of Springs.'
Hardly had he made an end of these words, when his
soul departed ; whereupon his father buffeted his face,
till the blood streamed from his mouth, and cried out to
two Marids, saying, 'Go to the Valley of Springs and
bring me all who are therein.' So they betook them-
selves to the valley in question, where they found Gherib
and Sehim asleep and snatching them up, carried them to ^fffljjt
their King, whom they saw seated on the throne of his t&lL
kingship, as he were a huge mountain, with four heads
on his body, the first that of a lion, the second that of an
elephant, the third that of a panther and the fourth that
of a lynx. The Marids set them down before Muraash
and said to him, * These are they whom we found in the
Valley of Springs.'

Muraash looked at them with wrathful eyes and puffed
and snorted and blew sparks from his nostrils, so that all
who stood by feared him. Then said he, 'O dogs of
mankind, ye have slain my son and kindled fire in my
heart. 5 e Who is thy son,' asked Gherib, ' and who hath
seen him ? ' Quoth Muraash, ' Were ye not in the Valley
of Springs and did ye not see my son there, in the guise of
a bird, and did ye not shoot at him with arrows, that he
died?' ' I know not who slew him,' replied Gherib ; 'and
by the virtue of the Great God, the One, the Immemorial,
who knoweth all things, and of Abraham the Friend, we
saw no bird, neither slew we bird nor beast ! ;

Now Muraash worshipped the Fire, not the All-powerful
King ; so, when he heard Gherib swear by God and His
greatness and by Abraham the Friend, he knew that he
was a Muslim and cried out to his people, saying, ( Bring


X24


me my mistress.* 1 Accordingly they brought a brasier of
gold and setting it before him, kindled therein fire and
cast on drugs, whereupon there arose therefrom green
and blue and yellow flames and the King and all who
were present prostrated themselves before the brasier,
whilst Gherib and Sehim ceased not to magnify God and
attest His greatness and omnipotence. Presently, Muraash
raised his head and seeing the two princes standing, said
to them, s O dogs, why do ye not prostrate yourselves?'
{ Out on thee, O accursed one ! ' replied Gherib. ' Pro-
stration befits not, save to the Worshipful King, who
bringeth forth all creatures into being from nothingness
and maketh water to well from the barren rock, Him who
inclineth the heart of the father unto his new-born child
and who may not be described as sitting or standing, the
God of Noah and Salih and Houd and Abraham the Friend,
who created Paradise and Hell-fire and trees and fruit, for
He is God, the One, the All-powerful.'

When Muraash heard this, his eyes started from his head
and he cried out to his guards, saying, 'Bind these two
dogs and sacrifice them to my mistress,' So they bound
them and were about to cast them into the fire, when,
behold, one of the merlons of the parapet fell down upon
the brasier and broke it and did out the fire, which became
ashes flying in the air. Then said Gherib, ' God is Most
Great ! He giveth aid and victory and forsaketh those who
deny Him and worship the Fire, not the Almighty King I '
Quoth Muraash, ' Thou art° a sorcerer and hast bewitched
my mistress, so that this thing hath befallen her.' 'O
madman,' answered Gherib, ' if the fire had soul or move-
ment, it would ward off from itself that which doth it
hurt' When Muraash heard this s he roared and bellowed
and reviled the Fire, saying, £ By my faith, i will not kill
you save by the fire ! *

1 Fire (nar) is feminine in Arabic


125


Then he cast them into prison and calling a hundred
Marids s bade them bring much firewood and set fire thereto.
So they brought great plenty of wood and made a huge
fire, which flamed up mightily till the morning, when
Muraash mounted an elephant, bearing on its back a throne
of gold set with jewels, and the tribes of the Jinn gathered
about him, in their various kinds. Then they brought in
Gherib and Sehim, who, seeing the flaming of the fire,
sought help of the One God, the All-conquering Creator
of night and day, Him who is mickle of might, whom no
sight comprehendeth, but who comprehendeth all sights,
for He is the Subtle, the All-knowing ; and they ceased
not to solicit Him, till, behold, a cloud arose from West
to East and pouring down showers of rain, like the swollen
sea, quenched the fire.

When the King saw this, he was affrighted, he and his
troops, and entered the palace, where he turned to his
Vizier and grandees and said to them, ' How say ye of these
two men ? ' 4 O King/ answered they, ' were they not in
the right, this thing had not befallen the fire; wherefore
we say that they speak sooth' 'Indeed,' rejoined Muraashj
'the truth hath been shown forth to me, ay, and the
manifest way, and I am certified that the worship of the
fire is false ; for, were it [god and] mistress, it had warded
off from itself the rain that quenched it and the stone that
broke its brasier and beat it into ashes. Wherefore I be-
lieve in Him Who created the fire and the light and the
shade and the heat. And ye, what say ye ? ' ' O King/
answered they, ' we also hear and follow and obey.'

So the King called for Gherib and Sehim and embraced
them and kissed them between the eyes ; whereupon the
bystanders all crowded to kiss their hands and. heads. 2f foj&t
Then Muraash sat down oa the throne of his kingship t)'fJf/.
and seating Gherib on his right and Sehim on his left
hand, said to them, e O mortals, what shall we say, that we


126


may become Muslims ? ' ' Say,' answered Gherib, ' a There
Is no god but God, and Abraham is the Friend of God ! " '
So the King and his folk professed Islam with heart and
tongue, and Gherib abode with them awhile, teaching them
the ritual of prayer. But presently he called to mind his
people and sighed, whereupon quoth Muraash, 'Verily,
trouble is past and gone and joy and gladness are
come.' 1 King,' said Gherib, ' I have many enemies
and I fear for my people from them.' Then he related to
him his history from first to last, and Muraash said, 'O
King of men, I will send one who shall bring thee news
of thy people, for I will not let thee go till I have had my
fill of gazing on thy face.' Then he called two stout
Marids, by name Kailjan and Courjan, and bade them
repair to Yemen and bring him news of Gherib's army.
They replied, ' We hear and obey,' and departed.

Meanwhile, when the captains of ' the Muslims arose in
the morning and rode to Gherib's palace, to do their
service to him, the servants told them that the King had
ridden forth with his brother at point of day. So they
made for the valleys and mountains and followed the
track of the princes, till they came to the Valley of
Springs, where they found their arms cast down and their
horses grazing and said, ' By the glory of Abraham the
Friend, the King is missing from this place ! ' Then they
dispersed and sought in the valley and the mountains three
days, but found no trace of them ; whereupon they raised
lamentations and despatched couriers to all the cities
and strengths and fortresses, to seek news of their King.
Accordingly, the couriers dispersed hither and thither and
sought everywhere for Gherib, but found no trace of him.

Now, when the news came to Agib by his spies that his
brother was missing, he rejoiced and going in to King
Yaarub ben Kehtan, sought aid of him. He granted him
the help he sought and gave him two hundred thousand


12/


Amalekites, with whom he set out for Yemen and sat down
before the city of Oman. Jemrcan and Saadan sallied
forth and gave him battle, and there were slain of the
Muslims much people, wherefore the true believers retired
into the city and shut the gates and manned the walls.
At this juncture the two Marids arrived and seeing the
Muslims beleaguered, waited till the night, when they fell
upon the infidels and plied them with sharp swords of the
swords of the Jinn, each twelve cubits long, if a man
smote therewith a rock, he would cleave it in sunder.
They attacked the idolaters, shouting, £ God is Most
Great ! He giveth aid and victory and forsaketh those
who deny the faith of Abraham the Friend ! ' whilst fire
issued from their mouths and nostrils, and they made great
slaughter amongst them. Thereupon the infidels ran out
of their tents and seeing these strange things, were con-
founded and their flesh shuddered and their reason fled,
So they snatched up their arms and fell on each other,
whilst the Marids shore off their heads, as a reaper cuts
grain, crying, ' God is Most Great 1 We are the henchmen
of King Gherib, the friend of Muraash, King of the Jinn ! *
The sword ceased not to go round amongst them till the
night was half spent, when the misbelievers, imagining
that the mountains were all Afrits, loaded their tents and
treasure and baggage upon camels and made off; and the
first to fly was Agifo. The Marids ceased not from the pur- ^fjjfjf
suit, till they had driven them far away into the hills and *0cXtli_
deserts ; and but fifty thousand infidels of two hundred
thousand escaped with their lives and made for their own
land, wounded and discomfited.

Meanwhile, the Muslims gathered together, marvelling
at this that had betided the infidels and fearing the tribes-
men of the Jinn ; but presently the latter returned and said
to them, s O host of the Muslims, your lord King Gherib
and his brother Sehim salute you; they are the guests of


128


Muraash, King of the Jinn, and will be with you anon.'
When Gherib's men knew that he was safe and well, they
rejoiced greatly and said to the Marids, ' May God rejoice
you with good news, O noble spirits ! ' So Courjan and
Kailjan returned to Muraash and Gherib and acquainted
them with that which had happened, whereat Gherib's
heart was set at ease and he said, ' May God abundantly
requite you ! '

Then said King Muraash, ' O my brother, I have a mind
to show thee our country and the city of Japhet son of
Noah, on whom be peace!' 'O King,' replied Gherib,
' do what seemeth good to thee.' So he called for horses
and mounting, he and Gherib and Sehim, set out with
& thousand Marids, as they were a piece of a mountain cut
endlong. They fared on, diverting themselves with the
sight of valleys and mountains, till they came to the city
of Japhet son of Noah (on whom' be peace), where the
townsfolk all, great and small, came forth to meet King
Muraash and brought them into the city in great state.
Then Muraash went up to the palace of Japhet son of
Noah and sat down on the throne of his kingship, which
was of alabaster, ten stages high, hung with all manner
coloured silks and trellised with wands of gold. The
people of the city stood before him and he said to them,
'O descendants of Japhet, what did your fathers and
grandfathers worship ? ' Quoth they, 4 We found them
worshipping the fire and followed their example, as thou
well knowest.' ' O folk,' rejoined Muraash, ' it hath been
manifested to us that the fire is but one of the creatures
of God the Most High, Creator of all things ; and when
we knew this, we submitted ourselves to God, the One,
the All-powerful Maker of night and day and the revolving
sphere, whom no sight comprehendeth, but who com-
prehended! all sights, for He is the Subtle, the All-wise.
So do ye likewise, and ye shall be saved from the wrath


129


of the Almighty and from the fiery torment in the world
to come/ And they embraced Islam with heart and
tongue.

Then Muraash took Gherib by the hand and showed
him the palace and its ordinance and all the marvels it
contained, till they came to the armoury, wherein were
the arms of Japhet son of Noah. Here Gherib saw a
sword hanging to a peg of gold and said, ' O King, whose
sword is that?' Quoth Muraash, *It i? the sword of
Japhet son of Noah, wherewith he was wont to do battle
against men and jinn. The sage Jerdoun forged it and
graved on its back names of might. It is named El
Mahic, s for that it never descends upon a man, but it
annihilates him, nor upon a genie, but it crushes him ;
and if one smote therewith a mountain, it would over-
throw it.' When Gherib heard tell of the virtues of the
sword, he said ? ' I desire to look on this sword ; ' and
Muraash said, € As thou wilt.' So Gherib put out his
hand and taking the sword, drew it from its sheath f
whereupon it flashed and death crept and glittered on its
edge ; and it was twelve spans long and three broad.
Now Gherib wished to take it, and Muraash said, ' If
thou canst wield it, take it. J * It is well,' answered Gherib,
and took it up, and it was in his hand as a staff; where-
fore all who were present, men and Jinn, marvelled and
said, i Well done, O prince of cavaliers 1 ! Then said
Muraash, ' Lay thy hand on this treasure, that the Kings
of the earth sigh for in Vain, and mount, that I may show
thee the city/

Then they took horse and rode forth the palace, with ^jf(g^|
Jinn and men attending them on foot, and passed through tJCitb«
the streets and thoroughfares of the town, threading their
way through ranks of palaces and deserted mansions and
gilded doorwaj% till they issued from the gates and entered
& The Destroyed
vOL, VS. §


130

gardens full of fruit-laden trees and running waters and
birds speaking and celebrating the praises of Him to whom
belong power and eternity ; nor did they cease to take
their pleasance in the land till nightfall, when they re-
turned to the palace of Japhet son of Noah and they
brought them the table of food. So they ate and Gherib
turned to the King of the Jinn and said to him, ' O King,
I would fain return to my people and my troops ; for I
know not their plight after me.' s By Allah, O my brother,'
answered Muraash, ' I will not part with thee for a full
month, till 1 have had my fill of thy sight.'

Gherib could not say him nay, so he abode with him ifi
the city of Japhet, eating and drinking and making merry,
till the month was up, when Muraash clad him and Sehim
in dresses of honour of gold-inwoven silk and set on
Gherib's head a crown jewelled with pearls and diamonds
of inestimable value. Moreover!, he gave him great store
of presents of emeralds and balass rubies and diamonds
and other jewels and ingots of gold and silver and amber-
gris and musk and brocaded silks and other rarities and
things of price. All these he made up into loads for him
and calling five hundred Marids, said to them, 1 Make
ready to set out on the morrow, that we may bring King
Gherib and Sehim back to their own country.' And they
answered, saying, 'We hear and obey.' So they passed
the night in the city, purposing to depart on the morrow,
but, next morning, as they were about to set forth, they
espied a great host advancing upon the city, with horses
neighing and drums beating and trumpets sounding, to the
number of threescore and ten thousand Marids, flying and
diving, under a king called Bercan, and the earth was filled
with them»

Now this Bercan was lord of the City of Cornelian and
the Castle of Gold and under his rule were five strongholds,
an each five hundred thousand Marids ; ' and he and his


I3i


people worshipped the fire, not the Omnipotent King.
He was the son of Muraash's father's brother and the cause
of his corning was on this wise. It chanced that there was
among the subjects of King Muraash a misbelieving Marid,
who professed Islam hypocritically, and he stole away from
his people and made for the Valley of Cornelian, where he
went in to King Bercan and kissing the earth before him,
wished him abiding glory and fair fortune. Then he told
him of Muraash's conversion to Islam, and Bercan said,
! How came he to forsake his faith ? ' So the rebel told
him what had passed and Bercan snorted and puffed and
railed at the sun and the moon and the sparkling fire,
saying, { By the virtue of my faith, I will surely slay my
cousin and his people and this mortal, nor will I leave one
of them on life ! ' Then he cried out to the tribes of the
Jinn and choosing of them seventy thousand Marids, set
out and fared on till he came to the city of Japhet and
encamped before its gates. When Muraash saw this, he
despatched a Marid to learn what the stranger host wanted,
bidding him return in haste. So the messenger repaired
to Bercan's camp, where the Marids hastened to meet him
and said to him, 5 Who art thou ? ' Quoth he, ' I bear a
message from King Muraash ; ' whereupon they carried
him in to Bercan, before whom he prostrated himself,
saying, ( O my lord, my master hath sent me to thee, to
know what brings thee hither.' ' Return to thy lord/
replied Bercan, 'and say to him, "This is thy cousin
Bercan, who is come to salute thee." ' So the messenger 3€t'i
returned and told Muraash, who said to Gherib, 'Abide &fi!
here whilst I go and salute my cousin and return to thee.'
Then he mounted and rode to Bercan's camp.

Now this was a trick of Bercan, to bring Muraash out,
and seize upon him, and he said to his Marids, who were
about him, 'When ye see me embrace my cousin, lay
hold of him and bind his hands behind him.' And they


answered, saying, 6 We hear and obey.' So, when Muraash
came up and entered Bercan's pavilion, the latter rose to
him and embraced him, whereupon the Jinn fell upon
Muraash and seized him and bound him. He looked at
Bercan and said, ' What manner of thing is this ? 5 Quoth
Bercan, *0 dog of the Jinn, wilt thou leave the faith of
thy fathers and grandfathers and enter a faith thou knowest
not?' 'O son of my uncle,' rejoined Muraash^ 4 indeed I
have found the faith of Abraham the Friend to be the true
faith and all other thaa it vain.' s And who told thee of
this?' asked Bercan, ' Gherib, King of Irak/ answered
Muraash, 4 whom 1 hold in the highest honour. 5 1 By the
fire and the light and the shade and the heat/ cried
Bercan, 1 1 will slay both thee and him ! ' And he cast him
Into prison.

Now, when Muraash's henchman saw what had befallen
his lord, he fled back to the city'and told the King's iBen,
who cried out and mounted. Quoth Gherib, 5 What is to
do?' And they told him what had passed s whereupon he
cried out to Sehim, saying s 'Saddle me one of the chargers
that King Muraash gave me.' ' O my brother/ said Sehim f
e wilt thou do battle with the Jinn ? s 5 Yes/ answered
Gherib ; 8 1 will fight them with the sword of Japhet son of
Noah, seeking help of the God of Abraham the Friend,
(on whom be peace s ) for He is Lord and Creator of all
things. So Sehim saddled him & sorrel horse of the
horses of the Jinn, as he were a castle, and he armed and
mounting, rode out with the tribes of the Jinn, armed
cap-a-pie. Then Bercan and his host mounted also and
the two hosts drew out in battalia in face of one another.
The first to open the chapter of war was Gherib;, who
spurred his charger into the mid-field and drew the en-
chanted sword, whence issued a glittering light, thai
dazzled the eyes of all the Jinn and struck terror to their
hearts* Then he played with the sword, till their wits were


233


amazed, and cried out, saying, * God is Most Great I i am
Gherib, King of Irak There is no faith save the faith of
Abraham the Friend J '

When Bercan heard Gherib's words, he said, 6 This is
he who seduced my cousin from his faith ; so, by the virtue
of my faith, I will not sit down on my throne till I have
cut off the head of this Gherib and made an end of his
life and forced my cousin and his people back to theif
faith. ° and whoso baulketh me, I will destroy him/ Then
he mounted a paper-white elephant, as he were a tower
plastered with gypsum, and goaded him with a pike of
steel, whereupon the elephant trumpeted and made for the
middle of the field. When Bercan drew near Gherib, he
cried out to him, saying, * O dog of mankind, what made
thee come into our land, to debauch my cousin and his
people and pervert them from one faith to another? Know
that this day is the last of thy worldly days. 5 And Gherib
answered, saying, ' Avaunt, O vilest of the Jinn ! ' There-
with Bercan drew a javelin and poising it in his hand, cast
it at Gherib; but it missed him. So he threw a second
javelin at him ; but Gherib caught it in mid-air and hurled
it at the elephant It smote him on the flank and came
out on the other side ; whereupon the beast fell down dead
and Bercan was cast to the ground, like a great palm-tree,,
Before he could stir, Gherib smote him with the sword ol
Japhet flatlings on the nape of the neck, and he fell down
in a swoon ; whereupon the Marids swooped down on him
and bound him.

When Bercan's people saw their king a prisoner, they
drove at the others, seeking to rescue him, but Gherib
and the true-believing Jinn fell upon them and bravo for
Gherib! indeed that day he pleased God who aeswereth
prayer and slaked his vengeance with the enchanted sword I
Whomsoever he smote, he clove him in sunder and before
his soul could depart he became a heap of ashes in the


*34


foe ; whilst the two hosts of the Jinn cast flames of fire at
one another, till the battle-field was wrapped in smoke.
And Gherib tourneyed right and left among the infidels
and they gave way before him, till he came to King
Bercan's pavilion, with Kailjan and Courjan on his either
hand, and cried out to them, saying, 1 Loose your lord! 5
ICfgfH So they unbound Muraash and broke his fetters and he
$f£U)i. said to them, s Bring me my arms and my winged horse.'
Now he had two flying horses, one of which he gave to
Gherib and the other he mounted himself, after he had
donned his battle-harness. Then he and Gherib fell upon
the enemy, flying through the air on their winged horses,
and the true-believing Jinn followed them, shouting, 4 God
is Most Great ! ' till the earth and hills and valleys and
mountains answered them. The infidels fled before them
and they returned, after having^ slain more than thirty
thousand Marids and Satans, to the city of Japhet, where
the two kings sat down on their beds of estate and sought
for Bercan, but found him not; for, whilst they were
diverted from him by stress of battle, an Afrit of his
servants made his way to him and loosing him, carried him
to his folk, of whom he found part slain and the rest in
full flight. So he flew up with the King into the air and
get him down in the City of Cornelian and Castle of Gold,
where Bercan seated himself on the throne of his king-
ship. Presently, those of his people who had escaped from
the battle came in to him and gave him joy of his safety;
and he said, ' O folk, where is safety ? My army is slain
and they took me prisoner and have rent in pieces my
repute among the tribes of the Jinn.' e O King,' answered
they, ' it is ever thus that kings still smite and are smitten.'
Quoth he, ' Needs must I take my revenge and wipe out my
reproach, else shall I be for ever dishonoured among the
tribes of the Jinn.' Then he wrote letters to the governors
of his fortresses, who came to him with three hundred and


235


twenty thousand fierce Marids and Satans; and he badf
them make ready to set out in three days' time.

Meanwhile, when Muraash discovered Bercan's escapej it
was grievous to him and he said, * Had we set a hundred
Marids to guard him, he had not fled ; but whither shall
he go from us ? " Then said he to Gherib, 4 Know, O my
brother, that Bercan is perfidious and will never rest from
avenging himself on us, but will assuredly assemble his
clans and return upon us ; wherefore I am minded to fore-
stall him and fall on him, on the heels of his defeat, whilst
he is yet weak by reason thereof.' 'This is well seeo/
replied Gherib ; and Muraash said, ' O my brother, let the
Marids bear thee back to thine own country and leave me
to fight the battles of the Faith against the infidels, that I
may be lightened of the burden of my sins.' s By the virtue
of the Clement, the Bountiful, the Protector,' answered
Gherib, 6 1 will not go hence till I do to deatfi all the mis»
believing Jinn and God hasten their souls to the fire and
evil shall be the abiding-place [to which they go ;] and none
shall be saved but those who worship God the One, the
Victorious S But do thou send Sehim back to the city of
Oman, so haply he may be healed of his sickness.' For
Sehim was sick. So Muraash bade the Marids take up Sehim
and the treasures and bear them to the city of Oman ; and
they took them and made for the land of men.

Then Muraash wrote letters to all his governors and
captains of fortresses and they came to him with eight-
score thousand men. So they made them ready and
departed for the City of Cornelian. In one day, they
marched a year's journey and halted in a valley, where
they encamped and passed the night. Next morning, as
they were about to set forth, the vanguard of Bercan's
army appeared, whereupon the Jinn cried out and the two
hosts met and fell upon each other in that valley, that the
earth trembled with the shock. Then there befell a sore


' 1 30

strife and the battle swayed to and fro with a mighty
clamour. Jest gave place to earnest and there was an
end of parley, whilst long lives were cut short and trouble
and confusion befell the unbelievers ; for Gherib charged
them, proclaiming the Unity of God, the Worshipful, the
Exalted, and shore through necks and made heads roll in
the dust; nor did the dark betide before nigh seventy
thousand of the infidels were slain, and of the true be-
lievers over ten thousand Marids had fallen. Then the
tKTf^fjt drums beat the retreat, and the two hosts drew apart, So
IgglbIL Gherib and Muraash returned to their tents, after they had
wiped their arms, and the evening meal being set before
them, they ate and gave each other joy of their safety.
As for Bercan, he returned to his tent, grieving for the
slaughter of his champions, and said to his officers, 1 If
we abide here and do battle thus with them, we shall be
cut off to the last man in three days' time.' Quoth they,
'And how shall we do, O King?' 'We will fall upon
them under cover of the night,' said Bercan, 'whilst they
sleep, and not one of them shall be left to tell the tale
So take your arms and when I give the word of command,
fall on your enemies as one man.'

Now there was amongst them a Marid named Jendel,
whose heart inclined to Islam; so, when he heard the
infidels' plot, he stole away from them and going in to
King Muraash and King Gherib, told them what Bercan
had devised; whereupon Muraash turned to Gherib and
said to him, s O my brother, what shall we do?' Quoth
Gherib, £ To-night we will fall upon the infidels and chase
them into the mountains and deserts, if it be the will of the
Omnipotent King.' Then he summoned the captains of
the Jinn and said to them, c Arm yourselves, you and your
men, and as soon as It is dark, steal out. of your tents on
foot and hide among the mountains ; and when ye see the
enemy engaged among the tents, do ye fall upon them


from all quarters. Strengthen your hearts and put your
faith in your Lord, and ye shall conquer; and behold, 1
am with you!' So, as soon as it was dark, the infidels
attacked the camp, invoking the aid of the light and the
fire ; but, when they came among the tents, the Muslims
fell upon them, calling for help on the Lord of the Worldi
and saying, 1 Q Most Merciful of those that show mercy 5
O Creator of all created things ! '' till they left them like
mown grass, cut down and dead. By the morning the
most part of the unbelievers were bodies without souls
and the rest made for the marshes and deserts, whilst
Gherib and Muraash returned in triumph and making
prize of the enemy's baggage, rested till the morrow,,
when they set out for the City of Cornelian.

As for Bercan, when he saw that the battle had turned
against him and that the most part of his men were slain,
he fled with the remnant of his folk to' his capital clty f
where he entered his palace and assembling his tribes,
said to them, ' O folk, whoso hath aught of price, let him
take it and follow me to the Mountain Caf, to the Blue
King, lord of the Parti-coloured Palace ; for he it is who
shall avenge us.' So they took their women and children
and goods and made for the Mountain Caf. Presently
Muraash and Gherib arrived at the City of Cornelian and
found the gates open and none left to give them news %
whereupon they entered and Muraash took Gherib, that he
might show him the city, whose walls were builded of
emeralds and its gates of red cornelian, with nails of silver,
and the roofs of its houses and mansions ceiled with aloes
and sandal-wood. So they took their pleasance in its
streets and alleys, till they came to the palace of gold
and entering, passed through seven vestibules, till they
came to a building, whose walls were of royal balasi
rabies and its pavement of emerald and jacinth. The two
kings were astounded at the goodliness of the place and


138


fared on from vestibule to vestibule, till they came to the
inner court of the palace, wherein they saw four estradeSj
each different from the others, and in the midst a fountain
of red gold, compassed about with golden lions, from
whose mouths issued water. The estrade at the upper end
was hung and carpeted with brocaded silks of various
colours and thereon stood two thrones of red gold, inlaid
with pearls and jewels. So Muraash and Gherib sat down
Cbf t£$i on the thrones and held high state in the palace of gold
fctlbuu Then said Gherib to Muraash, 'What thinkest thou to
do ? 5 And Muraash answered, saying, 4 O King of men, I
have despatched a hundred horse to learn where Bercan
is, that we may pursue him'

Then they abode three days in the palace, till the scouts
returned with the news that Bercan had fled to the Moun-
tain Caf and thrown himself on the protection of the Blue
King ; whereupon quoth Muraash fo Gherib, ' What sayst
thou, O my brother?' And Gherib answered, saying,
4 Except we attack them, they will attack us.' So they
made ready for departure and after three days, they were
about to set out with their troops, when the Marids, who
had carried Sehim back to Oman, returned and kissed the
earth before Gherib. He questioned them of his people
and they answered, saying, ' After the last battle, thy
brother Agib fled to the King of Hind and sought his
protection. The King granted his prayer and writing
letters to all his governors, levied an army as it were the
swollen sea, having neither beginning nor end, with which
he purposes to invade Irak and lay it waste.' When Gherib
heard this, he said, 1 Perish the unbelievers ! Verily, God
' the Most High shall give the victory to Islam and I will
show them cutting and thrusting.' ' O King of men,' said
Muraash, 1 by the virtue of the Mighty Name, I must needs
go with thee to thy kingdom and destroy thine enemies
and bring thee to thy desire.' Gherib thanked him and


139


they rested till the morrow, when they set oat, intending
for the City of Alabaster and the Parti-coloured Palace.

Now this city was builded of alabaster and [precious]
stones by Baric ben Fakia, father of the Jinn, and he built
also the Parti-coloured Palace, which was so named for
that the ordinance of its building was one brick of gold
and one of silver, nor was there its like in all the world.
When they came within half a day's journey of the city,
they halted to rest, and Muraash sent out a scout to re-
connoitre, who returned and said, 'O King, in the City of
Alabaster are tribesmen of the Jinn in number as the leaves
of the trees or as the drops of rain.' So Muraash said to
Gherib, ' How shall we do, O King of men ? ' ' O King, 8
answered he, £ divide your men into four bodies and en-
compass the camp of the infidels with them ; then, in the
middle of the night, let them cry out, saying, " God is Most
Great ! " and hold aloof and watch what happens among the
tribes of the Jinn.' So Muraash did as Gherib counselled
and the troops waited till midnight, when they cried out,
saying, 'God is Most Great ! Ho for the Faith of Abraham
the Friend, on whom be peace ! ' The unbelievers awoke
in affright and snatching up their arms, fell upon each
other till the morning, when the most part of them were
dead men and but few remained. Then Gherib cried out
to the true believers, saying, ' Up and at the remnant of the
infidels! Behold, I am with you, and God is your helper! 9
So the Muslims drove at the enemy and Gherib drew his
sword El Mahic and fell upon the foe, cutting off noses
and sending heads flying. Presently he came up with
Bercan and smote him and bereft him of life and he fell
down, drenched in his blood. On like wise he did with
the Blue King, and by the forenoon not one of the infidels
was left alive to tell the tale.

Then Gherib and Muraash entered the Parti-coloured
Palace and found its walls builded of alternate courses of


140


gold and silver, with sills of crystal and keystones of
emerald. In Its midst was a fountain adorned with bells
and pendants and figures of birds and beasts vomiting
forth water, and thereby an estrade furnished with gold-
brocaded silks, with borders of gold embroidered with
jewels : and they found the treasures of the palace past
count or description. Then they entered the inner court,
where they found a magnificent seraglio and Gherib saw,
among the Blue King's women, a girl clad in a dress
worth a thousand dinars, never had he beheld a goodlier.
About her were a hundred slave-girls, holding up her
skirts with hooks of gold, and she was in their midst as
the moon among stars. When he saw her, his reason
was confounded and he said to one of the waiting-women,
' Who is yonder damsel ? } Quoth they, e This is the Blue
TSTtgljt King's daughter, Morning Star.' Then Gherib turned to
ftcltiC. Muraash and said to him, 'O King of the Jinn, I have
a mind to take yonder damsel to wife.' Quoth Muraash,
4 The palace and all that therein is are the prize of thy
right hand ; for, hadst thou not devised a stratagem to
destroy the Blue King and Bercan, they had cut us off
to the last man : wherefore the treasure is thy treasure
and the people thy slaves.' Gherib thanked him for his
fair speech and going up to the girl, gazed steadfastly
upon her and loved her with an exceeding love, forgetting
Fekhr Taj and Mehdiyeh.

Now her mother was the King's daughter of China,
whom the Blue King had carried off from her palace and
deflowered, and she conceived by him and bore this girl,
whom he named Morning Star, by reason of her beauty
and grace ; for she was the princess of the fair. Her
mother died when she was a babe of forty days, and the
nurses and eunuchs reared her, till she reached, the age
of seventeen; but she hated her father and rejoiced in
his death. So Gherib put his' hand in hers and went is


14'

to her thai night and found her a virgin. Then he pulled
down the Parti-coloured Palace and divided the spoil with
the true-believing Jinn, and there fell to his share one
and-twenty thousand bricks of gold and silver and money
and treasure beyond count. Then Muraash took Gherib
and showed him the Mountain Caf and all its marvels;
after which they returned to Bercan's fortress and dis-
mantled it and shared the spoil thereof.

Then they returned to Muraash's capital, where they
abode five days, at the end of which time Gherib sought to
go to his own country and Muraash said, ' O King of men,
I will ride at thy stirrup and bring thee to thine own land.'
i Nay, by the virtue of Abraham the Friend,' answered
Gherib ; { I will not suffer thee to weary thyself thus, nor
will I take any of the Jinn save Kailjan and Courjan.'
Quoth the King, i Take with thee ten thousand horsemen
of the Jinn, to serve thee ; ' but Gherib said, 4 1 will take
only as I. said to thee. 5 So Muraash bade a thousand
Marids take him up and carry him to his native land, with
his share of the spoil; and he commanded Kailjan and
Courjan to follow him and obey him ; and they answered,
'We hear and obey' Then said Gherib to the Marids,
4 Do ye carry the treasure and Morning Star : ' for he him-
self thought to ride his flying charger. But Muraash said
to him, s O my brother, this horse will live only in our
clime, and if it come upon the earth, it will die : but I
have in my stables a sea-horse, whose like is not found in
Irak, no, nor in all the world. 9 So he caused bring forth
the horse, and when Gherib saw it, it interposed between
him and his reason.' Then they bound it and Kailjan took
it on his shoulders and Courjan took what he could carry.
And Muraash embraced Gherib and wept for parting from
him, saying, s O my brother, if aught befall thee, to which
thou art unable, send for me and 1 will come to thine aid

- i,e, his reason was confounded at its beauty.


with an army that may avail to lay waste the whole earth
and all that is thereon.' Gherib thanked him for his
courtesy and kindness and his zeal for the True Faith
and took leave of him ; whereupon the Marids set out
with Gherib and his goods and after traversing fifty years'
journey in two days and a night, alighted near the city of
Oman and halted to rest.

Then Gherib sent out Kailjan, to learn news of his
people, and he returned and said, 'O King, thy city is
beleaguered by a host of infidels, as they were the swollen
sea, and thy people are fighting them. The drums beat to
battle and Jemrcan goeth forth to them in the field.'
When Gherib heard this, he cried out, saying, ' God is
Most Great ! ' and said to Kailjan, ' Saddle me the horse
and bring me my arms ; for to-day the valiant shall be
known from the coward in the stead of war and battle.'
So Kailjan brought him all he sought and Gherib armed
and girding on El Mahic, mounted the sea-horse and made
toward the armies. Quoth Kailjan and Courjan to him,
*Set thy heart at ease and let us go to the infidels and
scatter them abroad in the wastes and deserts till, by the
help of God the Most High, the All-powerful, we leave not
a soul of them on life, no, not a blower of the fire.' But
Gherib said, ' By the virtue of Abraham the Friend, I will
not let you fight them without me ! '
ffglH Now the manner of the coming of that great host was
tdx« on this wise. When Agib fled from the field, after Yaarub's
army had been put to the rout by Kailjan and Courjan, he
said to his people, 4 If we return to Yaarub ben Kehtan,
he will say to us, " But for you, my son and my people had
not been slain ; " and he will put us to death, even to the
last man. Wherefore, methinks we were better go to
Terkenan, King of Hind, and beseech him to avenge us,. 8
*Come, let us go thither/" answered, they; e and the bless-
ing of the Fire attend thee ! " So they fared on days and


H3

nights till they reached King Terkenan's capital city and
Agib went in to him and kissed the earth before him.
Then he wished him what men use to wish to kings and,
said to him, 1 King, do thou protect me, so may the
sparkling fire and the night with its thick darkness protect
and defend thee ! ' Terkenan looked at Agib and said,
' Who art thou and what dost thou want ? ' 'I am Agib,
King of Irak,' replied he ; 1 my brother hath usurped my
throne and gotten the mastery of the land and the people
have submitted themselves to him. Moreover, he has
embraced the faith of Islam and ceases not to chase me
from country to country ; and behold, I am come to seek
protection of thee and thy power.' When Terkenan heard
Agib's words, he rose and sat down and said, * By the
virtue of the Fire, I will assuredly avenge thee and will
let none serve other than my mistress the Fire ! ' And he
cried out to his son, saying, * O my son, make ready to go
to Irak and lay it waste and bind all who serve aught but
the Fire and punish them and make an example of them j
yet slay them not, but bring them to me, that I may ply
them with various tortures and make them taste the bitter-
ness of humiliation and leave them a warning to all who
will take warning in this time.' Then he chose out to
accompany him fourscore thousand fighting-men on horse-
back and the like number on giraffes, beside ten thousand
lephants, bearing on their backs turrets of sandal-wood,
teellised with network of gold and railed and plated with
gold and silver and guarded with shields of gold and
emerald, and store of war-chariots, in each eight men
fighting with all kinds of weapons.

Now the prince's name was Raadshah and he was the
ehampion of his time, having no peer for prowess, So he
tnd his army equipped them in ten days' time, then set outj
as they were a bank of clouds, and fared on two months*
]ourney, till they came to Oman and encompased it, to


I


the joy of Agib, who thought himself assured of victory,,
So Jemrcan and Saadan and all their fighting-men sallied ] j

forth into the field, whilst the drums beat to battle and the
horses neighed. At this moment up came King Gherib,
who spurred his charger and entered among the infidels,
waiting to see who should come forth and open the chapter
of war. Then came out Saadan the Ghoul and offered
battle, whereupon there issued forth to him one of the
champions of Hind; but Saadan scarce let. him take his
stand in front of him ere he smote him to the earth with
his mace and crushed his bones; and so did he with a
second and a third, till he had slain thirty fighting-men.
Then there pricked out to him an Indian cavalier, by
name Bettash el Acran, uncle to King Terkenan and the
doughtiest champion of his time, reckoned worth five thou-
sand horse in battle, and cried out to Saadan, saying, ' O
thief of the Arabs, what art thou that thou shouldst slay
the Kings of Hind and their champions and capture their
horsemen ? But to-day is the last of thy worldly days/
When Saadan heard this, his eyes waxed bloodshot and
he drove at Bettash and aimed a stroke at him with his
club ; but he evaded it and the force of the blow bore

Saadan to the earth ; and before he could recover himself,

the Indians bound him and haled him off to their tents.
When Jemrcan saw his comrade a prisoner,, he cried out,

saying, : Ho for the faith of Abraham the Friend ! ? and

clapping spurs to his horse, ran at Bettash, They wheeled

and feinted awhile, till Bettash drove at jemrcan and

catching him by his coat of arms, tore him from his saddle

and threw him to the ground ; whereupon the Indians

bound him and dragged him away to their tents. And

Bettash ceased not to overcome all who came out to him„

till he had made prisoners of four and twenty captains of

the Muslims, whereat the latter were sore dismayed. When

Gherib saw what had befallen his men, he drew from be-


145


neath hm knee a mace of gold, six-score pounds in weight,
which had belonged to King Bercan, and set spurs to his l^fgflf
sea-horse, which bore him like the wind into the middle of tftbcC
the field. Then he drove at Bettash, crying out, 4 God is
Most Great ! ^ He giveth aid and victory and forsaketh
those who reject the faith of Abraham the Friend ! ' and
smote him with the mace, whereupon he fell to the ground
and Gheribj turning to the Muslims, saw his brother
Sehim and said to him, ' Bind this dog.' When Sehim
heard his brother's words, he ran to Bettash and bound
'him fast and bore him off, whilst the Muslims wondered
who this cavalier could be and the Indians said to one
another s 6 Who is this horseman that came out from
amongst us and hath taken our chief prisoner ? 5

Meanwhile Gherib continued to offer battle and there
came out to hira a captain of the Indians, whom he felled
to the earth with his mace, and Kailjan and Courjan bound
him and delivered him to Sehim ; nor did Gherib leave to
do thus, till he had taken prisoner two-and-fifty of the
doughtiest captains of the army of Hind. Then the day
came to an end and the drums beat the retreat ; whereupon
Gherib left the field and rode towards the Muslim camp.
The first to meet him was his brother Sehim, who kissed
his feet in the stirrups and said, ' May thy hand never
wither, O champion of the age ! Tell us who thou art
among the braves.' So Gherib raised his vizor and Sehim
knew him and cried out, saying, 'This is your king and
your lord Gherib, who is come back from the land of the
Jinn!' When the Muslims heard Gherib's name, they
threw themselves off their horses' backs and crowding
about him, kissed his feet in the stirrups and saluted him.,
rejoicing in his safe return. Then they carried him into
the city of Oman 5 where he entered his palace and sat
dowa on the throne of his kingship, whilst his officers
stood around him, in the utmost joy. Food was set on
VOL. VI. io


146


and they ate, after which Gherib related to them all that
had befallen him with the Jinn in the Mountain Caf, and
they marvelled thereat exceedingly and praised God for his
safety. Then he dismissed them to their sleeping-places ;
so they withdrew to their several lodgings, and when none
abode with him but Kailjan and Courjan, who never left
him, he said to them, 'Can ye carry me to Cufa, that I may
take my pleasure in my harem, and bring me back before
the end of the night ? 1 e O our lord/ answered they, 6 this
thou ask est is easy.'

Now the distance between Cufa and Oman is threescore
days' journey for a diligent horseman, and Kailjan said to
Courjan, C I will carry him going and thou coming back'
So he took up Gherib and flew off with him, in company
with Courjan ■ nor was an hour past before they set him
down at the gate of his palace in Cufa. He went in to
his uncle Damigh, who rose to him and saluted him ; after
which quoth Gherib, * How is it with my wives Morning
Star and Mehdiyeh?' And Damigh answered, saying,
1 They are both well and in good case.' Then the eunuch
went in and acquainted the women of the harem with
Gherib's coming, whereat they rejoiced and raised cries
of joy and gave him the reward for good news. Presently
in came Gherib, and they rose and saluting him, conversed
with him, till Damigh entered, when Gherib related to
them all that had befallen him in the land of the Jinn,
whereat they all marvelled. Then he lay with Morning
Star till near daybreak, when he took leave of his uncle
and wives and mounted Courjan's back, nor was the
darkness dispelled before the two Marids set him down
In the city of Oman. Then he and his men armed and
he bade open the gates, when, behold, up came a horse-
man from the host of the Indians, with Jemrcan and
Saadan and the rest of the captives, whom he had
delivered, and committed them to Gherib. The Muslims


147


rejoiced in their safety and the drums beat a point of war,
whilst the two hosts drew out in battle array. tNTfgtlt

The first to open the chapter of war was Gherib, who tttixflL
drove his charger between the two ranks and drawing his
sword El Mahic, cried out, saying, 'Whoso knoweth me
hath enough of my prowess and whoso knoweth me not,
I will make myself known to him. I am Gherib, King
of Irak and Yemen, brother of Agib.' When Raadshah
heard this, he cried out to his guards, saying, * Bring me
Agib. 5 So they brought him and Raadshah said to him,
! Thou knowest that this quarrel is thy quarrel and thou
art the cause of all this slaughter. Now yonder stands
thy brother Gherib amiddleward the field ; go thou out
to him and bring him to me prisoner, that I may set him
on a camel, face to tail, and make a show of him and
carry him to the land of Hind.' *0 King,' answered
Agib, ' send out to him other than I, for I am in ill case
this morning.' But Raadshah puffed and snorted and
said, 'By the virtue of the sparkling fire and the light
and shade and heat, except thou go out to thy brother and
bring him to me in haste, I will cut off thy head and make
an end of thee.' So Agib took courage and spurring his
horse up to his brother in mid-field, said to him. ' O dog
of the Arabs and vilest of all who smite upon tent-pegs s
wilt thou contend with kings ? Take what cometh to thee
and receive the tidings of thy death.' When Gherib heard
this, he said to him, i Who art thou among the kings ? 9
And Agib answered, saying, 4 I am thy brother, and to-day
is the last of thy worldly days/

When Gherib was assured that he was indeed his brother
Agib, he cried out and said, ( Ho, to avenge my fathef
and mother ! 8 Then giving his sword to Kailjan, he drove
at Agib and smote him with his mace a swashing blow,
thai all but beat in his ribs, and seizing him by the neck-
ring:?, tore him from the saddle and cast him to the ground |


whereupon the Marids fell on him and binding him fast,
dragged him off, abject and humiliated ; whilst Gherib
rejoiced in the capture of his enemy and repeated the
following verses of the poet i

I have won to my wish and the end of affrays t Unto Thee, O my Lord 5

be the thanks and the praise !
1 grew up, uncared for and abject and poors But God hath vouchsafed

me the aim of my ways,
I have conquered the lands, I have mastered the folk s But for Thee B I

were nothing, O Ancient of Days !

When Raadshah saw how Agib fared with his brother?
ht called for his charger and donning his harness and coat
©f arms, mounted and pricked out into the field. As soon
ss he drew near Gherib, he cried out to him, saying, 4 O
vilest of Bedouin faggot-bearers, who art thou, that thou
shouldst capture kings and warriors ? Dismount and put
thy hands behind thy back and kiss my feet and set my
warriors free and go with me in chains to my kingdom,
that I may pardon thee and make thee an elder in our
country, so mayst thou eat a morsel of bread there.' When
Gherib heard this, he laughed till he fell backward and
answered, saying, 1 raging dog and scurvy wolf, thou
shalt soon see against whom the shifts of Fate will turn ! *
Then he cried out to Sehim to bring him the prisoners;
so he brought them, and Gherib smote off their heads;
whereupon Raadshah drove at him, with the onslaught of
a lordly champion and a fierce warrior, and they wheeled
3f fgtt an d feinted and hewed at each other till nightfall, when
tttlxliu the drums beat the retreat and the two Kings returned,
each to his own place, where his people gave him joy of
his safety. And the Muslims said to Gherib, ' O King, it is
not of thy wont to prolong a fight 5 6 O folk, 5 answered
he, £ I have done battle with many kings and champions ;
but never saw I a sturdier swordsman than this one. Had


149


I chosen to draw El Mahic upon him, I had crushed his
bones and made an end of his days : but I went about with
him, thinking to take him prisoner and give him part ia
Islam.'

Meanwhile, Raadshah returned to his pavilion, where his
chiefs came in to him and asked him of his adversary, and
he said, ' By the sparkling fire, never in my life saw I the
like of yonder warrior S But to-morrow I will take him
prisoner and lead him away, abject and humbled.' Then
they slept till daybreak, when the drums beat to battle and
the fighting-men girt on their scimitars and mounting their
stout horses, raised their war-cries and drew out into the field 9
filling all the hills and plains and wide places. The first t©
open the chapter of battle was the prince of cavaliers and
the lion of war, King Gherib, who drove his steed between
the two hosts and spurred to and fro, crying, * Who is for
jousting, who is for fighting? Let no sluggard nor weakling
come out to me to-day !' Before he had made an end of
speaking, out came Raadshah, riding on an elephant, as
he were a vast tower, in a howdah girthed with silken
bands; and between the elephant's ears sat the driver,
bearing in his hand a hook, wherewith he goaded the
beast and directed him right and left When the elephant
drew near Gherib's horse, the latter, seeing a creature it had
never before set eyes on, took fright ; wherefore Gherib
dismounted and gave the horse to Kailjan. Then he drew
El Mahic and advanced to meet Raadshah on foot

Now it was Raadshah's wont, when he found himself
overmatched, to mount an elephant, taking with him an
engine called the noose, which was in the shape of a net,
narrow at top and wide at bottom, with a running cord of
silk passed through rings along its edges. With this he
would attack horsemen and casting the net over them,
draw the running noose and pull the rider off his horse
and make him prisoner ; and thus had he conquered many


150

cavaliers. So, when Gherib came up to him, he raised his
hand and casting the net over him, pulled him on to the
back of the elephant and cried out to the latter to return
to the Indian camp. But Kailjan and Courjan, who had
not left Gherib, laid hold of the elephant and falling upon
Raadshah, bound him with a rope of palm-fibres, whilst
Gherib strove with the net, till he rent it in sunder. There-
upon the two armies drove at each other and met with a
shock like two seas crashing or two mountains smiting
together, whilst the dust rose to the confines of the sky
and all eyes were blinded. The battle waxed fierce and
the blood ran in streams, nor did they cease to wage war
lustily with push of pike and stroke of sword, till the day
departed and the night brought on the darkness, when the
drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew asunder.

Now the Muslims were hard pushed that day by reason
of the riders on elephants and giraffes, and many of them
were slain and most of the rest wounded. This was
grievous to Gherib, who commanded the wounded to be
cared for and turning to his chief officers, asked them
what they counselled. ' O King/ answered they, 1 it is
but the elephants and giraffes that irk us ; were we but quit
of them, we should overcome the enemy.' Quoth Kailjan
and Courjan, 5 We two will draw our swords and fall on
them and slay the most part of them.' But there came
forward a man of Oman, who had been privy counsellor
to Julned, and said, 'O King, I will be surety for the
army, if thou wilt but hearken to me and follow my
counsel/ And Gherib turned to his captains and said to
them, * Obey this wise man in whatsoever he shall say to
jNffgljst you.' And they answered, saying, 6 We hear and obey/
Ittlxlb* So he chose out ten captains and said to them, ' How many
men have ye under your hands ? ' And. they replied., 5 Tea
thousand fighting-men/ Then he carried them into the
armoury and armed [five thousand of them with arquebuses


and other] five thousand with cross-bows and taught them
to shoot therewith.

As soon as it was day, the Indians came out to the field,
armed cap-a-pie, with the elephants and giraffes in their
van ; whereupon Gherib and his men mounted and the
drums heat and both hosts drew out in battle array.
Then the counsellor cried out to the archers and arque-
busiers to shoot, and they plied the elephants and giraffes
with shafts and bullets. The arrows and the lead entered
the beasts' flanks s and they roared out and turning upon
their own ranks, trampled them with their feet Then the
Muslims charged the misbelievers and set on them right
and left, whilst the elephants and giraffes trampled them
and drove them into the hills and deserts. Moreover, the
Muslims followed hard upon them with the keen-edged
sword and but few of the giraffes and elephants escaped.

Then Gherib and his folk returned, rejoicing in their
victory ; and on the morrow they divided the spoil and
rested five days; after which King Gherib sat down on
his throne and sending for his brother Agib, said to him s
' O dog, how hast thou assembled the kings against us I
But He who hath power over all things hath given us the
victory over thee Wherefore do thou embrace Islam and
thou shalt be saved, and I will forbear to avenge my father
and mother on thee. Moreover, I will make thee King
again as thou wast and will myself be under thy hand'
But Agib said, ' I will not leave my faith.' So Gherib
bade lay him in iron? and appointed a hundred stalwart
slaves to guard him ; after which he turned to Raadshah
and said to him . ' How sayst thou of the faith of Islam ? '
' O my lord,' answered Raadshah, ' 1 will enter thy faith,
for, were it not a true faith and a goodly, thou hadst not-
carried it over as. So put forth thy hand and I will testify
that there is no god but God and that Abraham the Friend
is His apostle/ At this Gherib rejoiced and said to him,


I$2


3 Is thy heart indeed stablished in the sweetness of the
Faith ? ' And he answered, saying, ' Yes, O my lord ! '
Then said Gherib, s O Raadshah, wilt thou go to thy
country and thy kingdom?' s O my lord,' replied he,

* my father will put me to death, for that I have left his
faith.' Quoth Gherib, 4 1 will go with thee and make thee
King of the country and constrain the folk to obey thee,
by the help of God the Bountiful, the Beneficent' And
Raadshah kissed his hands and feet. Then Gherib re-
warded the counsellor, who had been the cause of the rout
©f the infidels, and gave him great riches ; after which
he turned to Kailjan and Courjan and said to them,
«0 chiefs of the jinn, it is my will that ye carry me,
together with Raadshah and Jemrcan and Saadan, to the
land of Hind.' 'We hear and obey, 3 answered they.
So Courjan took up Jemrcan and Saadan, whilst Kailjan

tSCfgi)! took Gherib and Raadshah, and Jflew on with them from
tlClxb, sundown till the end of the night, when they set them

down on the terrace of King Terkenan's palace at

Cashmere.

Now news was come to Terkenan of the rout of his
army and that his son [was a prisoner], whereat he was sore
troubled and slept not neither took delight in aught. As
he sat in his harem, pondering his case, behold, Gherib
and his company descended the stairways of the palace and
came in to him ; and when he saw his son and those who
were with him, he was confounded and fear took him of
the Marids. Then Raadshah turned to him and said,

* How long wilt thou persist in thy frowardness, O traitor
and worshipper of the Fire ? Woe to thee ! Leave wor-
shipping the fire and serve the Magnanimous King, Creator
of night and day, whom no sight attaineth.' When
Terkenan heard his son's speech, he cast at him m iroa
mace he had by him ; but he avoided it and it fell upon a
buttress of the palace and smote out three stones, Then


153


said the King, 1 dog, thou hast destroyed my troops and
forsaken thy faith and comes t now to make me do likewise \ *
With this Gherib stepped up to him and dealt him a buffet
on the neck, that knocked him down; whereupon the
Marids bound him fast and all the women fled.

Then Gherib sat down on the throne and said to Raad-
shah, 'Do thou justice upon thy father/ So Raadshah
turned to him and said, 'O perverse old man, become
a Muslim and thou shalt be saved from the fire and the
wrath of the Almighty/ And Terkenan said, ' I will die
in my own faith.' Whereupon Gherib drew El Manic and
smote him therewith, and he fell to the earth in two pieces,
and God hurried his soul to the fire and ill was the abiding-
place [to which he went]. Then Gherib bade hang his
body over the gate of the palace and they hung one-half
on the right hand and the other on the left and waited till
day, when Gherib caused Raadshah don the royal habit
and sit down on his father's throne, with himself on his
right hand and Jemrcan and Saadan and the Marids stand-
ing right and left; and he said to Kailjan and Courjan,
'Whoso entereth of the princes and officers, seize him and
bind him, and let not a single captain escape you/ And
they answered, saying, s We hear and obey.'

Presently, the officers made for the palace, to do their
service to the King, and the first to appear was the chief
captain, who, seeing Terkenan's dead body cut in half and
hanging on either side the gate, was seized with horror
and amazement. Then Kailjan laid hold of him by the
collar and dragged him into the palace and bound him;
and before sunrise they had bound three hundred and fifty
captains and set them before Gherib, who said to them,
4 Have you seen your King hanging at the palace-gate ? '
Quoth they, *Who hath done this thing?* And he an-
swered, 5 1 did it, by the help of God the Most High ; and
whoso gainsayeih I will do with him likewise/ Thes


154


said they, 'What is thy will with us?' 6 1 am Gherib,
King of Irak,' answered he, 'he who slew your warriors;
and now Raadshah has embraced the faith of submission
and is become a mighty king and ruler over you. So do ye
become true believers and all shall be well with you ; but,
if you refuse, you shall repent it' So they pronounced the
profession of the faith and were numbered of the people
of felicity. Then said Gherib, 'Are your hearts indeed
stablished in the sweetness of the Faith?' And they
answered, 'Yes;' whereupon he bade release them and
clad them in robes of honour, saying, ' Go to your people
JCl'fiI)t and expound Islam to them. Whosoever accepts the faith,
btllbf. spare him ; but, if he refuse, slay him.' So they went out
and assembling the men under their command, expounded
Islam to them, and they all professed, except a few, whom
they put to death ; after which they returned and told
Gherib, who praised God the Most High and glorified
Him, saying, ' Praised be God who hath made this thing
easy to us without strife ! '

Then he abode in Cashmere forty days, till he had
ordered the affairs of the country and cast down the
shrines and temples of the Fire and built mosques and
places of worship in their stead, whilst Raadshah made
ready for him gifts and treasures beyond count and de-
spatched them to Irak in ships. Then Gherib mounted
on Kailjan's back and Jemrcan and Saadan on that of
Courjan, after they had taken leave of Raadshah, and
before daybreak they were in Oman, where their troops
met them and saluted them and rejoiced in them. Then
they set out for Cufa, where Gherib called fcr his brother
Agib and commanded to crucify him on the city-gate and
shoot at him with arrows. So Sehim brought hooks of
iron and driving them into the tendons of Agib's heels,,
hung him over the gate : and they riddled him with
arrows, till he was like a porcupine.


155


Then Gherib entered his palace and sitting down on the
throne of his kingship, passed the day in ordering the
affairs of the state. At nightfall he went in to his harem,
where Morning Star came to meet him and embraced him
and gave him joy, she and her women, of his safety. He
lay the night with her and on the morrow, after he had
washed and prayed the morning prayer, he sat down on
his throne and commanded preparation to be made for
his marriage with Mehdiyeh. So they slaughtered three
thousand head of sheep and two thousand oxen and a
thousand goats and five hundred camels and the like
number of horses, beside four thousand fowls and great
store of geese ; never was such a wedding in Islam to
that day. Then he went in to Mehdiyeh and did away
her maidenhead and abode with her ten days ; after which
he committed the kingdom to his uncle Damigh, charging
him to rule the people justly, and journeyed with his
women and warriors, till he came to the ships laden with
presents, which Raadshah had sent him, and divided the
treasure among his troops. Then they fared on till they
reached the city of Babel, where he bestowed on Sehim
a dress of honour and appointed him Sultan of the city.
He abode with him ten days, at the end of which time he jNTtQfjt
set out again and journeyed till he reached the castle of tJclxbtit
Saadan the Ghoul, where they rested five days.

Then said Gherib to Kailjan and Courjan, 'Go ye to
Isbanir el Medain, to the palace of Chosroes, and find
what is come of Fekhr Taj and bring me one of the King's
kinsmen, who shall acquaint me with what has passed.'
' We hear and obey,' answered they and set out forthright
for Isbanir. As they flew between heaven and earth, they
caught sight of a mighty army, as it were the swollen sea,
and Kailjan said to Courjan, J Let us descend and see what
Is this army.' So they alighted and walking among the
troops, found them Persians and questioned the soldiers


156


whose men they were and whither they were bound; to
which they made answer, saying, 6 We are bound for Irak,
to kill Gherib and all who are with him.' When the
Marids heard this, they repaired to the pavilion of the
Persian general, whose name was Rustem, and waited till
the soldiers slept, when they took up Rustem, bed and all,
and made for Gherib's camp. They arrived there by mid-
night and going to the door of the King's pavilion, said,
4 Permission ; ' which when the latter heard, he sat up and
said, * Enter.' So they entered and set down the couch
with Rustem asleep thereon. Quoth Gherib, 'Who is this?'
and they answered, 'This is a Persian prince, whom we
met coming with a great host, thinking to slay thee and
thine ; and we have brought him to thee, that he may tell
thee what thou hast a mind to know.' 'Fetch me a hun-
dred men,' said Gherib, and they fetched them ; whereupon
he made them draw their swords and stand at Rustem's
head.

Then they awoke him and he opened his eyes and
finding a vault of steel over his head, shut them again,
saying, 'What is this foul dream?' But Kailjan pricked
him with his sword-point and he sat up and said 'Where
am I ? ' Quoth Sehim, ' Thou art in the presence of King
Gherib, son-in-law of the King of the Persians. What
is thy name and whither goest thou?' When Rustem
heard Gherib's name, he bethought himself and said, ' Am
I asleep or on wake?' Whereupon Sehim dealt him a buffet,
saying, 'Why dost thou not answer?' And he raised his
head and said, ' Who brought me from my tent out of the
midst of my men?' Quoth Gherib, 'These two Marids
brought thee.' So he looked at them and voided in his
hose [for affright]. Then the Marids fell upon him, baring
their tusks and brandishing their swords, and said to him,
8 Wilt thou not rise and kiss the earth before King Gherib? 5
and he trembled at them and was assured that he was


157

not asleep; so he stood up and kissed the earth before
Gherib, saying, £ The blessing of the Fire be on thee, O
King, and long be thy life ! ' t O dog of the Persians,'
answered Gherib, 'fire is not worshipful, for that it is
harmful and profiteth not save for [cooking] food.' 'Who
then is worshipful ? ' asked Rustem ; and Gherib replied,
saying, ' God alone is worshipworth, who made thee and
formed thee and created the heavens and the earth.' Quoth
the Persian, ' What shall 1 say, that I may become of the
party of this Lord and enter thy faith ? ' ' Say,' rejoined
Gherib, ' " There is no god but God, and Abraham is the
friend of God." ! So Rustem pronounced the profession of
the faith and was written of the people of felicity.

Then said he to Gherib, 'Know, O my lord, that thy
father-in-law, King Sabour, seeks to kill thee and hath
sent me with a hundred thousand men, charging me to
spare none of you.' Quoth Gherib, ' Is this my reward for
having delivered his daughter from death and dishonour?
God will requite him his evil intent. But what is thy
name ? ' And the Persian answered, saying, ' My name
is Rustem, general of Sabour.' Quoth Gherib, 'Thou
shalt have the like rank in my army. But tell me,
O Rustem, how is it with the princess Fekhr Taj ? '
' May thy head live, O King of the age ! ' answered
Rustem. ' What was the cause of her death ? ' asked
Gherib ; and Rustem said, ' my lord, no sooner hadst
thou left us, than one of the princess's women went in to
King Sabour and said to him, " O my lord, didst thou give
Gherib leave to lie with the princess my mistress ? " " No,
by the virtue of the fire ! " answered he, and drawing his
sword, went in to his daughter and said to her, " Q filthy
baggage, why didst thou suffer yonder Bedouin to lie
with thee, without wedding or dower ? " " O my father "
answered she, " thou gavest him leave to lie with me. !!
" Did he have to do with thee ? " asked he. But she was


SS8

silent and hung down her head. Then he cried out to the
midwives and slave-girls, saying, " Bind this harlot's hands
behind her and look at her privy parts ! " So they did as
he bade and said to him, " O King, she hath lost her
maidenhead." Whereupon he ran at her and would have
slain her, but her mother threw herself between them,
saying, "O King, slay her not, lest thou be for ever
dishonoured ; but shut her in a ceil till she die." So he
cast her into prison till nightfall, when he called two of his
officers and said to them, " Carry her afar off and cast her
into the river J ihon and tell none." They did his com-
TNTfgflt mandment, and indeed her memory is forgotten and her
MxbuL time is past.'

When Gherib heard this, he said, £ By the virtue of Abra-
ham the Friend, I will assuredly go to yonder dog and
destroy him and lay waste his kingdom ! ' Then he sent
letters to Jemrcan and to the governors of Mosul and Meyya
Farikin and turning to Rustem, said to him, ' How many men
hadst thou in thine army ? ' 'A hundred thousand Persian
horse,' answered he. And Gherib said, 'Take ten thousand
horse and go to thy people and occupy them with war.' So
Rustem took ten thousand Arab horse and departed, saying
in himself, s I will do a thing that shall whiten my face with
King Gherib.' So he fared on seven days, till there re-
mained but half a day's journey between him and the
Persian camp ; when he divided his men into four troops
and bade them attack the Persians from different sides and
fall on them with the sword. So they rode on from even-
tide till midnight, when they came to the camp of the
Persians, who were asleep in security, and fell upon them,
shouting, ' God is Most Great ! ' Whereupon the Persians
started up from sleep and their feet slipped and the sabre
went round amongst them ; for the All-knowing King was
wroth with them, and Rustem wrought amongst them as
ire In dry firewood, till, by the end of the night, the whole


*S9

of the Persian host was slain or wounded or fled, and the
Muslims made prize of their tents and baggage and horses
and camels and treasure-chests. Then they alighted and
rested in the tents of the beaten army, till Gherib came up
and seeing what Rustem had done, invested him with a
dress of honour and said to him, ' O Rustem, it was thou
didst put the Persians to the rout ; wherefore all the spoil
is thine/ So he kissed Gherib's hand and thanked him,
and they rested till the end of the day, when they set out
for King Sabour's capital.

Meanwhile, the survivors of the defeated army reached
Isbanir and went in to Sabour, crying out and saying.,
' Alas ! ' and ' Ruin ! ' and ' Woe worth the day ! ' Quoth
he;, 5 What hath befallen you and who hath smitten you
with his mischief? ' So they told him all that had passed
and how his general Rustem had embraced Islam and
fallen upon them in the darkness of the night and routed
them. When the King heard this, he cast his crown to the
ground and said, ' There is no worth left to us 1 ' Then he
turned to his son Werd Shah and said to him, { O my son,
there is none for this affair but thou.' ' By thy life, O my
father/ answered Werd Shah, 1 1 will assuredly bring Gherib
and his chiefs of the people in chains and slay all who are
with him.' Then he numbered his army and found it eleven
score thousand men. So they slept, intending to set forth
on the morrow j but, next morning, as they were about to
depart, a cloud of dust arose and spread till it covered the
lands and baffled the sharpest sight

Now Sabour had mounted to take leave of his son, and
when he saw this great dusts he despatched a runner to
discover the cause thereof, who went and returned, saying,
i O my lord, Gherib and his men are upon you ; ' where-
upon they unloaded their beasts and drew out in order ol
battle, When Gherib came up and saw the Persians drawn
out in battalia, he cried out to his men, saying, 5 Charge^


i6o

and the blessing of God be upon you ! ' So they waved
the standards and the Arabs and the Persians drove at
each other and people fell upon people, The blood ran
in streams and air souls saw death face to face ; the brave
advanced and pressed forward and the coward turned and
fled and they ceased not from the battle till ended day,
when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew
apart. Then Sabour commanded to pitch his camp before
the city-gate, and Gherib set up his tents in front of
theirs and every one went to his tent until the morning.
tNTfftht As soon as it was day, the two hosts mounted their strong
tftlxfx horses and couched their lances and donned their harness
of war; then they raised their war-cries and drew out in
battle-array, whilst all the lordly champions and the lions
of war came forth.

The first to open the chapter of battle was Rustem s who
spurred his charger into the mid-field and cried out, saying,
4 God is Most Great! I am Rustem, chief of the champions
of the Arabs and the Persians. Who is for jousting, who is
for fighting ? Let no sluggard or weakling come out to me
to-day ! ' Then there came forth to him a champion of the
Persians and there befell between them a sore battle, till
Rust em smote his adversary with a mace he had with him,
seventy pounds in weight, and beat his head down upon
his breast, and he fell to the earth, dead and drowned in
his blood. This was grievous to Sabour and he commanded
his men to charge ; so they drove at the Muslims, invoking
the aid of the light-giving Sun, whilst the Muslims called
for help upon the Magnanimous King, But the infidels
outnumbered the true believers and made them drink the
cup of death ; which when Gherib saw, he drew his sword El
Mahic and crying out [his war-cry], fell upon the Persians,,
with Kailjan and Courjan at his either stirrup : nor did he
leave tourneying amongst them with the sword till he hewed
his way to the standard-bearer and smote him on the head


i6i

with the fiat of his sword, whereupon he fell down in a
swoon and the two Marids carried him off to their camp.
When the Persians saw the standard fallen, they turned and
fled towards the gates of the city ; but the Muslims followed
them with the sword and they crowded together to enter
the city, so that they could not shut the gates and there
died of them much people. Then Rustem and Saadan
and Jemrcan and Sehim and Kailjan and Courjan and all
the Muslim braves and the champions of the Faith of
Unity fell upon the misbelieving Persians in the gates
and the blood of the infidels ran in the streets like a tide ?
till they threw down their arms and harness and called out
for quarter; whereupon the Muslims stayed their hands
from the slaughter and drove them to their tents, as one
drives a flock of sheep.

Meanwhile, Gherib returned to his pavilion, where he
did off his harness and washed himself of the blood of
the infidels; after which he donned his royal robes and
sat down on his chair of estate. Then he called for the
King of the Persians and said to him, ' Q dog of the
Persians, what moved thee to deal thus with thy daughter?
How seest thou me unworthy to be her husband?' And
Sabour answered, saying, s O King, be not wroth with me
for that which I did ; for I repent me and came out to
thee in battle but in my fear of thee.' When Gherib
heard this, he bade throw him down and beat him. So
they beat him, till he could no longer groan, and cast him
among the prisoners. Then Gherib expounded Islam to
the Persians and six-score thousand of them embraced
.he faith, and the rest he put to the sword. Moreover,
all the townsfolk professed Islam and Gherib mounted
and entered the city in great state.

Then he went into the King's palace and sitting down
on his throne, gave gifts and largesse and distributed the
booty and treasure among the Arabs and Persians, where-

VOL. VL 12


1 62

fore they loved him and wished him power and victory and
length of days. But Fekhr Taj's mother remembered her
daughter and raised the voice of mourning for her, and the
palace was filled with crying and lamentation. Gherib
heard this and entering the harem, asked the women what
ailed them, whereupon the princess's mother came forward
and said, ' O my lord, thy presence put me in mind of my
daughter and how she would have joyed in thy coming, had
she been alive.' Gherib wept for her and sitting down on
his throne, called for Sabour, and they brought him,
stumbling in his shackles. Quoth Gherib to him, ' Q dog
of the Persians, what didst thou with thy daughter?' 'I
gave her to such an one and such an one/ answered the
King, ' saying, " Drown her in the river Jihon." ' So Gherib
sent for the two men and said to them, ' Is what he saith
true?' £ Yes, O King,' answered they; 'yet did we not
drown her, but took pity on her and left her on the banks
of the Jihon, saying, " Save thyself and do not return to the
city, lest the King put thee to death and us with thee."
j^Tfgfjt This is all we know of her.' When Gherib heard this, he
tltlXX, summoned the astrologers and said to them, ' Draw me a
geomantic figure and find out what is come of Fekhr Taj
and whether she is still in the chains of life or dead.' So
they levelled a table of sand and drawing a geomantic
figure, said, ' O King, the princess is alive and hath borne
a male child ; but she is with a tribe of the Jinn and will be
absent from thee twenty years ; look, therefore, how many
years thou hast been absent.' So he reckoned up the years
of his absence and found them eight years and said, 'There
is no power and no virtue but in God the Most High, the
Supreme ! ' Then he sent for all Sabour's governors of
towns and strongholds and they came and did him homage,.
One day after this s as he sat in his palace, a cloud of
dust appeared in the distance and spread till it covered the
whole country and darkened the horizon. So he despatched


163


the two Marids to reconnoitre, and they went forth and
snatching tip a horseman of the advancing army, returned
and set him down before Gherib, saying, ' Ask this fellow,
for he is of the army.' Quoth Gherib, 'Whose army is
this ? ' And the man answered, ' O King, it is the army of
Khired Shah, King of Shiraz, who is come to do battle with
thee.' Now the manner of Khired Shah's coming was on
this wise. When Gherib defeated Sabour's army, as hath
been related, and took the King himself, the latter's son
fled, with a handful of his father's men, to Shiraz, where he
went in to King Khired Shah and kissed the earth before
him, whilst the tears ran down his cheeks. When the
King saw him in this case, he said to him, ' Lift thy head,
O youth, and tell me what makes thee weep." s O King,'
answered the prince, ' a King of the Arabs, by name Gherib,
hath fallen on us and taken the King my father prisoner
and slain the Persians and made them drink the cup of
death.' And he told him all that had befallen. Quoth
Khired Shah, ' Is my wife 1 well ?' And the prince answered,
saying, ' Gherib hath taken her.' 4 As my head liveth,' cried
the King, ' I will not leave a Bedouin or a Muslim on the
face of the earth ! ' So he wrote letters to his governors,
who levied their troops and joined him with an army of
fourscore and five thousand men Then he opened his
armouries and distributed arms and armour to the troopSj
after which he set "out with them and journeyed till he
came to Isbanir and encamped before the city-gate.

With this Kailjan and Courjan came in to Gherib and
kissing his knee, said to him, ' O King, heal our hearts and
give us this army to our share ! ' And he said, ' Up and at
them ! ' So they flew up into the air and lighting down in
the pavilion of the King of Shiraz, found him seated on
his chair of estate, with the Prince of Persia sitting on his

1 i.e. Fekbr Taj, who had been promised him in marriage, See
supri, p. ^6.


1 64

right hand s and about him his captains, with whom he was
taking counsel for the slaughter of the Muslims. Kailjan
caught up the Prince and Courjan the King and flew back
with them to Gherib, who caused beat them, till they
fainted. Then the Marids returned to the Shirazi camp
and drawing their swords, which no mortal man might
wield, fell upon the infidels, and God hurried their souls
to the fire and evil was the abiding-place [to which they
went], whilst they saw nothing but two swords flashing
and reaping men, as a husbandman reaps corn. So they
forsook their tents and mounting their horses bare-backecl
fled for their lives. The Marids pursued them two days
and slew of them much people, after which they returned
and kissed Gherib's hand. He thanked them for that which
they had done and said to them, ' The spoil of the infidels
is yours alone : none shall share with you therein.' So
they called down blessings on him and going fovth f

jWfafN gathered the booty together and abode in their own place.

tjdxxle Meanwhile, the remains of the beaten army drew not
bridle, till they reached the city of Shiraz and there lifted
up the voice of weeping for those that had been slain of
them. Now King Khired Shah had a brother by name
Siran the Sorcerer, than whom there was no greater wizard
in his day, and he lived apart from his brother in a certain
stronghold, called the Castle of Fruits, in a place abound-
ing in trees and streams and birds and flowers, half a day's
journey from Shiraz. So the fugitives betook them thither
and went in to Siran, weeping and crying out. Quoth he,
*0 folk, what ails you to weep?' And they told him all
that had happened, whereupon the light in his eyes became
darkness and he said, ' By the virtue of my faith, I will slay
Gherib and all his men and leave not one alive to tell the
tale!' Then he pronounced certain magical words and
summoned the Red King, who appeared and Siran said to
him. 'Go to Isbanir and fall on Gherib s as he sits upon


' 'I

■1

i I

1 I
! !

1


t


•■'I


165


his throne.* 'I hear and obey,' answered the genie, and
gathering his troops, repaired to Isbanir and set upon
Gherib. When the latter saw him, he drew his sword El
Mab ; c and he and Kailjan and Courjan fell upon the army
of the Red King and slew of them five hundred and thirty
and wounded the King himself grievously ; whereupon he
and his people fled and stayed not in their flight, till they
reached the Castle of Fruits and went in to Siran, crying
out and saying, ' Woe ! ' and { Ruin V And the Red King
said to Siran, 'O sage, Gherib hath with him the en-
chanted sword of Japhet son of Noah, whomsoever he
smites withal, he cuts him in sunder, and with him also are
two Marids from the Mountain Caf, given him by King
Muraash. He it is who slew the Blue King and Bercan,
lord of the Cornelian City, and did to death much people
of the Jinn.'

When Siran heard this, he dismissed the Red King and
conjuring up a Marid, by name Zuazia, gave him a drachm
of powdered henbane and said to him, ' Take the form of
a sparrow and go to King Gherib's palace at Isbanir. Wait
till he is asleep and there is none with him ; then put the
henbane up his nostrils and bring him to me.' ' I hear and
obey,' answered the Marid and changing himself into a
sparrow, flew to Isbanir, where he perched on a window
of the palace and waited till all Gherib's attendants re-
tired and the King himself slept. Then he flew down and
going up to Gherib, blew the powdered henbane into his
nostrils, till he lost his senses, whereupon he wrapped him
in the coverlet of the bed and flew off with him, like the
storm-wind, to the Castle of Fruits; where he arrived at
midnight and laid his prize before Siran. The enchanter
thanked him and would have put Gherib to death, as he
lay senseless ) but a man of his people withheld him, say-
ing, 1 O sage, if thou slay him, his friend King Muraash
will fail on m with all his Jinn and lay waste our realm/


1 66

'How then shall we do with him? asked Siran. 'Cast
him into the Jihon,' answered the other, ' and he will be
drowned and none will know who threw him in/ And
ftffgfjt Siran bade the Marid take Gherib and cast him into the
tfdnfi. Jihon. So he carried him down to the river-bank, but it
was grievous to him to drown him, wherefore he made
& raft of wood and binding it with cords, pushed it and
Gherib thereon out into the current, which carried it away.

Meanwhile, when Gherib's people awoke in the morning
and went in to do their service to their King, they found
him not and seeing his rosary on the throne, awaited him
awhile, but he came not So they sought out the chamber-
lain and said to him, ' Go into the harem and look for the
King ; for it is not his wont to tarry till this time.' Ac-
cordingly, the chamberlain entered the harem and enquired
for the King, but the women said, 1 We have not seen him
since yesterday.' So he returned and told the officers, who
were confounded and said, ' Let us see if he have gone to
take his pleasure in the gardens.' Then they went out and
questioned the gardeners if they had seen the King, and
they answered, ' No ; ' whereat they were sore concerned
and searched all the gardens till the end of the day, when
they returned, weeping. . Moreover, the Marids sought
for him all round the town, but returned after three days,
without having come on any tidings of him. So the people
donned black and made their complaint to the Lord of all
Creatures, who doth what pleaseth Him.

Meanwhile, the current bore the raft along for five days,
till it brought it to the salt sea, where the waves played
with Gherib and his stomach, being troubled, threw up the
henbane. Then he opened his eyes and finding himself
in the midst of the sea, tossed about by the waves, said s
f There is no power and no virtue but in God the Most
High, the Supreme ! I wonder who hath done diis thing
with me ! ' Presently, as he lay, knowing not what to


1 6/

make of his case, he caught sight of a ship and signalled
with his sleeve to the sailors, who came to him and took
him up, saying, 'Who art thou and whence comest thou?'
Quoth he, * Do ye feed me and give me to drink, till
I recover myself, and after I will tell you who I am.' So
they brought him water and victual, and he ate and drank
and God restored his reason to him. Then said he to
them, ' O folk, what countrymen are ye and what is your
faith ? * * We are from Kerej,' 1 answered they, ' and worship
an idol called Mincash.' ' Perdition to you and your
idol ! ' cried Gherib. ' O dogs, none is worthy of worship
save God who created all things, who saith to a thing
"Be!" and it is.' When they heard this, they fell upon
him in great wrath and would have seized him. Now he
was unarmed, but whomsoever he struck, he smote down
and deprived of life, till he had felled forty men, after
which they overcame him by force of numbers and bound
him fast, saying, 'We will not put him to death save in
our own country, that we may [first] show him to our
King.'

Then they sailed on till they came to the city of Kerej, tKTfgfjf
the builder whereof was a fierce Amalekite and set up at fcCuXlii
each gate of the city a magical figure of brass, which,
whenever a stranger entered, blew a blast on a trumpet,
that all in the city heard it and fell upon the stranger and
slew him, except he embraced their faith. When Gherib
entered the city, the brazen figure stationed at the gate
blew such a terrible blast that the King was affrighted and
going in to his idol, found fire and smoke issuing from its
eyes And mouth and nostrils. Now a devil had entered
the belly of the idol and speaking as with its tongue, said
to the King of the city, £ O King, there is come to thy
city one Gherib, King of Irak, who uses to bid the folk
quit their faith and worship his Lord ; wherefore s whera
1 A town in Persian Irak.


i68


they bring him before thee, look thou spare him not'
So the King went out and sat down on his throne ; and
presently, the sailors brought in Gherib, saying, ' O King,
we found this youth shipwrecked in the midst of the sea,
and he believeth not in our gods.' Then they told him
all that had passed and the King said, 4 Carry him to the
house of the great idol and cut his throat before him, so
haply he may look favourably upon us.' But the Vizier
said, 1 O King, it befits not to slaughter him thus, for he
would die forthright; rather let us burn him with fire. 5

So the King commanded to cast Gherib into prison and
caused wood to be brought ; and they made a great pyre
and set fire to it, and it burnt till the morning,. Then the
King and the people of the city came forth and the King
sent to fetch Gherib ; but his men found him not ; so they
returned and told the King, who said, ' How made he his
escape?' Quoth they, 5 We found the doors locked and
the chains and shackles cast down.' Whereat the King
marvelled and said, ' Hath this fellow flown up to heaven
or sunk into the earth ? ' And they said, ' We know not,'
Then said the King, 5 1 will go and ask my god, and he
will tell me whither he is gone. 5 So he rose and went in,
to prostrate himself to his idol, but found it not and began
to rub his eyes and say s ' Am I asleep or awake ? ' Then
he turned to his Vizier and said to him, ' Where is my
god and where is the prisoner? By my faith, O dog of
Viziers, hadst thou not counselled me to burn him, I had
slaughtered him ; for it is he who hath stolen my god and
fled ; and needs must I be avenged of him 1 ' Then he
drew his sword and cut off the Vizier's head.

Now there was a strange cause for Gherib's escape, and
It was on this wise. When they had shut him up in a cell
adjoining the temple of the idol, he rose to pray, calling
upon the name of God the Most High and seeking de-
liverance of Him, may He be exalted and glorified ! The


169


Marid who had charge of the idol and spoke in its name s
heard him and fear gat hold upon his heart and he said,
' Confusion ! Who is this that seeth me and whom I see
not ? ' So he went in to Gherib and throwing himself at
his feet, said to him, 'O my lord, what must I say that
I may become of thy company and enter thy religion?'
1 Say,' answered Gherib, " ' There is no god but God, and
Abraham is the Friend of God,'" So the Marid pronounced
the profession of the faith and was written of the people
of felicity. Now his name was Zelzal, son of El Muzelzel,
one of the chief of the Kings of the Jinn. Then he un-
bound Gherib and taking him and the idol, made for the l^igfjt
upper air. fcchxfb,

When the King's soldiers saw what had befallen, they re-
nounced the worship of the idol and drawing their swords,
slew the King ; after which they fell on one another, and
the sword went round amongst them three days, till there
abode alive but two men, one of whom overcame the other
and killed him. Then the boys attacked the survivor
and slew him and fell to fighting amongst themselves, till
they were all killed ; and the women and girls fled to the
hamlets and villages ; wherefore the city became desert and
none dwelt therein but the owl.

Meanwhile, the Marid Zelzal flew with Gherib towards
his own country, the Islands of Camphor and the Castle
of Crystal and the land of the Enchanted Calf, so called
because its King, Muzelzel, had a pied calf, which he clad
in housings of gold brocade and worshipped as a god.
One day, the King and his people went in to the calf and
found him trembling ; so the King said, ' O my god, what
hath troubled thee?' Whereupon the Satan in the calPs
belly cried out and said, ' O Muzelzel, thy son hath deserted
to the faith of Abraham the Friend, at the hands of Gherib §
King of Irak.' When the King heard this, he was con<-
founded and going forth, sat down upon his throne. Then


170

he summoned his grandees and told them what he had
heard from the idol, whereat they marvelled and said,
t What shall we do, O King ? ' Quoth he, ' When my son
comes and ye see me embrance him, do ye lay hold of him. 5
And they said, ' We hear and obey.'

After two days came Zelzal and Gherib, with the King's
Idol of Kerej, but no sooner had they entered the palace-
gate than the Jinn seized on them and carried them before
Muzelzel, who looked at his son with angry eyes and said
to him, e O dog of a genie, hast thou left thy faith and
that of thy fathers and grandfathers?' Quoth Zelzal, 'I have
embraced the true faith, and thou, do thou likewise and
thou shalt be saved from the wrath of the Almighty King,
Creator of Night and Day.' Therewith his father waxed
wroth and said, 'O whoreson, dost thou affront me with
these words ? ' Then he bade clap him in prison and
turning to Gherib, said to him, '0 wretch of a mortal,
how hast thou abused my son's wit and seduced him from
his faith ? ' Quoth Gherib, ' Indeed, I have brought him
out of error into the way of righteousness, out of Hell into
Paradise and out of idolatry to the true faith.' Whereupon
the King cried out to a Marid called Siyyar, saying, ' Take
this dog and cast him into the Valley of Fire, that he may
perish.'

Now this valley was situate in the desert quarter of the
world and was so named by reason of the excess of its
heat and the flaming of its fire, which was so fierce that
none who fell therein could live an hour, but was de-
stroyed; and it was compassed about by high and slippery
mountains, wherein was no opening. So Siyyar took up
Gherib and flew with him towards the Valley of Fire, till
he came within an hour's journey thereof, when, being
aweary, be alighted in a valley full of trees and streams
and fruits, and setting down Gherib, chained as he was,
fell asleep for weariness. When Gherib saw that he slept


I/I

and heard him snore, he strove with his bonds till he burst

them ; then, taking up a heavy stone, he cast it down on
the Marid's head and crushed his bones, so that he died
forthright. Then he fared on into the valley and found tWfgfjt
himself in a great island in mid-ocean, full of all fruits fcclttk
that lips and tongue could desire. So he abode alone on
the island, drinking of its waters and eating of its fruits
and of fish that he caught, and days and years passed
over him, till he had sojourned there seven years.

One day, as he sat s there came down on him from the air
two Marids, each carrying a man ; and they said to him,
'Who art thou, O fellow, and of which of the tribes art
thou ? ' Now they took him for a genie, because his hair
was grown long ; and he replied, saying, ' I am no genie/
and told them all that had befallen him ; whereupon they
grieved for him and said, ' Abide here till we carry these
two lambs to our king, that he may make the morning meal
of the one and sup on the other, and after we will come
back and carry thee to thine own country.' He thanked
them and said, ' Where are the lambs?' Quoth they, ' These
two mortals are the lambs/ And Gherib said, ' I crave the
protection of the God of Abraham the Friend, the Lord
of all creatures, who hath power over everything ! ' Then
the Marids flew away and Gherib abode awaiting them two
days, when one of them returned, bringing with him a suit
of clothes, in which he clad him. Then he took him
up and flew with him out of sight of earth, till Gherib
heard the angels glorifying God in heaven, and a flaming
arrow issued from amongst them and made for the Marid,
who fled from it towards the earth. The arrow pursued
him, till he came within a spear's cast of the earth, when
Gherib leapt from Ms back, and the fiery shaft overtook
the Marid, who became a heap of ashes,

As for Gherib, he fell into the sea and sank two fathomi
deeps after which he came to the surface and swam for tro


i; 2


days and two nights, till his strength failed him and he
despaired of life. But, on the third day, he caught sight
of a steep and mountainous island ; so he made for it and
landing, walked on inland, where he rested a day and
a night, feeding on the fruits of the earth. Then he
climbed to the mountain-top and descending the opposite
slope, fared on two days till he came in sight of a walled
and fortified city, abounding in trees and streams. So he
made for it, but, when he reached the gate, the warders
seized on him and carried him to their queen, whose name
was Janshah. Now she was five hundred years old, and
every man who entered the city, they brought to her and
she lay with him ; then, when he had done his work, she
put him to death, and so had she slain many men. When
she saw Gherib, he pleased her and she said to him,
'What is thy name and faith and whence comest thou? 1
Quoth he, ( My name is Gherib, Ring of Irak, and I am
a Muslim. 5 ' Leave this faith,' said she, 5 and enter mine
and I will marry thee and make thee king.' But he looked
at her with angry eyes and said, ' Thy faith perish with
thee ! ' Quoth she, ' Dost thou blaspheme my idol, the
which is of red cornelian, set with pearls and jewels ? '
And she cried out to her men, saying, ' Imprison him in
the house of the idol ; peradventure it will soften his
heart' So they shut him up in the temple and locking
foclnht* the doors upon him, went their way. As soon as they
were gone, Gherib went up to the idol, which was of red
cornelian, with collars of pearls and precious stones about
its neck, and lifting it up, dashed it on the ground and
broke it in pieces ; after which he lay down and slept till
daybreak.

Next morning, the Queen sat down on her bed of estate
and said to her men, 'Bring me the prisoner. 5 So they
opened the temple doors and entering, found the idol
broken in piecesj, whereupon they buffeted their faces s till.


173


the blood ran from the corners of their eyes. Then they
made at Gherib, to seize him ; but he smote one of them
with his fist and killed him, and so did he with another
and another, till he had slain five-and-twenty of them and
the rest fled to Queen Janshah, crying out Quoth she s
4 What is the matter ? ' And they said, ' The prisoner hath
broken thine idol and slain thy men,' and told her all that
had passed. When she heard this, she cast her crown to
the ground and said, ' There is no worth left in idols S s
Then she mounted with a thousand fighting-men and rode
to the temple, where she found Gherib had gotten him a
sword and come forth and was slaying men and over-
throwing warriors. When she saw his prowess, her heart
was drowned in the love of him and she said in herself, 4 1
have no need of the idol and care for nought but this
Gherib, that he may lie in my bosom the rest of my life.'
Then she bade her men hold aloof from Gherib, and going
up to him, muttered certain magical words, whereupon his
arm became benumbed and the sword dropped from his
grasp. So they seized him and bound him, as he stood
confounded and stupefied.

Then the Queen returned to her palace and seating her-
self on her throne, bade her people withdraw and leave
Gherib with her. When they were alone, she said to him 8
* O dog of the Arabs, wilt thou break my. idol and slay my
men ? ' ' O accursed woman,' answered he, * had he been
a god, he had defended himself ! ' Quoth she, * Lie with
me and I will forgive thee that which thou hast done.'
But he replied, saying, ' I will do nought of this.' And
she said, 'By the virtue of my faith, I will punish thee
grievously ! ' So she took water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled it upon him and he became an ape. And she
used to feed and keep him in a closet, appointing one to
care for him ; and in this plight he abode two years.
Then she called him to her one day and said to him s 4 Wilt


174


thou hearken to me?' And he signed to her with his
head, as who should say, 'Yes,' So she rejoiced and freed
him from the enchantment. Then she brought him food
and he ate and toyed with her and kissed her, so that she
trusted in him. When it was night, she lay down and said
to him, 'Come, do thy business.' 'It is well,' answered
he and mounting on her breast, seized her by the neck
and broke it, nor did he arise from her till life had left
her. Then, seeing an open cabinft, he went in and found
there a sword of watered steel and a buckler of Chinese
iron; so he armed himself cap-a-pie and waited till
the day.

As soon as it was morning, he went forth and stood
at the gate of the palace. When the Amirs came and
would have gone in to do their service to the Queen, they
found Gherib standing at the gate, clad in complete steel ;
and he said to them, ' O folk, leave the service of idols and
worship the All-wise King, Creator of Night and Day, who
giveth life to dry bones, for He made all things and
hath dominion over all' When they heard this, they ran
at him, but he fell on them like a ravening lion and slew
NfcrJjt of them much people ; but, when the night came, they
overcame him by dint of numbers and would have taken
him, when behold, there descended upon the infidels a
thousand Marids, under the command of Zelzal, who plied
them with the keen sabre and made them drink the cup of
perdition, whilst God hurried their souls to the fire, till but
few were left of the people of Janshah and the rest cried
out for quarter and believed in the Requiting King, whom
no one thing diverteth from another, the Destroyer of
tyrants and Exterminator of the Chosroes, Lord of this
world and the next.

Then Zelzal saluted Gherib and gave him joy of his
safety; and Gherib said to him, s How knewest thou of
my plight?' 'O my lord,' answered Zelzal., ( my father


X75


kept me in prison two years, after which he released mCj
and I abode with him another year, till I was restored to
favour with him, when I slew him and his subjects sub-
mitted to me. I ruled them for a year's space, till, one
night, I lay down to sleep, having thee in my mind, and
saw thee, in a dream, fighting against Janshah's people ;
wherefore I took these thousand Marids and came to thee."
And Gherib marvelled at this happy chance. Then he
took Janshah's treasures and those of the slain and ap-
pointed a ruler over the city, after which the Marids took
up Gherib and the treasure and he lay the same night in
the palace of Crystal. He abode Zelzal's guest six months,
at the end of which time he desired to depart ; so Zelzal
gave him rich presents and despatched three thousand
Marids, who brought the spoils of the city of Kerej and
added them to those of Janshah. Then^ Zelzal loaded
forty thousand Marids with the treasure and himself taking
up Gherib, flew with his host towards the city of Isbanir,
where they arrived at midnight.

Gherib looked and seeing the city invested on all sides
by a vast army, as it were the swollen sea, said to Zelzal,
4 O my brother, how cometh the city thus beleaguered and
what is this army?' Then he alighted on the roof of his
palace and cried out, saying, £ Ho, Morning Star ! Ho,
Mehdiyeh ! ' Whereupon they started up from sleep in
amazement and said, ' Who calleth us at this hour ? '
Quoth he, 4 It is I, your lord, Gherib of the wondrous
deeds.' When the princesses heard their lord's voice,
they rejoiced and so did the eunuchs and women. Then
Gherib went down to them and they threw themselves
upon him and raised cries of joy, that all the palace rang
again and the captains of the army awoke and said,
i What is to do?' So they made for the palace and said
to the eunuchs, ' Hath one of the King's women given
birth to a child?' ' No,' answered they; e but rejoice, foz


IJ6

King Gherib hath returned to you.' So they rejoiced, and
Gherib came forth to his comrades, who threw themselves
upon him and kissed his hands and feet, returning thanks
to God the Most High. Then he sat down on his throne,
with his officers about him, and questioned them of the
beleaguering army. 'O King,' answered they, 'they sat
down before the city three days ago, and we know not
what they want ; for we have had with them neither battle
nor speech.'

Now the name of the commander of the besieging army
was Murad Shah and he had with him a hundred thousand
horse and three thousand foot, besides two hundred tribes-
!N"tgiE)t Taen of the Jinn ; and the manner of his coming was on
fcclnbuL this wise. When the two men, whom Sabour had charged
to drown his daughter Fekhr Taj, let her go, bidding her
flee for her life, she went forth distracted, knowing not
whither to go and saying, 'Where is thine eye, O Gherib,
that thou mayst see my case ? ' and wandered on from place
to place and country to country, till she came to a valley
abounding in trees and streams, in whose midst stood
a lofty and strong-builded castle, as it were one of the
pavilions of Paradise. So she betook herself thither and
entering the castle, found it hung and carpeted with stuffs
of silk, and therein were a hundred beautiful damsels and
great plenty of gold and silver vessels. When the damsels
saw her, they came up to her and saluted her, deeming her
of the damsels of the Jinn, and asked her of her case.
Quoth she, 'I am the King's daughter of the Persians,'
and told them all that had befallen her ; which when they
heard, they wept over her and condoled with her, saying,
{ Take comfort and be of good cheer, for here shalt thou
have meat and drink and raiment, and we all are thy hand-
maids.' She called down blessings on them and they
brought her food, of which she ate till she was satisfied.
Then said she to them, ' Who is the owner of this palace


9


177

and lord over you?' Quoth they, 'King Selsai, son of
Dal, is our master ; he passes a night here once in every
month and departs in the morning to rule over the tribes
of the Jinn.'

So Fekhr Taj took up her abode with them and after
five days she gave birth to a male child, as he were the
moon. They cut the cord of his navel and anointing his
eyes with kohl, named him Murad Shah, and he grew up
in his mother's lap. After awhile came Selsai, riding on
a paper-white elephant, as he were a tower plastered with
gypsum, and attended by the troops of the Jinn. He
entered the palace, where the hundred damsels met him
and kissed the earth before him, and amongst them Fekhr
Taj. When he saw her, he looked at her and said to the
others, 'Who is yonder damsel?' And they answered,
saying, ' She is the daughter of Sabour, King of the Per-
sians and Turcomans and Medes.' Quoth he, 'Who
brought her hither?' And they repeated to him her
story ; whereat he was moved to pity for her and said to
her, 'Grieve not, but take patience till thy son be grown
a man, when I will go to the land of the Persians and strike
thy father's head from his shoulders and seat thy son on
the throne in his stead.' So she rose and kissed his hands
and blessed him.

Then she abode in the castle and her son grew up and
was reared with the children of the King. They used to ride
forth together a-hunting, and he became skilled in the chase
of the wild beasts and of the ravening lions and ate of their
flesh, till his heart became harder than the rock. When he
reached the age of fifteen, his spirit waxed big in him and
he said to Fekhr Taj, 'O my mother, who is my father?'
( O my son,' mswered she, ' Gherib, King of Irak, is thy
father and I am the King's daughter of the Persians/ and
she told him her story. Quoth he, ( Did my grandfather
indeed give orders to slay thse and my father Gherib ? *
VOL. VI. i*


i;8

And she answered, 'Yes/ Whereupon, 'By the claim
thou hast on me for that thou rearedst me,' cried he, 5 1
will assuredly go to thy father's city and cut off his head
3CfgT)t and bring it to thee 1 ' And she rejoiced in his speech.
tiCtaxtX. Then he used to go a-riding with two hundred Marids
till he grew to man's estate, when he fell to making raids
and excursions in quest of plunder, till, one day, he attacked
the city of Shiraz and took it and cut off the King's head,
as he sat on his thronej and slew many of his troops s
whereupon the rest, to the number of ten thousand horse ;
cried out for quarter and kissed his stirrups. He led them
to Balkh, where he slew the King of the city and put his
men to the rout and made himself master of the riches of
the place. Thence he passed to Nourain, 1 at the head
of an army of thirty thousand horse, and the King of the
city came out to him, with presents and tribute, and did
him homage. Then he went on to Samarcand of the
Persians and took the city, and after that to Akhlat® and
took that town also ; nor was there any city he came to
but he took it, On this wise he became at the head of a
great army, and all the booty he made he divided among
his soldiers, who loved him for his valour and munificence.
At last he came to Isbanir el Medain and sat down before it,
saying. ' Let us wait till the rest of my army come up, when
I will seize on my grandfather and solace my mother's heart
by striking off his head in her presence.' So he sent for
her, and by reason of this, there was no battle for three
days, at the end of which time Gherib and Zelzal arrived
with the forty thousand Marids, laden with treasure,
Presently came Fekhr Taj, and her son Murad Shah
embraced her, saying, 5 Abide in thy tent till I bring thy
father to thee.' And she sought succour for him of the
Lord of the Worlds, fk. Lord of the heav o,d the
(garths,

1 A town of Turkestan. 9 A town of Arco*ok


179


Next morning, as soon as it was day, Murad Shah
mounted and rode forth, with the two hundred Marids
on his right hand and the kings of men on his left, whilst
the drums beat a point of war. When Gherib heard this,
he also took horse and calling his people to battle, rode
out, with the Jinn on his right hand and the men on his
left. Then came forth Murad Shah, armed cap-a-pie, and
spurred his charger right and left, saying, *0 folk, let
none come forth to me but your King, If he conquer me,
he shall be lord of both armies, and if I conquer hira,
I will slay him, as I have slain others.' When Gherib
heard his speech, he said, ' A vaunt, O dog of the Arabs ! *
And they drove at each other and thrust with spears, till
they broke, then hewed at each other with swords, till the
blades were notched ; nor did they cease to advance and
retreat and wheel and feint, till the day was half spent and
their horses fell down under them, when they dismounted
and gripped each other. Then Murad Shah lifted Gherib
up and strove to dash him to the ground; but Gherib
seized him by the ears and pulled them with his might, till
it seemed to him as if the heavens were falling on the
earth and he cried out, with his heart in his mouth, saying,
'I yield myself to thy mercy, O champion of the age!*
So Gherib bound him, and the Marids his comrades would Ht'g|)f
have charged and rescued him, but Gherib fell on them tfd£)CX.
with a thousand Marids and was about to smite them
down, when they cried out for quarter and threw down
their arms.

Then Gherib returned to his pavilion, which was of
green silk, embroidered with red gold and set with pearls
and jewels s and seating himself on his throne, called for
Murad Shah, So they brought him, shuffling in his fetters,
and Gherib said to him, £ O dog of the Arabs, who art thou
that thou shouldst ride forth and measure thyself against
kings?' s O my lord,' replied Murad Shah, "reproach


i8o

see not, for indeed I have excuse/ Quoth Gherib, ' What
is thine excuse?' And he answered, saying, 'Know, O
my lord, that I came out to avenge my mother and my
father on Sabour, King of the Persians; for he would
have slain them ; but my mother escaped and I know
not whether he killed my father or not,' 'By Allah!
rejoined Gherib, 'thou art indeed excusable! But who
were thy father and mother and what are their names?'
Quoth Murad Shah, ' My father was Gherib, King of Irak,
and my mother Fekhr Taj, daughter of King Sabour
of Persia.' When Gherib heard this, he gave a great cry
and fell down in a swoon. They sprinkled rose-water on
him, till he came to himself, when he said to Murad Shah,
' Art thou indeed Gherib's son by Fekhr Taj ? ' And he
answered, 'Yes.' Quoth Gherib, 'Thou art a champion,
the son of a champion. Loose my son.' And Sehim and
Kailjan went up to Murad Shah and loosed him.

Then Gherib embraced him and seating him beside
himself, said to him, ' Where is thy mother ? ' ' She is with
me in my tent,' answered Murad Shah ; and Gherib said ?
' Bring her to me.' So Murad Shah mounted and repaired
to his camp, where his men met him, rejoicing in his
safety, and asked him of his case ; but he answered,
saying, 'This is no time for questions.' Then he went
in to his mother and told her what had passed ; whereat
she rejoiced with an exceeding joy. So he carried her to
Gherib, and they embraced and rejoiced in each other.
Then Fekhr Taj and Murad Shah embraced Islam and
expounded the faith to their troops, who all made pro-
fession with heart and tongue. After this, Gherib sent for
Sabour and his son Wird Shah and upbraided them for
their evil dealing and expounded Islam to them; but they
refused to profess. So he crucified them on the gate of
the city and the people decorated the town and held high
festival Then Gherib crowned Murad Shah with the


i8i

crown of the Chosroes and made him King of the Persians
and Turcomans and Medes. Moreover, he made his
uncle, King Damigh, King over Irak, and all peoples and
lands submitted themselves to Gherib. Then he abode in
his kingship, doing justice among his subjects, wherefore
all the people loved' him, and he and his wives and
comrades ceased not from all delight and solace of life,
till there came to them the Destroyer of Delights and
Sunderer of Companies, and extolled be the perfection of
Him whose glory endureth for ever and whose benefits
embrace all His creatures ! This is all that hath come
down to us of the history of Gherib and Agik

OTBEH AND REYYA.

(Quoth Abdallah ben Maamer el Caisi), I went one year
on the pilgrimage to the Holy House of God, and when I
had accomplished my pilgrimage, I turned back to visit the
tomb of the Prophet, whom God bless and preserve ! One
night, as I sat in the Garden, 1 between the tomb and the
pulpit, I heard a low moaning in a soft voice ; so I listened
and heard one repeat the following verses :

Is it the lamentation of the doves of the lotus-tree That stirs the springs

of sadness up in the heart of thee ?
Or doth remembrance irk thee of maiden fair and sweet, That hath thy

soul afflicted with care and misery ?

night, thou Hngerest sadly on one who's sick for love ! Of love and

lack of patience full sore complaineth he.
Thou-'inakest him still wakeful, who's all with passion's heat Consumed ,

as on live embers he bums unquenchably.
The full moon is my witness that I am passion's slave, Love-maddened

for a maiden who's like the moon to see.

1 deemed not I should ever enamoured bs 6 until This wis® I was

afflicted and knew it not s ah me S

1 A decorated part of the southern portico of the Prophet's Mosque,
situate between his tomb and his pulpit and so called from his saying,
' 4 Between my tomb and my pulpit is a garden of the gardens of Paradise. "


182


Then the voice ceased and I abode perplexed s not
knowing whence it came to me ; but presently it again
took up its lament and recited the following verses :

Was it the ghost of Reyya that racked thy heart, when she, By night

black-tressed and sombre, in dreams did visit thee ?
Doth longing to thine eyelids cleave with its wakefulness, And doth the

nightly phantom still rob thy soul of glee ?
Unto my night, whilst darkness even as an ocean was, Wherein waves

clashed and billowed, sea surging against sea,
I cried, " O night, thou weariest a lover unto whom, Except the morn,

nor helper nor succour may there be. "
Bat, " Rail not at my slowness ; for love's the present cause Of sadness

and affliction," it answered unto me.

Now, at the first of the verses, I sprang up and made for
the quarter whence the sound came, nor had the voice
made an end of repeating them, ere I was with the speaker
and saw a youth of the utmost beauty, the hair of whose
face had not sprouted and in whose cheeks tears had worn
tfeJffgfjt two furrows. Quoth I to him s ' Fair befall thee for a
fcttlxxxt. youth ! ' And he, ' And thee also. Who art thou ? '
' Abdallah ben Maamer el Caisi,' answered I, and he said,
'Dost thou want aught?' Quoth I s 'I was sitting in the
Garden and nought hath troubled me this night but thy
voice. With my life would I ransom thee ! What aileth
thee ? ' And he replied, ' Sit down.' So I sat down and
he said, ' I am Otbeh ben el Hubab ben el Mundhir ben
El Jemouh the Ansari. 1 I went out in the morning to the
Mosque of El Ahzab 2 and occupied myself there awhile
with inclinations and prostrations, after which I withdrew
apart, to worship [privily]. Presently, up came women, as
they were moons, walking with a swaying gait, and mid-
most them a damsel of surpassing loveliness, accomplished
in beauty and grace, who stopped before me and said. ' O

1 i.e. descendant of one of those citizens of Medina who sucso-ared
the Prophet at the time of his flight from Mecca.
9 In Medina.


i83


Otbeh, what sayst thou of union with one who seeks union
with thee ? ' So saying, she left me and went away ; and
since then I have had no tidings of her nor come upon
any trace of her ; and behold, I am distracted and do
nought but remove from place to place.' Then he cried
out and fell down in a swoon. When he came to himself,
it was as if the. damask of his cheeks were dyed with tur-
meric, and he recited the following verses :

I see you with my heart from lands that yet far distant are | I wonder

eke if with your hearts ye see me from afar.
My heart and eyes alike for you do sorrow ; yea, with you My soul

abideth and the thoughts of you with me still are.
I cannot take delight in life, till I upon you look ; Your lack the very

pleasantness of Paradise would mar.

* O Otbeh, O son of my uncle,' said I, * repent to thy
Lord and seek pardon for thine offence ; for before thee
is the terror of the standing up [to judgment].' 'Away I s
answered he. 6 1 shall never leave to love till the two
mimosa-gatherers return.' 1

I abode with him till daybreak, when I said to him,
4 Come, let us go to the Mosque [of Ei Ahzab].' So we
went thither and sat there, till we had prayed the midday
prayers, when up came the women ; but the damsel was
not among them. Quoth they to him, ' O Otbeh, what
deemest thou of her who seeketh union with thee? 8
'And what of her?' asked he. ' Her father hath taken
her,' answered they, *and departed to Es Semaweh.' I
asked them the name of the damsel and they said, ' She is
called Reyya, daughter of El Ghitrif es Suleimi.' Where-
upon Otbeh raised his head and recited these verses :

Reyya hath mounted, O my friends, and fared away at dawn ; Unto

Semaweh's distant land her caravan is gone.
Friends, I have wept till I can weep no more : hath any tears, That 1

may borrow them and weep my love from me withdrawn ?
1 Two men of the tribe of Anezeh went forth to gather mimosa -frail
and never returned j hence the proverb.


1 84

Then said I to him, ' Otbeh, I have brought with me
great store of wealth, wherewith I desire to succour men
of merit ; and by Allah, I will lavish it before thee, so thou
mayst come to thy desire and more than thy desire ! Come
with me to the assembly of the Ansaris.' So we arose and
went, till we came to their assembly, when I saluted them
and they returned my greeting on goodly wise. Then said
I to them, ' assembly, what say ye of Otbeh and his
father ? ' And they answered, saying, £ They are of the
chiefs of the Arabs.' Quoth I, ' Know that he is smitten
with the calamity of love and I desire your furtherance to
Es Semaweh.' 1 And they said, 'We hear and obey.' So
they mounted with us and we rode till we drew near the
place of the Benou Suleim.

When Ghitrif heard of our coming, he hastened forth to
meet us, saying, ' Long life to you, O nobles I ' ' And to
thee also ! ' answered we. ' Behold we are thy guests.'
Quoth he, ' Ye have lighted down at a most hospitable and
well-furnished abode.' So saying, he alighted and cried
out, ' Ho, all ye serving folk, come down S ' So the slaves
came down and spread rugs and cushions and slaughtered
sheep and cattle • but we said, ' We will not taste of thy
victual, till thou have accomplished our need' 'And what
is your need ? ' asked he. Quoth we, ' We demand thy
noble daughter in marriage for the illustrious and well-born
Otbeh ben Hubab ben Mundhir.' ' O my brethren,' said
he, ' she whom you demand is her own mistress, and I will
go in to her and tell her ? ' So he arose in anger and went
in to Reyya, who said to him, ' O my father, why do I see
anger apparent on thee?' And he answered, saying,
' Certain of the Ansaris have come to demand thy hand of
me in marriage/ Quoth she, * They are noble chiefs ; the
Prophet, on whom be the most, excellent of blessings and

1 Semaweh {hod. Semeva), a place on the left bank of the Euphrates,
about midway between Cufa and Bassora.


i8s

peace, intercedeth for them [with God]. For whom among
them do they ask me in marriage?' 'For a youth known
as Otbeh ben el Hubab,' answered he ; and she said, ' I
have heard of this Otbeh that he performs what he promises
and attains what he seeks.' Quoth Ghitrif, ' I swear that
I will never marry thee to him, for there hath been re-
ported to me somewhat of thy converse with him.' 6 What
was that ? ' said she. £ But in any case, I swear that the
Ansaris shall not be uncivilly rejected ; wherefore do thou
make them a fair answer.' ' How so ? ' asked he ; and
she, ' Make the dowry heavy to them and they will desist. '
Quoth he, ' Thou sayst well,' and going out in haste, said
to the Ansaris, ' The girl consents • but she requires
a dowry worthy herself; who, then, engageth for this?'
' I,' answered I. Then said he, ' I require for her a
thousand bracelets of red gold and five thousand dirhems
of the coinage of Hejer and a hundred pieces of woollen
stuffs and striped stuffs of Yemen and five bladders of
ambergris.' ' Thou shalt have this/ answered I; ' dost thou
consent ? ' And he said, ' I do consent.' So I despatched
to Medina the Luminous a company of the Ansaris, who
brought all for which I had engaged ; whereupon they
slaughtered sheep and cattle and the folk assembled to eat
of the food.

We abode thus forty days, at the end of which time
Ghitrif said to us, ' Take your bride.' So we set her in a
litter and her father equipped her with thirty camel-loads
of things of price ; after which we took leave of him and
journeyed till we came within a day's journey of Medina,
when there fell upon us horsemen, with intent to plunder,
and methinks they were of the Benou Suleirn. Otbeh drove
at them and slew of them much people, but presently fell
back, wounded by a spear-thrust, and dropped to the earth.
Then there came to us a succour of the country people,
who drove away the highwaymen ; but Otbeh's days were


1 86


ended. So we said, 1 Alas for OtbehP Which when the
damsel heard, she cast herself down from the camel and
throwing herself upon him, cried out grievously and recited
the following verses :

Patience I feign, yet natheless am not patient, verily s I soothe my soul

but with the thought that I shall follow thee.
Had my soul dealt but righteously by me, it would indeed Have gone

to death before thyself, forestalling all that be.
None, whenas thou and I are gone away, unto a friend Will just and

righteous be, I trow, nor soul with soul agree.

Then she sobbed once and gave up the ghost. We dug
one grave for them and laid them in the earth, and I re-
turned to the dwellings of my people, where I abode seven
years. Then I betook me again to the Hejaz and entering
Medina the Luminous, to visit [the tomb of the Prophet],
said in myself, ' By Allah, I will go again to Otbeh's tomb ! '
So I repaired thither, and behold, oyer the grave was a tall
tree, on which hung fillets of red and green and yellow
stuffs. So I said to the people of the place, * How is this
tree called?' And they answered, 'The tree of the Bride
and the Bridegroom.' I abode by the tomb a day and a
night, then went my way ; and this is all I know of Otbehj,
may God the Most High have mercy upon him I

HIND DAUGHTER OF EN NUMAN AND
EL HEJJAJ.

It is related that Hind daughter of En Numan was the
fairest woman of her day, and her beauty and grace were
reported to El Hejjaj, who sought in marriage and lavished
much treasure on her. So he took her to wife, engaging
to give her a dowry of two hundred thousand dirhems in
case of divorce, and when he went in to her, he abode
with her a great while. One day after this, he went in to


18/


her and found her looking at her face in the mirror and
saying :

Hind is an Arab filly born and bred of purest stock And blood, that by

a mongrel mule, alack ! hath covered been j
So, if she bear a stallion-colt, God-gifted sure is she J But if a mule she

bear, the mule must bear the blame, I ween.

When he heard this, he turned back and went his ways
unseen of Hind ; then, being minded to put her away, he
sent Abdallah ben Tahir to her, to divorce her. So
Abdallah went in to her and said to her, 'El Hejjaj
Abou Mohammed saith to thee, " Here be the two
hundred thousand dirhems of thy contingent dowry
and he hath deputed me to divorce thee.' ' O Ibn Tahir/
replied she, ' I consent gladly ; for know that I never for
one day took pleasure in him ; so, if we separate, by Allah,
I shall never regret him, and the two hundred thousand
dirhems I give to thee as a reward for the glad tidings
thou bringest me of my release from yonder dog of &
ThekifV 1 '

After this, the Commander of the Faithful Abdulmelik
ben Merwan heard of her beauty and symmetry and the
amorous grace of her glances and sent to her, to demand !bCt(Xj)t
her in marriage; and she wrote him in reply a letter, in fyclxXXii
which, after the customary glorification of God and bene-
diction of His Prophet, she said, ' Know, O Commander of
the Faithful, that the dog hath lapped in the vase.' When
the Khalif read her answer, he laughed and wrote to her,
citing the prophet's saying, ' If a dog lap in the vessel
of one of you, let him wash it seven times, once thereof
with earth,' and adding, ' Wash the affront from the place
of usance.' With this, she could not gainsay him ; so she
replied to him, saying, s O Commander of the Faithful,
I will not consent save on condition that El Hejjaj lead


1 EI Hejjaj's family name was Eth Thekifi €*r descendant of Thekif,


i88


my camel to thine abiding-place, barefoot and clad as
he is.'

When the Khalif read her letter, he laughed long and
loudly and wrote to El Hejjaj, bidding him do as she
wished. The latter dared not disobey, so he submitted
to the Khalifs commandment and sent to Hind, bidding
her make ready for the journey. So she made ready and
mounted her litter, whilst her damsels and eunuchs rode
about her. Then came El Hejjaj with his suite and
dismounting at Hind's door, took the halter of her camel
and led it along, barefooted, whilst she and her damsels
and tirewomen laughed and jeered at him and made mock
of him. Then she said to her tirewoman, * Draw back the
curtain of the litter ; ' and she drew back the curtain, till
Hind was face to face with El Hejjaj, whereupon she
laughed at him and he recited the following verse :

Hind, for all thy jeering, how many and' many a nightj Of yore I've

left thee wakeful, lamenting for despite !

And she answered him with these :

We reck not, we, so that our life be safe and free oar soul, Of what we

lose of goods and gear ; it worketh us no dole.
For wealth anew may gotten be and rank and power regained, If bat &

man of malady and trouble be made whole.

And she ceased not to laugh at him and make sport os
him, till they drew near the city of the Khalif, when she
threw dowrf a dinar and said to El Hejjaj, 'O camel-driver s

1 have dropped a dirhem ; look for it and give it me.' So
he looked and seeing nought but the dinar, said, ' This is
a dinar.' ' Nay,' answered she, 'it is a dirhem.' But he
said, ' It is a dinar.' Then said she, i Praised be God who
hath given us a dinar in exchange for a paltry dirhem!
Give it us.' And he was abashed at this. Then he carried
her to the palace of the Commander of the Faithful, and
she went in to him and became his favourite*


189


KHUZEIMEH BEN BTSHR AND IKRIMEH
EL PEYYAZ.

There lived once, in the days of the Khalif Suleiman Hfgf)t
ben Abdulmelik, 1 a man of the Benou Ased, by name tdxixftt
Khuzeimeh ben Bishr, who was notorious for benevolence
and excellence and abounding generosity and righteous
dealing with his brethren. After awhile, times grew strait
with him and he became in need of the aid of those on
whom he had lavished favour and kindness. So they
succoured him awhile and then grew weary of him, which
when he saw, he went in to his wife, who was the daughter
of his father's brother, and said to her, ' O my cousin, 1
find that my brethren are changed to me ; wherefore I am
resolved to keep my house till death come to me.' So he
shut his doors and abode in his house, -living on that
which he had by him, till it was spent and he knew not
what to do. Now Ikrimeh er Reba'i [surnamed] el Feyyaz, 8
governor of Mesopotamia, had known him, and one day,
as he sat in his audience-chamber, mention was made of
Khuzeimeh, whereupon quoth Ikrimeh, 6 How is it with
him?' And they answered, saying, 'He is in a plight
past telling, and hath shut his door and keeps the house.'
Quoth Ikrimeh, 'This comes but of his excessive gene-
rosity : but how is it that Khuzeimeh ben Bishr finds none
to succour him or requite him his benefits?' And they
replied, ' He hath found nought of this.'

When it was night, Ikrimeh took four thousand dinars
and laid them in one purse ; then, bidding saddle his beast,
he mounted and rode privily to Khuzeimeh's houses
attended only by one of his servants, carrying the money,,
When he came to the door, he alighted and taking th@

1 Seventh Khalif of the Ommiade dynasty^ A.D.
8 Tfajg overflowing [in bounty].


190


purse from the servant, made him withdraw afar off ; after
which he went up to the door and knocked. Khuzeimeh
came out to him, and he gave him the purse, saying,
1 Better thy condition with this.' He took it and finding
it heavy, put it from his hand and laying hold of the bridle
of Ikrimeh's horse, said, * Who art thou ? My soul be thy
ransom I s 'O man/ answered Ikrimeh, ' 1 come not to
thee at the like of this time desiring that thou shouldst
know me." Khuzeimeh rejoined, saying, S I will not let
thee go till thou make thyself known to me.' And Ikrimeh
said, 6 1 am Jabir Athrat el Kirana.' 1 Quoth Khuzeimeh,
'Tell me more.' But Ikrimeh answered, 'No,' and went
away, whilst Khuzeimeh went in to his wife and said to
her, 'Rejoice, for God hath sent us speedy relief; if these
be but dirhems, yet are they many. Arise and light the
lamp.' But she said, ' I have not wherewithal to do this.'
So he spent the night handling the coins and felt by their
roughness that they were dinars, but could not credit it

Meanwhile. Ikrimeh returned to his own house and
found that his wife had missed him and enquiring for him,
had been told of his riding forth, wherefore she mis-
doubted of him and said to him, ' The governor of Meso-
potamia rideth not abroad, unattended and secretly, after
such an hour of the night, save to a wife or a concubine,'
'God knows,' answered he, 'that I went not forth to
either of these.' 'Tell rne then,' said she, 'wherefore thou
wentest forth?' and he, S I went hot forth at this hour
save that none should know it.' But she rejoined, saying,
' I must needs be told.' Quoth he, 4 Wilt thou keep the
matter secret, if I tell thee ? ' and she said ? ' Yes,' So he
told her the state of the case, adding, < Wilt thou have me

a i.e. A repairer of the slips of the noble, an evasive answer meant to
put Khuzeimeh off the scent of his benefactor's identity by making him
believe that this was the latter's real name, a deception easy to practise
among the Arabs, whose names all have a manifest meaning.


swear to thee ? ' ' No, no,' answered she ; 4 my heart is
set at ease and trusteth in that which thou hast told me.'

As for Khuzeimeh, as soon as it was day, he made his
peace with his creditors and set his affairs in order ; after
which he made ready and set out for the Court of the Khalif,
who was then sojourning in Palestine. When be came to
the royal palace, he sought admission of the chamberlain,
who went in and told the Khalif of his presence, Now he
was renowned for his beneficence and Suleiman knew of
him ; so he bade admit him. When he entered, he saluted
the Khalif after the usual fashion, and the latter said to
him, £ Khuzeimeh, what hath kept thee so long from
us ? ' c Evil case,' answered he. Quoth the Khalif, ' What
hindered thee from having recourse to us ? ' And he said s
'My infirmity, O Commander of the Faithful 1 '\ 'And
why/ asked Suleiman, £ comest thou to us now ? ' 4 'Know,

Commander of the Faithful/ replied Khuzeimeh, ' that

1 was sitting one night late in my house, when one knocked
at the door;' and he went on to tell him of all that had
passed between Ikrimeh and himself. 1 Knowest thou the
man ?' asked Suleiman. ' No, O Commander of the Faith-
ful/ answered Khuzeimeh, 'he was disguised and would'
say nought but C< I am Jabir Athrat el Kiram."* Wheis
Suleiman heard this, his heart burned within him to know
the man, and he said, c If we knew him, we would requite
him his generosity.' Then he tied Khuzeimeh an ensign
and made him governor of Mesopotamia, in the stead oi
Ikrimeh ; and he set out for El Jezireh. 2

When he drew near the city, Ikrimeh and the people of
the place came forth to meet him and they saluted each
•&ther and went on into the town, where Khuzeimeh took

- In token of deputation of authority, a ceremony usual on thu
appointment of a viceroy.

The capital of Mesopotamia, a town on the Tigris afosit iaidw4t-
bstwcCT. Mosul and Biarbckir-


192


op his lodging in the government house and bade take
security for Ikrimeh and that he should be called to
account. So an account was taken against him and he
was found to be in default for much money, whereupon
Khuzeimeh required him of payment ; but he said, ' I have
no means of paying aught.' Quoth Khuzeimeh, ' It must
be paid;' and Ikrimeh answered, saying, 'I have it not;
Wg!)t do what thou hast to do.' So Khuzeimeh ordered him to
iftlXXXtb. prison and sent to him again, to demand payment of the
money ; but he replied, * I am not of those who preserve
their wealth at the expense of their honour ; do what thou
wilt' Then Khuzeimeh bade load him with irons and
kept him in prison a month or more, till imprisonment
began to tell upon him and he became wasted.

After this, news of his plight came to his wife, who
was sore troubled thereat and sending for a freedwoman
©f hers, a woman of great wit and judgment, said to her,
5 Go forthwith to the Amir Khuzeimeh's gate and say,
4S I have' a counsel for the Amir." If they ask what it is,
say, "I will not tell it save to himself;" and when thou
winnest to him, ask to see him in private and say to him,
"What is this thou hast done? Hath Jabir Athrat el
Kiram deserved of thee no better requital than to be cast
into strait prison and laden with irons ? " ' The woman
did as she was bidden, and when Khuzeimeh heard her
words, he cried out at the top of his voice, saying, 4 Alas,
the shame of it! Was it indeed he?' And she answered,
* Yes.' Then he bade saddle his beast forthright and
summoning the chief men of the city, repaired with them
to the prison and opening the door, went in with them
to Ikrimeh, whom they found sitting in evil case, worn
out and wasted with blows and misery. When he saw
Khuzeimeh, he was abashed and hung his head ; but the
other bent down to him and kissed his face : wWeupon
he raised his head and said, ' What maketh thee ao this?'


i93


' The generosity of thy dealing,' replied Khuzeimeh, * and
the scurviness of my requital' And Ikrimeh said, 'God
pardon us and thee ! '

Then Khuzeimeh bade the jailor strike off Ikrimeh's
shackles and clap them on his own feet ; but Ikrimeh said,
' What is this thou wilt do ? ' Quoth the other, ' I have
a mind to suffer what thou hast suffered.' ' I conjure thee
by Allah,' cried Ikrimeh, ' do not so ! ' Then they both
went out and returned to Khuzeimeh's house, where
Ikrimeh would have taken leave of him and gone his
way; but he forbade him and Ikrimeh said, ' What is thy
will of me?' Quoth Khuzeimeh, 'I wish to change thy
case, for my shame before the daughter of thine uncle is
yet greater than my shame before thee.' So he caused
clear the bath and entering with Ikrimeh, served him,
himself, after which he bestowed on him a splendid dress
of honour and mounted him and gave him much money.
Then he carried him to his house and asked his leave to
make his excuses to his wife and did so.

After this, he besought him to accompany him to the
Khalifj who was then abiding at Remleh 1 and he agreed.
So they journeyed thither and when they reached the
palace, the chamberlain went in and acquainted the Khalif
with Khuzeimeh's coming, whereat he was troubled and
said, ' Is the governor of Mesopotamia come without our
order? This can only be on some grave occasion.' Then
he bade admit him and said to him, before he could salute
him, 'What is behind thee, O Khuzeimeh?' 'Good, O
Commander of the Faithful,' answered he. 'What bringeth
thee ? ' asked Suleiman ; and he answered, saying, ' I have
discovered Jabir el Athrat el Kiram and thought to
gladden thee with him, knowing thine excessive desire for
his acquaintance and thy longing to see him. 5 'Who is
be?'* asked the Khalif and Khuzeimeh said s 'He is Ikrimeh
1 In Palestine.
YOL. V!. 1J


194


el Feyyaz.' So Suleiman called for Ikrimeh, who ap-
proached and saluted him as Khalif ; and the prince bade
him welcome and .making him draw near to his sitting-
place, said to him, * O Ikrimeh, thy good deed to him hath
brought thee nought but trouble. But now write in a scroll
all thy needs and that which thou desirest.' He did so
and the Khalif commanded to do all that he asked and
that forthright. Moreover, he gave him ten thousand
dinars and twenty chests of clothes over and above that he
sought, and calling for a spear, tied him an ensign [and
made him governor] over Armenia and Azerbijan and
Mesopotamia, saying, ' Khuzeimeh's case is in thy hands ;
if thou wilt, continue him in his office, and if thou wilt,
depose him.' And Ikrimeh said, ' Nay, but I restore him
to his office, O Commander of the Faithful.' Then they
went out from him and ceased not to be governors under
Suleiman ben Abdulmelik all the "clays of his Khalifate.

YOUNUS THE SCRIBE AND THE KHALIF
WELID BEN SEHL.

There lived in the reign of the Khalif Hisham a noted
[man of letters] called Younus the Scribe, and he set out
one day on a journey to Damascus, having with him a slave-
girl of surpassing beauty and grace, whom he had taught
all that was needful to her and whose price was a hundred
thousand dirhems. When they drew near Damascus, the
caravan halted by the side of a lake and Younus went aside
with his damsel and took out some victual he had with him
and a leather bottle of wine. As he sat 'at meat-, there
came up a young man of goodly presence and dignified
aspect, mounted on a sorrel horse and followed by two
servants, and said to him, 1 Wilt thou accept me to guest ? '
6 Yes,' answered Younus. So the stranger alighted and
said, 5 Give me to drink of thy wine/ Younus gave him to


195


drink and he said, ' If it please thee, sing us a song. 1 So
Younus sang this verse :

Charms, never in one mortal yet combined compriseth, she, And tears
and wakefulness are sweet, for love of her, to me.

At which the stranger rejoiced exceedingly and Younus
gave him to drink again and again, till drunkenness got
the better of him and he said, ' Bid thy slave-girl sing.'
So she sang this verse :

A houri, by whose charms my heart confounded is, ah me ! Nor wand
nor sun nor moon, indeed, may evened with her be.

The stranger was much pleased with this and they sat
drinking till nightfall, when they prayed the evening-prayer
and the youth said to Younus, ' What brings thee hither ? '
He answered, £ [I come in quest of] wherewithal to dis-
charge my debts and better my case.' Quoth*the stranger,
1 Wilt thou sell me this thy slave-girl for thirty thousand
dirhems? ' * I must have more than that/ answered Younus.
4 Will forty thousand content thee ? ' asked the other ; but
Younus said, 6 That would only pay my debts, and I should
remain empty-handed.' Quoth the stranger, * I will take
her of thee at fifty thousand dirhems 1 and give thee a suit
of clothes to boot and the expenses of thy journey and
make thee a sharer in my estate, as long as thou livest' *I
sell her to thee on these terms, 5 answered Younus. Then
said the young man, ' Wilt thou let me take her with me
and trust me to bring thee the money to-morrow, or shall
she abide with thee till I bring thee her price ? ' And the
fumes of the wine and shamefastness and awe of the stranger
led Younus to reply, 1 1 will trust thee ; take her and may
God bless thee in her ! ' Whereupon the stranger bade one
of his servants take her up before him on his beast, and
mounting his own aorse s took leave of Younus and rode
away,

* About


ig6

Hardly had he left him, when Younus bethought himself
and knew that he had erred in selling her and said in him-
self, 'What have I done? I have delivered my slave-girl
to a man with whom I am unacquainted, neither know I
who he is ; and grant that I did know him, how am I to
get at him ? ' So he abode absorbed in anxious thought,
till the morning, when he prayed the appointed prayers and
his companions entered Damascus, whilst he sat, perplexed
and knowing not what to do, till the sun scorched him and
he misliked to abide there and thought to enter the city,
but said in himself, ' If I enter Damascus, I cannot be sure
but that the messenger will come and find me not, in which
case I shall have sinned against myself a second time/ So
he sat down in the shade of a wall that was there, and
towards end of day, up came one of the servants whom iie
had seen with the young man, at sight of whom great joy
possessed Younus and he said in himself, £ I know not that
aught hath ever given me more delight than the sight of
this servant.' When the man reached him, he said to him,
' O my lord, we have kept thee long waiting ; ' but Younus
said nothing to him of the anxiety he had suffered,. Theo
said the servant, ' Knowest thou the man who bought the
girl of thee ? ' ' No/ answered Younus, and the servant said,
' It was Welid ben Sehl 1 the, Heir Apparent* And Younus
was silent.

Then the other made him mount a horse he had with
him and they rode till they came to a house, where they
dismounted and entered. Here Younus found the damsel,
who sprang up at his sight and saluted him. He asked
her how she had fared with him who had bought her and
she said, c He lodged me in this apartment and ordered me
all I wanted,' Then he sat with her awhile, til! one of the
servants of the master of the house came in and bade him
J Eleventh Khalif of the Gmmiade dynasty, a.d. 243~744»


i9;

rise and follow him. So he followed the servant into the
presence of his yesternight's guest, whom he found seated
on his couch and who said to him, ' Who art thou ? ' 4 1
am Younus the Scribe,' answered the other. 'Welcome
to thee, O Younus ! ' rejoined the prince. ' By Allah, I
have long wished to look on thee ; for I have heard of
thy report How didst thou pass the night ? ' ' Well/
answered Younus; 'may God the Most High advance
thee ! ' ' Perad venture/ said the prince, ' thou repentedst
thee of that thou didst yesterday and saidst in thyself, " I
have delivered my slave-girl to a man whom I know notj
neither know I his name nor whence he cometh ? " ' ' God
forbid, O Amir,' replied Younus, 1 that I should repent over
her J Had I made gift of her to the prince, she were the
least of the gifts that are given unto him, for indeed she is jNff$(8t
not worthy of his rank.' s By Allah/ rejoined Welid, ' but SjCuXXfla
I repented me of having taken her from thee and said in
myself, i This man is a stranger and knows me not, and I
have taken him by surprise and acted inconsiderately by
him, in my haste to take the damsel ! " Dost thou recall
what passed between us ? ' ' Yes/ answered Younus,
Quoth Welid, 4 Dost thou sell her to me for fifty thousand
dirhems ? ' And Younus said, ' I do.'

Then the prince called to one of his servants, to bring
him fifty thousand dirhems and a thousand and five
hundred dinars 1 to boot, and gave them all to Younus,
saying,, s The thousand dinars are for thy fair thought of
us and the five hundred for the expenses of thy journey
and what thou shalt buy for thy people. Art thou con-
tent ? ' 'I am content/ answered Younus and kissed his
hands, saying, i By Allah, thou hast filled my eyes and my
hands and my heart ! ' Quoth Welid, * By Allah, I have
as yet had no privacy of her nor have I taken, my fill of
1 Thirty thousand dirhems or about £'/'^o.


198


her singing. Bring her to me.' So she came and he
bade her sit, then said to her, 'Sing.' And she sang
these verses :

Thou that comprisest all charms of every kindg O sweet of nature and

great of amorous grace,
In Turks and Arabs are beauties all ; but none Like thee, my loveling,

doth all in all embrace,
O bless thy lover, my fair, with thy promised sight, Though but in

visions of dreams, that flit apace '
Sweet are the sleepless nights, for thy sake s to me And goodly eves

abasement and disgrace.
I'm not the first one distraught for thee ; ere me, How many a mortal

thou'st slain with that fair face I
Thou, as my portion o ! th' world, wouldst me content ; To me thou'st

dearer than life and goods and place.

When he heard this, he was greatly delighted and praised
Younus's excellent teaching of her and the fair education
he had given her. Then he bade his servants bring him
a hackney, with its trappings and furniture, for his riding,
and a mule to carry his gear, and said to hirn, 6 O Younus,
when thou hearest that the Khalifate has fallen to me,
come thou to me, and by Allah, I will fill thy hands with
good and advance thee to honour and make thee rich as
long as thou livest ! ' So Younus took his goods and
departed ; and when he heard that Welid had succeeded to
the Khalifate, 1 he repaired to him ; and by Allah, he kept
his promise to him and entreated him with exceeding
munificence. Then Younus abode with him in all content
and honour and his affairs prospered and his wealth increased
and goods and farms became his, such as sufficed him and
bis heirs after him ; nor did he cease to abide with Welid,-
till he was slain, 2 the mercy of God the Most High be on
him 1


s 6th February, 743.

8 16th April, 744, by tfee rebels in the inUicxi of his cousin aad
successor, Yezid III,


199


THE KHALIF HAROUN ER RESHID AND THE
ARAB GIRL.

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid was walking one day with
Jaafer the Barmecide, when he espied a company of girls
drawing water and went up to them, having a mind to
drink. As he drew near, one of them turned to her
fellows and recited the following verses :

Bid thou thy spright from my couch s I pray, At the season of slumber
turn away,

So I may rest me and eke the fire In my bones that rages may ha?®
allay.

For me, the love-lorn, whom passion's hands Turn on the carpet of
sickness aye,

Thou knowest well how it is with me : Doth thy favour last for a single

day ? *

The Khalif marvelled at her beauty and eloquence and ^tgfjt
said to her, ' O daughter of nobles, are these verses thine frd£tX&i,
own or a quotation ? ' ' They are my own,' answered she.
'If thou say sooth, 3 rejoined the Khalif, ( keep the sense
and change the rhyme.' So she said :

Bid thou thy phantom forswear my stead At the season of sleep and
drowsihead,

So I may rest me and eke the fire Be quenched in my body that rages
red.

For me, a sick one, whom passion's hands Turn on affliction's unrestful
bed,

Thou knowest well how it is with me : Can aught of thy favours stand
in stead ?

Quoth the Khalif, 4 This also is stolen.' 'Nay,' replied

she, 1 it is my own.' { If it be indeed thine own/ said
Er Reshid, 4 change the rhyme again arid keep the sense/
So she recited the following %


2O0


Bid thine image hold off from my place of repose, What time is

slumber men's eyes do close,
So I may rest me and eke the fire Be quenched in mine entrails that

ever glows.

For me, a sick one, whom passion's hands Turn on the carpet of wake
and woes,

Thou knowest well how it is with me s Are thy favours bought with a
price, who knows?

Quoth Er Reshid, * This too is stolen.* ' Not so/ said
she ; 'it is mine.' 6 If it be so,' rejoined he, 'change the
rhyme once more.' And she recited as follows :

Bid thou thine image no more molest My couch at the season of sleep
and rest.

So I may ease me and eke the fire Be quenched that flames in my
tortured breast.

For me, a sick one, whom passion's hands On the couch of weeping

turn East and West,
My plight thou knov/st 5 will thy favour ne'er Come back* relenting,

to make me blest ? *

Then said the Khalif, * Of what [part] of this encamp-
ment [art thou]?' And she answered, ! Of its midmost in
dwelling and of its highest in tent-pole.' Wherefore he
knew that she was the chiefs daughter of the tribe. s
'And thou,' asked she, ' of what [art thou among] the
guardians of the horses ? ' Quoth he, { Of the highest in
tree and of the ripest in fruit.' * God protect thee,
O Commander of the Faithful S ' said she and called
down blessings on him. Then she went away with the
maidens of the Arabs, and the Khalif said to Jaafer,
4 Needs must I take her to wife.' So Jaafer repaired to
her father and said to him, * The Commander of the
Faithful hath a mind to thy daughter.' 4 With all my
heart,' replied he; 'she 5s a gift as a handmaid to His
Highness our lord the Commander ox the Faithful' S©

The tent of the chief of the tribe stands in the midst of the encamp*
Esent and is higher than the test*


201


he equipped her and carried her to the Khalif, who took
her to wife and went in to her, and she became of the
dearest of his women to him.

Moreover, he bestowed on her father largesse such as
succoured him among the Arabs, till he was transported
to the mercy of God the Most High. The Khalif, hearing
of his death, went in to her, troubled ; and when she saw
him thus, she entered her chamber and putting off all that
was upon her of rich apparel, donned mourning raiment
and raised lament for her father. It was said to her,
'What is the reason of this?' And she answered, saying,
' My father is dead.' So they went in to the Khalif and
told him and he rose and going in to her, asked her who
had given her to know of her father's death; and she
answered, ' It was thy face, O Commander of the Faithful ! '
' How so ? ' asked he ; and she said, ' Since I have been
with thee, I never saw thee thus till now,,and there was
none for whom I feared save my father, by reason of his
great age ; but may thy head live, O Commander of the
Faithful!' When the Khalif heard this, his eyes filled
with tears and he condoled with her ; but she ceased not
to mourn for her father, till she followed him [to the
grave,] may God have mercy on them both !

EL AS MAI AND THE THREE GIRLS OF BASSORA.

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid was exceeding restless
one night and rising from his bed, fared from chamber to
chamber, but could not compose himself to sleep. As
soon as it was day, he said, 1 Fetch me El Asmai.' 1 So
the eunuch went out and told the doorkeepers, who sent
for the poet and when he came, informed the Khalif. The
latter bade admit him and said to him, 5 Q Asmai, I wish

1 One of the mort celebrated of Er Resliid's court poets. See not%
¥ol IV. p. &


202


thee to tell me the best thou hast heard of stories of
women and their verses.' ' I hear and obey,' answered
El Asmai. ' I have heard great store of women's verses ;
but none pleased me save three lines I once heard from
Kfglt three girls.' ' Tell me of them,' said the Khalif. ' Know
telnxbti then, O Commander of the Faithful,' replied the poet,
1 that I once abode a year in Bassora, and one day, as
I was walking about, the heat was sore upon me and I
sought for a place where I might take the noonday rest,
but found none. Presently, however, I came upon a porch
swept and watered, at the upper end whereof was an open
lattice-window, whence exhaled a scent of musk and there-
under a wooden bench. I entered the porch, and lying
down on the bench, would have slept, when, behold, I
heard from within a girl's sweet voice talking and saying,
" O my sisters, we are sat here to spend this day in each
other's company ; so come, let us each put down a hundred
dinars and recite a line of verse"; and whoso recites the
goodliest and sweetest line, the three hundred dinars shall
be hers." " With all our hearts," said the others ; and the
eldest recited the following verse :

By Allah, I should delight in him, if in dreams to my couch came he !
But, an he visited me on wake, 'twould yet more marvellous be,

Quoth the second :

Only his image, in very deed, in slumber visited me ; And ' Welcome S '
straightway I said to him, ' a welcome fair and free I'

Then said the youngest :

With my soul and my folk I will ransom him, whom my bedfellow still
I see Each night and whose scent is pleasanter than the scent of
musk to me ! "

Quoth I, " If [the speaker] have beauty after the measure
[of the goodliness] of this [her speech], the thing is every
way complete." Then I rose and was about to go away s
when the door opened and out came a slave-girl, who said


203


t© me, " Sit, O elder." So I sat down again, and she gave
me a scroll, wherein was written, in characters of the
utmost beauty, with straight Alifs, 1 big-bellied Has 1 and
rounded Waws, 1 the following : " We would have the Sheikh
(whose days God prolong) to know that we are three
maidens, sisters, sitting in friendly converse, who have laid
down each a hundred dinars, on condition that whoso re-
cites the best and most agreeable line of verse shall have
the whole three hundred dinars ; and we appoint thee
judge between us : so decide as thou seest best, and
peace be on thee ! " Quoth I to the girl, " Bring me
inkhorn and paper." So she went in and returning after
a little, brought me a silvered inkhorn and gilded pens,
with which I wrote the following verses :

I've heard of young beauties once that sat in converse frank and free And

talked the talk of a man who's seen and proved all things that be j
Three like the dawnings of new-born day, they ravished every heart ;

Yea, tormentful to the yearner's soul were they, these maidens three.
They'd cloistered them, where no vision lewd their modesty might

affront ; The eyes of the spy were shut in sleep and none was there

to see.

So they discovered the secret thoughts in their breasts that hidden lay
And then to making of verse they fell, for pastime, in their glee.

Quoth one of them thus, — a loveling rare, fulfilled of amorous grace,
Her teeth for the sweet of her speech did smile at every word
spake she, —

" By Allah, I should delight in him, if in dreams to my couch came he !

But, an he visited me on wake, 'twould yet more marvellous be."
And when she had ended that which she gilt with smiles, the second

sighed And warbled these words with a trilling note, like a bird

upon a tree :

" Only his image, in very deed, in slumber visited me, And, " Welcome,"
straightway quoth I to him, " a welcome fair and free ! "

But the third did better than th' other twain, for, answering, thus said
she, With a word of her own that was sweeter still and goodlier,
perdie,

1 Alt/. {\\ Ha (J?) and Warn (^) s the first, twenty-seventh v*i
■wenty-sixth letters of the Arabic alphabet,


204


" With my soul and my folk I will ransom him, whom my bedfellow
still I see Each night and whose scent is pleasanter than the scent
of musk to me ! "

So, when I considered that which they said and sentence passed thereon,
I judged not so as to give the wits a cause for mockery ;

Nay, judgment I gave for the youngest maid and deemed her verse the
best, For that I judged the words she spake e'en nearest the truth
to be.

Then I gave the scroll to the girl, who went in with it,
and presently I heard a noise of dancing and clapping of
hands and tumult. Quoth I to myself, " It is time for me
to go." So I rose from the bench and was about to go
away, when the damsel cried out to me, saying, " Sit down,

Asma'i!" "Who gave thee to know that I was El
Asmal? " asked I, and she, " If thy name be unknown to
us, thy poetry is not" So I sat down again and behold,
the door opened and out came the first damsel, with a
dish of fruits and another of sweetmeats. I ate of both
and praised their fashion and would have gone away ; but
she cried out, saying, " Sit down, O Asmai ! " Wherewith

1 raised my eyes to her and saw a rosy palm in a saffron
sleeve, meseemed it was the full moon breaking put from
under the clouds. Then she threw me a purse containing
three hundred dinars and said to me, " This is mine and I
give it to thee in requital of thy judgment"

Quoth the Khalif, 'Why didst thou decide for the
youngest ? ' 'O Commander of the Faithful, whose life
God prolong,' answered 1 El Asmai, ' the eldest said, " I
should delight in him, if he visited my couch in sleep."
Now this is restricted and dependent upon a condition,
that may befall or may not befall ; whilst, for the second,
an image of dreams came to her in sleep, and she saluted
it ; but the youngest said that she actually lay with her
lover and smelt his breath sweeter than musk and she
engaged her soul and her folk for him, which she had not


20$


done, were he not dearer to her than her soul' 'Thou
didst well, O Asmai',' said the Khalif and gave him other
three hundred dinars, in payment of his story.

IBRAHIM OF MOSUL AND THE DEVIL.

(Quoth Abou Ishac Ibrahim el Mausili), I asked Er
Reshid once to give me a day's leave that I might be
private with the people of my household and my friends,
and he gave me leave for Saturday. So I went home and
betook myself to making ready meat and drink and other
necessaries and bade the doorkeepers shut the doors and
let none come in to me. However, presently, as I sat in
my sitting-chamber, with my women about me, I was ware
of an old man of comely and reverend aspect, clad in
white clothes and a shirt of fine stuff, with a doctor's hood
on his head and a silver-handled staff in his hand, and the
house and porch were fall of the sweet smell of the essences
with which he was scented. I was greatly vexed at his
coming in to me and thought to turn away the doorkeepers ;
but he saluted me after the goodliest fashion and I returned
his greeting and bade him be seated. So he sat down and
entertained me with stories of the Arabs and their verses,
till my anger left me and methought my servants had
sought to pleasure me by admitting a man of such good
breeding and elegant culture.

Then said I to him, ' Art thou for meat ? ' 'I have no
need of it,' answered he, 'And for drink?' asked I.
' That is as thou wilt,' said he. So I drank off a pint of
wine and poured him out the like. Then said he, ' O Abou
Ishac, wilt thou sing us somewhat, so we may hear of thy
fashion that wherein thou exceilest high and low?' His
words vexed me; but I dissembled my annoyance and
taking the lute, played and sang. £ Well done, O Abou
Ishac ! 5 said he ; whereat my anger redoubled and I said


205

to myself, ' Is it not enough that he should come in to me,
without my leave, and importune me thus, but he must call
me by my name, as though he knew not the right way to
address me ? ' Quoth he, 4 If thou wilt sing again, we will
requite thee.' 1 swallowed my annoyance and took the
lute and sang again, taking pains with what I sang and
rising thereto altogether, because of his saying, * We will
Htg|)t requite thee.' He was delighted and said, 'Well done, O
OuXXXimt. ray lord!' Then said he, < Dost thou give me leave to
sing?' 'As thou wilt,' answered I, deeming him weak of
wit, in that he should think to sing before me, after that
which he had heard from me. So he took the lute and
swept the strings, and by Allah, meseemed they spoke in
the Arabic tongue, with a sweet and liquid and murmurous
voice ; then he began and sang the following verses :

A heart that is cankered with grief I have": who will sell me therefor A
heart that of cankers is whole, un wounded of ulcer or sore ?

But no, not a soul will consent to barter a heart against mine ; For
whoso should buy were condemned to sickness and woe evermore.

He'd groan with the groaning of him who's wounded and choking with
wine, For the longing that lives in my heart and gnaws at its inner-
most coie.

And by Allah, meseemed the doors and the walls and
all that was in the house answered and sang with him, for
the beauty of his voice, so that methought my very limbs
and clothes answered him, and I abode amazed and unable
to speak or move, for the trouble of my heart. Then he
sang these verses*:

Hark ye, O doves of Liwa, 1 come back unto your nest : With longing

for your voices my bosom is opprest.
Back to the copse they winged it and me well-nigh did slay : Weil-nige

to them my secrets I had made manifest.

1 El Liwa, a beautiful valley ol Arabia frequently referred to by the
p:: :a-;.


207


They call on one departed, with cooing, as it were They'd drunken win®

and madness did sojourn in their breast.
Ne'er saw mine eyes, I swear it, the like of them for doves I They weep f

yet not a tear-drop is from their eyes exprest.

And also these :

O wind of Nejed, when thou blowst from Nejed far and wide, Thy

wafts add longing unto that for which long time I've sighed !
Lo, in the freshness of the morn, from out the trellised boughs Of

laurel and of cassia, to me a turtle cried.
She moaned, as moans the youth for love, and eke discovered thus The

secret of my yearning pain, that yet I fain would hide-
They say that, when a lover's near, he wearies of his love, And that by

absence passion's cured ; 'tis false, for I have tried
Both remedies, but am not cured of that which is with me, Withal that

nearness easier is than distance to abide.
Yet nearness of abode, forsooth, may nowise profit thee, An if th«

grace of her thou lov'st be unto thee denied. y

Then said he, 1 Ibrahim, sing this song after me and
do after the fashion thereof in thy singing and teach it to
thy slave-girls.' Quoth I, ' Repeat it to me.' But he
answered, ' There needs no repetition ; thou hast it by
heart,' and vanished from my sight. At this I was amazed
and running to my sword, drew it and made for the door
of the harem, but found it closed and said to the women,
4 What have ye heard ? 1 Quoth they, ' We have heard the
sweetest and goodliest of singing.' Then I went forth, in
amazement, to the door of the house and finding it locked,
questioned the doorkeepers of the old man. 'What old
man ? ' said they. ' By Allah, no one hath gone in to thee
this day!' So I returned, pondering the matter, when,
behold, he cried out from one of the corners of the house s
[though I saw none,] saying, ( Fear not, O Abou Ishac j
eo harm shall befall thee, It is I, Abou Murreh. 1 who
have been thy boon-companion this day.' Then I mounted
1 i.e* Father of Bitterness, a name for the Devil,


208


and rode to Er Reshid, to whom I told what had passed,
and he said, 1 Repeat to me the airs thou heardest from
him.' So I took the lute and played and sang them to
him ; for, behold, they were rooted in my heart. The
Khalif was charmed with them and drank thereto, albeit
he was no great wine-bibber, saying, 'Would he would
some day pleasure us with his company, as he hath
pleasured thee ! ' Then he ordered me a present and
I took it and went away.

THE LOVERS OF THE BENOU XJDHREH.

(Quoth Mesrour the Eunuch), The Khalif Haroun er
Reshid was very wakeful one night and said to me, 'See
which of the poets is at the door to-night.' So I went out
and finding Jemil ben Maamer el Udhri 1 in the ante-
chamber, said to him, 'The Commander of the Faithful
calls for thee.' Quoth he, ' I hear and obey/ and going in
with me, saluted the Khalif, who returned his greeting and
bade him sit down. Then he said to him, 5 O Jemil, hast
thou any new stories to tell us ? ' ■ Yes, O Commander of
the Faithful,' answered he. 'Whether wouldst thou liefer
hear, that which I have seen with mine eyes or that which
I have [but] heard tell ? ' i Tell me something thou hast
actually seen,' said the Khalif. Quoth Jemil, * It is well,
O Commander of the Faithful ; incline thy heart to me and
lend me thine ears/ The Khalif took a cushion of red
brocade, embroidered with gold and stuffed with ostrich-
feathers, and laying it under his thighs, propped up his
elbows thereon ; then he said to Jemil, 4 Now for thy tale?
O Jemil ! '

! Know, O Commander of the Faithful/ answered he 8
4 that I was once desperately enamoured of a certain girl

8 See note, Vol. II. p. 25. The introduction here of Jemil is as
afflachronism, as he died many years before Er Reshid* 5 birth,


209


and used to pay her frequent visits, for that she was my ^{g^j
desire and delight of all the things of this world. After fcclxXXfo,
awhile, her people removed with her, by reason of scarcity
of pasture, and I abode some time without seeing her, till
i grew restless for desire and longed for her sight and my
soul urged me to journey to her. One night, I could hold
out no longer j so I rose and saddling my she-camel, bound
on my turban and donned my oldest clothes. Then I girt
myself with my sword and slinging my spear behind rne$,
mounted and rode forth in quest of her. I fared on dili-
gently till, one night, it was pitch dark and exceeding black
and I heard on all sides the roaring of lions and howling
of wolves and the cries of the wild beasts ; whereat my
reason was troubled and my heart sank within me ; but for
all that I ceased not to press on, descending into valleys
and climbing mountains, whilst my tongue ceased not to
call on the name of God the Most High.

As I went along thus, sleep overtook me and the came!
carried me aside out of my road, till, presently, something!
smote me on the head, and I woke, startled and alarmed,
and found myself in a meadow, 2 full of interlacing trees and
streams and birds on the branches, warbling their various
notes. So I alighted and taking my camel's halter in my
hand, fared on softly with her, till I won clear of the trees
and came out into the open country, where I adjusted her
saddle and mounted again, knowing not where to go nor
whither the fates should lead me; but, presently, peering
into the desert, I espied a fire afar off. So I smote my
camel and made toward the fire. When I drew near, I
saw a tent pitched and thereby a spear stuck in the
ground, with a pennon flying and horses tethered and
camels feeding, and said in myself, " Doubtless there hangs
some grave matter by this tent for I see none other than!


Apparently the branch of a tree. 8 Or verdant tract of country.
VOL. VI. 14


2IO


it in the desert." So I went up to it and said. " Peace be
upon you. O people of the tent, and the mercy of God and
His blessings!" Whereupon there came forth to me a
young man, nineteen years old, who was as the shining
full moon, with valour written between his eyes, and
answered, saying, "And on thee be peace, O brother
of the Arabs, and God's mercy and blessing! Methinks
thou hast lost thy way ? " " Even so," replied I. s£ Direct
me aright, God ha.ve mercy on thee ! " " Q brother of the
Arabs," rejoined he, "of a truth this our land is infested
with lions and the night is exceeding dark and cold and
dreary, and I fear lest the wild beasts tear thee in pieces ;
wherefore do thou alight and abide with me this night in
ease and comfort^ and to-morrow I will put thee in the
right way."

Accordingly, I alighted and hobbled my camel with the
end of her halter; then I put ofj my heavy upper clothes
and sat down. Presently the young man took a sheep and
slaughtered it and kindled a brisk fire ; after which he
went into the tent and. bringing out fine salt and powdered
spices, fell to cutting off pieces of the flesh of the sheep
and roasting them over the fire and feeding me therewith,
weeping one while and sighing another. Then he groaned
heavily and wept sore and recited the following verses :

Nothing is left him but a fluttering spright. Ay, and an eye bereaved of
its light ;

Nor in his members is a single joint But sickness there is constant a&y
and night.

His tears flow ever and his heart burns aye 5 Yet for all this still silent
is the wight.

His foes, weep, pitying Mia ; alas for those Who pity in th 5 exultant fas
excite I

By this I knew that the youth \?as a distracted lover,—

1 none knoweth passion save he who hath taste d the,
savour thereof,, — and said to myself, "Shall I ask him? 83


211


But I bethought me and said, "How shall 1 intrude on
him with questioning, and I in his abode?" So I re-
strained myself and ate my sufficiency of the meat. When
we had made an end of eating, the young man arose and
entering the tent, brought out an elegant basin and ewer
and a silken napkin, fringed with broidery of red gold,
and a casting-bottle full of rose-water, mingled with musk.
I marvelled at his elegance and the daintiness of his
fashion and said in myself, " Never knew I of elegance
in the desert" Then we washed our hands and talked
awhile, after which he went into the tent and making
a partition between himself and me with a piece of red
brocade, said to me, " Enter, O chief of the Arabs, and take
thy rest ; for thou hast suffered toil and travel galore this
night and in this thy journey." So I entered and finding
a bed of green brocade, pulled off my clothes and passed
a night such as I had never passed in my life. tWfgfif
I lay, pondering the young man's case, till it was dark tWS*
aight and all eyes slept, when I was aroused by the sound
of a low voice, never heard I a softer or sweeter. I raised
the curtain and saw, by the young man's side, a damsel^
never beheld I a fairer of face, and they were both weeping
and complaining, one to the other, of the pangs of passion
and desire and of the excess of their longing for each
other's sight. (i By Allah," quoth I, " I wonder who this
can be I When I entered this tent, there was none there-
in but this young man. Doubtless this damsel is of the
daughters of the Jinn and is enamoured of this youth ; so
they have secluded themselves with one another in this
place," Then I considered her attentively and behold, she
was a mortal and an Arab girl, whose face, when she un-
veiled it, put to shame the shining sun, and the tent was
illumined by the light of her countenance. When I wai
assured that she was his mistress. I bethought me of g
lover's jealousy j so I let fall the curtain and covering mj


212


face, fell asleep. As soon as it was day, I arose and donning
my clothes, made the ablution and prayed such prayers as
were due from me. Then I said to my host, " O brother
of the Arabs, wilt thou add to thy favours by directing me
into the right road ?" " At thy leisure, O chief of the Arabs,*
answered he. " The time of a guest's stay is three days*
and I am not one to let thee go before that time."

So I abode with him three days, and on the fourth day s
as we sat talking, I asked him of his name and lineage.
Quoth he, " As for my lineage, I am of the Benou Udhreh %
my name is such an one, son of such an one and my father's
brother is called such an one." And behold, O Commander
of the Faithful, he was the son of my father's brother and
of the noblest house of the Benou Udhreh. a O my cousin/'
said I, " what moved thee to leave thy fair estate and that
of thy fathers and thy slaves and handmaids and seclude
thyself alone in this desert ? " When he heard my words,
his eyes filled with tears and he replied, saying, " Know,
O my cousin, that I was passionately enamoured of the
daughter of my father's brother and distracted for love of
her; so I sought her in marriage of her father, but he
refused and married her to a man of the Benou Udhreh,
who went in to her and carried her to his abiding-place
this last year. When she became thus removed from me
and I was prevented from looking on her, the pangs of
passion and excess of love-longing and desire drove me to
forsake my people and friends and fortune and take up my
abode in this desert, where I have grown used to my soli-
tude." " Where are their dwellings ? " asked I. And he said,
" They are hard by, on the top of yonder hill ; and every
night, at the dead time when all eyes sleep, she steals
secretly out of the camp, unseen of any s and I satisfy my
desire of her converse and she of mine." So I abide thus ?
comforting [or solacing] myself with her [company] a part
of the night, till God accomplish that which is to be;


213

either I shall compass my desire, in spite of the envious, I
or God will determine for me, and He is the best of those
that determine."

When I knew his case, O Commander of the Faithful,
I was concerned for him and perplexed by reason of [my]

jealousy [for his welfare] ; so I said to him, " O my cousin, ;
wilt thou that I counsel thee a plan, wherein, if it please
God, thou shalt find a source of amendment and the way of

advisement and success and whereby God shall do away from \
thee that thou dreadest ? " " Say on, O my cousin," answered

he. Quoth I } " When it is night and the girl cometh, set x
her on my camel ; for she is swift of going, and mount f,
thou thy courser, whilst I mount one of these she-camels, f
So will we fare on with her all night and by the morrow,

we shall have traversed deserts and plains, and thou wilt ■
have attained thy desire and won the beloved of thy heart. |
God's earth is wide, and by Allah, I will succour thee with %_
heart and wealth and sword, as long as I live ! " " O cousin," tbCfgfit

answered he, " wait till I take counsel with her, for she is I
prudent and quick-witted and hath insight into affairs." i
When the night darkened and the hour of her coming \
arrived, and he awaiting her at the appointed season, she
delayed beyond her usual time, and I saw him go forth the
door of the tent and opening his mouth, inhale the wafts

of air that came from her quarter, as if to sauff her odour, I
and he repeated the following verses : 1

Wind of the East, thou waftest a gentle air to me, From out the lovesl
one's country, the place where sojourns she.

wind, thou bear'st a token from her I hold so dear; Canst thou no?

give me tidings when will her coming be ?

Then he entered the tent and sat awhile, weeping j after
which he said to me, " O my cousin, some mischance must '
have betided the daughter of my uncle, to hinder her from
coming to me this night. But abide where thou art, till

1 bring thee news." And he took his sword and buckler


J


214


and was absent awhile of the night, after which he
returned, carrying something, and called to me. So I
hastened to him and he said, " O my cousin, knowst thou
what hath happened ? " " No, by Allah ! " answered L
Quoth he, "Verily, I am smitten with mourning for my
cousin this night ; for she was coming to me, as of wont s
when a lion met her in the way and rent her, and there
remaineth of her but what thou seest." So saying, he
threw down what he had in his hand, and behold, it was
the damsel's turban and what was left of her bones. Then
he wept sore and casting down his shield, took a bag and
went forth again, saying, "Stir not hence, till I return to
thee, if it please God the Most High."

He was absent awhile and presently returned, bearing
in his hand a lion's head, which he threw on the ground
and called for water. So I brought him water, with which
he washed the lion's mouth and- fell to kissing it and
weeping : and he mourned for her passing sore and recited
the following verses :

O lion, that thyself indeed didst on perdition throw s Perished hast thon

and for her loss hast filled my heart with woe.
Thou hast bereaved me of my love and eke the cold earth's womb Hast

made her dwelling till the day that calls up high and low.
To Fate, that with the loss of her afHicteth me, quoth I, " Now God

forbid that one to take her place to me thou show 1"

Then said he to me, " O cousin, I conjure thee by Allah
and the rights of kindred and sympathy betwixt us, keep
my charge. Thou wilt presently see me dead before thee ,
whereupon do thou wash me and shroud me and these that
remain of my cousin's bones in this mantle and bury us
both in one grave and write thereon these verses :

Upon the earth a life we lived of solace and delight % In land and house

foregathered we full many a day and night.
Bat fortune and the shifts of time did rend our loves aparl And bow

within its bosom strait the shroud doth us unite.


215

Then he wept sore and entering the tent, was absent
awhile, after which he came forth, groaning and crying
out. Then he gave one sob and departed this world.
When I saw that he was indeed dead, it was grievous to
me and so sore was my sorrow for him that I had well-
nigh followed him for excess of lamentation over him.
Then I laid him out and did as he had enjoined me,
shrouding the damsel's remains with him in one garment
and burying them in one grave. I abode by their grave
three days, after which I departed and continued to pay
frequent visits to the place for two years. This then is
their story, O Commander of the Faithful'

The Khalif was pleased with JemiPs story and rewarded
him with a dress of honour and a handsome present.

THE BEDOUIN AND HIS WIFE.

The Khalif Muawiyeh was sitting one day in his palace
at Damascus, in a room the windows whereof were open on
all four sides, that the breeze might enter from all quarters.
Now it was a day of excessive heat, with no air stirring,
and in the middle of the day, when the heat was at its
sultriest, the Khalif, chancing to look forth, saw a man
coming along, scorched by the heat of the ground and
limping, as he fared on barefoot. Muawiyeh considered
him awhile and said to his courtiers, ' Hath God [may He
be blessed and glorified !] created any more wretched than
he who needs must stir abroad at such an hour and in such
weather as this ? ' Quoth one of them, ' Perad venture, he
seeketh the Commander of the Faithful.' ' By Allah,' ex-
claimed the Khalif, ' if he seek me, I will assuredly give to
him, and if he be wronged, I will succour him. Ho, boy !
Stand at the door, and if yonder Arab seek to come in to
me, forbid him not therefrom.'

So the page went out and presently the Arab came up to


2l6


him and he said, ' What dost thou want ? f 'I want the
Commander of the Faithful,' answered the other, and
3Cfgt)t the page said, ' Enter.' So he entered and saluted the
IftXCtfa Khalif, who said to him, 'Who art thou?' * I am a man
of the Benou Temim/ answered the Arab. 'And what
brings thee here at this season ? ' asked Muawiyeh. Quoth
the Arab, ' I come to thee, complaining to thee and im-
ploring thy protection.' ' Against whom ? ' asked the Khalif.
e Against Merwan ben el Hekem, 1 thy deputy,' answered the
man and recited the following verses :

Muawiyeh, pitiful, munificent and kind, Thou in whom righteousness

and grace and wisdom are combined,

1 come to thee for that my way on earth is strait on me : O help ! nor

cut thou off my hope, but justice let me find.
Vouchsafe thou me redress 'gainst him, the tyrant who hath wrought Me

such unright as death itself were lighter to my mind.
Unjustly hath he dealt by me and tyrant-wise bereft Me of my wife, of

Suad, dear to me o'er all her kind.
Yea, he in truth hath gone about to slay me, ere my tale Of days be

told or come the term to me of God assigned.

When Muawiyeh heard him recite these verses, with the
fire flashing from his mouth, he said to him, ' Thou art
welcome, O brother of the Arabs ! Tell me thy tale and
expound to me thy case.' ' O Commander of the Faith-
ful/ replied the Arab, ' 1 had a wife, whom I loved passing
dear and who was the solace of my eyes and the delight
of my heart ; and I had a herd of camels, with whose
produce I made shift to maintain my condition; but there
came upon us a year [of calamity], which killed off hoof
and horn and bereft me of all I had. When what was in
my hand failed me and I fell into evil case, I became
abject and burdensome to those who had used to wish to
visit me ; which when my wife's father knew, he took her
from me and abjured me and drove me forth without pity.

1 Governor of Medina under Muawiyeh aad afterwards [A.D.. 683-4]
fourth Khalif of the Ommiade dynasty.


217

So I repaired to thy deputy, Merwan ben el Hekem, and
sought succour of him. He summoned my father-in-law
and questioned him, and he denied any knowledge of me,
" May God amend the Amir ! " said I. " If it please him to
send for the woman and question her of her father's saying,
the truth will appear." So he sent for her ; but no sooner
had he set eyes on her than he fell passionately in love
with her and becoming my rival, denied me succour and
was wroth with me. Moreover, he sent me to prison, and
I became as I had fallen from heaven and the wind had
cast me down in a far country. Then said Merwan to my
father-in-law, " Wilt thou give her to me to wife, at a
["present] dowry of a thousand dinars and [a contingent
one of] ten thousand dirhems, and I will engage to quit
her of yonder Arab ? " Her father was seduced by the
bribe and agreed to the bargain ; whereupon Merwan sent
for me and looking at me like an angry lion, said to me,
" O Arab, put away Suad." " I will not put her away,"
answered I ; but he set on me a company of his servants,
who tortured me with all manner tortures, till I found no
help for it but to do as he bade. So I divorced her and
he sent me back to prison, where I abode till the days of
her purification were accomplished, when he married her
and set me free. So now I come to thee, hoping in thee,
and imploring thy succour and throwing myself on thy
protection.' And he recited the following verses :

A fire is in the heart of me, That flameth still unquenchably.

My body's sick and leaches all Are . baffled by my malady.

Yea, and live coals, that cast forth sparks, For ever in mine entrails be :

Mine eyes rain tears without relent That down my cheeks in torrents flee j

Nor have I hope of help except In God my Lord and eke in thee.

Then he was convulsed, and his teeth chattered and he
fell down in a fit, writhing like a slain snake. When.
Muawiyeh heard his story, he said, e Verily, Merwan ben
el Hekem hath transgressed against the laws of the Faith


2l8


Hfgflt and hath done oppression and violated the harem of a true
iJOXtfL believer ! O Arab, thou comest to me with a story, the
like whereof I never heard 1 ' Then he called for inkhorn
and paper and wrote to Merwan as follows : ' It hath
reached me that thou transgressest the laws of the Faith
with regard to thy subjects. Now it behoves him who is
& governor to keep his eyes from their lusts and restrain
his soul from its delights.' And after he wrote many
words, which [quoth he who tells the tale] I omit, for
brevity's sake s and amongst them these verses :

Thou wast invested with a rule whereto thou art unapt : Ask pardon

[out on thee I] of God for thine adulterous deed.
Lo, the unhappy man to us complaining came of thee j Of severance he

made his moan and for redress did plead.
Hark ye, I've ta'en an oath to God, I'll not be false unto, Nay, I will

quit me of what's due unto my faith and creed ;
An if thou cross me in this thing I write to thee, I swear, Vultures and

eagles presently upon thy flesh shall feed.
Divorce Suad and by Kumeit and Nesr ben Dhiban Unto my presence

all equipped, despatch her with all speed.

Then he folded the letter and sealing it with his seal,
delivered it to El Kumeit and Nesr ben Dhiban [whom it
was his wont to employ on matters of weight, because of
their trustiness] who took the letter and carried it to
Medina, where they went in to Merwan and saluting him s
delivered to him the letter and told him how the case
stood. He read the letter and fell a-weeping ; but it was
not in his power to refuse obedience to the Khalif ; so he
went in to Suad and acquainting her with the case, divorced
her in the presence of Kumeit and Nesr ; after which he
equipped her and delivered her to them, together with
a letter to the Khalif, under his own hand and seal, to the
following purport :

Prince of the Faithful, hasten not : with a good grace thy vow 1 will
accomplish, nor constraint to force me dost thou need.


219


Why styl'st thou me adulterer and traitor? If she pleased My fancy,

'twas in me no sin, as eke thou wilt concede ;
For lo, there comes to thee a sun ; amongst all folk that be. Mortals or

Jinn, there's none may match with her in very deed.

So the messengers returned with Suad to Damascus and
delivered to Muawiyeh the letter, which when he had read,
he said, * Verily, he hath obeyed handsomely, but he is
extravagant in his praise of the woman.' Then he called
for her and found her such a beauty as he had never seen,
for grace and elegance and symmetry ; moreover, he talked
with her and found her fluent of speech and happy in
diction and expression. Quoth he, * Bring me the Arab.'
So they fetched the man, who came, sore disordered for
the evil dealing of fortune, and Muawiyeh said to him,
' O Arab, if thou wilt give her up to me, I will give thee in
her stead three slave-girls, high-bosomed maids like moons,
and a thousand dinars with each. Moreover* I will assign
thee on the treasury such an annual sum as shall content
and enrich thee.' When the Arab heard this, he gave
a groan [and swooned away], so that Muawiyeh thought
he was dead. When he revived, the Khalif said to him,
' What ails thee ? * And the Arab answered, ' With heavy
heart and in sore need, I appeal to thee from the injustice
of Merwan ben el Hekemj but to whom shall I appeal
from thine injustice?' And he recited the following verses :

God save the Khalif ! Make me not, as one, I prithee, who For succour

from the burning sands unto the fire doth sue.
Suad restore to one distraught, afflicted, morn and eve In memory who

passeth still and anguish ever new.
Loose thou my bonds and give her back, nor grudge her unto me.

Thou'lt find me no ungrateful one, if thus with me thou do.

Then said he s ' O Commander of the Faithful, wert thou
lo give me all the riches of the Khalifate, yet would 1 not
take them without Suad. 5 And he recited this verse :

My heart to love other than Suad. to me Deniesj for my drink and mj
victual is she.


220


Quoth the Khalif, ' Thou confessest to having divorced
her and Merwan hath done the like ; so now we will give
her her choice. If she choose other than thee, we will
marry her to him, and if she choose thee, we will restore
her to thee.' 1 Be it so,' replied the Arab. So Muawiyeh
said to her, ' What sayst thou, O Suad ? Which dost thou
choose? The Commander of the Faithful, with his power
and glory and dominion and palaces and treasures and all
else thou seest at his command, or Merwan ben el Hekem,
with his violence and tyranny, or this Arab, with his hunger
and poverty ? ' So she recited the following verses :

This man, for all lie be in hunger and distress, Dearer to me than folk

and neighbour is, nathelesse ;
Yea, he is more to me than he who wears the crown, Merwan his

governor and all who wealth possess.

Then said she, 'O Commander of the Faithful, 1 will
not forsake him by reason of the,, shifts of fortune or the
perfidies of Fate, for there is between us old companion-
ship, that may not be forgotten, and love beyond proof;
and indeed it is but just that I should have patience with
him in his stress, even as I shared fair fortune with him in
better days.' The Khalif marvelled at her wit and love and
constancy and ordering her ten thousand dirhems, delivered
her to the Arab s who took his wife and went away.

THE LOVERS OF BASSORA.

The Khalif Haroun er Reshid was sleepless one night ;
so he sent for El Asmai and Hussein el Khelia 1 and said
to them, * Tell me a story and do thou begin, O Hussein/

1 Abou AH el Hussein, surnamed El Khelia [the Wag] on account
of his gay and licentious humour, a well-known poet of the Court of
the early Abbaside Khalifs. He was a native of Bassora and a boon=
companion of Aboa Nuwas j but his introduction here is an anachronism
as he did not make his appearance at court till the sacceeding reigfi^
that of Er Reshid's son s El Amin.


221


ll is well, O Commander of the Faithful,' answered
Hussein. 'Some years ago, I went down to Bassora,
to present to Mohammed ben Suleiman er Rebiy 1 an ode
I had composed in his honour ; and he accepted it
and bade me abide [at his court]. One day, I went out
to El Mirbed, 2 by way of El Muhalliyeh, 8 and being
oppressed by the great heat, went up to a great door, to
ask for drink, when I was aware of a damsel, as she were
a swaying willow- wand, with languishing eyes, eyebrows
arched and finely pencilled and smooth and polished
cheeks. She was clad in a shift the colour of a pome-
granate-flower, and a vest of Senaa 4 work ; but the white-
ness of her body overcame the redness of her shift,
through which glittered two breasts like twin pomegranates
and a belly, as it were a roll of fine Egyptian linen, with
creases like scrolls of pure white paper, filled with musk.
Round her neck she wore a [chain and] amulet of red
gold, that fell down between her breasts, and on the table
of her forehead were browlocks like jet. Her eyebrows
joined one another and her eyes were like lakes ; she had
an aquiline nose and thereunder teeth like pearls. In
fine, pleasantness prevailed in every part of her ; but she
seemed dejected and distracted and came and went in the
vestibule, walking upon the hearts of her lovers, whilst her
legs made mute the voices of their ankle-rings ; and
indeed she was as saith the poet :

Eaah member of her charms so sweet and good Hath given rise to its
similitude.

I was smitten with awe of her, O Commander of the
Faithful, and drew near to salute her, and behold, the
house and vestibule and street were fragrant with musk.

a Governor of Bassora, but not hi El Hussein's time
8 A place near Bassora.
8 A quarter of Bassora.

* Senaa, capital of the Arabian province of Yemea,


222


So I saluted her and she returned my greeting with a
dejected voice and a grieving heart, consumed with the
ardour of passion. Then said I to her, " ray lady, I am
an old man and a stranger, and sore opprest of thirst
Wilt thou order me a draught of water, and God will
requite thee ? " " Away, O old man ! " answered she. " I
!Kftght am distracted from [all thoughts of] meat and drink." " By
tfCXCtb. what ailment, O my lady ? " asked I. Quoth she, " I love
one who dealeth not justly by me and desire one who will
none of me. Wherefore I am afflicted with the wakeful-
ness of those who watch the stars." " Q my lady," said I,
" is there on the face of the earth one to whom thou hast
a mind and who hath no mind to thee ?" "Yes," answered
she ; " and this by reason of the perfection of beauty and
amorous grace with which he is endowed." H And why
standest thou in this porch ? " asked I. " This is his road,"
answered she, " and the hour of his passing by." 53 O my
lady," said I, " have ye ever foregathered and had such
commerce as might cause this passion ? " At this she
heaved a deep sigh ; the tears rained down upon her
cheeks, as they were dew falling upon roses, and she recited
these verses ?

Even as two cassia-boughs entwined above a mead we were ; We draok

the fragrance of delights in all life has of fair.
Bat this branch rent itself away from that, and now thou seest One loss®

and yearning unto that which was its mate whilere.

Quoth I, " And what betideth thee of thy love for this
youth ? " She answered, " I see the sun upon the walls of
his people and I think that it is he ; or haply I catch sight
of him unexpectedly and am confounded and the blood
and the life flee from my body and I abide without reason
for weeks." " Excuse me/ 5 said I j u for I also have suffered,
for love-longing, that which is upon thee of distraction of
soul and wasting of body and loss of strength ; and I see in
lb.ee pallor and emaciation, such as testify of the fever-fits


223


of passion. But how shouldst thou be unsmitten of passion f
and thou a sojourner in the land of Bassora?" " By Allah,"
said she, " before I became enamoured of this youth, I was
endowed with the uttermost of amorous grace and was re-
splendent with beauty and perfection and ravished all the
princes of Bassora, till he fell in love with me S " " And
who parted you ? " asked I. " The vicissitudes of fortune,"
answered she ; " but the manner of our separation was a
strange one ; and it was on this wise.

One New Year's day I had invited the damsels of Bassora
and amongst them a girl belonging to Siran, who had
bought her out of Oman for fourscore thousand dirhems*
She was madly in love with me and when she entered, she
threw herself upon me and well-nigh tore me in pieces
with bites and pinches. Then we withdrew apart, to drink
wine at our ease, till our meat was ready and our delight
was complete, and she toyed with me and I with her, and
now I was upon her and now she upon me. Presently, the
fumes of the wine moved her to strike her hand on the
ribbon of my trousers, whereby it became loosed, unknown
of either of us, and my trousers fell down in our play.
At this moment, he came in, unobserved, and seeing me
thus, was wroth and made off, as doth the Arab filly, when
she hears the tinkle of her bridle. This, O elder, was tHTfgfjt
three years ago, and since that time I have never ceased i&DXb*
to excuse myself to him and entreat him with soft words
and implore his indulgence, but he will neither cast a look
at me nor write me a word nor speak to me by a messenger
nor hear aught from me." Quoth I, "Is he an Arab or
a foreigner ? " And she, " Out on thee ! He is of the
princes of Bassora." " Is he old or young?" asked I. She
looked at me laughingly and said, ££ Thou art certainly a
fool ! He is like the moon, at its full, smooth-cheeked
and beardless, nor is there any defect in him except his
aversion to me." s * What is his name ? " asked I, and she 2


224


" What wilt thou do with him ? " 16 1 will do my endeavour
to come at him," answered I, "that I may bring about
reunion between you." Quoth she, " I will tell thee } on
condition that thou cany him a letter." And I said, "I
have no objection to that" Then said she, " His name is
Zemreh ben el Mughaireh, hight Aboussekhaa, and his
palace is at El Mirbed."

Therewith she called to those within for inkhorn and
paper and tucking up her sleeves, showed two wrists like
bracelets of silver. She headed her letter with "In the
name of God etc, ; " then wrote as follows, " O my lord s
the forbearance of an invocation at the head of this my
letter proclaimeth my insufficiency, and know that if my
prayer had been answered, thou wouldst not have left me j
for how often have I prayed that thou shouldest not leave
me, and yet thou didst leave me 1 Were it not that distress
with me transcends the bounds of restraint, that which thy
servant hath forced herself to do in writing this letter were
succourable to her, for all her despair of thee, of her
knowledge of thee that thou wilt forbear to answer. Do
thou fulfil her desire, O my lord, of a sight of thee from
the porch, as thou passest in the street } wherewith thou
wilt revive the dead soul in her. Or better still, do thou
write her a letter with thine own hand (which God endow
with all excellence !) and appoint it in requital of the
privities that were between us in the nights of time past,
whereof thou knowest. O my lord, was I not to thee
a lover wasted with passion ? If thou answer my prayer,
I will give thee thanks and to God praise ; and so peace
be on thee S "

Then she gave me the letter and I went away. Next
morning I repaired to the Viceroy's door, where I found
an assembly of the notables of Bassora 9 and amongst them,
a youth who adorned the place and surpassed in grace
and majesty all who were there ; and indeed the Amir


22$


Mohammed set him above himself. I asked who he was
and behold, it was Zemreh himself : so I said to myself,
"Verily, there hath betided yonder unhappy one that
which hath betided her I " 1 Then I betook myself to El
Mirbed and waited at the door of his house, till he came
riding up in state, when I accosted him and invoking lavish
blessings on him, gave him the letter. When he read it,
he said to me, " O old man, we have taken another in her
stead. Wilt thou see the substitute?" And I answered,
H Yes." Whereupon he called out a woman's name, and
there came forth a damsel who put to shame the sun and
moon, swelling-breasted, walking the gait of one who
hastens without fear„ to whom he gave the letter, saying,
" Do thou answer it." When she read it, she turned pale
and said to me, " O old man, ask pardon of God for this
that thou hast brought." So I went out, dragging my feet,
and returned to her. When she saw me, she said, " What
is behind thee ? " I answered, "Evil and despair." And
she said, " Have thou no concern of him. Where are God
and Providence?" Then she ordered me five hundred
dinars and I took them and went away.

Some days after I passed by the place and saw there
horsemen and footmen. So I went in and lo, these were
the companions of Zemreh, who were begging her to
return to him ; but she said, "No, by Allah, I will not
look him in the face ! " And she prostrated herself in
gratitude to God and exultation over Zemreh. Then I
drew near her, and she pulled out to me a letter, wherein
was written, after the invocation of the Deity, the follow-
ing : " O my lady, but for my forbearance towards thee,
[may God prolong thy life i] I would relate somewhat of
what betided from thee and set out my excuse s in that
thou transgressedst against me, whenas thou wast mani-
festly a sinner against thyself and me in breach of vows

1 i^. she had no power to avert that which was fated to betide her.
VOL. VI. 15


and lack of faith and preference of another to me ;. for,
by Allah, on whom we call for help against that which was
of thy free-will, thou didst transgress against the love of
me ; and so peace be on thee ! " Then she showed me
the presents and things of price he had sent her, which
were of the value of thirty thousand dinars. 1 saw her
again after this, and Zemreh had married her.'

Quoth Er Reshid, 5 Had not Zemreh been beforehand
with us, I had certainly had to do with her myself/

ISAAC OF MOSUL AND HIS MISTRESS AND
THE DEVIL.

[Quoth Isaac ben Ibrahim el Mausili], I was in my house
one night in the winter-time s when the clouds spread them-
selves [over the sky] and the rains poured down in torrents,
as from the mouths of water-skins, and the folk forbore to
come and go about the ways by reason of that which was
therein of rain and mire. Now I was heavy at heart for
that none of my brethren came to me nor could I go to
them, for the mud and mire : so I said to my servant,
'Bring me wherewithal I may divert myself.' So he
brought me meat and drink, but I had no heart to eat,
without some one to bear me company, and I ceased not
to look out of window and watch the ways till nightfall,
when I bethought myself of a damsel belonging to one
of the sons of El Mehdi, 1 of whom I was enamoured and
who was skilled in singing and playing upon instruments
of music, and said to myself, 5 Were she here with us to-
night, my joy would be complete and my night would
be abridged of the melancholy and restlessness that are
upon ma,'

At this moment one knocked at the cioor 8 saying, * Shall

1 Third Khalif of the Abbaside dynasty [A.a 775-785] and father of
Harouis er Reshid.


22/


a beloved enter, who standeth at the door?' Quoth I,
' Meseems the plant of my desire hath fruited.' So I went
to the door and found my mistress, with a long green skirt
wrapped about her and a kerchief of brocade on her head,
to fend her from the rain. She was covered with mud to
her knees and all that was upon her was drenched with
water from the gutters ; in short, she was in a rare pickle-
So I said to her, ' O my lady, what brings thee hither
through all this mud ? ' Quoth she, ' Thy messenger came
to me and set forth to me that which was with thee of love
and longing, so that I could not choose but yield and
hasten to thee.' I marvelled at this, but was ashamed to ^fgfjt
tell her that I had sent no messenger ; so I said, ' Praised utXCbi
be God that He hath brought us together, after all I have
suffered for the pangs of patience ! Verily, hadst thou
delayed an hour longer, I must have run to thee, because
of my much love and longing for thee.'

Then I called to my boy for water, that I might better
her plight, and he brought a kettle full of hot water. I
bade them pour it over her feet, whilst I set to work to
wash them myself; after which I made her doff what she
had on and calling for one of my richest dresses, clad her
therein. Then I would have called for food, but she
refused and I said to her, 'Art thou for wine?' 'Yes/
answered she. So I fetched cups and she said to me,
' Who shall sing ? ' ' 1, O my lady,' answered I. But she
said, 'I care not for that.' 1 One of my damsels?*
suggested I. 'I have no mind to that either,' said she,
'Then,' quoth I, 'do thou sing thyself.' ' Not I,' replied
she. 'Who then shall sing for thee?' asked I. Quoth she 9
' Go out and seek some one to sing for me.' So I went
out, in obedience to her s though I despaired of finding
any one at such a time, and fared on till I came to the
main street, where I saw a blind man striking the earth
with his staff and saying, ' May God not requite with good.


228


those with whom I was ! When I sang, they hearkened
not, and when I was silent, they despised me.' So I said
to him, * Art thou a singer ? ' 4 Yes, 5 answered he. Quoth
I, ' Wilt thou finish thy night with us and cheer us with thy
company?' ' If it be thy will,' replied he, i take my hand. 8
So I took his hand and leading him to my house, said
to the damsel, { my mistress, I have brought a blind
singer, with whom we may take our pleasure and he will
not .see us.' 1 Bring him to me/ said she. So I brought
him in and invited him to eat. He ate a little and washed
his hands, after which I brought him wine and he drank
three cupsful. Then he said to me, 1 Who art thou ? *
And I answered, 'I am Isaac ben Ibrahim el MausilL'
Quoth he, 'I have heard of thee and now I rejoice in thy
company.' And I said, ' O my lord, I am glad in thy
gladness.' 'O Isaac,' said he, 'sing to me.' So I took
the lute, by way of jest, and said,"* I hear and obey.' When
I had made an end of my song, he said to me, ' O Isaac*
verily thou comest nigh to be a singer ! ' His words be-
littled me in mine own eyes and I threw the lute from my
hand ; whereupon he said, ' Hast thou not with thee some
one who is skilled in singing?' 'I have a damsel with
me,' answered I ; and he said, ' Bid her sing.' Quoth
I, 'Wilt thou sing, When thou hast had enough of her
singing ? ' ' Yes,' answered he. So she sang and he said,
' Nay, thou hast achieved nought' Whereupon she threw
the lute from her hand in anger and said, ' We have done
our best : if thou have aught, favour us with it' Quoth
he, ' Bring me a lute which no hand has touched.' So
I bade the servant bring him a new lute and he tuned it and
preluding in a mode I knew not, sang the following verses s

Across the middle dusk of night a maid fares swift and straight, Who
knows the visitation-tides, to where her love doth wait.

Twas but her greeting startled us and eke her voice that s&id t Si ShaE a
beloved enter in who standeth at the gate ? "


229


When she heard this, she looked at me askance and
said, ' Could not thy breast hold the secret that was be-
tween us an hour, but thou must discover it to this man ? '
But I swore to her [that I had not told him] and excused
myself to her and fell to kissing her hands and tickling
her breasts and biting her cheeks, till she laughed and
turning to the blind man, said to him, ' Sing, O my lord ! '
So he took the lute and sang as follows : '

How often have I visited the fair and side by sides With soft caressing

hands have stroked the fingers henna-dyed !
How often have I handled eke the breasts' pomegranates rips And the

plump apples of the cheeks with bites and kisses plied I

So I said to her, ' O my lady, who can have toldyhim


what we were about' 5 True/ answered she, and -we re-
moved to a distance from him. Presently quoth he ? 5 1
have a need to make water.' And I said, ' O boy, take
the candle and go before him.' Then he went out and
tarried a long while. So we went in search of him, but
could not find him; and behold, the doors were locked
and the keys in the closet, and we knew not whether lie
had flown up to heaven or sunk into the earth. Where-
fore I knew that he was Iblis and that he had done me
a pander's office and returned, recalling to myself the
words of Abou Nuwas in the following verses :

I marvel at Iblis no less for his pride Than the lewdness and meanness

that mark his intent.
To Adam himself he refused to prostrate, Yet his lineage to sarrc m a

pimp is content.


[Quoth Ibrahim Abou Ishac], I was once in my hotise s
when one knocked at the door j so my servant went out
and returned, saying, S A comely youth is at the door 5
seeking admission/ I bade admit him and there came
in to me a young raan 9 on whom were traces of sickness^


THE LOVERS OF MEDINA,


2$Q


and he said, ' I have long wished to meet thee, for I have
an occasion to thee.' 'What is it?' asked I. Where-
upon he pulled out three hundred dinars and laying them
before me, said, ' I beseech thee to accept these and com-
pose me an air to two lines of verse I have made/ ' Repeat
H"fg^t them to me,' said I. And he recited the following lines :

3CXCbft« By Allah, O mine eyes that sinned against my heart of yore, Quench
with your tears the fire of woe that burneth ever sore.
Fate is of those that chide at^ me for her, my heart's abode, Whom c
though in grave-clothes I be lapped, I never shall see more.

So I set the verses to a plaintive air and sang it to him ;
whereupon he swooned away and I thought that he was
dead. However, after awhile, he came to himself and
said to me, 'Repeat the air.' But I conjured him by
Allah to excuse me, saying, 'I fear lest thou die.' ' Would
it might be so ! ' replied he and ceased not to importune
me, till I had pity on him and repeated it ; whereupon he
cried out grievously and fell into a worse [swoon] than
before and I doubted not but that he was dead ; but, after
I had sprinkled rose-water on him awhile, he revived and
sat up. I praised God for his recovery and laying the
dinars before him, said to him, 'Take thy money and
depart from me.' Quoth he, 'I have no need of the
money and thou shalt have the like of it, if thou wilt
repeat the air.' My heart rejoiced in the money and I
said, ' I will repeat it, but on three conditions : the first,
that thou abide with me and eat of my victual, till thou
regain strength ; the second, that thou drink wine enough
to cheer thy heart; and the third, that thou tell me thy
story.'

He agreed to this and ate and drank; after which he
said, ' I am of the people of Medina and I went forth one
day a-pleasuring with my friends and following the road to
El Akic, 1 saw a company of girls and amongst them a
1 A well-known valley near Medina,


231

damsel as she were a branch pearled with dew, with eyes
whose glances stole away his soul who looked on them.
They rested in the shade till the end of the day, when
they went away, leaving in my heart wounds slow to heal
I returned [next day], to seek news of her, but found none
who could tell me of her ; so I sought her in the streets
and markets, but could come on no trace of her ; where-
fore I fell ill of grief and told my case to one of my
kinsmen, who said to me, " No harm shall befall thee : the
days of spring are not yet past and by and by it will rain,
whereupon she will go forth, and I will go out with thee,
and do thou thy will" His words comforted my heart
and I waited till El Akic ran [with water], when I went
forth with my friends and kinsmen and sat in the same
place as before. We had not sat long before up came the
women, like horses running for a wager ; and I said to a
girl of my kindred, <£ Say to yonder damsel, i Quoth yonder
man to thee, " He did well who said :

She shot a shaft at me that pierced my bosom through and through %
Then turned away and by that act did wound and scars renew." ' "

So she went to her and repeated my words, to which
she replied, saying, "Tell him that he said well who
answered thus :

' There is with us the like of that whereof thou dost complain : Patience ;
belike, to heal our hearts relief shall soon ensue.' "

I refrained from further speech for fear of scandal and
rose to go away. She rose at my rising, and I followed and
she looked back at me, till she saw I had noted her abode.
Then she began to come to me and I to go to her, so that
we foregathered and met often, till the thing was noised
abroad and grew notorious and her father came to know it.
However, I ceased not to do my endeavour to meet her
and complained of my case to my father, who assembled
our kindred and repaired to her father, to ask her in


232


marriage for me. But her father said, "Had this been
proposed to me before he dishonoured her, I would have
consented; but now the thing is notorious and I am loath
to verify the saying of the folk."'

Then (continues Ibrahim) I repeated the air to him and
he went away, after having acquainted me with his abodej
and we became friends. Now I was devoted to the
Barmecides ; so next time Jaafer ben Yehya sat [to receive
visits], I attended, as of my wont, and sang to him the
young man's verses, They pleased him and he drank
some cups of wine and said, 4 Out on thee ! Whose song
is that ? ' So I told him the young man's story and he
bade me ride to him and give him assurance of the attain-
ment of his desire. Accordingly I fetched him to Jaafer,
who asked him to repeat his story. He did so and Jaafer
said, ' Trust me, I will marry thee to her/ So his heart
was comforted and he abode with us.

On the morrow, Jaafer mounted and went in to Er
Reshid, to whom he related the story. The Khalif was
pleased with it and sending for the young man and myself,
commanded me to repeat the air and drank thereto. Then
he wrote to the governor of the Hejaz, bidding him send
the girl's father and his household to his court in honour-
able fashion and spare no expense for their outfit So, in
a little while, they came and the Khalif, sending for the
man, commanded him to marry his daughter to her lover j
after which he gave him a hundred thousand dinars, and
the man returned to his people. As for the young man,
he abode one of Jaafer's boon-companions, till there
happened what happened ; 1 whereupon he returned with
his household to Medina, may God the Most High have
mercy upon all their souls I

a Le. the murder of Jaafer and massacre of his kinsmen by the 68 r-e£ji SB

iroun er ResMcL


233


EL MELIK EN NASIR AND HIS VIZIER*

There was given to Abou Aarair ben Merwan, Vizier [t®
El Melik en Nasir of Egypt], 1 a boy of the Christians, than
whom never fell eyes on a handsomer. En Nasir saw him
and said to the Vizier, £ Whence comes this boy ? ' ' From
God,' answered Abou Aamir ; whereupon, £ Wilt thou fright
us with stars/ quoth the King, 'and captive us with moons?*
Abou Aamir excused himself to him and making up &
present, sent it to him with the boy, to whom he said, ' Be
thou part of the present : were it not of necessity, my soul
had not consented to give thee away.' And he wrote with
him these verses :

Behold the Ml moon, O my lord, that cometh to thy sky j For nosi^

that heaven than earth of moons is worthier, may deny.
My soul, to pleasure thee, I give, nor ever yet of one, His soul ts

pleasure one who gave, before myself, heard I.

The thing pleased En Nasir and he requited him with.
much treasure and the Vizier became high in favour with
him. After this, a slave-girl, one of the loveliest women
In the world, was presented to the Vizier, and he feared
lest this should come to the King's ears and he desire her,
and the like should happen as with, the boy. So he made
up a present still costlier than the first and sent it with ^fg§t
her to the King, together with these verses : tiCXClmi

My lord, the very sun is this j the moon thou hadst before: So now

these planets twain shall meet and glitter side by side ;
A combination presaging fair fortune to my life. Do thou with fheia

in all delight of Paradise abide ;
For they, by Allah, have no third in beauty nor hast thou A second ia

dominion in all the world so wide.

Wherefore his credit redoubled with En Nasir j but aftff
awhile, one of his enemies maligned him to the King,
alleging that there still lurked in him desire for the boj
1 See Vol. IV. p. 116, Bote.


234


and that he ceased not to lust after him, whenever the
North wind moved him, and to gnash his teeth for that he
had given him away. Quoth the King, ' Wag not thou thy
tongue at him, or I will cut off thy head.' However, he
wrote Abou Aamir a letter, as from the boy, to the follow-
ing effect: 1 my lord, thou knowest that thou wast all
and one to me and that I never ceased from delight with
thee. Albeit I am with the Sultan, yet would I choose
rather solitude with thee, but that I fear the King's mis-
chief: wherefore contrive thou to demand me of him.'
This letter he sent to Abou Aamir by a little page, whom
he enjoined to say, ' This is from such an one : the King
never speaks to him.' When the Vizier read the letter and
heard the cheating message, he smelt a rat and wrote on
the back of the scroll the following lines :

After experience's laws, doth it become a man Of sense unto the lion's

lair his steps fool wise to bend ?
I'm none of those whose reason love and passion overcrow ; Nor am I

ignorant of that the envious do pretend.
Wert thou my soul, I gave thee up obediently, and now Shall soul, from

body sundered, back again thereunto wend ?

When En Nasir knew of this answer, he marvelled at
the Vizier's quickness of wit and would never again lend
ear to any insinuation against him. Then said he to him,
' How didst thou escape falling into the snare ? ' And he
answered, saying, 'Because my reason is unentangled in
the toils of passion. 5

THE ROGUERIES OF DELILEH THE CRAFTY
AND HER DAUGHTER ZEYNEB THE
TRI C KSTRESS.

There lived in the Khalifate of Haroun er Reshid two

men named Ahmed ed Denef and Hassan Shouman, past
masters in trick and cunning, who had done rare things
in their time ; wherefore the Khalif invested them with


235

dresses of honour and made them captains of the watch
for Baghdad, Ahmed of the right hand and Hassan of the
left hand. Moreover, to Ahmed he committed the ward
of [the district] without [the city walls] and appointed
each of them a stipend of a thousand dinars a month and
forty men to be at their commandment. So Ahmed and
Hassan went forth in company of the Amir Khalid, the
Master of Police, attended each by his forty followers on
horseback and preceded by the crier, proclaiming aloud
and saying, 4 By order of the Khalif, none is captain of the
watch of the right hand but Ahmed ed Denef and none is
captain of the watch of the left hand but Hassan Shouman,
and it behoveth all to give ear to their word and pay them
respect'

Now there was in the city an old woman called Delileh
the Crafty, who had a daughter by name Zeyneb the
Tricks tress. They heard the proclamation aforesaid and
Zeyneb said to her mother, 'O my mother, see yonder
fellow, Ahmed ed Denef. He came hither from Cairo, a
fugitive, and played the double-dealer in Baghdad, till he
foisted himself into the Khalif s favour and is now become
captain of the watch of the right hand, whilst that mangy
knave Hassan Shouman is captain of the left hand, and
each has a monthly wage of a thousand dinars and a table
spread morning and evening, whilst we abide unemployed -
and neglected in this house, without estate and without
honour, and have none to ask of us.'

Now Delileh was a past mistress in all manner of craft
and trickery and double-dealing ; she could wile the very
serpents out of their holes and Iblis himself might have
learnt deceit of her. Her father had been governor of the
carrier-pigeons to the Khalif and used to rear them to
carry letters and messages, wherefore each bird in time of
need was dearer to the Khalif than one of his sons ; and
in this capacity he had a stipend of a thousand dinars a


236

month. Moreover, her husband had been town captain of
Baghdad and had a monthly wage from the Khalif of a
thousand dinars ; but he died, leaving two daughters, one
of whom was married and had a son, by name Ahmed el
Lekit, and the other, Zeyneb, unmarried. So Zeyneb said
to her mother, e Up and play off some trick that may make
us notorious in Baghdad, so haply we may get our father's
tKTfgfU stipends for ourselves.' £ As thy head liveth, O my daughter/
ftttttfr. answered the old woman, 6 1 will play off such rogueries
in Baghdad as never did Ahmed ed Denef nor Hassan
Shouman ! '

So saying, she rose and bound her face with the chin-
veil and donned clothes such as the Soufi Fakirs wear,
trousers of white wool falling over her heels, and a gown
of the like stuff and a broad girdle. Moreover, she took
an ewer and filled it to the neck with water ; after which
she set three dinars in the mouth and stopped it up with
palm fibre. Then she threw round her neck a rosary as
big as a load of firewood and taking in her hand a flag,
made of parti-coloured rags, red and yellow and green,
went out, saying, * Allah 1 Allah ! ' with tongue celebrating
the praises of God, whilst her heart galloped in the race-
course of abominations, seeking how she might play some
sharping trick in the town. She fared on from street to
street, till she came to an alley swept and watered and
paved with marble, where she saw a vaulted gateway, with
s threshold of alabaster, and a Moorish porter standing at
the door, which was of sandal-wood, plated with brass and
furnished with a ring of silver.

Now this house belonged to the Chief of the Khalif s
Ushers, a man of great wealth in lands and houses and
stipends, and he was called the Amir Hassan Sherr et
Teric 1 for that his blow forewent Ms word. He was
married to a handsome girl, whom he loved and who had
1 i.e. Ill of the Way.


237


made him swear, on the night of his going in to her, that
he would take none other to wife nor lie abroad from her
a night. One day, he went to the Divan and saw that each
Amir had with him a son or two. Then he entered the
bath and looking at his face in the mirror, saw that the
white hairs in his beard outnumbered the black and said
in himself, ' Will not He who took thy father vouchsafe
thee a son?' So he went in to his wife, in an angry
mood, and she said to him, 'Good-even to thee.' 'Away
from my sight!' answered he. ' From the day I saw thee
I have seen nothing of good.' ' How so ? ' asked she.
Quoth he, ' On the night of my going in to thee, thou
madest me swear to take no other wife than thee, and
to-day I have seen each Amir with a son and some with
two. So I bethought me of death and called to mind
that I had been blessed with neither son nor daughter and
that he who leaves no male child is not remembered.
This, then, is the reason of my anger, for thou art barren
and conceivest not by me.' ' The name of God be upon
thee ! ' answered she. ' Indeed, I have worn out the
mortars with beating wool and pounding drugs, and I am
not to blame ; the fault of my barrenness is with thee, for
that thou art a snub-nosed mule and thy sperm is thin and
impregnateth not neither getteth children.' Quoth he,
' When I return from my journey, I will take another wife.'
And she said, ' My portion is with God ! ' Then he went
out from her and each of them repented of the sharp
words spoken to the other.

As the Amir's wife looked forth of her lattice, as she
were a bride of the treasures, 1 for the jewellery upon her,
Delileh espied her and seeing her clad in costly clothes
and ornaments, said to herself, ' O Delileh, it would be a

1 The beautiful damsels who guard enchanted treasures, such as that
■sf Es Shemerdel (see supra, p. if et seq.), are called by the Arabs
"brides of the treasure,"


238


rare trick to entice yonder young lady from her husband's
house and strip her of all her clothes and jewels and make
off with them ! ' So she took up her stand under the
windows of the Amir's house, and fell to calling aloud upon
the name of God and saying, £ Be present, O ye friends of
God ! ' Whereupon all the women of the street looked from
their lattices and seeing the old woman clad, after the
Soufi manner, in clothes of white wool, as she were a
pavilion of light, said, ' God vouchsafe us a blessing by
the intermission of this pious old woman, from whose face
issueth light ! ' And Khatoun, the wife of the Amir Hassan,
wept and said to her maid, ' Go down and kiss the hand of
Sheikh Abou Ali, the porter, and say to him, " Let yonder
pious old woman enter, so haply we may get a blessing of
her." ' So she went down to the porter and kissing his
hand, said to him, 5 Quoth my mistress to thee, " Let
yonder pious old woman come in to her, so she may get a
^fftr])! blessing of her;" and belike her benediction may extend
to us likewise.' Accordingly, he went up to Delileh and
kissed her hand, but she forbade him, saying, ' Away from
me, lest my ablution be avoided ! 1 Thou, also, O Abou
Ali s art absorbed [in the contemplation of the Deity,] one
of the elect of God and under His especial guardianship.
Verily, He shall deliver thee from this servitude.'


Now the Amir owed the porter three months' wage
and he was straitened for want thereof, but knew not how
to recover it from him; so he said to the old woman,
'O my mother, give me to drink from thy pitcher, so
I may have a blessing through thee.' So she took the
pitcher from her shoulder and waved it in the air, so
that the stopper flew out and the three dinars fell to the
ground. The porter saw them and picked them up, saying
in himself, ' Glory to God 1 This old woman is one of the
saints that have hidden treasures at their commandment 1
1 i,g. by contact with a person in. a state of legal impurity,,


239


It hath been levealed to her that I am in want of money j
so she hath conjured me these three dinars out of the air,*
Then said he to her, ( O my aunt, take these three dinars
that fell from thy pitcher.' 1 Away with them from me ! *
answered she. ' I am of the folk that occupy not them-
selves with the things of the world. Take them and use
them for thine own benefit,, in lieu of these the Amir owes
thee.' Quoth he, ' Glory to Allah for succour ! This is of
the chapter of revelation \ '

Then the maid accosted her and kissing her hands,
carried her up to her mistress, whom she found as she
were a treasure, whose guardian spells had been done
awa> : ; and Khatoun bade her welcome and kissed her
hand. * O my daughter,' said Delileh, ' I come not to thee
but by God's [especial] advertisement.' Then Khatoun
set food before her ; but she said, ' O my^daughter, I eat
but of the food of Paradise and fast continually, breaking
my fast but five days in the year. But I see thee troubled
and desire that thou tell me the cause of thy trouble.' ' O
my mother,' answered Khatoun, ' I made my husband
swear, on my wedding-night, that -he would take none
other than me to wife, and he saw others with children
and ionged for them and said to me, " Thou art barren."
And I answered, " Thou art a mule that begetteth not."
Whereupon he left me in anger, saying, "When I come
back from my journey, I will take another wife." So, O my
mother, I fear lest he put me away and take another wife,
for he hath houses and lands and stipends galore, and if
he have children by another, they will possess the property
from me.' ' O my daughter/ said Delileh, * knowest thou not
of my master, the Sheikh Abouihemlat, whom if a debtor
¥isit, God quiiteth him his debt, and if a barren woman,
she conceiveth ? ' £ my mother/ answered Khatoun f
4 since the day of my wedding, I have not gone forth the
house, no, not even to pay visits of congratulation or con-


240


dolence.' Quoth the old woman, 4 1 will carry thee to him
and do thou cast thy burden on him and make a vow to
him ; so peradventure, when thy husband returns from his
journey, he will lie with thee and thou shalt conceive by
him and bear a girl or a boy : but, be it male or female, it
shall be a dervish of the Sheikh Aboulhemlat*

So Khatoun rose and arraying herself in her richest
clothes, donned all her jewellery and said to her maid,
' Keep thou an eye on the house.' And she said, * I hear
and obey, O my lady.' Then she went down and the
porter met her and said to her, 'Whither away, O my
lady ? ' 4 1 go to visit the Sheikh Aboulhemlat,' answered
she; and he said, 'Be a year's fast incumbent on me I
Verily yon old woman is of the saints of God and full of
holiness ! Moreover, O my lady, she hath hidden treasure
at her commandment, for she gave me three dinars of red
gold and divined my case, without my asking her, and knew
that I was needy.' Then the old woman went out with
Khatoun, saying to her, 4 God willing, O my daughter,
when thou hast visited the Sheikh Aboulhemlat, there shall
betide thee solace of soul and by God's leave thou shalt
conceive, and thy husband shall love thee by the blessing
of the Sheikh and shall never again say a despiteful word
to thee.' Quoth Khatoun, 4 1 will go with thee to him,

my mother ! ' But Delileh said in herself, 4 Where shall

1 strip her and take her clothes and jewellery, with the
folk coming and going ? ' Then she said to her s * Q my
daughter, walk thou behind me, within sight of me, for
thy mother 1 is a woman sorely burthened ; every one who
hath a burden casteth it on me and all who have pious
offerings 2 to make give them to me and kiss my hand.'

So the lady followed her at a distance,, whilst her anklets
tinkled and the coins and ornaments plaited in the tresses
a herselt g e& votch,


241


of her hair clinked as she went, till they reached the bazaas
of the merchants. Presently, they came to the shop of &
young merchant, by name Sidi Hassan, who had no hair
on his face and was very handsome. He saw the lady
coming and fell to casting stolen glances at her, which
when the old woman saw, she beckoned to her and said,
4 Sit down in this shop, till I return to thee.* So Khatoun
sat down before the shop of the young merchant, who cast
one glance at her, that cost him a thousand sighs. Then
the old woman accosted him and saluted him, saying, ' Is
not thy name Sidi Hassan, son of the merchant Muhsin ? 8
'Yes/ answered he; 6 who told thee my name?' Quoth
she, ' Folk of repute directed me to thee. Know that this
young lady is my daughter and her father was a merchants
who died and left her much good. She is come of mar-
riageable age and the wise say, " Offer thy daughter is
marriage and not thy son ; " and all her life *she hath not
come forth the house till this day. Now I have had a
divine advertisement and it hath been commanded me in
secret to marry her to thee; so, if thou art poor, I will
give thee capital and will open thee two shops, instead of
one. 5

When the young merchant heard this, he said in him*
self, * I asked God for a bride, and He hath given me
three things, coin and caze and clothing.' Then he said
to the old woman, ' O my mother, that which thou pro-
posest to me is well ; but this long while my mother saith
to me, " I wish to marry thee," and I reply, " I will not
marry, except on the sight of mine own eyes.' 3 ' 'Rise and
follow me,' answered Delileh, ' and 1 will show her to
thee, naked.' So he rose and shut his shop and took
a purse of a thousand dinars, saying in himself, ' Belike j^fgjl
we may need to buy somewhat or pay the fees for drawing t|£|£
up the [marriage] contract.' The old woman bade him
walk behind the young lady, so as to keep her in sight, and
VOL. vl 16


242


said to herself, 'Where shall I carry the young merchant
and the lady, that I may strip them ? 5

Then she walked on and Khatoun after her, followed
by the young merchant, till she came to a dyery, kept by
a master-dyer, by name Hajj Mohammed, a man of ill
repute, cutting male and female, like the colocasia-seller's
knife, 1 and loving to eat both figs and pomegranates. s
He heard the tinkle of the ankle-rings and raising his
head, saw the lady and the young man. Presently the
old woman came up to him and said, ' Art thou not Hajj
Mohammed?' 'Yes,' answered he. 'What dost thou
want ? ' Quoth she, 4 Folk of repute have directed me
to thee. Look at yonder handsome girl, who is my
daughter, and that comely beardless youth, who is my
son. I brought them both up and spent much money on
them. Now I have an old ruinous house, which I have
shored up with wood, and the builder says to me, "Go
and live in some other place, till this be repaired, lest
perchance it fall upon thee." So I went forth to seek
me a lodging, and people of worth directed me to thee,
and I wish to lodge my son and daughter with thee.'
Quoth the dyer in himself, ( Verily, here is fresh butter
upon muffins come to me.' But he said to the old
woman, ' True is it I have a house and saloon and upper
chamber ; but I cannot spare any part thereof, for I want
it all for guests and for the indigo-growers [who come
to me from time to time].' 'O my son,' answered she,
'it will but be for a month or two at the most, till our
house be repaired, and we are strangers. Let the guest-
chamber be shared between us and thee, and if thou
desire that thy guests be ours, we will welcome them

1 The colocasia is a kind of edible arum and (like the other species os
its family) bears both male and female flowers on one spathe,

8 See Vol. IIL p, 179, notes 2 and 3, where sycamore fruit is r-.-fl t. •
to, instead of promegranates ; but the meaning is the same.


243


and eat and sleep with them.' So he gave her the keys, '
one big and one small and one crooked, and said to
her, 1 The big key is that of the house, the crooked one
that of the saloon and the little one that of the upper
chamber.'

Delileh took the keys and fared on, followed by the lady
and the young merchant, till she came to the street in
which was the house. She opened the door and entered,
followed by the lady, to whom said she, ' O my daughter,
this,' pointing to the saloon, ' is the lodging of the Sheikh
Aboulhemlat ; but go thou into the upper chamber and
loose thy veil and wait till I come to thee.' So she went
up and sat down. Presently up came the young merchant,
whom Delileh carried into the saloon, saying, ' Sit down,
whilst I fetch my daughter and show her to thee.' So
he sat down and the old woman went up to Khatoun,
who said to her, 'I wish to visit the Sheikh, before the
folk come.' ' O my daughter,' said the old woman, ' we
fear for thee.' £ Why so?' asked Khatoun. 'Because,'
answered Delileh, * here is a son of mine, a natural who
knows , not summer from winter, but goes ever naked.
He is the Sheikh's deputy, and if he saw a girl like thee
cpme to visit him, he would snatch her earrings and
wound her ears and tear her silken clothes .1 So do thou
doff thy jewellery and clothes and I will keep them for
thee, till thou hast made thy visit.' So she did off her
[upper] clothes and jewels and gave them to the old
woman, who said, ' I will lay them for thee on the Sheikh's
curtain, that a blessing may betide thee.'

Then she went out, leaving the lady in her shift and
trousers, and hid the clothes and jewels in a place on
the stairs ; after which she betook herself to the young
merchant whom she found awaiting the girl, and he said.,

1 The wearing of gold and silk is held reprehensible by the stricl
Muslim,


244


* Where Is thy daughter, that I may see her?" But she
gmote upon her breast and he said, 4 What ails thee ? '

* Would there were no such thing as ill and envious neigh-
bours 1 ' answered she * My neighbours saw thee enter
the house with me and asked me of thee; and 1 said,
"This is a bridegroom I have found for my daughter. "*
They envied me on thine account and said to my daughter,
** Is thy mother tired of maintaining thee, that she marries
thee to a leper?" So I swore to her that she should see
thee naked.' Quoth he, ' I take refuge with God from the
envious ! ' and bearing his fore-arm, showed her that it was
like silver. 4 Have no fear,' said she ; 1 thou shalt see her
caked, even as she shall see thee.' And he said, ' Let her
come and see me. 9 Then he put off his sable pelisse and
girdle and dagger and the rest of his clothes, except his
shirt and trousers, and laid the purse of a thousand dinars
with them. Quoth Delileh, 4 Give them to me, that I may
take care of them.' So she took them and fetching the

3?fgf)i girl's clothes and jewellery, went out with the whole and
&££li locked the door upon them.

She deposited her purchase with a druggist of her
acquaintance and returned to the dyer, whom she found
sitting, awaiting her. Quoth he, 1 God willing, the house
pleaseth thee ? ' 4 There is a blessing in it/ answered she,
4 and I go now to fetch porters to carry our goods and
bedding thither. But my children would have me bring
them meat-patties ; so do thou take this dinar and buy
the patties and go and eat the morning meal with them.*

* Who shall guard the dyery meanwhile and the people's
goods that are therein?' asked the dyer. 'Thy boy,'
answered the old woman. 4 So be it,' rejoined he and
taking a covered dish, went out to do her bidding. As
soon as he was gone, she fetched the clothes and jewels
she had left with the druggist and going back to the
dyer?, said to the "boy, £ Run after thy master, and I will


245


not stir hence till you both return.' 'I hear and obey,'
answered he and went away.

Presently, there came up an ass-driver, a scavenger, who
had been out of work for a week, and she called to him,
saying, ' Hither, O ass-driver ! ' So he came to her and
she said, 'Knowest thou my son the dyer?' f Yes,'
answered he ; 'I know him.' And she said, ' The poor
fellow is insolvent and loaded with debts, and as often as
he is put in prison, I set him free. Now they are about to
declare him bankrupt and I am going to return the goods
to their owners; so do thou lend me thine ass for that
purpose and take this dinar to his hire. When I am gone,
take the handsaw and empty out the vats and jars and
break them, that, if there come an officer from the Cadi's
court, he may find nothing in the dyery.' Quoth he, ' 1
owe the Hajj a kindness and will do somewhat for the love
of God.'

So she laid the things on the ass and made for her own
house ; and [God] the Protector protected her, so that she
arrived there in safety and went in to her daughter Zeyneb,
who said to her, 1 O my mother, my heart has been with
thee ! What hast thou done by way of roguery ? 5 1 1 have
played off four tricks on four people/ answered Delileh ;

the wife of the Chief Usher, a young merchant, a dyer and
an ass-driver, and have brought thee all their spoil on the
latter's ass.' 'O my mother,' said Zeyneb, 'thou wilt never-
more be able to go about the town, for fear of the Chief
Usher, whose wife's clothes and jewellery thou hast taken,
and the merchant whom thou hast stripped, and the dyer
whose customer's goods thou hast stolen and the owner of
the ass.' ' Pshaw, my daughter ! ' rejoined the old woman,
'I reck not of them, save the ass-driver, who knows me,'

Meanwhile, the dyer bought the meat-patties and set
out for the house, followed by his servant, bearing the
food on his head. On his way thither, he passed his shop,


246


where he found the ass-man breaking the vats and jars
and saw that there was neither stuff nor liquor left in them
and that the shop was in ruins. So he said to him, ' Hold
thy hand, O ass-driver!' Whereupon the latter desisted
and said, ' Praised be God for thy safety, O Hajj ! Indeed,
my heart was with thee.' ' Why so ? ' asked the dyer.
' Thou art become bankrupt and they have filed a docket
of thine insolvency.' 'Who told thee this?' asked the
dyer. 'Thy mother told me,' answered the other, 'and
bade me break the jars and empty the vats, that the
apparitors might find nothing in the shop, if they should
come.' ' God confound thee ! ' cried the dyer. ' My
mother died long ago.' And he beat his breast, saying,
' Alas for the loss of my goods and those of the folk ! '
The ass-man also wept and said, ' Alas, for the loss of my
ass ! ' And he said to the dyer, ' Give me back my ass,
that thy mother stole from me.' The dyer laid hold of
him by the throat and fell to pummelling him, saying,
'Bring me the old woman;' whilst the other pummelled
him back, saying, 'Give me back my ass.' So they beat
$T{gi)t and cursed each other, till the folk collected round them
IJCCttt. and one of them said, 'What is the matter, O Hajj
Mohammed ? ' Quoth the ass-driver, ' I will tell thee the
case,' and related to them his story, saying, ' I thought
I was doing the dyer a good turn ; but, when he saw me,
he said, " My mother is dead," and beat his breast. And
now I require my ass of him, for that it is he who hath put
this trick on me, that he might make me lose my beast.'

Then said the folk to the dyer, <0 Hajj Mohammed,
dost thou know this old woman, that thou didst trust her
with the dyery and what was therein ? ' And he answered,
saying, * I know her not ; but she took lodgings with me
to-day, she and her son and daughter, 5 Quoth one, 'In
my judgment, the dyer is bound to indemnify the ass-
driver.' 'Why so?' asked another, 'Because, replied


the first, 1 he trusted not the old woman nor gave her his
ass, but because he saw that the dyer had entrusted her
with the dyery and its contents.' And a third said, ' O
Hajj, since thou hast lodged her with thee, it behoves thee
to get the man back his ass.' Then they made for the
house, and the tale will come round to them again.

Meanwhile, the young merchant abode awaiting the old
woman's coming with her daughter, but she came not j
whilst the lady in like manner sat expecting her return
with leave from her son, the possessed, the Sheikh's deputy,
to go in to him. When she was weary of waiting, she rose
to visit the Sheikh by herself and went down into the
saloon, where she found the young merchant, who said to
her, ' Come : where is thy mother, who brought me hither
to marry thee ? ' ' My mother is dead,' answered she ; ' art
thou the old woman's son the ecstatic, the deputy of the
Sheikh Aboulhemlat ? ' Quoth he, 'The swindling old
beldam is no mother of mine ; she hath cheated me and
taken my clothes and a thousand dinars. 5 ' And me also
hath she swindled,' said Khatoun ; ' for she brought me to
see the Sheikh Aboulhemlat and stripped me.' Quoth he,
1 1 look to thee for my clothes and my thousand dinars.'
'And I,' answered she, 'look to thee to make good my
clothes and jewellery. 5

At this moment in came the dyer and seeing them both
stripped of their clothes, said to them, 'Tell me where
your mother is.' So they told him their several cases and
he exclaimed, 'Alas, for the loss of my goods and those of
the folk ! ! And the ass-driver said, ' Alas for my ass 1
Give me my ass, O dyer J ' Then said the dyer, ' This old
woman is a sharper, Come forth, that I may lock the door."
Quoth the young merchant, ' It were a disgrace to thee that
we should enter thy house, clothed, and leave it, naked.' So
the dyer clad him and the damsel and sent her back to her
house. Then he shut the dyery and said to the young


248


merchant, ' Come, let us go and search for the old woman
and hand her over to the chief of the police.' So they and
the ass-man repaired to the house of the master of police
and made their complaint to him. Quoth he, ' How many
old women are there not in the town ! Go and seek for
her and lay hands on her and bring her to me, and I will
torture her for you and make her confess.' So they went
out and sought for her all round the town ; and so we will
leave them for the present.

Presently, Delileh said to her daughter, * I have a mind to
play off another trick.' ' O my mother/ answered Zeyneb,
' I fear for thee ; ' but the old woman said, ' I am like
bean-husks, proof against fire and water.' So she rose
and donning a handmaid's habit, of such as serve people
of condition, went out to look for some one to swindle.
Presently she came to a by-street, spread with carpets
and lighted with hanging lamps, and heard a noise of
singing-women and beating of tambourines. Here she
saw a slave-girl, bearing on her shoulder a boy, clad in
trousers embroidered with silver and velvet jacket, with
a pearl-embroidered cap on his head and a collar of
gold set with jewels about his neck. Now the house
belonged to the Provost of the Merchants of Baghdad,
and the boy was his son. Moreover, he had a virgin
daughter, to boot, who was promised in marriage, and it
was her betrothal they were celebrating that day. There
was with her mother a company of ladies and singing-
women, and whenever she went up or down, the boy clung
to her. So she called the slave-girl and said to her, * Take
thy young maste? and play with him, till the company
break up.'

Said Delileh to the maid, ' What festivities are these in
your mistress's house?' 'She celebrates her daughter's
betrothal to-day/ answered the girl. ' and she hath singing-
women with her.' Quoth the old woman to herself, ' O


249


Delileh, the thing to do is to spirit away the boy from "^["{gftt
the maid.' And she cried out, saying, 1 O disgrace ! O ill
luck ! ' Then, pulling out a brass token, resembling a
dinar, she said to the maid, who was a simpleton, 'Take
this dinar and go in to thy mistress and say to her, M Umm
el Khair rejoices with thee and is beholden to thee for thy
favours, and she and her daughters will visit thee on the
day of the assembly and handsel the tiring- women."' 'O
my mother/ said the girl, 1 my young master here catches
hold of his mother, whenever he sees her.' ' Give him to
me,' answered the old woman, 'whilst thou goest in and
comest back.'

So she gave her the child and taking the token, went
in ; whereupon Delileh made off with the boy to a by-lane,
where she stripped him of his clothes and jewels, saying
to herself, ' O Delileh, it would indeed be a-fine trick, even
as thou hast cheated the maid and taken the boy from
her, so now to pawn him for a thousand dinars' worth.'
So she repaired to the jewel-bazaar, where she saw a Jew
goldsmith seated, with a tray full of jewellery before him,
and said to herself, ' It would be a rare trick to get a
thousand dinars' worth of jewellery from this Jew and
leave the boy in pledge with him for it.' Presently the
Jew looked at them and seeing the boy, knew him for the
son of the Provost of the Merchants.

Now he was a man of great wealth, but would envy his
neighbour, if he sold and he himself did not ; so, when
he saw Delileh, he said to her, * What seekest thou, O my
mistress ? ' ' Art thou Master Azariah the Jew ? ' asked she,
having first enquired his name ; and he answered, ' Yes.'
Quoth she, 4 This boy's sister," the Provost's daughter of
the Merchants^ is a promised bride, and to-day they
celebrate her betrothal ; and she hath need of jewellery,,
So give me two pairs of gold ankle-rings and a pair of
gold bracelets and a girdle and pearl ear-drops and a


250


poignard and seal-ring.' Accordingly, he brought out to
her what she sought and she took of him a thousand
dinars' worth of jewellery, saying, * I will take these on
approval ; and what pleases them, they will keep and I
will bring thee the price and leave the boy with thee till
then.' 'Be it as thou wilt,' answered he. So she took
the jewellery and made off to her own house, where her
daughter asked her how she had sped. She told her all
she had done and Zeyneb said, ' Thou wilt never be able
to walk abroad again in the town.'

Meanwhile, the maid went in to her mistress and said
to her, 'O my lady, Umm el Khair salutes thee and
rejoices with thee, and will come, she and her daughters,
on the day of the assembly and give the customary
presents.' Quoth her mistress, ' Where is thy young
master?' 'I left him with her,' answered the maid, 'lest
he should cling to thee, and she "gave me this, as largesse
for the singing-women.' So the lady said to the chief of
the singers, ' Take thy money ; ' and she took it and found
it a brass token ; whereupon quoth the lady to the maid,
' O baggage, go down and look to thy young master.'
Accordingly, she went down and finding neither boy nor
old woman, shrieked aloud and fell on her face, and their
joy was changed into mourning.

When the Provost came in, his wife told him what had
befallen and he went out in quest of the child, whilst the
other merchants also went forth and sought, each his own
road. Presently, the Provost espied the boy seated, naked,
in the Jew's shop and said to the latter, ' This is my son.'
' It is well,' answered the Jew. So he took him up, with-
out asking for his clothes, of the excess of his joy at
finding him ; but the Jew laid hold of him, saying, ' God
succour the Khalif against thee ! ' Quoth the Provost,
' What ails thee, O Jew ? ? And he answered, saying,
5 The old woman look of me a thousand dinars' worth of


2$I

jewellery for thy daughter, and left the boy in pledge fot
the price ; and I had not trusted her, but that I knew the
child for thy son.' ' My daughter needs no jewellery,' said
the Provost ; ' give me the boy's clothes/

The Jew cried out, saying, ' Come to my aid, O
Muslims ! ' but at that moment up came the dyer and the
ass-man and the young merchant, who were going about,
seeking the old woman, and enquired the cause of their
quarrel. So they told them the case and they said, ' This
old woman is a cheat, who has cheated us before you.'
Then they told them how she had dealt with them, and
the Provost said, ' Since I have found my son, be his
clothes his ransom ! If I come upon the old woman, I will
require them of her.' And he carried the child home to
his mother, who rejoiced in his safety. Then said the
Jew to the three others, 'Whither go ye?' And they
answered, saying, ' We go to look for her? Quoth the
Jew, ' Take me with you. Is there any one of you knows
her ? ' 'I know her,' answered the ass-driver ; and the
Jew said, ' If we go all together, we shall never catch her ;
for she will flee from us. Let us each take a different road,
and be our rendezvous at the shop of Hajj Mesaoud, the
Moorish barber.' They agreed to this and set off, each in
a different direction.

Presently, Delileh sallied forth again in quest of prey,
and the ass-driver met her and knew her. So he caught
hold of her and said to her, ' Out on thee ! Hast thou
been long at this trade ? ' ' What ails thee ? ' asked she ;
and he answered, 'Give me back my ass.' 'O my son,'
said she, * cover what God covers ! Dost thou seek thine
ass and the people's things ? ' Quoth he, 4 1 want my ass j
that's all.' And she said, ' I saw that thou wast poor ; so
I deposited thine ass for thee with the Moorish barber.
Stand off, whilst I speak him fair, that he may give thee
the beast/ So she went up to the barber and kissed his


252


hand and wept. He asked her what ailed her and she
said, ' O my son, look at my son who stands yonder. He
was ill and exposed himself to the air, which corrupted his
wit. He used to buy asses and now, whether he sit or
stand or walk, he saith nothing but " My ass I " Now I
have been told by a certain physician that his mind is
disordered and that nothing will cure him but drawing two
of his grinders and cauterizing him twice on the temples.
So do thou take this dinar and call him to thee, saying,
" Thine ass is with me." ' s May I fast for a year,' said the
barber, 1 if I do not give him his ass in his fist S ' Now he
had with him two journeymen ; so he said to one of them.
* Heat the irons,'

Then the old woman went her way and the barber called
to the ass-driver, saying, ' Harkye, good fellow \ Thine
ass is with me ; come and take him, and as thou livest, I
will give him into thy hand.' So he came to him and the
barber carried him into a dark room, where he knocked
him down and the journeymen bound him hand and foot.
Then he pulled out two of his grinders and cauterized
him on both temples ; after which he let him go, and he
rose and said, 'O Moor, why hast thou used me thus?'
Quoth the barber, 4 Thy mother told me that thou hadst
taken cold, whilst ill, and lost thy reason, so that, whether
sitting or standing or walking, thou wouldst say nothing
but "My ass!" So here is thine ass in thy fist' 'God
requite thee/ said the other, 1 for pulling out my teeth ! '
Then the barber told him all that the old woman had said
and he exclaimed, ' May God torment her ! ' And the two
went out, disputing, and left the shop. When the barber
returned, he found his shop empty, for, whilst he was
absent, the old woman had taken all that was therein and
made off with it to her daughter, to whom she told all
that had befallen. The barber, seeing this, caught hold
of the ass-driver and said to him, 4 Bring me thy mother/


253


But he answered, saying, ' She is not my mother, but &
sharper, who has swindled much people and stolen my ass.'

At this moment up came the dyer and the Jew and the
young merchant, who, seeing the barber holding on to
the ass-driver and the latter cauterized on both temples 9
said to him, 'What hath befallen thee, O ass-driver?' So
he told them what had happened to him and the barber
did the like ; and the others in turn related to the Moor
the tricks the old woman had served them. Then he shut
up his shop and went with them to the Master of police, to
whom they said, 'We look to thee for compensation.' Quoth
he, ' How many old women are there not in Baghdad !
Doth any of you know her ? ' 'I do,' answered the ass-
man ; c give me ten of thine officers.' So he gave them
half a score men and they all five went out, followed by the
sergeants, and patrolled the city, till they met the old
woman, when they laid hands on her and "carrying her to
the house of the Master of police, stood waiting without,
till he should come forth.

Presently the officers fell asleep, for excess of watch-
ing with their chief, and Delileh feigned to follow their
example, till the ass-man and his fellows slept also, when
she stole away from them and going in to the harem of
the Master of police, kissed the hand of the mistress of the
house and said to her, 4 Where is the Chief of the police ? '
* He is asleep,' answered the lady ; ' what wouldst thou with
him ? ' Quoth Delileh, i My husband is a slave-merchant
and gave me five slaves to sell, whilst he went on a journey.
The Master of police met me and bought them of me for
a thousand dinars and two hundred for myself, saying,
u Bring them to my house." So I have brought them.' jNTfgtjt

Now the Master of police had given his wife a thousand
dinars, saying, ( Keep them by thee, that we may buy male
slaves with them.' So she believed the old woman's story
and said to her, ' Where are the slaves ? ' ' They are


254


asleep under the window,' replied Delileh ; whereupon the
lady looked out and seeing the barber clad in a Levantine
habit and the young merchant as he were a drunken white
slave 1 and the Jew and the dyer and the ass-driver as they
were shaven white slaves, said in herself, ' Each of these
is worth more than a thousand dinars.' So she opened a
chest and gave the old woman the thousand dinars, saying,
' Come back anon and when my husband wakes, I will get
thee the other two hundred from him.' ' Q my lady,'
answered the old woman, ' a hundred of them are thine,
under the sherbet-gugglet whereof thou drinkest, and the
other hundred do thou keep for me till I come back. Now
let me out by the private door. 5 So she let her out, and
[God] the Protector protected her and she made her way
home to her daughter, to whom she related all that had
passed, saying, ' The one that troubles me most is the ass-
driver, for he knows me.' 'O my mother,' said Zeyneb,
' abide quiet [awhile] and let what thou hast done suffice
thee, for not always comes the pitcher off unbroken.'

When the Chief of the police awoke, his wife said to
him, s I give thee joy of the five slaves thou hast bought
of the old woman.' ' What slaves ? ' asked he. 4 Why
dost thou mock me ? ' answered she. ' God willing, they
shall become people of condition like unto thee.' ' As my
head liveth,' rejoined he, ' I have bought no slaves S Who
saith this ? ' ' The old woman, the brokeress,' replied she,
1 from whom thou boughtest them ; and thou didst pro-
mise her a thousand dinars for them and two hundred for
herself,' Quoth he, 'Didst thou give her .the money?'
' Yes,' answered she ; ' for I saw the slaves with my own
eyes, and on each is a suit of clothes worth a thousand
dinars ; so I sent out to bid the sergeants have an eye to
them/

So he went out and said to the officers s 8 Where are the
1 on account of his beauty. See Vol. III. p. 2SS S note.


255


five slaves we bought for a thousand dinars of the old
woman ? ' ' There are no slaves here,' answered they ;
'only these five men, who found the old woman and
brought her hither. We fell asleep, whilst waiting for
thee, and she stole away and entered the harem. Presently
out came a maid and said to us, ' Are the five with you
with whom the old woman came?' And we answered,
'Yes. 3 ' By Allah/ cried the Master of police, 'this is a
rare great swindle ! ' And the five men said, ' We look to
thee for our goods.' Quoth the Master of police, 'The
old woman, your mistress, sold you to me for a thousand
dinars.' ' That were not allowed of God,' answered they :
' we are free-born men and may not be sold, and we
appeal from thee to the Khalif.' ' None showed her the
way to the house save you,' rejoined the Master of police ,
'and I will sell you to the galleys for two hundred dinars
apiece.'

Just then, up came the Amir Hassan Sherr et Teric,
who, on his return from his journey, had found his wife
stripped of her clothes and jewellery and heard from her
all that had passed; whereupon quoth he, 'The Master
of police shall answer me this ; 5 and repairing to him,
said, ' Dost thou suffer old women to go round about the
town and cozen folk of their goods ? This is thy business
and I look to thee for my wife's property.' Then said he
to the five men, ' What is to do with you ? ' So they told
him their stories and he said, 'Ye are oppressed,' and
turning to the Master of police, said to him, ' Why dost
thou detain them?' 'It was they who brought her to my s
house/ answered he, 8 so that she took a thousand dinars
of my money and sold them to my women,' 'O Amir
Hassan,' cried the five' men, 5 be thou our advocate in
this affair.'

Then said the Master of police to the Amir s 5 Thy wife's
goods are at my charge and I will be surety for the old


wornaa. But which of you knows her?* s We all know
her,' answered they. * Send ten men with us, and we will
take her/ So he gave them ten men, and the ass-driver
said to them, 'Follow me, for I should know her with
blue eyes. n Then they went out and presently they met
the old woman coming out of a by-street : so they laid
hands on her and brought her to the master of the police,
who said to her s 'Where are the people's goods?' And
she answered, saying, 4 1 have neither taken them nox
seen them.' Then said he to the gaoler, ' Take her and
clap her into prison till the morning.' But he said, ' I will
not take her, lest she play a trick on me and I be answer-
able for her.' So the Master of police took horse and rode
out with Delileh and the rest to the bank of the Tigris,
where he bade the executioner crucify her by her hair.
So he bound her on the cross and drew her up by the
pulley; after which the Master of police set ten men to
guard her and went home. Presently, the night fell down
and sleep overcame the watchmen.

Now a certain Bedouin heard one man say to another,
'Praised be God for thy safe return! Where hast thou
been?' "In Baghdad,' answered the other, 'where I
breakfasted on honey-fritters.' Quoth the Bedouin to him-
self, ' Needs must I go to Baghdad and eat honey-fritters ; '
for in all his life he had never entered Baghdad nor seen
fritters of the sort. So he mounted his horse and rode on
towards Baghdad, saying in himself, 'It is a fine thing to
eat honey-fritters! On the honour of an Arab, I will
!N"tg|)t break my fast on nothing else ! ' till he came to the place
tlCCbl. where Delileh was crucified and she heard him saying this,,
So he went up to her and said to her, 'What art thou?'
Quoth she, s O Sheik of the Arabs, I throw myself on thy
protection! 3 'May God indeed protect thee!' answered
he. *But what is the cause of thy crucifixion ?' Said
1 i.e. even were my eyes blue or diseased.


257


she, *I have an enemy, an oilman, who fries fritters, and
I stopped to buy of him, when I chanced to spit and the
spittle fell on the fritters. So he made his complaint to
the judge, who commanded to crucify me, saying, "I
adjudge that ye take ten pounds of honey-fritters and
feed her therewith. If she eat them, let her go, but if
not, leave her hanging." And my stomach will not brook
sweet things.' 'By the honour of the Arabs/ cried the
Bedouin, 4 1 departed not the camp but that I might eat
honey-fritters ! I will eat them for thee.' Quoth she,
' None may eat them, except he be hung up in my place.'
He fell into the trap and unbound her; whereupon she
bound him in her room, after she had stripped him of his
clothes and turban and put them on ; then, mounting his
horse, she rode to her house, where Zeyneb said to her,
*What meaneth this plight?' And she answered, saying,
'They crucified me and told her all that had befallen her.

To return to the watchmen ; the first who woke roused
his companions and they saw that the day had risen. So
one of them raised his eyes and said, 'Delilehl' £ By
Allah !' answered the Bedouin, *' I have not eaten all night.
Have ye brought the honey-fritters?' And they said,
'This is a man and a Bedouin.' Then said one of them
to him, 'O Bedouin, where is Delileh and who loosed
her ?' "It was I,' answered he ; ' she shall not eat the
honey-fritters against her will ; for her soul abhorreth
them.' So they knew that he was a man ignorant of her
case, whom she had cozened, and said to one another,
5 Shall we flee or abide the accomplishment of that which
God hath decreed to us?'

As they were talking, up came the chief of the pollce s
with all the folk whom the old woman had cheated, and
said to -the guardSj s Arise, loose Beiilek 5 Quoth the
Bedouin, 5 We have not eaten to-night. Hast thou brought
the honey-fritters?' Whereupon, the Master of poiic©
VOL. vi, s|


258

raised his eyes and seeing the Bedouin strung up in place
of the old woman, said to the watchmen, ' What is this ? '
'Pardon, O our lord!' cried they; and he said, 'Tell me
what has happened.' ' We were weary with watching with
thee on guard,' answered they, 'and said, "Delileh is
crucified." So we fell asleep, and when we awoke, we
found the Bedouin strung up in her stead ; and we are
at thy mercy.' 'God's pardon be upon you!' answered
the master of police. 'She is indeed a clever cheat! 8
Then they unbound the Bedouin, who laid hold of the
master of police, saying, ' God succour the Khalif against
thee ! I look to none but thee for my horse and clothes S
So the chief of the police questioned him and he told
him what had passed between Delileh and himself. 'Why
didst thou release her?' asked the magistrate, and the
Bedouin said, ' I knew not that she was a swindler.' Then
said the others, ' O chief of the police, we look to thee
for our goods ; for we delivered the old woman into thy
hands and she was in thy guard ; and we cite thee before
the Divan of the Khalif.'

Now the Amir Hassan had gone up to the Divan, when
in came the master of police with the Bedouin and the
five others, saying, ' We are wronged men ! ' ' Who hath
wronged you ? ' asked the Khalif. So each came forward
in turn and told his story, after which said the master of
police, 'O Commander of the Faithful, the old woman
cheated me also and sold me these five men as slaves for
a thousand dinars, albeit they are free-born.' Quoth Er
Reshid, ' I take upon myself all that you have lost' Then
he said to the master of police, ' I charge thee with the old
woman.' But he shook his collar, saying, ' O Commander
of the Faithful, I will not answer for her ; for, after I had
strung her up ob the cross, she tricked this Bedouin and
tied him up in her room and made off with his clothes
and horse.' Quoth the Khalif, 'Whom but thee shall I


259


charge with her?' Charge Ahmed ed Denef/ answered
the Master of police; 'for he has a thousand dinars &
month and one-and-forty followers, at a monthly wage of
a hundred dinars each.* So the Khalif said, 'Harkyej,
Captain Ahmed ! ' 'At thy service, O Commander of the
Faithful,' answered he ; and the Khalif said, ' I charge
thee to bring the old woman before me. 5 ( I will answer
for her,' replied Ahmed.

Then the Khalif kept the Bedouin and the five com- MtQ^I
plainants with him, whilst Ahmed and his men went down ilCSTO*
to their hall, 1 saying to one another, ' How shall we lay
hands on her, seeing that there are many old women in
the town?' [And Ahmed said to Hassan Shouman, ' What
counsellest thou?'] Whereupon quoth one of them, by
name Ali Kitf el Jemel, to Ed Denef, ' Of what dost thou
take counsel with Hassan Shouman? Is he any great
matter ? ' -'O Ali,' said Hassan. ' why dost thou disparage
me ? By the Mighty Name, I will not company with thee
at this time J ' And he rose and went out in anger. Then
said Ahmed, *Q lads, let "each sergeant take ten men and
search for Delileh, each in his own quarter.' And they
agreed to rendezvous in such a place.

It was noised abroad in the city that Ahmed ed Denef
had undertaken to lay hands on Delileh the Crafty, and
Zeyneb said to her mother, 'O my mother, if thou be
indeed a trickstress, do thou befool Ahmed ed Denef and
his company.' * I fear none but Hassan Shouman,' answered
Delileh ; and Zeyneb said, ' By my browlock, I will get thee
the clothes of all the one-and-forty.' Then she dressed
and veiled herself and going to a druggist, who had s
saloon with two doors, gave him a dinar and said to him,
' Let me thy saloon tili the end of the day and take this
dinar to its hire.' So he gave her the keys and she fetched
carpets and so forth on the stolen ass and furnishing the
1 Or barrack.


26o


place, set in each estrade a table of meat and wine
Then she went out and stood at the door, with her face
uncovered.

Presently, up came AH Kitf and his men, and she kissed
his hand. He fell in love with her, seeing her to be a
handsome girl, and said to her, 'What dost thou want?*
Quoth she, 'Art thou Captain Ahmed ed Denef?' 'No/
answered he ; ' but I am of his company and my name is
Ali Kitf el Jemel.' * Whither go you ? ' asked she, and he
said, ' We go in quest of a sharkish old woman, who has
stolen the people's goods, and we mean to lay hands oa
her. But who art thou and what is thy business?' Quoth
she, ' My father was a vintner at Mosul and he died and
left me much money. So I came hither, for fear of the
judges, and asked the people who would protect me, to
which they replied, " None but Ahmed et Denef." ' ( From
this day forth/ said the men, 4 thou art under his protec-
tion ; ' and she said, ' Favour me by eating a morsel and
drinking a draught' They consented and entering, ate
and drank till they were drunken, when she drugged them
with henbane and stripped them of their clothes and arms j
and on like wise she did with the three other companies.

Presently, Ahmed ed Denef went out to look for Delileh,
but found her not, neither set eyes on any of his followers,
and went on till he came to the door where Zeyneb was
standing. She kissed his hand and he looked on her and
fell in love with her. Quoth she, ' Art thou Captain Ahmed
ed Denef?' ' Yes/ answered he. ' Who art thou ? f And
she said, ' I am a stranger. My father was a vintner at
Mosul and he died and left me much wealth, with which
I came to this city, for fear of the judges, and opened this
wine-shop* The Master of police hath imposed a tax oa
me, but it Is my desire to put myself under thy protection
and pay thee what the police would take of me, for thou
hast the better right to it/ Quoth he, 'Thou shalt have


26l


my protection and welcome : do not pay him aught.* Then
said she, ' Heal my heart and eat of my victual/ So he
entered and ate and drank, till he could not sit upright,
when she drugged him and took his clothes and arms.
Then she loaded her purchase on the ass and the Bedouin's
horse and made off with it s after she had aroused Ali Kitf.
The latter awoke and found himself naked and saw Ahmed
and his men drugged and stripped. So he revived them
with the counter-drug and they awoke and saw themselves
naked. Quoth Ahmed, 1 O lads, what is this ? We were
going about to catch her, and lo, this strumpet hath caught
us ! How Hassan Shouman will crow over us ! But we will
wait till it is dark and then go away/

Meanwhile Hassan Shouman said to the hall-keeper,
'Where are the men?' As he spoke, up they came 5
naked ; and he recited the following verses :

Men in their purpose are alike and what they hope and fear : 'Tis in
the issues, 'twixt the folk, that difference doth appear.

Some men for ignorant are known and other some for wise, Even as itt
heaven some stars are dull and others bright and clear.

Then he said to them, 1 Who hath played you this trick?*
and they answered, saying, ' We were in quest of an old
woman, and a handsome girl stripped us.' 'She hath
done well, 5 said Hassan. ' Dost thou know her ? ' asked
they. ' Yes,' answered Hassan ; ' I know her and the old
woman too.' Quoth they, $ What shall we say to the
Khalif ? ' And he said, ' O Denef, do thou shake thy
collar before him, and if he ask why thou hast not caught
her, say thou, " We know her not j but charge Hassan
Shouman with her." And if he give her into my charge^
I will lay hands on her/

So they slept that night and on the morrow they repaired
to the KhaliPs Divan and kissed the earth before him s
Quoth he, ' Where is the old woman, O Captain Ahmed ? s
But he shook his collar. The Khalif asked him why he


262


did so, and he answered, * I know her not ; but charge
Hassan Shouman to lay hands on her, for he knows her
and her daughter also.' Then Hassan interceded for her
with the Khalif, saying, ' Indeed, she hath played off these
tricks, not because she coveted the folk's goods, but to
show her address and that of her daughter, to the intent
that thou shouldst continue to her her husband's stipend
and that of her father to her daughter. So, if thou wilt
spare her life, I will fetch her to thee.' ' By the life of
my ancestors,' said Er Reshid, 'if she restore the people's
goods, I will pardon her, on thine intercession I ' And he
gave him the handkerchief of pardon.

So Hassan repaired to Delileh's house and called to
her. Her daughter Zeyneb answered him and he said to
her, ' Where is thy mother ? ! ' Upstairs,' answered she ;
and he said, ' Bid her take the people's goods and come
with me to the Khalif; for I have brought her the hand-
kerchief of pardon, and if she will not come with a good
grace, let her blame none but herself.' So Delileh tied
the kerchief [of truce] about her neck and coming down,
gave him the people's goods on the ass and the Bedouin's
horse. Quoth he, ' There remain the clothes of my chief
and his men.' ' By the Most Great Name,' replied she,
' it was not I who stripped them ! ' ' Thou sayst sooth,*
rejoined Hassan; 'it was thy daughter Zeyneb's doing s
and this was a good turn she did thee.' Then he carried
her to the Divan and laid the people's goods before the
Khalif, who, as soon as he saw the old woman, commanded
to throw her down on the carpet of blood. Quoth she,
' I cast myself on thy protection, O Shouman ] ' So he
rose and kissing the Khalif 5 s hands, said, 'Pardon, O
Commander of the Faithful ! Indeed, thou gavest me the
handkerchief of pardon.' ' I pardon her for thy sake, 5
said Er Reshid. ' Come hither, O old woman ; what is
thy name ? ' ' My name is Delileh/ answered she, and the


263


Khalif said, 'Thou art indeed crafty and full of artifice."
Whence she was dubbed Delileh the Crafty.

Then said he, ' Why hast thou played all these tricks on
the folk and wearied our hearts?' Quoth she, 'I did \i
not of desire for their goods, but because I had heard of
the tricks which Ahmed ed Denef and Hassan Shouman
played in Baghdad and said in myself, " I will do the like/*
And behold, I have returned the folk their goods.' But
the ass-driver rose and said, 1 1 invoke the law of God a
between her and me ; for it sufficed her not to take my
ass, but she must needs egg on the barber to pull out my
teeth and cauterize me on both temples.' The Khalif tKTfgf^t
bade give him a hundred dinars and ordered the dyer the frCC&IHo
like, saying, ' Go ; set up thy dyery again.' So they called
down blessings on his head and went away. The Bedouin
also took his clothes and horse and departed, saying, ' It
is forbidden to me to enter Baghdad and eat honey-*
fritters.' And the others took their goods and went away.

Then said the Khalif, ' Ask a boon of me, O Delileh ! 6
And she said, 6 My father was governor of the carrier-
pigeons to thee and I know how to rear them, and my
husband was town-captain of Baghdad. Now I wish to
have the reversion of my husband and my daughter wishes
to have that of her father.' The Khalif granted their
requests and she said, 4 1 ask of thee that I may be portress
of thy khan.' Now he had built a khan of three storieSj
for the merchants to lodge in, and had assigned to its
service forty slaves, which latter he had brought from the
King of Suleimaniyeh, when he deposed him, and let
make collars for them ; and there was in the khan a cook-
slave, who cooked for the slaves and fed the dogs. s O
Delileh,' said the Khalif, ' I will write thee a patent of
guardianship of the khan, and if aught be lost therefrom^
thou shalt be answerable for it s s It is well/ replied sheg
1 the lex taIioni&


264


' but do thou lodge my daughter in the pavilion at the door
of the khan, for it hath terraced roofs, and carrier-pigeons
may not be reared to advantage save in an open space.'

The Khalif granted her this also and she and her
daughter removed to the pavilion in question, where
Zeyneb hung up the one-and-forty dresses of Ahmed ed
Denef and his company. Moreover, they delivered to
Delileh the forty pigeons that carried the royal messages,
and the Khalif appointed her mistress over the forty slaves
and charged them to obey her. She made the place of
her session behind the door of the khan, and every day
she used to go up to the Khalifs Divan, lest he should
need to send a message by pigeon-post, whilst the forty
slaves abode on guard at the khan ; nor did she return till
ended day, when they loosed the forty dogs, that they
might keep watch over the place by night,

THE ADVENTURES OF QUICKSILVER ALT OF
CAIRO: being a sequel to THE ROGUERIES
OF DELILEH THE CRAFTY.

There lived once at Cairo, in the days of Selah the
Egyptian, who was chief of the Cairo police and had
forty men under him, a sharper named Ali, for whom
the Master of Police used to set snares and think that he
had fallen therein; but, when they sought for him, they
found that he had fled like quicksilver, wherefore they
dubbed him Quicksilver Ali. One day, as he sat with his
men in his hall, his heart became heavy within him and
his breast was straitened. The hall-keeper saw him sitting
frowning-faced and said to him, 6 What ails thee, O my
thief? If thy breast be straitened, go out and take a
turn in the streets of Cairo, for assuredly walking in its
markets will do away thine oppression/ So he went


26s


out and walked the streets awhile, but only redoubled fa
dejection and heaviness of heart Presently, he came to
a wine-shop and said to himself, ' I will go in and drink
wine.' So he went in and seeing seven rows of people in
the shop, said to the tavern-keeper, £ Harkye, taverner 1
I will not sit but by myself.' Accordingly, the vintner
seated him in a chamber by himself and set wine before
him, of which he drank till he lost his senses. Then he
sallied forth again and walked till he came to the street
called Red, whilst the people left the road clear before
him, out of fear of him.

Presently, he turned and saw a water-carrier going along,,
with his skin and mug, crying out and saying, * O exchange 1
There is no drink but from raisins, there is no love-delight
but of the beloved and none sitteth in the place of honour
save the man of sense ! n So he said to him, ' Here, give me
to drink ! ' The water-carrier looked at Kim and gave him
the mug. He took it and looking into it, shook it up and
poured it out on the ground. ' Why dost thou not drink?'
asked the water-carrier ; and he answered, saying, ' Give
me to drink.' So the man filled the cup a second time
and he took it and shook it and emptied it on the ground |
and thus he did a third time. Quoth the water-carrier, 1 If
thou wilt not drink, begone.' And Ali said, ' Give me to
drink.' So he filled the cup a fourth time and gave it him ;
and he drank and gave the man a dinar. The water-carrier
looked at him with disdain and said, ' Good luck to thee f
Good luck to thee! Little folk are one thing and great tN°fCrJjf
folk another!' When Ali heard this, he caught hold of ^cCtX.
the man's gown and drawing on him a poignard of price,
such an one as that whereof the poet speaks when he says,

1 Nonsense- words, Strang together for the sake of the jangle of rhymes
between the words sebib (raisins), hebib (beloved) and lebib (man of sense) a
The water-carrier was apparently selling nebiz or raisin- wine, as a flavour-
ing for his water.


266


A whittle of watered steel, perfect of temper and bright, With vipers 8

poison it plies the folk whom it meets in fight ;
If it fall, it sundereth limbs and sheddeth the blood forthright And

picks up a jewel, to boot, from marble hard and white.

said to him, ' O old man, speak reasonably to me ! Thy
water-skin is at the utmost worth three dirhems, and the
cups I emptied on the ground held a pint or so of water. 1
£ It is well,' replied the water-carrier ; and Ali said, ' I gave
thee a dinar : why, then, dost thou belittle me ? Hast thou
ever seen any more valiant than I or more generous ? '
' Ay,' answered the water-carrier ; ' I have seen one more
valiant than thou and eke more generous ; for, never, since
women have borne children, was there on the face of the
earth a man of valour who was not generous.' i And who
is he whom thou deemest braver and more generous than
I ? ' asked AIL

4 Know,' replied the other, ' that I had a strange adven-
ture of late. My father was Sheikh of the water-carriers
in Cairo, and when he died, he left me five camels and
a mule and shop and house : but the poor man is never
content ; or, if he be content, he dieth. So I said to myself,
" I will go to the Hejaz," and taking a file of camels, bought
[goods] on credit, till I had run in debt for five hundred
dinars, all of which I lost in the pilgrimage. Then I said
in myself, " If I return to Cairo, the folk will put me in
prison for their goods." So I returned with the Syrian
pilgrims to Aleppo, and thence I went on to Baghdad, where
I sought out the Sheikh of the water-carriers of the city
and repeated the first chapter of the Koran to him. He
questioned me of my case and I told him what had befallen
me, whereupon he assigned me a shop and gave me a
water-skin and gear. So I sallied forth, trusting in God
to provide, and went round about the city. I offered the
cup to one, that he might drink ; but he said, " I have eaten
nought whereon to drink ; for a niggardly fellow invited


26/


me to-day and set two gugglets before me ; so I said to
him, { son of the sordid, hast thou given me aught to
eat, that I should drink after it?' So go thy ways,
water-carrier, till I have eaten somewhat. Then come and
give me to drink." Then I accosted another and he said,
" God provide thee ! " And so I went on till noon, without
taking aught, and I said to myself, " Would I had never
come to Baghdad ! "

Presently, I saw the folk running; so I followed them
and saw a long file of cavaliers, riding two and two and
clad in steel, with double neck-rings and felt bonnets
and burnouses and swords and bucklers. I asked one of
the folk whose suite this was, and he answered, " That of
Captain Ahmed ed Denef." Quoth I, " And what is he ? "
"He is town-captain of Baghdad," answered the other,
c< and to him is committed the care of the, suburbs. He
gets a thousand dinars a month from the Khalif and
Hassan Shouman has the like. Moreover, each of his
men gets a hundred dinars a month ; and they are now
returning to their barrack from the Divan." Ahmed saw
me and cried out to me to give him to drink. So I filled
the cup and gave it him, and he shook it and emptied it
out, like unto thee ; and thus he did a second time. Then
I filled the cup a third time and he took a draught ; after
which he said to me, "O water-carrier, whence comest
thou ? " " From Cairo," answered I, and he, " May God
keep Cairo and her people ! What brings thee hither ? n
So I told him my story and gave him to know that I was a
debtor fleeing from debt and distress. Quoth he, " Thou
art welcome to Baghdad." Then he gave me five dinars
and said to his men, " Be generous to him, for the love of
God." So each of them gave me a dinar and Ahmed said
to me, " What while thou abidest in Baghdad, thou shall
have of us the like every time thou givest us to drink."

Accordingly, I paid them frequent visits and good ceased


268


not to come to me from the folk, till, one day, reckoning
up the profit I had made of them, I found it a thousand
dinars and said in myself, " The best thing I can do is to
return to Egypt." So I went to Ahmed's house and kissed
his hand, and he said, " What seekest thou ? " Quoth I,
" I have a mind to depart j " and I repeated the following
verses :

The stranger's sojourning in any land of lands Even as the building is

of mansions on the wind.
The waitings of the breeze cast down what he hath built, And now to

fare away the stranger hath a mind.

"The caravan is about to start for Cairo," added I, "and
1 wish to return to my people/' So he gave me a mule
and a hundred dinars and said to me, " I desire to send
somewhat by thee. Dost thou know the people of Cairo ?"
3Cfg!)t " Yes," answered I ; and he said, " Take this letter and carry
tfCOC. it to Quicksilver Ali of Cairo and say to him, * Thy captain
salutes thee and he is now with the Khalif.' " So I took the
letter and jouneyed back to Cairo, where I paid my debts
and plied my trade of a water-carrier ; but I have not
delivered the letter, because I know not the abode of
Quicksilver Ali.' Quoth Ali ? 'O elder, be of good cheer:
I am that Ali, the first of the lads of Captain Ahmed : give
me the letter.' So he gave him the letter and he opened
it and read as follows :

* I've written unto thee, adornment of the fair, A letter that indeed the

passing winds shall bear.
Could I bat fly, I'd flown for longing after thee; But how shall he who's

clipped of pinions wing the air ?

From Captain Ahmed ed Denef to the eldest of his sons,,
Quicksilver Ali of Cairo, greeting. Thou knowest that I
tormented Selaheddin the Cairene and befooled him till
1 buried him alive and reduced his lads to obey me, and

amongst them Ali Kitf el Jemel ; and I am hq¥/ become
town-captain of Baghdad and overseer of the suburbs, If
thou be still mindful of our love s come to me ; haply thou


269


shalt play some trick in Baghdad that may advance thee to
the Khalif s service, so he may appoint thee stipends and
allowances and assign thee a lodging, which is what thou
desirest, and so peace be on thee.'

When Ali read this letter, he kissed it and laying it on
his head, gave the water-carrier ten dinars ; after which
he returned to his lodging and told his comrades and
commended them to one another. Then he changed his
clothes and donning a tarboosh and a travelling cloak, took
a case, containing a bamboo spear, four-and-twenty cubits
long, made in several pieces, to fit into each other. Quoth
his lieutenant, 4 Wilt thou go a journey, whenas the treasury
is empty ? 9 ' When I reach Damascus/ answered Ali, 4 1
will send you what shall suffice you.' Then he set out and
fared on, till he overtook a caravan about to start, whereof
were the Provost of the Merchants and forty other mer-
chants. They had all loaded their beasts, except the
Provost, whose loads lay upon the ground, and Ali heard
his caravan-leader, who was a Syrian, say to the muleteers*
' Help me, one of you ! ' But they mocked him and reviled
him. Quoth Ali in himself, ' None will suit me so well to
travel withal as this leader.'

Now Ali was beardless and well-favoured; so he went
up to the leader and saluted him. The latter welcomed
him and said, 4 What seekest thou ? ' 1 my uncle,' replied
Alij * I see thee alone with forty mule-loads of goods ;
but why hast thou not brought men to help thee ? ' * O my
son,' rejoined the other, 4 1 hired two lads and clothed
them and put in each one's pocket two hundred dinars \
and they helped me till we came to the Dervishes' Convent, 1
when they ran away.' Quoth Ali, ' Whither are you bound ? '
5 To Aleppo,' answered the Syrian, and Ali said, ' I will
help thee. 5 So they loaded the beasts and the Provost
mounted his mule and they set out The leader rejoiced

1 El Khanekeh.


2JO


in Ali and loved him and made much of him and they
fared on till nightfail, when they halted and ate and drank.
Then came the time of sleep and Ali lay down and made
as if he slept ; whereupon the Syrian laid himself near
him and Ali rose and sat down at the door of the merchant's
pavilion. Presently, the Syrian turned over and would
have taken Ali in his arms, but found him not and said in
himself, ' It would seem as though he had promised another
and he hath taken him ; but I have the first right and
another night I will keep him.'

Ali sat at the door of the tent till nigh upon daybreak,
when he returned and lay down near the Syrian, who found
him by his side, when he awoke, and said in himself, ' If I
ask him where he has been, he will leave me and go away,"
So he dissembled with him and they went on till they
came to a forest, in which was-- a cave, where dwelt a
ferocious lion. Now, whenever a caravan passed, they
would draw lots among themselves and throw him on
whom the lot fell to the lion. So they drew lots and the
lot fell upon the Provost of the Merchants. Now the lion
stopped the way, awaiting his prey, wherefore the Provost
was sore distressed and said to the leader, * God disappoint
thy enterprise and bring thy journey to nought ! I charge
thee, after my death, give my loads to my children.' Quoth
Ali, ' What meaneth all this ? ' So they told him the case
and he said, s Why do ye run from the cat of the desert ?
I warrant you I will' kill him.'

So the Syrian went to the Provost and told him of this
and he said, ' If he kill him, I will give him a thousand
dinars.' ' And we/ said the other merchants, 'will reward
him likewise.' With this Ali put off his mantle and there
appeared upon him armour of steel ; then he took a whin-
yard of sueel and [opening It] turned the ring; 1 after

1 So as to fix it in the handle and present it shutting up, when used
to strike with.


271

which he went forth alone and standing in the road before
the lion, cried out at him. The lion ran at him, but Ali
smote him between the eyes with his cutlass and cut him
in sunder, whilst the caravan-leader and the merchants
looked on. Then said he to the leader, 'Have no fear,
O my uncle!' and the Syrian answered, saying, 'O my
son, I am thy servant for all time.' Then the Provost
embraced him and kissed him between the eyes and gave
him the thousand dinars, and each of the other merchants
gave him twenty dinars.

He deposited all the money with the Provost and they
slept that night till the morning, when they set out again,
intending for Baghdad, and fared on till they came to the
Lion's Wood and the Valley of Dogs, where lay a Bedouin
brigand and his tribe, who sallied forth on them. The
folk fled from the highwaymen and the Proyost said, ' My
goods are lost ! ' When, behold, up came Ali in a coat
of leather, full of bells, and bringing out his long lance,
fitted it together. Then he seized one of the Arab's
horses and mounting it, shook his bells and cried out to
the Bedouin chief, saying, ' Come out to me with spears ! '
The Bedouin's mare took fright at the noise of the bells
and Ali struck the chief's spear and broke it. Then he
smote him on the neck and cut off his head. When the
Bedouins saw their chief fall, they all ran at Ali, but he
cried out, saying, 1 God is Most Great ! ' and falling on
them, put them to flight. Then he raised the chiefs
head on the point of his spear and returned to the
merchants, who rewarded him liberally and continued
their journey.

When they reached Baghdad, Ali took his money from
the Provost and committed it to the Syrian;, saying, ( When
thou returnest to Cairo, enquire for my lodging and give
the money to my deputy.' Then he slept that night and
on the morrow he entered the city and enquired for Ahmed


272


ed Denef s lodging ; but none would direct him thereto. 2
So he walked on, till he came to a square called En Nefz,
where he saw children at play, and amongst them a lad
called Ahmed el Lekit, 2 and said to himself, ' Thou shalt
not get news of them but of their little ones.' Then he
turned and seeing a sweetmeat-seller, bought cakes of him
and called to the children ; but Ahmed el Lekit drove the
rest away and coming up to him, said, 6 What seekest
thou ? ' Quoth Ali, ' I had a son and he died and I saw
him in a dream asking for sweetmeats : wherefore I have
bought sweetmeats and wish to give each child some.' So
saying, he gave Ahmed a cake, and he looked at it and
seeing a dinar sticking to it, said, ' Begone S I am no
catamite: seek another than I.' 'Q my son,' answered
Ali, ' it is a sharp fellow who takes the hire, even as is he
who gives it. I have sought all day for Ahmed ed Denef's
barrack, but none would direct me thereto ; so the dinar is
thine, if thou wilt guide me thither.' Quoth the lad, ' I
will run before thee, till I come to the place, when I will
catch up a stone with my foot and kick it against the door |
and so shalt thou know it.'

So he ran on and Ali after him, till they came to the
^jr{g|j£ place, when the boy caught up a pebble and kicked it against
ftttxL ^ e door. Ali laid hold of him and would have taken the
dinar from him, but could not ; so he said to hirn, ' Go :
thou deservest liberality, for thou art a sharp fellow, whole
of wit and stout. God willing, if I become captain to the
Khalif, I 'will make thee one of my lads.' Then the boy
made off and Ali went up to the door and knocked;
whereupon quoth Ahmed ed Denef to the doorkeeper,
' Open the door ; that is the knock of Quicksilver Ali.'

1 Apparently because of the fear in which the people of the city held
the notorious rascal and swashbuckler whom Er Reshid had made town-
captain of Baghdad.

E i.e. the sister's son of Zeyneb the Trickstress } see supra^ p. 236,


273


So he opened the door and Ali entered and saluted
Ahmed, who embraced him, and the forty saluted him.
And Ahmed gave him a suit of clothes, saying, ' When
the Khalif made me captain, he clothed my lads and I
kept this suit for thee.' Then they seated him in the
place of honour and setting on meat and drink, ate and
drank and made merry till the morning, when Ahmed said
to Ali, 6 Look thou walk not about Baghdad, but abide
here.' e Why so ? ' asked Ali. ' I came not hither to be shut
up, but to look about me and divert myself.' £ my son/
rejoined Ahmed, 'think not that Baghdad is like Cairo.
Baghdad is the seat of the Khalifate : sharpers abound in
it and rogueries spring in it as plants spring in the earth.'
So Ali abode in the barrack three days, at the end of which
time Ahmed said to him, S I wish to present thee to the
Khalif, that he may assign thee an allowance.' But he
answered, sayings 1 When the time comes,' So he let him
go his own way.

One day, as Ali sat in the barrack, his breast became
straitened and his soul troubled and he said to himself,
'Come, let us walk awhile in Baghdad and lighten my
heart.' So he went out and walked from street to street,
till he came to the bazaar, where he entered a cookshop
and ate the morning-meal; after which he went out to
wash his hands. Presently, he saw forty slaves, with bon-
nets of felt and cutlasses of steel, come walking, two by
two ; and last of all came Delileh the Crafty, riding on &
mule and clad in a coat of mail, with a gilded helmet on
her head. Now she was returning from the Divan to the
khan of which she was portress ; and when she espied Ali,
she looked at him fixedly and saw that he resembled
Ahmed ed Denef in height and breadth. Moreover, he
was clad in a striped cloak and a burnouse, with a steel
cutlass by his side, and valour shone from his eyes, testi-
fying for him and not against him. So she returned to ih@
VOL. VI. 18


274


khan and going in to her daughter, fetched a table of san& 3
which she levelled and drew a geomantic figure, by which
she discovered that the stranger's name was Ali of Caird
and that his fortune overrode her own and that of her
daughter. ' O my mother,' said Zeyneb, ' what has befallen
thee, that thou hast recourse to the table of sand ? ' ' O my
daughter/ answered Delileh, 4 1 have seen this day a young
man who resembles Ahmed ed Denef, and I fear lest he
come to hear how thou didst strip Ahmed and his men
and enter the khan and play us a trick, in revenge for
what we did with his chief and the forty ; for me thinks
he hath taken up his lodging with Ed Denef. 5 'What
is this ? ' rejoined Zeyneb, 4 Methinks thou hast taken
his measure.'

Then she donned her finest clothes and went out into the
town. When the people saw her, they all made love to her
and she promised and retracted and listened and coquetted
and passed from market to market, till she saw Ali coming,
when she went up to him and rubbed her shoulder against
him. Then she turned and said, ' God preserve folk of
discrimination ! ' Quoth he, s How goodly is thy fashion i
To whom dost thou belong ? ' 'To the gallant like thee/
answered she ; and he said, * Art thou married or single ? '
* Married,' replied she. * Shall it be in my lodging or
thine ? ' asked Ali, and she said, £ I am a merchant's
daughter and a merchant's wife and in all my life I have
never been out of doors till to-day, when I made ready food
and thought to eat, but found I had no mind thereto
[without company]. When I saw thee, love of thee
entered my heart : so wilt thou solace my soul and eat a
mouthful with me ? ' Quoth he, s Whoso is invited, let
him accept.' So she went on and he followed her from
street to street : but presently he bethought himself and
said, i What wilt thou do and thou a stranger? Verily it is
said, "Whoso doth whoredom in his strangerhood, God


275


will send him back disappointed." But I will put her oil
with fair words.' So he said to her, ' Take this dinar and
appoint me a day other than this.' ' By the Mighty Name,'
answered she, ' it may not be but thou shalt go home with
me this very day and I will take thee to friend.'

So he followed her till she came to a house with a lofty
porch and a padlock on the door and said to him, * Open
this lock.' * Where is the key ? ' asked he. And she
answered, * It is lost.' Quoth he, ' He who opens a lock
without a key is a knave, whom it behoves the judge to
punish, and I know not how to open doors without keys.'
With this she raised her veil and showed him her face, at
which he took one look that cost him a thousand sighs.
Then she let fall her veil on the lock and repeating over
it the names of the mother of Moses, opened it without
a key and entered. He followed her and saw„ swords and
armour of steel hanging up ; and she put off her veil and
sat down with him. Quoth he to himself, ' [Needs must
thou] accomplish what God hath decreed to thee,* and
bent to her, to take a kiss of her cheek ; but she covered
it with her hand, saying, 'This beseemeth not but by
night.' Then she brought a tray of food and wine, and
they ate and drank; after which she rose and drawing
water from the well, poured from the ewer over his hands,
whilst he washed them.

Presently, she cried out and beat upon her breast, saying,
4 My husband had a signet ring of ruby, which was pledged
to him for five hundred dinars, and I put it on ; but it was
too large for me, so I straitened it with wax, and when
I let down the bucket into the water, the ring [must
have] dropped into the well. So turn thy face to the
door, whilst I put off my clothes and go down into the
well and fetch it.' Quoth Ali, i It were shame on me that
thou shouldst go down into the well, whilst I am present ;
none shall do it but I.' So saying, he put off his clothes


276


md tied the rope about himself &n& she let him down
Into the well. Now there was much water therein and
she said to him, 'The rope is too short j loose thyself
and drop down.' So he did himself loose from the rope
and dropped into the water, in which he sank fathoms
deep, without touching the bottom of the well ; whilst
Mfgllt sne ve iled herself and taking his clothes, returned to her
tjccctf, mother, to whom said she, ' 1 have stripped Ali the
Egyptian and cast him into the Amir Hassan's well, from
which there is no chance of his escaping.'

Presently } the Amir Hassan, the master of the house,
who had been absent at the Divan, came home and finding
the door open, said to his groom, ' Why didst thou not lock
the door?' l O my lord,' answered the groom, 'indeed
1 locked it with my own hand' Quoth the Amir, 4 As my
head liveth, some thief hath entered my house S ' Then
he went in and searched right and left, but found none and
said to the groom, 'Fill the ewer, that I may make the
ablution.' So the man lowered the bucket into the well ;
but, when he drew it up, he found it heavy and looking
down, saw one sitting therein ; whereupon he let it fall
into the water and cried out, saying, ' O my lord, an Afrit
came up to me out of the well ! ' Quoth the Amir, ' Go
and fetch four doctors of the law, that they may read the
Koran over him, till he go away.' So he fetched the
doctors and the Amir said to them, ' Sit round the well and
exorcise me this Afrit.' They did as he bade them ; after
which the groom and another servant lowered the bucket
again and Ali clung to it and hid himself under it, till he
came near the top, when he sprang out and landed among
the doctors, who fell a-cuffing each other and crying out,
& Afrit ! Afrit I '

The Amir looked at Ali and seeing him a young man?
said to him, 6 Art thou a thief ? ' ' No/ answered Ali.
s Then what dost thou in the well ? ' asked the Amir ; and


277

Ali said, ' I was asleep and dreamt a dream of dalliance; 1
so I went down to the Tigris to wash myself and dived,
whereupon the current carried me under the earth and I
came up in this well.' ' Tell the truth,' said the Amir. So
Ali told him all that had befallen him, and the Amir gave
him an old gown and let him go. He returned to Ahmed
ed Denefs lodging and told him all that had passed.
Quoth Ahmed, ' Did I not tell thee that Baghdad is full
of women who play tricks upon men ? ' And Ali Kitf el
Jemel said, ' I conjure thee by the Mighty Name, tell me
how it is that thou art the chief of the lads of Cairo and
yet hast been stripped by a girl ? ' This was grievous to
Ali and he repented him of not having followed Ahmed's
advice.

Then Ed Denef gave him another suit of clothes and
Hassan Shouman said to him, ' Dost thou know the girl ? *
4 No,' answered Ali ; and Hassan said, ' It was Zeyneb, the
daughter of Delileh the Crafty, the portress of the Khalif s
khan : and hast thou fallen into her toils, O Ali ? ' 4 Yes,*
replied he ; and Hassan said, * O Ali, it was she who took
thy chiefs clothes and those of all his men,' Quoth Ali,
* This is a disgrace to you all' Then said Hassan, ' And
what thinkest thou to do ? ' And he answered, ' I purpose
to marry her/ 4 Put away that thought from thee,' rejoined
the other, * and console thy heart of her.' Quoth Ali,
' O Hassan, do thou counsel me how I shall do to marry
her.' 'With all my heart,' replied his comrade. s If thou
wilt drink from my hand and march under my banner, I
will bring thee to thy will of her/ And Ali answered,
saying, ' I will well. 8

So Hassan made him put off his clothes and taking a
saucepan, heated therein somewhat as it were pitch, with
which he anointed him? and he became like unto a black

1 Emissio seminis, evm involuntary, entails total ablution upoa a
Muslim.


278


slave. Moreover, he anointed his lips and smeared his
eyes with red kohl. Then he clad him in a slave's habit
and giving him a tray of kabobs and wine, said to him,
* There is a black cook in the khan, and thou art now
become his like ; so go thou to him and accost him in
friendly fashion and speak to him in the blacks' lingo,
saying, " It is long since we foregathered in the beer-shop."
He will answer thee, " I have been too busy for this ; for
I have on my hands forty slaves, for whom I cook the
morning and the evening meals, besides making ready
a tray for Delileh and the like for her daughter Zeyneb
and the dogs' food." And do thou say to him, " Come, let
us eat kabobs and drink wine." Then go in with him into
the saloon and make him drunk and question him of his
service, how many and what dishes he has to cook, and
ask him of the dogs' food and the keys of the kitchen and
the larder ; and he will tell thee, for a man, when he is
drunk, tells all that he would conceal, were he sober.
[When thou hast learned all this of him,] drug him and
don his clothes and sticking the two knives in thy girdle,
take the vegetable -basket- and go to the market and buy
meat and greens, with which do thou return to the khan
and enter the kitchen and the larder and cook the food.
Dish it up and put henbane in it, so as to drug the dogs
and the slaves and Delileh and Zeyneb. Then serve up
and when they are all asleep, go up into the upper chambei
and bring away all the clothes thou wilt find hanging there.
And if thou have a mind to marry Zeyneb, bring also the
forty carrier-pigeons.'

So Ali went to the khan and going in to the cook 9
saluted him and said, * It is long since I have foregathered
with thee in the beer-shop.' Quoth the cook, 6 1 have been
busy cooking for the slaves and the dogs.' Then he took
him and making him drunk, questioned him of his duties,
Said the cook, 1 Every day I cook five dishes for the morn-


279


ing and the like for the evening meal ; and yesterday they
sought of me a sixth dish, rice dressed with honey and
saffron, and a seventh, a mass of cooked pomegranate-
seed.' ' And what is the order of thy service ? ' asked Alia
8 First,' answered the cook, ' I serve up Zeyneb's tray, then
that of Delileh ; then I serve the slaves and give the dogs
their sufficiency of meat, and the least that satisfies them
is a pound each.' But, as fate would have it, he forgot
to ask him of the keys. Then he drugged him and donned
his clothes ; after which he took the basket and went to tbCtgfjt
the market. There he bought meat and greens and re- iJCCXftf
turning to the khan, with the two knives stuck in his girdle,
saw Delileh seated at the gate, watching those that went in
and out, and the forty slaves with her, armed.

He took courage and entered; but Delileh knew him
and said to him, ' Back, O captain of thieves ! Wilt thou
play a trick on me in the khan ? ' When he heard this, he
turned and said to her, ' What sayst thou, O portress ? '
' What hast thou done with the cook ? ' asked she. 1 What
cook?' answered he. ' Is there here another cook than I?*
'Thou liest,' rejoined shej 'thou art Quicksilver Ali the
Cairene.' And he said to her, in slaves' lingo, ' O portress,
are Cairenes black or white ? I have always been a
servant.' Then said the slaves to him, 'What is the
matter, cousin?' Quoth Delileh, 'This is none of your
cousin, but Quicksilver Ali the Egyptian • and meseems
he hath either killed your cousin or drugged him.' But
they said, ' Indeed this is our cousin, Saadullah the cook.'
' Not so,' answered she ; ' it is Quicksilver Ali, and he hath
dyed his skin.' Quoth the sharper, 'And who is Ali? I
am Saadullah.' Then she fetched ointment of proof, with
which she anointed Ali's forearm and rubbed it ; but the
black did not come off ; whereupon quoth the slaves, 4 Let
him go and dress us the morning meal.' s If he be indeed
your cousin,' said Delileh, ' he knows what you sought of


28o


him yesternight and how many dishes he cooks every day.*
So they asked him of this and he said, ' Every day I cook
you five dishes for the morning and the like for the evening
meal, lentils and rice and broth and fricassee and sherbet
of roses, and [yesternight ye sought of me] a sixth dish
and a seventh, to wit, rice dressed with honey and saffron
and cooked pomegranate-seed.' And the slaves said,
1 Right' Then said Delileh, 6 Take him in, and if he
knows the kitchen and the larder, he is indeed your
cousin ; but, if not, kill him. 5

Now the cook had a cat, which he had brought up, and
whenever he entered, it would stand at the door of the
kitchen and spring on his shoulders, as soon as he went
in. So, when Ali entered, the cat saw him and jumped on
his shoulders ; but he threw it off and it ran before him to
the door of the kitchen and stopped there. He guessed
that this was the kitchen-door; so he took the keys and
seeing one with traces of feathers thereon, knew it for the
key of the kitchen and opened the door therewith. Then
he entered and setting down the greens, went out again,
guided by the cat, which ran before him and stopped at
another door. He guessed that this was the larder and
seeing one of the keys with marks of grease thereon, knew
it for the key and opened the door therewith ; whereupon
quoth the slaves, 'O Delileh, were he a stranger, he had
not known the kitchen and the larder, nor had he been
able to distinguish the keys thereof from the rest ; verily,
he is our cousin Saadullah.' Quoth she 5 'He knew the
places by the cat and distinguished the keys, one from the
other, by their appearance : but this imposeth not upon
me.' Then he returned to the kitchen, where he cooked
the morning-meal and carrying Zeyneb's tray up to her
apartment, saw all the stolen clothes hanging up; after
which he went down and. carried Delileh her tray and gave
the slaves and the dogs their ration. The like he did at


28l


sundown arid drugged Delileh's food and that of Zeyneb
and the slaves.

Now the doors of the khan were opened and shut
with the sun : so he went forth and cried out, saying, ' O
dwellers in the khan, the watch is set and we have loosed
the dogs; so whoso stirs out after this hath but himself
to blame.' Now he had delayed 'the dogs' supper and put
poison therein ; so, when he set it before them, they ate
of it and died. Then he went up and took all the clothes
and the carrier-pigeons and opening the gate, made off to
the barrack of the Forty, where he found Hassan Shouman,
who asked him how he had fared. So he told him what
had passed and he praised him. Then he caused him put
off his clothes and made a decoction of herbs, with which
he washed him, and his skin became white as before;
after which he donned his own clothes and going back
to the khan, clad the cook in the clothes he had taken
from him and made him smell to the counter-drug : where-
upon he awoke and going forth to the greengrocer's,
bought vegetables and returned to the khan.

When the day broke, one of the lodgers in the khan
came out of his chamber and seeing the gate open and
the slaves drugged and the dogs dead, went in to Delileh,
whom he found lying drugged, with a scroll on her neck
and at her head a sponge steeped in the counter-drug.
He set the sponge to her nostrils and she awoke and said,
'Where am I?' Quoth he, 'When I came down from
my chamber, I saw the gate of the khan open and the
dogs dead and found the slaves and thee drugged.' So
she took up the scroll and read therein these words,
1 None did this thing save Ali the Egyptian.' Then she
awoke the slaves and Zeyneb by making them smell to
the counter-drug and said to them, £ Did I not tell you
that this was Ali of Cairo ? But do ye conceal the matter. 5
Then she said to her daughter, 'How often have I told


282

thee that Ali would not forego his revenge? He hath
done this in requital of that which thou didst with him
and he had it in his power to do with thee other than
this; but he refrained therefrom out of courtesy and a
desire that there should be friendship between us.' So
saying, she put off her man's clothes and donned woman's
attire and tying the kerchief [of truce] about her neck,
repaired to Ahmed ed Denefs lodging.

Now when Ali entered with the clothes and the carrier-
pigeons, Hassan Shouman gave the hall-keeper the price of
forty pigeons and he bought them and cooked them before
the men. Presently there came a knock at the door and
Ahmed ed Denef said to the hall-keeper, ' That is Delileh's
knock : rise and open to her.' So he admitted her and
"Nfc^t Hassan said to her, ' What brings thee hither, O ill-omened
fcCCXlb. old woman ? Verily, thou and thy brother Zureic the fish-
monger are of a piece ! 5 ' O captain,' answered she, ' I am
in the wrong and my neck is at your mercy ; but tell me
which of you it was that played me this trick ? ' Quoth
Ahmed, 'It was the first of my lads.' 'For God's sake/
rejoined Delileh, ' intercede with him to give me back the
carrier-pigeons and what not, and thou wilt lay me under
great obligation.' When Hassan heard this, he said to
Ali, ' God requite thee, O Ali ! Why didst thou cook the
pigeons ? ' And Ali answered, ' I knew not that they were
carrier-pigeons.' Then said Ahmed to the hall-keeper,
'Bring us the cooked pigeons.' So he brought them and
Delileh took a piece and tasting it, said, 'This is none of
the carrier-pigeons' flesh, for I fed them on grains of inusfc
and their flesh is become even as musk.' Quoth Hassan,
' An thou wilt have the carrier-pigeons, comply with Ali's
desire.' ' What is that ? ' asked she, and Hassan answered,
saying, ' He would have thee marry him to thy daughter
Zeyneb.' 4 1 have no power over her except of affection/
said she ; and Hassan said to Ali, ' Give her the pigeons. 9


28 3


So he gave them to her, and she took them and rejoiced
in them.

Then said Hassan to her, 1 Needs must thou give us &
sufficient answer.' ' If it be indeed his wish to marry her,'
replied Delileh, * it availed nothing to play this trick upon
us : it behoveth him rather to demand her in marriage of
her uncle Captain Zureic, him who cries out, saying, "A
pound of fish for two farthings ! " and hangs up in his shop
a purse containing two thousand dinars; for he is her
guardian.' When the forty heard this, they all rose and
cried out, saying, ' What manner of talk is this, O strumpet ?
Dost thou wish to bereave us of our brother Ali of Cairo?'
Then she returned to the khan and said to her daughter,
4 Ali the Egyptian seeks thee in marriage.' Whereat
Zeyneb rejoiced, for she loved him because of his for-
bearance towards her, and asked her mother what had
passed. So she told her, adding, * I made it a condition
that he should demand thy hand of thine uncle, so I might
make him fall into destruction.'

Meanwhile Ali turned to his fellows and said to them,
*What manner of man is this Zureic?' 'He was chief of
the sharpers of the land of Irak,' answered they, ' and could
all but pierce mountains and lay hold upon the stars. He
would steal the very kohl from the eye and in brief, he
had not his match for roguery ; but he hath repented and
forsworn his old way of life and opened him a fish shop.
Moreover, he has amassed two thousand dinars by the sale
of fish and laid them in a purse with strings of silk, to
which he has tied bells and rings and rattles of brass.
Every time he opens his shop, he hangs up the purse on a
peg within the door and cries out, saying, " Where are ye,
O sharpers of Egypt, O cutters of Irak, O tricksters of the
land of the Persians? Behold, Zureic the fishmonger
hath hung up a purse in front of his shop, and whoso
pretendeth to sleight and cunning and can take it by craft,


284


it is his." So the light-fingered gentry come and try to
take the purse, but cannot ; for he lays at his feet cakes of
lead, whilst he fries his fish and tends the fire ; and when-
ever a thief thinks to take him unawares and makes a snatch
at the purse, he casts a disc of lead at him and kills him
or does him a mischief. So, O Ali, wert thou to tackle
him, thou wouldst be as one who jostles a funeral, un-
knowing who is dead ;* for thou art no match for him, and
we fear his mischief for thee. Indeed, thou hast no call
to marry Zeyneb, and he who leaves a thing alone lives
without it.' 'This were shame, O comrades,' answered
Ali. 1 Needs must I take the purse: but bring me a
woman's habit/

So they brought him women's clothes and he clad him-
self therein and stained his hands with henna, Then he
took a lamb and killing it, took out the guts and filled
them with the blood and bound them between his thighs |
after which he donned women's trousers and walking boots,,
Moreover, he made himself a pair of false breasts with
pelican's pouches and filled them with milk 2 and tied
round his hips a piece of linen, which he stuffed with
cotton, [to represent a big belly and buttocks], girding
himself over all with a silk handkerchief well starched.
Then he veiled himself and went out, whilst all who saw
him exclaimed, e What a fine pair of buttocks 1 ' Presently
he saw an ass-driyer coming, so he gave him a dinar and
mounting, rode till he came to Zureic's shop, where he
saw the purse hung up and the gold glittering through
the meshes. Now Zureic was frying fish, and Ali said to
the ass-man, e O driver, what is that smell?' £ It is the
smell of Zureic's fish,' answered he. Quoth All, 6 1 am
1 i^. one who gratuitously meddles in matters that concern him not g
a popular saying similar in character to thg well-known verses, " They
who in quarrels interpose^ Must often wipe a bloody nose. 9 '

s Leben, sic in ail the texts % probably a copyist's mistake for tebn
(straw jo


28 s


with child and the smell irketh me ; go, fetch me a piece
of the fish.' So the man said to Zureic, ' What ails thee
to fry fish so early and annoy pregnant women with the
smell ? I have here the wife of the Amir Hassan Sherr
et Teric, and she is with child; so give her a piece of
fish, for the child stirs in her belly. O Protector, O my
God, avert from us this day's mischief ! ' So Zureic took
a piece of fish and would have fried it, but the fire had
gone out and he went in, to rekindle it.

Meanwhile Ali dismounted and sitting down, pressed
upon the lamb's gut till it burst and the blood ran out from
between his legs. Then he cried out, saying, 1 O my back !
O my side ! ' Whereupon the driver turned and seeing the
blood running, said, 'What ails thee, O my lady?' i I
have miscarried,' answered Ali, whereupon Zureic looked
out and seeing the blood, was affrighted and fled into the
[inner] shop. Quoth the driver, ' God torment thee, O
Zureic ! The lady has miscarried and thou art no match
for her husband. Why must thou make a stench so early
in the morning? I bade thee bring her a piece, but thou
would st not,' So saying, he took his ass and went his
way, whilst Ali put out his hand to the purse; but no
sooner had he touched it than the bells and rings began to
jingle and the gold to chink. Quoth Zureic, ' Thy perfidy
is discovered, O gallows-bird ! Wilt thou put a cheat on
me and thou in a woman's habit ? Take what cometh to
thee!' And he threw a cake of lead at him, but it went
askew and lighted on another ; whereupon the people rose
against Zureic and said to him, ' Art thou a tradesman or
a swashbuckler? If thou be a tradesman, take down thy
purse and spare the folk thy mischief.' * In the name of
God S On my head be it,' answered he.

As for Ali s he made off to the barrack and told Hassan
Shouman what had happened, after which he put off his
woman's clothes and donning a groom's habit, took a dish


286

and five dirhems. Then h.e returned to Zureic's shop and
the fishmonger said to him, ' What dost thou want, my
master?' He showed him the five dirhems and Zureic
would have given him of the fish in the tray, but he saidj
' I must have hot fish.' So he put fish in the pan and
finding the fire dead, went in to relight it ; whereupon Ali
put out his hand to the purse and caught hold of the end
of it The bells and rings and rattles jingled and Zureic
said, ' Thy trick hath not deceived me. I knew thee by
the grip of thy hand on the dish and the dirhems, for all
"Nfttfjt thou art disguised as a groom.' So saying, he threw the
tftciu. lead at him, but he avoided it and it fell into the pan full
of hot fish and broke it and overturned it, fat and all, upon
the shoulders of the Cadi, who was passing. The fat ran
down inside his clothes to his privy parts and he cried out,
saying, ' my privities 1 What a ^pickle you are in 1 Alas,
unhappy that I am! Who hath played me this trick? 5
4 O my lord,' answered the people, £ it was some boy that
• threw a stone into the pan : but for God's protection, it
had been worse.' Then they turned and seeing the piece
of lead and that it was Zureic who had thrown it, said to
him, ' O Zureic, this is not allowed of God 1 Take down
the purse, or it will be the worse for thee.' ' If it please
God,' answered he, ' I will take it down.'

Meanwhile, Ali returned to the barrack and told his
comrades what had passed and they said, 'Thou hast
exhausted two-thirds of his sharpness.' Then he changed
his groom's dress for that of a merchant and going out,
met a snake-charmer, with a bag of serpents and another
of gear, to whom said he, ' O charmer, come and amuse
my lads, and thou shalt have largesse.' So he accompanied
him to the barrack, where he fed him and drugging him,,
took his clothes and put them on. Then he took the bags
and repairing to Zureic's shop, began to play the flute*
Quoth Zureic, ' God provide thee I ' But Ali took out the


28/


serpents and cast them down before him ; whereat the fish-
seller, who was afraid of snakes, fled from them into the
[inner] shop. Then Ali picked up the snakes and thrusting
them back into the bag, put out his hand and caught hold
of the end of the purse. The bells rang and the rings and
rattles jangled, and Zureic said, 'Wilt thou never cease to
play me tricks? Now thou feignest thyself a serpent-
charmer.' So saying, he took up a piece of lead and hurled
it at Ali ; [but he avoided it,] and it fell on the head of a
groom, who was passing by, in attendance upon his master,
a trooper, and knocked him down. Quoth the soldier^
' Who did that ? ' And the folk said, ' It was a stone fell
from the roof.' So the soldier passed on and the people,
seeing the piece of lead, went up to Zureic and said to him,
Take down the purse ; ' and he said, ' God willing, I will
take it down this very night.'

All ceased not to play tricks upon Zureic, till he had
made seven different attempts for the purse, but without
success. Then he returned the snake-charmer his clothes
and gear and gave him a present ; after which he went
back to Zureic's shop and heard him say, ' If I leave the
purse here to-night, he will break in and take it; I will
carrry it home with me.' So he shut his shop and putting
the purse in his sleeve, set out home, and Ali followed him
till he came near his house, when he saw a wedding toward
in a neighbour's house and said in himself, ' I will go
home and give my wife the purse and change my clothes
and return to the wedding.' Now he was married to a
black girl, one of the freedwomen of the Vizier Jaafer,
and she had borne him a son, whom he named Abdallah,
and he had promised her to spend the money in the purse
on the occasion of the boy's circumcision and marriage.
So he went into his house and Ali, following him by
stealth, stepped into a closet, whence he could hear and
see all that passed. When Zureic entered, his wiie saw that


288


his face was overcast and asked him what had vexed him.
Quoth he, ' God hath afflicted me this day with a sharking
fellow, who hath made seven attempts to. get the purse, but
without avail.' And she said, ' Give it to me, that I may
lay it up against the boy's festival-day.' So he gave her
the purse and changed his clothes, saying, ' Keep the purse
safely, O Umm Abdallah, for I am going to the wedding.'
But she said, ' Sleep awhile. 5 So he lay down and fell
asleep. Presently, Ali rose and going on tiptoe to the
purse, took it and went to the house of the wedding and
stood there, looking on.

Meanwhile, Zureic dreamt that he saw a bird fly away
with the purse and awaking in affright, said to his wife,
' Rise ; look for the purse.' So she looked and finding it
gone, buffeted her face and said, ' Alas, the blackness of
thy fortune, O Umm Abdallah ! A thief hath taken the
purse.' ' By Allah/ quoth Zureic, ' it can be none other
than the rascal [who has plagued me all day !] He has
followed me home and taken the purse ; and needs must
I go and get it back.' ( Except thou bring it/ answered
his. wife, 'I will lock the door on thee and leave thee to
pass the night in the street.' So he went up to the house
of the wedding, and seeing Ali looking on, said to himself,
' This is he who took the purse ; but he lodges with Ahmed
ed Denef.' So he ran on before him to the barrack and
climbing up at the back, made his way into the saloon,
where he found every one asleep. Presently there came
a knock at the door and Zureic said, ' Who is there ? ' 'All
of Cairo,' answered the knocker; and Zureic said, ''Hast
thou brought the purse?' Ali thought it was Hassan
Shouman and answered, ' Yes ; open the door.' Quoth
Zureic, ' I cannot open to thee till I see the purse ; for
the chief and I have laid a wager about it' £ Put out thy
hand,' said Ali. So he put out his hand through the hole
of the door and Ali laid the purse in it ; whereupon Zureic


289


took it and going forth, as he had come in, returned to
the wedding.

Ali stood awhile at the door, but none opened to him ; and
at last he gave a thundering knock that awoke all the men
and they said, ' That was Ali of Cairo's knock.' So the hall-
keeper opened to him and Hassan Shouman said to him,
'Hast thou brought the purse?' 'Enough of jesting, O
Shouman,' replied Ali. ' Didst thou not swear that thou
wouldst not open to me till I showed thee the purse, and
did I not give it thee through the hole of the door ? ' 'By
Allah/ said Hassan, ' it was not I who took it, but Zureic ! '
Quoth Ali, 'Needs must I get it again,' and repaired to
the house of the wedding, where he heard the buffoon
say, ' Largesse, O Abou Abdallah ! Good luck to thee
with thy son ! ' Quoth Ali, ' My luck is in the ascendant,'
and going to the fishmonger's house, climbed over the
back wall and found his wife asleep. So he drugged her
and clad himself in her clothes. Then he took the child
in his arms and went round, searching, till he found a
basket containing gimblet-cakes, which Zureic, of his
niggardliness, had kept from the Feast of the New Moon.
Presently, the fishmonger returned and knocked at the
door, whereupon Ali imitated his wife's voice and said,
' Who is at the door?' ( Abou Abdallah,' answered Zureic,
and Ali said, i I swore that I would not open the door to
thee, except thou broughtest back the purse.' Quoth the
fishmonger, ' I have brought it.' ' Then give it into my
hand,' said Ali, c before I open the door ; ' and Zureic
answered, saying, 'Let down the basket and take it
therein.' So Ali let down the basket and the other put the
purse therein, whereupon Ali took it and drugged the child.
Then he aroused the woman and making off by the back
way as he had entered, returned with the child and the
purse and the basket of cakes to the barrack and showed
them all to the forty, who praised his dexterity. Then he
vol. vi„ 1 9


290

gave them the cakes, which they ate, and delivered the boy
to Hassan Shouman, saying, ' This is Zureic's child ; hide
it.' So he hid it and fetching a lamb, gave it to the hall-
keeper, who cooked it whole, wrapped in a cloth, and laid
it out, with a shroud over it, as it were a dead body.

Meanwhile Zureic stood awhile, waiting at the door, then
gave a thundering knock, and his wife said to him, ' Hast
thou brought the purse ? ' ' Didst thou not take it up in
the basket but now ? ' answered he, and she said, ' 1 let no
basket down to thee, nor have I set eyes on the purse.'

* By Allah,' quoth he, ' the sharper hath been beforehand
with me and hath taken the purse again ! ' Then he
searched the house and found the basket of cakes gone
and the child missing and cried out, saying, 'Alas, my
child ! ' Whereupon the woman beat her breast and said s

* I will complain of thee to the yizier, for none has killed
my child but this sharper, and all because of thee,' Quoth
Zureic, ' 1 will answer for him.' So he tied the kerchief
[of truce] about his neck and going to Ahmed ed Denefs
lodging, knocked at the door. The hall-keeper admitted
him and Hassan Shouman said to him, ' What brings thee
here ? ' Quoth he, ' Do ye intercede with Ali the Cairene
to restore me my child and I will give him the purse.'

* God requite thee, O Ali ! ' said Hassan. ' Why didst thou
not tell me it was his child?' 'What has befallen him?'
asked Zureic, and Hassan answered, saying, ' We gave him
raisins to eat, and he choked and died ; and here he is.'
Quoth Zureic, ' Alas, my child ! What shall I say to his
mother ? ' Then he rose and opening the shroud, saw it
was a lamb cooked whole and said, 'Thou makest sport
of me, O Ali ! ' Then they gave him the child, and Ahmed
ed Denef said to him, 'Thou didst hang up the purse,
proclaiming that It should be the property of any sharper
who should avail to take it, and Ali has taken it ; so it is
his,' Quoth Zureic, ' I make him a present of it' But


291

Ali said to him, ' Do thou accept it on account of thy niece
Zeyneb.' And Zureic replied, ' I accept it.'

Then said the forty, 'We demand of thee Zeyneb ia
marriage for Ali of Cairo/ But he answered, saying, ' I
have no control over her but of courtesy.' Quoth Hassan,
i Dost thou grant our suit?' 'Yes,' replied he; 'I will
grant her in marriage to him who can avail to her dowry.'
' And what is her dowry ? ' asked Hassan. Quoth Zureic,
'She hath sworn that none shall mount her breast except
he bring her the robe of Kemer, daughter of Azariah the
Jew, and her crown and girdle and pan table of gold.' 4 If
I do not bring her the robe this very night,' said Ali, *I
renounce my claim to her.' ' O Ali,' rejoined Zureic, 4 if
thou play any tricks on Kemer, thou art a dead man. 8
1 Why so ? ' asked Ali, and the other said, ! Her father
Azariah is a skilful magician, wily and perfidious, and has
the Jinn at his service. He has without the city a palace^
the walls whereof are one brick of gold and one of silver
and which is only visible to the folk whilst he is therein :
but, when he goes forth, it disappears. He brought his
daughter this robe I speak of from an enchanted treasure,
and every day he lays it in a dish of gold and opening the
windows of the palace, cries out, saying, "Where are
the sharpers of Cairo, the cutters of Irak, the master-
thieves of the land of the Persians? Whoso availeth to
take this robe, it is his." So all the light-fingered gentry
essayed the adventure, but availed not to take it, and he
turned them into apes and asses.' But Ali said, ' I will
assuredly take it and Zeyneb shall be displayed therein.' 1

So he went to the shop of the Jsn and found him a man
of stern and forbidding aspect, seated with scales and
weights and gold and silver and nests of drawers and so
forth before him, and a mule tethered hard by. Presently
he rose and shutting his shop, laid the gold and. silver "m>
1 i.t, on her wedding-night.


292


two purses, which he placed in a pair of saddle-bags and
set on the mule's back. Then he mounted and rode,
followed, without his knowledge, by Ali, till he came
some way without the city, when he took out a little dust
from a purse he carried in his pocket and muttering over
it certain magical words, sprinkled it in the air. No
sooner had he done this than there appeared a palace,
which had not its like, and the Jew mounted the steps
without alighting; after which he dismounted and taking
the saddle-bags off the mule's back, dismissed the latter,
which was a genie he had pressed into his service, and
it vanished. Then he entered the palace and sat down,
whilst Ali watched him from behind the door. Presently
he arose and opening the lattices, took a wand of gold,
[which he ' set up in the open window,] and hanging
thereto a golden tray by chains of the same metal, laid
in it the robe and cried out, saying, 'Where are the
sharpers of Cairo? Where are the cutpurses of Irak s
the master-thieves of the land of the Persians? Whoso
can take this robe by practice, it is his ! ' Then he
pronounced certain conjurations and behold, a tray of
food spread itself before him. He ate and conjured &
second time, whereupon the tray disappeared and a table
of wine appeared in its stead, and he drank. Quoth Ali,
' I know not how I am to take the robe, except if he be
drunken.'

Then he stole up behind the Jew, with his drawn sword
in his hand ; but the other turned and conjured, saying to
his hand, 4 Hold with the sword ; ' whereupon Ali's right
arm was arrested and abode half-way in the air, holding
the sword. He put out his left hand to the weapon, but
it also abode fixed in the air, and so with his right foot,,
leaving him standing on one foot Then the Jew dis-
pelled the charm from him and Ali became as before
Then Azariah levelled a table of sand and drew a geo-


293


mantic figure, by which he found that the intruder's name
was Quicksilver Ali of Cairo; so he turned to him and
said, ' Who art thou and what dost thou here ? ' 'I am
Ali of Cairo,' answered the sharper, ' of the band of
Ahmed ed Denef. I sought the hand of Zeyneb, daughter
of Delileh the Crafty, and she demanded thy daughter's
robe to her dowry ; give it to me and become a Muslim,
if thou wouldst save thy life.' ' After thy death,' answered
the Jew. ' Many have gone about to steal the robe, but
could not avail thereto ; so, if thou wilt take good advice,
thou wilt begone and save thyself ; for they only seek the
robe of thee, that thou mayst fall into destruction; and
indeed, had I not found by geomancy that thy fortune
overrideth my own, I had cut off thy head.'

Ali rejoiced to hear that his luck overrode that of the
Jew and said to him, ' There is no help for it but I must
have the robe and thou must become a true believer.'
' Is this thy last word ? ' asked the Jew, and Ali answered,
8 Yes.' So the Jew took, a cup and filling it with water,
conjured over it and said to Ali, ' Quit this shape of a
man for that of an ass.' Then he sprinkled him with the
water and straightway he became an ass, with hoofs and
long ears, and fell to braying after the manner of asses.
The Jew drew a circle round him, which became a wall
against him, and drank on till the morning, when he said
to Ali, ' I will ride thee to-day and give the mule a rest'
So he locked up the robe and tray and rod in a cupboard
and conjured over Ali, who followed him. Then he laid
the saddle-bags on his back and mounting, rode forth of
the palace, whereupon it disappeared and he rode into
Baghdad, till he came to his shop, where he alighted and
emptied the bags of gold and silver into the trays before
him. As for Ali, he tied him up by the shop-door, where
he stood, hearing and understanding all that passed, with-
out being able to speak.


294


Presently, up came a young merchant with whom fortune
had played the tyrant and who could find no easier way
of earning his livelihood than water-carrying. So he
brought his wife's bracelets to the Jew and said to him,
* Give me the worth of these bracelets, that I may buy me
an ass.' ' What wilt thou do with him ? ' asked the Jew,
and the other answered, ' 1 mean to fetch water from the
river on his back, and earn my living thereby. 5 Quoth
the Jew, 'Take this ass of mine.' So he sold him the
bracelets and received Ali of Cairo in part payment, in
the shape of an ass, and carried him home. Quoth Ali
in himself, ' If the ass-man clap the pannel on me and
load me with water-skins and go half a score journeys
© day with me, he will rain my health and I shall die.'
So, when the water-carrier's wife came to bring him his
fodder, he butted her with his head and she fell on her
back ; whereupon he sprang on her and smiting her head
with his mouth, put out that which his father left him.
She cried out and the neighbours came to her assistance
and beat him and drove him off her breast. When her
husband came home, she said to him, ' Either divorce me
or return the ass to [his former] owner.' 'What has
happened ? ' asked he ; and she answered, saying, i This
is a devil in the guise of an ass. He sprang upon me,
and had not the neighbours beaten him off me, he had
done a foul thing with me.'

So he carried the ass back to the Jew, who said to him,
' Why hast thou brought him back ? ' and he replied, i He
did a foul thing with my wife.' So the Jew gave him his
money again and he went away ; and Azariah said to Ali,
4 Unlucky wretch that thou art, hast thou recourse to
^Tfgfjt knavery to cause him return thee to me ? But since it
&£Odbtt. pleases thee to be an ass, I will make thee a laughing-
stock to great and small' Then he mounted him and
rode till he came without the city, when he brought out


\WAv


295


the powder and conjuring -over it, cast it abroad in the
air, and immediately the palace appeared. He entered
and taking the saddle-bags off the ass, set up the rod and
dish and hung out the robe, proclaiming aloud as of his
wont. Then he conjured, and meat and wine appeared
before him and he ate and drank ; after which he took
a cup of water and pronouncing certain words thereover,
sprinkled it on Ali, saying, c Quit this shape and return
to thy former one.' Ali straightway became a man again
and Azariah said to him, < O Ali, take good advice and be.
content with [what thou hast felt of] my mischief. Thou
hast no call to marry Zeyneb nor to take my daughter's
robe, for it is no easy matter for thee ; so leave covetise
and it will be better for thee, Else will I turn thee into
a bear or an ape or set an Afrit on thee, who will cast
thee behind the Mountain Caf.' 'O Azariah/ answered
Ali, 'I have engaged to take the robe and needs must
I have it and thou must become a Muslim ; else I will
kill thee.' ' O Ali,' rejoined the Jew, 'thou art like a
walnut ; unless it be broken, it cannot be eaten.'

Then he took a cup of water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled Ali with it, saying, ' Take the shape of a bear ; '
whereupon he instantly became a bear and the Jew muzzled
him and putting a collar about his neck, chained him to a
picket of iron. Then he sat down and ate and drank s
now and then throwing him a morsel and emptying the
dregs of the cup over him, till the morning, when he rose
and lay by the tray and the robe and conjured over the
bear, which followed him to the shop. There he tied him
up by the chain and he abode, hearing and seeing and
understanding, but unable to speak, whilst the Jew sat
down and emptied the gold and silver into the trays before
him. Presently up came a merchant, who accosted the
Jew and said to him, £ Wilt thou sell me yonder bear ? 1
have a wife who is my cousin [and is sick ;] and it hath


296


been prescribed to her to eat bears' flesh and anoint her-
self with the grease.' At this the Jew rejoiced and said in
himself, 'I will sell him to this merchant, so he may
slaughter him and we be at peace from him.' And Ali
thought in himself, ' By Allah, this fellow means to slaughter
me ; but deliverance is with God.' Then said the Jew,
' He is a present from me to thee.' So the merchant took
him and carried him to the butcher, to whom he said,
' Take thy tools and follow me.' So the butcher took his
knives and followed the merchant to his house, where he
bound the beast and fell to sharpening his knife ; but
when he went up to him to kill him, the bear escaped
from his hands and rising into the air, disappeared from
sight.

Now the reason of this was on this wise. When the
Jew returned to his palace, his daughter questioned him o£
Ali and he told her what had happened ; whereupon 3 ' Call
a genie,' said she, ' and ask him of the youth, whether he
be indeed Quicksilver Ali or another who seeketh to put a
cheat on thee.' So Azariah called a genie and questioned
him of Ali. And he answered, saying, * It is Ali of Cairo
himself. The butcher has bound him and whetted his
knife to kill him.' Quoth the Jew, ' Go, snatch him up
and bring him hither, ere the butcher slaughter him.' So
the genie flew off and snatching Ali out of the butcher's
hands, carried him to the palace and set him down before
the Jew, who took a cup of water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled him therewith, saying, 'Return to thine own
shape.' And he straightway became a man again as before.
The Jew's daughter Kemer, seeing him to be a handsome
young man, fell in love with him and he with her ; and
she said to him, i O unlucky one, why dost thou go about
to take my robe and enforce my father deal thus with
thee ? ' Quoth he, 5 1 have engaged to get it for Zeyneb the
Trickstress, that I may wed her therewith,' And she


297


said, * Others than thou have gone about with my father to
get the robe, but could not compass it : so put away this
thought from thee.' But he answered, saying, 'Needs
must I have it, and thy father must become a Muslim j or
I will kill him.'

Then said the Jew, * See, O my daughter, how this un-
lucky fellow seeks his own destruction. But I will turn
him into a dog.' So he took a cup graven with characters
and full of water and conjuring over it, sprinkled Ali there-
from, saying, * Take the form of a dog.' Whereupon he
straightway became a dog, and the Jew and his daughter
drank together till the morning, when the former laid up
the robe and tray and mounted his mule. Then he con-
jured over the dog, which followed him, as he rode towards
the town, and all the dogs barked at Ali, as he passed, till
he came to the shop of a broker, who rose and drove away
the dogs, and Ali lay down before him. The Jew turned
and looked for him, but finding him not, [rode on].

Presently, the broker shut up his shop and went home s
followed by the dog. When his daughter saw the dog
enter the house, she veiled her face and said, ' O my father,
why dost thou bring a strange man in to me ? ' 8 O my
daughter,' answered the broker, ' this is a dog.' "Not so,"
quoth she, e it is Ali of Cairo, whom the Jew Azariah hath
enchanted.' And she turned to the dog and said to him,

* Art thou not Ali of Cairo ? ' And he signed to her with
his head, as who should say, ' Yes.' Then said her father
to her, ' Why did the Jew enchant him ?' And she answered,

* Because of his daughter Kemer's robe ; but I can release
him.' ' If thou canst indeed do him this good office,' said
the broker, 6 now is the time.' Quoth she, ' If he will
marry me, 1 will release him/ And he signed to her
with his head, as who should say, s Yes. * So she took
a cup of water, graven with certain signs and characters,
and conjuring over it, [was about to sprinkle Ali therewith,]


298


when she heard a great cry and the cup fell from her hand.
She turned and lo, it was her father's maid, who had cried
out ; and she said to her, ' O my mistress, is it thus thou
keepest thy covenant between me and thee ? None taught
thee this fashion but I, and thou didst covenant with me
that thou wouldst do nought without consulting me and
that he who took thee to wife should marry me also, and
that one night should be mine and one thine.' And the
broker's daughter said, ' It is well. 5

When the broker heard the maid's words, he said to his
daughter, 'Who taught the maid?' And she answered,
8 Ask herselfo' So he asked her and she said, 'Know, O
my lord, that, when I was with Azariah the Jew, I used
to spy upon him and listen to him, when he performed
his magical operations ; and when he went forth to his
shop in Baghdad, I opened his books and read in them,
till I became skilled in the Cabala. One day, he was
warm with wine and would have me lie with him, but
I refused, saying, " I may not grant thee this except thou
become a Muslim." He refused and I required him to
carry me to the Sultan's market and sell me there. So he
sold me to thee and I taught my young mistress, making
it a condition with her that she should do nought, without
taking counsel with me, and that whoso married her
should marry me also, one night for her and one for me.*
Then she took a cup of water and conjuring over it,
sprinkled the dog therewith ; saying, 4 Return to the form
of a man.' And he was straightway restored to his former
shape ; whereupon the broker saluted him and asked him
'H'f^llt the manner of his enchantment. So Ali told him all that
ifcCXbtU. had passed and the broker said to him, £ Will [not] my
daughter and the maid suffice thee?' But he answered,
saying, 5 Needs must I have Zeyneb [also]/

At this moment there came a knock at the door and the
snaid said, ' Who is at the door ? ' e Kemer, daughter of


299


Azariah the Jew,' answered the new comer. 5 Is Ali of
Cairo with you ? ' 'O Jew's daughter,' answered the young
lady, ' if he be with us, what wilt thou with him ? Go down,
O maid, and open to her.' So the maid let her in, and
when Ali saw her, he said to her, ' What brings thee hither,
O dog's daughter ? ' Quoth she, ' I testify that there is no
god but God and that Mohammed is the Apostle of God,
Do men in the faith of Islam give marriage-portions to
women or women to men ? ' ' Men endow women/ an-
swered Ali. ' Then/ said she, 6 1 come and dower myself
for thee, bringing thee, as my marriage-portion, my robe,
together with the rod and tray and chains and the head of
my father, thine enemy and the enemy of God.' And she
threw down the Jew's head before him, Now the manner
of her killing her father was as follows. On the night of
his turning Ali into a dog, she saw, in a dream, one who
said to her, ' Become a Muslim.' And she did so. Next
morning, as soon as she awoke, she expounded Islam to
her father, but he refused to embrace the faith; so she
drugged him and killed him. As for Ali, he took the gear
and giving the broker rendezvous for the morrow at the
Divan of the Khalif, that he might take his daughter and
the maid to wife, set out, rejoicing, to return to the barrack
of the Forty.

On his way, he met a sweetmeat-seller, who was beating
hand upon hand and saying, ' There is no power and no
virtue save in God the Most High, the Supreme ! Folk's
labour is become sin and men are active but in fraud ! '
Then said he to Ali, ' I conjure thee, by Allah, taste of this
marchpane ! ' So Ali took a piece and ate it and fell down
senseless, for there was henbane therein ; whereupon the
sweetmeat-seller took the robe and the tray and the rest
of the gear and thrusting them into the box in which he
kept his sweetmeats, made off. Presently he met a cadi,
who called to him, sayings 1 Come hither, O sweetmeat-


30o


seller !* So he went up to him and setting down his sack,
laid the tray of sweetmeats thereon and said, ' What dost
thou want ? f i Marchpane and sugar-almonds,' answered
the cadi and taking some in his hand, said, ' These are
adulterated.' Then he brought out sweetmeats from his
sleeve and gave them to the sweetmeat-seller, saying,
' Look at this ware ; how excellent it is ! Eat it and make
the like.' So he ate and fell down senseless, for the sweet-
meats were drugged, whereupon the sham cadi, who was
none other than Hassan Shouman, bundled him into the
sack and made off with him, tray and chest and all, to the
barrack of the Forty. Now the reason of this was as
follows. When Ali had been gone some days in quest of
the robe and they heard no news of him, Ahmed ed Denef
said to his men, <0 lads, go and seek for your brother
Ali.' So they sallied forth in quest of him and among the
rest Hassan Shouman, disguised in a cadi's habit. He
came across the sweetmeat-seller and knowing him for
Ahmed el Lekit [Delileh's grandson,] suspected him of
having played some trick upon Ali ; so he drugged him
and did as we have seen.

Meanwhile, the other forty went about, making search
in different directions, and amongst them Ali Kitf el Jemel,
who, seeing a crowd of people, made towards them and found
Quicksilver Ali lying drugged and senseless in their midst
So he revived him and he came to himself and said, * Where
am I?' 'We found thee lying here drugged,' answered
El Jemel, 8 but know not who drugged thee.' Quoth Ali,
'It was a certain sweetmeat-seller who drugged me and
took the gear from me : but where is he gone ? ' 4 We have
seen nothing of him,' replied his comrades; 'but come?
rise and go home with us.' So they returned to the barrack s
where they found Ahmed ed Denef, who greeted Ali and
enquired if he had brought the robe. Quoth he, ' 1 was
coming hither with it and the Jew's head and what not


3d


else, when a sweetmeat-seller met me and drugged me and
took them from me ; but, if I come across him again, I
will requite him.'

Presently Hassan Shouman came out of a closet and
said to him, ' O Ali, hast thou gotten the gear ? ' So he
told him what had befallen him and added, ' If I knew
where to find the knave, I would pay him out/ ' Knowest
thou whither he went?' 'Yes,' answered Hassan ; 'I know
where he is,' and opening the door of the closet, showed
him the sweetmeat-seller within, drugged and senseless.
Then he aroused him and he opened his eyes and finding
himself in presence of Quicksilver Ali and Ahmed ed
Denef and the Forty, started up and said, ' Where am I
and who has laid hands on me ? ' 'It was I laid hands on
thee/ answered Hassan ; and Ali said, ' O perfidious wretch,
wilt thou play thy tricks on me ? ' And he would have slain
him : but Hassan said to him, * Hold thy hand, for this
fellow is become thy kinsman.' ' How so ? ' asked Ali ;
and Hassan said, 'This is Ahmed el Lekit, Zeyneb's
sister's son.'

Then said Ali to the prisoner, 4 Why didst thou thus,
O Lekit ? ' and he answered, saying, ' My grandmother,
Delileh the Crafty, bade me do it; because Zureic the
fishmonger foregathered with her and said, "Quicksilver
Ali is a sharper and a past master in craft and knavery, and
he will certainly kill the Jew and bring back the robe."
So she sent for me and said to me, " O Ahmed, dost thou
know Ali of Cairo ? " " Yes," answered I ; "it was S who
directed him to Ahmed ed Denef's lodging, when he first
came to Baghdad." Quoth she, " Go and set thy snares for
him, and if he have brought back the gear, put a cheat on
him and take it from him." So I went round about the
city, till I met a sweetmeat-seller and buying his clothes
and stock-in-trade and gear for ten dinars, did with thee
as thou knawest.' Quoth Ali, 'Go back to thy grand-


302


mother and Zureic and tell them that I have brought the
gear and the Jew's head and bid them meet me to-morrow
at the Khalif's Divan, to receive Zeyneb's dowry.' And
Ahmed ed Denef rejoiced in this and said to Ali, * Thou
hast not disappointed our pains in rearing thee, O Ali ! '

Next morning, Ali took the robe and tray and the rod
and chains of gold, together with the Jew's head on
a pike, and went up, accompanied by Ahmed ed Denef
and the Forty, to the Divan, where they kissed the ground
jNft'ght before the Khalif, who turned and seeing a youth of the
fofXitX. most valiant aspect, enquired of Ahmed ed Denef con-
cerning him, s O Commander of the Faithful/ answered
Ahmed, 'this is Quicksilver Ali the Egyptian, captain of
the brave boys of Cairo, and he is the first of my lads.'
And the Khalif loved him for the valour that shone from
between his eyes, testifying for him and not against him.
Then Ali rose and cast the Jew's head down before him,
saying, ' May all thine enemies be like this one, O Com-
mander of the Faithful ! ' Quoth Er Reshid, ' Whose
head is this ? ' And Ali answered, ' It is the head of
Azariah the Jew.' 'Who slew him?' asked the Khalif.
So Ali related to him all that had passed, from first to
last, and the Khalif said, ' I had not thought thou wouldst
kill him, for that he was a sorcerer.' ' O Commander of
the Faithful/ rejoined Ali, £ my Lord made me able to
his slaughter.' Then the Khalif sent the chief of the
police to the Jew's palace, where he found him lying
headless ; so he laid the body on a bier, and carried it to
Er Reshid, who commanded to burn it

At this moment up came Kemer and kissing the earth
before the Khalif, informed him that she was the Jew's
daughter and that she had become a Muslim. Then she
renewed her profession before the Commander of the
Faithful and said to him, 'Be thou my intercessor with
Quicksilver Ali that he take me to wife. 8 [So Er Reshid


303


interceded with Ali] and she appointed him hsr guardian
to consent to her marriage with the sharper, to whom he
gave the Jew's palace and all its contents, saying, 'Ask
a boon of me.' Quoth Ali, ' I beg of thee to let me stand
on thy carpet and eat of thy table.' And the Khalif said 8
'O All, hast thou any lads? 5 'Yes,' answered he, 'I have
forty lads; but they are in Cairo,' 'Send to Cairo,' said
the Khalif, 'and fetch them hither. But hast thou a
lodging for them?' 'No/ replied Ali; and Hassan
Shouman said, 'O Commander of the Faithful, I make
him a present of my barrack, with all that is therein/
But the Khalif answered, saying, ' O Hassan, thy lodging
is thine own.' And bade his treasurer give the court
architect ten thousand dinars, that he might build All
a hall with four estrades and forty sleeping-closets for
his lads. Then said he, 'O Ali, hast thou any farther
wish, that we may order its fulfilment?' 'O King of the
age,' answered Ali, 'be thou my intercessor with Delileh
the Crafty that she give me her daughter Zeyneb to wife
and take the Jew's robe and gear in lieu of dower/
Delileh accepted the Khalif's intercession and took the
robe and dish and what not, and they drew up the marriage
contracts between Ali and Zeyneb and Kemer, the Jew's
daughter and the broker's daughter and the maid. More-
over, the Khalif assigned him stipends and gratuities and
a table morning and evening, together with allowances for
fodder and what not.

Then Ali fell to making ready for the wedding festivities
and after thirty days, he wrote a letter to his comrades in
Cairo, wherein he gave them to know of the favours that
the Khalif had bestowed upon him and said, 'I have
married four girls and needs must ye come to the wedding/
So, after awhile, the forty lads arrived and they held high
festival. Moreover, he lodged them in his barrack and
entreated them with the utmost honour and presented


3°4


them to the Khalif, who bestowed on them dresses of
honour and largesse. Then the tiring-women displayed
Zeyneb before Ali in the robe of the Jew's daughter, and
he went in to her and found her an unpierced pearl and
a filly that none but he had ridden. Then he went in to
the three other girls and found them accomplished in
beauty and grace.

After this, it befell that Ali was one night on guard by
the Khalif and the latter said to him, ' O Ali, I wish thee
to tell me all that has befallen thee from first to last.' So
Ali related to him all his adventures and the Khalif bade
record them and lay them up in the royal treasuries. So
they wrote down all that had befallen him and laid it up
with other histories for the people of the Best of Men. 1
And Ali and his wives and comrades abode in all delight
and solace of life, till there came ^ to them the Destroyer
of Delights and Sunderer of Companies ; and blessed and
exalted be Allah, for He [alone] is All-knowing I


ARDESHIR AND HEYAT EN NUFOUS.

There was once in the city of Shiraz a mighty king
called Seif el Aazem Shah, who had grown old, without
being blessed with a son. So he summoned the doctors
and sages and said to them, * I am grown old and ye know
my case and the state and ordinance of the kingdom, and
I fear for my subjects after me, for that up to now God
hath not vouchsafed me a son.' * We will compound thee
drugs,' answered they, ' wherein, if it please God the Most
High, there shall be efficacy.' So they mixed him drugs,
which he used and lay with his wife, and she conceived by
leave of God the Most High, who saith to a thing, ' Be/
sad it is, When her months were accomplished, she gave
1 Ls. Mohammed,


305


birth to a son like the moon, whom his father named
Ardeshir, 1 and he grew up and throve and applied himself
to the study of science and polite letters, till he attained
the age of fifteen.

Now there was in Irak a king called Abdulcadir, who
had a daughter, by name Heyat en Nufous, and she was
like the rising full moon ; but she had an aversion to men
and the folk scarce dared name them in her presence.
The kings of the Chosroes had sought her in marriage of
her father; but, when he spoke with her thereof, she said 8
' Never will I do this thing ; and if thou force me, I will
slay myself/ Ardeshir heard of heir and fell in love with
her and told his father, who, seeing his case, took pity on
him and promised him that he should marry her. So he
despatched his Vizier to demand her in marriage of King
Abdulcadir; but he refused, and when the Vizier returned
to King Seif el Aazem and acquainted him with the failure
of his mission, he was exceeding wroth and said, 'Shall
the like of me send to one of the kings on an occasion
and he accomplish it not?' Then he let make pro-
clamation to his troops, bidding them get out the tents
and equip them for war with all diligence, though they
should borrow money for the necessary expenses; and he
said, 'I will not turn back, till I have laid waste King
Abdukadir's dominions and slain his men and plundered
his treasures and blotted out his traces !'

When the report of this reached Ardeshir, he rose from
his bed and going in to his father, kissed the earth before
him and said, 'O mighty King, burden not thyself with
this thing and levy not thy troops neither spend thy money, ^ftrjjt
Thou art stronger than King Abdulcadir, and if thou loose q££X&>
upon him this thy host, thou wilt lay waste his dominions
and spoil his good and slay his men and himself; but,
when his daughter comes to know what hath befallen her
J Artaxerxes,

VOL. VI. S@


306


father and his people on her account, she will kill herself
and I shall die for love of her ; for I can never live aftef
her.' 'And what then thinkest thou to do, O my son?*
asked the King. 'I mean to go on my own errand,'
answered the prince. 'I will don a merchant's habit and
cast about how I may win to the princess and compass my
desire of her.' Quoth Self el Aazem, < Art thou deter-
mined upon this?' And the prince said, 'Yes, O my
father ; ' whereupon the King called to his Vizier and said
to him, ' Do thou journey with my son, the darling of my
heart, and help him to his desire and watch over him and
guide him with thy sound judgment and stand to him in
my stead.' ' I hear and obey,' answered the Vizier ; and
the King gave his son three hundred thousand dinars in
gold and great store of jewels and precious stones and
goldsmiths' ware and stuffs and other things of price,
Then Ardeshir went in to his mother and kissed her hands
and asked her blessing. She blessed him and opening her
treasuries, brought out to him necklaces and trinkets and
apparel and all manner of other precious things laid up
from the time of the bygone kings, whose price might not
be evened with money. Moreover, he took with him of
his servants and slaves and cattle all that he needed for
the road and clad himself and the Vizier and their company
in merchants' habits.

Then he bade his parents and kinsfolk and friends fare-
well and setting out, fared on over deserts and wastes all
tides of the day and watches of the night ; and whenas the
way was long upon him, he recited the following verses :

Passion and longing and unease are heavy on my spright s Nor is there

one to succour me 'gainst destiny's unright.
Arcturtis and the Pleiades I watch, as 'twere for love A servant of th®

stars I'd grown ; yea, all the tides of night
Still for the moming-star I look, till, when at last it comes, I'm yearning*

maddened and my pain redoubles for its sight


30?

From the religion of thy love I have not strayed, I swear ; Nay, wakeful.

lidded aye am I, a love distracted wight.
Though that I hope be hard to win and languor waste me sore And

patience after thee to live and helpers fail me quite,
Yet will I constantly await till God our loves unite And mortify the foe

and bring to nought the enviers' spite.

Then he swooned away and the Vizier sprinkled rose-
water on him, till he came to himself, when he said to him,
1 king's son, possess thy soul in patience ; for the issue
of patience is solace, and behold, thou art on the way to
that thou desirest.' And he ceased not to speak him fair
and comfort him, till his trouble subsided and they con-
tinued, their journey with all diligence. Presently, the
prince again became impatient of the length of the way and
bethought him of his beloved and recited these verses :

Absence is long and restlessness and care upon me weigh ; Yea, and my

heart in flames of fire consumeth night and day.
Mine eyes stream still with floods of tears and for the burning stress Of

longing that affiicteth me, my very head's grown gray.
O thou my hope, my wishes' term, I swear by Him who made Both

branch and leaf and every thing and moulded man of clay,
A load of passion for thy sake, O my desire, I bear ; None else amongst

the folk of love to bear it might essay.
Question the night of me and it will tell thee if therein, Through, all the

watches of the dark, my lids in sleep close aye.

Then he wept sore and complained of that which he
suffered for stress of passion and love-longing; but the
Vizier comforted him and spoke him fair, promising him
the attainment of his desire ; after which they fared on
again, till, in a few days, they came in sight of the White
City, [the capital of King Abdulcadir,] soon after sunrise.
Then said the Vizier to the prince, ' Rejoice s O king's
son s in all good ; for see, yonder is the White City, that
which thou seekest. 5 Whereat the prince rejoiced with an
exceeding joy and recited the following verses :


3o8


Friends, I am longing-hearted, distraught with love and dole : Desire

abides and yearning cleaves fast unto my souL
Even as a mourning mother, who wakes for woe, I moan, When night

falls down. None pities nor doth with me condole.
Yet, when from out thy country the winds breathe fresh and sweet,

Meseems as if refreshment upon my spirit stole.
My lids, like clouds rain-laden, pour ever, and my heart Swisns in their

tears' salt ocean, that never leaves to roll.

Then they entered the White City and took up thek
lodging at the Khan of the Merchants, where they hired
three magazines and laid up therein all their goods and
JCfgljt gear. They abode in the khan till they were rested, when
tEOESi, the Vizier applied himself to devise a plan of conduct for
the prince, and said to him, 4 1 have bethought me of
somewhat, wherein methinks will be advantage for thee,
go it please God the Most High.' { Vizier of good
counsel,' replied Ardeshir, i do what cometh to thy mind,
and may God direct thy wit aright ! ' Quoth the Vizier,

* I purpose to hire thee a shop in the bazaar of the stuff-
sellers and set thee therein ; for that all, great and small,
have occasion to the bazaar, and methinks, when the folk
see thee sitting in the shop, their hearts will incline to
thee and thou wilt thus be able to attain that thou seekest,
for thou art fair of favour and souls incline to thee and
eyes rejoice in thee.' ' Do what seemeth good to thee/
answered Ardeshir.

So the Vizier clad the prince and himself in their richest
raiment and putting a purse of a thousand dinars in his
pocket, went forth and walked about the city, whilst all
who saw them marvelled at the prince's beauty, saying,

* Glory be to Him who created this youth of vile water ! 1
Blessed be God, the most excellent of Creators 1' Great
was the talk of him and some said, £ This is no mortal, but
& noble angel ; 5 s and others, e Hath Rizwan, the door-
keeper of Paradise, left the gate unguarded, that this

1 i.e. semen hominis. 2 Koran xiL 31. (Said of Joseph.)


309


^outh hath come forth?' The people followed them to
the stuff-market, where they entered and stood, till there
came up to them an old man of venerable appearance,
who saluted them, and they returned his salute. Then
said he to them, ' O my lords, have ye any need, that we
may have the honour of accomplishing?' Quoth the
Vizier, 'Who art thou, O elder?' And he answered, l l
am the overseer of the market' 'Know then, O elder,'
said the Vizier, 'that this youth is my son and I wish to
take him a shop in the bazaar, that he may sit therein and
learn to buy and sell and give and take and come to know
the ways and habits of merchants.' ' I hear and obey,*
replied the overseer and straightway brought them the key
of a shop, which he caused the brokers sweep and clean.
Then the Vizier sent for a high divan, stuffed with ostrich-
down, and set it up in the shop, together --with a small
prayer-carpet, fringed with broidery of red gold, and a
cushion : and he transported thither so much of the
goods and stuffs that he had brought with him as filled the
shop.

Next morning, the prince came and opening the shop,
seated himself on the divan, and stationed two white slaves,
clad in the richest of raiment, before him and two black
slaves of the goodliest of the Abyssinians without the shop.
The Vizier enjoined him to keep his secret from the folk,
so thereby he might find assistance in the accomplishment
of his wishes; then, charging him tc acquaint him with
what befell him in the shop, day by day, he left him and
returned to the khan. The prince sat in the shop all day,
as he were the moon at its full, whilst the folk, hearing tell
of his beauty, flocked to the place, without errand, to gaze
on his beauty and grace and symmetry and glorify God
who created and shaped him, till none could pass through
the bazaar for the crowding of the folk about him,
Ardeshir turned right and left, abashed at the throng of


3io

people that stared at him, hoping to make acquaintance
with some one about the court, of whom he might get
news of the princess, but found no way to this, wherefore
his breast was straitened.

On this wise the case abode some time, whilst the Vizier
daily promised him the attainment of his desire, till, one
day, as he sat in the shop, there came up an old woman of
venerable and respectable appearance, clad in raiment
of [white wool, such as is worn of] devotees and followed
by two slave-girls like moons. She stopped before the
shop and considered the prince awhile, after which, ' Glory
be to God,' said she, 'who fashioned that face and wrought
that handiwork to perfection !' Then she saluted him
and he returned her greeting and seated her by his side.
Quoth she, ' Whence comest thou, O fair of face ? ' * From
the parts of Hind, O my mother,' answered he; 'and I
have come to this city to see the world and look about
me.' ' Honour to thee for a visitor ! ' rejoined she. 'What
goods and stuffs hast thou ? Show me something hand-
some, fit for kings.' Quoth he, ' If thou wish for handsome
stuffs, I will show them to thee ; for I have wares that
beseem persons of every condition.' ' O my son,' answered
she, 'I want somewhat costly and fair of fashion; brief,
the best thou hast' Said he, 'Thou must needs tell me
for whom thou seekest it, that I may show thee goods
according to the rank of the person in question.' ' Thou
sayst sooth, O my son,' replied she. ' I want somewhat
for my mistress Heyat en Nufous, daughter of Abdulcadir,
lord of this land and king of this country.'

When Ardeshir heard his mistress's name, his reason
fled for joy and his heart fluttered and he gave no order
to slave or servant, but, putting his hand behind him,
pulled out & purse of & hundred dinars and gave it to the
old woman,, saying, 5 This is for the washing of thy clothes.'
Then he brought out of a wrapper a dress worth ten


thousand dinars or more and said to her, 'This is of that
which I have brought hither.' When the old woman saw
it, it pleased her and she said, ' What is the price of this
dress, O perfect in beauty ? ' 'I will take no price for it,*
answered he ; whereupon she thanked him and repeated
her question ; but he said, ' By Allah, I will take ho price
for it ! If the princess will not accept it s I make thee a
present of it and it is a guess-gift from me to thee.
Praised be God who hath brought us together, so that, if
one day I have a want, I shall find thee a helper to me in its
accomplishment ! ' She marvelled at the goodliness of his
speech and the excess of his generosity and courtesy, and
said to him, ' What is thy name, O my lord ? ' ' My name
is Ardeshir,' answered he ; and she said, ' By Allah, this
is a rare name ! Therewith are kings' sons named, and
thou art in the guise of the sons of the merchants.'
Quoth he, ' Of the love my father bore me, he gave me
this name, but a name signifies nothing.' And she
wondered at him and said, ! O my son, take the price of
thy goods.' But he swore that he would take nothing.

Then said she to him, ' O my son, truth is the greatest
of all things and thou hadst not dealt thus generously
by me but for a special reason : so tell me thy case and
thy secret thought ; belike thou hast some need to the
accomplishment of which I may help thee.' Thereupon
he laid his hand in hers and swearing her to secrecy,
told her the whole story of his passion for the princess
and his sufferings by reason thereof. The old woman
shook her head and said, ' True, O my son ; but the wise
say, in the current adage, "If thou wouldst be obeyed,
abstain from ordering that which may not be ; " and thou,
my son, thy name is " Merchant," and though thou hadst
the keys of the hidden treasures, yet wouldst thou be called
nought but " Merchant." If thou have a mind to advance
thyself in rank, according to thy station, seek the hand of


312


& Cadi's daughter or an Amir's; but why, O my son, aspirest
thou to none but the daughter of the King of the age and
the time, and she a clean maid, who knows nought of the
things of the world and has never in her life seen aught
but her palace in which she dwells ? Yet, for all her tender
age, she is intelligent, shrewd, vivacious and quick-witted,
well-advised and prudent in action. Her father hath no
other child than her and she is dearer to him than his life.
Every morning he comes to her and gives her good-morrow,
and all who dwell in the palace stand in awe of her. Think
not, O my son, that any dare bespeak her with aught of
these words; as for me, there is no way for me thereto.
By Allah, O my son, my heart and bowels love thee and
were it in my power to give thee access to her, I would
assuredly do it ; but I will tell thee somewhat, wherein
Allah may haply appoint the healing of thy heart, and will
venture my life and my goods for thee, till 'I accomplish
thy desire for thee.' 'And what is that, O my mother?'
asked he. ' Seek of me the daughter of a Vizier or an Amir,'
answered she, 'and I will grant thy request; but it may
not be that one should mount from earth to heaven at
one bound.'

When the prince heard this, he replied to her with
courtesy and reasonableness, saying, ( my mother, thou
art a woman of sense and knowest how things go. Doth
a man, when his head irketh him, bind up his hand?'
4 No, by Allah, O my son,' said she. ' Even so/ rejoined
he, 'my heart seeketh none but her and nought slayeth
me but the love of her. By Allah, I am a lost man, an
I find not one to counsel me aright and succour me ! God
Might on thee, O my mother^ have pity on my strangerhood and
Itanth the streaming of my tears ! 8 e By Allah, O my son,' answered
the old woman, 5 thy words rend my heart, but 1 know not
how to help thee.' Quoth he, ' I beseech thee of thy favour,
carry her a letter and kiss her hands for me ' So &H« took


313


compassion on him and said, 'Write what thou wilt and
I will carry it to her.' When he heard this, he was trans-
ported for joy and calling for pen and ink and paper s wrote
the following verses :

Heyat en Nufous, be gracious and incline Unto a lover who for

severance doth pine.

1 was in all delight and ease of life, but now Distraction and despair

consume this heart of mine.
I company the night with sorrows in discourse And wakefulness cleaves

fast all tides unto mine eyne.
Pity a lover sad, afflicted with desire, Whose lids are ulcered aye with

yearning's tears of brine j
And when the morning comes at last, the tardy morn, He's dnu&ejs

aud distraught with passion's heady wine.

Then he folded the letter and kissing it, gave It to the
old woman ; after which he put his hand to a chest and
took out a second purse of a hundred dinars, which he
gave her, saying, ' Divide this among the slave-girls.' She
refused it and said, ' By Allah, O my son, I am not with
thee for aught of this!' But he thanked her and said,
'Thou must indeed take it.' So she took it and kissing
his hands, returned to the princess, to whom said she, ' O
my lady, I have brought thee somewhat the like whereof is
not with the people of our city, and it comes from a hand-
some young man, than whom there is not a goodlier on
the surface of the earth.' ' O my nurse/ answered the
princess, 4 and whence cometh he ? ' ' From the parts of
Hind,' replied the old woman ; * and he hath given me
this dress of gold brocade, embroidered with pearls and
jewels and worth the kingdom of Chosroes and Caesar. 5
So saying, she opened the dress and spread it out before
her, whereupon the whole palace was illumined by its
brightness, by reason of the beauty • of its fashion and
the wealth of pearls and jewels with which it was
broidered, and all who were present marvelled at it The
princess examined it and judging it to be worth no less


3H


than a whole year's revenue of her father's kingdom, said
to the old woman, 4 O my nurse, comes this dress from
him or another?' 'From him,' answered she; and Heyat
en Nufous said, 4 Is he of our town or a stranger ? *
4 He is a stranger,' replied the old woman, ' newly come
hither ; and he hath slaves and servants and is fair of face s
symmetrical of shape, well-mannered, open-handed and
open-hearted, never saw I a goodlier than he, except
thyself.'

4 my nurse,' rejoined the princess, 'this is an extra-
ordinary thing, that a dress like this, which money cannot
buy, should be in the hands of a merchant ! What price
did he set on it ? ' ' He would set no price on it,' answered
the old woman, 4 but gave me back the money thou sentest
by me and swore that he would take nought thereof, saying,
'It is a gift from me to the King's daughter ; for it be-
seemeth none but her; and if she will not accept it, I
make thee a present of it* 1 By Allah,' said the princess,
4 this is indeed rare liberality and wonderful munificence !
But I fear the issue of his affair, lest he be brought to
necessity. Why didst thou not ask him, O my nurse, if he
had any desire, that we might fulfil it for him ? ' 4 O my
lady,' answered the nurse, 4 1 did ask him, and he said to
me, 44 1 have indeed a desire, w but would not tell me what
it was. However, he gave me this letter and said, " Carry
it to the princess."' So Heyat en Nufous took the letter
and opened and read it; whereupon she was sore chafed
and changing colour for anger, cried out to the old woman,
saying, 4 Out on thee, O nurse ! What is the name of this
dog who dares to write thus to a king's daughter ? What
affinity is there between him and me, that this dog should
address me thus? By the great God, Lord of the well
Zemzem and of the Kaabeh, but that I fear God the
Most High, I would send and bind the dog's hands
behind him and slit his nostrils and cut off his nose


3iS


and ears and crucify him on the gate of the bazaar
wherein is his shop ! '

When the old woman heard this, she turned pale and
trembled in every nerve and her tongue clave to her
mouth ; but she took courage and saidj 'Softly, O my
lady ! What is there in his letter to trouble thee thus ?
Is it aught but a memorial, wherein he maketh his com-
plaint to thee of poverty or oppression, from which he
hopes to be relieved by thy favour ? ' ' By Allah, O my
nurse,' replied the princess, 'it is nought of this; but
verses and shameful words ! Needs must the dog be in
one of three cases : either he is mad and hath no wit or
he seeks his own slaughter, or else he is assisted to his
wish of me by some one of exceeding puissance and a
mighty Sultan. Or hath he heard that I am one of the
light o' loves of the city, who lie a night or two with
whosoever seelceth them, that he writeth me shameful
verses to debauch my reason withal ? ' 'By Allah, my
lady,' rejoined the old woman, ' thou sayst sooth ! But
reck not thou of yonder ignorant dog, for thou art seated
in thy high-builded and unapproachable palace, to which
the very birds cannot soar neither the wind pass over it,
and he is distracted. Wherefore do thou write him a
letter and chide him roundly and spare him no kind of
reproof, but threaten him exceedingly and menace him
with death and say to him, "Whence hast thou knowledge
of me, that thou darest to write to me, O dog of a merchant,
that trudgest far and wide all thy days in deserts and
wastes for the sake of gaining a dirhem or a dinar ? By
Allah, except thou awake from thy sleep and put off thine
intoxication, I will crucify thee on the gate of the bazaar
wherein is thy shop ! " ' Quoth the princess, ' I fear lest
he [be encouraged to] presume, if I write to him. 5 1 And
what is he/ rejoined the nurse, 'that he should presume
to us? Indeed, we write to him but to the intent that


3i6


his presumption may be cut off and his fear magnified.*
And she ceased not to persuade her, till she called for
inkhorn and paper and wrote him the following verses :

© thou that feignest thee the prey of love and wakefulness, Thou that
for passion spendst the nights in transport and distress,

self-deluder, dost thou seek enjoyment of a moon ? Did ever any of

the moon win grace and love-liesse ?

1 rede thee hearken to my word ; I give thee counsel fair ; Desist, for

danger, ay, and death do hard upon thee press.
Sf thou to this request return, a grievous punishment Shall surely fall on

thee from us, and ruin past redress.
Be reasonable, then : behold, I give thee good advice : Return unto thy

wit and stint from this thy frowardness.
By Him who did all things that be from nothingness create, Who with

the golden glittering stars the face of heaven did dress,
111 surely have thee crucified upon a cross of tree, If in the like of this

thy speech thou do again transgress !

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the old woman,
tfcClght w ho repaired to Ardeshir's shop and delivered it to him,
fttCXXHtt saying, ' Here is thine answer, and thou must know that,
when she read thy verses, she was exceeding wroth ; but
I soothed her and spoke her fair, till she consented to
write thee asi answer.' He took the letter joyfully, but,
when he had read it and apprehended its purport, he wept
sore, whereat the old woman's heart ached and she said,
* O my son, may God spare thine eyes to weep and thy
heart to mourn 1 What can be more gracious than that
she should answer thy letter, under the circumstances?'
'O my mother, 5 answered he, 4 how shall 1 do for a subtler
device? Behold, she writes to me, threatening me with
death and crucifixion and forbidding me from writing to
her, and by Allah, I see my death to be better than my
life; but 1 beg thee of thy favour to carry her another
letter from me/ ' Write/ said she, 4 and I warrant I'll
bring thee an answer. By Allah, I will venture my life to
bring thee to thy desire, though I die to pleasure thee V


3i7


He thanked her and kissing her hands, wrote the following

verses :

Dost thou with slaughter threaten me, for that I love thee dear? Death

is decreed and slaughter eke to me were easefulness.
Better death end a lover's woes than that a weary life He live, rejected

and reviled, forbidden from liesse.
Visit a lover, for God's sake, whose every helper fails ; For praiseworthy

it is in men to strive to soothe distress.
An thou on aught determined be, up, then, and do thy will ; I am thy

worshipper and eke thy bondslave none the less.
What shall I do ? I cannot live without thee : otherguise How should

it be, since lovers' hearts constraint doth still oppress ?
Have ruth, O lady mine, on one who's sick for love of thee 5 For all

who love the noble stand excused of wantonness.

He folded the letter and gave it to the old womaiSj,
together with two purses, containing two hundred dinars,,
which she would have refused, but he conjured her to take
them. So she took them and said, 'Needs must I bring
thee to thy desire, despite thine enemies ! ' Then she
returned to the palace and gave the letter to Heyat ea
Nufous, who said, ' What is this, O my nurse ? Here are
we in correspondence [with a man] and thou coming and
going ! Indeed, I fear lest the matter get wind and we be
disgraced.' ' How so, O my lady ?' rejoined the old woman.
' Who dare speak such a word ?' So she took the letter and
read it and smote hand on hand, saying, 'Verily, this is &
calamity that is fallen upon us, and I know not whence
this young man came to us!' ' O my lady,' said the old
woman, ' God on thee, write him another letter ; but be
round with him this time and say to him, " If thou write
me another word after this, I will have thy head struck
off." ' 1 my nurse/ answered the princess, 1 1 am assured
that the thing will not end after this fashion ; it were better
to leave it unanswered, and except the dog take warning
by my previous threats, I will strike off his head.' Quoth
the old woman, * Then write him a letter and give him to


3i8


know this.' So Heyat en Nufous called for inkhom and
paper and wrote the following verses :

Thou that, heedless, letst the lessons of experience pass by, Thou whcee

amorous heart and doating doth for my possession sigh,
Hopest thou, O self-deluder, to the heavens to attain? Dost thou think

the moon to come at, shining in the distant sky ?
With a fire whose flames are quenchless I will surely burn thee up, And

one day with swords destroying slain and slaughtered shalt thou lie I
Yea, before thee the extremest of affliction hidden lies, Such as e'en the

parting-places shall with white for terror dye.
Wherefore take a friendly warning and from love-liking abstain, Nor to

that which is not seemly evermore thyself apply.

Then she folded the letter and gave it to the old woman,
who carried it to Ardeshir, leaving the princess sore in-
censed by reason of this affair. The prince read the letter
and bowed his head to the earth, making as if he wrote
with his fingers and speaking not. Quoth the old woman,
5 O my son 3 what ails thee that thou sayst nought?' 1 my
mother,' answered he, c what shall I say, seeing that she
doth but threaten me and redoubleth in hard-heartedness
and aversion? 8 'Write her a letter of what thou wilt/
rejoined the nurse. 'I will protect thee, and let not thy
heart be cast down, for needs must I bring you together.'
He thanked her for her kindness and kissing her hand,
wrote the following verses :

A heart that unto him who loves no prayers may mollify Yea, and &

lover for his love's possession who doth sigh
And lids that ever ulcered are with burning tears, what time The

shrouding blackness of the dark falls on them from the sky !
Be charitable, then ; have ruth on one with passion worn, A loves

parted from his love, that may not come her nigh.
Drowned in the sea of tears and burnt with longing, knowing not

Slumber nor peace, the whole night long unresting doth he lie.
Cut thou not off my heart's desire ; for 'tis afflicted sore, Wasted and

palpitating aye, for passion like to die.

Then he folded the letter and gave it to the old woman,,
together with three hundred dinars, saying, 1 This is foi


319


the washing of thy hands.' She thanked him and kissed
his hands, after which she returned to the palace and gave
the letter to the princess, who read it and throwing it from
her hand, sprang to her feet, whilst the vein of anger
started out between her eyes. Then she walked, shod as
she was with pattens of gold, set with pearls and jewels,
till she came to her father's palace, and none dared ask
her how it was with her. When she reached the palacej
she asked for the King, and the slave-girls said to her,
'O my lady, he is gone forth a-hunting.' So she returned,
as she were a raging lioness, and spoke to none for the
space of three hours, at the end of which time her wrath
subsided and her brow cleared.

When the old woman saw that her anger was past, she
went up to her and kissing the earth before her, said to
her, ' O my lady, whither went those noble steps ? ' e To
the palace of the King my father,' answered Ileyat en
Nufous. * And could no one do thine errand ? ' asked the
nurse. ' No,' replied the princess ; ' for I went to acquaint
him with that which hath befallen me with yonder dog of
a merchant, that he might lay hands on him and on all the
merchants of the bazaar and crucify them over their shops
and suffer no foreign merchant to abide in our town.'
Quoth the old woman, ' And was this thine only reason
for going to thy father ? ' ' Yes,' answered Heyat en
Nufous ; 1 but I found him absent a-hunting and await
his return.' ' I take refuge with God the All-hearing and
knowing 1 ' exclaimed the old woman, 4 Praised be He 1 O
my lady, thou art the most sensible of women and how
couldst thou think of telling the King these wild words,
which it behoveth none to publish ? ' ' And why so ? !
asked the princess. 'Suppose,' -said the nurse, 'thou hadst
found the King in his palace and told him all this and he
had sent after the merchants and commanded to hang
them over their shops, the folk would have seen them


320


hanging and asked the reason and it would have been
Iffglt answered them, "They sought to debauch the King's
SSXXXtb, daughter." Then would they have spread divers reports
concerning thee, some saying, " She abode with them half
si score days, away from her palace, till they had taken
their fill of her ; " and other some otherguise ; for honour,
O my lady, is like milk, the least dust spoils it; or like
glass, which, if it be cracked, may not be mended. So
beware of telling thy father or any other of this matter,
lest thy honour be ruined, for it will never profit thee to
tell folk aught. Weigh what I say with thy keen wit, and
If thou find it not just, do as thou wilt.'

The princess pondered her words and seeing them to be
altogether just, said, ' Thou art right, O my nurse : indeed,
anger had blinded my judgment.' Quoth the old woman,
s Thy resolve to tell no one is pleasing to God the Most
High ; but that is not all : we must not let the insolence of
yonder vile dog of a merchant pass without rebuke. Write
him a letter and say to him, " O vilest of merchants, but
that I found my father absent, I had straightway com-
manded to hang thee and all thy neighbours. But thou
shalt gain nothing by this ; for I swear to thee by God the
Most High that, if thou return to the like of this talk, I
will blot out the trace of thee from the face of the earth ! "
And deal thou roundly with him in words, so shalt thou
discourage him and arouse him from his heedlessness.'
' And wilt these words cause him to abstain from his offend-
ing?* asked the princess. 'How should he not abstain?'
replied the old woman. 'Besides, I will talk with him and
tell him what has passed.' So the princess called for ink-
horn and paper and wrote the following verses :

Thj hopes ant© the winning our favours still cieave fast, And still of m

thou seekest thy wishes to attain*
It Is his self-delusion alone that slays the man And that which he

require th of us shall be his bane.


321


No man art thou of prowess, thou hast no hosts at call ; Thou'rt neithef

king nor viceroy, nor kingdom nor domain
Hast j and were this the fashion of one who is our peer, Hoary for wai

and terrors he had returned again.
Yet that wherein thou sinnest once more I'll pardon thee, So thou from

this time forward repent thee and refrain.

Then she gave the letter to the old woman, saying,
'O my nurse, do thou admonish the dog, lest we [be
forced to] cut off his head and commit sin on his account.'
* By Allah, O my lady,' replied the old woman, ' I will not
leave him a side to turn on ! ' Then she returned to
Ardeshir and gave him the letter. He read it and shook
his head, saying, 'Verily, we are God's and to Him we
return ! O my mother, what shall I do ? My fortitude
fails me and my patience is exhausted.' ' O my son,' an-
swered she, 'take patience: perad venture, after this God
shall bring somewhat to pass. Write that which is in thy
mind and I will fetch thee an answer, and be of good
cheer; for needs must I bring about union between her
and thee, so God please.' He blessed her and wrote the
following verses :

Since there is none to succour me in love and to assain, Me who of
passion's tyranny am ail fordone and slain,

Since flames of fire within my heart by day I do endure And through
the weary night I seek a resting-place in vain,

How should I leave to hope in thee, O term of all desire, Or rest con-
tent with what I dree of passion and its pain ?

I beg- the Empyrean's Lord to grant me His approof, Since I with
longing for the fair am perished, heart and brain,

Yea, and enjoyment speedily to give me. Oh, consent ! For with the
terrors of desire I'm smitten and o'erta'en.

Then he folded the letter and gave it to the old woman,,
together with a purse of four hundred dinars. She took

the whole and returning to the palace, gave the letter to the
princess ; but she refused to take it and said, ' What is this?"
' O my lady/ replied the old woman, 5 this Is the answer to

VOL. VI. gi


322


the letter thou wrotest to that dog of a merchant.' Quoth
Heyat en Nufous, 'Didst thou forbid him, as I told thee?'
'Yes,' answered she; 'and this is his answer.' So the
princess took the letter and read it; then turned to the
old woman and said to her, ' Where is the result thou didst
promise me ?' ' O my lady,' replied she, ' saith he not in
his letter that he repenteth and will not again offend,
excusing himself for the past ?' 6 Not so, by Allah ! '
replied the princess. 'On the contrary, he increases [his
offending].' 'O my lady,' rejoined the nurse, 'write him a
letter and thou shalt see what I will do with him.' Quoth
Heyat en Nufous, 'There needs no letter nor answer.' 'I
must have a letter,' answered the nurse, ' that I may rebuke
him roundly and cut off his hopes.' ' Thou canst do that
without a letter,' rejoined the princess : but the old woman
said, 'I cannot do it without the letter.' So Heyat en
Nufous called for inkhorn and paper and wrote these
verses :

Again and again I chide thee ; but chiding hinders thee ne'er : How

many a time with my writing in verse have I bid thee forbear !
Conceal thy passion, I rede thee, nor ever reveal it to men ; For, if

thou gainsay me, no mercy I'll show thee henceforward nor spare ;
Yea, if, in despite of my warning, to this that thou sayst thou return,

The herald of death 1 shall go calling for thee and thy death shall

declare ;

Ere long, on thy body the breezes shall blow, as the hurricane blows,
And eke on thy flesh in the desert shall batten the fowls of the air.

Return to fair fashion and comely ; 'twill profit thee, trust me ; but, i£
Thou purpose ill-dealing and lewdness, for sure I'll destroy the®,
I swear.

When she had made an end of writing this, she cast the
scroll angrily from her hand, and the old woman picked it

op and carried it to Ardeshir, When, he read it, he knew

1 Nadi el maut^ the persoa who announces any one's death to the
friends and relations of the deceased and invites them to the funeral.


323


that she relented not to him, but only redoubled in anger
against him, and that he would never win to her, and
bethought himself to write her an answer, invoking [God's
help] against her. So he called for pen and ink and wrote
the following verses :

Lord, by the Five Elders, deliver me, I pray, From her whose love

hath wrought me affliction and dismay.
Thou knowest what I suffer for passion's flames and all My sickness for

a maiden who saith me ever nay.
She hath on that no pity wherewith I smitten am : How long o'er this

my weakness shall she the tyrant play?

1 am for her distracted with agonies of death And find nor friend nor

helper, O Lord, to be my stay.
How long, when night its pinions o'er all hath spread, shall I On wake,

alas 1 bemoan me with heart and tongue till day ?
Full fain would I forget her, but how can I forget, When for desire my

patience is wasted clean away ?
Tell me, O bird of parting, is she then fenced and free From fortune's

tribulations, that shifts and changes aye ?

Then he folded the letter and gave it, together with
a purse of five hundred dinars, to the old woman, and she
took it and carried it to the princess, who read it and casting
it from her hand, said to her, ' Q wicked old woman, tell me
the cause of all that hath befallen me from thee and from
thy cunning and thy favouring of him, so that thou hast
made me write letter after letter and ceasest not to go
and come between him and me and cany messages, till
thou hast brought about correspondence and connection
between us. Thou sayest still, " I will ensure thee against
his mischief and cut off. from thee his speech;" but thou
speakest thus only to the intent that I may continue to
write thee letters and thou to fetch and carry between us,
till thou ruin my repute. Out on thee ! Ho s eunuchs,
seize her f So they laid hands on the nurse and Heyat
en Nufous commanded them to beat her, and they did
so till her whole body streamed with blood and she fainted


324


away, whereupon the princess caused her waiting-women
drag her forth by the feet and cast her without the palace
and bade one of them stand by her, till she recovered, and
say to her, 'The princess hath taken an oath that thou
shalt never re-enter the palace and hath commanded to
slay thee without mercy, if thou return hither.'

So, when she came to herself, the damsel told her what
the princess said and she answered, saying, 'I hear and
obey.' Then the slave-girls fetched a basket and a porter
and caused carry her to her own house and sent after he?
a physician, bidding him tend her assiduously till she re-
covered. He did as he was commanded and as soon &&
she was whole of her wounds, she mounted and rode to
the shop of Ardeshir, who was sore troubled with concern
for her absence from him and longing for news of her.
As soon as he saw her, he sprang .up and coming to meet
her, saluted her. Then he noticed that she was weak and
ailing ; so he asked her how she did and she told him all
that had passed. When he heard this, he was sore con-
cerned and smote hand upon hand, saying, ' By Allah, O
my mother, this that hath befallen thee is grievous to me !
But what is the reason of the princess's aversion to men ? s
'Thou must know, O my son,' answered the old woman,
'that she has a beautiful garden, than which there is not
& goodlier on the face of the earth and it chanced that she
lay there one night. In the delight of sleep, she dreamt
that she went down into the garden, where she saw a fowler
set up his net and strew corn thereabout, after which he
withdrew and sat down afar off to await what game should
fall into it. Before long, the birds flocked to pick up the
corn and a male pigeon fell into the net and struggled in
it, whereat the others took fright and lied from him, His
mate flew away with the rest,, but presently returned and
coming up to the net, sought out the mesh in which his
foot was entangled and ceased not to peck at it with


325


her bill, till she severed it and released her mate, with
whom she flew away. All this while, the fowler sat
dozing, and when he awoke, he looked at the net and
found it broken. So he mended it and strewed fresh
corn, then withdrew to a distance and sat down again to
watch it. The birds soon returned and began to pick
up the corn, and amongst the rest the pair of pigeons.
Presently, the female pigeon fell into the net and struggled
to win free ; whereupon the other birds all flew away, and
her mate fled with the rest and did not return to her.
Meantime, slumber had again overcome the fowler and
he slept a great while ; and when he awoke, he saw the
she-pigeon caught in the net ; so he went up to her and
freeing her feet from the meshes, killed her. The princess
awoke, troubled, and said, " Thus do men with women ; for
women have pity on men and venture their lives for them,
when they are in trouble ; but if the Lord decree against
a woman and she fall into calamity, her mate deserts her
and rescues her not, and wasted is that which she did
with him of kindness. May God curse her who putteth
her trust in men, for they ill requite the kind offices that
women do them ! " And from that day she conceived an
aversion to men.'

' O my mother,' said the prince, ' doth she never go out
into the street ? ' 4 No,' answered the old woman ; ' but,
O my son, I will tell thee somewhat, wherein, God willing,
there shall be profit for thee. It is that every year, at
the time of the ripening of the fruits, the princess goes
forth into her garden, which is of the goodliest of the
pleasaunces of the time, and takes her pleasure therein
one day, nor lies the night but in her palace. She enters
the garden by the private door of the palace which leads
thereto, and it wants now but a month to the time of her
going forth. So take my advice and go this very day to
the keeper of the garden and clap up an acquaintance


326


with him and insinuate thyself into his good graces, foi
he lets not a soul enter the garden, because of its com-
munication with the princess's palace. I will let thee
know two days beforehand of the day fixed for her coming
forth, when do thou repair to the garden, as of thy wont 8
and make shift to pass the night there. When the prin-
ICfgljt cess comes, be thou hidden somewhere and presently
b'CCQ'b, show thyself to her. When she sees thee, she will in-
fallibly fall in love with thee; for thou art fair to look
upon and love covers all things. So take comfort and
be of good cheer, O my son, for needs mast I bring about
union between her and thee.'

The prince kissed her hand and thanked her and gave
her three pieces of Alexandrian silk and three of satin of
various colours, and with each pie'ce s linen for shifts and
stuff for trousers and a kerchief ibr the turban and fine
white cotton cloth of Baalbek for the linings, so as to
make her six complete suits, each handsomer than its
fellow. Moreover, he gave her a purse containing six
hundred dinars and said to her, { This is for the fashion.'
She took the whole and said to him, £ Q my son, wilt thou
not acquaint me with thine abiding-place and I also will
show thee the way to my lodging ? ' ' Yes,' answered he
and sent a servant with her to note her lodging and show
her his own.

Then he rose and bidding his slaves shut the shop, went
back to the Vizier, to whom he related all that had passed
between him and the old woman. ' Q my son,' said the
Vizier, £ what wilt thou do, should the princess come out
and look upon thee and thou find no favour with her?*
Quoth Ardeshir, s There will be nothing left but to pass
from words to deeds and venture my life with her ; for I
will snatch her up from amongst her attendants and set
her behind me on a swift horse and make for the uttermost
of the desert. If I escape, I shall have gained my desire


3^7

and if I perish, I shall be at rest from this loathed life. 8
' O my son,' rejoined the Vizier, ' dost thou think to do
this thing and live? How shall we make our escape,
seeing that our country is far distant, and how wilt thou
deal thus with a king of the kings of the time, who has
under his hand a hundred thousand horse, nor can we be
sure but that he will despatch some of his troops to waylay
us? Verily, there is no good in this project and no man
of sense would attempt it.' £ And how then shall we do,

Vizier of good counsel ? ' asked Ardeshir. ' For, [except

1 get her,] I am a dead man without recourse.' £ Wait till
to-morrow,' answered the Vizier, ' till we behold this garden
and note its ordinance and see what betides us with the
keeper.'

So, on the morrow,, they took a thousand dinars and
repairing to the garden, found it compassed about with
high and strong walls, abounding in trees and streams
and well furnished with goodly fruits. And indeed its
flowers breathed perfume and its birds warbled, as it were
a garden of the gardens of Paradise. Within the door sat an
old man on a bench of stone, and they saluted him. When
he saw them and noted the goodliness of their favour, he rose
to his feet and returned their salute, saying, ' O my lords,
peradventure you have a wish, which we may have the
honour of satisfying ? ' ' Know, O elder,' replied the Vizier,
' that we are strangers and the heat hath overcome us.
Now our lodging is afar off at the other end of the town j
wherefore we desire of thy courtesy that thou take these
two dinars and buy us somewhat of victual and open us
meanwhile the door of this garden and seat us in some
shaded place, where there is cold water, that we may cool
ourselves there, against thou return with the victual, when
we will eat, and thou with us, and go our ways, rested and
refreshed 5 So saying, he pulled out a couple of dinars,
and put them into the keeper's hand.


328


Now the keeper was a man of seventy years of age and had
never in all his life possessed so much money. So, when he
saw the two dinars in his hand, he was transported for joy
and forthwith opening the garden gate to the prince and the
Vizier, made them enter and sit down under the shade of a
wide-spreading tree, laden with fruit, saying, £ Sit here and
go no further into the garden, for it hath a privy door
communicating with the palace of the princess Heyat en
Nufous.' ' We will not budge hence,' answered they.
Then he went out to buy what they had ordered and
returned, after awhile, with a porter bearing on his head
a roasted lamb and bread. They ate and drank together
and talked awhile, till, presently, the Vizier, looking about
him right and left, caught sight of a lofty pavilion in the
midst of the garden ; but it was old and the plaster was
peeled from its walls and its coigns were broken down.
So he said to the gardener, 4 O elder, is this garden thine
own or dost thou hire it ? ' 6 O my lord/ answered the old
man, ' I am neither owner nor tenant of the garden, only
its keeper.' i And what is thy wage ? 5 asked the Vizier.
' A dinar a month/ replied the old man, and the Vizier said,
' Verily, they wrong thee, especially if thou hast a family.'
'By Allah, Q my lord/ answered the gardener, S I have
eight children.' * There is no power and no virtue save in
God the Most High, the Supreme ! ' exclaimed the Vizier.
*" Thou makest my heart bleed for thee, my poor fellow 1
What wouldst thou say of him who should do thee a good
turn, on account of this family of thine ? ' ' O my lord/
answered the old man, 'whatsoever good thou dost shall
be treasured up for thee with God the Most High ! '

Then said the Vizier, £ O old man, this garden of thine
is a goodly place ; but the pavilion yonder is old and
ruinous. Now I mean to repair it and plaster it anew and
paint it handsomely, so that it will be the finest thing in
the garden ; and when the owner of the garden comes and


329

finds the pavilion reinstated, he will not fail to question
thee concerning it. Then do thou say, " O ray lord, I set
it in repair, for that I saw it in ruins and none could make
use of it nor sit in it." If he says, " Whence hadst thou
the money for this ?" say, " I spent of my own money upon
it, thinking to whiten my face with thee and hoping for
thy bounties." And he will assuredly recompense thee
handsomely. To-morrow, I will bring builders and painters
and plasterers to repair the pavilion and will give thee what
I promised thee.' Then he pulled out a purse of five
hundred dinars and gave it to the gardener, saying, 6 Provide
thy family with this and let them pray for me and my son
here.' When the gardener saw the money, he was trans-
ported and fell down at the Vizier's feet, kissing them and
calling down blessings on him and his son ; and when they
went away, he said to them, 4 1 shall expect you to-morrow s
for, by Allah, there must be no parting between us, day or
night J * As they went home, the prince said to the Vizier,
'What is the meaning of all this?' and he answered,
* Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof." ISTfO^lt
Next day, the Vizier sent for the syndic of the builders iKCIXfei
and carried him and his men to the garden, where the
gardener rejoiced in their sight. He gave them the price
of victual and what was needful to the workmen for the
amendment of the pavilion, and they repaired it and
plastered it and decorated it. Then said the Vizier to the
painters, 'Harkye, my masters, give ear unto my words
and apprehend my wish and my intent. Know that I have
a garden like unto this, where I was sleeping one night and
saw in a dream a fowler spread his nets and sprinkle corn
thereabout The birds flocked to pick up the grain, and
a he-bird fell into the net, whereupon the others took
fright and flew away, and amongst the rest his mate : but;,
after awhile, she returned alone and pecked at the mesh
that held his feet, till she set him free and they flew away


330


together. Now the fowler had fallen asleep and when he
awoke and found the net empty, he mended it and strewing
fresh corn, sat down at a distance s waiting for game to fall
into the snare. Presently the birds assembled again to
pick up the corn, and amongst the rest the two pigeons.
By and by, the female fell into the net and the other birds
took fright at her and flew away, and her mate flew with
them and did not return ; whereupon the fowler came up
and taking the she-bird, killed her. Now, when her mate
flew away with the others, a hawk seized him and slew him
and ate his flesh and drank his blood, and I would have
you pourtray me in lively colours the presentment of this
my dream, even as I have related it to you, laying the
scene in this garden, with its walls and trees and streams.
If ye do this that I have set forth to you and it please me,
I will give you what shall gladden your hearts, over and
above your wage.'

So the painters applied themselves with all diligence to
do what he required of them and wrought it out in masterly
wise. When they had made an end of the work, they
showed it to the Vizier, who, seeing his [pretended] dream
set forth in lively fashion, was pleased and thanked them
and rewarded them munificently. Presently, the prince
came in, after his wont, and entered the pavilion, knowing
not what the Vizier had done. So, when he saw the por-
traiture of the fowler and the birds and so forth and saw
the male pigeon limned in the clutches of the hawk, which
had slain him and was eating his flesh and drinking his
blood, his understanding was confounded and he returned
to the Vizier and said to him, ' O Vizier of good counsel,
I have seen this day a wonder, which, were it graven with
needles on the corners of the eyes, would serve as an
admonition to whoso will be admonished?' 6 And what is
that, O my lord ? 3 asked the Vizier. ( Did 1 not tell thee/
gaid the prince, ' of the dream the princess had and how it


33i


was the cause of her aversion to men V ' Yes,' answered
the Vizier ; and Ardeshir rejoined, saying, ' O Vizier, by
Allah, I have seen the whole dream pourtrayed in painting,
as I had beheld it with mine eyes ; but with a circumstance
that was hidden from the princess, so that she saw it not 9
and it is upon this that I rely for the attainment of my
desire.' 'And what is that, O my son?' said the Vizier.
Quoth the prince, 'I saw that, when the male bird flew
away and left his mate entangled in the net, a hawk
pounced on him and slaying him, ate his flesh and drank
his blood ; and this was the cause of his failure to return
and liberate her. Would that the princess had seen the
whole of the dream and beheld, to the end, the story
thereof!' 'By Allah, O august King, 5 replied the Vizier,
'this is indeed a rare and wonderful thing!' And the
prince ceased not to marvel at the picture and lament that
the princess had not seen the whole of the dream, saying
in himself, ' Would she had seen it to the end or might see
the whole over again, though but in the illusions of sleep ! '

Then said the Vizier to him, 'Thou saidst to me,
" Why wilt thou repair the pavilion?" And I answered,
"Thou shalt presently see the issue thereof." And behold,
now thou seest the issue thereof; for it. was I did this
thing and caused the painters pourtray the princess's
dream thus and paint the male bird in the hawk's clutches,
so that, when she comes to the pavilion, she will behold
her dream depicted and see how the male pigeon was
slain and excuse him and turn from her aversion to men.'
When the prince heard the Vizier's words, he kissed his
hands and thanked him, saying, 'Verily, the like of thee
is fit to be Vizier to the most mighty king, and by Allah,
if I accomplish my desire and return to my father, rejoicing,
I will acquaint him with this, that he may redouble in
honouring thee and advance thee in dignity and hearken
to thy word.' The Vizier kissed his hand and they both


332


vent to the gardener, to whom said the Vizier, e Look at
yonder pavilion and see how fine it is ! * And he ans\vered s

4 This is all of thy bounty.' Then said they, 5 O elder, when
the owners of the place question thee concerning the re-
instatement of the pavilion, say thou, " It was I did it of
my own monies," to the intent that there may betide thee
favour and good fortune.' Quoth he, 'I hear and obey,*
And the prince continued to pay him frequent visits.

Meanwhile s when Heyat en Nufous ceased to receive
the prince's letters and messages and the old woman was
absent from her, she rejoiced beyond measure and con-
cluded that the young man had returned to his own
country. One day, there came to her a covered tray
from her father ; so she uncovered it and finding therein
fine fruits, said to her waiting-women, 'Is the season of
these fruits come ? 8 4 Yes,' answered they, and she said,

5 Would we might make ready to take our pleasure In the
iMIXbfL garden S ' 1 my lady/ answered they, ' thou sayst well, and

by Allah, we also long for the garden ! ' And she said, ' How
shall we do, seeing that every year it is my nurse who taketh
as to walk in the garden and pointeth out to us the various
trees and plants and I have beaten her and forbidden her
from me? Indeed, I repent me of the affront I offered her,
for that, in any case, she is my nurse and hath over me the
right of fosterage. But there is no power and no virtue
save in God the Most High, the Supreme! 5 When her
women heard this, they all rose and kissing the earth before
her, said, ' God on thee, O my lady, do thou pardon her and
command her to be brought ! ' { By Allah,' answered the
princess, 4 1 am resolved upon this ; but which of you will go
to her, for I have prepared her a splendid dress of honour ?

With this two damsels came forward, by name Bulbui
and Sewad el Ain, who were comely and graceful and the
chief of the princess's women, and said to her, 'We will
go tc her, O princess 1 ' And she said, e Do what seemeth


good to you." So they repaired to the house of the nurse s
who received them with open arms and welcomed them.
When they had sat awhile with her, they said to her,
4 nurse, the princess pardons thee and desires to take
thee back into favour.' 'This may never be,' answered
she, ' though I drink the cup of perdition ! Hast thou
forgotten how she put me to shame before those who love
me and those who hate me, when my clothes were dyed
with my blood and I well-nigh died for excess of beating,
and after this they dragged me forth by the feet like a
dead dog and cast me without the door? By Allah, I
will never return to her nor fill my eyes with her sight ! '
Quoth they, ' Disappoint not our pains in coming to thee
neither send us away, unsuccessful Where is thy courtesy
to us ? Think but who it is that cometh to thee : canst
thou wish for any higher of standing than we with the
princess ? ' ' God forbid ! ' answered she, ' I know well
that my station is less than yours, were it not that the
princess's favour exalted me above all her women, so that,
were I wroth with the greatest of them, she had died of
fright.' 'All is as it was,' rejoined they, "and is in nowise
changed Indeed, it is better than before, for the princess
humbles herself to thee and seeks a reconciliation without
intermediary.' 4 By Allah,' said the old woman, s were it
not for your presence [and intercession] with me, I had
never returned to her, no, not though she had commanded
to put me to death ! ' They thanked her for this and she
rose and dressing herself, accompanied them to the palace.

When the princess saw her, she rose to her feet and the
old woman said, 1 Allah S Allah ! O King's daughter, whose
was the fault, thine or mine ? ' ' The fault was mine,
answered Heyat en Nufous, * and it Is thine to pardon and
forgive. By Allah, O my nurse, thy rank is high with me
and thou hast over me the right of fosterage ; but thou
knowest that God (blessed be He !) hath allotted to His


334


creatures four things, disposition and life and fortune and
death, nor is it in man's power to avert that which is
decreed. Verily, I was beside myself and could not govern
my anger; but I repent, O my nurse, of what I did.'
With this, the nurse's anger ceased from her and she rose
and kissed the ground before the princess, who called for
a splendid dress of honour and threw it over her, whereat
she rejoiced with an exceeding joy. Things being thus
happily accorded, in the presence of the princess's slaves
and women, Hey at en Nufous said to the old woman, 'O
my nurse, how go the fruits of our garden ? ' s O my lady/
replied she, ' I see excellent fruits in the town ; but I will
enquire of the matter and return thee a,n answer this
very day. 5

Then she withdrew, attended with all honour and con-
sideration, and betook herself to Ardeshir, who received
her with open arms and rejoiced in her coming, for that
he had long expected her. She told him all that had
passed between herself and the princess and how the latter
^TfQfji was minded to go down into the garden on such a day and
$tCHbitf. said to him, ' Hast thou done as I bade thee with the
keeper of the garden and made him taste of thy bounties ? "'
i Yes/ answered the prince ; 5 and he is become my good
friend : my way is his way and he would well I had need
of him.' Then he told her all that had happened and of
the paintings that the Vizier had caused to be done in the
pavilion : whereat she rejoiced greatly and said, ' God upon
thee, do thou set thy Vizier midmost thy heart, for this that
he hath done points to the keenness of his wit and he hath
helped thee to the attaining thy desire. So rise forthright,
O my son, and take a bath and don thy richest clothes ;
then go to the gardener and make shift to pass the night
in the garden, for none may win to enter it } [whilst the
princess is there] s though he should give the earth full of
gold When thou hast entered hide thyself where none


335


may see thee and stir not till thou heai me say, 4 O Thou
whose bounties are hidden, vouchsafe us assurance from
that we fear ! ' Then come forth and walk among the
trees and show thy beauty and grace, which put the moons
to shame, to the intent that Heyat en Nufous may see thee
and that her heart and soul may be filled with love of thee j
so shalt thou attain to thy desire and thy grief be done
away.' 4 1 hear and obey/ answered the prince and gave
her a purse of a thousand dinars, which she took and
went away.

As for Ardeshir, he went straight to the bath and washed %
after which he arrayed himself in the richest of clothes of the
apparel of the kings of the Chosroes and girt his middle with
a sash wherein were assembled all manner precious stones
and donned a turban laced with red gold and embroidered
with pearls and jewels. His cheeks shone rosy-red and
his lips were scarlet ; his eyelids wantoned, gazelle- wise»
and he swayed in his gait like a drunken man ; beauty and
grace covered him, as with a. garment, and his flexile shape
shamed the swaying branches. Then he put in his pocket
a purse containing a thousand dinars and repairing to the
garden, knocked at the door. The gardener opened to
him and received him with joy and honour ; then, observing
that his face was overcast, he asked him how he did.
'Know, O elder,' answered Ardeshir, 'that I am dear to
my father and he never laid his hand on me till this day s
when words arose between us and he reviled me and smote
me on the face and beat me with the staff and drove me
sway. Now I have no friend to turn to and I fear the
perfidy of fortune, for thou knowest that a father's anger is
no light thing. Wherefore I come to thee, O uncle, seeing
that thou art known to my father, and desire of thy favour
that thou suffer me abide 3 till the end of the day s in the
garden or pass the night there, til God make accord
between my father and myself. 5


33$


When the old man heard this, he was sore concerned
and said, ' O my lord, give me leave to go to thy father
and be the means of reconciliation between him and thee."
'Q uncle,' replied Ardeshir, 'thou must know that my
father is of a very impatient nature, and if thou proffer him
reconciliation in his heat, he will make thee no answer ;
but when a day or two have passed, his humour will soften,
Then go thou in to him and thereupon he will relent/
e I hear and obey, 5 said the gardener. ' But, O my lord 5
do thou go with me to my house, where thou shalt pass
the night with my children and family and none shall
reproach this to us.' ' O uncle/ replied Ardeshir, £ I must
be alone, when I am angry/ Quoth the old man, ' It were
grievous to me that thou shouldst lie alone in the garden,
when I have a house.' But Ardeshir said, ' O uncle, I have
a purpose in this, that the trouble .of my mind may be dis-
pelled from me and I know that in this lies the means of
regaining his favour and softening his heart to me.' 1 It
it must be so,' rejoined the gardener, ' I will fetch thee
a carpet to sleep on and a coverlet to cover thyself withaL'
And the prince said, ' There is no harm in. that, O uncle. 8
So the keeper opened the garden to him and brought him
the carpet and coverlet, knowing not that the princess was
minded to visit the garden.

Meanwhile, the nurse returned to the princess and told
her that the fruits were ripe on the trees of the garden ;
whereupon she said, s O my nurse, go down with me to-
morrow into the garden, that we may walk about in it and
take our pleasure, so God please ; and send meanwhile to
the gardener, to let him know our purpose/ So she sent
to the gardener to tell him that the princess would visit the
garden on the morrow, bidding him leave neither tree-
tenders nor water-carriers therein nor let one of all the
creatures of God enter the place. So, when word came
to him, he set his trenches and channels in order and


337


going to Ardeshir, said to him, 'O my lord, the place m
thy place and I live only in thy favours, besides that my
tongue is under thy feet. But do thou excuse me : I must
tell thee that the princess Heyat en Nufous, the mistress
of this garden, hath a mind to visit it to-morrow at the first
of the day and hath bidden me leave none therein to see
her. So I would have thee of thy favour go forth of the
garden this day, for the princess will only abide in it till
the time of afternoon prayer and after it shall be at thy
service for months and years/ 'O elder/ said Ardeshir,
' belike we have caused thee some inconvenience ? ' And
the other answered, saying, ' By Allah, Q my lord, there
hath betided me from thee nothing but honour ! ' ' If it be
so/ rejoined the prince, ' nothing but all good shall befall
thee through me ; for I will hide in the garden and none
shall see me, till the princess has gone .back to her
palace.' i O my lord/ said the gardener, ' if she espy the
shadow of a human being in the garden, she will strike off *^
my head.' 6 Have no fear/ replied the prince ; ' I will let
none see me. But doubtless to-day thou lackest of spend-
ing money for thy family.' Then he put his hand to his
purse and pulled out five hundred dinars, which he gave to
him, saying, ' Take this gold and spend it on thy family,
that thy heart may be at ease concerning them.' When
the gardener saw the gold, his life seemed a light matter
to hira and he suffered the prince to abide where he
was, charging him straitly not to show himself in the
garden.

Meanwhile, when the eunuchs went in to the princess at
break of day, she bade open the private door leading into
the garden and donned a royal robe, embroidered with
pearls and jewels, over a shift of fine silk, embroidered
with rubies. Under the whole was that which the tongue
refuses to describe, whereat the mind was confounded and
for love whereof the coward would become brave. On her

VOL. VI. 2g


338


head she set a crown of red gold, inlaid with pearls and
diamonds, and put her feet in slippers of cloth of gold,
embroidered with fine pearls and adorned with all manner
precious stones. Then she put her hand on the old woman's
shoulder and commanded to go forth by the privy door ;
but the nurse looked out and seeing the garden full of
eunuchs and girls, walking about, eating the fruits and
troubling the streams and taking their ease of sport and
pleasance therein, said to the princess, i O my lady, is this
a garden or a madhouse? 5 Quoth the princess, 'What
meaneth thy speech, O nurse ? ! And the old woman
answered, saying, ' Verily, the garden is full of slave-girls
and eunuchs, near five hundred girls and the like number
of eunuchs, eating of the fruits and troubling the streams
and scaring the birds and hindering [us] from taking [our]
ease and sporting and laughing, and what not else ; and
thou hast no need of them. Wert thou going forth of thy
palace into the highway, this would be fitting, as an honour
and protection to thee ; but thou goest forth of the privy
door into the garden, where none of the creatures of God
the Most High may look on thee.' ' By Allah, O nurse/
rejoined the princess, { thou sayst sooth ! But how shall
we do?' And the old woman said, 'Send them all away
and keep only two of the slave-girls, that we may make merry
with them/ So she dismissed them all, with the exception
of two of her women, who were most in favour with her.

Then, when the old woman saw that her heart was light
and that the season was pleasant to her, she said to her,
'Now we can enjoy ourselves aright: come, let us take
our pleasance in the garden.' So the princess put her
hand on her shoulder and went out by the private door.
The two waiting-women walked in front and she followed
them, laughing at them and swaying gracefully to and fro
in her robes; whilst the nurse forewent: her, showing her
the trees and feeding her with fruits ; and so they fared on


339


from place to place, till they came to the pavilion, which
when the princess beheld and saw that it had been newly
repaired, she said to the old woman, 1 O my nurse, seest
thou yonder pavilion ? It has been repaired and its walls
newly plastered.' 1 By Allah, O my lady,' answered she, ' I
heard say that the keeper of the garden had taken stuffs of
a company of merchants and sold them and bought bricks
and lime and stones and plaster and so forth with the
price ; so I asked him what he had done with all this, and
he said, " I have put the ruined pavilion in repair, and when
the merchants sought their due of me, I said to them,
4 Wait till the princess visits the garden and sees the
repairs and they please her : then will I take of her what
she is pleased to bestow on me, and pay you your due.'"
Quoth I, "What moved thee to do this thing?" And he
said, " I saw the pavilion in ruins, the coigns thrown down
and the plaster stripped from the walls, andf none had the
grace to repair it ; so I borrowed the money on my own
account and reinstated the - place ; and I trust in the
princess to deal with me as befits her dignity." Quoth I,
" The princess is all goodness and generosity and will no
doubt requite thee." And he did all this but in hopes
of thy bounty.' 1 By Allah,' replied the princess, £ he hath
dealt nobly in rebuilding it and hath done the deed of
a man of worth ! Call me my purse-keeper.' The old
woman accordingly fetched the purse-keeper, and the
princess bade the latter give the gardener two thousand
dinars ; whereupon the nurse sent a messenger to him,
bidding him to the princess's presence.

When the gardener received the summons, he trembled
in every limb and said in himself, ' Doubtless, the princess
has seen the young man, and this day will be the most
unlucky of days for me.* So he went home and told his
wife and children what had happened and gave them his
last injunctions, and they wept for him. Then he took


340


h.'-tve of them and returning to the garden, presented him-
self before the princess, with a face the colour of turmeric
and scarce able to stand upright. The old woman remarked
his plight and hastened to forestall him, saying, 'O old
man, kiss the earth in gratitude to God the Most High and
be instant in prayer to Him for the princess ; for I told her
what thou didst in the matter of repairing the ruined
pavilion, and she rejoiceth in this and bestoweth on thee
two thousand dinars in requital of thy pains ; so take them
from the purse-keeper and kiss the earth before the prin-
cess and bless her and go thy way/ So he took the money
and kissed the earth before Heyat en Nufous } calling down
blessings on her. Then he returned to his house, and his
family rejoiced in him and blessed him 1 who had been the
1€%f)t [prime] cause of all this.

|g|30aL As soon as he was gone, the old woman said to the
princess, e O my lady, this is indeed become a fine place !
Never saw I a purer white than its plastering nor goodlier
than its painting ! I wonder if he have repaired the inside
also : else hath he made the outside white and [left] the
inside black. Come, let us enter and see.' So they entered
and found the interior painted and gilded in the goodliest
fashion. The princess looked right and left, till she came
to the upper end qf the estrade, when she fixed her eyes
upon the wall and gazed attentively thereat ; whereupon
the old woman knew that she had lighted on the present-
ment of her dream and took the two waiting-women with
her, that they might not divert her attention. When the
princess had made an end of examining the painting, she
turned to the old woman, wondering and beating hand on
hand, and said to her, 6 O my nurse, come and see a won-
derful thing. Were it graven with needles on the corners
of the eyes, it would serve as an admonition to him who
will be admonished.' ''And what is th&t $ O mj lady? 8
1 the Vizier*


34*


asked she. 5 Go, look at the upper end of the estrade,'
replied the princess, 1 and tell me what thou seest there.'

So she went up and came down, wondering, and said,
4 By Allah, O my lady, here is depicted the garden and
the fowler and his net and the birds and all thou sawest
in thy dream ; and verily, nothing but urgent necessity
withheld the male pigeon from returning to free his mate ;
for I see him in the talons of a hawk, which has slaughtered
him and is drinking his blood and rending his flesh and
eating it ; and this, O my lady, accounts for his tarrying to
return and rescue her from the net. But the wonder is
how thy dream came to be thus depicted, for, wert thou
minded to set it forth in portraiture, thou hadst not availed
thereto. By Allah, this is a wonder that should be recorded
in history ! Surely, O my lady, the angels, to whom are
committed the care of the sons of Adam, .knew that the
male pigeon was wronged of us, whenas we blamed him
for deserting his mate ; so they embraced his cause and
made manifest his excuse.' ! O my nurse,* said the princess,
'verily, fate and fore-ordained fortune had course against
this bird, and we wronged him.' £ my lady/ rejoined
the nurse, 'adversaries shall meet before God the Most
High : but, O my lady, verily, the truth hath been made
manifest and the male pigeon's excuse certified to us ; for,
except the hawk had seized him and killed him, he had
not held aloof from his mate, but had returned to her and
set her free ; but against death there is no recourse, nor, O
my lady, is there aught in the world more tenderly solicitous
than the male for the female, among all creatures that God
the Most High hath created, and especially is it thus with
man ; for he starves himself to feed his wife, strips himself
to clothe her, angers his family to please her and disobeys
and denies his parents to give to her. She knoweth his
secrets and concealeth them and cannot endure from him
an hour. If he be absent from her one night ? her eyes


342


sleep not, nor is there a dearer to her than he. She
tenders him more than her parents and they lie down to
sleep in each other's arms, with his hand under her neck
and her hand under his neck, even as saith the poet in
the following verses :

I made my wrist her pillow, yea, and lay with her the night, Saying to
it, " Be long," what while the full moon glittered white.

Ah me, that night ! God never did the like thereof create ; Its first was
sweetness and its last was bitter to my spright.

Then he kisses her and she kisses him ; and I have
heard that a certain king, when his wife fell sick and
died, buried himself alive with her, submitting of his own
accord to death, for the love of her and the strait com-
panionship that was between them. Moreover, a certain
king sickened and died, and when they were about to bury
him, his wife said to her people, " Let me bury myself alive
with him : else will I slay myself and my blood will be on
your heads." So, when they saw she would not be turned
from this thing, they left her, and she cast herself into
the grave with her dead husband, of the greatness of her
love and tenderness over him.' And she ceased not to
ply the princess with anecdotes of [mutual fidelity] between
men and women, till there ceased that which was in her
heart of aversion to the male sex ; and when she saw that
she had succeeded in renewing in her [the natural] inclina-
tion [of women] to men, she said to her, e It is time to go
and walk in the garden.' So they went out and walked
among the trees.

Presently the prince chanced to turn and his eyes fell on
Heyat en Nufous ; and when he saw the justness of her
shape and her rosy cheeks and the blackness of her eyes
and her exceeding grace and loveliness and her excelling
beauty and elegance and her abounding perfection, his
reason was confounded and he could not take his eyes off
her. His judgment failed him for passion and love over-


343


passed all limits in him ; his entrails were occupied with
her service and his heart was aflame with the fire of love-
longing, so that he swooned away and fell to the ground
senseless. When he came to himself, she had passed from
his sight and was hidden from him among the trees ; so he M*fg$t
sighed from his inmost heart and repeated the following tJEOCXXl
verses :

Whenas mine eyes her charms beheldj so wonder-excellent s With passion

and with love-longing my heart in twain was rent
And I became forthright o'erthrown, cast down upon the ground, Nos

knows the princess that which is with me of languishment.
She turned and ravished in the act the slave of passion's heart : By God,

have pity on my pain ; have pity and relent !
G Lord, make access near to me, vouchsafe me her I love f Ere to the

graveyard I descend arid all my life is spent.
Til kiss her half a score of times and ten, and other ten Be on his wasted

cheek who's pined for longing and lament !

The old woman ceased not to carry the princess about
the garden, till she brought her to the place where the
prince lay in wait, when she said, ' O thou whose bounties
are hidden, vouchsafe us assurance from that we fear!"
The prince, hearing the signal, left his hiding-place and
walked among the trees, swaying to and fro with a proud
and graceful gait and a shape that shamed the branches.
His brow was pearled with sweat and his cheeks red as the
afterglow, extolled be the perfection of God the Supreme in
that He hath created ! When the princess caught sight of
him, she gazed a long while on him and saw his beauty and
grace and symmetry and his eyes that wantoned, gazelle-
wise, and his shape that outvied the branches of the myro-
balan ; wherefore her reason was confounded and her soul
captivated and her heart transfixed with the arrows of his
glances. Then she said to the old woman, s O my nurse 5
whence came yonder handsome youth?' "Where is he s
© my lady ? ' enquired the nurse. i There he is/ answered
Heyat en Nufous; 'close at hand, among the trees. 5 The


old woman turned right and left, as if she knew not of his
presence, and said, 'Who can have taught this youth the
way into the garden?' Quoth Heyat en Nufous, 'Who
shall give us news of him ? Glory be to Him who created
men ! Dost thou know him, O my nurse ? ' * O my lady,'
answered the old woman, ' he is the young merchant who
wrote to thee by me.' Quoth the princess (and indeed
she was drowned in the sea of her desire and the fire of
her passion and love-longing), ' O my nurse, how goodly
is this youth ! Indeed he is fair of favour. Methinks,
there is not on the face of the earth a goodlier than he ! '

When the old woman was assured that the love of him
had gotten possession of the princess, she said to her, 4 Q
my lady, did I not tell thee that he was a comely youth of
a bright visage ? ' ' O my nurse/ replied Heyat en Nufous,
'kings' daughters know not the ways of the world nor the
manners of those that be therein, for that they company
with none, neither give nor take. But how shall I do to
present myself to him, and what shall I say to him and
what will he say to me?' £ What device is left me?' said
the old woman. 'Indeed, we were confounded in this
matter by thy behaviour.* And the princess said, * Know,
O my nurse, that if any ever died of passion, I shall do
so, and behold, I look for nothing but instant death, by
reason of the fire of my love-longing.' When the old
woman heard her words and saw the transport of her
passion for him, she answered, saying, ' O my lady, as
for his coming to thee, there is no way thereto; and
indeed thou art excused from going to him, because of
thy tender age ; but follow me and I will accost him. So
shalt thou not be put to shame, and in the twinkling of
an eye there shall betide 'familiarity between you/ ( Go
before me,' said the princess ; £ for the decree of God may
not be averted. 5

So they went up to the place where Ardeshir sat. as be


345

were the moon at its full, and the old woman said to him,
' See, youth, who is present before thee ! It is the
King's daughter of the age, Heyat en Nufous ; bethink
thee of her rank and the honour she doth thee in coming
to thee and rise and stand before her, out of respect for
her.' The prince sprang to his feet forthright and his
eyes met hers, whereupon they both became as they were
drunken without wine. Then the love of him and desire
redoubled upon the princess and she opened her arms and
he his, and they embraced ; but love-longing and passion
overcame them and they swooned away and lay a great
while without sense. The old woman, fearing scandal,
carried them both into the pavilion and sitting down at
the door, said to the two waiting-women, ' Seize the
occasion to take your pleasure in the garden, for the
princess sleeps. 5 So they returned to their .diversion.

Presently, the lovers recovered from their swoon and
found themselves in the pavilion, whereupon quoth the
prince, 'God on thee, O princess of fair ones, is this a
dream or an illusion of sleep?' Then they embraced and
intoxicated themselves without wine, complaining each to
each of the anguish of passion ; and the prince recited
the following verses :

The sun of the day shines out from her forehead's lambent snow And
eke from her cheeks flames forth the red of the afterglow ;

And whenas athwart the veil her charms to the sight appear, The star
of the skyline sets for shame and away doth go.

IS' lightnings flash from her teeth, in the break of her smiling lips, The
veils of the dark are drawn and day through the dusk doth show

And when with her graceful shape she sways in her swimming gait, The
cassia-boughs in the leaf are jealous of her, I trow.

Her sight is enough for me ; 1 care for no other bliss ; To God. I com-
mend her, the Lord of the heavens and the earth below S

The full moon borrows a part of her beauties, and eke the sua To imitate
her were fain, but needs must the strife forego.

For whence should it get her shape and the flexile grace of her gait, And
whence should the moon the charms of her mind and her body know ?


34^


So who shall reproach it to sne, if I'm all in her love absorbed, 'Twixt

discord in her and accord divided, 'twixt gladness and woe?
Tis she who hath captived my heart with the amorous grace of her port;
!H"!(tI)t And what saa h tne true lover's heart protect from so charming a foe?

ctxxxii*

When he had made an end of these verses, the princess
strained him to her bosom and kissed him on the mouth
and between the eyes; wheieupon life returned to him
and he fell to complaining to her of that which he suffered
for stress of love and tyranny of passion and excess of
transport and distraction and all he had endured for the
hardness of her heart. She kissed his hands and feet and
unveiled her head, whereupon the darkness 1 gathered and
the full moons 5 arose and shone therein. Then said she to
him, ' O my beloved and the term of my wishes, would the
day of estrangement had never been and God grant it may
never return between us!' And „they embraced and wept
together, whilst she recited the following verses :

Thou that the full moon sham'st and eke the sun of day, Thou hast unto

thy face committed me to slay ;
So with a glance's sword, that shore the heart, on me It fell ; and where

shall one from glances flee away ?
Thine eyebrows are a bow, whence at my heart are launched Arrows of

flaming fire and passion and dismay.
The gathering of thy cheeks is paradise to me J How shall my heart

endure from gathering them, I pray ?
Thy graceful-swaying shape is as a flowered brands, From which ar<s

gathered fruits, the burden of the spray,
la love of thee, indeed, I've put away restraint : Thou d rawest me per-
force and mak'st me waken aye-
God aid thee with the light of splendour and contract The distance and

make near the visitation-day !
Have pity on a heart that's seared for lov« of thee And entrails that

appeal to thee to be their stay 1

Then passion overcame her and she was distraught for
lo^e and wept copious tears, streaming down like rain.
Tlbis inflamed the prince's heart and he in turn became
1 Le. her feair. s ue, her eyes.


34?

troubled and distracted for love of her. So he kissed her
hands and wept sore, and they ceased not from tender
reproaches and converse and reciting verses, nor was there
aught between them other than this, until the call to after-
noon prayer, when they bethought them of parting and she
said to him, ' O light of mine eyes and kernel of my heart,
the time of parting is come : when shall we meet again?'
s By Allah,' replied he (and indeed her words pierced him
as with arrows), 'I love not the mention of parting V
Then she went forth of the pavilion, and he turned and
saw her sighing sighs that would melt the rock and weeping
tears like rain ; whereupon he for love was sunken in the
sea of desolations and recited the following verses :

Distraction, O wish of the heart, aye anew For love of thee irketh me t
how shall I do ?

By thy face, like the dawn when it breaks through the dark, And thy

locks, that resemble the night in their hue,
And thy shape like the branch, when it bends in the breeze And the

North wind shakes from it the pearls of the dew,
And the glance of thine eyes like the antelope's gaze, That the eyes of

the noble and generous ensue,
And thy waist worn to nought by the weight of thy hips, These so heavy,

so slender the other to view,
By the wine of thy spittle, the sweetest of drink, Pure musk and fresh

water, to thee do I sue ;
O gazelle of the tribe, let thine image in sleep Ease my soul of the grief

that enfoiceth it rue 1

When she heard his verses in praise of her, she turned
back and embracing him, with a heart on fire for the
anguish of parting, fire which nought might assuage save
kisses and embraces, said, ' Quoth the byword, Patience
behoves a lover and not the lack of it And I will surely
contrive a means for our reunion.' Then she bade him
adieu and went away, knowing not where she set her feet,
for stress of love ; nor did she stay her steps till she found
herself in her own chamber. When she was gone, passirts


34»


and love-longing redoubled upon the prince and the delight
of sleep was forbidden to him, whilst she m her turn tasted
not food and her patience failed and her heart sickened
for desire.

As soon as it was day, she sent for her surse, who came
and found her in sorry plight. Quoth the princess, s Ques-
tion me not of my case; for all I suffer is due to thee.
Where is the beloved of my heart ? ' 'O my lady/ answered
the old woman, * when did he leave thee ? Hath he been
absent from thee more than this night ? ' * Can I endure
from him an hour ? ' rejoined Heyat en Nufous. ' Come,
find some means to bring us together speedily, for my soul
is like to depart [my body]-' ' O my lady/ said the old
woman, "have patience till I contrive thee some subtle
device, whereof none shall be ware.' * By the Great God,'
cried the princess, ' except thou bring him to me this very
day, I will tell the King that thou hast corrupted me, and
he will cut off thy head ! ' Quoth the nurse, ' I conjure
thee, by Allah, have patience with me, for this is a dangerous
matter ! ' And she humbled herself to her, till she granted
her three days' delay, saying, ' O my nurse, the three days
will be as three years to me ; and if the fourth day pass
and thou bring him not, I will go about to slay thee.'

The old woman left her and returned to her lodging,
where she abode till the morning of the fourth day, when
she summoned the tirewomen of the town and sought of
them fine paint and dyes for the painting and adorning of a.
virgin girl, and they brought her cosmetics of the best,
Then she sent for the prince and bringing forth of her
chest a suit of woman's apparel, worth five thousand dinars,
and a kerchief fringed with all manner jewels, said to him^
£ O my son, hast thou a mind to foregather with Heyat en
Nufous ? ' 8 Yes,' answered he. So she took a pair of
tweezers and pulled out the hairs of his face and anointed
his eyes with kohl. Then she stripped him and painted


349

him with henna from his nails to his shoulders and from
his insteps to his thighs and tattooed him about the body s
till he was like red roses on tables of alabaster. After £
little, she washed him and dried him and bringing out
a shift and a. pair of trousers, made him put them on.
Then she clad him in the dress aforesaid and binding the
kerchief about his head, veiled him and taught him how to
walk, saying, ' Advance thy left and draw back thy right/
He did as she bade him and walked before her, as he were
a houri escaped from Paradise. Then said she to himj
' Fortify thy heart, for we are going to the King's palace,
where there will without fail be guards and eunuchs at the
gate ; and if thou take fright at them and show hesitation
or fear, they will suspect thee and examine thee, and we
shall both lose our lives: wherefore, an thou feel thyself ...
unable to do this, tell me.' ' This thing hath no terrors for
me,' answered he ; 'so take courage and be of good cheer. 8
Then she went out and he followed her, till they came
to the gate of the palace, which was full of eunuchs. She
turned and looked at him, to see if he were troubled or
no, and finding him unchanged, went on. The chief »
eunuch looked at the nurse and knew her, but seeing
a damsel following her, whose charms confounded the
reason, he said in himself, 'As for the old woman, she
is the nurse; but who is the girl with her? There is
none in our land resembleth her in favour or approacheth
her in beauty save the princess Heyat en Nufous, who is
cloistered and never goeth out. Would I knew how she
came into the street and whether or no it was by leave of
the King ! ' Then he rose to discover the matter and nigh
thirty eunuchs followed him ; which when the old woman
saw, her reason fled for fear and she said, ' There is no
power and no virtue, save in God S Verily, we are God's
and to Him we return ! Without doubt we are dead folk tHffgif
this time.' When the chief eunuch heard her say this, ftCCHSlli


350


fear gat hold upon him, by reason of that which he knew
of the princess's violence and that her father was ruled by
her, and he said in himself, 'Belike the King hath com-
manded the nurse to carry his daughter forth upon some
occasion of hers, whereof she would have none know ;
and if I stop her, she will be wroth with me and will say,
"This fellow stopped me, that he might pry into my
affairs." So she will go about to kill me, and I have no
call to meddle in this matter.'

So saying, he turned back, and the thirty eunuchs with
him, and drove the people from the door of the palace ;
whereupon the nurse entered and saluted the eunuchs with
her head, whilst they stood to do her honour and returned
her salutation. The prince followed her from door to door,
and [God] the Protector protected them, so that they
passed all the guards, till they came to the seventh door,
which was that of the great pavilion, wherein was the
King's throne, and communicated with the apartments of
his women and the saloons of the harem, as well as with
his daughter's palace, Here the old woman halted and
said, 1 Glory be to God, O my son, who hath brought us
thus far in safety ! We cannot foregather with the princess
except by night; for night covers the fearful.' 'True, 5
answered he ; ' but what is to be done ? ' Quoth she s
8 Behind the door is a dark and deep cistern, with a cover
thereto, wherein thou must hide thyself till nightfall* So
he entered the cistern, and she went away and left him
there till ended day, when she returned and carried him
into the palace, till they came to the door of Heyat en
Nufous's apartment. The old woman knocked at the door
and a little maid came out and said, ' Who is there ? ' 'It
Is I,' answered the nurse; whereupon the maid returned
znd told the princess, who said $ ' Let her enter, with her
companion, 5

So they entered and found that the princess had made


ready the sitting-chamber and ranged the lamps and lighted
candles of wax in chandeliers of gold and silver and spread
the divans and estrades with carpets and cushions. More-
over, she had set on food and fruits and confections and
perfumed the place with musk and aloes-wood and
ambergris. She was seated among the candles and the
lamps, and the light of her face outshone the lustre of
them all. When she saw the old woman, she said to herj
'O nurse, where is the beloved of my heart?' 'O my
lady,' answered she, ' I cannot find him ; but I have
brought thee his own sister ; and here she is.' * Art thoa
mad?' exclaimed the princess. 'What need have I of
his sister ? If a man's head irk him, doth he bind up his
hand ? ' * No, by Allah, O my lady ! ' replied the old
woman. ' But look on her, and if she please thee, let her
be with thee.' So saying, she uncovered the prince's face,
whereupon Heyat en Nufous knew him and running to
him, pressed him to her bosom, and he pressed her to his.
Then they both fell down in a swoon and lay without sense
a long while. The old woman sprinkled rose-water upon
them, till they came to themselves, when she kissed him
on the mouth more than a thousand times and recited
these verses :

My heart's belov'd in the darkness visited me ; I rose in honour of him,

till down sat he.

" O thou my only desire," quoth I, " by night Thou dost me visit nm

fearesf. the guards should see ! "
" I feared," he answered, " but love hath captive ta'en My soul and spirit

and will not set me free. "
We clipped with kisses and clung together awhile ; For here was safety;

nor guards nor spies feared we ;
Then rose, undoubting, and shook out skirts, wherein Nowise unclean-

ness nor aught impure might be. l^C XQ[i)t

Quoth she, { Is it indeed true that I see thee in my ^K^fo.
abode and that thou art my house- mate and my cup-
companioK? ? ' Then passion redoubled on her and love


352


was heavy upon her, so that her reason well-nigh fled foi
joy and she recited the following verses :

With all my soul I'll ransom him who came to me by night In darkness,

whilst I waited for the tryst between us plight ;
And nought aroused me but his voice lamenting soft and low % Assd i e

" Fair welcome, O my love, to joyance and delight ! "
A thousand times his cheek I kissed and yet a thousand times I clipped

him close in my embrace, where he was veiled from sight.
Quoth I, "At last have I attained to that I wearied for j So to praise

God for this His grace is only due and right' 8
Aad then the goodliest of nights we passed, even as we would, Until

the curtains of the dark were drawn by morning light.

When it was day, she made him enter a place of con-
cealment in her apartment and he abode there till night-
fall, when she brought him out and they sat carousing.
Presently s he said to her, ' I- wish to return to my own
country and tell my father what has passed between us,
that he may send his Vizier to demand thee in marriage
of thy father.' 1 my love,' answered she^ ' I fear, if thou
return to thy country and kingdom, thou wilt be distracted
from me and forget the love of me or that thy father will
not fall in with thy wishes, and I shall die. Meseems the
better counsel were that thou abide with me and in my
hand, I looking on thy face and thou on mine, till I devise
some plan, whereby we may escape together some night
and flee to thy country ; for my hopes are cut off from my
people and I despair of them.' ' I hear and obey,' replied
he, and they fell again to their carousal.

He abode with her thus for some time, till, one nights,
the wine was pleasant to them and they lay not down to
sleep till break of day* Now it chanced that one of the
Kings sent her father a present, and amongst other things,
a necklace of unique jewels, nine-and-twenty in nurnber s
to whose price a king's treasures might not suffice. Quoth
Abdulcadkj 4 This beseemeth none but my daughter Heyat


353


en Nufous,' and calling an eunuch, whose jaw-teeth the
princess had knocked out, bade him carry the necklace to
her and say to her, 4 One of the kings hath sent thy father
this, as a present, and its price may not be paid with
money | put it on thy neck.' The slave took the necklace,
saying in himself, ' God make it the last thing she shall put
on in this world, for that she deprived me of the use of my
teeth ! ' and repairing to the princess's apartment, found
the door locked and the old woman asleep before it. He
shook her, and she awoke in affright and said, 1 What dost
thou want ? ' Quoth he, ' The King hath sent me on an
errand to his daughter/ 1 The key is not here,' answered
the old woman. 'Go away, whilst I fetch it.' But he said,
* I cannot go back to the King, without having done his
commandment.' So she went away, as if to fetch the key j
but fear overtook her and she sought safety in "flight.

The eunuch awaited her awhile ; then, finding she did
not return, he feared that the King would be angry at his
delay ; so he shook the door, whereupon the bolt gave
way and the door opened. He entered and passed on, till
he came to the seventh door, [which was that of the prin-
cess's chamber], and going in, found the place splendidly
furnished and saw candles and flagons there. At this he
marvelled and going up to the bed, which was enclosed
with a curtain of silk, embroidered with a network of
jewels, drew back the curtain and saw the princess asleep
in the arms of a young man handsomer than herself-
whereat he magnified God the Most High, who had created
him of vile water, and said, ' This is a goodly fashion for
one who hath an aversion to men ! How came she by this
fellow? Methinks it was on his account that she knocked
out my teeth ! ' Then he dropped the curtain and made
for the door ; but the princess awoke in affright and seeing
the eunuch, whose name was Kafour, called to him. He
made her no answer : so she came down from the bed and
vol. vi. 23


354


catching hold of his skirt, laid it on her head and kissed
feis feet, saying, 'Cover what God covers! 1 Quoth he,
s May Allah not cover thee nor him who would cover thee !
Thou didst knock out my teeth and saidst to me, "Let
none make mention to me of men and their ways ! s? ' So
saying, he disengaged himself from her grasp and running
out, locked the door on them and set another eunuch to
guard it

Then he went in to the King, who said to him, * Hast
thou given the necklace to Heyat en Nufous ? ' * By Allah/
replied the eunuch, ' she deserves more than that ! ' And
the King said, 4 What hath happened ? Tell me quickly.'
1 I will not tell thee, save in private/ answered Kafour ;
but the King rejoined, saying, 'Tell me at once and in
public' 4 Then grant me immunity,' said the eunuch. So
the King threw him the handkerchief of immunity and he
said, ' O King, I went in to the princess Heyat en Nufous
and found her asleep in a carpeted chamber, in the arms
of a young man. So I locked the door on them and came
back to thee.' When the King heard this, he started up
and taking a sword in his hand, cried out to the chief of
the eunuchs, saying, ' Take thy lads and go the princess's
chamber and bring me her and him who is with her, as
j^{g|}t they lie on the bed, coverings and all' So the chief
$tCXXXb< eunuch and his men repaired to the princess's apartment,
where he found her and the prince standing up, dissolved
in tears, and said to them, ' Lie down on the bed, as you
were.' The princess feared for her lover and said to hir%
s This is no time for resistance.' So they both lay down
and the eunuchs covered them up and carried them into
the King's presence.

Abdulcadir pulled off the coverings and the princess
sprang to her feet; whereupon he looked at her and would
have struck off her head ; but the prince threw himself
between them, saying, ( The fault was mine, not hers ; kill


355


me before her.' The King made at him, to kill him, but
Heyat en Nufous threw herself on her father and said,
' Kill me and not him ; for he is the son of a great King,
lord of all the land in its length and breadth.' When the
King heard this, he turned to his chief Vizier, who was a
compend of all that is evil, and said to him, ' What sayst
thou of this matter, O Vizier ? ' Quoth the Vizier, ' What
I say is that all who find themselves in such case as this
have need of lying, and there is nothing for it but to cut
off both their heads, after torturing them with all manner
of tortures.' With this the King called the swordsman of
his vengeance, who came with his lads, and said to him,
' Take this gallows-bird and strike off his head and after
do the like with this harlot and burn their bodies, and
consult me not again about them.' So the headsman put
his hand to her back, to take her ; but the King cried out
at him and cast at him somewhat he had in his hand, which
had well-nigh killed him, saying, ' O dog, wilt thou show
clemency to those with whom I am wroth? Put thy hand
to her hair and drag her along by it, so that she may fall
on her face.' So he haled the two lovers by their hair to
the place of blood, where he tore off a piece of his skirt
and bound the prince's eyes therewith, putting the princess
last, in the hope that some one would intercede for her.
Then he swung his sword three times, whilst all the
troops wept and prayed God to send them deliverance s
and raised his hand to cut off Ardeshir's head, when,
behold, there arose a cloud of dust, that spread till it
covered the landscape.

When King Abdulcadir saw this, he said, ' O folk, what
is the meaning of yonder dust that obscures the sight?
The Grand Vizier went out to reconnoitre and found
behind the cloud men like locusts, beyond count or limit,
filling the hills and plains and valleys. So he returned
and told the King, who said to him, ' Go down and learn


356


who they are and who is their commander and salute him
for me and ask him the reason of his coming. If he come
in quest of aught, we will aid him to his desire, and if he
have a feud with one of the kings, we will ride with him ;
or, if he desire a gift, we will handsel him ; for this is
indeed a mighty host and a vast power and we fear for
our land from its mischief/ Accordingly, the Vizier went
forth and walked among the tents and guards and troopers
and fared on from the first of the day till near sundown,
when he came to tents studded with stars and guards with
gilded swords. Passing these, he made his way, through
Amirs and Viziers and captains and chamberlains, to the
pavilion of the Sultan and found him a mighty King.
When the King's officers saw him, they cried out to him,
saying, ' Kiss the earth ! Kiss the earth ! ' He did so and
would have risen, but they cried but at him a second and
a third time. So he kissed the earth again and again
and raised his head and would have stood up, but fell
down for excess of awe. When at last he stood before
the King, he said to him, ' O august King, may God pro-
long thy days and increase thy sovranty and exalt thy
rank 1 King Abdulcadir salutes thee and kisses the earth
before thee and asks on what weighty business thou art
come. If thou seek to avenge thee on any king, he will
take horse in thy service; or, if thou come in quest of
aught wherein it is in his power to help thee, he is at
thy service on account thereof.' Now this was Ardeshir's
father, who, hearing no news of his son, had levied a
mighty army and himself set out in quest of him. So he
replied to the Vizier, saying, ' O messenger, return to thy
lord and tell him that the most mighty King [Seif el
Aazem Shah, King of Shiraz] had a son, who has been
long absent from him and news of him have been cut off
from him, nor knoweth he what is become of him. If he
be in this city, he will take him and depart from you;


357


but, if any mischief have befallen him among <you, his
father will lay waste your land and slay your men and
make spoil of your goods and your women. Return,
therefore, in haste, to thy lord and tell him this, ere evil
befall him.' ' I hear and obey,' answered the Vizier and
turned to go away, when the chamberlain cried out to
him, saying, 4 Kiss the earth ! Kiss the earth S ' So he
kissed the earth a score of times and rose not till his heart
was in his mouth. "Mt'gf)!

Then he returned to the city, full of anxious thought $£OXXte
concerning the affair of this King and the multitude of his
troops, and going in to King Abdulcadir, pale with fear
and trembling in every limb, acquainted him with that
which he had seen and heard; whereat disquietude and
fear for his people laid hold upon him and he said to the
Vizier, ' O Vizier, and who is this King's son ? ' , 1 It is even
he whom thou badest put to death,' answered the Vizier ;
' but praised be God who hastened not his slaughter ! Else
had his father laid waste our lands and spoiled our goods/

* See now,' quoth the King, ' thy corrupt judgment, in that
thou didst counsel us to kill him ! Where is the young
man, the son of yonder magnanimous king ? ' ' O mighty
King,' answered the Vizier, 'thou didst, command him
to be put to death.' When the King heard this, he was
distracted and cried out in a terrible voice, saying,

* Out on you ! Fetch me the headsman forthright, lest
death fall on him!' So they fetched the headsman and
he said, ' O King of the age, I have smitten off his head
even as thou badest me.' ' O dog,' cried Abdulcadir,
'if this be true, I will assuredly send thee after him.'
Quoth the headsman, ' O King, thou didst command me
to slay him without again consulting thee.' 'I was in
my anger/ replied the King ; { but speak the truth, ere
thou lose thy life.' And he said, s O King ? he is yet ha
the chains of life. 5


358


At this Abdulcadir rejoiced and his heait was set at ease;
then he called for Ardeshir, and when he came, he stood
up to receive him and kissed his mouth, saying, 'O my
son, I ask pardon of God for the wrong I have done thee,
and say thou not aught that may lower my credit with thy
father, the Supreme King.' 'O King of the age,' said the
prince, ' and where is my father?' ' He is come hither on
thine account,' replied Abdulcadir; and Ardeshir said,
' By thy worship, I will not stir from before thee till I have
cleared my honour and that of thy daughter from that
which thou laidst to our charge ; for she is a clean maid.
Send for the midwives and let them examine her before
thee. If they find her maidenhead gone, I give thee leave
to shed my blood ; and if they find her a pure virgin, her
innocence and mine will be made manifest' So he sum-
moned the midwives, who examined the princess and found
her a clean maid and told the King, seeking largesse of
him. He gave them what they sought, putting off his
royal robes to bestow on them, and in like manner he
made presents to all who were in the harem. And they
brought forth the casting-bottles and perfumed all the
officers of state and grandees ; and they all rejoiced with
an exceeding joy.

Then the King embraced Ardeshir and entreated him
with all honour and' consideration, bidding his chief
eunuchs carry him to the bath. When he came out, he
cast over his shoulders a costly robe and set on his head
a diadem of jewels. Moreover, he girt him with a sash of
silk, embroidered with red gold and set with pearls and
jewels, and mounted him on one of his finest horses, with
trappings of gold inlaid with pearls and jewels. Then he
bade his grandees and captains mount and escort him to
his father's presence and charged him tell the latter that
King Abdulcadir was at his disposal, hearkening to his
word and obeying him in whatsoever he should command


359


or forbid ' I will not fail of this,' answered Ardeshir and
repaired to his father, who was transported for joy at sight
of him and springing up, advanced to meet him and em-
braced him, whilst joy and gladness spread among his
troops. Then came the viziers and chamberlains and
captains and kissed the earth before the prince and rejoiced
in his coming : and it was a great day with them for joy-
Moreover, the prince gave leave to those of King Abdul-
cadir's officers who had accompanied him and others of the
townsfolk, to view the ordinance of his father's host, without
let or hindrance, so they might know the multitude of the
Great King's troops and the might of his empire. And
all who had seen him selling stuffs in the bazaar marvelled
how his soul could have consented thereto, considering
the nobility of his rank and the loftiness of his dignity;
but it was his love and inclination to the princess that
constrained him to this.

Meanwhile, news of the multitude of his troops came to
Heyat en Nufous, who was still a prisoner under com-
mandment, till they knew what her father should order
respecting her, whether pardon and release or death and
burning ; and she looked down from the top of the palace
and turning towards the mountains^ saw the whole plain
filled with armed men. When she beheld all these troops
and knew that they were the army of Ardeshir's father,
she feared lest he should be diverted from her by his father
and forget her and depart from her, whereupon her father
would put her to death. So the called a maid that was
with her -in her apartment, by way of service, and said to
her, 4 Go to Ardeshir, son of the Great King, and fear not.
When thou comest into his presence, kiss the earth before
him and tell him who thou art and say to him, <£ My lady
salutes thee and would have thee to know that she is &
prisoner in her father's palace, awaiting his sentence,
whether he be minded .to pardon her or kill her, and she


$6o

beseecheth thee not to forget her or forsake her; fof
to-day thou art all-powerful ; and whatsoever thou com-
mandest, none dare cross thee therein. Wherefore, if
it seem good to thee to rescue her from her father and
take her with thee, it were of thy bounty, for indeed she
suffereth all these tribulations on thine account. But if
this seem not good to thee, for that thy desire of her is
at an end, speak to thy father, so haply he may intercede
for her with her father and depart not, til] he have made
him set her at liberty and taken surety from him that he
will not go about to put her to death nor do her any hurt.
This is her last word to thee, may God not bereave [her]
Ift'crfjt of thee, and peace be on thee ! " '
ftttXXJCbtt. The maid made her way to Ardeshir and delivered him
her mistress's message, which when he heard, he wept sore
and said to her, ' Know that Heyat en Nufous is my
mistress and that I am her slave and the captive of her
love. I have not forgotten what was between us nor the
bitterness of the day of separation ; so do thou say to
her, after thou hast kissed her feet, that I will speak with
my father of her, and he will send his Vizier, who sought
her aforetime in marriage for me, to demand her hand
once more of her father, for he dare not refuse. So, if
he send to her to consult her, let her make no opposition ;
for I will not return to my country without her.' So the
maid returned to Heyat en Nufous and kissing her hands,
delivered to her the prince's message, which when she
heard, she wept for very joy and returned thanks to God
the Most High.

Meanwhile, Ardeshir being alone with his father by
night, the latter questioned him of his case and he told
him all that had befallen him, first and last; whereupon
quoth the King, 4 What wilt thou have me do for thee, G
my son ? If thou desire Abdulcadir's ruin, I will lay waste
his lands and spoil his treasures and dishonour his family.'


3<5i

* O my father,' replied Ardeshir, 'I do not desire that ? fof
he hath done nothing deserving thereof; but I wish fat
anion with the princess ; wherefore I beseech thee of thy
favour to make ready a present for her father, (but let it
be a magnificent one,) and send it to him by thy Vizier,
the man of just judgment.' * I hear and obey,' answered
the King and sending for the treasures he had laid up
from time past, chose out all manner of precious things
and showed them to his son, who was pleased with them.
Then he called his Vizier and bade him carry the present
to King Abdulcadir and demand his daughter in marriage
for Ardeshir, saying, 'Accept the present and return him
an answer.'

Now from the time of Ardeshir's departure, King Abdul-
cadir had been troubled and heavy at heart, fearing the
laying waste of his kingdom and the spoiling„of his realm ;
so, when the Vizier came in to him and saluting him 9
kissed the earth before him, he rose to his feet and re-
ceived him with honour ; but the Vizier made haste to fall
at his feet and kiss them, saying, ' Pardon, O King of the
age ! The like of thee should not rise to the like of me,
for I am the least of slaves' servants. Know, O King, that
Prince Ardeshir hath acquainted his father with some of
the favours and kindnesses thou hast done him, wherefore
he thanks thee and sends thee, by thy servant who stands
before thee, a present, saluting thee and wishing thee all
manner of prosperities.' Abdulcadir, of the excess of his
fear, could not believe what he heard, till the Vizier laid
the present before him, when he saw it to be such as no
money could purchase nor could one of the kings of the
earth avail to the like thereof; wherefore he was belittled
in his own eyes and springing to his feet, praised God the
Most High and glorified Him and thanked the prince.

Then said the Vizier to him, 'O noble King, hearken
to me and know that the Great King sendeth to thee,
vol. vi. 24


362


desiring thine alliance, and I come to thee, seeking and
craving the hand of thy daughter, the chaste lady and
treasured jewel Heyat en Nufous, in marriage for his son
Ardeshir: wherefore, if thou consent to this, accepting
of him, do thou agree with me for her marriage-portion/
4 1 hear and obey,' answered Abdulcadir. ' For my part,
1 make no objection, and nothing can be more agreeable
to me ; but the girl is of full age and reason and her affair
is in her own hand. So I will refer it to her and she shall
choose for herself.' Then he turned to the chief eunuch
and bade him go and acquaint the princess with this. So
he repaired to the harem and kissing the princess's hands,
acquainted her with the Great King's proposal, saying,
jbCCgtSt 'What say st thou in answer ?' 'I hear and obey,' replied
ftCCXnbtlt. she. So the eunuch returned to the King and gave him
her answer, whereat he rejoiced with an exceeding joy and
calling for a sumptuous robe of horfour, threw it over the
Vizier's shoulders. Moreover, he ordered him ten thousand
dinars and bade him carry the answer to the Great King
and crave leave for him to pay him a visit. ' I hear and
obey,' answered the Vizier, and returning to his master,
delivered him the reply and Abdulcadir's message, whereat
he rejoiced greatly and Ardeshir was transported for joy
and his breast expanded and he was glad.

Moreover, King Self el Aazem gave King Abdulcadir
leave to come forth to visit him ; so, on the morrow, he
took horse and rode to the camp of the Great King, who
came to meet him and saluting him, seated him in the
place of honour, and they two sat, whilst Ardeshir stood
before them. Then arose an orator of the Great King's
court and pronounced an eloquent discourse, giving
Ardeshir joy of the attainment of his desire and of his
marriage with the princess, queen of kings' daughters.
When he sat down, King Seif el Aazem caused bring &
chest full of pearls and jewels, together with fifty thousand


3^3


dinars, and said to King Abdulcadir, * I am my son's deputy
in all that concerns this matter.' So Abdulcadir acknow-
ledged to have received the marriage-portion and amongst
the rest, fifty-thousand dinars for the expenses of the nuptial
festivities; after which they fetched the Cadis and the
witnesses, who drew up the contract of marriage between
the prince and princess, and it was a notable day, wherein
ail lovers rejoiced and all haters and enviers were mortified.
They made the marriage feasts and banquets and Ardeshir
went in to the princess and found her an unpierced and
unique pearl, a treasured jewel and a filly that none but
he had ridden and notified this to her father. Then said
King Seif el Aazem to his son, ' Hast thou any wish thou
wouldst have fulfilled ere we depart?' 'Yes, 'O King/
answered he ; 'I would fain take my wreak of the Vizier
who entreated us evil and the eunuch who forged a lie
against us.' So the King sent forthright to Abdulcadir,
demanding of him the vizier and the eunuch, whereupon
he despatched tbem to him and he commanded to hang
them over the gate of trie city.

After this, they abode a little while and then sought of
Abdulcadir leave for his daughter to make ready for depar-
ture. So he equipped her and mounted her in a travelling-
litter of red gold, inlaid with pearls and diamonds and
drawn by thoroughbred horses. She carried with her all
her waiting-women and eunuchs, as well as the nurse,
who had returned, after her flight, and resumed her office.
Then King Seif el Aazem and his son mounted and Abdul-
cadir mounted also with all the officers of his realm, to take
leave of his daughter and his son-in-law ; and it was a day
to be reckoned of the goodliest of days. After they had
gone some distance,, Seif el Aazem conjured King Abdul-
cadir to turn back ; so he took leave of him [and his son],
after he had strained him to his breast and kissed him
between the eyes and thanked him for his favours and


364

commended his daughter to his care. Then he went in
to the princess and embraced her j and she kissed his
hands and they wept in the stead of parting, Then he
returned to his capital and Ardeshir and his company
fared on, till they reached Shiraz, where they celebrated
the marriage festivities anew. And they abode in all
delight and solace and comfort of life, till there came
to them the Destroyer of Delights and Sunderer of
Companies, He who layeth waste the palaces sm$
peopleth the tombs*


ssro of rote vs.
